IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

217

Design of Inner LDPC Codes for Magnetic Recording Channels
Weijun Tan LSI Corporation (formerly Agere Systems), Longmont, CO 80501 USA
Inner low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are designed for practical use in magnetic recording read channel with traditional outer Reed–Solomon (RS) codes. These codes are based on single-parity codes and therefore have low encoding and decoding complexity. Simulation results show that these LDPC codes are promising inner codes for both 512 and 4k byte sectors.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, lattice, LDPC codes, magnetic recording, outer codes, read channel.

I. INTRODUCTION

LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) codes have been intensively studied since their rediscovery in the 1990s. The outstanding performance of the LDPC codes (e.g., [1], [2]) has stimulated investigations on how to implement LDPC codes in the magnetic recording read channel. Toward this goal, two problems must be overcome. First, the performance of LDPC codes must be guaranteed to be superior to the traditionally used Reed Solomon (RS) codes. Second, the prohibitive high complexity in both encoding and decoding of the LDPC codes must be reduced. While it is still up to debate, whether the LDPC codes should totally replace the RS codes, or just be used as an inner codes, we designed LDPC codes as inner codes in this work. Simulation results show that the codes we designed perform better than a RS plus single-parity check (SPC) code. This overcomes the first problem of finding gain over the traditional RS codes. On the other hand, the codes feature simplicity in terms of fast encoding, easy decoding, and programmability. This solves the second difficulty of implementing LDPC codes: overcoming the high implementation cost. This work is another stepping stone in introducing LDPC codes to magnetic recording.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sections II–IV describe the code design methodology. Section V presents the simulation results in perpendicular recording channels. Section VI concludes the paper.
II. TYPE-I SPC-BASED LDPC CODES
This section and the next section describe the design methodology for two types of SPC-base LDPC codes. These two types of codes, namely, Type-I and Type-II codes, both have the following features.
1) They are both based on multiple SPC codes. 2) Each SPC code is defined by one interleaver, which speci-
fies which user bits are checked by which parity bit. 3) Therefore, the simplicity of the encoder and decoder of
SPC code is inherited. These two types of codes have low and linear encoding complexity, and low decoding complexity. The parity-check matrix does not need to be stored in hardware. It can be calculated from the interleavers.

Fig. 1. Structure of basic Type-I codes.

4) These two types of codes have very good programmability in both code design and hardware architecture. The code parameters, including the code length, rate, column weight of the parity-check matrix, etc., are determined by several simple arguments.

A. Basic Structure of Type-I Codes

The Type-I codes have a structure similar to parallel concate-

nated SPC codes [8], and 3-D turbo product code (TPC) code

[3], [4], where data bits are arranged in a 3-D array with three

sets of embedded SPC codes. Instead, in Type-I codes, data bits

are arranged in a 2-D array, but also with three sets of embedded

SPC codes. Shown in Fig. 1(a) is such a basic structure, where

user bits are arranged in a

2-D array with one extra

shaded parity row and two extra shaded parity columns padded

at the bottom and right of the user block. This structure com-

poses a

LDPC code, whose rate

.1

Let us number the SPC codes with parity in the last parity

row, the first parity column, and the second parity column, the

first, second, and third set of SPC codes, respectively. Each SPC

code in the first set checks user bits and one parity in the

parity row. Each SPC in the second (third) set checks user

bits and one parity bit in the first (second) parity column. The

only exceptions are the two parity-on-parity bits, which are the

parity of the first and second parity columns, respectively. For

demonstration, in Fig. 1, bits denoted by same symbol define

a SPC code, where hollow symbol denotes user bits, and solid

symbol denotes parity bit in a particular SPC code. One SPC

code out of each set of the three sets of SPC codes is shown. The

SPC code with parity symbol belongs to the first set, and the

SPC codes with parity symbols and belongs to the second

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2007.912833

1Extra linear-dependent parity bits, if any, are ignored for code rate in this paper.

0018-9464/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

218

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

and third sets of SPC codes. The corresponding parity-check

matrix has column weights

3, and 2 for the user and

parity bits, respectively.

In order to make the matrix be regular in row-wise, we

usually use

. This way, the code becomes a

code. Obviously, the length and rate of this type of codes is not very flexible. For example, we want to de- Fig. 2. Structure of extended Type-I codes.

sign of code of rate

, then

is a good solution,

which gives a (1640, 1521) code of rate

.

avoid

, no two interleavers from any two sets of the

B. Design of Interleavers for Type-I Codes
The design of interleavers is a key issue in designing this type of codes. One straightforward solution is to use (pseudo-) random column and row interleavers as follows. Step 1: Randomly permute rows of the user (excluding the parity bits) block

SPC codes should have two common entries.

Interleavers based on slopes can be used as well, with

straightforward modifications. For example, user bits in same

row are used to define the second, third, and fourth sets of SPC

codes. One simple implementation is that the th bits belong

to the second set of SPC codes,

th bits to the third set,

and use each column as a SPC code; Step 2: Randomly permute the columns of the user block and use each row ( user bits plus one bit from the first parity column) as a SPC code; Step 3: Randomly permute again the columns of the user block and use each row ( user bits plus one bit from the second parity column) as a SPC code. In order to avoid minimum distance

th bits to the fourth set, where

.

Shown in Fig. 2 is an example using slope sets to define inter-

leavers.

A (4920, 4563) code is designed using random interleaver.

The performance of this code will be evaluated in Section VI.

, constraints are put upon the interleavers such that no two interleavers from any two sets of the SPC codes have two

III. TYPE-II SPC-BASED LDPC CODES

common entries. This type of interleaver is shown in Fig. 1(a). A. Basic Structure of Type-II Codes

An alternative is to use rows, diagonals, anti-diagonals, or

more generally, slops in the data block to define SPC codes. One

simple example is to use

(anti-diagonal) for the first

set of SPC codes, and use

(row) and

(diagonal),

for the second and third sets of SPC codes. It is worth noting that

the bits in a slope wrap around on boundary of the user block,

and that the parity bits in the one set are not included in the

interleavers for the other two sets of SPC codes, except for the

two parity-on-parity bits. Shown in Fig. 1(b) is such an example.

In the Type-II codes, there is no parity row but three parity

columns. All these parity columns are padded on the right of

the user block. Let the numbers of user data rows/columns be

and , then this is a

code, whose

rate

.

Let us number the SPC codes with parity bits in the first,

second, and third parity column the first, second, and third set

of SPC codes, respectively. Each SPC code in any of the three

sets check user bits and one parity bit in its own set. In ad-

C. Extension to Longer Codes

dition, every SPC code in the second set checks one parity bit in the first set, and every SPC code in the third set checks one

One drawback of this type of codes is that the code lengths

are short for high-rate codes. In the sample code given above,

the code length is only

for rate

, so

one issue is how to design codes of same rate but larger size.

For example, we want to obtain a code (1640 3, 1521 3).

This can be easily be accomplished by extending the technique

described above.

We arrange the larger user block of size

in a 2-D

array, ash shown in Fig. 2. There is still one parity row padded

parity bit in the first set and one parity bit in the second set. The

structure of this type of code is depicted in Fig. 3. This defines

an LDPC code whose matrix has column weights

for the user bits and

1, 2, and 3 for 1/3 of the parity bits,

respectively. In this H matrix, the lower half sub-matrix below

the diagonal are all zero, which is similar to what [5] modified

to make array code easy encoding. Apparently, this type of code

has very flexible code length and rate, and therefore does not

need code length extension.

at the bottom of the user block, but six parity columns padded on the right of the last user column. Let us number the SPC B. Enhanced Type-II Codes

codes with parity bits in the last row the first set of SPC codes. The Type-II codes are weak because part of its H matrix has

Note that the size of this set is three times that of the first set

. Several simple methods can be used to improve it and

in previous subsection, and number the SPCs with parity bits enhance the powerfulness.

in the th parity column the

th set of SPC codes, where The first method is to apply several additional parity bits,

.

which are used as parity-on-parity bits. If we look at Fig. 1 of the

The interleavers can be defined similarly. First, the inter- Type-I code, we will notice that Type-I code is such a code when

leavers for the first set of SPC codes are generated by randomly we put the last row of parity vertically along the two columns

permuting rows of the user block. Second, the interleavers of parities. The two extra parity-on-parity bits are used to make

for the second set of SPC codes are generated by randomly

for all pairty bits. For the Type-II codes, we can do sim-

permuting columns of the user block. This step is repeated for ilar thing. The only difference is that we need to add

the th set of SPC codes, where

. Again, in order to extra parity bits. Doing so we can even make

for all the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAN: DESIGN OF INNER LDPC CODES FOR MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

219

m k Fig. 4. Rectangular integer lattice for = 5 and = 3.

Fig. 3. Structure of Type-II codes.

parity bits. This way we have a regular code of

with

SPC-based code features.

The second method is to let any one set of SPC codes check

parity bits in other two set of SPC codes, unlike in Section III-A

that the first set of SPC codes does not check parity bits in the

second and third sets of SPC codes, and the second set of SPC

codes does not check parity bits in the third set of SPC codes.

This way, we achieve a regular LDPC codes of

. How-

ever, we lose the simplicity of SPC-based codes.

C. Design of Interleavers for Type-II Codes

Both the (pseudo-) random and slope-based interleavers for

Type-I codes can be used for Type-II codes.

H Fig. 5. -matrix of the integer lattice in Fig. 4.

To use random interleavers, for every set of SPC codes, the

columns of the user block are randomly permuted, and every

row of the permuted user block defines a SPC codes. This

process needs to be repeated three times for the three sets of

SPC codes. To avoid

, no two interleavers from any

two sets of the SPC codes should have two common entries.

Slopes can be as used to define interleavers, almost in the

same way as for the Type-I codes. If designed elaborately, these

interleavers can define one type of LDPC codes whose girth

. For better readability, this technique is presented in next

section and the designed codes are renamed Type-III girth-8

LDPC codes.

any common points, and there are classes of parallel lines

corresponding to different slopes. Each class of parallel lines

comprises lines. Let the incidence matrix of the points on the

parallel lines of slope s be of dimension

, then the

matrix

of dimension

defines

a LDPC code of rate

. Since the column and row

weights of are and 1, respectively, then the matrix of

the code has column weight and row weight . The matrix

of the integer lattice in Fig. 4 is shown in Fig. 5.

Although the code C constructed above does not have

IV. TYPE-III GIRTH-EIGHT LDPC CODES

4-cylces, it has a lot of 6-cycles, since it has triangles in the lattice. The three dark lines in Fig. 4 corresponding to slopes

A. Review of Lattice-LDPC Codes

0, 1, and 2 composes such a triangle. It is not hard to see that this triangle is equivalent to a 6-cycle in the matrix. So

The code design technique described in this section is based we must avoid triangles in the lattice in order to design a code

on the rectangular integer lattice [6]. For easy understanding, without 6-cycles, i.e., with girth . Arithmetically, we need

the technique of [6] is briefly reviewed.

to find a slope set , for any three elements

,

Consider a rectangular integer lattice

, where

depicted in Fig. 4 for

is a point on a line of slope and

is a point on a

and

, where is a prime or power of a prime. Let line of slope . The technique introduced in [6] is to find such

be a one-to-one mapping of the lattice to the point a slope set S of maximum cardinality. This problem is generally

set . An example of such mapping is a simple linear mapping difficult, i.e., the complexity of the algorithm for finding such

. The numbers

are referred to as a set of slopes is exponential in

. Instead, [6] proposed

lattice-point labels. A line with slope

, starting at a polynomial algorithm using the Dijkstra or Bellman-Ford

the point (0, ), is the set of points

algorithm.

, where

. Consider the Let us look at the rate of this type of codes,

.

incidence structure comprised of points on the integer lattice Since

in general, it is very hard to design very high

and all lines of slopes

. Two lines are referred rate codes using this technique. The two codes of length 2512

to as parallel, e.g., lines 1 and 4 in Fig. 4, if they do not have and 4811 designed in [1] are of rate 0.81 and 0.76 only.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

220
H Fig. 6. matrix of the integer lattice in Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008 Fig. 8. Factor graph of SPC-based LDPC codes.

Fig. 9. Decoder architecture.

complexity of this problem is much lower than that of the orig-

inal one in [6].

Using the triangle-free condition, we can find slope set of

specified cardinality . Here we are only interested in codes of

and

, because they perform well as inner codes

in perpendicular recording channels. A simple way is to first set

Fig. 7. Encoder architecture for (a) Type-I and (b) Type-II SPC-based LDPC

, then to find additional legible element. Specifically,

codes.

consider any parallel line in slope

and any parallel line

in slope

. For any point on and any point on

B. Lattice-Based Type-III LDPC Codes

, if slope

is a integer, this integer is not an element

of . Repeat this procedure for any two elements in , until all

In [6], the small rectangular integer lattice does not have a

physical meaning and the incident matrix composes of a sub-

matrix of the overall H matrix. The code rate cannot be high

because of the problem of finding a slope set satisfying the tri-

angle-free condition. This can be made much easier if we only

need to find a small slope set .

Let us look at the matrix

in [6] more

carefully, we will see that the matrix

of dimension

for any

also defines

a parity-check matrix. The rate of this code is

.

This code is a regular code, of column weight

and row

weight

. This can be easily extended to codes of column

weight 4 and 5, etc., as long as we can find a slope set of

are either included or excluded in .

Using this technique it is very easy to design low rate codes,

such as codes of rate

. However, of our interests are

codes of very high rate

. For this high rate, it is non-

trivial to design codes of favorable rate and length. This is be-

cause the larger , the harder to find a slope set

. In some

case, we have to increase in order to find such a slope set .

For example, we designed a code (4470, 4023) of rate

.

This is much better than the code in [6], where the highest rate

. For even higher rate,

, the shortest code

we designed is a (5379, 4890) code. This is a little bit long for

a 512-byte sector, but is good for a larger sector, e.g., a 4k-byte

sector.

4 and 5. This way, the rectangular integer lattice has specific physical meaning. In fact, the lattice is just the LDPC codeword,

V. ENDEC ARCHITECTURE FOR TYPE-I/II CODES

arranged in a 2-D block. Shown in Fig. 6 is the corresponding This section describes encoder/decoder (endec) architecture

matrix of

from the matrix H in Fig. 5.

for Type-I and Type-II codes. Since both types are SPC-based

With this modification, the problem of finding a large set of codes, their endec architecture is very simple. The endec archi-

meeting triangle-free condition for small integer lattice

tecture for Type-III codes is not presented in this section, be-

changes to finding small set of meeting triangle-free condi- cause this type of codes is quasi-cyclic, therefore, any general

tion for large integer lattice

. It is not hard to see that the architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes can be used.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAN: DESIGN OF INNER LDPC CODES FOR MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

221

Fig. 10. Performance evaluation in terms of (a) ByER and (b) SFR for 512 byte sector.

Fig. 11. Performance evaluation in terms of (a) ByER and (b) SFR for 4k byte sector.

A. Encoder Architecture

sharing common variable nodes. Plotted in Fig. 8 is the factor graph of Type-I and Type-II codes, where edges denoted by solid

The code structures used to defined Type-I and Type-II codes in Sections II and III can be depicted in Fig. 7, where , and are interleavers for the first, second, and third set of SPC codes. After the user bits being interleavered, all the encoder needs to do is to accumulate the parity for each particular SPC code and fit the parity bit into the right position.
For Type-I code, since the three set of SPC codes are independent with each other, the parity accumulators for the three sets can be done in parallel. For Type-II code, since the second set of SPC codes is dependent on the first set of SPC codes and the third sets of SPC codes is dependent on the first and second sets of SPC codes, the parity accumulators for the three sets of SPC codes are functioning in a sequential manner.
B. Decoder Architecture

lines, broken lines and dashed lines belong to the three sets of SPC codes.
The decoder architecture is designed to match the factor graph. Similar as there are three subgraphs, there are three sub decoders, one for one set of SPC codes. These three decoders share a memory pool where check-to-variable LLRs are processed to generate variable-to-check LLRs. Basically the check-to-variable LLRs from two sets of SPC codes are added up and passed to the third set of SPC codes as the variable-to-check LLRs. On the variable node side, memory of 2N units is needed to buffer these check-to-variable LLRs. On the check node side, since a min-sum decoder is used, the variable-to-check LLRs do not need to be buffered. Instead, the minimum value, the subminimum value, the location of the minimum value, and signs of these LLRs are buffered. Plotted

A normalized min-sum decoder is used for its low complexity in Fig. 9 is the decoder architecture. Inside each SPC decoder

and small need of memory.

block, standard check node update for a simple SPC code is

Conceptually, the decoder works on the factor graph of the used.

code in a manner analogous to normal LDPC codes. However, since these codes are SPC-based codes, there are no edge con-

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS

nections between the subgraphs of the three sets of SPC codes. This sections shows simulation results for the three types of

The overall graph of code consists of these three subgraphs by codes designed in Sections II–IV on a perpendicular recording

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

222

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

channel. In this channel model, the channel bit density (CBD)

is defined as

, where

is the width of

the derivative of the transition response function at half its max-

imum, and T is the bit period. Letting the rate of the outer RS

code be , the user bit density (UBD) excluding the RS code

is defined as

, and the information bit density

(IBD) is defined as

[7]. In this work,

, and 90% jitter noise are used in all simulations.

The definition of SNR is similar to the one in Chapter 6 of [2].

The codes evaluated are Type-I code (4920, 4563), Type-II

code (4914, 4563), Type-III code (5379, 4890). For the first

two codes, pseudo-random interleavers are used. For the third

code, slope-based interleaver is used. As references, SPC (64,

63), and interleaved TPC code (1225, 1156) and Mackay code

(4914, 4563) are also evaluated. The SOVA channel detector

and LDPC decoder run 3 inner iterations and 4 global iterations.

Shown in Figs. 10 and 11 are the pre-RS byte error rate (ByER)

and post-RS sector failure rate (SFR) using the block multinom-

inal model [7] for 512 and 4k byte sectors, respectively. From

both figures, we have the following observations. First, the de-

signed LDPC codes have around 0.4 dB and 0.7 dB SFR gains

over SPC code for 512 byte sector at

, and for 4k

byte sector at

, respectively. Second, among the

codes designed in this work, type-II codes are a little bit worse

than type-I codes while having the flexibility in code length and

rate. Third,

codes performance only slightly better than

code, which implies LDPC codes as inner codes are not

very sensitive to the girth. Last, all three types of LDPC codes

have similar or even a little bit better performance than random

Mackay code, indicating that the codes designed herein are good

inner codes.

VII. CONCLUSION
This papers presents methodology to design several type of LDPC codes for use as inner code in magnetic recording read channel. These codes feature easy encoding and decoding and flexible programmability. Simulation results show solid SNR gain over conventional SPC codes on perpendicular recording channels.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and M. Fossorier, “Capacity-approaching codes: Can they be applied to the magnetic recording channel,” IEEE Commun., vol. 42, pp. 122–130, Feb. 2004.
[2] Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording Systems, B. Vasic and E. Kurtas, Eds. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 2004.
[3] L. Ping, “Turbo-SPC codes,” IEEE. Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 754–759, May 2001.
[4] J. Li, K. R. Narayanan, and C. N. Georghiades, “On the performance of high-rate TPC/SPC codes and LDPC codes over partial response channels,” IEEE. Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 723–734, May 2002.
[5] E. Eleftheriou and S. Olcer, “Low-density parity-check codes for digital subscriber lines,” in Proc. ICC’2002, 2002, pp. 1752–1757.
[6] B. Vasic, K. Pedagani, and M. Ivkovic, “High-rate girth-eight LDPC codes on rectangular integer lattices,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, pp. 1248–1252, Aug. 2004.
[7] Z. A. Keirn, Z. A, K. Y. Krachkovsky, E. F. Haratsch, and H. Burger, “Use of redundant bits for magnetic recording: Single-parity codes and reed-Solomon error-correcting code,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 225–230, Jan. 2004.
[8] T. Oenning and J. Moon, “A low density generator matrix interpretation of parallel concatenated single bit parity codes,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 737–741, Mar. 2001.
Manuscript received May 18, 2007. Corresponding author: W. Tan (e-mail: weijun.tan@lsi.com).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

