This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the ICC 2008 proceedings.

Maximum Likelihood Decoding of Turbo Codes on the Binary Erasure Channel

Marco Ferrari, Member IEEE CNR-IEIIT at Dipartimento di Elettronica e Informazione
Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy marco.ferrari@polimi.it

Sandro Bellini Dipartimento di Elettronica e Informazione
Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy sandro.bellini@polimi.it

Abstract—In this paper we deal with Maximum Likelihood (ML) decoding of Turbo Codes on the Binary Erasure Channel. First we describe a new ML decoder. When the standard iterative decoder fails because the set of erasures includes a stopping set, with the component decoders we obtain a linear system of equations that seeks the codeword constrained by both component codes. We evaluate the complexity in terms of equivalent turbo iterations and we show that this ML decoder is implementable. We also modify the algorithm proposed in [6] for LDPC to decode Turbo Codes and we compare the two methods. We find that, in general, our method is more efficient with low memory or punctured codes. Finally, by simulation we show that m-ary Turbo Codes under ML decoding outperform the error exponent bounds for random codes down to WER=10−6, for all rates ranging from 1/3 to 7/8.
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
The output of a Binary Erasure Channel (BEC) is either correctly received, or erased with probability . The capacity is C = (1 − ) [bits per channel use], even with a feedback channel [1]. This model is suitable, e.g., for Packet Switched Networks, where data are either delivered without errors or lost. Some authors [2] suggest that the renewed interest of coding theorists for the BEC model comes also from the fact that a theoretical analysis of codes for this channel is often simple, yet drives design guidelines that are effective also on the Gaussian channel.
With non-binary erasure channel, a.e. with GF (2q) input and output symbols, Reed Solomon codes are optimal. Here we focus on the binary case, for which [3] proposed an efficient scheme based on random coding and message-passing decoding on the corresponding Tanner graph. Since then, most of the attention of coding for the BEC has been concentrated on LDPCs. In particular it has been recognized that messagepassing decoding fails when the set of erased bits includes one stopping set of the code [4].
In [5] two algorithms are proposed to overcome this weakness of iterative decoding of LDPC: in algorithm B, one of the unrecovered bits is guessed and the message passing algorithm is run until a new stop is reached. Then a second unrecovered bit is guessed and so on. In case of inconsistency, one of the guesses is flipped and the algorithm is restarted. In algorithm C, a modified message passing algorithm fills a system of equations that expresses every unrecovered bit as a linear combination of a set of guesses. If the process is completed,

the solution of this system identifies the ML codeword. In [6] the authors start from the straightforward ML decoder
for LDPC that solves the binary linear system Hy = 0 for the erased symbols in the received codeword y. This is a rather large problem even if the system can be reduced by iterative decoding. To simplify its solution, the authors look for a fraction of these unrecovered bits, namely reference bits, whose knowledge allows the full codeword recovery. With an algorithm inspired to [7] the system is reduced to a non sparse system in the reference bits only, much reduced in size, which is solved via gaussian elimination.
The first paper dealing with BEC stopping sets and Turbo Codes (TC) is [8]. In this paper the authors show that also Turbo Decoding (TD) suffers from stopping sets, but this phenomenon is less extensive than in LDPC codes: TD is a message passing between only two “super-nodes” that perform exact MAP decoding on each component code. The authors state conditions for the existence of a turbo stopping set, and propose an improvement of TD to combat stopping sets that is inspired to algorithm B of [5].
In this paper we exploit the trellis representation of the two components of a TC to identify a basis for each component subcode constrained to the received symbols and to the extrinsic information generated by TD when it stops. Using these two bases we write a binary linear system that identifies the (hopefully) unique intersection of the two subcodes, getting an ML decoder as shown in Section III. We take care that the two bases share the maximum possible number of bits, hence the system generated is as small as possible and its solution via gaussian elimination has negligible complexity compared to the compilation of the system. This is true at least for block sizes below 104 according to our experience. The search of the bases and the compilation of the system are done using the SISO component decoders. The complexity of this ML decoder, namely CSI (Constrained Subcodes Intersection) is implementable and in Section V we show several results obtained through simulation. Under many respects it can be seen as a TC version of algorithm C proposed in [5].
Also for TC we can write a binary system Hy = 0 and apply the algorithm proposed in [6], named BM after the authors. Unlike in [6] here we deal with finite block length and we require to achieve ML decoding for each case. In Section IV we develop a TC version of the BM algorithm with both

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a2d0e7d5o-n9/J0u8ne/$2245,2.00026©a2t 0010:859I:E53EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1144

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the ICC 2008 proceedings.

these features, and we perform a comparison with the CSI algorithm.
Finally, in Section V we show that m-ary TCs, under ML decoding, outperform the error exponent bounds for random codes down to WER=10−6, for all rates from 1/3 to 7/8.

II. TURBO DECODING ON THE BEC
We assume a parallel concatenation of two Recursive Systematic Convolutional (RSC) component codes Ca and Cb of rate Rc, that share the information set u ∈ F2k (permuted according to interleaver π for Cb). Turbo decoding is done iterating the exchange of information about the erased bits between the two component decoders. To modify the code rate, one generally punctures the binary component codes, or uses m-ary component codes. In the first case, the most efficient MAP component decoder is the BCJR algorithm. In the latter case, dual MAP decoding can be used.
In most of the examples presented in this paper, we use mary component codes with rate m/(m + 1) [9]. However, we consider also a low rate code, decoded by the BCJR algorithm. In any case, we terminate these codes using tailbiting.

A. BCJR decoding of binary codes on the BEC
As shown in [10] and [8], BCJR decoding of BEC messages can be done as for AWGN channel Log-Likelihood Ratios (LLR) λ either totally uncertain (0, for the erasures) or completely reliable (±∞, for the received bits). Then in the forward recursion of BCJR

αk(s) = αk−1(s )γk(s , s)

(1)

each transition probability γk(s , s) is simply the product of m + 1 probabilities equal to 0, 1, or 1/2. A similar equation holds for the backward recursion. The forward and backward probabilities αk(s) and βk(s) can be normalized at each step.
Each transition and each state in the trellis are either allowed or not. Since neither the BEC nor the MAP decoders can produce errors, states and transitions can only evolve with iterations from “allowed” to “certain” or “forbidden”.

B. Dual MAP decoding of m-ary codes on the BEC

An m-ary RSC encoder [9] of rate m/ (m + 1), with input
polynomials u1(D), u2(D)...um(D), whose coefficients are the bits of the input sequence u ∈ F2k, generates a parity sequence x(D) given by

x(D) = g1(D)u1(D) + ...gm(D)um(D)

(2)

g0(D)

We consider only odd generators, i.e., polynomials g1(D)... gm(D) not divisible by D. The number of transitions stemming from each state of the trellis is 2m. The number of states in the trellis is M = 2ν where ν is the code memory.
These m-ary codes are efficiently decoded on the trellis
of the dual reciprocal code which has M states and only
two transitions starting from each state. In the dual trellis,
the concept of “allowed” transition or state is lost, hence the
picture is less intuitive than in the direct trellis. We can use

the analogy with the “radical” AWGN channel (λ ∈ {0, ±∞})
and derive a “radical” dual MAP on the dual trellis where the algorithm remains unchanged as long as the inputs, tk = t (λk) = tanh (λk/2) are taken from the set {0, ±1} only. The forward recursion on the dual trellis is

1

Ak(s) = 2 Ak−1(s )Γk(s , s)

(3)

where each Γk(s , s) is the product of m + 1 terms equal to

0 or ±1:

m+1

Γk(s , s) =

(t(kj))xj

(4)

j=1

Here xj is the j-th label {0, 1} of the transition (s , s) in the
dual trellis. Each sum in (3) has only two terms. A similar
recursion is run backward to evaluate Bk (s). The extrinsic LLRs of the information bits are evaluated from Ak(s), Bk(s) and extrinsic Γk(s , s) (for more details see a.e. [11]).
We recall that if we include the fraction 1/2 in the dual recursions as in (3), then A = Ξα, where A = (A(1), A(2)...A(M ))T , Ξ is a Hadamard matrix with entries equal to ±1 and α = (α(1), α(2)...α(M ))T are the forward
state probabilities that a BCJR would deliver. The same result
holds true if we multiply both vectors by the same normalization factor ρ(Ak), such that the sum of αk(1), . . . , αk(M ) is always equal to one. Then Ak (s) ∈ {±1, 0} and αk(s) ∈ {0, 1/nα(k)}, where nα(k) is the number of states allowed by the forward recursion at the k-th step. Similarly, we normalize the backward recursion so that βk(s) ∈ {0, 1/n(βk)}, B = Ξβ, and Bk (s) ∈ {±1, 0}. If we collect the branch metrics in an M × M matrix Γk and the state transformed probabilities in column vectors Ak and Bk, the normalized forward and backward recursions can be rewritten in matrix form as

Ak+1

=

ρ(Ak) 2

ΓkT

Ak

Bk

=

ρ(Bk) 2

Γk

Bk+1

(5)

The extrinsic LLRs of the information bits are

Le(u(ki)) = t−1

BkT Γk(−i,11)Ak−1 BTk Γk(−i,01)Ak−1

(6)

where t−1 (·) is the inverse function of t (·), and

m+1

Γk(i,x)(s , s) =

(tk(j))xj

(7)

j=1,j=i

with the metrics Γk(i,x)(s , s) of transitions with xi = x, forced to zero.
If ti ∈ {0, ±1} and there is no inconsistency in the data, it can be proved that the denominator in (6) is always positive. Hence Le(u(ki)) is the sign of the numerator. If input data were inconsistent, as could happen if we flipped erased bits
randomly, the denominator would be zero.
As in the BCJR, all the variables involved in the dual MAP
never change sign during the iterations. The bit and transition transformed probabilities tk and Γk (s , s) and hence the state

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1145

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the ICC 2008 proceedings.

transformed probabilities Ak (s), Bk (s) only can switch from 0 to ±1. These properties can be exploited for an efficient
version of the dual MAP iterations.

III. THE LIMIT OF THE TD AND THE ML DECODER

When the TD fails, the remaining set of erasures E includes
a stopping set [8]. This means that there are two subcodes Ca, Cb of the component codes, consistent with the received and the decoded bits, that share the information support set.
If the intersection of these two subspaces contains a single
information set, an ML decoder would pick that set. In the
iterative decoder the two component decoders can not help
each other to recognize the unique intersection, because the
information exchange is done bit by bit. To find the intersection of the subcodes, we look for two
bases that linearly span the two subspaces. Subcode Ca, is a subspace of F2k/Rc , of unknown dimension ma. We look for a basis, i.e., a subset ia of size ma of the Ne residual erasures ua ⊆ E in the information set. Any other bit of ua is to be uniquely determined by a linear combination of the bits of ia, through the binary matrix Wa (to be determined), i.e.:

ua = Waia + za

(8)

where the sequence za ∈ Ca corresponds to all zeros in ia. All
operations and variables are in F2. A similar operation is run on the subcode Cb, obtaining ub through a basis ib, a matrix Wb and a vector zb. After permutation of ub according to the deinterleaver π−1 we have that ua and ub refer to the same bits and hence after permutation of the rows of Wb, we can constrain the pair (ia, ib) at:

Waia + Wbib = za + zb ⇒ Wi = z

(9)

with

i=

ia ib

,

W = [Wa Wb] ,

z = za + zb

(10)

If W is not full rank we claim an ML decoding failure, as

more than one turbo codeword is consistent with the received data. If W is full rank the solution is unique, (9) is solved

and, once i is known, the whole message is retrieved by (8).

Although system (9) is rather sparse we found gaussian

elimination was the most efficient algorithm. In any case, the

solution of the system of equations is not the bulk of the

computations, at least for blocks of few thousand bits. This is

what we call the CSI algorithm.

We remark that the improved TD proposed in [8] can be

seen in this framework as an iterative method to find a solution

to (9) without explicitly writing the whole system of equations. The problem (9) is equivalent to the Hy = 0 of LDPC,

that can be compiled also for TC taking into account the

generators of the component codes, as we do in Section IV.

The advantage of CSI is that acting on the basis choice, we

considerably lower the number of unknowns and equations,

up to one order of magnitude. In fact we take care to include

the minimum number of basis bits, provided that they allow

to fully describe the two subcodes independently.

A. The basis and the subcode

There are many different possible choices for the set ia. Also note that many bits (possibly almost all the bits) of ia may be chosen also in ib. If we do this, many unknowns in (9)
may be eliminated, and the solution simplified. To determine

ia and Wa we wish to use the available decoders, hence a good choice is an algorithm that is easy to implement on the

code trellis.

Focus on the direct trellis of Ca with the forbidden states

and transitions pruned by the TD. Observe the ratio between

the and

nthuemnbuemr bNetr(kN) s(okf)

allowed transitions of allowed states in

in the k-th the left side

section of that

section. This number is two power the number of bifurcations

Nb(k) that is the number of independent bits for the subcode

in that transition. If the code is binary the job is simple: if

Nt(k)/Ns(k) = 2 the k-th information bit is erased and has

to be included in the basis. A problem may arise with m-ary

codes when in the k-th section the number Ne(k) of erased information bits, is larger than Nb(k): some subset of Nb(k)

erasures may not be independent. An easy solution is to start

from a section with just one transition allowed, and proceed

forward including in the basis just one bit at a time and forcing this erased bit to zero, until Nb(k) = Ne(k).
Once the whole trellis has been covered by this procedure,

we have chosen the basis ia, and we have also the vector za (i.e., the vector of values of all the erased bits with all null ia).
Since we need only the forward recursion, the cost is roughly

half an iteration of BCJR.

The determination of the matrix Wa of (8) is the costly part of the ML decoder. The basic action is to run a BCJR with, e.g., ia(1) = [1, 0...0, 0]: given the set of Ne bits ua(1) returned by the BCJR, the first column of Wa is u(a1)+za. Each column of Wa is evaluated similarly. This procedure costs at most ma half turbo iterations. The cost can be considerably reduced

breaking the erasures and the basis in groups, according to

the unresolved error events found in the trellis. Each section

with a single allowed transition decouples the erasures, since

the effect of a bit of the basis vanishes beyond that section.

Inside this group, the influence of each base bit is also limited

by the number of bifurcations and base bits on its left, and the

number of confluences (i.e. counting the allowed states in the

right margin of the section) and base bits on its right. Hence

the BCJR can be run only on the short piece of trellis that

is potentially influenced by that bit, which can be recognized

previously. This reduces dramatically the average number of

iterations needed.

If we aim to keep the number of unknowns and equations

as low as possible in the final problem (9), the basis ib of the subcode Cb must be chosen trying to share as many bits as possible with ia. In this case, the columns of Wa and Wb are added instead of merged as in (10). We start from the bits chosen in ia and try to include them in ib as well.
With this procedure also a few steps of backward recursion are

necessary, after each erased bit of the basis has been forced

to zero. This process ends with almost all the bits of ia also

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1146

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the ICC 2008 proceedings.

included in ib, and we need to add a few extra bits with the previous method to complete the mb bits of ib.

B. ML decoding with the dual trellis

With m-ary component codes we work on the trellis of the dual reciprocal code. The dual MAP can be used like the BCJR to write the system (9) once the basis is given. To find a basis we need to evaluate the number of allowed states and allowed transitions in the direct trellis, using only variables available in the dual trellis.
When a section of the dual trellis has all nonzero Ak or Bk this corresponds to certainty of a state in the forward or backward recursion, respectively. The number of zeros in a section of the dual trellis determines uniquely the number of allowed states in the direct trellis. Besides, also the number of transitions allowed in each section of the direct trellis by the combination of the forward recursion, the backward recursion, and the state transition probabilities, can be easily evaluated in the dual domain. Specifically, we have found the following results whose proofs are not reported here, due to lack of space.

Property 1: In each section of the direct trellis, the number nα of allowed states according to the forward recursion is given by

nα = M/nA

(11)

where nA is the number of not null items in the transformed vector A(1)...A(M ). An equivalent relation exists for the
backward recursion, i.e.,

nβ = M/nB

(12)

Property 2: Given the whole set of input constraints, the number Ns(k) of allowed states in the (left) k-th section of the direct trellis is given by

Ns(k)

=

M n(Ak)nB(k)

AkT

Bk

(13)

and the number Nt(k) of allowed transitions in the k-th section of the direct trellis is given by

where

Nt(k)

=

M 2E(k)

1 ρ(Ak)

BTk+1Ak+1 nA(k)n(Bk+1)

(14)

ρ(Ak) =

1 2

if Ak−1(s ) = Γk(s , 1) = ±1, otherwise.

(15)

E(k) is the number of erased bits in k-th section and s = 1 is the state merging into state 1 of the dual trellis.
It can be proved that coefficient (15) is the same normalization factor used in the first equation of (5).

TABLE I RATIO OF COMPUTING TIMES REQUIRED FOR ALGORITHM CSI AND BM

TCSI /TBM R
k ≈ 500 k ≈ 1500 k ≈ 5000

TC, ν = 3 1/3 3/4
0.7 0.65 0.37 0.25 0.32 0.17

m-TC, ν = 3 1/2 3/4
1.28 0.95 0.89 1.20 0.79 1.40

m-TC, ν = 4 1/2 3/4 4/5
1.55 1.33 1.34 1.45 2.33 2.25 1.20 2.42 3.32

IV. AN ML DECODER BORROWED FROM LDPC
In [6] the authors propose an efficient algorithm to solve the sparse binary system

H(K)y(K) = H(K)y(K)

(16)

where y is the LDPC codeword, the union of y(K) that are the erased unknown symbols (approximately N ), and of y(K) that are the received ones, and H(K), H(K) are the two corresponding column sets of the parity check matrix H. The method is inspired to [7] and exploits the fact that the system with at most N − K equations in about N unknowns has a very sparse coefficient matrix H(K); αN unknowns are selected as reference variables and the rest of them are progressively expressed as linear combinations of the reference ones or of those already expressed. At the end of this process there remains a non sparse system with αN unknowns and, hopefully, a sufficient number of independent equations to determine them. This system can be solved via gaussian elimination with complexity proportional to (αN )3. This is the leading term (asymptotically) as the previous part and the final back substitution that delivers all the unknowns have a complexity that grows as N 2 thanks to sparseness.
Of course the smaller is α, the more efficient the algorithm. In [6] three probabilistic methods are proposed to choose the fraction α under the constraint that the probability of not being able to conclude the process goes to zero with N going to infinity for a given LDPC ensemble. The value of α depends on the code ensemble, on the erasure rate and on the method chosen, but remains in the order of few percents.

A. Application to m-ary TC
Here we are concerned with finite-length m-ary TC and ML decoding hence we have adapted the BM algorithm for a comparison with the CSI method proposed previously. The sparse parity check matrix H for an m-ary TC is easily built based on the fact that for each component code, the parity stream is given by (2) and hence, a.e. for Ca:

xa(D)g0(D) + g1(D)u1(D) + ...gm(D)um(D) = 0 (17)

Eq. (17) is a system with mL information variables u (some known and some erased), L parity bits xa and L equations that constrain the coefficients of polynomial (17) to zero:

Hau + Pxa = 0

(18)

From (17), the coefficients of the jth column of Ha are all null but in rows (k − ν, k − ν + 1, ...k) mod L that are the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1147

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the ICC 2008 proceedings.

coefficients of gl(D), with j = m(k − 1) + l. Similarly, the kth column of P has the coefficients of g0(D) in rows (k − ν, k − ν + 1, ...k) mod L. A set of equations identical to (18)
holds for Cb, hence for the interleaved information sequence and the parity stream xb. If we call Hb the matrix obtained by permuting the columns of Ha according to the interleaver π, the parity check matrix H for any turbo codeword y = [u, xa, xb]T is:

H[2L×N] =

Ha[L×mL] H[bL×mL]

P[L×L] 0[L×L] 0[L×L] P[L×L]

(19)

Now we can apply the BM algorithm. As in versions B and C of [6] we first run the iterative decoder, and then we apply the BM method when the decoder gets stuck. We add one reference variable (chosen appropriately) each time the diagonal extension step fails because there are no degree-one rows left in the residual matrix. We have implemented the BM method with the refinements suggested in [6], to exploit the sparseness of the matrix.

B. A complexity comparison between CSI and BM
We have focused on an average WER performance (10−3) and we have run both algorithms with various TC. The number of unknowns in the final problem generated by the BM algorithm, to be solved via gaussian elimination, was an average fraction α of the block size N between 1% and 7% depending on R and N . Only in the case of R = 3/4 obtained puncturing a R = 1/3 binary TC we needed an α between 8% and 15%. Except for the binary TC case (punctured or not) where the problems generated by the two algorithms have almost the same number of unknowns, the final size of the system generated by the BM algorithm is smaller than that of the CSI, approximately 2 or 3 times. Consider that the unknowns of CSI span the two full subcodes, which is not strictly necessary when the target is only the ML solution.
Notwithstanding this there are many cases where the CSI method is faster and others where the BM is advantageous. We have not found analytical results for the complexity of CSI, so far. Thus we have sampled the behavior of the two methods depending on the code rate R and memory ν, on the block size N and on the number of input lines m. We compare the computing time T as a coarse measure of complexity. In Table I we summarize all these measures TCSI /TBM . The parameters that favour the BM method are large code memories (ν=4) and not punctured high rate component codes (large m). On the opposite in the region of low code rates or high code rates obtained by puncturing and lower memories (ν=3) the CSI algorithm is more efficient.
This is due to the fact that the size of matrix H(K) (both 2L and Ne) is the most critical aspect for BM and with punctured codes, independently of the code rate, they are both as for R = 1/3 (there is no difference in the decoder between punctured and erased bits). On the other hand CSI method also takes advantage from m-ary codes with large m thanks to MAP dual decoding, but not so much as BM. These are the cases where there is the largest difference in the number of unknowns (with

R = 3/4, ν = 3, k ≈ 5000 we have α = 2% for the BM, and 8% for the CSI). Besides, most of the CSI method complexity is in the dual MAP, which is used as a method to simplify parts of the problem Hy = 0, to express bits ua as linear functions of ia. Its efficiency strongly depends on the number of states in the trellis and suffers high memory codes. Finally, the amount of extra memory requirement with CSI is always smaller than with BM, as CSI directly compiles the final reduced size linear problem.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

We have simulated CSI-ML decoding of several m-ary TC

with information block size 1504 (MPEG2 packet size) or

slightly larger for tailbiting purposes.

For the lower rates (R = 1/2, 3/5, 2/3) we have used 8

state component codes with backbone interleavers designed ad

hoc [9]. For each rate m/(m + 2) we use the first m feedfor-

ward polynomials taken from the set {17, 15, 11, 07, 05, 03}8 and feedback (13)8. For proper backbone interleaver design with higher rates (R = 4/5, 7/8) we need 16 states

component codes with m polynomials taken from the set

{35, 27, 37, 31, 15, 33, 21, 25, 03, 05, 07, 11, 13, 17}8 and feedback (23)8. These two codes would have been more efficiently

decoded via BM-ML decoder, but the error rate performance

would obviously be identical. For just one case (R = 3/4) we

have simulated both 8 and 16 state codes, for comparison. In

all these cases we have exploited the advantages of decoding

on the dual trellis. We have simulated also a rate R = 1/3

turbo code with component codes of rate 1/2, that we have

decoded by the BCJR.

For each rate we have evaluated the BEC random coding

bound for the block error probability [12] with the corre-

sponding block size, and we plot them as dash-dotted lines

in Fig. 1. Markers are simulation results for the ML decoder.

We remark that m-ary TC are indeed as good as random

codes, as they show Word Error Rates (WER) lower than the

random coding bound for every rate and erasure probability we

have simulated. This is true until the ML decoder incurs into

the error floor, due to the minimum distance of the codes.

In this respect, it is known that TC are not so efficient as

random codes. Taking into account the specific interleaver and

evaluating the first terms of the weight spectrum (d, n(d)) via

[13], we have evaluated the Maximum Likelihood Asymptote

(MLA):

M LA = n(d) d

(20)

d

The MLAs are also plotted in Fig. 1 as dashed lines. Thanks
to the backbone interleaver design we obtained high minimum
distances and low multiplicities in the weight spectra. The expected error floors are lower than 10−6 for all examples, except (R = 3/4, ν = 3). In this case the interleaver design ended up with an error floor above 10−5. This offered a good chance to show how the ML decoder follows the prediction
given by the MLA. We also see that the error rate of the
memory 4 turbo code is slightly lower, down to the error floor
of the memory 3 code, where the memory 4 performance curve

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1148

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the ICC 2008 proceedings.

WER

100

10−1

10−2

10−3

10−4

ν=3

10−5

10−6

ν=4

10−7

R=7/8, ν=4 R=4/5, ν=4 R=3/4, ν=3 R=3/4, ν=4 R=2/3, ν=3 R=3/5, ν=3 R=1/2, ν=3 R=1/3, ν=3

10−8

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

channel erasure rate ε

Fig. 1. Performance of ML decoded m-ary TCs of various rates (markers). MLAs and random coding bounds are plotted by dashed and dash-dotted lines.

TABLE II MAXIMUM AND AVERAGE NUMBER OF ITERATIONS (I ) NEEDED FOR EVERY CODE RATE (R), CODE MEMORY (ν ) AND ERASURE RATE ( )
SIMULATED IN FIG. 1, AT WER≤ 10−3 .

Rν

I max I

1/3 3 0.64 17 91 0.63 12 60
1/2 3 0.46 15 160 0.455 12 156
3/5 3 0.36 16 188 0.35 10 187
2/3 3 0.29 11 152 0.28 8 141

Rν

I max I

3/4 3 0.2 5 40 0.19 3 40
3/4 4 0.21 24 144 0.207 19 146
4/5 4 0.17 33 121 0.16 16 120
7/8 4 0.10 13 81 0.09 5 78

breaks through toward its MLA, expected at 10−7 thanks to its larger dmin. This happens because, contrary to turbo decoding, there are no convergence issues when we use an ML decoder: high memory component codes do not entail any degradation of the convergence threshold.
In these simulations the average number of equivalent turbo iterations required by the ML decoder is less than 35 for all codes, with WER≤ 10−3. The maximum number of equivalent iterations we have found is between 40 and 190, depending on the code rate. Details on the average and maximum number of iterations for the various code rates are listed in Table II.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
Starting from the framework proposed in [8] for the analysis of BEC turbo stopping sets, we have developed an ML decoder for turbo codes on the BEC. This decoder processes the residual subcodes left by iterative decoding, seeking the intersection constrained by both subcodes.
The complexity expressed in terms of equivalent turbo iterations is not dramatic and, anyway, implementable. By simulation we have shown that applying this decoder to m-ary Turbo Codes with backbone interleaver [9] we outperform the error exponent bounds for random codes down to WER=10−6,

for all rates ranging from 1/3 to 7/8.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors whish to thank Prof. Martin Tomlinson and Dr. Adrian Ambroze for providing the initial impetus to this work and for the helpful suggestions and discussions.
REFERENCES
[1] D. J. MacKay, Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[2] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic Information Transfer Functions: Model and Erasure Channel Properties,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Vol. 50, pp. 2657-2673, Nov. 2004.
[3] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient Erasures Correcting Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. 47, pp. 569-584, Feb. 2001.
[4] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T. Richardson, R. Urbanke, “Finite Length analysis of LDPC codes on the Binary Erasure Channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Vol. 48, pp. 1570-1571, June 2002.
[5] H. Pishro-Nik, F. Fekri, “On decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check codes over the Binary Erasure Channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. 50, pp. 439-454, Mar. 2004.
[6] D. Burshtein, G. Miller, “An efficient Maximum Likelihood decoding of LDPC codes over the Binary Erasure Channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. 50, pp. 1-8, Nov. 2004.
[7] T. Richardson, R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. 47, pp. 638-656, Feb. 2001.
[8] E. Rosnes, O. Ytrehus, “Finite-length analysis of Turbo Decoding on the Binary Erasures Channel,” in Proc. ISIT ’05, pp. 1246-1250.
[9] M. Ferrari and S. Bellini “Multi-binary Turbo Codes with controlled error-floors,” submitted to IEEE Trans. on Commun..
[10] B. Kurkoski, P. Siegel, J. Wolf, “Exact probability of erasure and a decoding algorithm for convolutional codes on the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. GLOBECOM ’03, pp. 1741-1745, 1-5 Dec. 2003.
[11] J. Berkmann and C. Weiss, “On dualizing trellis based APP decoding algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Commun., Vol. 50, pp. 1743-1757, Nov. 2002.
[12] R. G. Gallager, “A simple derivation of the coding theorem and some applications,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 11, pp. 318, Jan. 1965.
[13] M. Ferrari, S. Bellini, “Hamming weight evaluation of non binary turbo codes,” IEEE Commun. Letters, Vol. 9, No. 7, pp. 640-642, July 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1149

