IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

187

Macroscopic and Microscopic Approaches in Sector Failure Rate Estimation
Alexander V. Kuznetsov and Raman Venkataramani
Seagate Research, Pittsburgh, PA 15222 USA
The sector failure rate (SFR) is extremely small at normal operating conditions of hard disk drives. In practice, it cannot be obtained by counting as that would require prohibitively large simulation times. Therefore, appropriate statistical models characterizing the distribution of error symbols are used in order to estimate the SFR. In this paper, we look at the underlying philosophy of existing estimation methods and classify them into macroscopic and microscopic types. We observe that the microscopic approach is well suited for certain iterative channels.
Index Terms—Error correction coding, error modeling, failure rate estimation, minimum relative entropy.

I. INTRODUCTION

I N data storage systems such as magnetic and optical storage devices, there is a need for extremely high reliability in terms of recovering the stored data. This is achieved by using powerful error correction codes (ECCs) for the recording channel. The simplified block diagram of a typical magnetic recording channel is shown in Fig. 1. The block labeled “channel” represents the combination of physical channel and the inner error correcting codes designed for the particular physical channel. An additional outer ECC is used to correct any residual bit errors resulting from the inner decoder. The purpose of the outer code is to guarantee extremely low error rates. Reed–Solomon (RS) codes are used in today’s recording systems due to their high code rates and their ability to correct burst errors efficiently.
In magnetic and optical recording systems, bits are read and written in blocks or sectors, where a sector can either be a single ECC codeword or contain a small number of such codewords interleaved so that in an event of a burst error, the symbol errors would be distributed evenly among the codewords. Thus, a commonly used figure of merit for a storage device is its sector failure rate (SFR), defined as the rate at which the ECC is unable to decode any part of the sector. Sector failure rates are typically extremely low (10 or smaller) and cannot be estimated by simulation and counting. Thus, the estimation of sector failure rates is done by first modeling the error statistics of the input to the ECC decoder, and then using the model to estimate the SFR. Because the model is analytically tractable, we can predict even extremely small rates of sector failure.
In this paper, we examine a few existing flavors of SFR estimation based on modeling of error statistics. From a philosophical standpoint, these approaches can be classified as microscopic and macroscopic methods having their own advantages and disadvantages. In Section III-A, we present a macroscopic approach based on a multinomial model for error events. For this model, we show how to estimate the model parameters from a sample data set and estimate the SFR and confidence bounds. In Section IV, we present a microscopic method which is applicable to channels with iterative decoding. Finally, we present an example of SFR estimation.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2007.912835

Fig. 1. Block diagram of a channel with an outer error correcting code.

II. DEFINITIONS

We assume that the outer ECC code is a Reed–Solomon (RS)

code whose -bit symbols are elements of

. The RS en-

coder can produce codewords of length

symbols.

For sufficiently large , the entire sector can be a single code-

word of the RS code. Otherwise, multiple codewords are inter-

leaved in a sector. An RS code can correct as many as symbol

errors in the received codeword and encode

message

symbols in a codeword of length .

Denote the written and decoded codewords respectively

by

and

, where

. The error indicator vector is a binary

sequence defined as

if

and

otherwise.

Denote its weight distribution by

where denotes the probability and

is the

Hamming weight. Thus, the word failure rate (WFR) is

(1)

where is the ECC capability. Assuming that codewords

are interleaved in sector, the sector failure rate (SFR)

is given by the union bound:

. Usually

if the word failures are independent and the

WFR is small. The quantity (1) is difficult to compute because

the error weight distribution of the error vectors is analytically

intractable. Furthermore, the typical values for

are so

small that it is infeasible to estimate them by simulation and

counting.

The traditional approach to estimate failure rates is to use a

model for error vector statistics and compute the failure rates an-

alytically. The model parameters are estimated using a sample

collection of actual error vectors for the given channel and its

inner code. This method requires far fewer number of error

vectors than to estimate the failure rates by directly counting

failures. In the following sections, we provide models for the

0018-9464/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

188

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

requires the knowledge of the exact code and interleaver used. In the following sections, we consider two methods for SFR estimation: a macroscopic approach based on the multinomial modeling and a microscopic approach based on modeling the error events with two types of components. These methods are discussed in detail below.

Fig. 2. Simplified illustration of iterative decoding.

A. Multinomial Model

According to this model (a) an error indicator vector consists

error statistics of the error vectors and show how to estimate the word/sector failure rate.

of independent error events, and (b) an error event consists of a collection of up to ones (representing symbols in error) including the trivial error event with no symbols in error.

III. MACROSCOPIC AND MICROSCOPIC APPROACHES

In practice, the nontrivial error events are so infrequent that we assume that they do not overlap. Let the error events in an

The errors at the output of a Viterbi detector are bursty and localized because the ISI in the system is approximately timelimited. For systems that use codes such as run-length limited (RLL) codes and convolutional codes, we observe a similar phe-

error vector be denoted by

, and their

weights by

. Let for

denote the proba-

bility of seeing an error event of weight symbols. This model

results in the multinomial distribution for the error vector weight

nomenon that the errors tend to be bursty and localized. Since a

single bit error in a symbol produces a symbol error, we find that

(2)

a bursty sequence of bit errors usually causes a train of symbol

errors. However, for systems that employ iterative codes such as low-density parity check (LDPC) codes or turbo codes, the erroneous bits can be scattered across the entire error sector instead of being bursty. Fig. 2 is an illustration of iterative decoding. Note that the code is applied to a set of input bits and being and

where is the number of events in the error indicator vector with weight , and is the set of all combinations of indices
such that their sum is and the total weight is

then passed through an interleaver . This creates a strong long-

range correlation of erroneous bits and symbols. The problem

and

is to determine good statistical models for both cases, i.e., for

more simple noniterative channels with bursty errors, and also This is perhaps the most widely used model for modeling error

for more complex channels with iterative decoding.

vector weights [1]–[7]. For example, Feng et al. [3] consider

Philosophically, all methods for estimation of the properties byte size symbols and error events with a maximum length of

of the error indicator vectors may be classified as either micro-

bytes. The model parameters are estimated using the

scopic or macroscopic. We say that a method is microscopic if “common sense” approach based on the frequency of occur-

it attempts to capture the precise correlation among symbol er- rence of each error event. Keirn et al. [2] examine both the multi-

rors in terms of their locations. Likewise, the algorithm to es- nomial and block multinomial models.

timate the model parameters uses the actual symbol error loca- The multinomial method is a macroscopic approach, because

tions in the available training data set. In general, it is a diffi- we model the weight of error vectors rather than the individual

cult task to determine this precise microscopic model for itera- error symbol locations. The model parameters are

tive coded channels because they are very complex due to the

.

long-range correlations present in the symbol errors. Furthermore, depending on the exact code and interleaver that is used, B. Markov Chain Models

each iteratively coded channel has its own characteristic micro- Sometimes the symbol errors are modeled as Markov random

scopic model. On the other hand, the macroscopic method at- processes. An example is the Gilbert model [8], [9] or the gen-

tempts to model only the weight of the error indicator vectors, eralized Gilbert model [10] which can be represented using a

paying no attention to the actual locations of the bit or symbol state diagram. The model parameters are the unknown transi-

errors. The model estimation also relies only on the weights of tion probabilities. These models are microscopic because they

the error indicator vectors in the training data, rather than the explicitly model the error locations, not the error weight.

precise error locations.

In this section, we give an example of a slightly richer model

The macroscopic method is generally simple to analyze: the than the Gilbert model. According to this model, given that

main problem is to model the weight distribution function and a symbol error has occurred the probability of seeing another

estimate the model parameters from training data. From expe- symbol error is , where is the run-length of symbol er-

rience, the macroscopic approach also tends to work well for rors leading up to that time. To reduce the model complexity,

simple noniterative codes. However, they tend to be inaccurate we let

for all

. This yields the state diagram

for channels with iterative codes and long-range dependence be- shown in Fig. 3. When the chain returns to the zero state from

tween symbol errors prompting us to resort to a microscopic the nonzero state , the generation of an error event

is

model. Although a microscopic approach might yield more ac- completed by attaching the final “0” to the run of consecu-

curate results, it is often difficult to find an accurate model as it tive ones. The reduced complexity model is sufficient in many

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUZNETSOV AND VENKATARAMANI: MACROSCOPIC AND MICROSCOPIC APPROACHES IN SECTOR FAILURE RATE ESTIMATION

189

and (5), we obtain the following expression for the word failure rate:
(6)

Fig. 3. Model for error event generation.

practical cases. In fact, a model with fewer parameters is preferable because the model parameters can then be estimated more accurately from limited data than a more complex model.
The probability of the th error event is
(3)

In the above definition,

for all

. For this

model, there is an additional step of finding the modeled weight

distribution which is done as follows.

Define the following matrix whose rows and columns indexes

are assumed to start from 0:

...

... ... . . .

...

(4)

The entries of

are monomials in , and the coefficient of

is the probability of transition from state to state

whereas the presence of an in a term indicates that the tran-

sition induces a symbol error. Note that for a first-order model,

i.e.,

, (4) degenerates to the scalar

.

Clearly, is the probability transition matrix for the state di-

agram in Fig. 3.

Define

whose entries are polynomials in .

The powers of in enumerate the symbol errors in a code-

word of length . Thus, the entry

is a polynomial in

in which the coefficient of is the probability of a run of

length starting at state and ending at state consisting of

a total of exactly symbol errors. Since we are primarily inter-

ested in the number of symbol errors and not the final state, we

have

(5)

where is the coefficient of in the polynomial

. Note that the above expression is not computation-

ally very intensive. The quantity

can be implemented

in roughly

polynomial matrix multiplications. We can

also accumulate the coefficients of

and higher powers of

after each multiplication.

C. Estimation of Model Parameters

Having chosen an appropriate model for the symbol errors, its

parameters are estimated from a library of actual error vectors

for the particular channel and codes used. Let the data set consist

of error indicator vectors

.

First, consider the macroscopic approach. Let denote the

histogram of the error vector weights in the sample set of error

vectors:

, where is the number of error in-

dicator vectors with weight and

is the total

number of vectors in the data set . Let

denote the

modeled weight distribution for the model with parameters

. Our aim is to determine the model parame-

ters for which the modeled weight distribution vector matches the experimental weight distribution vector

. The optimal choice of the model parameters minimizes a cost function or a distance measure between the two distributions.
Some researchers [11] have considered ad hoc cost functions such as the mean squared error between the counted and modeled weight distributions

(7)

or sometimes, the mean squared error between the counted and modeled word failure rates (or equivalently, sector failure rates)
(8)

where

and

are the counted and modeled WFR

estimates for an error correcting capability of symbols.

Although the above cost functions are conceptually simple,

they are suboptimal. Indeed, the optimal model parameter is the

maximum-likelihood (ML) model estimate from the empirical

weight distribution. It is a fairly easy exercise to check that this

solution yields the so-called minimum relative entropy solution:

, where

where is a vector containing the initial probabilities of the

states, and

is a row vector of length con-

(9)

sisting of ones. For simplicity, we assume that all error vectors

represent paths in the state diagram starting at the zeroth state. In is the familiar relative entropy function or the Kullback–Leibler

practice, this assumption has a very minimal effect on accuracy distance between the two weight distributions [12]. All of the

of our estimates because the model order is much smaller above optimizations can be done using a gradient descent algo-

than the length of a codeword and the probabilities

are rithm [13]. Compared to (9), the cost functions (7) and (8) tend

quite small. Thus, we take

. Combining (1) to place too much importance on matching the distributions for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

190

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

small values of index (usually large values of

while ig-

noring the tails where

is smaller. The result is that the tail

probabilities are estimated poorly.

We should note that our recommendation to use (9) does not

require a specific model. It could be a multinomial model, or any

other model with a known distribution . In other words, if

we have a model for the weight distribution , then the cor-

rect metric for “fitting” it to the experimental data is the min-

imal relative entropy (9), not (7) or (8) as used by some. Fitting

methods work well for noniterative channels, but again often

does not work for iterative channels.

For the microscopic approach, we solve the ML estimation

problem using the actual data set rather than the weight

distributions

(10)

where

is the probability of observing the data set

assuming the model .

As an example, consider the estimation of model parameters

for the (microscopic) Markov model shown in Fig. 3. Let

be the total number of times that an error indicator vector from

the training set traverses the path from state to state

(for

) or looped-back to state (if

).

Similarly, let be the number of times that the path from state

to 0 is traversed. Evidently,

is the number of times

that state is visited. Then, it is an easy exercise to show that

the optimal estimates for are given by

and is computed from using (3). Also, the modeled weight

distribution

and WFR are found using the algorithm de-

scribed in Section III-B.

Fig. 4. Model for isolated error event generation, where S and E denote the
start and end states.

is modeled as a random variable independent of the . Fur-

thermore, assume that each (but not the error-free runs )

is described by finite state model with start and end states

and , respectively, as shown in Fig. 4. In other words, condi-

tioned on the first symbol error, the remaining errors are given

precisely by the state model in Fig. 3 without the loop-back at

the “0” state, i.e.,

. The estimation of transition proba-

bilities in the trellis from experimental data can be derived in a

straightforward way using the ML estimation (10) described in

Section III-C, but it is not included in this paper for brevity.

Remark 1: We reiterate that the Markov model is used only

to model these nontrivial error events. The error-free runs are

not given by the Markov model, and we do not try to fit them

to the Markov model for its parameter estimation. Instead, the

number of error events in a codeword is modeled separately as

an independent entity. The PDF of the error-free runs is used in-

directly as described below. Thus, the algorithm is to parse the

experimentally observed error indicator vectors into nontrivial

error events (bursts of ones), and error-free runs , and ex-

tract the transition probabilities from the data

alone.

A. SFR Estimation Using Microscopic Method

IV. MICROSCOPIC METHOD WITH TWO COMPONENT TYPES

We shall now extend multinomial model to SFR estimation

of iterative channels as well. Let

denote an error event

(EE) of length in : it consists of

ones followed by a

zero, e.g.,

. Note that we exclude the single-zero

event

in the list of error events. A sequence of

consecutive zeros is called an error-free run of length .

Thus, we can always parse an error indicator vector into a unique

sequence of interlacing error events and error-free runs as

follows:

For example,

is represented

as

, where

,

,

,

,

,

, and

.

Main Assumptions: Rather than modeling the symbol errors

using a state model as in Fig. 3, we choose to model only the

isolated error events and the number of such error events. The

events are modeled as independent identically distributed

random objects. The number of such error events in a sector

By definition,

is the word failure

rate, where is the maximum number of errors that the ECC

can correct. Given the number of error events in the sector,

we can also define the conditional word failure rate as

(11)

Here, we should note that if

, then

according to our definition of an error event of length .

The probability

that the error event has the Hamming

weight is calculated using (3) and estimated transition prob-

abilities of the Markov chain . In practice, given the transi-

tion probabilities of the Markov chain and the number of

error events , the conditional word failure rate

can

be easily calculated recursively using a computer. As we already

mentioned before, the number of error events in a codeword is

a random variable. Therefore, its PDF

must be estimated

from statistics obtained from real or simulated data. Given ,

the word failure rate is calculated as follows:

(12)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUZNETSOV AND VENKATARAMANI: MACROSCOPIC AND MICROSCOPIC APPROACHES IN SECTOR FAILURE RATE ESTIMATION

191

2) The distribution

can have different types of tails for

different detectors. For example, we found that iterative

channels using TPC and LDPC codes have exponential

tails

and iterative channels using SPC have tails with a Poisson distribution

Q k Fig. 5. Empirical distribution ( ) for an iterative SPC based channel.

3) Having identified the tail type, we can use data fitting techniques such as those described in the last section to choose specific parameters of the distributions. Suboptimal metrics can also be used. For example, we can choose parameter that minimizes the following quantity:

Q k Fig. 6. Empirical distribution ( ) for an iterative TPC-based channel.

where is an integer chosen in the range

,

and

is some constant. A quadratic form

is a

convenient choice.

4) Therefore, in (12), we use experimental values

for

and modeled values

for

.

Remark 2: An experimental histogram for the number of non-

trivial error events per sector should be used as is. It could be

fancy for some iterative channels, so do not approximate it. The

tail of the histogram will be always missing due to limited sim-

ulation time. Do not use zeros for the tail. We can guess the

analytical shape of the tail (exponential, Poisson, or something

else). For different classes of iterative channels the guess could

be different. Choose the parameter(s) of the analytical expres-

sion for tail by matching with existing experimental part of tail

with analytical part. In our case, this last approach was working

well for all types of iterative channels.

B. Estimation of

C. Simulation Results

Collecting statistics for estimating probabilities and

In the following example, we evaluate the performance of the

requires long simulations or tests of real drives. But even after descriptive and predictive capabilities of various SFR estima-

lengthy testing, we rarely observe error events longer than some tion methods. The descriptive capability refers to how well the

small integer for moderate SNRs. Fig. 5 shows an example of analytic SFR estimate from a data set matches the counted es-

the simulation results for a perpendicular iterative channel using timate from the same data set. The predictive capability refers

a single parity check (SPC) code. In this case, the maximum to how well the analytic SFR estimate from a data set matches

number of observed error events in a sector was

(bottom the counted SFR, which uses a much larger data set. Thus, to

curve). Fig. 6 shows another example of the simulation results evaluate the predictive capability of a method, we first estimate

in a perpendicular iterative channel using a turbo product code the SFR analytically using a limited set of data. We then per-

(TPC) where the maximum number of observed error events in form more simulations and use this data to get a more reliable

a sector was

.

counted estimate, which usually yields more points on the SFR

Different experiments with SFR estimation show the plot. Finally, we compare the analytic estimate and the counted

following.

estimates. Another way of viewing this is that we collect a lot

1) We cannot apply (12) with

for

since this of data for the counting estimation but only a part of it is used

leads to an abrupt change of the slope of SFR curves as a in the analytic estimation.

function of at some

and wrong SFR estimates Consider a TPC system operating at 24 dB. Each sector con-

for

. This is because the tail part of the sequence sists of

symbols (including the ECC parity symbols)

is too small to be accurately estimated by counting, which are 10 bits wide. The full data set contains 79711 sectors

yet crucial for estimation. Therefore, the distribution

and the partial data set contains 10% of this data. Suppose we

must be extrapolated for

.

use an RS code with correction capability of symbol errors,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

192

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

approach works better. We observe through simulations that the microscopic models can be used for certain iterative channels where the multinomial model fails.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was supported by Seagate Technology.

Fig. 7. SFR estimate for the TPC system at 24 dB.

we require

parity symbols. Thus, the code rate would be

. Fig. 7 shows the SFR estimates as a function

of using several methods from the partial data and counted

values from the full data set. These methods appear to be consis-

tent with each other and match the extrapolated counted values

well.

V. CONCLUSION
We examined several existing approaches to estimate SFR for iterative and noniterative channels. Philosophically, they may be classified as macroscopic and microscopic depending on whether we model the error weights or the actual error locations. For the macroscopic approach, we introduced the well-known minimum relative entropy solution to estimate the model parameters from a sample library of error vectors for any chosen model. These can then be used to analytically compute the word and sector failure rates. The macroscopic approach tends to be easier to analyze and applicable to a wide range of noniterative channels. However, it is inaccurate for iterative channels where the underlying codes create long-range correlations in symbol errors. For these channels, the microscopic

REFERENCES
[1] R. Martin, “Error bounds for concatenated Reed-Solomon/convolutional codes,” in Proc. MILCOM’79, Oct. 1979, vol. 2, pp. 23.5.1–23.5.6.
[2] Z. A. Keirn, V. Y. Krachkovsky, E. F. Haratsch, and H. Burger, “Use of redundant bits for magnetic recording: Single-parity codes and ReedSolomon error-correcting code,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 225–230, Jan. 2004.
[3] W. Feng, A. Vityaev, G. Burd, and N. Nazari, “On the performance of parity codes in magnetic recording systems,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 2000, pp. 1877–1881.
[4] R. Cideciyan, J. Coker, E. Eleftheriou, and R. Galbraith, “Noise predictive maximum likelihood detection combined with parity-based postprocessing,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 714–720, Mar. 2001.
[5] C. M. Riggle and G. McCarthy, “Design of error correction systems for disk drives,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 2362–2371, Jul. 1998.
[6] K. Saeki and Z. Keirn, “Optimal combination of detection and error correction coding for magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 708–713, Mar. 2001.
[7] J. Moon, J. Park, and J. Lee, “Cyclic redundancy check code based high-rate error-detection code for perpendicular recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1626–1628, May 2006.
[8] J. R. Yee and E. J. Weldon, “Evaluation of the performance of errorcorrecting codes on a Gilbert channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 2316–2323, Aug. 1995.
[9] E. N. Gilbert, “Capacity of burst noise channel,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 39, pp. 1253–1266, Sep. 1960.
[10] J. K. Wolf, “ECC performance of interleaved RS codes with burst errors,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 75–79, Jan. 1998.
[11] J. L. Sonntag, “New technique for estimating ECC performance of channels with large blocks,” Lucent Technologies, Tech. Rep., 2000.
[12] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley, 1991.
[13] D. G. Luenberger, Optimization by Vector Space Methods. New York: Wiley, 1997.
Manuscript received May 18, 2007. Corresponding author: A. V. Kuznetsov (e-mail: alexander.v.kuznetsov@seagate.com).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

