ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008
Improved Impulse Method to Evaluate the Low Weight Profile of Sparse Binary Linear Codes
David Declercq and Marc Fossorier ETIS ENSEA/UCP/CNRS-UMR-8051, 6, avenue du Ponceau,
95014, Cergy-Pontoise, France. Email: david.declercq@ensea.fr

Abstract— In this paper, the impulse method to determine the low weight profile of sparse codes is improved based on efficient probabilistic approaches for reliability based decoding that are adapted to this problem. As a result, compared with previous approaches, the same low weight profile can be obtained with a significant time reduction (for example from 30 hours to a few minutes) or more complete low weight profiles can be determined in the same amount of time. Index terms- impulse method, weight distribution, minimum distance, low weight profile.
I. INTRODUCTION
In [1], [2], a simple method referred to as the impulse method has been introduced to compute the minimum distance of turbo codes. The method was adapted to the computation of the minimum distance of low density parity check (LDPC) codes in [3], [4] and tuned to approximate the low weight profile of LDPC codes in [5]. The method was further improved in [6] in a code dedicated way by utilizing the code graph connectivity as well as extended to the determination of stopping sets. The use of the impulse method to determine small stopping sets has also been investigated in [7]. In [8], a probabilistic approach using the time memory trade-off has been proposed to determine low weight codewords of binary linear codes. This method was improved in [9] and adapted to the determination of the low weight profile of LDPC codes in [10], [11].
In this paper, we first review existing impulse methods and exhibit some of their limitations. We then propose improvements of the original impulse method for LDPC codes which overcome these limitations and show the resulting gains in efficiency by comparative simulations.
II. REVIEW OF EXISTING APPROACHES
The impulse method introduced in [1], [2] is a simple method to evaluate an upper bound on the minimum distance of a binary linear block code. It consists of adding to the allzero codeword one (or a few) impulse(s) of large magnitude and decode the resulting vector with a soft decision decoding algorithm. Both the magnitude of the impulse(s) [1], [2] and the weight of the decoded codeword [3], [4] can provide an upper bound on the minimum distance of the code considered.
In [3], [4], it is proposed to use impulses of infinite (or of very large) magnitude in order to restrict the search to the

ne least reliables

1

1 1

nd

1

1

H=

1

1

0/1

M

1

0

1 1

N
Fig. 1. Parity check matrix form for original bit reversing method.
coset of the subcode with “ones” at the impulse positions. The method is applied to LDPC codes and an iterative soft decoding algorthim is used. At each iteration, the soft values returned by the decoder are ordered in increasing absolute values of reliability and the corresponding permutation is also applied to the columns of H, the M ×N parity check matrix of the code. Then a Gaussian elimination is performed on the ne first columns of the permuted H, ne < M . In the process, nd dependent colums are found and these columns are positioned after the last independent column, as depicted in Figure 1.
If the last M − (ne − nd) parity check equations of the matrix depicted in Figure 1 are satisfied by the hard decisions of the soft values in these ordered positions, all 2nd possible binary values at the dependent positions are tested and for each choice, the remaining ne − nd first values are determined from the systematic form. Consequently, at most 2nd codewords can be found at each iteration. The value of parameter nd defines the number of codewords tested and consequently fixes the method overall complexity. Hence the value of nd should be reasonnably selected, say nd ≤ 10.
For simplicity, we refer to this second approach also as the impulse method.
The impulse method is composed of two main algorithmic components: first, the use of an iterative message passing decoder intitialized with impulse noise, and second, a list

978-1-4244-2571-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

1963

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

decoder based on a permuted version of the parity-check matrix H defined by the bit reliabilities at each iteration. At the first iteration, the reliabilities correspond to the absolute values of the channel log-likelihoods, and at later iterations, the reliabilities are computed from the absolute values of the a posteriori log-probability ratios.
Regarding an efficient use of the list decoder, we observe the following drawbacks:
(i) The method is somewhat qualitative as an iteration is discarded if any of the last M − (ne − nd) parity check equations is not satisfied. Although it may be appropriate to search for the minimum distance in a short time, it seems less suitable to the search of a low weight profile in a non strictly restricted amount of time as good candidates may be missed. Furthermore, in many cases, the partial Gaussian elimination is more computationally costly than the search for low weight codewords (which complexity is tuned by the value of nd).
(ii) With respect to reliability-based decoding algorithms [12, Chapter 10], the nd dependent positions correspond to the least reliable positions of the most reliable information set, also referred to as the most reliable basis (MRB) and the search corresponds to applying a Chase-type [14] search on these positions. Since besides the impulses, the algorithm should tend to include the positions which are most likely to be “zero” in the MRB, an OSD-type [15] re-encoding in which a few positions are flipped over the entire MRB seems promising as well.
(iii) The impulses are almost always included in the MRB as they are initialized with very high likelihood values. However considering that the all-zero codeword was initially sent, this may not be the best strategy afterall. If we conditioned on the all zero codeword being sent, the MRB could be computed using the log-likelihood ratios:

Lk

=

log

prob(yk |ck prob(yk |ck

= =

0) 1)

k = 0 . . . N − 1 (1)

instead of their absolute values. With such a conditioned MRB, the positions of the impulses are likely to occupy the first positions rather than the last positions of the ordering in Figure 1. (iv) Each test on the codewords in the list is processed independently and no memory is exploited. Since codewords of low weight are expected to be found, it would be interesting to record those with a large weight in the same positions and add them pairwise. Hence approaches along the line of Stern search [8] or BMA [17] seem promising extensions.

We propose in the next section some modifications of the impulse method to overcome the limitations induced by (i)-(iv) and which led in a consequent performance improvement.

III. IMPROVEMENTS OF THE LIST DECODER
In this paper, we do not change the first step of the impulse method, that is the iterative message passing decoder with impulse noise initialization. We choose the Min-Sum decoder

as it showed better behavior for the impulse method [4], and we consider the multiple impulse case, that is Ni ≥ 1 indices are corrupted with an infinite impulse noise. It has been observed in [13] (and we reached the same conclusion in our simulations), that for difficult problems (typically codes with large minimum distance), it is desirable to consider a consequent number of impulses Ni ∈ {2, . . . 5} to obtain better estimates of the low weight distance profile.
In this section, we describe in details the two main algorithmic improvements that we proposed in order to speed up the search of low weight codewords in the vicinity of the decoding trajectory. These improvements focus on choosing a list of candidate low weight codewords with a good performance/complexity tradeoff. In other words, for a given cardinality of the codeword list which fixes the method complexity, we wish to record the largest number of low weight codewords.
A. Composition of the list
a) MRB conditioned to the all-zero codeword.: Since we know that the all-zero codeword is used, it is possible to sort the reliabilities in ascending order with this a priori knowledge instead of sorting the absolute values of the reliabilities as in [4]. As a consequence, the indices of the impulses are labeled as least reliable instead of most reliable, and then the corresponding bits can be either set to 0 or 1 during the re-encoding process. This changes a lot the composition of the list since we no longer explore the space formed by the coset corresponding to the impulses, but we explore the most reliable directions of the code space from the all-zero codeword. This increases the chance of finding low weight codewords which are not in the coset of the impulse bits.
We modify the existing technique in the following manner. For a linear code defined by a parity-check matrix H of size M × N , the bits reliabilities are sorted in increasing order of the log-likelihood-ratios defined in (1). The corresponding column permutation is denoted πrel. Then a Gaussian elimination is performed on H.πrel in order to get the MRB conditioned to the all-zero codeword. The column permutation obtained during the Gaussian elimination is denoted πMRB. As a consequence, with the overall column permutation π = πrel.πMRB, the matrix H.π has the form of the transpose of a generator matrix H.π = [IdM |P ]1, and can be used for the reencoding process. Finally, we denote by cπ(0) . . . cπ(N−1) the codeword indices corresponding to H.π, so that the K = N − M bits cπ(M) . . . cπ(N−1) serve as information set in the list decoder.
b) Order statistics instead of Chase type.: We have found by simulation that for the same complexity, an order statistics decoding (OSD) approach [15] provides a better list than a Chase type list decoder [14]. In a Chase type list decoder of order d (Chase-d), the codewords are
1This is the case only if rank(H) = M , but the method can be adapted easily to codes with redundant rows.

1964
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

Impulse method: Ni = 2 - OSD-1
weight 20 -→ 2 weight 22 -→ 19 weight 24 -→ 48 weight 26 -→ 114

Impulse method: Ni = 2 - Chase-8
weight 20 -→ 0 weight 22 -→ 8 weight 24 -→ 11 weight 26 -→ 39

TABLE I PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF OSD AND CHASE LIST DECODERS IN
THE IMPULSE METHOD FOR THE MACKAY (N = 504, K = 252) REGULAR (3, 6) LDPC CODE.

obtained by re-encoding all the non-zero combinations of the

d least reliable bits in the MRB, that is by considering all

non-zero d-uples for cπ(M) . . . cπ(M+d−1) , while the other bits cπ(M+d) . . . cπ(N−1) are set to 0. The size of the list is therefore 2d − 1.

In an OSD based re-encoding of order d (OSD-d), all

the non-zeros K-uples cπ(M) . . . cπ(N−1) with Hamming

weight lower or equal than d are considered. The size of such

d
a list is therefore

K k

.

k=1

It is readily seen that if the size of the lists are equal, the

complexity of the impulse method is the same. The OSD-d

method appears to be more suitable than the Chase method

since in practice, with an impulse noise initialization, the

difference of reliability between the first permuted information

bit cπ(M) and the last one cπ(N−1) is rather small. It follows that flipping a bit close to cπ(M) or close to cπ(N−1) gives the same overall re-encoded reliability, but the latter case cannot

be obtained with a Chase type list. In order to verify this

assumption, we have conducted the following experiment: with

the exact same impulse noise locations, we have compared the

low weight profiles of the MacKay (N = 504, K = 252)

regular (3, 6) LDPC code [16] obtained with the impulse

method. For each of the NMC = 500 impulse initializations, Ni = 2 impulses were chosen at random, Nit = 40 iterations of the Min-Sum decoder were performed, and at each decoding

iteration, we considered a list decoder with 252 candidate

codewords for an OSD-1 method and 256 candidate codewords

for a Chase-8 method. The codewords of Hamming weight

lower than 27 were stored and the results are shown in Table I.

The OSD approach is indeed much more efficient to find low

weight codewords than the Chase approach. The same trend

has been observed for other codes.

B. Memory versus Complexity
The approach we propose consists of increasing the size of the list in a clever way. The approach is related to ideas borrowed from the Stern decomposition [8] and the “box and matc” technique introduced in [17].
First the set of codewords in the OSD-d list are stored in memory. The idea is to increase the list size by combining

the codewords in the memory, conditioned on the fact that they share a given number ncb of common bits in the least reliable part. We call the subset of indices for these ncb bits the control band (CB). By adding bitwise two such distinct codewords, we save the time of the re-encoding process for a codeword which has the following properties: (i) zero Hamming weight over the CB, (ii) Hamming weight at most 2d in the information set. The codewords obtained in such a way are then likely to have small overall Hamming weight, and they are obtained without the need of a re-encoding process. This technique allows to increase greatly the size of the list of candidate low weight codewords, with a reduced computational time. The additionnal cost in memory to store the codeword OSD-d list is the only price to pay.
In practice, we adopt the following procedure. We define 2ncb memory boxes, which correspond to the number of possible binary ncb-uples over the CB. Each box is then labeled by the ncb bits of the CB. During the OSD-d process, for each codeword with Hamming weight lower than a fixed threshold (fixed to 3 times the target minimum distance in our simulations), the codeword is saved in the box labeled by its CB value. After the OSD-d process is completed, all the codewords in a box have common bits over their CB. We then perform bitwise additions of the codewords in the same box and check if the resulting codewords have low Hamming weight. Note that by adopting the strategy that has been proposed in [17], we can further increase the size of the list by comparing the codewords in a box with the codewords in adjacent boxes, that is boxes for which the Hamming distance between their labels is small (typically 1 or 2). As far as computationnal complexity is concerned, adding one candidate codeword with the box technique requires only N binary additions while the re-encoding of one codeword requires O(N 2) binary operations. With the same computationnal complexity and additional memory, using the box technique allows to test a lot more candidate low weight codewords, therefore increasing the probability of identifying the low weight profile of a linear code.
Let us now discuss the location of the control band in the redundancy part of the MRB. The ncb control bits can be put anywhere within the M first columns of H.π, without changing the box procedure we have described in this section. The two extreme cases are:
• to place to control band at the beginning, i.e. cπ(0) . . . cπ(ncb−1) . This choice is good since these bits
correspond to the least reliables conditioned to the allzero codeword, which means that during the OSD-d step, these bits are likely to be set to one during the re-encoding process. For exemple, the impulses are always in the CB with this choice. It follows that the combining step cancels a lot of ’1’ and increases the chance of obtaining low weight codewords after combining. • to place to control band at the end, i.e.
cπ(M−ncb) . . . cπ(M−1) . This choice is also good

1965
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

because after the combining process, all the bits in the CB are set to zero, and since the bits at the end of the redundancy part of the MRB are the most likely conditioned to the all-zero codeword, setting them to zero increases the overall reliability of the codewords obtained after combining. This choice cancels however fewer ’1’ that the first choice.
We have checked by simulation that - for the codes that we tested in this work - the location of the CB has no huge impact on the algotithm performance.
IV. LOW WEIGHT PROFILES OF “CLASSICS” LDPC CODES
In order to illustrate the performance of our modified impulse method, we have estimated the low weight profiles of six test codes that are available on [16]. For all the simulations presented in this section, an OSD-1 or OSD-2 was used, with a control band of size 4 ≤ ncb ≤ 8.
• Regular (3, 6) LDPC codes Two strictly regular LDPC codes with rate R = 1/2 and parameters (dv = 3, dc = 6) constructed by D. MacKay, one with length N = 504 and the other one with length N = 1008. These two codes are known to have good minimum distance (for sparse codes) and are often used as reference in papers for minimum distance estimation. In Table II, we have reported the five first multiplicities of the distance spectra that we found with our method.

MacKay regular (3, 6) R = 1/2 - N = 504
weight 20 -→ 2 weight 22 -→ 22 weight 24 -→ 117 weight 26 -→ 481 weight 28 -→ 2587

MacKay regular (3, 6) R = 1/2 - N = 1008
weight 30 -→ 1 weight 32 -→ 1 weight 34 -→ 11 weight 36 -→ 42 weight 38 -→ 134

TABLE II LOW WEIGHT PROFILES OF THE MACKAY’S REGULAR (3, 6) CODES

For the first three multiplicities of the N = 504 code, we find the same spectrum as in the recent papers [10], [11], but with our method, the spectrum is found only in a few minutes while a computer time of more than 30 hours is reported in [11]. Accurate values of the fourth and fifth multiplicities are obtained in approximately 15 hours of simulations. For the first three multiplicities of the N = 1008 code, the spectrum 30(1) − 32(1) − 34(10) is reported in [11], obtained after 170 hours of simulations. We reached the same values within 24 hours, and found one more codeword with weight 34 after 50 hours of simulations2. Note that for this code, the fourth and fifth multiplicities are assumed accurate and we report the values obtained
2In [11], it is mentionned that there exist 2 codewords of weight 32 that are obtained with the bit-reversing method of [5], but after proper verification, the codes used in both papers are different. We report here the spectrum that is obtained with the N = 1008 code that can be downloaded from [16]

irregular PEG R = 1/2 - N = 504
weight 13 -→ 1 weight 14 -→ 1 weight 15 -→ 5 weight 16 -→ 11 weight 17 -→ 16 weight 18 -→ 28 weight 19 -→ 60 weight 20 -→ 121 weight 21 -→ 248

irregular PEG R = 1/2 - N = 1008
weight 13 -→ 1 weight 16 -→ 3 weight 17 -→ 3 weight 18 -→ 4 weight 19 -→ 3 weight 20 -→ 9 weight 21 -→ 11 weight 22 -→ 37 weight 23 -→ 62 weight 24 -→ 85 weight 25 -→ 156

TABLE III LOW WEIGHT PROFILES OF IRREGULAR PEG LDPC CODES AVAILABLES
ON [16]

after 2 weeks of simulation.
• Irregular R = 1/2 LDPC codes We have also computed the low weight profiles of two irregular LDPC codes listed in [16], which have been constructed using the well known progressive-edge-growth (PEG) method [18]. The codes have the same rate and lengths than the two (dv = 3, dc = 6) codes of Table II. The spectra are reported in Table III. The spectra are assumed correct since they were obtained in a few hours, and no other codewords were found after 2 days of simulation. These results confirm the well known fact that irregular LDPC codes tend to have worse distance profiles than regular LDPC codes with same parameters.
• Margulis and Ramanujan Finally, we considered the Margulis (R = 1/2, N = 2640, K = 1320) and the Ramanujan (R = 1/2, N = 4896, K = 2448) codes which are constructed from graph theoretic tools. The minimum distances and corresponding multiplicities are reported in [3] and we found the same values in less than 10 hours of simulation. We have compiled the results in Table IV by adding the first few nonzero terms of the distance spectra for each code. One can see that for these specific codes, there is an important gap between the minimum distance and the second minimum weight. To our knowledge, this is the first time that the low weight profiles of these codes are reported, so we do not have any comparison point. Note that the spectrum profile for the Margulis code is very particular as we did not find a stricly increasing profile, as usually found for error correcting codes. Also, for the Margulis code, the 4 codewords with weight 72 are quite difficult to find as we got these results after more than 4 weeks of simulation. For these codes, we do not claim that the values are accurate, except for the minimum distance multiplicity (however, the multiplicity of weight 36 for the Ramanujan code is likely to be

1966
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

Margulis N = 2640 K = 1320
weight 40 -→ 66 weight 68 -→ 36 weight 72 -→ 4 weight 76 -→ 696 weight 80 -→ 2258

Ramanujan N = 4896 K = 2448
weight 24 -→ 204 weight 36 -→ 4896 weight 48 -→ 38658

TABLE IV LOW WEIGHT PROFILES OF MARGULIS AND RAMANUJAN CODES
AVAILABLES ON [16]

exact). Finally, please note that some of the codewords in these low weight profiles were obtained by combination of minimum distance codewords. Indeed, since two distinct codewords of weight 24 for the Ramanujan code do not have a one-bit in common, any combination of two distinct codewords has weight 48. The same can be applied for the Margulis code.
V. CONCLUSION

[9] A. Canteaut and F. Chabaud, ’‘A New Algorithm for Finding Minimum-

Weight Words in a Linear Code: Application to McEliece’s Cryptosys-

tem and to Narrow-Sense BCH Codes of Length 511”, IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 367-378, Jan. 1998.

[10] M. Hirotomo, M. Mohri, M. Morii, “A Probabilistic Computation

Method for the Weight Distribution of Low-Density Parity-Check

Codes”, Proc. ISIT, Adela¨ıde, Australia, 2005.

[11] M. Hirotomo, M. Mohri, M. Morii, “New Probabilistic Algorithm to

Enhance the Reliability of Computed Weight Distribution of LDPC

codes”, Proc. ISITA2006, Seoul, Korea, 2006.

[12] S. Lin and D. J. Costello Jr, Error Control Coding, Second Edition,

New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 2004.

[13] S. Crozier, P. Guinand and A. Hunt, “Estimating the Minimum Distance

of Turbo-codes using Double and Triple Impulse Methods”, IEEE

Commun. Letters, vol. 9, pp. 631-633, July 2005.

[14] D. Chase, “A Class of Algorithms for Decoding Block Codes with

Channel Measurement Information,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.

18, pp. 170-182, Jan. 1972.

[15] M. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft Decision Decoding of Linear Block

Codes Based on Ordered Statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory., vol.

41, pp. 1379-1396, Sept. 1995.

[16] D. MacKay,

“Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes”,

http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/.

[17] A. Valembois and M. Fossorier, “Box and Match Techniques Applied

to Soft Decision Decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory., vol. 50, pp.

796-810, May 2004.

[18] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou and D.M. Arnold, “Regular and Irregular

Progressive Edge-Growth Tanner Graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. 51, pp. 386-398, Jan. 2005.

In this paper, the impulse method efficiency has been significantly improved based on three main enhancements: (i) allowing the impulses to change of value; (ii) using an OSD type of decoding rather than a Chase type to complement the list at each iteration of the search; and (iii) introducing a time memory trade-off. The new algorithm allows to get better estimates of the low weight profiles of sparse linear codes, with a convergence speed 10 to 20 times faster than exisisting methods in the litterature. While the paper focuses of determining the low weight profile of LDPC codes, the same enhancements can also improve methods to determine the low weight profile of turbo codes, small stopping sets or code dedicated searches.

REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou and S. Vaton, “Computing the Minimum Distance of Linear Codes by the Error Impulse Method,” Proc. IEEE Intl. Symp. Inform. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jul. 2002.
[2] C. Berrou, S. Vaton, M. Jezequel and C. Douillard, “Computing the Minimum Distance of Linear Codes by the Error Impulse Method,” Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Taiwan, Nov. 2002.
[3] X.Y. Hu and M. Fossorier, “On the Computation of the Minimum Distance of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. Commun., Paris, France, June 2004.
[4] X.Y. Hu, M. Fossorier and E. Eleftheriou, “Approximate Algorithms for Computating the Minimum Distance of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” Proc. IEEE Intl. Symp. Inform. Theory, Chicago, USA, June 2004.
[5] C. Tissieres, “Exploring Algorithms for Finding Low Weight Codewords”, Diploma Thesis, EPFL Lausanne, Sep. 2004.
[6] C.A. Cole, S.G. Wilson, E.K. Hall and T.R. Giallorenzi, “A General Method for Finding Low Error Rates of LDPC Codes”, preprint available at http://arxiv.org/PS cache/cs/pdf/0605/0605051v1.pdf, May 2006.
[7] G. Richter, “Finding Small Stopping Sets in the Tanner Graphs of LDPC Codes”, Proc. ISTC, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006.
[8] J. Stern, “A Method for Finding Codewords of Small Weight”, in Coding theory and applications, G. Cohen and J. Wolfmann, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1989, pp 106-113.

1967
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

