IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

51

Extremal Problems of Information Combining
Yibo Jiang, Alexei Ashikhmin, Member, IEEE, Ralf Koetter, Senior Member, IEEE, and Andrew C. Singer, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we study moments of soft bits of binary-input symmetric-output channels and solve some extremal problems of the moments. We use these results to solve the extremal information combining problem. Further, we extend the information combining problem by adding a constraint on the second moment of soft bits, and find the extremal distributions for this new problem. The results for this extension problem are used to improve the prediction of convergence of the belief propagation decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, provided that another extremal problem related to the variable nodes is solved.
Index Terms—Extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) functions, information combining, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

LOW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were invented by Gallager [1] in 1960. In recent years, there has been

surging interest in LDPC codes. A lot of work has been

done in areas such as asymptotic performance analysis, ca-

pacity-approaching code design, and low-complexity decoding

algorithms for LDPC codes (see [2]). Among various low-com-

plexity decoding algorithms for LDPC codes, the belief

propagation decoding algorithm is a popular and powerful one

[3]. It is well known that an LDPC code can be represented

by a Tanner graph [4], which is a bipartite graph consisting of

variable nodes and check nodes. A variable node corresponds

to a codeword bit, while a check node corresponds to a row of

the check matrix. In belief propagation decoding, each node on

the Tanner graph works as a local decoder. More specifically,

at a degree variable node, the local variable node decoder

(VND) is essentially an extrinsic a posteriori probability (APP)

decoder for a

repetition code (remember there is an in-

coming channel message for each variable node). At a degree

check node, the local check node decoder (CND) is essentially

an extrinsic APP decoder for a

single parity-check

code. Overall, the belief propagation decoder works iteratively.

Manuscript received January 21, 2006; revised September 8, 2007. Y. Jiang was with the Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urabana, IL 61801 USA. He is now with Qualcomm, San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail: yjiang@qualcomm.com). A. Ashikhmin is with Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 USA (e-mail: aea@research.bell-labs.com). R. Koetter was with the Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urabana, IL 61801 USA. He is with the Institute for Communications Engineering, Technische Universität München, D-80290 München, Germany (e-mail: ralf.koetter@tum.de). A. C. Singer is with the Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA (e-mail: acsinger@uiuc. edu). Communicated by T. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of Figures 1, 4, and 5 in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2007.911266

In each iteration, first, every VND uses the channel message

and incoming check-to-variable messages (from the previous

iteration) to compute the outgoing variable-to-check messages,

then every CND uses the incoming variable-to-check messages

to compute the outgoing check-to-variable messages.

Density evolution was proposed in [3], [5], which rigorously

analyzes the convergence behavior of belief propagation de-

coding. A one-dimensional approximation method of density

evolution, the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart, orig-

inally suggested by ten Brink [6] for analyzing and designing

turbo codes, was a simpler method for convergence prediction.

In [7], [8], the EXIT chart method was extended for the anal-

ysis and design of LDPC codes, and a rigorous analysis of the

method was conducted when the a priori channel is a binary era-

sure channel (BEC). VND and CND EXIT functions are defined

to characterize how the mutual information contained in mes-

sages changes during the variable and check nodes processing

at each iteration of the belief propagation decoding. In the com-

putation of VND and CND EXIT functions, every incoming

message to a VND or a CND is usually modeled as the output

log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of an additive white Gaussian noise

(AWGN) channel whose input is the binary phase-shift keying

(BPSK) modulated codeword bit corresponding to the message

[9]. The EXIT chart method has proven useful in practice, see,

e.g., [9], and simple since it tracks only one parameter, namely,

the mutual information. However, since the distributions of mes-

sages are often non-Gaussian, it only provides an approximation

to the real decoding trajectory. Thus, it is worthwhile to conduct

a more rigorous analysis. Bounds on the extrinsic mutual infor-

mation at either a VND or a CND will be useful and lead to

upper and lower bounds on the decoding trajectory of mutual

information. These bounds are still simple in the sense that mu-

tual information is the only parameter tracked, and useful since

they can lead to rigorous convergence predictions. This moti-

vates the study of information combining problems.

The notion of information combining was introduced by

Huettinger et al. in [10], [11] for the study of concatenated

coding systems. In the belief propagation decoding of LDPC

codes, the processing at a VND or a CND can be interpreted

as an operation of information combining, i.e., combining the

mutual information contained in those incoming messages. Let

be a codeword of either a

repetition code

or a

single parity-check code, which models a degree

variable node or a degree check node, respectively.

Assume

to avoid trivial cases. Assume is BPSK

modulated under the mapping

and

, and

transmitted through a binary-input symmetric-output channel

with output ,

, i.e.,

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

52

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

These channels are assumed to be independent. The notation is used to indicate the th channel. The soft bit for
the th channel is defined as

and is a sufficient statistic. Although the transition probability

distribution of each channel is unknown, the mutual informa-

tion of each channel is assumed to be known. Without loss of

generality, one can focus on and ask the following ques-

tion: can we find tight lower and upper bounds on the combined

information

, i.e., the extrinsic mutual

information? Such an extremal problem was first considered in

[12] for a repetition code. It was shown that

is maximized (or minimized) when both

and

are BECs (or binary-symmetric channels (BSCs)) with pre-

scribed mutual information values. In [13], the case of

single parity-check codes was studied, and it was shown that

BSCs achieve the upper bound, and BECs achieve the lower

bound. In [14]–[17], the above results were extended to arbi-

trary codeword length for both repetition codes and single

parity-check codes. In [18], instead of mutual information, con-

ditional expectations of messages were used to bound on the

performance of belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes.

In [12]–[15], the extrinsic mutual information

is optimized over all

channels

subject to their individual mutual information constraints. In

[16], [17], the problems were generalized by optimizing the

extrinsic mutual information with respect to a single channel.

Fix the binary-input symmetric-output channels

,

, and fix the mutual information of

.

It is shown by Sutskover et al. in [17] that for a repetition code,

when the channel

is a BEC (BSC), the extrinsic

mutual information

is maximized

(minimized). For a single parity-check code, the roles of BEC

and BSC are reversed.

In the above information combining problems, all the results

were obtained by proving new mutual information inequalities

and using various existing inequalities and identities of mutual

information. The work by Sharon et al. in [19], [20] tells us

that when the input is equiprobable, the mutual information of

a binary-input symmetric-output channel can be expressed as

where is the th conditional moment of the channel soft bit

. For a

single parity-check code, the extrinsic mutual

information at the output of its APP decoder is

(1)

where

is the th conditional moment of the

channel soft bit . These results lay a foundation and motivate

us to solve the extremal information combining problem from

a moments approach. In other words, we first solve an extremal

problem of soft-bit moments, determining the channel distri-

butions maximizing or minimizing the second conditional mo-

ment subject to a mutual information constraint. We find that the

extremal channel distributions are BSC and BEC, respectively.

Then, we determine the ordering between moment sequences of

the BSC and an arbitrary channel that satisfies the mutual infor-

mation constraint, and the ordering between moment sequences

of the BEC and that (arbitrary) channel. We also find the con-

nection between the extremal problem of the second moment

and a related minimum mean-squared error (MMSE) estimation

problem. The theory of Tchebycheff systems [21], [22] is used

to solve the extremal problem of the second moment.

Next, we use the ordering properties of moment sequences to

prove the results for a

single parity-check code ob-

tained in [17]; i.e., BSC and BEC are the most and least infor-

mative channels, respectively.

Bounds obtained from the information combining problems

are used to bound the VND and CND EXIT functions [13], [17].

In [17], the lower bounds on the extrinsic mutual information for

the variable nodes and check nodes were combined to obtain

the overall worst performance bound, which was used to find

sufficient conditions on communication channels for successful

decoding. Similarly, the upper bounds were combined to ob-

tain the overall best performance bound, which was used to find

necessary conditions on communication channels for successful

decoding. The independence assumption on channels in the in-

formation combining problems are satisfied due to the property

of asymptotic tree-like decoding neighborhoods for very long

ensembles of LDPC codes [5]. However, as computed in [17],

the gap between the predicted threshold and the exact threshold

is significant. For binary-input AWGN communication chan-

nels and LDPC codes of various rates, the upper bounds on the

thresholds are about 0.5 dB above the exact thresholds, and the

lower bounds on the thresholds are about 1.2 dB below the exact

thresholds. This motivates us to consider improving the bounds

to reduce threshold gaps.

To this end, we extend the information combining problem

for a

single parity-check code by adding one more

constraint on the channel distribution [23], namely, a constraint

on the second conditional moment of the channel soft bit. The

solution to this extension problem can be used to improve the

prediction of convergence of the belief propagation decoding

of LDPC codes, provided that another extremal problem re-

lated to the variable nodes be solved (details can be found in

Section VIII). Again, we use the moments approach to solve

the extension problem, first solving an extremal problem of the

fourth moment, then determining the ordering among moment

sequences. We also use the results obtained in the extension

problem to bound the CND EXIT function with Gaussian priors.

The gap of our bounds is very small and we find that an approx-

imation function for the CND EXIT functions in [9, eq. (9)] is

very accurate.

Recently new stronger bounds on information combining

were reported in [24]. In [24], for obtaining stronger bounds,

the authors added additional constraint on the probability of

error, which is different from the approach used in [23] and the

current paper.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: EXTREMAL PROBLEMS OF INFORMATION COMBINING

53

This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we introduce some basic concepts and results from [3] and [20]. In Section III, we solve an extremal problem of second moments of channel soft bits. In Section IV, we apply the obtained results for analysis of MMSE estimators. In Section V, we study the properties of sequences of soft-bit moments. In Section VI, we use the properties of soft-bit moment sequences to solve the original information combining problem at the check nodes. In Section VII, an extension of the information combining problem is proposed and solved. In Section VIII, the results from the extension problem are used to compute potentially improved best and worst performance bounds on the decoding trajectory of mutual information. Some key concepts and results in the Tchebycheff system theory are outlined in Appendix I.
II. -CONSISTENCY AND MUTUAL INFORMATION

and

(6)

which is also true if

contains Dirac delta

functions. If a random variable satisfies (5) and (6), it is called

-consistent (like symmetry for LLR). For a BSC with capacity

, its variable takes two values

where

is the binary en-

tropy function and

. For a BEC, its variable

always takes three values

.

From (5) and (6), it follows that the mutual information be-

tween and is

In [3] and [5], the concept of consistency, later called symmetry, of channel probability distributions were proposed. In [19], [20], the concept of consistency, called -consistency, was formulated for soft bits and several new mutual information results were obtained. The concept of consistency and results obtained in [3], [5], [19], and [20] lay a foundation for solving the extremal problems of information combining with the help of soft-bit moments. In this section, we give a short summary of the results for completeness. For convenience of notation and exposition we mostly follow presentation in [19], and [20].
Let and be random variables at the input and output of a binary-input symmetric-output channel, respectively. Since the channel is symmetric, its transition probability density function satisfies
We assume the input is equiprobable, i.e.,

where the th conditional moment is defined by

Note that

and

(7) of the channel soft bit
(8)

therefore, the right-hand side of (7) is convergent. We also point

out that the singularity of

at

does not affect

the integral (7) since from (5) it follows that

. Furthermore, it is not difficult to show that

Define the channel soft bit as

(9)

It follows that

(2) Consider an

binary linear code. Its codeword is BPSK

modulated and transmitted through binary-input symmetric-

output independent channels. Let

and

indicate the input vector and output vector of those

(3) channels, respectively. Assume that is equally probable to

be any BPSK modulated codeword. The extrinsic soft bit for (4) of an APP decoder is defined as

Thus, soft bit is a change of variable of the LLR . Many

properties for LLRs, such as symmetry, are well established in

[3], [5], [25], and similar properties can be obtained for soft bits

as follows.

Let

denote the conditional probability

density function of . Let

for no-

where is used to denote the vector obtained by deleting the th element of a vector . Let be the all-zero codeword and be the set of codewords whose th position is . The random variable is -consistent and

tational convenience. Since the channel is symmetric, it follows

that

transmitted

(5)

transmitted

(10)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

54

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

Furthermore, for an trinsic soft-bit satisfies

single parity-check code, the ex-

(15)

(11) where

where

. In

general, the extrinsic mutual information at the output of the

APP decoder of an

single parity-check code is

(16)
We point out that the odd moments with respect to are at most as large as those moments with respect to , i.e.,

transmitted transmitted

The derivation from (14) to (16) establishes the following two facts.
1) The mapping in (14) is a bijection from

(12)

As a special case, if all channels have the same distribution,

the average extrinsic mutual information is

to

(13)

where the th moment is defined in (8).

2) Let

is a -consistent probability density (17)
is a probability density on (18)
, then

III. AN EXTREMAL PROBLEM OF THE SECOND MOMENT

In this section, we focus on the following optimization

problem.

Therefore, we have

Problem 1: Among all binary-input symmetric-output channels with a fixed mutual information
, determine the maximum and minimum of the conditional second moment of the channel soft-bit.
We will use -system theory to solve this problem. -system theory (see Appendix I) requires that all integrand
functions must be continuous on a closed interval. According to (7)

(19)

(20)

Note that

is a continuous function on .

Thus, we can formulate the following equivalent optimization

problem, which is solvable by -system theory.

and one can notice that the integrand

is not contin-

uous on

. To avoid this problem, we use the map

defined by

Problem 2: Among all probability distributions on which satisfy the mutual information constraint, determine the probability distribution ( ) which maximizes (minimizes) the second moment. Mathematically

The new density

is defined on

. (14) and
. From this we have

where is a distribution on .

(21)

Remark 1: To avoid trivial cases, throughout the remainder

of this section, we assume

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: EXTREMAL PROBLEMS OF INFORMATION COMBINING

55

Let us define

Lemma 1: The system

is a -system on

Proof: Let

. Since

is a strictly increasing function, one has

The second equality is due to the interchangeability of finite sum and infinite sum, and the last inequality is due to Lemma 2.

(22) (23)
.

Now we are ready to solve Problems 2 and 1.

Theorem 1: Among binary-input symmetric-output channels

with a fixed mutual information, BSC (BEC) strictly maximizes

(minimizes) .

Proof: We first use -system theory to solve Problem 2.

Next, using the map , we find the solutions of Problem 1.

We use

, and defined in (22) and (23). Let

Hence, according to Definition 2 of Appendix I,

form

a -system.

Before dealing with more complicated -systems, we need to establish the following lemmas.

Lemma 2: The systems

with

and

with

are -systems on .

Proof: See Appendix II.

As an application, we can prove the following lemma.

Lemma 3: The augmented system

is a -system

on .

Proof: Since

has the following series

expansion:

one can see that

be the set of distributions which are probability distributions

and satisfy the mutual information constraint (15). Notice that

since

. From Lemma 1, Lemma 3,

and Theorem 8 of Appendix I, we conclude that the distribu-

tion associated with the upper principal representation of

strictly maximizes

and the distribution associ-

ated with the lower principal representation of strictly mini-

mizes

. Thus,

and

.

According to Theorem 7, since

is odd, the entire prob-

ability mass of is concentrated at an interior point , and the

entire probability mass of is concentrated on the two end-

points and . By solving (15) for , i.e.,

, we

obtain

. According to (14), the -consis-

tent distribution

has probability mass of

at

and probability mass of

at . This exactly cor-

responds to a BSC with capacity . Similarly, for , one can

conclude that the probability mass at is . The -consistent

distribution

has probability mass of at , and prob-

ability mass of

at . This exactly corresponds to a BEC

with capacity .

For a BEC with mutual information , its is equal to . For a BSC with mutual information , we have

At

,

. We have

by convention. Let

Define a function

(24)

The following property of sequel.

will be useful for us in the

Lemma 4:

is a strictly increasing and concave function

on ; its inverse

is strictly increasing and convex on

.

Proof:

is obviously strictly increasing on . Thus,

its inverse function exists

It is easy to see that

is strictly increasing and convex on

. Thus, it follows that is concave.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

56

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

IV. MMSE AND MUTUAL INFORMATION
In this section, we show how to apply results from the previous section for analysis of the MMSE estimator of a binaryinput symmetric-output channel.
It is easy to see that the channel soft bit defined in (2) is in fact the MMSE estimator for the channel input . It is well known that the MMSE is equal to

By Holder’s inequality, for
where the expectation is with respect to negativity of , we have for

. Due to the non-

Further

It remains to show

. By Holder’s inequality

(25) where the second equality is due to (6). Hence
(26)
Theorem 2: Among binary-input symmetric-output channels with a fixed mutual information, the MMSE for estimating the channel input in a BSC is strictly minimal.
Proof: Combine (26) and Theorem 1.

thus,

. This concludes the proof.

Remark 2: Another conclusion [26, p. 110] related to ratios

of moments is as follows: let be an arbitrary probability dis-

tribution function and

; then

For a BSC with mutual information , we have derived that Thus, for BSC, we have

The following lemma can be used to prove that BSC is the

best channel (or most informative channel) for information com-

bining at a check node of an LDPC code. Recall that defined

in (17) is the set of -consistent distributions on

which

satisfy the mutual information constraint.

It is easy to see that as increases, its MMSE decreases, as expected.
Similarly, we have the following.
Lemma 5: Among binary-input symmetric-output channels with a fixed mutual information, the MMSE for estimating the channel input in a BEC is strictly maximal.
Proof: Combine (26) and Theorem 1.
For a BEC with mutual information , we have

Lemma 7: There are two possible types of ordering for the

moment sequence

of the BSC and the moment se-

quence

of an arbitrary channel with

:

1)

for

, and

for

;

2)

for

,

and

for

;

where is an integer depending on .

Proof: For the BSC, its moment sequence

is a geometric sequence; therefore, the moment ratio

V. PROPERTIES OF SOFT-BIT MOMENTS
In this section, we will characterize the ordering between moment sequences of channel soft bits of a BSC (or BEC) and any other binary-input symmetric-output channels with the same mutual information value. These ordering properties will be used to prove the information combining results. We first prove the following auxiliary lemma.

Lemma 6: The moment sequence

of a channel soft

bit defined by (8) has the following properties:

1)

is nonnegative and nonincreasing;

2) the ratio sequence

is nonincreasing.

Proof: Nonnegativity is obvious. For

By Theorem 1, we have

. Since

, we have

and therefore there exists at least one index such that

. Let be the smallest index with this property. Then there

are two possible cases.

1)

:

By the definition of , we have

for

.

It is easy to see that

By Lemma 6, we have , i.e.,

thus,

is nonincreasing.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: EXTREMAL PROBLEMS OF INFORMATION COMBINING

57

Fig. 1. The moment sequences of a BSC, a binary-input AWGN channel, and a BEC. All three channels have mutual information 0:5.

Thus

and therefore there exists at least one index such that
. Let be the smallest index with this property. Then (27)
(29)

Using the above argument repeatedly and sequentially for

, one can conclude that

for

.

This concludes the proof of the first case.

2)

:

The remaining proof is exactly the same as in the first case

except that the second inequality ( ) in (27) becomes an

equality.

Similarly, the following lemma will be used to prove that the BEC is the worst channel (or least informative channel) for information combining at a check node of an LDPC code.

Lemma 8: There are two possible types of ordering for the

moment sequence

of the BEC and the moment se-

quence

of an arbitrary channel with

:

1)

for

, and

for

;

2)

for

,

and

for

;

where is an integer depending on .

Proof: It is easy to see that

. By Theorem 1,

one has

. Since

we have

For the th moment, there are two possible cases.

1)

:

For

, one has

where the last inequality is due to Lemma 6. This concludes

the proof of the first case.

2)

:

We claim that

and prove it by con-

tradiction. If not so, it must be

since moments are nonincreasing. Therefore,

. Together with the fact that a ratio

of two consecutive moments is at least and Lemma 6,

we obtain

. Thus

Together with (29), it is obvious that (28) is violated. Thus,

we have proved that

, and it follows

. The rest of the proof is the same as

in the first case.

As an example, in Fig. 1, we plot the initial parts of the moment sequences of a BSC, a binary-input AWGN channel, and (28) a BEC, all having mutual information .
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

58

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

VI. INFORMATION COMBINING

Let

be a codeword of either a repetition

code, or a

single parity-check code. The repetition

code is a model for a variable node of degree

with an

incoming message from a communication channel. The single

parity-check code is a model for a check node of degree . As-

sume

to avoid trivial cases. Assume is BPSK modu-

lated under the mapping

and

, and transmitted

through a binary-input symmetric-output channel with output

,

. These channels are assumed independent.

In this section, we focus on the type of information combining

problem proposed in [16], [17].

Problem 3: Fix the binary-input symmetric-output channels

,

, and fix the mutual information

of

. Find symmetric channel distributions for

such that the extrinsic mutual information

is maximized or minimized.

Theorem 3: [17, Theorem 3] Under the constraints of

Problem 4 the BSC and BEC maximize and minimize the

extrinsic mutual information

, respectively.

Proof: Let

indicate the moment sequence for

. Define

Obviously, we have

. By (7) and (12),

Due to [17, Lemma 3], we only need to solve either the variable node problem or the check node problem. In this section, we will solve Problem 3 for a degree check node, i.e., a
single parity-check code, using the properties of the moments .

By Lemmas 7 and 9, we conclude that BSC with the prescribed

mutual information maximizes

. Similarly, by

Lemmas 8 and 9 , we conclude that a BEC with the prescribed

mutual information minimizes

.

Since we will work with moments of soft bits, we will reformulate Problem 3 in terms of soft bits. Without loss of generality, the extremal problem of information combining at a check node can be stated as follows.

We would like to note that the condition

is equivalent to requiring each channel

,

, to have a constant moment sequence, i.e., all

of them to be BEC channels. Thus, if

,

,

Problem 4: Let

be a codeword of a

are all BECs with mutual information , the extrinsic mutual

single parity-check code. Fix the first

binary-input information

symmetric-output channels

,

,

and let each channel have a positive mutual information.

Find symmetric channel distributions for

that maximize and minimize, respectively, the extrinsic

mutual information

subject to the constraint

.

does not depend on the channel distribution of

.

It means for

, that a BSC, BEC, or any other

channel distribution with mutual information

leads to a

Remark 3: If any of the first

channels has zero mutual

information,

is also zero. Thus, we assume they all

have positive mutual information. The assumption

is also used to avoid trivial cases.

Before solving Problem 4, we need to prove the following lemma.

constant extrinsic mutual information. Otherwise, if any channel

among

,

, is not a BEC, by Lemma 9, the

BSC for

strictly maximizes the extrinsic mutual

information

, and the BEC strictly minimizes it.

For a repetition code, we know that

. Assume at least one of the first

channels has positive

mutual information. If

,

, are all BECs

Lemma 9: Assume

for

. Let sequences

1)

,

, for ;

2)

;

3)

for

, and

Then

,

,

satisfy

for .

with mutual information , for

, a BSC, or a

BEC, or any other symmetric channel distribution (with mutual

information ) leads to a constant extrinsic mutual informa-

tion. Otherwise, the BEC is a strict maximizer, and the BSC is

a strict minimizer.

Now consider the case [13] when the distribution of each

channel is allowed to vary subject to a mutual information

equality constraint in

. At a check node, by applying

Theorem 3 sequentially, one can conclude that when

,

and a necessary and sufficient condition to achieve the equality

is

.

Proof: See Appendix III.

, are all BSCs, the extrinsic mutual informa-

tion

is strictly maximized. However,

the minimizing distribution is not unique. As long as there

is at most one non-BEC distribution for

channels,

Now we are ready to show the following theorem, which

is minimized. Similarly, for a

solves Problem 4.

repetition code, when

,

, are all BSCs,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: EXTREMAL PROBLEMS OF INFORMATION COMBINING

59

the extrinsic mutual information

is

strictly minimized. However, the maximizing distribution is not

unique. As long as there is at most one non-BEC distribution

for

channels,

is maximized.

In [13] and [17], the bounds obtained in the information com-

bining problem were used to bound the EXIT chart of LDPC

codes. For a degree variable node (corresponding to bit

), let be the probability density function of the

channel LLR message conditioned on

, and be the

channel mutual information. Let be the mutual information

for each incoming message. The upper bound on the extrinsic

mutual information is [17]

(30)

and the lower bound is [17]

(31)

where

. These two bounds will be used in

Section VIII.

Furthermore, in [17], best and worst performance bounds

were derived and used to predict the convergence of the be-

lief propagation decoding of LDPC codes. However, the gap

between the predicted threshold and the exact threshold is

significant. For instance, in [17], it was computed that, for bi-

nary-input AWGN communication channels and LDPC codes

of various rates, the upper bounds on the thresholds are about

0.5 dB above the exact thresholds, and the lower bounds on the

thresholds are about 1.2 dB below the exact thresholds. This

observation motivates us to improve the bounds. To this end, in

the next section, we study an extended information combining

problem.

• where

;

and

.

Recall that is defined in (24). Since we will work with

soft bits, a channel distribution for

means a prob-

ability distribution of

conditioned on

. We use

and to indicate the maximizing and minimizing distri-

butions, respectively. Since

, by Theorem 1, we

have the following.

1) If

, there is only one channel distribution, namely

BEC, satisfying both constraints.

2) If

, there is only one channel distribution,

namely BSC, satisfying both constraints.

3) If

, there are infinitely many channel

distributions satisfying both constraints.

Thus, Problem 5 is nontrivial if and only if

and

. Notice that these two conditions imply

.

Recall that the extremal distributions for Problem 4 are

exactly the extremal distributions for Problem 1. Following

that approach, first, we consider the following optimization

problem. Later we will show that the extremal distributions of

this problem are exactly the same as those of Problem 5.

Problem 6: Among all binary-input symmetric-output channels with a fixed mutual information and a fixed conditional second moment , determine the maximum and minimum of the conditional fourth moment of the channel soft-bit.

Again, since we will work with the channel soft bit, we focus

on its conditional probability distribution and use

and

to indicate the maximizing and minimizing distributions,

respectively.

We will use -system theory to solve Problem 6. As in the

approach to Problem 1, we transform Problem 6 to an equivalent

problem on the domain . For convenience, we first make the

following definitions:

VII. AN EXTENDED INFORMATION COMBINING PROBLEM

A. More on Properties of Soft Bits

In this section, we consider an extension of the original ex-

tremal information combining problem by adding a constraint

on the second conditional moment . The motivation is to

narrow the gap between the maximum and minimum of extrinsic

mutual information at a check node. In turn, this will potentially

help improve the prediction of convergence of the belief propa-

gation decoding of LDPC codes, which will be analyzed in Sec-

tion VIII. Throughout this section, we keep assuming all chan-

nels

,

, are independent.

The equivalent problem is as follows.
Problem 7: Among all probability distributions on which satisfy an equality constraint on mutual information and an equality constraint on conditional second moment, determine the probability distribution ( ) which maximizes (minimizes) the fourth moment . Mathematically

Problem 5: Let

be a codeword of a

single parity-check code. Fix the first

binary-input

symmetric-output channels

,

, and

each channel has a positive mutual information. Find symmetric

channel distributions for

that maximize and

minimize the extrinsic mutual information

, respec-

tively, subject to the following constraints:

•

;

where is a distribution on .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

60

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

After this problem is solved, by taking an inverse mapping of (14), we obtain the extremal distributions to Problem 6.
Next, we prove a couple of lemmas related to -systems.

Lemma 10:

is a -system on .

Proof: We have already shown in Lemma 3 that

is a -system on . By Definition 2,

is a -system on as well.

Fig. 2. A not-to-scale illustration for the distribution P .

Lemma 11: The augmented system

is a

-system on .

Proof: The proof is similar to the proof of Lemma 3, with

the help of Lemma 2.

Since we have proved both

and

are -systems on , we will use the notation

from

-system theory, i.e.,

, where is defined in

Problem 7. Now we are ready to solve Problem 7 (equivalently,

Problem 6).

Obviously

Fig. 3. A not-to-scale illustration for the distribution P .
of at . From the constraints and the distribution structure, we can determine that

(36)

is a set of distributions which are probability distributions and

satisfy constraints on the mutual information and the conditional

second moment. Notice that

since

and

. By Lemmas 10 and 11, as well as

Theorem 8 of Appendix I, we concludes that the distribution

associated with the upper principal representation of strictly

maximizes

, thus,

. For the same reason,

the distribution associated with the lower principal represen-

tation of strictly minimizes

, thus,

.

Next, we will determine , , and map them by (

defined in (14)) back to -consistent distributions on

,

which will be and , respectively. According to The-

orem 7, since

is even,

, all probability mass of

concentrates at two points

, where is an interior

point, and all probability mass of concentrates at two points

, where

. Correspondingly,

has probability mass of at , probability mass of at ,

and probability mass of

at . From the con-

straints and the distribution structure, we can determine that

(37) (38) (39)

Since is a strictly increasing function on , defined.
In Fig. 3, we give a not-to-scale illustration for In summary, we have the following theorem.

is well .

Theorem 4: Among binary-input symmetric-output channels

with a fixed mutual information

and a fixed conditional

second moment , where

and

, the channel corresponding to ( ) strictly max-

imizes (minimizes) .

For convenience, we define the following set:

is a -consistent probability density

(40)

(32) For , the moment sequence

is a geo-

(33)

metric sequence. Thus, similar to Lemma 7, we have the following statement.

(34) Lemma 12: There are two possible types of ordering for the

moment sequence

of and the moment sequence

(35)

of any

other than :

1)

for

, and

for

;

Since is a strictly increasing function on , is well 2)

for

,

and

defined.

for

;

In Fig. 2, we give a not-to-scale illustration for .

where is an integer depending on . Obviously,

Similarly,

has probability mass of at

.

, probability mass of

at , and probability mass

Proof: Similar to the proof of Lemma 7.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: EXTREMAL PROBLEMS OF INFORMATION COMBINING

61

Fig. 4. The moment sequences of P , a binary-input AWGN channel and P at I = 0:5 and  = 0:562223.

Before proving ordering properties related to to establish the following lemma.

, we need Also by Holder’s inequality, we have

Lemma 13: Let

be the moment sequence of a

channel soft bit. Define

for

, and

.

has the following properties:

1)

is nonnegative and nonincreasing;

2) the ratio sequence

is nonincreasing.

Proof: Nonnegativity is true since the moment sequence

is nonincreasing, and

. Due to the second property in

Lemma 6, we have for

,

. It follows

that

Due to Lemma 6, we have

. Thus

By Holder’s inequality, for

thus

Now we are ready to prove the following result for .

Lemma 14: There are two possible types of ordering for

the moment sequence

of

and the moment

sequence

of any

other than :

1)

for

, and

for

;

2)

for

,

and

for

;

where is an integer depending on . Obviously,

.

Proof: See Appendix IV.

For example, when

and

, we plot

the initial parts of the moment sequences of , a binary-input

AWGN channel and in Fig. 4.

Now we are ready to show the following theorem, which

solves Problem 5.

where the expectation is with respect to nonnegativity

. Due to the Theorem 5: Under the constraints of Problem 5 the distribu-

tions and maximize and minimize the extrinsic mutual

information

, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

62
Proof: Let Define
Obviously, we have

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

be the moment sequence for

. chart analysis of LDPC codes. We assume

. It im-

plies

.

We first treat the nontrivial case where

.

We know that when all channels have the same channel

distribution (i.e., ),

is maximized. Recall

that for , for the th channel has three values:

. By (7) and (12), where is computed by (32) as

By (11), we have

By Lemmas 12 and 9, we conclude that

maximizes By (10), we can determine that

. Similarly, by Lemmas 14 and 9, we conclude that

minimizes

.

(41)

Remark 4: According to our notation, we have

and

.

As pointed out after the proof of Theorem 3, if

,

, are all BECs with mutual information , the

extrinsic mutual information

where as

(42) is computed by (34). Then we obtain the upper bound

does not depend on the channel distribution of

.

(43)

It means the gap between the maximum and minimum of

is zero. On the other hand, if any channel among To obtain the lower bound, all channels should have the

,

is not a BEC, by Lemma 9,

same channel distribution (i.e., ). Recall that for ,

for

strictly maximizes the extrinsic mutual for the th channel has four values:

information

, and strictly minimizes it.

Let us now consider a case where the distribution of each of

the

channels

,

, is allowed where is computed as

to vary subject to a mutual information equality constraint

and a conditional second moment equality constraint . We

assume that

and

. By sequentially

applying Theorem 5, we can conclude that when all of the

Since

and

channels are of the type (with appropriate parameters), the

. By (11), we have

extrinsic mutual information

is strictly maximized.

, we have

Similarly, when all of the

channels are of the type

(with appropriate parameters), the extrinsic mutual information

is strictly minimized.

B. Computation of Bounds

Due to

and (10), when we compute

the probability mass function of conditioned on

,

In this subsection, we derive the formulas to compute the we can neglect any combination of ,

, if any

maximum and minimum of the extrinsic mutual information

is equal to . Through some computation, we have

at a degree check node for the following scenario:

(44)

the distribution of each channel

,

, is

allowed to vary subject to an equality constraint on mutual in- and

formation and an equality constraint on conditional second mo-

ment. For simplicity, we assume that for all

channels, the

mutual information constraint value is and the constraint value is . In fact, this kind of constraint is typical for EXIT

(45)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: EXTREMAL PROBLEMS OF INFORMATION COMBINING

63

Thus, the lower bound is

C. Bounding the CND Exit Function With Gaussian Priors
In the design of LDPC codes, for instance [9], it is often assumed that the a priori information is conditionally Gaussian distributed. Then, the CND EXIT function is approximated by [9, eq. (9)]

(46)

(49)

For the trivial case where

, i.e., all

channels

are BECs, the lower and upper bounds coincide as . For

another trivial case, where

, i.e., all

channels

are BSCs, the lower and upper bounds coincide as [1]

Combining the nontrivial and trivial upper bounds together,

we get the complete upper bound for

as

(47)

where

. We can establish the following proper-

ties related to the complete upper bound (47). Recall that by

Lemma 4

which is based on the duality theorem from [8]. The func-

tion is the mutual information between the input and output of

a binary-input AWGN channel. To facilitate the computation,

both and

are approximated piecewisely by some el-

ementary functions. In this section, we use our lower bound in

(46) and upper bound in (43) to bound the CND EXIT function.

For a given

, we first compute the conditional

second moment of the channel soft bit. Let us indicate it by .

Then we use (46) and (43) to compute the bounds.

In Fig. 5, for a

check node, we plot the upper bound

(43), lower bound (46), and the approximation function (49)

together. We can see that the gap between the lower and upper

bounds is very small, and the approximation function is very

accurate. We did the computation for many other check degrees,

and made similar observations. Thus, our bounds are very tight

for the CND EXIT functions with Gaussian priors, and (49) is

very accurate.

and

a strictly increasing function on .

Lemma 15:

1) Assume that is fixed. The upper bound

(47) is a

strictly increasing function of , provided that

.

2) Assume that is fixed. The upper bound (47) is a

strictly increasing function of , provided that

.

Proof: See Appendix V.

Combining the nontrivial and trivial lower bounds together,

we get the complete lower bound for

as

(48)

where

. We can establish the following prop-

erties related to the complete lower bound (48).

VIII. PREDICTION OF CONVERGENCE OF LDPC DECODING

In this section, we will describe how the results from the ex-

tended information combining problem can be used to predict

the convergence of the belief propagation decoding of LDPC

codes. Later, we will argue why this method has the potential to

improve the prediction.

Let

and

be the left edge (variable) degree distri-

bution and right edge (check) degree distribution, respectively.

The codeword of the LDPC code is sent through a memoryless

binary-input symmetric-output communication channel, which

ensures that in the belief propagation decoding messages are

symmetric [3]. Let indicate the mutual information of the

channel, and indicate the conditional second moment of the

channel soft bit. Recall that the relation between an LLR and

a soft bit is

.

First, we will describe how to obtain a best performance

bound on the decoding trajectory of mutual information. At the

first iteration, a VND will directly send the incoming channel

LLR to each variable-to-check edge as the outgoing message.

Thus, the average mutual information of variable-to-check

messages is

Lemma 16:

1) Assume that is fixed. The lower bound

(48) is a

strictly increasing function of , provided that

.

and the average conditional second moment of vari-

2) Assume that is fixed. The lower bound

(48) is a able-to-check messages (in the soft-bit domain) is

strictly increasing function of , provided that

.

Proof: See Appendix VI.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

64

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

Fig. 5. For a d = 4 check node, compare the upper bound (43), lower bound (46), and an approximation function (49) on its EXIT function.

Based on these two quantities, we use (47) to compute the upper bound on the mutual information of an outgoing check-to-variable message for a degree check node. Let be the upper bound. The upper bound on the average mutual information of check-to-variable messages is

where

needs to be determined. The upper bound on the

average conditional second moment of variable-to-check mes-

sages (in the soft-bit domain) is

The upper bound on the average mutual information of vari-

This concludes the first iteration.

able-to-check messages is

Now we consider the second iteration of decoding. For a de-

gree variable node, the upper bound on the mutual in-

formation of an outgoing variable-to-check message is obtained when all incoming check-to-variable messages are BECs; thus, Based on these two quantities, for a degree check node, we

we have

use (47) to compute the upper bound

on the mutual in-

formation of an outgoing check-to-variable message. The upper

bound on the average mutual information of check-to-variable

Next, we need to upper-bound (i.e., maximize) the conditional messages is

second moment of an outgoing variable-to-check message (in

the soft-bit domain), given the mutual information of in-

coming messages. This is an unsolved problem, and its connec-

tion to MMSE will be discussed in Section VIII-B. First, we can show that the maximum and minimum exist. It follows from sequential compactness of the space of symmetric distributions [25] (under point-wise convergence at points of continuity of the cumulative distributions) and continuity of mutual information and the moments. Assume the upper bound is

This concludes the second iteration. The computation for the remaining iterations is the same as
that for the second iteration. The following property is useful to ensure that this procedure leads to a best performance bound. The proof of the property was told to us by T. Richardson.
Lemma 17: (T. Richardson) For given and ,

(50) in (50) is a nondecreasing function of .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: EXTREMAL PROBLEMS OF INFORMATION COMBINING

65

Proof: Let

and , be the maximizing LLR

distributions for and , respectively. Let be the distri-

bution for channel message. For , the output LLR has the

distribution

, where stands for convolution of dis-

tributions. Let be the associated second moment. Similarly,

let be the associated second moment to

. One can

upgrade to (this concept is established in [25]). It follows

that

is upgraded with respect to

. Since

the second moment of soft-bit is monotonic under degradation

[25, Ch. 4], it follows that the second moment of

is greater than or equal to the second moment of

.

Remark 5: Similarly, one can show that the minimum second moment is a nondecreasing function of .

. In our method, we take into account another quantity , which is an upper bound on the average conditional second moment of variable-to-check messages (in the soft-bit domain)

If we can show that

, then by Lemma 15, the upper-

bound value in (47) for

is smaller than the upper-

bound value for

, which corresponds to the case of

all BSCs. In other words, our method gives a better bound. Thus,

it is enough to show

. By Theorem 1 and Lemma

4, it is easy to see that

Another property needs to be shown is as follows.

Lemma 18: If

and

satisfy

To achieve , there must be at most one non-BEC channel

among the incoming message channels and the communication

channel. It means that the outgoing message cannot be a BSC.

Thus,

. Now we have

the upper bound value in (47) for

is strictly larger than

the value for

.

Proof: In the first step, we define a new pair

Since

, by Lemma 15, the upper bound value for

is not smaller than the value for

. In the

second step, define

Since

and

, we have

By Lemma 15, the upper bound value for

larger than the value for

. In general, for

. is strictly
, define

Keep increasing until the newest pair becomes

.

Starting from the second step, the upper bound value keeps

strictly increasing. Since it requires at least two steps to reach

, this lemma is proved.

Remark 6: The trajectory of the pairs on the staircase.

plane is a

Thus, if the upper-bound function

in (50) can be de-

termined, one gets a best performance bound, which can be used

to derive a necessary condition for successful decoding. Next,

we will show that this bound is tighter than the best performance

bound in [17]. At any iteration, assume the upper bound on the

average mutual information of variable-to-check messages is

where the second step is due to the concavity of

in

Lemma 4. Thus, we have shown our method potentially gives a

better best performance bound.

To obtain a worst performance bound, the procedure is sim-

ilar. At a variable node, the lower bound on the mutual informa-

tion of an outgoing message is obtained when all incoming mes-

sage channels are BSCs, and computed according to (31). Simi-

larly, we need to find a lower bound (i.e., minimum) on the

conditional second moment of an outgoing variable-to-check

message (in the soft-bit domain), given the mutual information

of incoming messages. At a check node, the lower bound on

the mutual information of an outgoing message is computed by

(48). We can also show a similar version of Lemma 18 for the

lower bound (48) and that our method potentially gives a better

worst performance bound, compared to [17]. The key is to show

.

Finally, the independence assumption on channels in the orig-

inal and extended information combining problems is satisfied

since it is well known that the decoding neighborhoods (for any

fixed depth) of a very long ensemble of LDPC codes are asymp-

totically tree like [5].

A. Bounding the Conditional Second Moment at a Variable Node
As pointed out before, we need to solve the following problem.

Problem 8: Assume the communication channel is given. For Consider a degree check node. In [17], the upper bound on the a degree variable node, the first incoming message chanmutual information of check-to-variable messages is obtained nels have the same mutual information , but their distributions when all incoming messages are BSCs with mutual information are unknown. Let indicate the soft bit of the th outgoing
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

66

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

variable-to-check message. Find the maximum and minimum of the conditional second moment of .
Let indicate the BPSK-modulated code bit represented by that variable node and indicate the incoming messages. As shown in Section IV,

Thus, the optimization of is equivalent to the optimization of

MMSE for the estimation of from

. Intuitively,

as increases, both the maximum and minimum of MMSE

will decrease. It means both the maximum and minimum of

will increase, as increases.

IX. CONCLUSION

of moments and information combining, Tchebycheff system theory plays an important role. For the sake of completeness, in this appendix, we will summarize some of the key concepts and results of the theory.

Definition 1: A set of real continuous functions

defined on a real closed finite interval is called a Tcheby-

cheff system ( -system) [21], [22] if every nontrivial real linear

combination

has at most distinct zeros in .

It is easy to show that the determinant

is a -system if and only if

...

...

...

...

(51)

In this paper, we have studied an extremal problem of moments. Among all binary-input symmetric-output channels with a fixed mutual information value, the BSC and BEC have been shown to maximize and minimize the conditional second moment of the channel soft bit, respectively. We have also determined the ordering between the moment sequences of the BSC (or BEC) and an arbitrary binary-input symmetric-output channel (with the same mutual information). The connection between the extremal problem of moments and a related MMSE estimation problem has been found.
We have used the results on moments to solve the information combining problem (of the type in [17]) at the check nodes of LDPC codes. Namely, for the information combining at a check node of an LDPC code, the BSC and BEC are the most and least informative channels, respectively. Aiming at obtaining a better prediction of the convergence behavior of the belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes, we have extended the information combining problem at the check nodes by adding a constraint on the conditional second moment of the channel soft-bit. To solve the extension problem, first, an extremal problem with respect to the conditional fourth moment was solved, then the ordering between the moment sequences of an extremal distribution and an arbitrary distribution (of course, satisfying the constraints) was determined. We have also derived the formulas for computing the maximum and minimum of the extension problem. The results have been used to bound the CND EXIT function with Gaussian priors. Along with the results of information combining at the variable nodes (the BEC and BSC are the most and least informative channels, respectively), the results from the extension problem have been used to derive the best and worst performance bounds of the belief propagation decoding. The performance bounds are expected to be better than the performance bounds derived in [17], provided that Problem 8 is solved. We will leave this as future work.
APPENDIX I TCHEBYCHEFF SYSTEMS

does not vanish whenever

. Since

the determinant (51) is a continuous function of , it is equiv-

alent to requiring that the determinant (51) maintains a fixed

strict sign over variations of . Without loss of generality, we

will assume that the sign is positive. Thus, we have the following

equivalent definition of -systems.

Definition 2:

is called a -system if the deter-

minant (51) is strictly positive whenever

.

The following definition introduces an important concept of distribution.

Definition 3: [21, p. 15] A distribution on

is

a nondecreasing, right-continuous (except at the left endpoint

) function. For a distribution , the mass at a point

is

, and the mass at the left endpoint

is

.

The notations

and

indicate the left and

right limits, respectively. Note that a distribution is not neces-

sarily a probability distribution (total mass on

is , i.e.,

).

The moment space

induced by the -system

is

(52)

where is the set of all valid distributions (the subscript “ ”

indicates “distribution”). One can show that geometrically the

moment space

is a closed convex cone.

Assume

(such a is called a

“positive sequence” in [21]). Define a set to be

Tchebycheff systems have broad applications in a wide va-

riety of subjects, for example, the theory of approximations, In general,

contains either one distribution or infinitely

boundary value problems, and the theory of inequalities. For a many distributions. consists of a single distribution if and

good introduction into the theory of Tchebycheff systems see only if is a boundary point of

(such is called a “singu-

for example [21], [22]. In our research on extremal problems larly positive sequence” [21]). consists of infinitely many

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: EXTREMAL PROBLEMS OF INFORMATION COMBINING

67

distributions if and only if is an interior point of

(de-

noted by

) (such is called a “strictly positive

sequence” [21]).

Assume

is a -system. Let be a distribution

in . If is a distribution with finitely many points of

increase

, we have

• lower principal representation: all mass is concen-

trated at interior points of , and at the endpoint

, i.e.,

;

• upper principal representation: all mass is concen-

trated at interior points of , and at the endpoint

, i.e.,

.

(53)

where is the mass at the point . We will say that (53) is

a representation of . The points

are called roots of the

representation and is called the distribution associated with

the representation. As in [21], an index function is defined

as

.

It is easy to verify that all the above forms of representations

have an index equal to

.

Let

be a continuous function and

be a

-system and let

. The following theorem deter-

mines the maximum or minimum of the integral

where

belongs to the set .

. For convenience, we define

The index of the representation (53) is defined as the sum

. Obviously, it is equal to either ,

, or

.

Lemma 19: ([22, Theorem 2.1] or [21, Theorem 4.1, Sec.

III.4]) is a boundary point of

if and only if it admits a

representation of index not greater than .

Theorem 8: ([21, Theorem 1.1, Sec. IV.1], [22, Theorem

1.1, Sec. III.1]) Let

. If

both

and the augmented system

are

-systems

If is a boundary point of

then, since

con-

tains only one distribution, admits a unique representation. If

, then admits infinitely many representations.

Among them, there are two important types of representations,

namely, a canonical representation and a principal representa-

tion. If the index of a representation is not greater than

,

the representation is said to be canonical. If the index is equal

to

, the representation is said to be principal. By Lemma

19, it is obvious that

is the smallest possible index for

an interior point of

. Furthermore, if a canonical or prin-

cipal representation has a root at the right endpoint , it is further

called an upper canonical representation or an upper principal

representation. On the other hand, if is not a root, it is fur-

ther called a lower canonical representation or a lower principal

representation.

Theorem 6: ([22, Corollary 3.1, Sec. II.3] or [21, Theorem

5.1, Sec. III.5]) For each

, there exist exactly one

lower principal representation and exactly one upper principal

representation. The roots of these two representations strictly

interlace.

is attained uniquely for the distribution associated with the upper principal representation of , and

is attained uniquely for the distribution associated with the lower principal representation of .
It is remarkable that as long as the augmented system is a -system, the maximizing and the minimizing
distributions ( and ) are independent of the function .

APPENDIX II PROOF OF LEMMA 2

Let For the system
, we have

and

for

.

with

The following theorem characterizes the roots of these two principal representations.

Theorem 7: ([21, p. 77], [22, p. 45]): The roots of lower and

upper principal representations have the following properties.

1) For odd (

):

• lower principal representation: all mass is concen-

trated at interior points of , i.e.,

;

where , , and are nonnegative integers. Thus,

and

• upper principal representation: all mass is concen-

is a -system.

trated at

interior points of , and at both end- For the system

points , , i.e.,

.

2) For even (

):

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

68

with

, it can be shown that

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008
Overall, the new sequence

satisfies

(56)

where ,

are nonnegative integers. Thus,

and

is a -system on .

A more general proof is as follows. Let

be an

matrix with entries

, where

and integers satisfy

.

Let

be the Vandermonde matrix with

.

By the theory of generalized Vandermonde determinants [27],

we have

If and solve (54) to obtain that

(57) , then define

where

is a homogeneous symmetric function

[28] with positive coefficients (called the Schur function). Since

, we have

. Furthermore, since

all belong to , we conclude that

.

Thus,

.

APPENDIX III PROOF OF LEMMA 9

For convenience, we call

the target value for a

sequence . First we prove the following lemma.

It is easy to see that

and

. So similarly,

(55), (56), and (57) hold. Therefore, the operation on the pair

leads to a new pair and sequence which has a larger

target value as shown in (57).

Next, if

, we pick the pairs

and

; if

, we pick the pairs

and

; if

and

, we pick the

pairs

and

. Then we repeat the same

process as described above to obtain a new sequence satisfying

Lemma 20: If

,

,

,

,

(58)

,

, then

(59)

A necessary and sufficient condition to achieve equality is .
Proof:

As the operations continue,

converges to

as goes to infinity, and the target value decreasing in . It follows that

is non-

Since

and

, the necessary and sufficient

condition to achieve equality is

.

Pick the pairs

and

. If

In order to achieve

, in each step of the operation the

target value of the newly obtained sequence should remain the

same as the old sequence. By Lemma 20, it requires

. On the other hand, if

, it is trivially true that

.

This concludes the proof.

then define to obtain that

and solve

(54) Define

APPENDIX IV PROOF OF LEMMA 14

It is easy to see that

and

and Lemma 20, we conclude that

. Along with (54)

(55)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: EXTREMAL PROBLEMS OF INFORMATION COMBINING

69

thus, .

is a geometric sequence. Define

APPENDIX V PROOF OF LEMMA 15

Lemma 21: There are two possible types of ordering for We know that and should satisfy

.

and

:

Thus, for a fixed , should satisfy

. By

1)

for

, and

for definition of in (35), we have

;

2)

for

,

and

for

;

where is an integer depending on . Proof: Obviously, we have

Thus

By Theorem 4, we obtain

(60) The upper bound (47) can be rewritten as

Based on these two facts, the remaining proof is similar to the proof of Lemma 7.

Since

, we have

and

(61)

As increases and is fixed,

strictly increases

and so does

. Thus, is a strictly increasing function

of .

Now fix

and allow to change provided that

. For convenience, we write the com-

plete upper bound (47) as a function of , i.e.,

. The

right endpoint of the feasible interval corresponds to all BSCs,

which strictly maximizes the extrinsic mutual information

among all channel combinations subject to mutual information

constraints (see Section VI). Thus

By Theorem 4, one has

. Thus, for (61) to hold,

after the fourth moment, there should exist at least one moment

for to be not greater than its counterpart for . Letting the

smallest index for such a moment be , then there are two

possible cases.

1)

:

By the definition of , one has

for

. It is easy to see that

(62)

The left endpoint corresponds to all BECs, which minimizes

the extrinsic mutual information among all channel combina-

tions subject to mutual information constraints (see Section VI).

Since for

, no channel could be a BEC; therefore, we

have

It remains to show that

is a strictly increasing func-

tion when

. Recall that is the type of maxi-

mizing distribution to Problem 5 and determined by (32)–(35).

We first prove the following lemma.

By Lemma 21, one has

Lemma 22: Assume

be a codeword of a

single parity-check code. The first

channels

,

are fixed and each channel has a

positive mutual information. Let

, , and indicate

Then one obtains

the distributions corresponding to

and

,

respectively. Let and indicate the extrinsic mutual

information

when

has the channel

distribution and , respectively. It is true that

.

(63)

Proof: Since

, by (32), has a smaller value

than . Since the moment sequences for and have the

Using the above argument repeatedly and sequentially for form

, i.e., a geometric sequence, it means that ’s

, one can conclude that

for

. sequence has a larger initial value but decays faster than ’s

This concludes the proof of the first case of Lemma 14. sequence. We can easily conclude that the moment sequence of

2)

and the moment sequence of have the same two possible

The remaining proof is exactly the same as in the first case. types of ordering as in Lemma 7. Since they have the same mu-

Thus this lemma is proved.

tual information , by Lemma 9, we have

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

70

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

Recall that when all of the first

channels have the

same distribution,

becomes . For , it

means they all have the channel distribution . For , they

all have the channel distribution . Starting from all distri-

butions, we can replace a channel by a channel. By the

preceding lemma, we get a larger extrinsic mutual information

. Repeat the procedure times and

keeps strictly increasing. As a result, all

channels have

the same channel distribution and

becomes the

upper bound for . Therefore,

for has a larger value

than for . This concludes the proof.

APPENDIX VI PROOF OF LEMMA 16
Assume is fixed. For convenience, we define the following function:

function on

. Let

. and indicate the

distributions corresponding to

and

, respec-

tively (determined by (36)–(39)). We first show this lemma.

Lemma 23: Assume

be a codeword of a

single parity-check code. The first

channels

,

are fixed and each channel has a

positive mutual information. Let

and

indicate the

extrinsic mutual information

when

has the channel distribution and , respectively. It is true

that

.

Proof: Let

and

be the moment

sequences for and , respectively. Let

and

be the corresponding sequence defined in

Lemma 13. Since

, we have

Namely, when

,

When

,

When

,

channel corresponding to

.
is the th moment for a BEC. is the th moment for a BSC.
is the th moment for a , i.e.,

Both sequences are geometric sequences. Since has

a larger value than ,

decays faster than

. Since

it is easy to see that these two sequences have the following two possible orderings:

1)

for

, and

2)

for

,

for

;

for

;

and

For a fixed , it is obvious that strictly decreasing function of . Due to
is a strictly increasing function on also have for
and

where is an integer depending on

, and is a

, for

,

. We

and . Since

based on the same technique as in the proof of Lemma 14, it is easy to conclude that the two moment sequences have the following two possible orderings:

1)

for

, and

for

;

2)

for

,

and

Thus, we have shown that

is a strictly increasing func-

tion on

.

Recall that the lower bound is equal to the extrinsic mu-

tual information

when all of the first

chan-

nels are BECs, or of the same distribution, or BSCs. Thus,

by (12), can also be computed as

As shown above,

is a strictly increasing function of .

Thus, we can conclude

is a strictly increasing function

of as well.

Now assume is fixed. Based on the same argument as in

Section V, it suffices to show that

is a strictly increasing

for

;

where is an integer depending on and . Thus, by

Lemma 9, we have

.

Recall that when all of the first

channels have the

same distribution,

becomes . For , it

means they all have the channel distribution . For , they

all have the channel distribution . Starting from all distri-

butions, we can replace a channel by a channel. By the

preceding lemma, we get a larger extrinsic mutual information

. Repeat the procedure times and

keeps strictly increasing. As a result, all

channels have

the same channel distribution and

becomes the

lower bound for . Therefore, for has a larger value

than for . This concludes the proof.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: EXTREMAL PROBLEMS OF INFORMATION COMBINING

71

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to the Associate Editor Tom Richardson for his proof of the existence of maximum and minimum of second moment at the variable node and their nondecreasing property, and useful comments from the reviewers.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] IEEE Transactions on Information Theory (Special Issue on Codes on Graphs and Iterative Algorithms), vol. 47, no. 2, Feb. 2001.
[3] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[4] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[5] T. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[7] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: A model and two properties,” in Proc. Conf. Information Sciences and Systems, Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2002, pp. 742–747.
[8] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.
[9] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[10] S. Huettinger, J. Huber, R. Johannesson, and R. Fischer, “Information processing in soft-output decoding,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. 38th Annu. Communications, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2001.
[11] S. Huettinger, J. Huber, R. Fischer, and R. Johannesson, “Soft-outputdecoding: Some aspects from information theory,” in Proc. Int. ITG Conf. Source and Channel Coding, Berlin, Germany, Jan. 2002, pp. 81–90.
[12] I. Land, S. Huettinger, P. A. Hoeher, and J. Huber, “Bounds on information combining,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 39–42.

[13] I. Land, S. Huettinger, P. A. Hoeher, and J. Huber, “Bounds on information combining,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 612–619, Feb. 2005.
[14] I. Land, P. A. Hoeher, and J. Huber, “Bounds on information combining for parity-check equations,” in Proc. Int. Zurich Seminar on Communications (IZS), Zurich, Switzerland, Feb. 2004, pp. 68–71.
[15] I. Land, S. Huettinger, P. A. Hoeher, and J. Huber, “Bounds on mutual information for simple codes using information combining,” Ann. Telecomm., vol. 60, no. 1-2, pp. 184–214, Jan. 2005.
[16] I. Sutskover, S. Shamai (Shitz), and J. Ziv, “Extremes of information combining,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Confe. Communications, Conrol and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1446–1455.
[17] I. Sutskover, S. Shamai (Shitz), and J. Ziv, “Extremes of information combining,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1313–1326, Apr. 2005.
[18] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Bounds on the performance of belief propagation decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 112–122, Jan. 2002.
[19] E. Sharon, A. Ashikhmin, and S. Litsyn, “EXIT functions for the Gaussian channel,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Confe. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 972–981.
[20] E. Sharon, A. Ashikhmin, and S. Litsyn, “EXIT functions for binary input memoryless symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1207–1214, Jul. 2006.
[21] M. G. Krein and A. A. Nudel’man, The Markov Moment Problem and Extremal Problems. Providence, RI: Amer. Math. Soc., 1977.
[22] S. Karlin and W. J. Studden, Tchebycheff Systems: With Applications in Analysis and Statistics. New York: Interscience, 1966.
[23] Y. Jiang, A. Ashikhmin, R. Koetter, and A. C. Singer, “Extremal problems of information combining,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 1236–1240.
[24] I. Sutskover, S. Shamai (Shitz), and J. Ziv, “Constrained information combining: Theory and applications for LDPC coded systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1617–1643, May 2007.
[25] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Preliominary version [Online]. Available: http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/mct/index.php, 2007
[26] R. Durrett, Probability: Theory and Examples, 2nd ed. Belmont, CA: Duxbury, 1996.
[27] R. P. Flowe and G. A. Harris, “A note on generalized Vandermonde determinants,” SIAM J. Matrix Anal. Appl., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1146–1151, Oct. 1993.
[28] I. G. Macdonald, Symmetric Functions and Orthogonal Polynomials. Providence, RI: Amer. Math. Soc., 1998, vol. 12, University Lecture Series.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

