IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 12, NO. 4, APRIL 2008

301

Design of Cages with a Randomized Progressive Edge-Growth Algorithm
Auguste Venkiah, David Declercq, and Charly Poulliat

Abstract— The progressive edge-growth (PEG) construction is a well known algorithm for constructing bipartite graphs with good girth properties. In this letter, we propose some improvements in the PEG algorithm which greatly improve the girth properties of the resulting graphs: given a graph size, they increase the girth g achievable by the algorithm, and when the girth cannot be increased, our modified algorithm minimizes the number of cycles of length g. As a main illustration, we focus on regular column-weight two graphs (dv = 2), although our algorithm can be applied to any graph connectivity. The class of dv = 2 graphs is often used for non-binary low density parity check codes that can be seen as monopartite graphs: for a given target girth gt, this new instance of the PEG algorithm allows to construct cages, i.e. graphs with the minimal size such that a graph of girth gt exists, which is the best result one might hope for.
Index Terms— Progressive edge-growth (PEG), low density parity check (LDPC) codes, girth, Tanner graphs.
I. INTRODUCTION
S PARSE bipartite graphs with large girths are extremely useful in coding theory and most good low density parity check (LDPC) code constructions focus on avoiding short cycles in their associated Tanner graph. Graphs of particular interest in the recent literature are those with dv = 2 edges on the variable nodes, also called “cycle graphs” [1]. Such graphs are used to design ultra sparse non-binary (NB) LDPC codes that achieve very good performance at small to moderate codeword lengths and high Galois field orders [2], and in that case it is crucial to focus on the girth properties of the underlying Tanner graph. A construction based on a progressive edgegrowth (PEG) of the graph was proposed in [3], which results in graphs that have higher girths compared to pre-existing techniques. In this letter, we propose some modifications in the PEG algorithm which further improve the girth properties of the resulting graphs: given a graph size, our method improves the girth g achievable by the PEG algorithm, and when the girth cannot be increased, our modified algorithm, that we called RandPEG for “randomized progressive edge-growth”, minimizes the number of cycles of length g.
For a given graph setting and a given target girth, there exists a the minimal size for the graph such that a graph of girth gt exists, which is often given in terms of a lower bound. In the case of cycle codes (dv = 2), there exists a monopartite representation of the Tanner graph where the vertices of the monopartite graph represent check nodes, and edges represent variable nodes. When such a graph is minimal, meaning that it achieves the lower bound on the size, it is called a cage.
Manuscript received November 5, 2007. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was J. Li (Tiffany).
The authors are with ETIS, CNRS UMR 8051, ENSEA, University of Cergy Pontoise (e-mail: venkiah@ensea.fr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2008.071843.

II. NOTATIONS AND DEFINITIONS

In this section, we briefly review the PEG algorithm to

introduce the notations. A bipartite graph is denoted as (V, E)

where V (resp. E) is the set of the vertices (resp. edges).

V = Vc ∪ Vs where Vc is the set of check nodes and Vs the set of symbol nodes. Let N = |Vs| denote the total number

of symbol nodes, which we will refer to as the size of the

graph. When the graph is the Tanner graph of an LDPC code,

N is the codeword length. For a given graph setting, namely a 3-tuple (dv, dc, g), we denote by Ng(dv,dc) the lower bound on N such that a regular (dv, dc) graph of girth g exists. This lower bound can be easily computed by using the results of

[3, lemma 3], and is known not to be tight when dv = 2, for g ≥ 18 [4]. Let Nslj denote the set of all check nodes reached by a tree spanned from symbol node sj within depth l, and N¯slj denote the complementary set in Vc. At a given
stage of the construction, only a subset of the check nodes

have reached a connectivity of dc, and we call candidates the check nodes in N¯slj whose incident edges have not been all affected. When a particular check node is selected among the

candidates, an edge is added in the graph between the node

sj and that check node. The original PEG algorithm [3] is a procedure for construct-

ing a bipartite graph in an edge by edge manner, where the

selection of each new edge aims at minimizing the impact on

the girth: at each step the local girth is maximized. For each

node sj, the first edge is chosen randomly, and the other edges

are chosen N¯slj+1 = ∅,

in the set N¯slj , i.e. among the

where nodes

l is that

such that are at the

N¯slj = largest

∅ and depth

from the symbol node sj. This maximizes the length of the

cycles created through this new edge. When multiple choices

are possible, the algorithm selects the candidate that has the

smallest degree under the current setting.

Even though the original PEG algorithm produces only

almost regular graphs, the construction of strictly regular

graphs can be easily enforced by discarding all candidates

where all the edges have already been assigned.

III. THE RANDOMIZED-PEG ALGORITHM
There are basically two differences between the original PEG algorithm and the RandPEG algorithm that we propose in this paper: firstly, the way we build and use the spanning tree is different, and secondly, we introduce an objective function for the edge selection. The RandPEG algorithm is based on a randomization approach: given a target girth gt, we consider, at each stage of the construction, the maximum number of possibilities when adding an edge in a graph, and we use the objective function to discriminate among the numerous edge candidates. Similarly to Monte Carlo approaches, the algorithm runs many times and stores the best graph.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. D10o8w9n-l7o7ad9e8d/0o8n$2J5u.n0e024c,20220608atI0E2E:0E1:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

302

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 12, NO. 4, APRIL 2008

In this section, we describe our contributions in details. Our the probability that the algorithm actually terminates if much

goal is to actually reach a given target girth gt of the bipartite higher.

graph, when all the edges of the graph have been assigned.

Therefore, if at some point of the construction there is no possibility to add an edge without creating a short1 cycle, then we consider that the algorithm fails. In the sequel, we only consider the construction of (dv, dc) regular graphs, in order to compare to the known bounds for regular graphs. We point out that this limitation concerns only our study, not the RandPEG algorithm itself, which can be used for the design of regular or irregular graphs.

B. The objective function
We consider in this section the general case where N ≥ Ng(dv,dc), i.e. when the graph size N is large enough such that a (dv, dc) graph of girth g may exist. The set of candidates can be potentially very large, especially at the beginning of the graph construction, and it becomes possible (and necessary) to discriminate among the multiple candidates.
We describe here the objective function that we used, which

A. Truncated spanning tree
Instead of spanning to the maximal possible depth, we span the tree only up to a maximal depth lmax. This technique, which defines the nongreedy version of the algorithm [3], is suggested for the construction of long codes where it would be computationally expensive to build the whole tree. Here, we argue that this is not only a computational or speed-up enhancement of the algorithm, but that this technique should be used when one wants to construct a graph that matches the lower bound Ng(dv,dc). We justify our argument with the following three points.
1) Diameter argument: First, we give a justification on how deep the construction tree should be spanned, based on a graph argument: for a given value of the target girth gt, if the graph has minimum size N = Ng(tdv,dc) then the diameter of the graph equals d = gt/2 [5]. Therefore in that case, the tree must be spanned up to a maximal depth lmax = gt, so that the diameter is ensured to equal d = gt/2. Indeed, if at some point the algorithm selects a node in N¯slj with l > gt, then the condition that diameter of the graph equals gt/2 cannot

minimizes the number of created cycles. We would like to
point out that other objective functions could be used com-
plementarily: the minimization of other topological structures
such as the number of created stopping sets, trapping sets etc.
or the minimization of an ACE metric [6], as done in [7] for
the construction of irregular graphs.
When the construction tree is spanned up to a maximal depth lmax, the objective function restricts the set of candidates N¯sljmax , as follows:
1- If there are candidates at depth lmax, then discard all the candidates that are not exactly at the depth lmax. By doing so, we only create cycles of size exactly lmax, and ensure that the diameter argument is fulfilled
2- For each candidate cj, compute nbCyclesj, the number of cycles that would be created if cj is selected. Discard all candidates that would create more than minj(nbCyclesj).
3- Compute dcmin, the lowest degree of all remaining candidates. Discard all candidates with current degree dc > dcmin
At this point, the algorithm randomly samples among the
remaining candidates.

hold, and the construction will fail.

Spanning the tree at a given depth l = gt gives a set of candidates for which we ensure that no cycle smaller than the target girth gt can be created if such a candidate is selected.
2) The randomization approach: We recall that our goal is to reach a given target girth gt, when all the edges of the graph have been assigned. By spanning the tree less deeply, the number of candidates at each step of the algorithm becomes much larger, and each edge is selected among a very large number of candidates. Thus, the algorithm is based on a certain amount of randomness in the construction: if at some point

C. Refinement for spanning the tree
For a given target girth gt, the diameter argument does not hold anymore for lengths N such that Ng(tdv,dc) < N < Ng(td+v,2dc). In that case, the diameter may be larger than g/2, and we propose an alternative strategy by introducing a gap variable: we span the tree up to a maximal depth lmax = gt + gap. At the beginning of the construction, cycles of size larger than gt + gap are created. Each time that it is no longer possible to add any edge, we decrease the value of gap, and

the construction fails, then all the edges are discarded and therefore allow to create smaller cycles. At some point, we the procedure restarts from scratch. This justifies the name span the tree only up to a depth l = gt, and only at this point of “Randomized PEG”, and ensures that a wide variety of the algorithm starts creating cycles of size gt. This technique,

solutions are explored.

coupled with the objective function described in the previous

3) Reduced probability of construction failure: When span- section, allows to minimize the multiplicity of the girth, i.e.

ning the tree to its maximal depth, the first cycles that are the number of cycles length gt. It is not necessary for the

created by the algorithm are locally optimal in the sense simulations presented in the next section, but leads to a better that they are of the largest possible size. However, as the LDPC code design when dv ≥ 3.

procedure progresses, the construction problem becomes too

constrained and eventually fails if the target girth is relatively

IV. PERFORMANCE OF THE RANDPEG ALGORITHM

high compared to the graph parameters. Our extensive tests A. Design of ultra-sparse graphs

show that by spanning the tree at a lower depth, we create smaller cycles at the beginning of the procedure and thus the choice of the edge is not locally optimal, but nevertheless

In Table I we report, for different values of dc and g, the smallest value of N such that the RandPEG algorithm could construct a regular (2, dc) graph of girth g. When

1 by short cyAculteh,owrizeemd elicaenncsyecdleusseshliomritteerdtthoa:nYothnesetiaUrgneitv.gDirothwnloaded on Junet2h4i,s20v26alaut e02:a01c:h5i6eUvTeCs frtohmeIElEoEwXeprlorbe.ouRnesdtricNtiogn(2s,adpcp)l,y. we indicate

VENKIAH et al.: DESIGN OF CAGES WITH A RANDOMIZED PROGRESSIVE EDGE-GROWTH ALGORITHM

303

TABLE I FOR VARIOUS VALUES OF GIRTH g AND VARIOUS VALUES OF CHECKNODE DEGREE dc , WE REPORT THE SMALLEST GRAPH SIZE N SUCH THAT THE
RANDPEG ALGORITHM COULD CONSTRUCT A REGULAR (2, dc) GRAPH OF GIRTH g.

g\dc 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22

3 6∗ [6] 9∗ [9] 15∗ [18] 21∗ [27] 36∗ [36] 45∗ [72] 114(69) [150] 201(93) [285] 447(141) [558]

4 10∗ [10] 16∗ [20] 38(34) [42] 52∗ [104]
260 [292] 160∗† [850]

5 15∗ [15] 25∗ [35] 90(65) [110] 105∗† [380]

6 21∗ [21] 36∗ [48] 189(111) [225] 186∗† [966]

7 28∗ [28] 49∗ [70] 385(175) [441]

8 36∗ [36] 64∗ [116] 728(260) [812]

9 45∗ [45] 81∗ [162]

10 55∗ [55] 100∗ [230]

··· ...∗ ...∗

50 1275∗ [1275] 2500∗ [???]

NB−LDPC codes of size N=160 symobols in GF(64) 10 0

16. For both graphs, we optimized the non-binary coefficients

PEG RandPEG

in GF (64) according to the method described in [2], and

10 −1

simulated the resulting codes on a binary input additive white

gaussian noise channel (BIAWGNC). The simulation results

10 −2

on Fig. 1 show that for ultra-sparse non-binary LDPC codes,

a graph with better girth properties performs better in the

10 −3

error floor region, by inducing better spectrum and minimum

distance properties [2].
10 −4

Frame Error Rate

10 −5

10 −6

10 −7

SP 59

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

E b / N0

Fig. 1. Performance comparison for the design of non-binary LDPC codes: two codes whose underlying Tanner graphs were constructed with respectively the PEG and RandPEG algorithm are simulated over a BIAWGNC. The sphere packing bound of 1959 (SP59) [9] gives a lower bound on the block error probability for this codeword length.

so by super-scripting with a star (∗), and the corresponding

graph

defines

a

(dc,

g 2

)-cage.

Otherwise

the

value

of

the

lower bound Ng(2,dc) is super-scripted with parenthesis. Some

values are super-scripted with a dag, which means that the

RandPEG was initialized with a tree for these constructions.

For comparison, the value of N such that the standard PEG

algorithm could construct the corresponding graph is reported

in square brackets.

For all values of dc that we tested up to 50, the RandPEG successfully constructs cages for target girths g = 6, 8. More-

over, for lower values of dc = 3, 4 the algorithm successfully constructs graphs of girth up to 16 that achieve the lower

bound. The corresponding graphs are available on [8].

B. Application to the design of NB-LDPC codes
We now illustrate the interest of our algorithm for the design of non-binary LDPC codes. We designed two codes of rate one-half, with (2, 4) graphs of size N = 160. For this graph setting the regular PEG algorithm constructed a graph of girth 12, whereas the RandPEG constructs a cage of girth

C. Girth multiplicity
One important property that does not appear in Table I is the multiplicity of the girth, i.e the number of cycles with length equal to the girth. The multiplicity of the girth can be extremely important if the graph is used for designing (binary or non-binary) LDPC codes. We designed regular (3, 6) binary LDPC codes of size N = 504 and N = 1008. All the codes were of girth 8, but for N = 504, the PEG code had a girth multiplicity of 808, whereas the RandPEG code had a multiplicity of only 452. For N = 1008, the PEG code had a girth multiplicity of 167, whereas the RandPEG code had a multiplicity of only 31. Simulation results show that the RandPEG codes perform better that the PEG codes.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Song, J. Liu, and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Large girth cycle codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 3084– 3086, July 2004.
[2] C. Poulliat, M. Fossorier, and D. Declercq, “Design of regular (2, dc) LDPC codes over GF(q) using their binary image,” accepted for publication in IEEE Trans. Commun., 2007.
[3] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M.Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[4] N. Biggs, “Constructions for cubic graphs with large girths,” The Electron. J. of Combinatorics, vol. 5, no. 1, 1988.
[5] R. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISTA, 2001.
[6] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, and R. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[7] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth (peg) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715–717, Dec. 2004.
[8] “David declercq’s homepage,” http://perso-etis.ensea.fr/ ~declercq.
[9] C. Shannon, “Probability of error for optimal codes in a gaussian channel,” Bell Syst. Techn. J., vol. 38, pp. 611–656, May 1959.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

