IEEE-International Conference on Signal processing, Communications and Networking Madras Institute of Technology, Anna University Chennai India, Jan 4-6, 2008. pp41-45

Efficient Realization of CORDIC based LDPC Decoder for WiMax System
1P.Palanisamy, 2R.Thilagavathy, 3M.Ratheesh Kumar and 4A.Srihari
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering National Institute of Technology, Trichy-15, India.
1palan @nitt.edu, 2thilagavathy@nitt.edu, 3ratheesh.mungara@gmail.com, 4sriharia444@gmail.com

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have recently emerged due to their excellent performance in wired, wireless communication applications and in disk drives. Based on architecture-aware LDPC codes, this paper presents an efficient joint LDPC coding and decoding hardware architecture. We used a special class of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes, which have an efficient encoding algorithm due to the simple structure of their paritycheck matrices. Since the parity-check matrix of a QC-LDPC code consists of circulant permutation matrices or the zero matrix, the required memory for storing it can be significantly reduced, as compared with randomly constructed LDPC codes. An encoder and a decoder are designed using Verilog-HDL and are synthesized using synopsys design compiler with 150 nm TSMC standard cell library. We used CORDIC algorithm to implement check node update unit in decoder which saves much hardware compared to conventional LUT approach. We study the optimal permutation of the bit nodes that will result in the maximum possible burst erasure correction capability for a given LDPC code. The simulation results show the burst-erasure correction capability of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes in the IEEE 802.16e (WiMax) standard.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [6] proposed by R. G. Gallager in 1962 were too complex to implement and had almost been forgotten in spite of their powerful errorcorrecting capability. However, it was rediscovered by MacKay and Neal in the 1990s, who made significant improvements on BER performance [7]. Chung and others [8] showed that the threshold for an LDPC code of code rate 1/2 on an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel was within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit, and simulation results were within 0.04 dB of the Shannon limit at a BER of 10-6 using a block length of 107.
Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes have been established through their success in various different scenarios as one of the most powerful and versatile codes available today. Therefore, the LDPC codes have been widely considered as next-generation error-correcting codes for telecommunication. Different standards such as Digital Video Broadcasting and the IEEE 802.16e (WiMax) standards have already adopted LDPC codes. In applications such as magnetic recording, an important requirement is that the code used should be capable of correcting bursts of erasures (in addition to random errors) caused by media defects such as scratches. Correction of burst erasures also has applications in wireless communication systems limited by interference. In some OFDM-based cellular systems, a contiguous band of subcarriers might be affected by interference from neighboring cells. One way of handling such interference is

to declare the affected symbols as erasures and rely on the error-correcting code to correct the erasures. In such settings, a code with better burst erasure correction performance will perform better. While the threshold phenomenon of LDPC codes has been exploited to design good degree distributions to protect against random errors, burst errors and erasures need special attention. In the case of finite length LDPC codes over the Binary Erasure Channel (BEC), stopping sets introduced in [2] determine the success of the iterative decoding algorithm. By searching for stopping sets that occur within a sequence of consecutive bit nodes, one can determine the maximum length burst erasure that can be corrected by a given LDPC code.
LDPC codes possess many advantages including parallelizable decoding, self-error-detection capability by syndrome check, an asymptotically better performance than turbo codes, etc. Regardless of many advantages of LDPC codes, the encoding problem of LDPC codes may be an obstacle for their commercial applications because they have higher encoding complexity than turbo codes. Recently, many people have tried to solve it in some structured forms by taking not only the ensemble of codes with a parity-check matrix of a lower triangular shape but also cyclic or quasicyclic codes like the LDPC codes based on finite geometries [10], etc.
MacKay et al. [12] and Richardson et al. [1] showed that the encoding complexity is upper-bounded by O(n) + O(g2), where n is the code length and g is the gap to measure the “distance” between a given parity-check matrix and triangular matrix. Therefore, it may be possible to reduce the encoding complexity if we can reduce the gap g. In the extreme case of g = 0, the corresponding LDPC codes have linear encoding complexity. However, g is not generally required to be zero in order to get linear encoding complexity. This may be possible if the matrix Φ of a given parity-check matrix which causes O(g2) encoding complexity in [1] is chosen to be a special form, say, the identity matrix.
Another disadvantage of general LDPC codes is that a significant amount of memory is needed to store their paritycheck matrices. Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes may be a good candidate to solve the memory problem, since their parity-check matrices consist of circulant permutation matrices or the zero matrix. In fact, the required memory for storing them can be reduced by a factor 1/z, when z×z, circulant permutation matrices is employed. A good example for QC-LDPC codes is the array codes [4].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II dis-cusses the quasi cyclic LDPC code construction. In

978-1-4244-1923-4/08$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

41

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE-ICSCN Jan.2008

section III we present the efficient encoding strategy and decoding algorithm and their architectures. In section IV we discuss simulation results showing the burst erasure correction capability of codes over AWGN and wireless fading vehicular A channel. Conclusions are drawn in section V. Throughout this paper, vectors are denoted by lowercase bold letters, and matrices are denoted by uppercase bold letters. The superscript T denotes transposition.

where A is (m-g)×(n-m), B is (m-g)×g, T is (m-g)×(m-g), C is g×(n-m), D is g×g, and, finally, E is g×(m-g). Let v is code
word given by [s u1 u2] decomposed according to (1) where s is information bit vector with length (n-m), u1 and u2 combined denote the parity part, u1 has length g, and u2 has length (m-g). The encoding process involves in computation
of u1 and u2 which can be calculated from the equations given below.

II. QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES
In this section we review QC-LDPC codes and their burst erasure correction capability. The IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX) standard has proposed the use of quasicyclic LDPC codes described in [3] and [4]. Each LDPC code in the set of LDPC codes is defined by a matrix H of size m×n, where n is the length of the code and m is the number of parity check bits in the code. The number of message bits is k = n – m. The matrix H is expanded from a binary base matrix Hb of size mb×nb where n= z.nb and m=z.mb with z is an integer. Let P be z×z permutation matrix with (i, i+1)-th entry (modulo z) as 1 for i = 0, 1, 2, ···, z-1. The matrix P represents a circular shift of a length-z vector. Each entry of the base matrix is chosen from the set {-1, 0, 1, 2, ···, m-1}. To obtain the expanded final m×n matrix
1) each -1 in the base matrix is replaced by the z×z permutation matrix, and
2) each j ∈ { 0, 1, 2, ···, z-1} in the base matrix is
replaced by Pj.
The base matrix is chosen suitably to provide good error correcting performance.

III. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
We propose a joint code-encoder-decoder design as a complete solution for LDPC coding system implementations. The design of encoder and decoder and their hardware implementation are discussed below.

LDPC Encoder Design
We describe an efficient hardware. Although LDPC codes achieve better performance and have low decoding complexity compared to Turbo codes, one of the major drawback of LDPC codes lies in their high encoding complexity. Whereas Turbo codes can be encoded in linear time, a straightforward implementation for a LDPC code has complexity quadratic in the block length.

It is suggested that using an approximate upper triangular parity check matrix to construct LDPC code can reduce the encoding complexity significantly without performance degradation. Our hardware implementation is based on the RU algorithm in [1], which admits linear time encoding through optimizing irregular codes. We can write parity check matrix as

H

=

A C

B D

T E

(1)

u1T = −φ −1 (ET −1A + C)s T

(2)

u

T 2

=

−T −1 (As T

+

Bu

T 1

)

(3)

where φ:= −ET−1B + D and assume for the moment that ϕ
is nonsingular and for proper parity check matrix it is identity matrix. Fig. 1 shows the encoding flow diagram.

A

ET-1

B

s

s

u1

T-1

u2

C
Fig.1. Flow diagram of encoding process
The above architecture involves only XOR and AND operators for matrix addition and multiplications because the elements are binary. We have used pre computed values of A, B, C, ET-1 which was done in MATLAB. The complete architecture is written in VerilogHDL for hardware implementation.
LDPC Decoder Design LDPC codes are often represented by bipartite graphs
made up of two families of nodes, variable nodes and check nodes. variable nodes represent the transmitted bits in the code, including both information bits and parity bits. Each variable node is connected to a few check nodes through a sparse array of edges. Each check node represents a parity check constraint on the set of adjacent bit nodes.
LDPC decoders implement a message passing algorithm, which specifies the computation of messages and their communication between variable nodes and check nodes as defined by the edges in the graph. An iteration of LDPC decoding consists of a round of message passing from each variable node to all adjacent check nodes, followed by another round of message passing from each check node to its adjacent variable nodes. Decoding performance is achieved through repeated iterations of message passing along edges in the graph, with some stopping criteria.

42
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Efficient Realization of CORDIC based LDPC Decoder for WiMax System

Let H be an m×n parity check matrix (which was taken from IEEE 802.16e) of an LDPC code comprising n variable
nodes and m check nodes. The set v(m) ={n :Hm,n = 1}defines the variable nodes that are connected to mth check node.
µ(n) ={m :Hm,n = 1} is set of check nodes that are connected to nth node. The algorithm steps are given below.

Step(0): Initialize: The input to the decoding algorithm is a message vector (pi0, pi1) for each bit vi, giving the intrinsic
probability with respect to the decoder for each bit. As a log-

likelihood ratio, this intrinsic information can be represented

as

LLR(pi

)

=

LLR

int LDPC

(v i

)

= log

PLinDt PC (vi PLinDt PC (vi

= =

1) 0)



(4)

relies on concurrent computation of messages, the number of processing elements required is as same as the number of nodes in the underlying graph. Our proposed hardware design require less computational resources for check to bit messages because we had implemented the function Ψ(x) using COrdinate Rotation DIgital Computer (CORDIC) algorithm which requires only adders and shifters instead of Look Up Tables (LUT). The complete architecture of LDPC decoder is given below.

Channel Output

Input Data Buffer

BNU1 BNU2

Interconnection
network

CNU1 CNU2

Step(i): Bit to Check messages: The messages from bit node to check node is given by

∑ LLR(k) (q ji ) =

LLR(k−1) (rj'i ) + LLR(pi )

(5)

j'∈µ(i)\{j}

BNUn

CNUn

Step(ii): check to bit messages: The messages from check node to bit node is given by

Fig.2. Complete decoder block diagram

LLR (k)

(rji

)

=

(−1)

v(j)

( ∏ sgn(LLR (k)
i'∈v(j)\{i}

(q

ji'

)

⋅

∑ ψ 

Ψ

LLR

(k

)

(q

ji'

)



, 

(6)

where,

ψ(x)

=

−log

tanh 

x 2

 



⋅

Step(iii): compute the output: The message from the decoder

is the extrinsic information given by

∑ LLR

ext LDPC

(vi

)

=

LLR(k) (rj'i ),

(7)

j'∈µ(i)

and the estimate of the posterior information LLR post (vi ) is given by

∑ LLR(k) (qi ) =

LLR (k) (rj'i ) + LLR(pi )

(8)

j'∈µ(i)

This is used to compute the bit by bit estimate of the code

word given by,

vˆ (k) = 1 0

if LLR(k) (qi ) > 0 if LLR(k) (qi ) < 0

(9)

So far we had discussed about theoretical issues of LDPC

decoding algorithm. Now we will discuss about hardware

implementation issues.

We had implemented fully parallel implementation which provides potentially the fastest decoding throughput. Since it

From Channel LLR(Pi)
Rij1
Rij2 Rij3

LLR(qi) Qij1 Qij2 Qij3

Fig.3. Bit node update unit (BNU)
Fig.2 indicates complete message passing algorithm which was discussed in the previous paragraph. Fig.3 indicates Bit node update block diagram which implements (4) and (8). Where Rij1, Rij2, Rij3 are check nodes and Qij1, Qij2 ,Qij3 are bit nodes. The Check node update unit block diagram is shown in Fig.4. The function Ψ(x) is implemented using CORDIC algorithm is shown in Fig.5. In drawing Fig.3 we assumed there are only 3 bit nodes and 3 check nodes and degree of each of node is 2 for illustration purpose. In Fig.4 we assumed that there are 7 bit nodes that are connected to one check node. The fig shows how check node calculate the message needed for bit node7 from remaining 6 bit nodes.

43
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Qij1

ψ (x)

Qij2

ψ (x)

Qij3

ψ (x)

Qij4

ψ (x)

Qij5

ψ (x)

Qij6

ψ (x)

IEEE-ICSCN Jan.2008

∏ ∏ n

n

K = cos(αi ) , K ' = cosh(αi )

(13)

i=0

i =1

−ψ (x)

Rij

Fig.4. Check node update unit (CNU)

sinh(x)

1

CORDIC

0

Rotations ( rotation

÷

x

>>2

mode )

cosh(x)

CORDIC

+1

>>2

Rotations

( vector

mode )

-1

-1

( )ψ x =-ln (tanh(x/2))
( ) Fig.5. ψ x Computation using CORDIC algorithm

This CORDIC algorithm [13] can perform vector rotations along a line, circle or hyperbola. The CORDIC algorithm is simple and efficient, based on technical shift–addition and vector rotation. Theoretical studies [3] take to these recurrent equations of CORDIC algorithm:

X i+1 = Xi − mσi 2−i Yi

(10)

Yi+1 = Yi + σ i 2−i Xi

(11)

Zi+1 = Zi − σi αi

(12)

with m ∈{1, − 1, 0} according to the type of coordinate: m=l:

circular coordinates, m=O: linear coordinates and m=-1 for hyperbolic coordinates. αi = tanh-12-i for m=-1. σi designates
the sign of Zi in rotation mode or the sign of Yi in vector mode. We define the factors K and K′ (for m=1 and m=-1)
[9]:

Fig.6. Pipelined CORDIC block diagram.

Basing on the previous equations and with the appropriate

choice of the initial values x0, y0, z0, we can have two functional modes [11]: the rotation mode and the vector

mode. In the rotation mode, we can calculate the hyperbolic

function cosh(z) and sinh(z), and the exponential function. By

giving x0=1,y0=0 and z0=x. The outputs Xn=cosh(z )and Yn=sinh(z).
By using a divider we can implement tanh(z). To

calculate logarithm function, we use vectoring mode (Z0=0)

to obtain:

Zn ≈ tanh −1 (y/x)

(14)

If x=w+1 and y=w-1 then

Zn

≈

1 2

ln(w)

(15)

For faster computation pipelined CORDIC is used. The

block diagram of pipelined CORDIC is shown in Fig. 6,

which involves only adders and shifters. The number of

pipeline stages in CORDIC was taken as 7. For good

convergence of logarithmic values are shifted to convergence

range of logarithmic given in [14].

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
An LDPC code adopted for the IEEE 802.16e (WiMax) standards. The burst erasure correction capability is observed

44
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Efficient Realization of CORDIC based LDPC Decoder for WiMax System

in the context of AWGN channel, and the fading channel [5].A 1024 - subcarrier OFDM system occupying a bandwidth of 5 MHz is used in the simulations. The code block length for the rate-1/2 LDPC code is chosen to be 960 (expansion factor is 40). Each subcarrier is BPSK-modulated. Strong interference from other cells is assumed to affect Lbe adjacent subcarriers leading to log-likelihood ratios of the corresponding bits being close to zero, i.e., burst erasure of size Lbe.

requirements and hardware requirements and gives high throughput. We used pipelined CORDIC in decoder to reduce memory requirements. From the simulations results it is observed that for large number of burst errors BER performance is insensitive even at higher SNR values. The BER performance can be further improved by interleaving in the form of permutations of the columns of the base matrix result in a significant improvement in burst erasure correction capability.

100

zero burst errors

100 burst errors

200 burst errors

10-1

300 burst errors

10-2

R 10-3 E B
10-4

10-5

10-6

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Eb/No (dB)

Fig.7. Performance of LDPC codes over AWGN channel

100

zero burst errors

100 burst errors

-1 10

150 burst errors

200 burst errors

10-2

10-3

R

E

B

-4

10

10-5

-6 10

-7 10
0

5

10

15

20

25

Average Eb/No (dB)

Fig.8. Performance of LDPC codes over Vehicular A channel

Fig.7 and 8 shows the bit error rate (BER) performance of the original LDPC code as a function of average Eb/No for the AWGN and vehicular A channels, respectively. The burst lengths chosen are Lbe =100, 200, and 300. A BER floor is observed for the code for Lbe =200.
We synthesized the encoder and decoder using Synopsys Design Compiler with 150 nm TSMC cell library. We achieved a reduction in 50% hardware in decoder architecture compared to conventional LUT approach for each CNU unit. The maximum operating frequency of CORDIC block is 250 MHz. Each CNU operates at 90 MHz.The number of CORDIC iterations are 7.

REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638– 656, Feb. 2001.
[2] Changavan Di, D.Proietti, I.E.Telatar, T.J.Richardson, RL.Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity checj codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol.48, No.6, pp.1570-1579, Jun2002.
[3] Seho Myung, Kyeongcheol Yang, Jaeyoel Kim, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Volume 51, Issue 8, pp:2894 - 2901, Aug 2005.
[4] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, D. J. Costello Jr., “LDPC block and Convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Volume 50, Issue 12, pp:2966 - 2984, Dec 2004.
[5] ‘Guides for the evaluation of radio transmission technologies for IMT2000,” Recommendation ITU-RM.1225, 1997.
[6] R. G. Gallager, “Low Density Parity Check Codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, Jan. 1962, pp. 21-28.
[7] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes,” Electron. Letters, vol. 32, Aug. 1996, pp.1645-1646.
[8] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the Design of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon Limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, Feb. 2001, pp. 58-60.
[9] M.W. Kharrat, M. Loulou, N. Masmoudi, L. Kamoun, “A New Method To Implement CORDIC Algorithm” International Conference on Electronics, Circuits and Systems ICECS September 2001.
[10] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometires: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans.Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[11] N. Eklund, “CORDIC: Elementary Function Computation Using Recursive Sequences”, Issue of the college Mathematics Journal Nov 200 1.
[12] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[13] J.E Volder “The CORDIC trigonometric computation technique” IRE transactions on Electronic computers. VOL EC-88, no 3,pp 330-334 ,sep 1959.
[14] Anis Boduabous, Fahmi Ghozzi, M. Wajdi Kharrat, Nouri MASMOUDI, “Implementation of Hyperbolic functions using CORDIC”, ICM 2004 proceedings on Microelectronics, pp. 738-741, Dec.2004.

V. CONCLUSION
We developed an efficient LDPC encoder and parallel decoder for WiMax systems, which requires less memory

45
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

