1376

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 26, NO. 8, OCTOBER 2008

PEEC: A Channel-Adaptive Feedback-Based Error Control Protocol for Wireless MAC Layer
Sohraab Soltani and Hayder Radha Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Reliable transmission is a challenging task over wireless LANs since wireless links are known to be susceptible to errors. Although the current IEEE802.11 standard ARQ error control protocol performs relatively well over channels with very low bit error rates (BERs), this performance deteriorates rapidly as the BER increases. This paper investigates the problem of reliable transmission in a contention free wireless LAN and introduces a Packet Embedded Error Control (PEEC) protocol, which employs packet-embedded parity symbols instead of ARQbased retransmission for error recovery. Specifically, depending on receiver feedback, PEEC adaptively estimates channel conditions and administers the transmission of (data and parity) symbols within a packet. This enables successful recovery of both new data and old unrecovered data from prior transmissions. In addition to theoretically analyzing PEEC, the performance of the proposed scheme is extensively analyzed over real channel traces collected on 802.11b WLANs. We compare PEEC performance with the performance of the IEEE802.11 standard ARQ protocol as well as contemporary protocols such as enhanced ARQ and the hybrid ARQ/FEC. Our analysis and experimental simulations show that PEEC outperforms all three competing protocols over a wide range of actual 802.11b WLAN collected traces. Finally, the design and implementation of PEEC using an Adaptive LowDensity-Parity-Check (A-LDPC) decoder is presented.
Index Terms—Forward error correction, Channel coding, Wireless LAN, Feedback communication, Automatic repeat request.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ELIABLE transmissions over wireless channels are challenging since wireless links are error-prone and susceptible to noise imposed by fading, interference and mobility. Therefore, the current IEEE802.11 error control protocol is designed to be as reliable as possible [1]; it incorporates frame check sequence (FCS) to detect errors and automatic repeat request (ARQ) to retransmit corrupted packets. The IEEE802.11 link layer discards corrupted packets without regard to the number and location of the errors. This approach is suitable for wireless channels with relatively low bit error rates (BER) because the likelihood of receiving consecutive corrupted packets is small and the original packet could be delivered after few retransmissions. However, for channels with more severe error conditions (and arguably more realistic),
Manuscript received November 2, 2007; revised April 15, 2008. This work was supported in part by NSF Award CNS-0721550, NSF Award CCF 0728996, NSF Award CCF-0515253, and NSF Award CNS-0430436.
S. Soltani is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 48824 USA (e-mail: soltanis@cse.msu.edu).
H. Radha is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 48824 USA (e-mail: radha@egr.msu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSAC.2008.081004.

IEEE802.11 ARQ causes multiple retransmissions (even if there is a single error in a packet) which in turn leads to the transmission of a large number of redundant (correct) data. As a result, the overall throughput deteriorates steadily and rapidly with increasing average channel BER.
To enhance the IEEE standard ARQ performance, packet combining techniques have been developed where they exploit the multiple transmissions typical of ARQ schemes. The basic idea is to store previous transmissions of the corrupted copies of a packet and attempt error recovery. Techniques developed in this context are xor combining [2] [3] and majority combining schemes [4]- [6]. Their advantage is that they are IEEE802.11 MAC compatible [7]–[9]; however as our experimental analysis suggests, the improvement of the throughput is not remarkable. In recent years, many papers in multimedia applications have proposed cross-layer mechanisms to overcome performance limitations imposed by conventional protocols. For instance UDP Lite [10] [11], improves the bandwidth utilization by making adjustments to the protocol stack at the transport and the link layers which relies on the error-resilience nature of multimedia content. The analysis of the hybrid Erasure-Error protocols (HEEPs) in [12] shows that cross-layer protocols in general provide capacity improvement in many realistic scenarios and they significantly improve the overall performance as measured by video quality. However, the drawback of the cross-layer protocols is that their implementations require major modifications in transport and application layers. Another alternative includes well established hybrid ARQ (HARQ) schemes [16]- [18], where the combination of ARQ and forward error correction (FEC) can be used. These schemes introduce additional complexity stems from FEC operations but at the same time improve the overall throughput for channels with high BER. Although these schemes perform better in noisy channels, their performances are below the IEEE standard ARQ for channels with good conditions.
In this paper, we analyze the statistical properties of a contention free wireless communication model where a receiver stores a corrupted packet in its buffer for further recovery. Based on these properties, we develop suitable models for each component of this communication scheme, which includes message, channel, distortion and buffer models. We use these models to introduce an error control protocol at a link layer, which we refer to as Packet Embedded Error Control (PEEC) protocol. PEEC employs packet-embedded parity symbols (instead of retransmission) for error recovery. Further, PEEC uses certain flags embedded in the receiver feedback to determine the amount of redundancy necessary

0733-8716/08/$25.00 c 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOLTANI and RADHA: PEEC: A CHANNEL-ADAPTIVE FEEDBACK-BASED ERROR CONTROL PROTOCOL FOR WIRELESS MAC LAYER

1377

for the next transmission. PEEC is similar to the HARQ-II assumption is reasonable since the size of the ACK messages

protocol in the sense that in both schemes, the recovery is are small and often protected by FEC [13]. Alternatively, the

achieved through the transmission of additional redundancy ACK frames can be transmitted over low PHY rates to reduce

information; however PEEC utilizes acknowledgment flags, a the probability of corruption.

decoding and a buffer, to assess the channel and the receiver

buffer conditions in every transmission. Depending on this assessment, PEEC adaptively administers the transmission of the data and redundancy (parity) symbols such that: (1) the level of parity symbols guarantees high likelihood of successful recovery of new data as well as corrupted data at the receiver buffer; (2) the available bandwidth is efficiently utilized for the transmission of new data. Another design objective of PEEC is its compatibility with conventional higher-layer transport and application layer protocols. That is, unlike cross-layer protocols, PEEC does not pass corrupted packets up to the higher layers of the protocol stack.
To analyze the performance of the proposed scheme, we applied PEEC onto 41 actual channel traces collected on an 802.11b WLAN. For generalization, we do not assume any specific encoder/decoder for FEC. That is, we measure the performance of PEEC based on various error-correcting capa-

A. Sender Side
During τi, a sender transmits a message which is represented by the tuple Mi = (Ci(ki, xi), yi) where ki represents the number of data symbols which are not being retransmitted. In each τi, a transmitter encodes ki with parity symbols xi creating a codeword Ci(ki, xi). We refer to these parity symbols as type-I parity. The receiver utilizes xi to decode Ci. Upon successful decoding, Ci is extracted and ki data symbols are passed up to the higher layer. The error correction fails
when the decoding operation fails as indicated in FCS. In that case, the receiver stores Ci in its buffer and issues a request for more parity symbols. The transmitter also sends additional (type-II) parity symbols1 denoted by yi. The receiver utilizes yi symbols to recover old corrupted codewords accumulated in its buffer (e.g., Cj, j = 1, · · · , i − 1).

bilities which can be associated to different error-correcting

codes such as Reed Solomon, LDPC, Turbo, etc. Our experimental results show that the PEEC protocol performance is as good as the IEEE ARQ scheme for channels with very good conditions. In particular, for channels with average BERs less than 0.005, PEEC throughput is above 95%. Furthermore, for channels with average BERs higher than 0.015 where the IEEE ARQ performance degrades, PEEC outperforms various majority combining mechanisms with more than 20% improvement. Furthermore, PEEC always operates above the best performances of the HARQ schemes regardless of the channel condition. The design and implementation of the PEEC protocol using an Adaptive LDPC (A-LDPC) decoder suggests that by utilizing a simple code with a very low complexity, the overall performance could improve a minimum of 25% with respect to the performance of the IEEE802.11 standard ARQ scheme over channels with higher BERs.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II describes a contention free communication model where a receiver stores corrupted packets in its buffer for error recovery. The statistical properties of this model are analyzed in Section III. Section IV describes the PEEC protocol. In Section V, we comparatively evaluate the performance of PEEC with (a) IEEE802.11 standard ARQ, (b) various majority combining methods and (c) HARQ schemes using real channel traces. We determine that PEEC is a better choice regardless of the channel condition. Section VI concludes the paper.
II. COMMUNICATION SCHEME
In this section, we describe a general contention free communication model in which one transmitter and one receiver are communicating over a wireless link. We define a transmission interval τi as the duration in which a transmitter sends the ith message Mi and receives its corresponding acknowledgment ACKi. A transmitter sends a new message after the reception of an acknowledgment (ACK). In our analysis we assume that the ACK message is error-free. This

B. Receiver Side
We assume that the receiver has a finite buffer containing m rooms. That is, the receiver can accommodate up to m corrupted messages waiting for recovery. If a newly corrupted packet finds all rooms in the buffer occupied, it does not enter the buffer and is dropped.
We assume that there are s, 1 ≤ s ≤ m, decoders available in the receiver. The status of the receiver is reported to the transmitter via certain flags in an acknowledgment message. Specifically, 1+s flags are encapsulated in every acknowledgement. Let Fi[k], k = 0, · · · , s represent values of these flags in ACKi. We refer to the first flag (i.e., Fi[0]) as a decoding flag, indicating the decoding status of the transmitted message in τi; Fi[0] = 1 when decoding of Mi was not successful. The remaining s flags (i.e., Fi[k], k = 1, · · · , s) are called buffer flags. Each buffer flag is associated with a particular decoder in the buffer and represents the status of that decoder. For instance, if the jth decoder is busy then Fi[j] = 1.
To perceive the functionality of this communication model, consider the example given in Fig. 1. A short communication consisting of four transmission intervals, buffer capacity of two and one decoder at the receiver is shown. During the first transmission interval τ1, a message M1 = (C1(k1, x1), y1) is sent. There are no type-II parity symbols in M1, because there is no prior corrupted message in the receiver buffer, so y1 = 0. A receiver that fails to decode C1, stores C1 in its buffer and sends an acknowledgment ACK1 = (1, 1). In τ2, the transmitter sends M2 = (C2(k2, x2), y2 = {y21}). The receiver uses x2 to decode C2 and employs type-II parity symbols y21 (yij denote additional parity for Cj, j < i transmitted in τi) in addition to x1 to decode C1. The receiver acknowledges ACK2 = (1, 1), indicating decoding failure of C2 and C1(k1, x1 + y21). As a result, in τ3, the sender sends M3 = (C3(k3, x3), y3 = {y31}). Note that since there
1It is important to note that type-I and type-II parity symbols have no relationship with the widely known Hybrid ARQ Type-I and Type-II protocols.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1378

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 26, NO. 8, OCTOBER 2008

III. THEORETICAL SETTINGS
In this section, we investigate the statistical nature of the communication scheme described in the previous section to find a suitable model for each of its components. We introduce four models: a message model that represents the distribution of the parity and data symbols in a particular message; a channel model that describes the process under which the errors are introduced in a message when it is transmitted over a wireless link; a distortion model that measures the distortion level of a message after a transmission; and a buffer model which models the receiver buffer as a queuing system.

A. Message Model

Let random variables K, X and Y represent the number of

data, type-I and type-II parity symbols in a message. Consider

Fig. 1. An example of communication model consists of four transmission intervals.

a message M = (K, X, Y ) containing n symbols. That is, any message M is represented by a vector of three random variables and has a fixed length K +X +Y = n. Let pK be the

probability measure that a particular symbol in a message is a

is only one decoder in use, the sender transmits type-II parity
which corresponds to a particular message that the decoder
is serving. In τ3, the receiver successfully decodes C3 using x3 and C1(k1, x1 + y21 + y31). Now, since decoding of the recent transmitted message was successful, the receiver sets the decoding flag to zero (i.e., F3[0] = 0) but at the same time since the decoder is waiting for type-II parity symbols to
perform decoding on C2, the buffer flag is set to one (i.e., F3[1] = 1); so ACK3 = (0, 1). Accordingly, in τ4, the sender transmits M4 = (C4(k4, x4), y4 = {y42}). The receiver decodes C4 using x4 and C2 = (k2, x2 + y24) successfully; so ACK4 = (0, 0).

data symbol. Similarly, let pX (pY ) denote this likelihood for type-I (type-II) parity symbol. Therefore, K, X and Y each, has a binomial distribution with parameters (n, PK ), (n, PX ) and (n, PY ) respectively.
Finding a model for a message M is equivalent to finding a distribution of the vector (K, X, Y ). Since K, X and Y
are binomial random variables, a multinomial distribution can
be used as an accurate approximation of the distribution of M = (X, Y, Z) with the probability mass function

P r{K

= k, X

= x, Y

= y} =

n! k!x!y!

pKk

pxX

pYy

,

k+x+y

=n

where pK + pX + pY = 1. In practice, since n is a large number, we can approximate

The communication model described above represents the distributions of K, X, and Y by Poisson distributions with a general communication mechanism that utilizes packet- parameters λK = npK, λX = npX and λY = npY .

embedded parity symbols instead of retransmission to retrieve

corrupted data. For this communication scheme, developing a B. Channel Model

protocol that estimates and adjusts the amount of necessary redundancy in every transmission, requires several controlling subtleties that we need to handle carefully to achieve high performance. For instance, depending on the feedback from the receiver, a transmitter should send enough type-I parity symbols to increase the likelihood of reliable reception. On the other hand, a reasonable amount of type-II redundancy is required to correct corrupted packets and prevent buffer overflow. Sending excessive redundancy will deteriorate average bandwidth utilization; meanwhile, transmitting too few parity symbols may result in unsuccessful decoding and will increase the number of corrupted messages accumulated in the buffer. Therefore, the amount of redundancy transmitted over a channel has a critical impact on overall performance of this communication scheme. To that end, we propose an error control mechanism called Packet Embedded Error Control protocol (PEEC). In the next section, we study underlying statistical characteristics of this communication model and develop necessary models which provide essential tools for the design and analysis of PEEC. Note that, throughout this paper,

In every τi, we assume a message Mi is transmitted over a Binary Symmetric Channel (BSC). Meaning, each symbol in
Mi can be altered independently from other symbols with a probability i which is the channel Bit Error Rate (BER). To derive a channel model for all transmission intervals τi, i = 1, 2, · · · , we assume that each i of a particular τi is valued from a finite set F with length N : |F | = N, i ∈ F . As a result, we can consider the channel model as a combination of N various BSCs with unique BERs (i.e., l = j for l = j l, j = 1, 2, · · · , N ). That is, in every τi, the channel is in one of the N possible states (S1, · · · , SN ) where each state corresponds to a particular BSC. Based on these settings, we
can model the channel as a discrete Markov chain with N
states where each state is a representation of the BSC with
a particular BER. We assume a homogenous and stationary Markov chain with transitional probability matrix P and the limiting probabilities π = (π1, · · · , πN ). Now, the probability that the channel is in states Si = r and Si+1 = t in τi and τi+1 is:

the terms “packet” and “message” are used interchangeably.

P r{Si = r, Si+1 = t} = πrprt. r, t = 1, 2, · · · , N (1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOLTANI and RADHA: PEEC: A CHANNEL-ADAPTIVE FEEDBACK-BASED ERROR CONTROL PROTOCOL FOR WIRELESS MAC LAYER

1379

By training a Markovian channel model on real channel traces, we can capture the effects of multipath fading and interference on the channel BER in every transmission interval [14] [15].

C. Distortion Model
Suppose the transmitter sends a message Mi = (ki, xi, yi) to the receiver through the channel which is a BSC with BER i during the transmission interval τi. So each symbol in Mi can be distorted independently from the other symbols. Thus, the distortion of each symbol has a Bernoulli distribution with parameter i. As a result, the distortion level of Mi in a transmission interval τi, denoted by Di, has a binomial distribution with parameters (n, i). In practice, n is a relatively large number, and i is very small. Accordingly, we can approximate Di with a Poisson distribution with rate λDi = n i.
The receiver decodes Mi and utilizes xi to correct possible errors in the message. Depending on the decoding algorithm, the receiver can correct some of the corruption proportional to the number of parity symbols in the message. That is, if Mi carries xi parity symbols, then the receiver is capable of retrieving up to α × xi error symbols in the message. Here α measures the expected error-correcting capability of a particular decoder. For example, the error-correcting capability of Reed-Solomon codes is half as many as redundant symbols (i.e., α = 0.5).
The distortion level Di is random and unknown to the receiver and therefore the notion of partial recovery is unrealistic in error correction. That is, the receiver can either correct all errors in Mi and acknowledges successful decoding or just assumes that no recovery is achieved. So the level of distortion in Mi after decoding, denoted by Ui, is

Ui =

0 Di ≤ αxi Di otherwise

(2)

D. Buffer Model

The receiver has a finite buffer with the capacity of m

messages. A message enters the buffer when its decoding with

type-I parity symbols has failed. Meanwhile, a message leaves

the buffer when its decoding with additional type-II parity

symbols was successful or it is timed out. Any particular

message in the buffer is being served with an individual

decoder where a decoder uses incoming type-II parity symbols

to correct that message. Let us assume there are s identical

decoders in the receiver that can serve up to m messages in

the buffer simultaneously. The buffer can be modeled as the

M/M/s/m queuing system with s servers and m buffer slots.

Each server (decoder) serves a particular costumer (message)

in the queue and the queue has the capacity m. In this system,

if a new corrupted packet finds all of the slots busy, it does

not enter the queue and considered as lost to the system.

The M/M/s/m queuing system assumes that messages

arrive according to the Poisson process with rate λ and

the

service

time

has

exponential

distribution

with

mean

1 μ

.

To determine these rates, we let λi and μi represent the

corresponding arrival and service rates when a channel is

in state Si with BER i. According to the distortion model, a message enters the buffer if Di > αXi. Thus, by using equation (3), arrival rate is

n
λi = 1 − e−n( i+pXi )

αx

nd+x

d i

pXx i

.

d!x!

(4)

x=0 d=0

Any particular decoder utilizes type-II parity symbols in addition to the original type-I parity symbols to decode a particular message. So the service rate is equivalent to the probability of successful decoding using type-I and type-II parity symbols. As a result, according to the distortion model,

μi = P r{Di ≤ α(Xi + Yi)}.

Equation (2) shows that the distribution of Ui is equivalent to the distribution of Di truncated on αxi. So, the probability of successful decoding of Mi is equivalent to the probability that Ui = 0. That is,

P (Ui = 0) = P (Di ≤ αxi) =

αxi

e−λDi

λdDi (d)!

.

(3)

d=0

Equation (3) clearly illustrates that the probability of success-

ful decoding is directly related to the amount of available re-

dundancy (i.e., xi) and the decoder error-correcting capability (i.e., α). This relationship is presented in the following lemma.

Lemma 1: In a transmission interval τi with error probabil-

ity i, the ν likelihood of successful decoding of a message Mi

with type-I parity probability distribution pXi can be achieved

if

1 pXi ≥ nα

n

i

+

√ n

iφ−1(ν)

,

where φ−1(ν) is the ν-quantile of the standard normal distri-

Recall that Zi = Xi +Yi which is the sum of two independent Poisson variables, is in fact a Poisson random variable with rate λZi = λXi + λYi . Correspondingly, the service rate is

n
μi = e−n( i+pZi )

αz

nd+z

d i

pZz i

,

d!z!

(5)

z=0 d=0

where pZi = pXi + pYi . The channel is in the state Si with the probability of πi,
therefore the overall arrival and service rates for the buffer is

N

N

λ = πiλi, μ = πiμi.

(6)

i=1

i=1

From equations (4) and (5), we observe that λi and μi are functions of the parity symbols distribution parameters pXi and pYi. Each pair of pXi and pYi introduces a particular value for λi and μi. This verifies our intuitive claim that average
amount of parity symbols allocated in every transmission has

bution.

a critical impact on the behavior of the buffer and therefore

Proof: See Appendix.

the overall performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1380

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 26, NO. 8, OCTOBER 2008

that, the amount of type-I parity symbols in the message

was not sufficient to correct distortion. Similarly, a successful

decoding (Fi−1[0] = 0) shows that the BER was low. The

error-correcting capability of a decoder and the amount of

parity symbols that are sent in the previous transmission have

a direct impact on our estimation. The boundedness of the

channel state estimate is given by the following two Lemmas.

Note that, we use the notation ˆ to represent estimate.

Lemma 2: In τi−1, if a decoder with error-correcting capability α decodes a message with type-I parity symbol rate

pXi−1 = g(ˆi−1) successfully, then for τi, ˆi has the upper

bound

ˆi ≤ g−1

ˆi−1 α

.

Fig. 2. The architecture of the PEEC protocol

Proof: See Appendix. Lemma 3: In τi−1, if a decoder with error-correcting capability α fails to decode a message with type-I parity symbol rate pXi−1 = g(ˆi−1) , then the estimation of BER for τi has a lower bound
ˆi ≥ αg(ˆi−1).

IV. PACKET EMBEDDED ERROR CONTROL PROTOCOL

Proof: See Appendix.

The error-combating scheme of the communication model Lemma 2 provides an upper bound for the estimate of BER

of section II is Forward Error Correction (FEC). That is, a receiver uses redundancy symbols that are embedded in the transmitted message to correct errors. In contrast to the IEEE standard ARQ mechanism, the receiver does not drop a packet unless its buffer is full. As the steady state analysis of the receiver buffer shows, the average amount of redundancy in a message has direct impact on the buffer behavior and the overall performance. Transmitting too few parity symbols in every transmission may result in frequent decoding errors, causing buffer overflow. On the other hand, transmitting many parity symbols may result in degrading the bandwidth utilization (more parity symbols are transmitted than data symbols). In both scenarios, the average amount of data that are decoded successfully and delivered to the upper layer decays. So, it is important for an error-control mechanism to adaptively find an accurate tradeoff between the number of data and parity symbols transmitted in every interval.
In this section, we present the PEEC protocol that uses the receiver acknowledgement to determine the amount of redundancy necessary for the next transmission. Specifically, PEEC utilizes decoding and buffer flags to assess the status of the channel condition and the receiver buffer. Depending on this assessment, PEEC evaluates the amount of data symbols and parity symbols necessary to send in the next transmission.

for the next transmission interval τi when the decoding flag in

ACKi−1 indicates successful decoding of Mi−1 (Fi−1[0] =

0). Lemma 3 determines a lower bound when Fi−1[0] = 1.

We let ˆ(iU) = g−1

ˆi−1 α

and ˆ(iL) = αg(ˆi−1) represent

the upper and lower bounds of ˆi when Fi−1[0] = 0 and

Fi−1[0] = 1 respectively. According to the channel model,

since each state of the channel corresponds to a particular

BER, so ˆi(U) and we denote them as

ˆi(L) correspond to Uˆi (i.e., Si = {Uˆi|

particular states which i = ˆi(U)}) and Lˆi (i.e.,

Si = {Lˆi| i = ˆ(iL)}). Let Sˆi represent the estimate of the

state of the channel for transmission interval τi. According

to Lemma 2, when Fi−1[0] = 0, a candidate for Sˆi should

be selected from a set A = {1, 2, · · · , Uˆi}. To make the best

guess, we calculate the joint probability of Si−1 = {r| r =

ˆi−1}, which represents the state of the channel in τi−1 and

Si = {w|w ∈ A}, which represents one of the possible state of

the channel in τi. Using equation (1), we choose the state that

introduces the maximum joint likelihood as our best estimate

for the state of the channel in τi. Therefore,

Sˆi

=

arg

max
w

P r{Si−1

=

r,

Si

=

w}.

w∈A

Using similar technique, we can find the best Sˆi when Fi−1[0] = 1.

Fig. 2 illustrates the PEEC in more details. It shows that the

PEEC performs two important procedures namely Channel B. Redundancy Allocation

State Estimation and Redundancy Allocation.
A. Channel State Estimation PEEC uses the decoding flag of the acknowledgment of
the previous transmission interval (i.e., Fi−1[0]) to estimate the state of the channel in the next transmission interval τi. According to the channel model, each state is a representation

PEEC uses Sˆi along with buffer flags (i.e., Fi−1[j] j =

1, · · · , s) in ACKi−1 to determine the distribution of data

and redundancy symbols of the message in τi, namely pXi,

pYi , and PEEC

pKi . uses

Sˆi

to

determine

pXi .

Recall

that,

pXi

is

the

rate

of type-I redundancy in the message. That is, pXi represents

the minimum number of symbols required to correct each

of a BSC with a particular BER. Correspondingly, PEEC data symbol transmitted over the BSC channel with BER ˆi. uses Fi−1[0] to guess the BER of BSC in τi. For instance, a For this BSC, there is an uncertainty about the correctness decoding failure (Fi−1[0] = 1), indicates high BER, meaning of each transmitted symbols imposed by ˆi. Conceptually, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOLTANI and RADHA: PEEC: A CHANNEL-ADAPTIVE FEEDBACK-BASED ERROR CONTROL PROTOCOL FOR WIRELESS MAC LAYER

1381

can resolve this uncertainty by sending additional information

to the receiver which shows whether the channel caused an

error. This is equivalent to sending a redundancy that informs

the receiver about the BSC status with the transmission of

every symbol. This redundancy have a minimum number of

symbols that is the same as the entropy of ˆi. Thus, we have

1

1

pXi

=

H (ˆi )

=

ˆi

log2( ˆi )

+

(1

−

ˆi) log2( 1

−

). ˆi

According to our communication model each buffer flag in the acknowledgment message (Fi−1[j] j = 1, · · · , s) indicates the status of a particular decoder in the receiver. Let pYi = (pYi1 , pYi2 , · · · , pYis ), where pYij shows the rate of type-II redundancy symbols allocated for the jth decoder. Intuitively if Fi−1[j] = 0 then pYij = 0. That is, it is unnecessary to allocate redundancy for an idle decoder. On the other hand, if Fi−1[j] = 1, it means that the jth decoder is working on a specific message M (j) in the buffer. To determine pYij , let us assume that M (j) has been sent in the transmission interval
τi−1. Therefore, from the sender perspective, the uncertainty of corruption in M (j) is dictated by ˆi−1 (the estimated BER of BSC in τi−1). Furthermore, every symbol in type-II parity symbols associated with M (j) (say y(j)) transmitted in τi might be distorted with the probability ˆi. Hence, the overall uncertainty of corruption in the new message (M (j) + y(j))
is dictated by the combination of the BERs of BSCs in
τi−1 and τi. This is equivalent to assuming that the message (M (j) +y(j)) has been transmitted over a single BSC which is composed of two cascaded BSCs with parameters ˆi−1 and ˆi. So, the overall error in (M (j) + y(j)) is caused by a channel
with BER,

ˆi(j) = ˆi−1(1 − ˆi) + ˆi(1 − ˆi−1).

Thus,

pYij = H ˆ(ij) .

Notice that similar technique is applicable for the messages

that have entered the buffer before τi−1 and have already

utilized some amount of type-II parity symbols. According to

the message model, a valid message distribution has to satisfy

pKi + pXi + pYi = 1. Thus,

s

pKi = 1 − H(ˆi) −

H ˆi(j) .

j=1, Fi−1[j]=1

The transmitter constructs a message Mi according to the message distribution specified by PEEC. This distribution is adaptively computed in every transmission interval based on the channel and the receiver buffer conditions. Therefore, the overall throughput of the communication model increases when the PEEC protocol is utilized. To ascertain the capability of PEEC, in the next section, we perform experimental analysis for the proposed protocol using real channel traces. Meanwhile, in the next subsection, we describe the changes necessary in the current IEEE 802.11 standard to satisfy PEEC requirements.

(a) Data frame format
(b) ACK frame format Fig. 3. IEEE802.11 MAC frame formats and corresponding modifications necessary for PEEC.
IEEE802.11 data and ACK frame formats. The IEEE802.11 link-layer only employs an ARQ mechanism, and hence, a Frame Check Sequence (FCS) is used for error detection. For the proposed scheme, we modify the data and ACK frame structures as shown in Fig. 3 to incorporate fields that used by PEEC. First, we modify the frame body field and divide it into three fields for data, type-I and type-II parity bits2. Further, we modify the frame control (FC) field in the ACK frame to incorporate decoding flag and buffer flags. Specifically, we redefine the retry field to serve as the decoding flag. As eluded above, when the decoding flag is set to zero, this signals to the transmitter that the last transmitted packet was decoded successfully. However, when the decoding flag is set to one, this signals to the transmitter that additional decoding bits are (still) needed for the last transmitted packet (which was just transmitted and now is waiting to be correctly decoded at the receiver buffer). The buffer flags indicate the status of one or more (up-to s) previously corrupted packets, which are being served by one or more s decoders at the receiver. Recall that these s corrupted packets were not successfully decoded in prior attempts. Therefore, depending on the number of decoders utilized, we increase the length of the FC field by s bits for additional s buffer flags. In the next section, we observe that in practice, by utilizing a single buffer flag that corresponds to a decoder with error-correcting capability close to that of perfect codes, the feedback in the proposed scheme can be limited to only one additional bit to the current IEEE802.11 standard FC field.

C. MAC Frame Structure
The PEEC protocol is designed to provide reliable data delivery at the IEEE802.11 link-layer. Fig. 3 shows the

2As mentioned before, the PEEC protocol type-I and type-II channel coding bits should not be confused with the well-known Hybrid ARQ Type-I and Type-II protocols.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1382

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 26, NO. 8, OCTOBER 2008

Throughput

alpha = 0.1
0.95

alpha = 0.2

alpha = 0.3

alpha = 0.4

alpha = 0.5

0.9

0.85

0.8

0.75

0.7

0.65

Fig. 4. Trace collection setup.
TABLE I THE AVERAGE ERROR PROBABILITY FOR DIFFERENT CHANNEL TRACES.

1

2

alpha = 0.1
5
4.5

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Number of Decoders

(a) Average throughput.

alpha = 0.2

alpha = 0.3

alpha = 0.4

alpha = 0.5

Average Service Time

4
2Mbps 5.5Mbps 11Mbps

500kbps 0.0088 0.0065 0.0094

3.5

750kbps 0.0003 0.0102 0.0090

900kbps 0.0049 0.0056 0.0186

3

1024kbps 0.0100 0.0038 0.0231

2.5

2

V. EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS

1.5

In this section, we evaluate the performance of the PEEC

1

protocol on real channel traces collected on an 802.11b WLAN. First, we briefly describe the wireless configuration of the collected traces. Second, we analyze the impact of the number of decoders and their error-correcting capability factor on the performance. Next, we compare the performance of

0.5

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Number of Decoders

(b) Service Time (Average number of transmission intervals)

the PEEC protocol with the IEEE standard ARQ, enhanced Fig. 5. The average throughput 5(a) and service time 5(b) for different α ARQ schemes and HARQ mechanisms in a practical scenario values with respect to the number of decoders operating at the receiver.

where the receiver uses a single decoder. Finally, we evaluate

the performance of PEEC using an adaptive LDPC decoder. The performance measure is throughput (the proportion of transmitted data bits that are successfully delivered to the higher layers).

To capture packets at high transmission rates, packet dissectors were implemented inside the device drivers. These packet dissectors ensured that only packets pertinent to our wireless experiment are processed, while all other packets are dropped.

A. Channel Trace Collection
In our analysis, we use channel traces that are collected over the wireless setting depicted in Fig. 4, described as follows:

We collected 41 traces over different receivers. However due to brevity, Table I shows the channel average BERs associated to 12 of these traces.

five wireless receivers were used to simultaneously collect error traces on an 802.11b WLAN. These receivers are placed B. Multiple Decoders & Error Correcting Capability Factors

in different locations in a room. Across the hallway from the In the communication model in Section II, it is assumed that

room, the access point (AP) is located. A wired sender is used there are s, s > 0 decoders operating at the receiver buffer.

to send multicast packets with a predetermined payload on In addition, the error correction capability of each decoder is

the WLAN; multicasting disabled MAC layer retransmissions. measured by the parameter α. For instance, for perfect codes

Each trace comprised of one million packets with a payload of α = 0.5, since they can correct half as many errors as there

1,000 bytes each. At the physical layer, the auto rate selection are parity symbols in a message. Intuitively, we should get

feature of the AP was disabled and for each experiment the a better performance with multiple decoders in place where

AP was forced to transmit at a fixed data rate. Each trace each decoder is using an error-correcting code with capability

collection experiment was repeated for different physical layer close to perfect codes. That is, we expect that the overall

(PHY) data rates (i.e., 2Mbps, 5.5 Mbps and 11Mbps). For throughput monotonically increases with respect to s and α.

a specific PHY data rate, we have collected traces using four Fig. 5(a) shows the PEEC throughput for the channel trace

transmission rates: 500kbps, 750kbps, 900kbps and 1024kbps. with PHY rate of 11Mbps and transmission rate 1024kbps.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOLTANI and RADHA: PEEC: A CHANNEL-ADAPTIVE FEEDBACK-BASED ERROR CONTROL PROTOCOL FOR WIRELESS MAC LAYER

1383

IEEE ARQ
1 0.95
0.9

GMA-5

HARQ-I (Best)

HARQ-II (Best) PEEC

IEEE ARQ PEEC (LDPC) PEEC (alpha = 0.1)
1
0.9

0.85

0.8

Throughput Throughput

0.8 0.7
0.75

0.7

0.6

0.65 0.5
0.6 0.4
0.55

0.5

0

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.3

Channel average BER

0.2 0
Fig. 6. The throughput of different ARQ protocols over the various channel traces.

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

Channel average BER

This Figure illustrates the change in throughput with respect to the variations of s and α. Interestingly, we observe that the throughput slightly increases when two decoders are used, but it remains unvaried as the number of decoders increases. This result suggests that the service time for the buffer does not improve dramatically as the number of decoders increases. To investigate this, using equation (5), we compute the average service time measured by the number of transmission intervals for this channel trace. Fig. 5(b) illustrates that the reduction in average service time is relatively slower for large number of decoders. Moreover, the average service time is longer when decoders are using codes with lower α. Further, when there are multiple decoders in place, the sender is obliged to transmit parity symbols requested by each decoder. As a result, the average amount of parity symbols embedded in each message will increase with respect to the number of decoders; because the service time is not significantly improving, it is possible that using multiple decoders degrades the overall throughput. This phenomenon is observed in Fig. 5(a) for α = 0.1. Therefore, using multiple decoders is not only ineffective in improving the throughput but also may reduce the overall performance.
It is also observed in Fig. 5(a) that the performance increases significantly when a decoder is utilizing a code with decent error-correcting capability. So, we conclude that the only parameter that plays a critical rule in improving the performance is α. This result is desirable in practice since using more than one decoder in every receiver in the network is expensive and impractical. This analysis shows that in order to achieve a better throughput, one should employ a decoder with error-correcting capability close to that of perfect codes rather than multiple decoders.

Fig. 7. The throughput of the PEEC protocol using the A-LDPC decoder over various channel traces.
We apply the IEEE802.11 standard ARQ, majority combining methods and HARQ techniques as well as PEEC onto all channel traces. For each trace, we evaluate the throughput of the IEEE standard ARQ and GMA-5 and we also find the best performances of the HARQ schemes. For these experiments, the Maximum Transmission Limit (MTL) is six; for HARQ schemes and PEEC α = 0.3, the buffer size is 10 and there is only one decoder operating at the receiver. Fig. 6 illustrates these performances with respect to the average BERs of our channel traces. We observe that IEEE802.11 ARQ performs better than HARQ-I,-II schemes when the BER is small (i.e., below 0.005) because these schemes transmit a fixed amount of redundancy regardless of the channel conditions. As a result, for channels with low BERs these schemes suffer overcompensation. As the BER increases, the performance of the IEEE802.11 ARQ decreases while the performance of HARQ schemes increases. Similar to HARQ schemes, PEEC outperforms the IEEE802.11 ARQ scheme for channels with relatively high average BER. For example, over traces with BER ranging from 0.015 to 0.02, IEEE802.11 ARQ throughput ranges between 55% and 65% while PEEC throughput hovers around the 90% mark. Over very-low errorrate traces, PEEC provides virtually 100% throughput while HARQ schemes does not exceed 95% throughput. This result shows that the adaptive redundancy allocation in the PEEC protocol can successfully prevent overcompensation for the channels with low BER. Fig. 6 also shows that PEEC always has even a better throughput than the best throughput of HARQ schemes regardless of the channel condition.
D. Implementation of PEEC using A-LDPC

C. Comparison with Contemporary Protocols

For the experimental results illustrated in Fig. 6, it is assumed that the error-correcting capability of a code is α = 0.3.

Various error-combating schemes have been adopted in To investigate whether the performance analysis given for

the link layer for wireless systems such as IEEE802.11 these results is always valid, we evaluate the throughput of

standard ARQ [1], majority combining mechanisms (MA-3, the PEEC protocol using a relatively simple Adaptive Low-

MA-5, GMA-4, GMA-5) [4] [5] and the well known hybrid Density-Parity-Check code (A-LDPC). The experimental setup

ARQ/FEC (HARQ) [16]- [18].

is as follow: we let a sender always transmits a zero codeword.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1384

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 26, NO. 8, OCTOBER 2008

We use our channel traces to distort the transmitted codeword by flipping distorted bits. The receiver uses A-LDPC to decode the received word and checks whether the decoded word is a zero codeword. Upon decoding failure, a receiver stores the received word in its buffer and requests for additional redundancy. We use the LDPC source code provided in [19] for our experiment. Note that we use a soft decision decoding using an iterative belief propagation method which requires a knowledge of channel BER. So, we use our estimate for channel BER for every transmission interval described in Section IV to decode each packet. For this experiment, the maximum iteration is 100; the variable side has degree three and the check side degree is approximately regular. Fig. 7 shows the overall performance could improve at a minimum of 25% with respect to the performance of the IEEE802.11 standard ARQ scheme over channels with higher BER. Also, PEEC performs close to IEEE standard ARQ when the BER is less than 0.005. To estimate the average error-correcting capability of this decoder, we consider all the packets that are successfully decoded; for each packet, we compute the fraction of the number of errors by the total amount of parity symbols embedded in that packet. We find that the estimated error-correcting capability of this decoder is around αˆ = 0.1. In Fig. 7, we also show the throughput of PEEC when a decoder is utilizing a code with error-correcting capability α = 0.1. We observe that the performance of the model captures the throughput obtained by employing A-LDPC. This result verifies the accuracy of our analysis and suggests that by using a code with error-correcting capability close to perfect codes, we can achieve higher throughput.

Since Di has Poisson distribution with mean λDi , then

P {Di ≤ αxi} = φ

αxi − λDi λDi

= ν,

Thus

αxi = λDi + λDi φ−1(ν).

According to the message model, xi = npX, and λDi = n i; so ν likelihood of successful decoding can be achieved if

pX

≥

1 nα

n

i

+

√ n

iφ−1(ν)

.

Proof of Lemma 2: In τi−1, because the decoding of a message was successful, according to lemma 1, we have

1 pXi−1 = g(ˆi−1) ≥ nα (nˆi−1 +

nˆi−1φ−1(ν)),

where ν is close to one (i.e., ν = 0.99). By assuming

very slow fading, such that the channel does not change

significantly between consecutive transmission; because of

successful decoding, we assess that the actual BER for τi is at most ˆi−1, that is

i ≤ ˆi−1 ⇒ g( i) ≤ g(ˆi−1),

given that g( ) > , > 0. Accordingly, for the estimation of i (i.e, ˆi), g(ˆi) is bounded by g(ˆi−1). Consequently, the maximum ˆi is the one that introduces g(ˆi) which satisfies the equality. Thus

max ˆi = g−1

1 nα (nˆi−1 +

nˆi−1φ−1(ν)) .

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied the problem of reliable transmission over wireless links. In particular, a contention free wireless communication model was analyzed where a receiver stores corrupted packets for future error recovery. We developed suitable models for each component of this communication scheme to introduce an error-combating scheme at the link layer, which we refer to as Packet Embedded Error Control protocol (PEEC) protocol. In addition to theoretically analyzing PEEC, the performance of the proposed scheme was extensively analyzed over real channel traces collected on 802.11b WLANs. We compared PEEC performance (as measured by throughput) with the performance of (a) the IEEE802.11 standard ARQ protocol, (b) enhanced ARQ schemes such as majority combining mechanisms and (c) the well known hybrid ARQ/FEC (HARQ) schemes. Our analysis and experimental simulations showed that PEEC outperforms all three competing protocols over a wide range of actual channel traces. Finally, the implementation of PEEC using an Adaptive Low-Density-Parity-Check (A-LDPC) decoder was presented.

In practice, since ν is close to one, then φ−1(ν) ≈ 8 and n is a large number. Therefore, we can approximate the upper bound of ˆi by calculating the above expression when n is infinity. That is,

ˆi

≤

lim g−1
n→∞

ˆi−1 + α

ˆi−1φ−1(ν) . n

Thus

ˆi ≤ g−1

ˆi−1 α

.

Proof of Lemma 3: According to the distortion model, the decoding failure in τi−1, suggests that the distortion of the message was higher than its type-I redundancy. That is,
Di−1 > αxi−1.
Furthermore, the failure in decoding indicates that the actual BER i is greater than ˆi−1. This assumption is true under very slow fading. Accordingly, the distortion created by i in τi should satisfy,
P r{Di > αxi−1} > ν,

VII. APPENDIX

where ν is close to one (i.e., ν = .99) and Di is a Poisson random variable with rate λDi = n i. Thus

Proof of Lemma 1: According to Equation (3), the ν

P r{Di ≤ αxi−1} ≤ 1 − ν

likelihood of successful decoding is P {Di ≤ αxi} = ν.

φ αxi−1 − λDi λDi

≤ 1 − ν.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOLTANI and RADHA: PEEC: A CHANNEL-ADAPTIVE FEEDBACK-BASED ERROR CONTROL PROTOCOL FOR WIRELESS MAC LAYER

1385

To find a lower bound for ˆi, we solve the equality. That is, αxi−1 − λDi = λDi φ−1(1 − ν).

By rearranging this expression, we obtain a second order equation with respect to λDi

λ2Di − λDi (2αxi−1 + φν−1) + α2xi2−1 = 0.

The solution of this equation leads to

λDi

=

1 2 (2αxi−1

+ φν−1

±

(φ−ν 1)2 + 4αxi−1φ−ν 1.

Since λDi = n i and xi−1 = npXi−1 = ng(ˆi−1), then the minimum ˆi is

ˆi

=

αg(ˆi−1)

+

φ−ν 1 2n

−

(φν−1 )2 4n2

+

αg(ˆi−1)φ−ν 1 . n

In practice n is a large number and since ν is close to one, φ−ν 1 ≈ 8. Consequently, we can find the lower bound for ˆi by
computing the limiting convergence of the above expression

when n is infinity. That is

⎛

⎞

ˆi

≥

lim
n→∞

⎝αg(ˆi−1)

+

φν−1 2n

−

(φν−1)2 4n2

+

αg(ˆi−1)φν−1 ⎠ n

Thus

ˆi ≥ αg(ˆi−1).

[13] J. G. Kim and M. M. Krunz, “Delay analysis of selective repeat ARQ for a Markovian source over a wireless channel,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 19681981, Sep. 2000
[14] S. Karande, S. A. Khayam, Y. Cho, K. Misra, H. Radha, J. Kim and J. Hong, “On Channel State Inference and Prediction Using Observable Variables in 802.11b Networks,” IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Glasgow, UK, June 2007.
[15] S. A. Khayam and H. Radha, “Constant-Complexity Models for Wireless Channels,” IEEE Infocom, April 2006.
[16] S. Lin and D. J. Costello Jr., “Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications,” Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.
[17] S. Lin and P. S. Yu, “A hybrid ARQ scheme with parity retransmission for error control of satellite channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 30, pp. 1701-1719, July 1982.
[18] Y. Wang and S Lin, “A modified selective-repeat type-II hybrid ARQ system and its performance analyses,” IEEE Trans. Commun. 31(5), pp. 124-133, 1983.
[19] R. M. Neal, “Software for Low Density Parity Check Codes”, http://www.cs.utoronto.ca/r˜adford/ldpc.software.html
Sohraab Soltani received the B.E. degree (Hons.) in Computer Science and Engineering from the Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran, in 2003 and the M.S degree in 2006 from Michigan State University (MSU), East Lansing, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
His research interest includes wireless communication, wireless networking, stochastic modeling, and channel coding.

REFERENCES
[1] IEEE Computer Society LAN MAN Standard Committee, “Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifcations,” IEEE Std. 802.11-1999, New York, 1999.
[2] P. S. Sindhu, “Retransmission error control with memory”, IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-25, no. 5, pp. 473.479, May 1977.
[3] S. S. Chakraborty, E. Yli-Juuti, and M. Liinaharja, “An adaptive ARQ scheme with packet combining,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 7, pp. 200.202, July 1998.
[4] M. Gidlund, “Receiver-based packet combining in IEEE 802.11a wireless LAN,” in Proc. IEEE Radio and Wireless Conference (RAWCON), August 2003, pp. 47.50.
[5] Y. Liang and S. S. Chakraborty, “ARQ and packet combining with postreception selection diversity,” in Proc. 60th IEEE Semiannual Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Fall), 2004.
[6] Q. Zhang and S. A. Kassam, “Hybrid ARQ with selective combining for fading channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 867.874, May 1999.
[7] H. Yomo, S. S. Chakraborty, and R. Prasad, “IEEE 802.11 WLAN with Packet Combining”, International Conference on Computer and Device 2004 (CODEC-04), January, 2004, Kolkata, India
[8] Grace Woo, Pouya Kheradpour, Dawei Shen, and Dina Katabi, “Beyond the Bits: Cooperative Packet Recovery Using Physical Layer Information,” ACM MOBICOM, 2007.
[9] E. C. Strinati, S. Simoens, and J. Boutros, “Performance evaluation of some Hybrid ARQ schemes in IEEE 802.11a Networks“, IEEE VTC, 4(4):2735- 2739, 2003
[10] L. Larzon, M. Degermark, and S. Pink, “Efficient Use of Wireless Bandwidth for Multimedia Applications,” IEEE International Workshop on Mobile Multimedia Communications (MoMUC), November 1999.
[11] L. Larzon, M. Degermark, and S. Pink, “UDP Lite for Real Time Multimedia Applications,” IEEE International Conference of Communications (ICC), June 1999.
[12] S. S. Karande and H. Radha, “Hybrid Erasure-Error Protocols for Wireless Video,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 9, no. 2, Feb 2007.

Hayder Radha received the Ph.M. and Ph.D. degrees from Columbia University in 1991 and 1993, the M.S. degree from Purdue University in 1986, and the B.S. degree (with honors) from Michigan State University (MSU) in 1984 (all in electrical engineering). Currently, he is a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) at MSU, the Associate Chair for Research and Graduate Studies of the ECE Department, and the Director of the Wireless and Video Communications Laboratory at MSU. Professor Radha was with Philips Research (1996-2000), where he worked as a Principal Member of Research Staff and then as a Consulting Scientist in the Video Communications Research Department. He became a Philips Research Fellow in 2000. Professor Radha was a Distinguished Member of Technical Staff at Bell Laboratories where he worked between 1986 and 1996 in the areas of digital communications, image processing, and broadband multimedia. Professor Radha served as Co-Chair and Editor of the ATM and LAN Video Coding Experts Group of the International Telecommunications Union - Telecommunications Section (ITU-T) between 1994-1996. He currently serves on the Editorial Board of IEEE Transactions on Multimedia and the Journal on Advances in Multimedia. He is an elected member of the IEEE Technical Committee on Multimedia Signal Processing and the IEEE Technical Committee on Image and Multidimensional Signal Processing (IMDSP). He also served as a Guest Editor for the special issue on NetworkAware Multimedia Processing and Communications of the IEEE Journal on Selected Topics in Signal Processing. Professor Radha is a recipient of the Bell Labs Distinguished Member of Technical Staff Award, the AT&T Bell Labs Ambassador Award, AT&T Circle of Excellence Award, the MSU College of Engineering Withrow Distinguished Scholar Award for outstanding contributions to engineering, and the Microsoft Research Content and Curriculum Award. He is also a recipient of National Science Foundation (NSF) Theoretical Foundation, Network Systems, and CyberTrust awards. His current research areas include wireless communications and networking, sensor networks, network coding, video coding, stochastic modeling of communication networks, and image and video processing. He has more than 100 peer-reviewed papers and 30 US patents in these areas.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

