32

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

Generalized ACE Constrained Progressive Edge-Growth LDPC Code Design
Dejan Vukobratovic´, Student Member, IEEE, and Vojin Sˇ enk, Member, IEEE

Abstract— In this letter, we propose a generalization of the Progressive Edge-Growth (PEG) algorithm with the aim of designing LDPC code graphs with substantially improved Approximated Cycle Extrinsic Message Degree (ACE) properties. The proposed realization of generalized PEG algorithm outperforms original PEG algorithm and its subsequent modification proposed by Xiao and Banihashemi.
Index Terms— Approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE), error floor, irregular low density parity check (LDPC) codes, progressive edge-growth (PEG) algorithm.

enumeration and analysis for all of the candidate check nodes. We fit original PEG [7] and improved PEG [6] algorithms as special realizations of this framework. Moreover, we propose a novel realization of generalized PEG algorithm with the aim of optimizing the ACE properties of designed code graphs. Using the proposed algorithm, we demonstrate a significant improvement of both the ACE spectrum properties and Bit Error Rate (BER) performance of the designed codes.

I. INTRODUCTION
T HIS letter addresses the problem of irregular LDPC code design with good minimum pseudodistance properties [1]. In particular, for Binary Erasure Channels (BEC), the problem is to design irregular LDPC codes such that the size of their minimum stopping set (stopping distance) is maximized. The stopping distance determines the performance of LDPC codes under iterative decoding in the error-floor region. The problem of finding the stopping distance of the LDPC code graph is shown to be NP-hard [2], i.e., no efficient algorithm for explicit identification and removal of small stopping sets exists (except for very short length LDPC codes [3]). However, a subgraph of the LDPC code graph induced from a stopping set always contains cycles; this motivates the possibility of influencing stopping set sizes via cycles. An ACE metric associated with a cycle is identified as a simple and effective connection between the cycles and the stopping sets [4]. By conditioning cycles with respect to their ACE values, an ACE constrained design algorithm [4] produces irregular LDPC codes with low error floors. Recently, we proposed an ACE spectrum of LDPC codes as a useful tool for their evaluation and design [5]. A generalized ACE constrained design [5] based on the ACE spectrum is shown to be more flexible and efficient than the original proposal [4]. However, by increasing ACE spectrum components, generalized ACE constrained design runs into computational problems [5]. The previous work by Xiao and Banihashemi [6] motivated our search for an efficient algorithm designing LDPC codes with extremal ACE spectrum properties (i.e., with as large as possible ACE spectrum components) using PEG design methodology [7].
In this letter, we introduce a generalized framework for PEG LDPC code design based on the procedure of shortest path

II. ACE PROPERTIES OF LDPC CODES
Approximate Cycle Extrinsic Message Degree (ACE) is a
simple metric associated with a cycle in the LDPC code graph
[4]. ACE approximately measures extrinsic connectivity of
the cycle with the rest of the graph, i.e., counts the edges
emanating from symbol nodes in the cycle that are not part of the cycle. It can be calculated as (ds − 2), where the sum is taken over all symbol nodes in the cycle, and ds is the degree of the symbol node s. We refer to a cycle of length lcyc and ACE value ηcyc as to an (lcyc, ηcyc)-cycle. ACE constrained design algorithm [4] outputs (dmax, ηACE) ACE constrained LDPC codes where, by construction, each (lcyc, ηcyc)-cycle satisfies that if lcyc ≤ 2dmax, then ηcyc ≥ ηACE.
For an overall assessment of ACE values of cycles of any LDPC code graph G(H), the ACE spectrum of LDPC codes is proposed in [5]. The ACE spectrum η(G(H)) of depth dmax is the dmax-tuple η(G(H)) = (η2, η4, . . . , η2dmax ), where η2i is the minimum ACE value of all cycles of length 2i in G(H). For a selected ACE spectrum ηACE = (η2, η4, . . . , η2dmax ), a generalized ACE constrained design algorithm [5] produces (dmax, ηACE) ACE constrained LDPC codes where, by construction, each (lcyc, ηcyc)-cycle satisfies the condition ηcyc ≥ η2i, for lcyc = 2i ≤ 2dmax. The original ACE design is thus a special case of the generalized ACE design, where all the values of ACE spectrum are set to be equal to ηACE.
Instead of the generalized ACE design, we use PEG frame-
work to search for an efficient design of LDPC codes with
extremal ACE spectrum properties. In this sense, our work
is somewhat similar to [6] and it can be understood as its
extension. On the other hand, our main goal is very clear:
How to design LDPC code graphs with as large as possible
ACE spectrum components?

Manuscript received August 31, 2007. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was V. Stankovic´. This work was supported in part by the Republic Ministry of Science Grant for fundamental research No.145062B, Republic of Serbia.
D. Vukobratovic´ and V. Sˇ enk are with the Department of Communications and Signal Processing, University of Novi Sad, Trg D. Obradovic´a 6, 21000 Novi Sad, Serbia (email: {dejanv, ram senk}@uns.ns.ac.yu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2008.071457.

III. GENERALIZED PEG ALGORITHM
The generalized PEG algorithm consists of two independent procedures, “Check Nodes Shortest Paths Discovery” and “Check Node Selection” procedure, applied sequentially when adding a new edge to the code graph. We start by describing these procedures following the notation introduced in [7].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. D10o8w9n-l7o7ad9e8d/0o8n$2J5u.n0e024c,20220608atI0E1E:5E8:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VUKOBRATOVIC´ and SENK: GENERALIZED ACE CONSTRAINED PROGRESSIVE EDGE-GROWTH LDPC CODE DESIGN

33

level 0
sj

1

l-1

...

... ...

l

l+1

ci

Fig. 1. The set Pslj ,ci of all distinct shortest paths between sj and ci.
A. “Check Nodes Shortest Paths Discovery” procedure
The goal of this procedure is to provide a complete list of all shortest paths and their associated parameters of interest, between the root symbol node and every candidate check node.
Let us assume that the algorithm appends the k-th edge Eskj to the symbol node sj. Let k > 0 and the code graph be connected under the current setting. We denote by Nslj the set of all check nodes reached by the rooted tree spreading from the symbol node sj within depth l [7]. Let Cslj be the set of check nodes at the shortest path distance of 2l + 1 edges from the root node sj, i.e., Cslj = Nslj \ Nslj−1. For every check node ci ∈ Cslj we identify the set Pslj,ci of all distinct, but not necessarily edge disjoint, shortest paths between sj and ci (Figure 1). For each path in Pslj,ci we calculate appropriately selected path metrics. (We take the path ACE metric, ηpath =
(ds − 2), where the sum is taken over all symbol nodes in the path, as an appropriate choice; our goal is to maximize the ACE values of the shortest cycles emerging upon appending the new edge.) The procedure is summarized as follows:
“Check Nodes Shortest Paths Discovery” Initialize Cs0j = {sj}; l = 0; while (Nslj = VC ) begin
Expand all check nodes ci ∈ Cslj in a breadth-first fashion to the level l + 1; Identify set Csl+j 1 and sets Psl+j,1ci , ∀ci ∈ Csl+j 1; Calculate values of path metrics for every path p ∈ Psl+j,1ci , ∀ci ∈ Csl+j 1; l = l + 1; end

• Original PEG algorithm [7]: Select check node c ∈

C lmax
sj

→

Select

minimum

degree

survivor.

• Improved PEG algorithm [6]: Select check node c ∈

C lmax
sj

→ Select minimum degree survivor → Select

survivor with largest minimum path ACE metric.

By enforcing selection of the minimum degree survivors

early, the proposed PEG algorithms output LDPC code graphs

with concentrated check node degree distributions. This op-

timizes waterfall performance of the designed codes, but if

the goal is to increase values of their ACE spectrum compo-

nents in order to improve their error-floor behavior, different

sequence of selection criteria is needed. This is particularly

important for the higher degree symbol nodes, where the

number

of

neighbors

in

C lmax
sj

grows

quickly

after

appending

every new edge, as well as the number of paths in each set

P . lmax
sj ,ci

In

this

case,

a

careful

processing

of

P lmax
sj ,ci

for

all

check

nodes

ci

∈

C lmax
sj

is

of

major

importance.

As

a

result

of

a

thorough examination of different possible PEG realizations

defined by different “Check Node Selection” procedures, we

propose the following one, that substantially improves ACE

spectrum properties of the designed code graphs:

• ACE spectrum optimizing PEG algorithm: Select check

node

c

∈

C lmax
sj

→

Select

survivor

with

largest

minimum

path ACE metric → Select survivor with smallest num-

ber of minimum ACE shortest paths → Select survivor

with smallest total number of shortest paths → Select

minimum degree survivor.

C. Generalized Progressive-Edge-Growth Algorithm
A complete description of generalized PEG algorithm1 is given in the following modular form:
Generalized Progressive-Edge-Growth Algorithm for j = 0 to n − 1 do begin
for k = 0 to dsj − 1 do begin
if k = 0 “First Edge Check Node Selection” procedure;
elseif (G(H) is not connected in the current setting) “Unreachable Check Node Selection” procedure;
else “Check Nodes Shortest Paths Discovery” procedure; “Check Node Selection” procedure;
end end

B. “Check Node Selection” procedure

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

Given the output of the previous procedure: the sets Cslj , Pslj,ci and path metrics for all l ≤ lmax, “Check Node Selection” procedure classifies check nodes and selects one based
on a suitably defined selection criterion. Different “Check
node selection” procedures define different PEG algorithms.

In order to compare different realizations of generalized

PEG algorithm for short-to-medium length LDPC codes, we

design binary irregular LDPC codes using original, improved

and ACE spectrum optimizing PEG algorithms. The ensemble

parameters:

lengths

n

=

504

and

n

=

1008,

rate

1 2

,

and

Selection procedures are sequences of selection criteria of de- 1Two additional initializing procedures are part of the generalized PEG creasing priority. If multiple check nodes survive any selection algorithm: “First Edge Check Node Selection” procedure that selects a check

criterion, the next criterion is applied on the surviving check node neighbor for the first edge of every symbol node, and “Unreachable

nodes only. If the same occurs after the last selection criterion,

Check Node Selection” procedure that selects a check node neighbor in the initial phase, while the graph is not connected under the current setting. These

one of the cAhuethcokrizneoddliceenssuerdvuivseorlims itiesdstoe:leYcontesedi Urannivd. Doomwlnylo.aded on Junep2r4o,c2e0d2u6reast 0re1m:5a8i:n12thUeTsCamfroemasIEiEnEthXepolorrieg.inRalesPtEricGtioanlsgoarpitphlym. [7].

34

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY 2008

TABLE I ACE SPECTRA OF THE DESIGNED CODES

(a) n = 504

Algorithm Version Original PEG Improved PEG ACE Optimized PEG

ACE Spectrum ηmax(G(H)) = (∞, ∞, 13, 4, 3) ηmax(G(H)) = (∞, ∞, 13, 6, 3) ηmax(G(H)) = (∞, ∞, 14, 7, 3)

(b) n = 1008

Algorithm Version Original PEG Improved PEG ACE Optimized PEG

ACE Spectrum ηmin(G(H)) = (∞, ∞, 13, 4, 3) ηaver(G(H)) = (∞, ∞, 13.00, 5.54, 3.02) ηmax(G(H)) = (∞, ∞, 13, 6, 4) ηmin(G(H)) = (∞, ∞, 13, 7, 3) ηaver(G(H)) = (∞, ∞, 13.53, 8.41, 3.94) ηmax(G(H)) = (∞, ∞, 15, 9, 4) ηmin(G(H)) = (∞, ∞, 17, 8, 3) ηaver(G(H)) = (∞, ∞, 18.59, 8.99, 3.96) ηmax(G(H)) = (∞, ∞, 19, 10, 4)

10−1

ACE Optimized n=504

ACE Improved (X&B) n=504

10−2

Original PEG n=504

ACE Optimized n=1008

ACE Improved (X&B) n=1008

10−3

Original PEG n=1008

Bit Error Rate (BER)

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

10−8

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

3.2

3.4

Eb/No (dB)

Fig. 2. BER performance of (504,252) and (1008,504) DE-optimized irregular LDPC codes designed using different PEG algorithm proposals.

density evolution (DE) optimized degree distributions, are the

V. CONCLUSION

same as in [6] and [7]. The subgraphs of the code graphs, The class of irregular LDPC codes with extremal ACE

induced from the degree 2 symbol nodes, are designed to be spectrum properties has a potential to provide LDPC codes

cycle-free.

with good stopping distance and low error-floor behavior.

Since PEG is a greedy design algorithm, we note a considerable variability of the ACE spectrum and BER properties of the designed LDPC code graphs. Therefore, we design 100 code graphs using each realization of PEG algorithm and isolate top ten code graphs from each group by comparing the values of their ACE spectra2. ACE spectrum calculation is a

In this letter, we propose a novel PEG algorithm, as a realization of the generalized PEG framework, to design LDPC codes from this class. Our simulation experiments show improvements of the proposed algorithm in both, average and best element performance, over previously proposed PEG algorithm versions.

linear-time, Viterbi-like procedure that enables us to quickly

isolate the top performing candidates [5]. We perform BER

REFERENCES

estimation of the selected LDPC code graphs using Monte- [1] Pseudocodewords homepage, http://www.pseudocodewords.info.

Carlo (MC) simulation, assuming BPSK transmission over [2] K. M. Krishnan, and P. Shankar, “Computing the stopping distance of

the AWGN channel, and the standard sum-product Belief-

a Tanner graph is NP-hard,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.53, no. 6,

pp. 2278–2280, June 2007.

Propagation (BP) iterative decoding with 100 decoding it- [3] C. C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Exhausting error-

erations at the receiver. The ACE spectra and the BER

prone patterns in LDPC codes,” preprint, available at the ArXiv:

performance of the best performing codes designed by each

arxiv.org/pdf/cs.IT/0609046, 2006.

[4] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance

PEG algorithm realization are presented in Table I and Figure

of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,

2, respectively. ACE spectrum improvement, switching from original to improved, and from improved to ACE optimizing PEG design, is apparent from Table I. BER curves of

vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1248, Aug. 2004. [5] D. Vukobratovic´, A. Djurendic´, and V. Sˇ enk, “ACE spectrum of LDPC
codes and generalized ACE design,” in Proc. IEEE ICC 2007, pp. 665–
670.

Figure 2 demonstrate that the ACE spectrum improvements [6] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth

are followed by the BER performance improvements in the

(PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol.

error-floor region3. Particularly, at length n = 1008, Table I

8, no. 12, pp. 715–718, Dec. 2004. [7] Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progres-

additionally contains the worst, the average and the best ACE

sive edge growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51,

spectra of 100 randomly designed LDPC code graphs using

no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.

[8] D. J. C. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weakness of Margulis and Ramanujan-

different PEG algorithms. Clearly, the proposed processing of

Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electronic Notes in Theoretical

the shortest path data in the domain of short cycles provides

Computer Science, vol. 74, 2003.

significant shifts towards larger ACE values. We observed [9] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” Proc. 41st Annual Allerton
Conference, 2003.
similar performance relationships when experimenting with [10] L. Dinoi, F. Sottile, and S. Benedetto, “Design of variable-rate irregular

other lengths and degree distributions.

LDPC codes with low error floor,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, pp. 647–651,

2005.

2The following order relation in the set of ACE spectra is used: η(1) > η(2) ⇔ ∃j ≤ dmax|(η2(1j) > η2(2j)) ∧ (η2(1i) = η2(2i), 1 ≤ i < j) .

[11] G. Richter and A. Hof, “On a construction method of irregular LDPC codes without small stopping sets,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, pp. 1119–1124, 2006.

3It is expected that increasing ACE spectrum components will, on average, increase the stopping distance. However, this does not necessarily prevent occurrence of the low weight near-codewords [8] (or trapping sets [9]) in

[12] J. Chen, R. M. Tanner, J. Zhang, and M. P. C, Fossorier, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes by quasi-cyclic extension,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1479–1483, April 2007.

the code graph that affect the code performance over the AWGN channel in

the error-floor region. Several authors addressed this problem and suggested

additional design constraints in order to explicitly avoid small stopping and

trapping sets [10]-[12]. Note that these constraints, particularly the ones

proposed in [11] and [12] for degree 3 symbol nodes, can be easily included

as an additionaAl uctohnosritzreaidnlticienngseendeursaelizliemditePdEGto:dYeosnigsnei aUlgnoivr.itDhomw.nloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

