The 2010 Military Communications Conference - Unclassified Program - Waveforms and Signal Processing Track
DECODING OF A QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODE ON A STREAM PROCESSOR JaWone A. Kennedy and Daniel L. Noneaker (corresponding author)
Holcombe Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 305 Fluor Daniel Engineering Innovation Building Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634

ABSTRACT
The TDMP layered belief-propagation algorithm is investigated for decoding a quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check code on a stream processor using fixed-point arithmetic. The effect of the processor’s fixed-point resolution on the decoder performance is determined, and a simple technique is described for minimizing the performance penalty incurred when using the (highest throughput) lowest-resolution arithmetic mode of the processor. A reordering of the decoder schedule and a modification of the parity checks are also considered which permit increased software pipelining and improved latency hiding, with a corresponding increase in the data throughput. The fixed-point Storm-1 stream processor is used for comparative throughput results.
INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are employed in an increasing range of wireless communication systems and networks. Many of the applications require decoding at a data rate that necessitates embedded devices capable of exploiting the parallelism available in the belief-propagation decoding algorithms [1] used with LDPC codes. Currently, LDPC decoders for most applications are implemented in an application specific integrated circuit or a fieldprogrammable gate array in order to satisfy the decodingtime constraints.
An emerging option for computationally demanding digital signal processing in embedded applications is a stream processor (or on-chip stream co-processor) employing a high-data-width single-instruction, mulitple-data (SIMD) architecture with strict compiler-controlled adherence to the stream-processing computing paradigm [2]. Stream processors have architectural similarities to high-throughput graphics processor units (GPUs), but with a design emphasis on low power consumption. They are amenable to use in applications that exhibit compute intensity, data parallelism,
This material is based in part upon work supported by the US Navy SPAWAR Systems Center Charleston contract N65236-08-P-4278 and in part upon work supported by the Southern Regional Education Board.

and producer-consumer locality, including many signalprocessing and image-processing algorithms [3]. A stream processor can be coupled with high-level programming tools that isolate the programmer from details of the processor’s resource management and timing while efficiently exploiting the processor’s capabilities in these applications.
Belief-propagation decoding of quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes based on parity-check matrices with (circulant) permutation sub-matrices [4] is well-suited to implementation on a stream processor. Recent research has considered LDPC decoding using floating-point arithmetic in a GPU [5], [6]. In contrast with a GPU, however, a low-power stream processor for embedded applications is likely to support only fixed-point arithmetic.
In this paper, we examine the performance of iterative decoding of an LDPC code using a stream processor with saturating fixed-point arithmetic. We focus on the turbodecoding message passing (TDMP) [7], [8] algorithm (a form of layered belief-propagation decoding [9]) and its use with QC-LDPC codes. We consider the effect that the resolution of the fixed-point arithmetic has on decoder performance, and we describe a simple method to mitigate the performance penalty incurred with the TDMP algorithm when using the (highest throughput) lowest-resolution mode of the processor. We propose two decoder modifications: a reordering of the schedule which increases the compiler’s opportunity for software pipelining, and an alteration of the occurrence of parity checks. Both increase the throughput at no discernible cost in the error probability. The decoder throughput is measured on the Storm-1 processor system [10], which includes a low-power, fixed-point stream coprocessor.
THE TDMP ALGORITHM
The TDMP algorithm is a belief-propagation algorithm applied to the M x N parity-check matrix H of an LDPC code in which the parity-check equations corresponding to the blocks of rows of H are decoded sequentially [8]. Extrinsic messages computed from decoding earlier rows are used as input prior messages for decoding the later ensuing rows. The row-wise layered-decoding schedule contrasts

978-1A-4ut2ho4ri4ze-d8l1ic8en0s-e4d /u1se0l/im$i2te6d.t0o:0Yo©ns2e0i U1n0iv.IEDoEwEnloaded on2J0un6e224,2026 at 03:25:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

with the flooding schedule of the sum-product algorithm

(SPA) [12] and the column-wise schedule of the shuffled

belief-propagation algorithm [13].

We consider application of the offset-min-sum approxi-

mation [14] to the TDMP algorithm, which yields perfor-

mance comparable to the original TDMP algorithm with

substantially lower decoding complexity. In the following

description of the offset-min-sum TDMP algorithm, the
vector λi = [λi1, . . . , λici ] represents the extrinsic messages that correspond to the nonzero entries in row i of H, where

ci represents the row weight of row i. The notation Ii denotes a list of the column positions of non-zero entries

in row i in H. The vector γ = [γ1, . . . , γN ] represents the N posterior messages, one for each code symbol vi. The subset of the posterior messages corresponding to the non-

zero column positions of row i are denoted γ(Ii).

The offset-min-sum TDMP algorithm is implemented as

follows:

1) Initialize λi = 0, for i = 1, . . . , M . Also, initialize
the posterior messages γ = [ξ · ri, . . . , ξ · rn], where ri is the soft channel output for vi and ξ is a positive
scaling factor. 2) Read the extrinsic messages λi and the posterior

messages γ(Ii) for row i. 3) Subtract λi from γ(Ii) to generate prior messages ρ
= [ρ1, . . . , ρci ] = γ(Ii) - λi.
4) Decode the parity check equation for row i. Define

α = [α1, . . . , αci] and β = [β1, . . . , βci ], where αj = sgn[ρj] 1 and βj = |ρj|. Set

⎛
ci
λij = ⎝

⎞ αk⎠ · max

k=1,k=j

min
1≤k≤ci,k=j

βk

−

η,

0

The floating-point performance of the offset-min-sum TDMP algorithm is illustrated in Fig. 1, where is it compared with the performance of the SPA and the min-sum TDMP algorithm. (The min-sum TDMP algorithm corresponds to offset-min-sum TDMP algorithm with η = 0.) The probability of bit error, Pb, is shown for each algorithm as a function of the signal-to-noise ratio, Eb/N0, for a (2432,1216) rate-1/2 repeat-accumulate LDPC code based on a Robertson cage. (The code, described in [8], has a parity-check matrix constructed of 64-by-64 circulant submatrices.) The offset-min-sum algorithm employs the scaling factor ξ = 0.7 and the offset η = 0.125. Performance is shown for the min-sum and offset-min-sum TDMP algorithms with a maximum of 10 iterations and for the SPA and the offset-min-sum TDMP algorithm with a maximum of 20 iterations.
The performance of the offset-min-sum TDMP algorithm with 10 iterations is 0.25 dB better than the performance of the min-sum TDMP algorithm for Pb = 10−5, and it is comparable to the performance of the SPA with 20 iterations. For a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 2.2 dB, the offset-min-sum TDMP algorithm yields better performance than the SPA. The offset-min-sum TDMP algorithm requires an average of 6.2 iterations to decode a code word at a signal-to-noise ratio of 2 dB, whereas the SPA requires an average of 11 iterations. The performance of the offsetmin-sum TDMP algorithm is improved by a further 0.2 dB for Pb = 10−5 if the maximum number of iterations is increased from 10 to 20, and the increase yields even greater performance improvement at lower error probabilities. The increase doubles the maximum decoding delay for a code word, but it has little effect on the average number of iterations per code word for error probabilities of interest.

for j = 1, . . . , ci, where the offset η is a non-negative constant. (The values of ξ and η are chosen jointly to minimize the error probability at some performance point of interest.) 5) Update the posterior messages for the bit positions of Ii as γ(Ii) = ρ + λi. 6) Steps 2-5 represent a decoding subiteration for one row of H. Repeat the steps for each row of H.
Steps 2-6 represent one iteration of the algorithm. After each iteration, a hard decision is made on each vi based upon the sign of γi. If all parity checks are satisfied, decoding is terminated and the information bits are recovered by inverse mapping. If not, but the maximum number of iterations has been executed, decoding failure occurs. If neither, another iteration of the algorithm is performed.
1sgn represents the sign of ρj

PERFORMANCE OF THE TDMP ALGORITHM WITH FIXED-POINT ARITHMETIC
Many processor architectures (including stream-processor architectures) permit multiple, concurrent fixed-point operations per arithmetic logic unit (ALU) using packed 8-bit or 16-bit data units within a longer data word. Thus the choice of resolution for fixed-point arithmetic represents a trade-off between computation rate and the accuracy of approximation to real-valued quantities. In this section, we consider the performance of the offset-min-sum TDMP algorithm using 8-bit fixed-point arithmetic and 16-bit fixedpoint arithmetic. Results are given for the (2432, 1216) QCLDPC code noted above and uniform quantization with a quantization width of 0.125 for channel outputs equal to ±1 plus Gaussian noise. The pre-quantization scaling factor and the min-sum offset are ξ = 0.7 and η = 0.125, resp., which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on2J0un6e324,2026 at 03:25:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

are optimized for 8-bit fixed-point arithmetic and the given quantization scheme.
The performance of the offset-min-sum TDMP algorithm with fixed-point arithmetic is shown in Fig. 2 for both 8-bit operations and 16-bit operations. Performance is shown for both a maximum of 10 iterations and a maximum of 20 iterations. An average of 6.4-6.5 iterations per code word is executed by the fixed-point algorithm in each case for a signal-to-noise ratio of 2 dB, only slightly above the average for the floating-point algorithm. If the processor is operating in 16-bit mode, the performance of the fixed-point algorithm is only 0.03 dB poorer than the performance of the floatingpoint algorithm for Pb = 10−5, regardless of whether the maximum number of iterations is 10 or 20. This is seen by comparing Fig. 1 and Fig. 2.
The performance with 8-bit fixed-point arithmetic is nearly identical to the performance with 16-bit fixed-point arithmetic if the maximum number of iterations is 10. In contrast to 16-bit operation, however, increasing the maximum number of iterations from 10 to 20 results in noticeably poorer performance. This is a consequence of the increased probability of saturation of the posterior values during iterations 11-20. The error due to saturation of the posterior value for a given bit position propagates into extrinsic (and thus posterior) calculations in subsequent subiterations involving the same bit position, resulting in a marked divergence from the corresponding values obtained with floating-point arithmetic and an increased number of erroneous information bits per erroneous code word. The ability to improve the probability of code-word error with extra iterations is compromised, and the additional iterations increase the number of erroneous bits per erroneous code word. (The problem is much more severe with the sequential update schedule of the TDMP algorithm than with the flooding schedule of the SPA.)
The effect of saturation can be mitigated by the simple expedient of limiting the largest value of the extrinsic update to a posterior in any sub-iteration. The choice of the limit is a trade-off between the risk of posterior saturation (with a large extrinsic limit) and the loss of accuracy in the extrinsic update (with a small limit). The performance of the offsetmin-sum TDMP algorithm with 8-bit fixed-point arithmetic is shown in Fig. 3 for 8-bit mode and 16-bit mode with no limits on the extrinsic updates and for 8-bit mode with several values of the extrinsic-update limit. Limits of 10, 20, 30, and 40 are applied to the 8-bit signed integers with magnitudes ranging from 0 to 127, corresponding to limits of 1.25, 2.5, 3.75, and 5.0 relative to the scaled channel outputs. The best performance is obtained with a limit of 20 or 30, either of which yields performance comparable to the performance with 16-bit fixed-point arithmetic for

Pb = 10−5. A limit of 40 does not sufficiently mitigate the saturation effect, and a limit of 10 results in too much loss of accuracy in the extrinsic updates.
AN EXAMPLE OF A STREAM PROCESSOR
The Storm-1 system-on-a-chip by Stream Processors Inc. is used as the example of a stream processor in subsequent numerical results in this paper. It includes two generalpurpose processors and a separate data-processing unit (DPU) with a SIMD architecture. The DPU contains 80 ALUs organized as 16 data-parallel 5-ALU lanes controlled by a very long instruction word. The Storm-1 processor contains a three-level, non-caching memory hierarchy. A large external memory is accessible to the DPU. Lane Register Files (LRFs) are high-bandwidth, per-lane, on-chip memory used to stage data for processing by the ALUs. Operand Register Files (ORFs) within each lane’s ALU cluster, addressable only within the cluster, serve as local registers. Data can also be exchanged directly between ALU clusters across an inter-lane bus. (Details of the architecture are given in [10].) The accompanying compiler allows an application programmer to exploit available data parallelism and instruction parallelism without the need to explicitly manage the resources of lanes and associated memory.
The DPU is designed for the flow of similarly formatted records of a large data set which form a stream. The stream is processed by one or more kernel functions, each of which is a compute-intensive inner loop that applies parallel processing to a stream that is resident in on-chip memory. The computations in the parallel-processing units are thus restricted to records in the stream as atomic data units and kernel functions as atomic instructions. Control tasks and computations that do not fit well within this streamprocessing paradigm are assigned by the compiler to a general-purpose processor.
Analysis by the compiler establishes the stream allocation and run-time data transfers into on-chip memory for kernels and streams based on dependencies associated with execution. Parallel processing occurs within kernels only; consequently, single structured instruction flow is preserved. Kernels are managed by the compiler, and they can form pipelines which share intermediate stream results. Data reference by a kernel is limited to the data records it is processing and other locally retained constants and variables. The compile-time analysis imposes a tight control on use of the memory hierarchy, hiding the access latency to external memory for many tasks.
The Storm-1 processor provides 8-bit packed integer and 16-bit packed integer fixed-point arithmetic modes using 32bit data registers. The production device is fabricated in a 130nm process. It employs a nominal DPU clock rate of 800

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on2J0un6e424,2026 at 03:25:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MHZ, resulting in an aggregate computing rate of 512 8-bit fixed-point GOPS (billion operations per second) or 256 16bit fixed-point GOPS per second [10]. An evaluation board which operates at a lower clock rate is used (along with an emulator) to obtain the decoder performance measurements discussed in subsequent sections, but the results are given for the clock rate of the production device. The programming language used for application development for the Storm-1 processor is based on ANSI “C” with enhancements that define the kernel functions and streams as well as several compiler directives (pragmas).
Much higher absolute throughput may be obtained with stream processors fabricated in newer process technologies using more recent architectural innovations for lowpower embedded processors [11] and greater SIMD width. The Storm-1 processor serves as a suitable platform for comparing the relative throughput obtained on a stream processor with various modifications of the TDMP decoding algorithm, however.
IMPLEMENTING THE OFFSET-MIN-SUM TDMP ALGORITHM ON A STREAM PROCESSOR
The TDMP algorithm is well suited to a partially parallel implementation on a stream processor when used with an LDPC code in which groups of row updates can be performed in parallel at steps 2-5 above with disjoint sets of posterior data. A QC-LDPC code satisfies this condition if the number of concurrent row updates is no greater than the number of rows per circulant permutation sub-matrix. The extrinsic messages for multiple rows are allotted to and managed by the same lane throughout the decoding of the code word. In contrast, posterior data must be exchanged between lanes as needed within each iteration of the decoder, though for most decoding sub-iterations the latency of the exchange is hidden.
The code is optimally matched to the stream processor’s resources if the number of row updates that can be processed concurrently without data conflicts is large enough to fully exploit the available data parallelism, instruction parallelism, and pipeline depth of the processor. The Storm1 processor can perform 64 updates concurrently by performing 8-bit calculations for four rows per lane in parallel. Thus with 8-bit arithmetic, the circulant sub-matrix size of 64 rows for our example code ensures the ability to concurrently utilize of all lanes, thus fully exploiting the architecture’s data parallelism. Similarly, 32 concurrent row updates result in utilization of all lanes if 16-bit arithmetic is used. The circulant size of 64 does not guarantee maximal exploitation of each lane’s ALUs (instruction parallelism) or instruction pipelining, however, due in part to the possibility of data dependencies over larger spans of row updates.

PERFORMANCE OF THE OFFSET-MIN-SUM TDMP ALGORITHM ON A STREAM PROCESSOR
The offset-min-sum TDMP decoding algorithm is implemented on the Storm-1 stream processor for the (2432,1216) QC-LDPC code noted above. The throughput using 8-bit fixed-point arithmetic mode is nearly twice the throughput using 16-bit mode; the rest of the discussion is thus focused on 8-bit operation. The channel-output scaling and quantization and the offset are also as noted above, and each 8bit signed-integer extrinsic update is limited to a maximum value of 20.
The processing time per code word can be divided into a fixed set-up and completion time, a decoding time that is proportional to the number of decoding iterations, and a parity-check time that is proportional to the number of parity checks performed during decoding. Consider first the offsetmin-sum TDMP algorithm in which the decoding schedule occurs in the natural row order determined by the design of the parity-check matrix [8]. (We refer to this as the standard schedule.) The factors determining the processing time are shown in Table I. The decoding algorithm with the standard schedule has a set-up and completion time of 3.96 μs per code word, which reflects the processing required to initialize the DPU for the first iteration and to recover decoded data after the final iteration. The decoding time per iteration is 3.73 μs and the time required to perform parity checks for all rows is 2.23 μs.

Decoding algorithm
Standard schedule Reordered schedule Integrated parity check

Set-up & completion
3.96 μs 3.96 μs 3.96 μs

Decoding per iteration
3.73 μs 3.46 μs 3.89 μs

Parity check
2.23 μs 2.19 μs
0 μs

TABLE I FACTORS IN THE PROCESSING TIME FOR A CODE WORD.

One factor in the decoding time is the occurrence of pipeline stalls when processing for a later row in the paritycheck matrix is delayed due to a data dependency with an earlier row. A decrease in the frequency of such delays can be obtained by reordering the row schedule to increase the minimum schedule spacing between rows sharing non-zero bits in the same column. We illustrate this by reordering the TDMP decoder’s schedule so that no two rows with a data dependency occur consecutively in the schedule, which we refer to as the reordered schedule. (Consecutive rows with dependencies can occur in the standard schedule at the boundary between QC sub-matrices of the parity-check matrix.) The resulting processing times are shown in Table I. The time for a decoding iteration is 3.46 μs, which is approximately 7% less than for the standard schedule. The parity-check time is reduced slightly as well.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on2J0un6e524,2026 at 03:25:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The effect of schedule reordering on the decoder’s throughput is shown in Table II in which the information throughput is given for both the standard and reordered schedules. Decoding without early termination is considered for each of several values of the number of iterations, I, where a single set of parity checks is performed at the end of the final iteration. The reduced decoding time per iteration with the reordered schedule results in an increase in the throughput compared with the standard schedule. The percentage increase in the throughput is greatest if the number of iterations is large, and it approaches 7.7% for a large number of iterations. The reordering has no discernible effect on the probability of error.

Decoding algorithm
Standard schedule (Mbps) Reordered schedule (Mbps) Change in throughput (%)

I =2
89.1 93.0 4.4

I =6
42.6 45.3 6.1

I =10
28.0 29.9 6.6

I =20
15.0 16.2 7.2

TABLE II THROUGHPUT WITHOUT EARLY TERMINATION.

Reduced average decoding time for signal-to-noise ratios of interest can be achieved by employing early termination in which parity checks are performed after each iteration. Parity checks becomes a significant factor in the overall decoding time with early termination, accounting for more than 30% of the average decoding time with either the standard schedule or the reordered schedule if an average of three or more iterations is required. Much of the time required for parity checks at the end of each iteration is due to the exposed latency of the inter-lane exchange of posterior values required between the end of the decoding step and the start of the parity-check step in the iteration.
We consider a modification of the decoding step in which the parity check for a given row of the parity-check matrix is performed immediately after the posterior updates are performed for the row. The modified approach is referred to as the integrated parity check. The integrated parity check allows the DPU to exploit locally available posterior values for the parity check in the lane in which the corresponding updates have just been performed, eliminating a later interlane data exchange. A positive outcome for each parity check in an iteration using this approach does not guarantee that the hard decisions at the end of an iteration represent a valid code word, however. Thus the algorithm proceeds until an iteration occurs in which each parity check has a positive outcome and no hard decisions have changed from the previous iteration. The combined decoding and parity check for an iteration of the reordered schedule with integrated parity check requires 3.89 μs, as shown in Table I, which represents a reduction of 31% in comparison with the time required for consecutive decoding and parity check.

The average number of iterations and the throughput using the standard decoding schedule and consecutive decoding and parity check is compared in Table III with the average number of iterations and the throughput if the reordered schedule is used with the integrated parity check. The performance of both decoders is considered with a maximum of 20 iterations. (The probability of error for the two decoders is essentially identical for a given signal-to-noise ratio.) If the signal-to-noise ratio is 2 dB, the average number of iterations required with reordering and the integrated parity check is 7.85, compared with an average of only 6.50 iterations with the standard schedule not using the integrated parity check. Each iteration requires less time with the integrated parity check, however, so that the resulting throughput of 35.2 Mbps is 23.5% greater than the throughput using the standard schedule and consecutive decoding and parity check. If the signal-to-noise ratio is 3 dB (not shown in the table), the integrated parity check requires almost 47% more iterations on average than the standard approach (5.26 versus 3.57), but it still results in a throughput (49.8 Mbps) which is slightly higher than with the standard approach.

Decoding algorithn
Standard schedule Integrated parity check Increase in throughput

Avg # iterations
6.50 7.85 X.XX

Throughput (Mbps)
28.5 35.2 23.5%

TABLE III PERFORMANCE WITH EARLY TERMINATION FOR SNR = 2 DB.

CONCLUSION
A penalty in error probability is incurred in using the 8bit fixed-point mode of a stream processor to obtain high throughput for offset-min-sum TDMP decoding of a QCLDPC code. We have shown that a properly chosen hard limit on the extrinsic values in the algorithm can eliminate most of the penalty. We have also shown that reordering of the decoder’s row schedule can reduce the decoding time per iteration, and we have described a modified parity-check implementation that increases the throughput for decoding with early termination, both without any penalty in the error probability.

REFERENCES
[1] S. Lin and D. J. Costello Jr., Error Control Coding, 2nd ed., New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2004.
[2] W. Dally et al., “Stream processors: programmability with efficiency,” ACM Queue, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 52–62, Mar. 2004.
[3] U.J. Kapasi et al., “Programmable stream processors,” IEEE Computer, vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 54–62, Aug. 2003.
[4] R. M. Tanner et al., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on2J0un6e624,2026 at 03:25:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[5] G. Falca˜o, L. Sousa, and V. Silva, “Massive parallel LDPC decoding on GPU,” in ACM Symp. Princ. Prac. Parallel Prog. (Salt Lake City, UT), Feb. 2008, pp. 83–90.
[6] H. Ji, J. Cho, and W. Sung, “Massively parallel implementation of cyclic LDPC codes on a general purpose graphics processing unit,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Proc. Systs. (Tampere, Finland), Oct. 2009, pp. 285–290.
[7] M. M.. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. on Very Large Scale Integration Systems, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[8] M. M. Mansour, “A turbo-decoding message-passing algorithm for sparse parity-check matrix codes,” IEEE Trans. on Signal Processing Systems, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 4376–4392, Nov. 2006.
[9] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layerer decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Proc. Systs. (Austin, TX), Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[10] B. Khailany et al, “A programmable 512 GOPS stream processor for signal, image, and video processing,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 202–213, Jan. 2008.
[11] W. J. Dally et al., “Efficient embedded computing,” IEEE Computer, vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 27–32, July 2008.
[12] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[13] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[14] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Ltrs., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[15] N. Wiberg, Codes and decoding on general graphs, PhD thesis. Linko¨ping: Linko¨ping University, 1996.



  
 

Fig. 2. Fixed-point performance of the offset min-sum TDMP algorithm.

    



 

 



 







  

 







 



 
 









Fig. 1. Floating-point performance of the SPA and TDMP algorithm. Fig. 3. Fixed-point performance of the offset min-sum TDMP algorithm with a maximum of 20 decoding iterations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on2J0un6e724,2026 at 03:25:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

