Extended Optimum Decoding for LDPC Codes based on Exhaustive Tree Search Algorithm
Li Yang, Martin Tomlinson, Marcel Ambroze, Jing Cai Fixed and Mobile Communications Research University of Plymouth PL4 8AA, United Kingdom
Email: li.yang, martin.tomlinson, marcel.ambroze, jing.cai@plymouth.ac.uk

Abstract—A maximum-likelihood decoding algorithm inspired by information set decoding is realised for LDPC codes or linear block codes with sparse parity-check matrices of moderate codeword lengths over the AWGN channel. The extension involves an exhaustive branch and bound tree-search based algorithm for finding all small Euclidean distance error vectors. It provides an approach of searching on the bounded n-bit positions, which involves 2k combinatorial dual codes based on the corresponding parity-check matrix, to achieve the near-optimum decoding output with attainable computational complexity. Soft decision decoding results are presented for some well-known LDPC codes demonstrating near-optimum maximum-likelihood performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes as classical linear block codes were first introduced by Gallager [1] in 1963, and such class of codes attracted a great deal of interest in recent years following their rediscovery by MacKay [2] in 1999. Using message passing decoding algorithm (belief propagation, BP) in iterative decoding performance, the results are comparable to turbo codes’ [3].
In terms of the optimal decoding performance or maximum likelihood (ML), LDPC codes with ML decoding in general is not feasible. For the AWGN channel, most of the optimal or near optimal decoding algorithms are only practical for relatively short codes. In 1995, Fossorier rediscovered the information set decoder proposed by Dorsch [4], with the name called “ordered statistics decoder” (OSD) algorithm [5], it was to search the ordered most-reliable k information bits for the maximised codeword with constraint of order i. A better arrangement improving the performance with same order of i was proposed in [6]. Valembois [7] based on Fossorier’s previous work proposed the “box and match” technique to further improve the decoder performance. An extended Dorsch decoder was proposed by Tomlinson [8] in 2007, it was towards achieving the optimal or near-optimum decoding performance for linear block codes by generating a series of low weight error vectors in the information part to incrementally search the closest codeword according to the cross correlation with the received vector.
Recently different effective methods have been introduced to find low weight codewords for a binary linear block code. Based on the knowledge of computing the minimum distance of LDPC codes, some efficient algorithms for finding the minimum-size stopping sets of LDPC codes were introduced

by following different approaches. An “error impulse” (EI) based algorithm to find the small size stopping sets was proposed by Richter [9]. Hirotomo [10] proposed a probabilistic based algorithm to find the minimum-size stopping sets of LDPC codes. The probabilistic methods were superseded by Wang [11] who proposed the first exhaustive search based algorithm to find all low weight vectors, which include codewords, stopping sets and k-out trapping sets, for LDPC codes. Furthermore, based on previous work [12], [13] concerning an exhaustive search for turbo codes’ stopping sets, Rosnes proposed an efficient algorithm to find all the low weight stopping sets, including codewords, for LDPC codes [14]. The idea was taken further by Ambroze [15], optimising the algorithm in a tree search branch and bound approach.
The searched error vector introduced by Tomlinson [8] consists of the hard-decided received vector bit-wised by a codeword derived from re-encoded codeword according to the k nearly ordered most-reliable information bits and a codeword with low-weight information. Processing this error vector produces the most likelihood codeword with the closest Euclidean distance compared to the received vector. In this paper an algorithm for searching all low-weight error patterns of a received vector for LDPC codes is proposed.
This paper is organised as follows: general code representations and definitions are described and the exhaustive search algorithm for low weight codewords is described in Section II. Section III introduces the modified expanded Dorsch decoding algorithm coupled with branch and bound, exhaustive search for finding low-weight codewords. Some considerations to optimise the search algorithm are discussed. In Section IV, the extended algorithm for finding low weight error vectors is described in terms of a new lower bound algorithm. Section V compares results of iterative decoding performance, sub-optimum decoding performance and optimal decoding performance for some linear codes with sparse structure and reasonable codeword length. Section VI concludes the research work.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In common with earlier papers [14], [15], similar notations and preliminaries are used in this paper.

978-1-4244-70A0u6t-h8o/r1iz0e/d$l2ic6e.n0s0ed©u2s0e1li0miItEedEtEo: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u0n8e 24,2026 at 03:23:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A. Code Representation
Let C be a binary linear code with length n, n ∈ N, and k-dimensional subspace of {0, 1}n. The linear code C can be represented by a m × n binary parity-check matrix H, where m ≥ n − k. Let x = {x0, ..., xn−1} ∈ {0, 1}n be the transmitted vector, then bits x satisfy Hx = 0. In equivalent graphical representation, the linear block code C, especially for
LDPC codes, may be represented by a bipartite graph, called a
Tanner graph [16]. A bipartite graph comprises a vertex set of variable nodes V = {v0, ..., vn−1}, and a vertex set of check nodes C = {c0, ..., cm−1}. The variable nodes correspond to the columns of H, and the check nodes correspond to the rows of H. hi represent the ith parity-check equation of H, Hij represents the connection relationship between the variable node vj and check node ci. It is defined that there exists an connected edge between variable node vj and check node ci, if Hij = 1.
Let S denote a subset of {0, 1}n, the set of all binary vectors of length n. At any point during the tree search process, a constraint set, F is defined to consist of bit positions pi and the states of these bit positions spi , spi ∈ {0, 1}. The support set X (F) of the constraint set F, is the set of positions where spi = 1 and the Hamming weight w(F ) of F is the total number of such positions. The sub-matrix HX (F) is defined by the columns of H where spi = 1, and the row weight of hiX (F) is the total number of 1 s at row i. A row of hi is considered as an active row of HX (F), if w(hiX (F)) has odd row weight. If a constraint set F with size of n contains no active rows of HX (F), then the set F forms a codeword with weight w(F). Thus a codeword set is a subset of {x0, ..., xn−1} with Hamming weight d, d = w(F ), where the induced subgraph contains no check node with odd degree. The minimal Hamming distance dmin is defined as the minimal weight of the non-empty codeword set. If there exist active rows, then F has either to be appended with additional bit positions if |F | < n, or one or more states spi need to be changed to compensate the active rows with odd row weight.

Algorithm 1 Tree-search based Codeword Set Enumeration (TCSE)
repeat Pick one untouched branch as a constraint set F. if |F| = n and w(F) ≤ τ then Constraint set F is saved, if F is valid else 1). Pass F to the iterative decoder with erasures in the unconstrained positions. 2). Construct a new constraint set F with new decoded positions, which is the extended branch. if |F | = n and w(F ) ≤ τ then Constraint set F is saved, if F is valid else if No contradiction is found in HX (F ), and w (F ) ≤ τ then a). Pick an unconstrained position p. b). Extend the branch F to position p to get new branch F = F {(p, 1)} and branch F = F {(p, 0)}. end if end if
until Tree has been fully explored by threshold τ
When the whole tree has been explored constrained by the lower bound, the list of the saved constraint sets in full size n is the whole set of codewords up to size of τ . The contradiction is considered as that if w(hXi (F)) = 1 and w(hiX (F)) = 0, where hiX (F) is the row weight of row i for the unconstrained positions {pi : (pi, 1)} ∈ {0, 1, ..., n − 1}\F intersected by row i on H. The iterative BP decoder over the erasure channel is considered as the candidate iterative decoder. It should be noted that it is not necessary to call the iterative decoder unless the condition of w(hiX (F)) = 1 is met. Thus it helps reduce the computing complexity to call the decoder for every new branch F . The lower bound algorithm w (F )and position selection criteria follow the same rule as in [15].

B. Tree-search based Codeword Set Enumeration Algorithm
Since we aim to find codewords excluding stopping sets, the search criteria can be simplified based on [15]. The algorithm termed, the Tree-search based Codeword Set Enumeration (TCSE) algorithm is designed to search all the codeword set up to size of threshold τ for any parity-check code C.
In the equivalent graphical tree view representation, the constraint set can be considered as a branch of the tree, which represents the set of searched known bit-positions of a code C. |F| denote the size of F, representing the known depth of the tree. Since the active row is defined as the row with odd weight, thus the set of active rows in H is denoted by {h0, ..., hφ−1}, where φ is the total number of active rows. A constraint set F with size n is said to be valid if and only if there exists no active row in HX (F), in other word, a codeword is found. The pseudocode of the algorithm to find all the codeword sets by threshold size τ is given in Algorithm 1.

III. ALGORITHM INSPIRED BY DORSCH ALGORITHM
The codeword search approach of the proposed algorithm is different from the the approaches in [4], [8], a set of codewords satisfying the parity-check matrix H is explored instead of the codes generated by the re-ordered nearly most-reliable k information bits. Furthermore, the number of search size might be constrained by a updated threshold. The BPSK-modulated codeword x is transmitted through the AWGN channel and received as the vector r = {r0, ..., rn−1} ∈ R, which is affected by noise with variance σ2. A hard-decided received vector b ∈ {0, 1}n is derived from the received vector r using bit-wise decisions. Usually, the binary vector b is not a codeword. The re-encoded codeword xˆ is produced by H according to the binary information set of b. The maximum attainable correlation Ymax with the received vector is given

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u0n9e 24,2026 at 03:23:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

by
n−1

Ymax = |rj |

(1)

j=0

According to the extended Dorsch decoding algorithm [8], the

codeword x˜i with low Hamming weight is used to find the closest codeword xi, which has the highest cross-correlation corresponding to the received vector r, such codeword is given

by

xi = xˆ ⊕ x˜i

(2)

Then the corresponding binary error vector zi is given by

zi = b ⊕ xˆ ⊕ x˜i

(3)

The first error vector ˆz is defined as

ˆz = b ⊕ xˆ

(4)

Algorithm 2 Simplified Tree-search based Error-vector Set
Enumeration (STESE)
repeat Pick one untouched branch as a constraint set F. if R(F ) < Y (emin) then 1). Constraint set F is picked, if F is valid. 2). And Y (emin) is updated as R(F ) else Active rows set hF is collected if R (F ) ≤ Y (emin) then a). Pick an unconstrained position p. b). Extend the branch F to position p to get new branch F = F {(p, |bp − 1|)}. end if
end if until Tree has been fully explored by updated Y (emin)

Thus the cross-correlation cost Y (xi) is given by

Y (xi) = Ymax − Y (xi)

(5)

where Y (xi) is defined by

n−1

Y (xi) = 2 (zˆj ⊕ x˜ij ) × |rj|

(6)

j=0

In order to find the codeword xi with smallest cross-correlation

reduction from Ymax, which is the smallest difference between

Ymax and Y (xi), then we find the smallest Y (xmin), starting

with Y (xˆ)

Y (xmin) = min(Y (xi))

(7)

This may be achieved by searching for the low weight codeword xi using the TCSE algorithm.
IV. SIMPLIFIED APPROACH BASED ON TCSE ALGORITHM
At low SNR, the low weight codeword search has to proceed until the threshold is reached, and the simple method bound does not provide a sufficiently tight lower bound to limit the size of codeword search. Another approach based on the basic algorithm is proposed. It is to use TCSE algorithm to search for an error vector ˜ei, which contains an index set I˜ei consisting of positions, where their values are different from received binary vector b. Thus the error vector ˜ei is given by

e˜ij =

|bj − 1|, 0,

if j ∈ I˜ei otherwise

(8)

The cross-correlation difference Y (˜ei) corresponding to Ymax is given by

n−1

Y (˜ei) = 2 (e˜ij ) × |rj|

(9)

j=0

The smallest correlation difference Y (emin) is given by

Y (emin) = min(Y (˜ei))

(10)

Then the constraint set F is redefined as a set with spj = |bpj − 1|, which produces extra correlation cost R(F ) =

|F | j=0

(|rpj

|).

F

is

said

to

be

valid

if

and

only

if

H(ˆeF

⊕

b)

=

0 , where ˆeF is the error vector corresponding to constraint

set F with extra cost less than threshold Y (emin). In other

words, there is no active row for (ˆeF ⊕ b) on H. The

simplified tree-search based error vector enumeration (STESE)

is depicted in Algorithm 2 to search all the error vectors

with extra cost up to Y (emin), which might be initialised as Y (ˆz). The simplified algorithm is designed to find all the

potential error-vector sets with extra cost less than threshold.

Once a smaller error vector is found, then the threshold is

updated. Thus the search size of the error vectors is reduced

as the threshold decreases. R (F) is designated to compute

the lower bound of potential cost corresponding to F.

A. Computing R (F) on F
The simple method bound given in [15] computes the intersected positions by active rows ordered by column-weight. Each ordered position with its column-weight is deducted from the total number of active rows φ until all active rows are compensated. Thus the number of deducted positions is the least possible bound, which guarantees that no potential p missed. The proposed bound algorithm is to estimate the potential coordinates where their column weights could compensate the active rows, meanwhile their total cost has to be less than the difference between threshold and R(F). Let I(F ) = {Ii0 (F ), ..., Iiq−1 (F )} be the active rows index set, where Ii0 (F ) is the set of active rows on F corresponding to the i0th column of H, and q is the total number of intersected positions. First of all, the bound is designed to order the intersected positions by their normalised cost, which is its cost |ri0 | divided by the column weight w(Ii0 ). Then it follows the same strategy, the least ordered position is picked. Its column weight is deducted and the threshold is checked, it is repeated until all active rows are compensated or threshold is exceeded. During observations, the lower bound algorithm can not provide the least probable bound, as the normalised position can not guarantee to attain all the potential error patterns. Such issue could be the involved positions actually

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u1n0e 24,2026 at 03:23:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 3 Lower bound algorithm to find a satisfied position-combination
repeat Pick one unflagged position as a list set L. if (R(L) + R(F )) < Y (emin) and w(L) ≥ φ then 1). The satisfied position-combination is found. 2). Break. else if w(L) < φ then a). Pick an unflagged position p based on η(L), where (R(L) + R(F ) + |rp|) < Y (emin). b). Extend the list L with position p to get new L and η(L ) = (η(L) p). end if
until Combination is found or maximum iteration number is reached

100

10-1

10-2

Frame Error Rate (FER)

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6

10-7

BP

OSD-1

10-8

OSD-2 Proposed Optimum

Union Bound 10-9

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Eb/No, (dB)

Fig. 1. FER Performance of Assorted Regular Gallager Code (120, 56, 10)

could produce different combinations to satisfy the check criteria without in any arranged order.
Thus a lower bound algorithm is realised to find a possible position combination to satisfy the requirement of all active rows’ compensation and extra allowed cost. Let L be a list set ∈ {0, ..., n − 1} to store positions’ indices. η(L) is denoted as a flag set to flag the positions on L, it consists of the positions selected in L and the excluded positions. The excluded position is the position p with (|rp| + R(F )) ≥ Y (emin). The position combination search algorithm is inspired by the codeword search algorithm, which follows the similar strategy. The proposed position-combination search algorithm as a lower bound is depicted in Algorithm 3, where w(L) represents the total number of column weight corresponding to the positions in L. The allowed cost based on F decreases, as the R(F) reaches the threshold. Once the qualified number of intersected positions gets smaller, then the iterations in finding a position-combination gets faster and easier to determine. At the beginning stage of extending the search on the tree, there might exist a relative large number of positions based on the active rows, even though H is sparse. With the increase of the codeword length, the complexity of computing the lower bound is significantly increased, a limitation on the iteration is required to stay within a reasonable computational complexity. The position for the extended tree search from computing on the lower bound is ideal to pick the position in the approved combination with highest column-weight and least cost at the same column weight.

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS

The simulated code is the assorted (3, 6) regular Gallager

code (120, 56, 10) [2], [17], which provides a very sparse

parity-check matrix. The corresponding results of the code

with iterative output, optimum output and sub-optimal OSD-i

output are shown in Fig. 1. The BP iterative decoding output

is achieved with 50 iterations and has better performance than

OSD-1

with

0.5dB

additional

coding

gain

at

4.5dB

Eb No

.

The

decoder uses the algorithm described above with a limitation

of 107 nodes search and 500 iterations of position combination

Frame Error Rate (FER)

100

10-1

10-2

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6

10-7

BP

10-8

OSD-1

OSD-2

10-9

OSD-3 Proposed Optimum

10-10

Union Bound

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Eb/No, (dB)

Fig. 2. FER Performance of Tanner Code (155, 64, 20)

search for the lower bound. With such decoding arrangement, the decoder successfully achieves near-optimum performance compared with the computed union bound.
The Tanner code (155, 64) is a (3, 5)-regular LDPC code constructed by Tanner [18]. The underlying Tanner graph has girth 8 and its relatively large minimum distance of 20 makes the code an excellent candidate for iterative decoding. The results of the code with iterative output, optimum output and sub-optimal OSD-i output are shown in Fig. 2. The optimum decoder is with the proposed algorithm with limitation of 1 × 108 nodes search. Furthermore, the lower bound is limited to 500 iterations during the position combination search, which is sufficient to find the maximised codeword. From the results it can be seen that the iterative decoding performance achieves similar results to the OSD-2 decoder. As the order number i increases, the sub-optimal decoding performance is significantly improved by more than 1dB additional coding gain for each increased order number. And the near-optimum decoding performance is successfully achieved by the proposed tree-search based error-vector searching decoder using 500 iterations of position combination search and 108 maximum nodes search.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u1n1e 24,2026 at 03:23:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The near-optimum decoding performance approaches closely

to

the

computed

union

bound

at

4dB

Eb No

.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this research, a new approach of achieving maximumlikelihood achievement based on the Dorsch decoder is introduced. The approach utilises an efficient exhaustive tree search algorithm to find a low-weight codeword, which is used to find the closest codeword to the received vector. A further optimisation has been described, which is based on the basic algorithm to exhaustively search for a low weight error vector, in order to determine the closest codeword. The practical simulation results have demonstrated that the proposed decoder algorithm is able to approach the nearoptimum decoding using a bounded search algorithm. Since the search exploits the sparseness of the parity-check matrix of the code, it is more suitable for linear block codes having very sparse parity-check matrices, such as LDPC codes.

[16] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, September 1981.
[17] D. J. C. MacKay, “Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes,” Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html.
[18] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured ldpc codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. on Commun. Theroy and Appl. (ISCTA), Ambleside, England, July 2001.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399– 431, Feb 1999.
[3] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near shannon limit error-correcting coding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, 23–26 May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[4] B. Dorsch, “A decoding algorithm for binary block codes and j -ary output channels,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 20, pp. 391–394, May 1974.
[5] M. P. C. Fossorier and S. Lin, “soft-decision deocidng of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1379–1396, Sep 1995.
[6] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Reliability-based soft-decision decoding with iteartive information set reduction,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3101–3106, Dec 2002.
[7] A. Valembois and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Box and match techniques applied to soft-decision decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 796–810, May 2004.
[8] M. Tomlinson, C. Tjhai, and M. Ambroze, “Extending the dorsch decoder towards achieving maximum-likelihood decoding for linear codes,” IET Communications, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 479–488, 2007.
[9] G. Richter, “Finding small stopping sets in the tanner graph of ldpc codes,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr 2006.
[10] M. Hirotomo, Y. Konishi, and M. Morii, “A probabilistic algorithm for finding the minimum-size stopping sets of ldpc codes,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Porto, Portugal, May 2008, pp. 66–70.
[11] C. C. Wang, S. R. Kulkami, and H. V. Poor, “Finding all small errorprone substructures for ldpc codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 55, pp. 1976–1999, May 2009.
[12] E. Rosnes and O. Ytrehus, “Turbo stopping sets: The uniform interleaver and efficient enumeration,” in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Adelaide, SA, Australia, Sep 2005, pp. 1251–1255.
[13] E. Rosnes and O.Ythehus, “Turbo decoding on the binary erasure channel: finite-length analysis and turbo stopping sets,” IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Feb 2006.
[14] E. Rosnes and O. Ytrehus, “An algorithm to find all small-size stopping sets of low-density parity-check matrices,” in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Nice, France, June 2007.
[15] Marcel Ambroze, Martin Tomlinson, and Li Yang, “Exhaustive weight spectrum analysis of some well known ldpc codes,” in the 10th IEEE International Communication Theory and Applications (ISCTA 09), Lake District, UK, March 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u1n2e 24,2026 at 03:23:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

