IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 57, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2010

893

A Min-Sum Iterative Decoder Based on Pulsewidth Message Encoding
Kevin Cushon, Student Member, IEEE, Camille Leroux, Member, IEEE, Saied Hemati, Senior Member, IEEE, Shie Mannor, Senior Member, IEEE, and Warren J. Gross, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this brief, we introduce a new iterative decoder implementation called pulsewidth-modulated min-sum (PWM-MS), in which messages are exchanged in a pulsewidth-encoded format. The advantages of this method are low switching activity, very low complexity check nodes, low routing congestion, and excellent energy efficiency. We implement a fully parallel PWM offset MS decoder for a (660, 484) regular (4, 15) low-density parity-check code with 4-bit quantization in 0.13-µm CMOS, with a core area of 5.76 mm2 (4.24-mm2 cell area or 556K equivalent AND gates). In postlayout simulations, this decoder achieves an average information throughput of 5.71 Gb/s and an energy consumption of 65.8 pJ per information bit at a signal-to-noise ratio of 5.5 dB. Our results show a 21% reduction in area, a 0.6-dB improvement in coding gain, and an energy efficiency improvement of 19% over the comparable bit-serial MS decoder architecture. We also demonstrate 3-bit implementations, in which the coding gain is traded off for further improvements in throughput, area, and energy efficiency.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, low power, low switching activity, min-sum (MS) iterative decoding, pulsewidth modulation (PWM).
I. INTRODUCTION
I TERATIVE decoding techniques play a prominent role in modern forward-error-correction applications. Originally proposed for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], the interest in iterative decoding was renewed with the introduction of Turbo codes [2], where it was shown that these methods could achieve near-capacity error-correction performance for reasonable complexity. It was later discovered that LDPC codes offered similar near-capacity performance [3]. Other notable examples of iteratively decoded codes include serially concatenated codes and product codes [4]. Today, Turbo and LDPC codes remain the most eminent examples of iteratively decoded codes, as evidenced by their inclusion in numerous current and upcoming communications standards.
Since an iterative decoder can account for a large portion of the silicon area and consumed power in a receiver, they are a prime target for power reduction efforts. Several different approaches to low-power iterative decoding have been taken.

Among these are bit-serial (BS) architectures such as [5] and [6], in which probability updates are exchanged bit serially over single wires. This has the effect of reducing computational complexity and routing congestion.
Another way to reduce power consumption is to reduce switching activity. In [7], differential density evolution is used to analyze the switching activity of various message exchange formats in an LDPC decoder. Differential BS message passing is found to significantly reduce interleaver switching activity compared with conventional BS message passing.
Various analog iterative decoders have also been proposed and built [8], [9]. Such analog decoders have been tested to have much better energy efficiency than digital decoders. However, due to process variations and imprecision, it is not practical to scale analog decoders to large codeword lengths, whereas the current LDPC code standards specify codeword lengths of hundreds or thousands of bits. Analog decoders also have much lower throughput compared with digital decoders.
In this brief, we propose a new approach to low-power iterative decoding called pulsewidth-modulated min-sum (PWMMS). In PWM-MS, messages are exchanged over single wires, with their magnitudes encoded using a digital pulse of variable width. This technique has a number of advantages in the power domain: Single-wire messages reduce overall wire lengths and parasitic capacitance, it has a lower average switching activity in the interleaver compared with BS-MS, and it has very simple computational units.
The remainder of this brief is structured as follows. Section II provides a brief background of the algorithmic notions necessary to understand this brief and the complexity problems faced in MS decoding. Section III introduces pulsewidth message encoding and shows the advantages it has over other message exchange techniques. Section IV details how pulsewidth message encoding gives rise to low-complexity MS decoder architectures. Section V contains the implementation results for PWM-MS LDPC decoders. Finally, concluding remarks and a summary are presented in Section VI.

Manuscript received April 1, 2010; revised July 12, 2010; accepted September 13, 2010. Date of publication October 28, 2010; date of current version November 17, 2010. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor Z. Wang.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2A7, Canada (e-mail: kevin. cushon@mail.mcgill.ca; camille.leroux@mcgill.ca; saied.hemati@mcgill.ca; shie.mannor@mcgill.ca; warren.gross@mcgill.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2010.2082970

II. MS ITERATIVE DECODING
Many algorithms for iterative decoding have been formulated, but of those, many can be described as instances of a general algorithm known as belief propagation (BP) over a graphical model of the code [10]. The basic principle of this algorithm is the exchange of messages, or “beliefs,” between processing nodes associated with each vertex of this graph. More specifically, it has been noted that these algorithms fall

1549-7747/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:25:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

894

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 57, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2010

under two general subcategories of BP: the sum–product algo-

rithm and the MS algorithm (MSA) [11].

Let us consider the conventional form of the MSA, which is

applied to a Tanner graph representation of a code. The decoder

is initialized based on the information received at the channel

output. Decoding is performed by iteratively passing messages

through the edges of the Tanner graph between the variable nodes and the check nodes. In the kth iteration (k > 0), in

the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) domain, the messages that are

passed between a variable node v and a check node c are defined

as follows:

m(vk→)c = Lv +

mc(k→−1v)

(1)

c ∈Ci\c

mc(k→)v =

sgn

v ∈Vj \v

m(vk→) c

· min
v ∈Vj \v

mv(k→) c

(2)

where Ci and Vj are the sets of the check and variable nodes incident to the variable node v and the check node c, respectively. The message m(ak→)b is the message sent from node a to node b at iteration k. The initial round of messages ma(0→) b are set to zero. Lv is the initial weight of the variable node v in the LLR domain, which is based on the received value from the channel.
The estimation of the transmitted bit in each variable node is computed by taking the sum of all incoming messages from the check nodes, plus the initial channel information Lv. The decoding process continues until a stopping criterion is reached; this could be once the estimated bits from all the variable nodes form a valid codeword or when an iteration limit kmax is reached.
While the variable node processing consists of simple addition, the check-node processors represent a large part of the complexity in an MS iterative decoder. The reason for this is that each check node must compute the minima of all incoming extrinsic messages for each of its outputs. It is also possible to apply heuristics to the check-node computation, reducing complexity at the cost of some error-correction performance. Split-row MS [12] and the single minimum with correction technique for BS-MS in [5] are examples of this. Pulsewidthencoded messages, on the other hand, are naturally suited to MS decoding, as finding the minima of these messages is very simple, eliminating this source of complexity.

Fig. 1. Some examples of pulsewidth-encoded messages. The message y is the check-node result produced from the inputs a, b, and c.
Auth et al. [13] demonstrate 45-nm transistors with gate leakage currents reduced by two to three orders of magnitude compared with 65-nm transistors. Subthreshold currents, which are another source of static power consumption, can be reduced by using transistors with high threshold voltages. For these reasons, in this work, we exclusively focus on reducing dynamic power consumption.
In an iterative decoder, the switching activity generated by message passing has a particularly high priority for reduction. One reason for this is that message passing represents a great volume of exchanged information, so representing these messages in a power-efficient format can have a large impact on the circuit’s overall power consumption [7]. In addition, the routing networks required to support message passing can necessitate very long wires with multistage buffer chains, particularly in large codes, leading to a high effective parasitic capacitance for these signals.
In our proposed pulsewidth message encoding, the messages between the variable and check nodes are exchanged in sign–magnitude format, with the magnitude determined by the width of a digital pulse, and transferred over single wires. Fig. 1 shows some examples of one possible pulsewidth encoding scheme, in which the first bit of each message is a sign bit. The subsequent bits indicate the magnitude, with the signal held at logic 1 for a number of clock cycles equal to the magnitude. The length of a decoding iteration in clock cycles is thus equal to the maximum message magnitude, plus 1 for the sign bit. Since this number can be set arbitrarily, it is possible to have a nonpower-of-2 number of quantization levels.
One of the key motivations for using such a message en-

III. PULSEWIDTH MESSAGE ENCODING

coding scheme is the very low switching activity. Using the encoding scheme shown in Fig. 1, for instance, each message

In digital CMOS circuits, the causes of power dissipation can has a maximum of one 0-to-1 transition per decoding cycle.

be classified as either static or dynamic. Dynamic power refers This low activity translates directly to low dynamic power

to power dissipated when circuit nodes switch from one voltage consumption. The switching activity could be reduced even

level to another. Static power refers to constant leakage currents further using a transition-based encoding scheme, in which the

that are present even when the circuit is inactive.

signal holds the same state as the sign bit and then transitions

Although static power consumption has been observed to to indicate the magnitude. However, this would result in a more

increase as a share of total power at smaller manufacturing complex CMOS circuit implementation as it requires transition-

process sizes, dynamic power is generally the dominant factor sensitive circuitry. For the remainder of this brief, we consider

in iterative decoder integrated circuits. For instance, in [12], only the level-based scheme, as indicated in Fig. 1.

in a fully parallel iterative decoder in 65-nm CMOS, static Since the activity factor varies as the decoding process pro-

power accounts for only 0.5% to 1% of the total power. ceeds, it is more relevant to characterize the switching activity

Furthermore, recent developments in manufacturing processes using the total transition count observed during decoding [7].

have shown that gate leakage currents can be greatly reduced. Fig. 2 plots the simulated average number of transitions per

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:25:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CUSHON et al.: MIN-SUM ITERATIVE DECODER BASED ON PULSEWIDTH MESSAGE ENCODING

895

Fig. 2. Average number of transitions per edge per decoded codeword for the

(660, 484) LDPC code used in this work.

Fig. 4. PWM-MS variable node of degree dv = 3.

the magnitudes in accordance with (2). A control signal ctrl

selects the appropriate output during the sign and magnitude

computation phases. A parity output is used for convergence

detection and early termination logic.

Not only is this check-node architecture very compact, but

it also offers an exact implementation of the MS check-node

function. There is no performance loss resulting from the

application of heuristics.

The PWM-MS variable node is shown in Fig. 4. It consists of

an up/down counter on each incoming edge, which converts the

incoming PWM message to 2’s complement binary. An adder

network computes the hard-decision bit estimation, as well as

the outgoing messages on each edge. Down counters on each

outgoing edge take the binary messages as input and encode

them in a PWM format. In the variable node, the ctrl input

signals the start of a new iteration, which resets the up/down

Fig. 3. PWM-MS check node of degree dc = 4.

counters to zero and loads the down counters. One notable property of this variable node design is that it

edge in the Tanner graph per decoded codeword for PWM- can be used to implement OMS for a negligible increase in

MS, PWM offset MS (PWM-OMS), and BS-MS to serve as complexity, as opposed to other decoder architectures includ-

comparison. This result shows that PWM has a lower switch- ing BS. This is because the sign–magnitude format of PWM

ing activity than BS-MS for all given values of the number allows the offset to be efficiently applied in the variable node.

of quantization bits q and SNR. The difference is relatively The offset is implemented by setting the output counters to

minor at q = 4 (about 5%); however, at q = 6, this advantage transition when their internal count reaches a number equal

increases to over 25%. This is because the switching activity to or less than a predetermined offset value, rather than zero.

for PWM-MS remains roughly constant with q. In BS-MS, the Furthermore, applying an offset reduces the maximum message

average transition count increases with the number of bits. The magnitude. With pulsewidth message encoding, this reduces the

results for OMS (PWM-OMS and BS-OMS) are also plotted, number of clock cycles per iteration and increases throughput

with PWM-OMS showing a similar advantage.

accordingly. For instance, with 4-bit quantization and an offset

of 1, the maximum message magnitude decreases from 7 to 6,

IV. LOW-COMPLEXITY ARCHITECTURE OF PWM-MS DECODERS
In addition to low switching activity, another major advan-

and the number of clock cycles per iteration decreases from 8 to 7, increasing throughput by 12.5%. It is therefore very advantageous to use PWM-OMS over PWM-MS.

tage of PWM-MS is that it results in a very low complexity check node. As shown in the check-node schematic in Fig. 3,

V. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

the minimum of a group of messages can be computed with We implemented PWM-OMS decoders in three differ-

a single AND gate. The check node is fully combinatorial; ent configurations in IBM CMRF8SF standard-Vt 0.13-µm thus, the CMOS implementation is very compact, and power CMOS to obtain estimates for silicon area, throughput, and

is further saved by the lack of sequential elements. The XOR power consumption. We also implemented PWM-OMS and

gate network is used to determine the signs of the outgoing PWM-MS decoder prototypes on a Xilinx Virtex-5 LX330

messages on each edge, whereas the AND gates determine field-programmable gate array (FPGA) for verification and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:25:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

896

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 57, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2010

TABLE I IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH [5]

Fig. 5. Block diagram of the implemented decoder.

Fig. 6. Decoding performance (a) for different quantization levels of OMS with an offset of 1 and (b) for 4-bit PWM-MS and PWM-OMS decoders implemented on the FPGA.

between our decoder and this one are particularly relevant as they both use the same process size, supply voltage, and LDPC code. They also have architectural similarities—both are fully node parallel with single-wire node interconnections,

bit-error-rate (BER)/frame-error-rate (FER) measurements. In and both were primarily designed for low-power applications.

all cases, the LDPC code used is a (660, 484) regular (4, 15) Throughput and power for our designs were calculated using

progressive-edge-growth-based LDPC code. This code has also postlayout simulations, with back-annotated delays and wiring

been used in [5] for verifying the BS approach. This section parasitics, and includes the clock trees.

contains discussion of these results, as well as comparisons with We implemented three configurations of PWM-OMS de-

other decoders.

coders. Configuration A is optimized for decoding perfor-

Fig. 5 shows a top-level block diagram of the implemented mance. Configuration B is optimized for energy efficiency,

decoder. It is a fully node-parallel architecture, and the inter- whereas configuration C is optimized for throughput.

connections between the nodes are each a single wire. Early Since our decoder architecture uses OMS and no heuristics

termination logic uses parity checks from the check nodes in the check node, configuration A achieves a coding gain

to detect convergence. A state machine ctrl generates control of approximately 0.5 dB over conventional 4-bit MS with a

signals and acts as the off-chip interface.

maximum of 15 iterations, as shown in Fig. 6(b). On the

The impact of the number of quantization bits on the BER other hand, [5] incurs a loss of 0.1 dB due to a check-node

performance of PWM-OMS is shown in Fig. 6(a). In terms approximation. We note that, with q = 3, PWM-OMS can

of the number of quantization bits, q = 4 results in a very achieve approximately the same BER performance as the 4-bit small performance loss compared with q = 6, whereas q = 3 approximate MS used in [5]. Hence, in configurations B and C,

incurs another loss of 0.4–0.5 dB. Fig. 6(b) shows the BER we trade off this 0.6-dB coding gain for reduced area, higher

and FER performance of the FPGA decoder prototypes. For throughput, and better energy efficiency.

this code, OMS gives a performance gain of 0.4–0.5 dB over Configuration A has seven clock cycles per decoding iter-

conventional MS. All BER tests use a maximum of 15 decoding ation. In standard MS, eight cycles would be required—one

iterations. These FPGA prototype results exactly match the for the message sign, plus seven for the 3 bits of magnitude.

results obtained with a software model. These performance tests However, since we implement OMS, we apply an offset of 1, re-

used an emulated Gaussian channel [14].

ducing the maximum magnitude to 6. Likewise, configuration B

Table I shows the application-specific integrated circuit takes only three cycles per decoding iteration (one for the sign implementation results for our decoder in 0.13-µm CMOS, and two for the magnitude). Pipelining adds a cycle of latency;

alongside the BS approximate MS decoder in [5]. Comparisons thus, configuration C requires four cycles.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:25:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CUSHON et al.: MIN-SUM ITERATIVE DECODER BASED ON PULSEWIDTH MESSAGE ENCODING

897

VI. CONCLUSION

In this brief, we have presented a new iterative decoding

technique called PWM-MS and implemented it for a (660, 484)

regular (4, 15) LDPC code. The advantages of this architecture

include very low complexity check nodes and low message

exchange switching activity. Our implementation of an OMS

decoder with 4 bits of message quantization achieved a core area of 5.76 mm2 and an average information throughput of

5.71 Gb/s at 5.5-dB SNR. It also achieved an energy efficiency

value of 65.9 pJ/bit at this SNR and a coding gain of 0.5 dB

over conventional MS, which can be traded off for additional

improvements in area, throughput, and energy by reducing

Fig. 7. (a) Average power consumption and (b) energy efficiency for a PWMOMS decoder with q = 4.

the number of quantization levels. These results for area and energy represent respective improvements of 21% and 19% compared with the similar BS-MS decoder architecture. These

Area is reduced relative to BS-MS due to the simpler check results also favorably compare with other recent LDPC decoder

node. We define average throughput as the throughput achieved architectures.

by immediately beginning decoding of a new codeword once

the current one has converged. Average throughput is therefore determined by the average number of iterations required for convergence and varies for different values of SNR. Raw throughput is lower, due to both the lower clock frequencies and (in the case of configuration A) higher number of clock cycles per iteration. In terms of throughput per unit area, however, configuration C is 15% higher than [5]. We also define another metric that takes power consumption into account: throughput per unit area per unit power. In these terms, all three PWMOMS implementations are superior to [5]. Energy efficiency, which is defined in terms of energy consumed per decoded bit, is also better in PWM-OMS. Plots of average power consumption and energy efficiency for the A decoder over a range of SNR values are shown in Fig. 7. Energy efficiency was determined by dividing the average power by the average throughput at each given value of SNR.
The complexity and energy efficiency of PWM-OMS also favorably compare with other recent LDPC decoders, although differences in the process size and LDPC code make direct comparisons difficult. One example is the partially parallel OMS decoder in [15], which implements a (2048, 1723) Reed–Solomon-based code in 65-nm CMOS. It achieves an average information throughput of 40 Gb/s at 5.5-dB SNR, with power of 2800 mW and energy of 69.8 pJ/bit.
Another recent architecture is the 90-nm fully node- and bitparallel MS decoder in [16], which achieves an information throughput of 13.21 Gb/s, with average power of 1323 mW and energy of 98 pJ/bit at 5-dB SNR. It should be noted that these figures are without early termination, which was used to greatly increase throughput and decrease energy in [5], [15], and this work. However, since [16] partitions long internode wires with registers, early termination would be less effective due to added complexity and increased latency. In addition, this architecture requires parallel check nodes, which become very complex at high degrees, whereas in this work, the check-node complexity is extremely low, even at high degrees.
If we assume energy consumption per information bit scales quadratically with feature size, the scaled energy values of [15] and [16] are 279 and 204 pJ/bit, respectively, giving this work respective improvements of 76% and 68%.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit errorcorrecting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. ICC, May 1993, vol. 2, pp. 1064–1070.
[3] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] R. Pyndiah, “Near-optimum decoding of product codes: Block turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 1003–1010, Aug. 1998.
[5] A. Darabiha, A. Chan Carusone, and F. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1835–1845, Aug. 2008.
[6] T. Brandon, R. Hang, G. Block, V. C. Gaudet, B. Cockburn, S. Howard, C. Giasson, K. Boyle, P. Goud, S. S. Zeinoddin, A. Rapley, S. Bates, D. Elliott, and C. Schlegel, “A scalable LDPC decoder ASIC architecture with bit-serial message exchange,” Integration, VLSI J., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 385–398, May 2008.
[7] V. Gaudet, C. Schlegel, and R. Dodd, “LDPC decoder message formatting based on activity factor minimization using differential density evolution,” in Proc. ITW, Sep. 2007, pp. 571–576.
[8] S. Hemati, A. Banihashemi, and C. Plett, “A 0.18- µm CMOS analog min-sum iterative decoder for a (32, 8) low-density parity-check (LDPC) code,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2531–2540, Nov. 2006.
[9] C. Winstead, N. Nguyen, V. Gaudet, and C. Schlegel, “Low-voltage CMOS circuits for analog iterative decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 829–841, Apr. 2006.
[10] F. Kschischang and B. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[11] N. Wiberg, Codes and Decoding on General Graphs. Linköping, Sweden: Linköping Univ., 1996.
[12] T. Mohsenin, D. Truong, and B. Baas, “A low-complexity messagepassing algorithm for reduced routing congestion in LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1048–1061, May 2010.
[13] C. Auth, M. Buehler, A. Cappellani, C.-H. Choi, G. Ding, W. Han, S. Joshi, B. McIntyre, M. Prince, P. Ranade, J. Sandford, and C. Thomas, “45 nm high- k+ metal gate strain-enhanced transistors,” Intel Technol. J., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 77–85, Jun. 2008.
[14] A. Ghazel, E. Boutillon, J.-L. Danger, G. Gulak, and H. Laamari, “Design and performance analysis of a high speed AWGN communication channel emulator,” in Proc. PACRIM, 2001, vol. 2, pp. 374–377.
[15] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “An efficient 10GBASE-T ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[16] N. Onizawa, T. Hanyu, and V. Gaudet, “Design of high-throughput fully parallel LDPC decoders based on wire partitioning,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 482–489, Mar. 2010.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:25:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

