1032

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 68, NO. 5, MAY 2021

Radiation-Induced Error Mitigation by Read-Retry Technique for MLC 3-D NAND Flash Memory
Preeti Kumari , Student Member, IEEE, Umeshwarnath Surendranathan , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Maryla Wasiolek , Khalid Hattar , Member, IEEE, Narayana P. Bhat, and Biswajit Ray , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— In this article, we have evaluated the Read-Retry (RR) functionality of the 3-D NAND chip of multilevel-cell (MLC) configuration after total ionization dose (TID) exposure. The RR function is typically offered in the high-density state-of-the-art NAND memory chips to recover data once the default memory read method fails to correct data with error correction codes (ECCs). In this work, we have applied the RR method on the irradiated 3-D NAND chip that was exposed with a Co-60 gammaray source for TID up to 50 krad (Si). Based on our experimental evaluation results, we have proposed an algorithm to efficiently implement the RR method to extend the radiation tolerance of the NAND memory chip. Our experimental evaluation shows that the RR method coupled with ECC can ensure data integrity of MLC 3-D NAND for TID up to 50 krad (Si).
Index Terms— 3-D NAND, ionizing radiation, multilevel-cell (MLC), read-retry (RR).
I. INTRODUCTION
N ONVOLATILE memory (NVM) such as NAND flash technology is an integral part of electronic systems that are used in space, nuclear, and defense applications. While commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) NAND flash memory chips offer high-density, high-capacity, and lightweight storage solutions in small form factors, they suffer from radiation-induced data-corruption issues [1]–[5]. The state-ofthe-art radiation-hardened NVMs have very limited capacity (in Megabytes) and of very high cost, making them impractical for many emerging data-intensive applications, such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, and predictive analytics. Thus, there exists a need to enhance the radiation tolerance of the COTS NAND flash memory to enable different dataintensive applications in the radiation-prone environments.
Manuscript received November 7, 2020; revised January 11, 2021; accepted January 16, 2021. Date of publication January 19, 2021; date of current version May 20, 2021. This work was supported in part by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Energy through the Department of Energy (DOE) Idaho Operations Office as part of a Nuclear Science User Facilities experiment under Contract DE-AC07-051D14517, in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant 1929099, and in part by the U.S. DOE’s National Nuclear Security Administration under Contract DE-NA-0003525.
Preeti Kumari, Umeshwarnath Surendranathan, and Biswajit Ray are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Alabama in Huntsville, Huntsville, AL 35899 USA (e-mail: pk0039@uah.edu; us0003@uah.edu; biswajit.ray@uah.edu).
Maryla Wasiolek and Khalid Hattar are with the Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM 87185 USA.
Narayana P. Bhat is with The Center for Space Plasma and Aeronomic Research, The University of Alabama in Huntsville, Huntsville, AL 35899 USA.
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TNS.2021.3052909.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNS.2021.3052909

A limited number of software-based error mitigation techniques are typically employed in the NAND flash memory controller to enhance data integrity [6]–[11]. One of these techniques uses error correction code (ECC) that is utilized to detect and correct bit errors. Different ECC techniques such as Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) code and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are commonly used by NAND memory controllers. Unfortunately, the existing data correction techniques invariably fail under high-dose radiation environments, as error-correction methods have an upper limit for data correction (∼0.5%–1% bit error) [12]. The alternative software-based error mitigation technique involves data redundancy by writing the same data set on multiple memory locations [9]. During memory read operation, a majority voting is employed to mitigate the errors. However, redundancy type techniques come with the additional cost of reduced memory performance and reduced density and hence they are not very attractive.
Since intrinsic bit errors are commonly observed in high-density flash memories such as multilevel-cell (MLC) NAND technology, chip manufacturers provide a few additional data-recovery commands on the state-of-the-art NAND chips. These additional commands are typically referred to as Read-Retry (RR) options, which are exercised by the NAND memory controller to recover data in case the default read method fails. The interaction process between the memory controller and the flash chip is explained in Fig. 1(a). COTS flash memory chips come with a fixed command set and chip-interfacing protocol defined by Open NAND Flash Interface (ONFI) [13]. The memory controller usually sends the ONFI-defined commands to the flash chip to perform storage operations such as memory-read and the flash chip responds by sending digital data to the controller. The RR commands can be implemented using the same interfacing method. In the following paragraph, we explain the working principle and the associated device physics behind the RR method.
Flash memory is a charge-based analog memory where data are encoded in terms of cell threshold voltage (Vt ) representing the logical value of the cell. Fig. 1(b) shows the schematic for Vt distribution of memory cells where the high Vt distribution represents program cells (or logic “0”) and the low Vt distribution stands for erase cells (or logic “1”). Even though we have shown only erase and program states in the schematic for clear illustration of the RR method, the device under test being an MLC chip has four different Vt states as explained later in the article. The solid lines in Fig. 1(b)

0018-9499 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMARI et al.: RADIATION-INDUCED ERROR MITIGATION BY RR TECHNIQUE FOR MLC 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

1033

characterization of this method on the state-of-the-art highdensity NAND memory chip is important and interesting. In this article, we evaluate the effects of the RR method on the total ionization dose (TID) response of COTS 3-D MLC NAND memory chips. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first characterization work of the RR method on the irradiated 3-D NAND chips. The details on the chip specifications, the experimental set-up, measurement procedure, gamma irradiation conditions, and the data collection method are discussed in Section II. Section III demonstrates the experimental evaluation results and the proposed algorithm. Section IV concludes the article.

Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of the RR method implementation through NAND controller. (b) Simplified threshold voltage distribution of NAND memory cells for preirradiation (solid line) and postirradiation (dashed line) conditions. Three different read reference voltages correspond to different RR options.
represent Vt distribution just after a program operation, whereas dashed lines represent the corresponding cell Vt distribution after irradiation [1]. The irradiation generally causes different amount of voltage shifts on the erase and program states. The program state usually shifts down after irradiation, whereas the erase state may shift up or down depending on the underlying technology [14]. Since we do not have the privilege to measure the Vt distribution on the chip under test, the schematic of Fig. 1(b) should be treated as a simplified Vt distribution for illustration of the RR method. During memory read operation, a read reference voltage, VREF is applied on the memory cells to distinguish the erase and program states. The value of VREF, which lies in between the erase and program state distributions, remains fixed during default read. If the cell Vt distribution gets distorted due to radiation effects as shown with dashed lines in Fig. 1(b), the default read may cause significant bit errors. For example, the default read will incorrectly identify the state of the original program cells whose Vt values are lowered below VREF due to radiation effects. Instead, if the same memory location is read with a shifted reference voltage VREF2 as shown in Fig. 1(b), the fails will be minimal. The RR method allows the memory controller to choose a few predefined reference voltages apart from the default value [Fig. 1(b)]. It is important to note that the RR command does not always reduce the errors. There are several reference voltage options, which will increase the errors even more than the default read option. For example, if we read the memory with the reference voltage VREF1 as shown in Fig. 1(b), the fails will increase relative to the default read. Therefore, the challenge for implementing the RR method is to identify the appropriate reference voltage based on the damaged condition of the memory chip.
Since the RR method offers a promising data recovery technique under ionizing radiation environment, accurate

II. DEVICE AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
A. Device Details
Fig. 2(a) shows the device structure of a 3-D NAND flash memory cell, which is essentially a floating gate metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor (MOSFET). It is in the program state (logic 0) when electrons are stored on the floating gate, whereas it is in the erase state (logic 1) when there are no electrons on the floating gate. Fig. 2(b) shows the physical structure of the 3-D NAND memory array. The green layers are the word lines (WLs), and the vertical pillars are memory holes that contain the channel of the flash memory cells. Fig. 2(c) shows the circuit diagram of the memory cell arrangement in a NAND flash memory block. Each memory block consists of a fixed number of memory pages. The cells in each memory page are electrically connected through a metal WL. WL acts as the control gate of the memory cells. Each column (or string) of cells in a block is connected to a bitline (BL). Memory-read and program operations are performed at the page granularity, while erase is performed at the block granularity. Any flash cell that is set to a logic “0” by a program operation on a page can only be reset to a logic “1” by erasing the entire block.
We used 32-layer 3-D NAND flash memory chips from Micron Technology for evaluating the TID response. The part number of the chips was MT29F256G08CBCBBWP10:B which is 256 Gbit MLC memory. Nine different COTS chips were used to improve statistics. Each 3-D memory chip contains 2192 logical blocks, where each block consists of 1024 logical pages of size 18 592 bytes (16 384 bytes of user data with 2208 spare bytes reserved for storing out-ofband (OOB) information such as ECCs).
B. Gamma-Ray Irradiation
The flash memory chips were irradiated using Co-60 sources to evaluate their TID response. The irradiation was carried out at Sandia National Laboratories’ Gamma Irradiation Facility [15]. The chips received a TID up to 20 krad (Si) at a dose rate of 18.5 rad (Si)/s. If not otherwise stated, all doses in the following are expressed as absorbed dose in silicon. Gamma irradiation was performed on the packaged devices thin small outline package (TSOP) in unbiased condition, where all the pins of the chip were grounded. The unbiased or unpowered state is a common use condition for NVMs which are designed to retain data without any external power. Hence,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1034

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 68, NO. 5, MAY 2021

Fig. 2. (a) Schematic of a 3-D NAND flash memory cell. (b) Physical structure of 3-D NAND flash memory array. (c) Circuit diagram of a NAND memory block (reproduced from [17]).

the irradiation of these chips in an unbiased state represents an important test condition. In addition, the unbiased state irradiation ensures minimal damage to the peripheral circuitry (e.g., charge pump) of the chip, which allows us to explore radiation effects mainly on the memory cells. Irradiation of chips with biased condition is another important test for space application, which may affect the radiation sensitivity on the chip [16]–[19]. However, in this work we have focused only on the unbiased state irradiation effects. The direction of gamma rays during irradiation was perpendicular to the flat surface of the chip. The entire unbiased chip in unlidded condition went through the gamma irradiation.
C. Measurement Setup and Procedure
To interface the raw NAND chip with the computer, we used a custom-designed hardware board. The board includes a socket to insert the NAND flash chip and an FT2232H mini module from Future Technology Devices International (FTDI) to interface the memory chip with a computer through universal serial bus (USB) connection. The hardware setup allowed us to access the raw memory bits without any error correction. The hardware setup was not exposed to gamma radiation. It was only used to write/read the memory chips that were irradiated. Before sending the chips for radiation exposure, we wrote a known random data pattern on four to six memory blocks in each chip. We read all the blocks immediately after writing data. We found very low bit error (<5 per 16 kB) in the memory just after writing data on them. A small number of bit errors were observed as the chips are of MLC configuration which has a very low voltage margin between different memory states. We then exposed the NAND memory chips to gamma radiation for a total dose of up to 50 krad (Si). Finally, we read the data from the corresponding memory block and computed the failed byte count (FBC). The time gap between write and irradiation was 3–4 h and the time gap between irradiation and read out was around an hour. We monitored a reference chip, to observe any data retention-related errors and we found very little increase in

FBC within a week time frame for preirradiation condition. On the irradiated chip, we observed some relaxation effects within a week where we found that FBC reduced slightly after a week. However, data retention effects within few hours were negligible in the chips that we tested.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

We have performed the FBC analysis on the irradiated chip. Data were read from the chip byte by byte and compared to the original random data pattern to calculate the FBC. We compute FBC from at least 1024 pages in a chip and compute the average page FBC as follows:

Avg.pageFBC = Sum of FBC in 1024 pages .

(1)

1024

We implement the RR operation in our hardware setup

through firmware change. The RR operations are a coordination of NAND page Read command and Set Features (0xEF) command with feature address 0 × 89. The Set Feature com-

mand allows selecting different internal read reference voltages

to aid in data recovery. The 3-D NAND chips under test offer 16 different reference voltage options for the RR operation. However, the exact amount of voltage shift corresponding to

these options is not specified in the datasheet. The command

sequence used to implement the RR operation for ONFIcompliant NAND flash memory is as follows.
1) Send Command SET FEATURES (0xEF). 2) Send Address (0 × 89). 3) Send Data (select read option #). 4) Send Command PAGE READ.

A. Impact of RR Operation on Unirradiated Chips
To evaluate the effects of RR operation, we first perform it on the unirradiated chip to collect FBC data. It is common to find a few error bytes in the high-density MLC chips, even when data are read immediately after the write operation. These errors are mainly due to the program and read noise inherent in the high-density memory. We count all the byte

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMARI et al.: RADIATION-INDUCED ERROR MITIGATION BY RR TECHNIQUE FOR MLC 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

1035

Fig. 3. Average FBC in memory pages of size 16 kB is shown for 16 different RR options for unirradiated chips.
errors by comparing the data read from the memory with the original random data pattern that was written to the chip. The average FBC per memory page for unirradiated chips is plotted in Fig. 3, where RR option #0 represents the default read and the other options correspond to different reference voltages in the RR method. We read the same memory location 16 times with all the available RR options and summarize the results in Fig. 3. Each bar in Fig. 3 represents the average FBC per memory page obtained with a particular RR option given on the x-axis. The RR option #0 (default read reference) yields the least FBC on an unirradiated chip. The average FBC with option #0 was less than 1 and hence, it is not visible in Fig. 3. We find that different read options yield different FBC from the same memory page. The FBC pattern remains the same for several read operations implying minimal read disturb effects. In other words, if we read a memory page with option #4, we always find high fails, whereas the default option #0 always yields low FBC. This also confirms the correct implementation of the RR function in our controller firmware. It may be noted that there are multiple RR options that yield low FBC in the unirradiated chips. Since the memory is read immediately after the write operation, there are large enough voltage margins between the analog Vt states, such that a small shift in the read reference voltage corresponding to different RR options does not cause significantly higher fails. Three different chips were used (different colors in the bar plot) to account for the chip-to-chip variability. Interestingly, all three chips respond in the similar way to the different RR options with little chip to chip variability.
B. Impact of RR Operation on Irradiated Chips
In this section, we systematically analyze the effects of the RR method on the irradiated chips. Fig. 4(a) compares the average fails before and after the chips are irradiated [TID = 20 krad (Si)] with respect to different RR options. The first point to note here is that the average FBC after radiation exposure obtained with the default read option (or option #0) is significantly higher compared to preirradiation conditions. This observation is reported in the literature in terms of increased errors due to radiation effects on the NAND memory [2], [20]–[22]. Ionizing radiation causes charge (electron) loss either by ejecting electrons from the floating gate or

trapping positive charge in the oxide [4]. Charge loss lowers the cell Vt causing higher failure during memory read as explained in Fig. 1(b). Second, unlike the unirradiated chip, the default read (RR option #0) does not yield minimum FBC on the irradiated chip; instead, RR option #11 yields minimum FBC and hence it is the optimal option for this specific condition. This result is very interesting and significant as it provides an alternative to the system designer to recover data after irradiation. Physically, this result implies that the TID-induced errors do not reflect cell functionality loss and hence the errors are minimized by appropriate choice of read reference voltage. In this case, RR option #11 provides the optimal read reference voltage which accounts for the down-shifted Vt distribution. Interestingly, there are a few RR options [#3 and #4 in Fig. 4(a)] which yield higher FBC at preirradiation conditions compared to postirradiation conditions. This behavior can be explained if we consider a read reference voltage which touch the upper tail of the Vt distribution [similar to VREF2 in Fig. 1(b)]. Read operation with such reference voltage will cause high FBC at preirradiation condition. Since TID effects lower down the Vt distribution, FBC will decrease if we read the same memory page with the same reference voltage after irradiation. Finally, note that not all the radiation-induced errors are correctable with the RR method. The postirradiation FBC values obtained with the optimal RR option are still higher than prior to irradiation (the minimum height of the red bar in Fig. 4(a) is higher than the minimum height of the blue bar). This can be explained with distribution overlapping effects after TID exposure as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). Since TID-induced voltage shifts will be different for different memory states, there can be overlap in the Vt distribution after the TID exposure. Errors due to overlapped Vt distribution cannot be corrected by adjusting the read reference voltage and hence postirradiation FBC will be higher compared to preirradiation case even with optimal RR method.
Since the FBC obtained with the optimal RR option (option #11) is significantly lower than that for the default read option, it can be used to recover the data when the default read method fails to correct the data with ECC. However, identifying the optimal RR option remains a challenge in the implementation of the RR method. The optimal RR option depends on the magnitude of cell Vt shift, which is a function of many factors, such as chip-to-chip variability, absorbed dose, data retention effects, MLC page type, and 3-D layer-tolayer variability [21]. In the following, we discuss the effect of some of these factors on the optimum RR method.
C. Impact of Chip-to-Chip Variability on RR Operation
Chip-to-chip variability is commonly observed in NAND flash memory due to intrinsic process variation. To account for the chip-to-chip variability, we obtain FBC data from three different chips after 20 krad (Si) TID exposure. In Fig. 4(b), we show the average FBC obtained with the RR method for these three chips. We find a similar FBC trend with different RR options for all three chips. For all the three chips, the default read option shows very high FBC, which is around

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1036

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 68, NO. 5, MAY 2021

Fig. 4. (a) Comparison of FBC obtained with the RR method on the memory chips before and after irradiation [20 krad (Si)]. (b) Impact of chip-to-chip variation on the RR method illustrated with three different irradiated [TID = 20 krad (Si)] chips.

Fig. 5. Comparison of the RR method for radiated chip with TID = 10 and 20 krad (Si).
500 failed bytes out of 16 kB of a page. In percentage terms, almost 3% bytes are read in failed condition with default read. This is a high percentage that may exceed the error correction limit of the standard ECC engines [12], [23]. However, the number of FBC is significantly reduced with optimal RR option (#11 for chips 1–3), which can be easily corrected by the standard ECC engines. Due to chip-to-chip variability, the optimal RR option can be different for different chips. Nevertheless, the FBC obtained with RR options #11 and #12 is low in all the three chips. The physical reasoning for the reduced errors with these RR options can be explained using Fig. 1(b). Even though the exact voltage shifts associated with the RR options are not specified in the datasheet, the reduced error implies that the optimal RR options are most likely similar to VREF2 in Fig. 1(b), which appropriately accounts for the downshifted Vt distribution caused by irradiation. More importantly, all three chips show a similar trend with the RR options, suggesting that it is sufficient to characterize one chip in order to find the optimum RR option (or a group of options) for a given exposure condition.
D. RR Operation for Different TID Exposure
In this section, we evaluate the impact of the RR method for two different TID exposure levels. Fig. 5 compares the average FBC obtained with the RR method after 10 and 20 krad (Si) of gamma-ray exposure. We find that optimal RR option changes with the absorbed dose value. For instance,

RR option #11 was optimal for 20 krad (Si) exposure, whereas RR option #10 is optimal after 10 krad (Si). Since cell Vt distribution shifts down by increasing amount with higher absorbed dose, the optimal RR option should have the corresponding negative voltage shift with respect to the default read reference voltage. In other words, the optimal RR option for 20 krad (Si) will have higher amount of negative voltage shift compared to the optimal RR option for 10 krad (Si) exposure. Since the exact amount of voltage shift associated with each RR option is a proprietary information, we cannot explicitly calculate the voltage downshift associated with each TID exposure. However, we can predict the relative positions of the reference voltages corresponding to each RR option based on measured data. For instance, from Fig. 5, we can infer that RR options #1–#3 will have increasingly higher negative voltage shifts with respect to the default read reference voltage as they progressively minimize the TID-induced FBC.
E. Impact of RR Operation on Least Significant Bit/Most Significant Bit Pages
In MLC NAND flash devices, each memory cell holds two bits of information. The cell threshold voltage (Vt ) distribution of MLC NAND memory thus has four different states as shown in Fig. 6(a). Each Vt state in Fig. 6(a) represents 2 bits of information that belong to two different logical pages, namely least significant bit (LSB) page and most significant bit (MSB) page. The MSB of the logic states of all the memory cells connected to a given WL forms the logical MSB page. Similarly, the LSB of the logic states of the memory cells forms the logical LSB page. Note that only one reference voltage is required to read the LSB page bits, whereas two reference voltages are needed for the MSB page read. Thus, the read operation of LSB and MSB pages are quite different and hence the impact of the RR method needs to be evaluated separately on these two different page types.
Fig. 6(b) shows the comparison of the effects of the RR method on LSB and MSB pages on the irradiated [TID = 20 krad (Si)] memory chip. In a given memory block, the 3-D NAND chip under test has 480 LSB pages and 480 corresponding MSB pages. The logical addresses of the LSB and MSB pages are taken from the datasheet of the chip. After reading data from all the LSB and MSB pages, we calculate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMARI et al.: RADIATION-INDUCED ERROR MITIGATION BY RR TECHNIQUE FOR MLC 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

1037

Fig. 6. (a) Cell threshold voltage distribution of MLC memory. (b) Comparison of the RR method for LSB and MSB pages on radiated chip with TID = 20 krad (Si).

Fig. 7. Optimal RR option on different vertical layer of the 3-D NAND after 20 krad (Si) of TID exposure for (a) LSB and (b) MSB pages.

the average FBC for LSB and MSB pages separately. The average fails for different RR options in the LSB pages are shown in Fig. 6(b) with the blue bars, and the corresponding average FBC of the MSB pages are shown with the red bars. We found that the FBC for the MSB pages are higher than that for the LSB pages in many RR options. The reason for such behavior can be explained using Fig. 6(a): MSB pages incur failures if cells from the highest Vt state (state C) drifts down to the next Vt level, whereas LSB pages register a failure if cells from Vt state B downshifts to state A. Since higher Vt cells lose more charge compared to the low Vt cells due to TID effects, MSB pages usually incur higher FBC compared to the LSB pages. In addition, MSB pages will register a failure if erase cells Vt upshifts to state A or state A downshifts to erase Vt level. Such transition will not register any fails in the LSB pages due to the data encoding process as shown in Fig. 6(a). Therefore, MSB pages usually have more fails compared to LSB pages. In general, the reference voltages of the LSB and MSB page read are different, and hence, it is important to find out the optimal RR option for the LSB and MSB pages separately.
F. RR Operation on Different Layers of 3-D Structure
In our previous publication [21], we demonstrated that 3-D NAND memory exhibits significant layer-to-layer variability under ionizing radiation. It was argued that the layer-to-layer variability mainly originates from the fundamental geometric variation of the 3-D architecture which produces a different amount of voltage downshifts across different layers after TID exposure [21]. Since the optimal RR option critically depends on the exact amount of voltage downshift, we expect different

optimal RR option for memory pages located at different vertical layers. Fig. 7 shows the optimal RR option as a function of 3-D layer numbers after 20 krad (Si) of TID exposure. The optimal RR option is obtained for LSB [Fig. 7(a)] and MSB [Fig. 7(b)] pages separately. The layer numbers of 0, 1, 32, and 33 are not shown for the MSB pages in Fig. 7(b), because these layers operate in single-level cell (SLC) mode and do not have their corresponding shared page. It is evident that the optimal RR option is different for different vertical layers, which supports our hypothesis that different vertical layers of 3-D NAND memory experience different amounts of voltage shifts under TID exposure. This layer-dependent optimal RR option is another critical information that needs to be precharacterized for the efficient implementation of this technique into the memory controller.
G. Proposed Algorithm for Optimized Read to Mitigate FBC
Typically, the RR method is used when the default read fails to recover data with ECC. All the RR options are used one by one on a trial-and-error basis, which introduces a higher read latency and more energy dissipation. Here, we propose an algorithm (see Fig. 8) to reduce the fails from an irradiated chip in a more efficient way. The challenge for minimizing the read error with the RR method is to automatically identify the optimal RR option. Since our experimental evaluation results in Section III-B show that the optimal RR option depends on several factors including the absorbed dose, LSB/MSB page type, and the 3-D layer number, we propose an algorithm for efficiently identifying the optimal RR option.
One critical information for identifying the optimal RR option is the absorbed dose. For this purpose, we propose

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1038

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 68, NO. 5, MAY 2021

Fig. 8. Flowchart of the proposed algorithm.
to utilize the on-chip quasi-dosimetry concept as follows. We assume that each memory block has one dedicated page that serves as a dosimeter. This page contains a known data pattern (e.g., all-zero pattern), specifically tailored to be sensitive to failures caused by ionizing radiation. The concept of using flash memory pages for dosimetry purposes was established in our previous work [5]. In this work, we apply the flash-based dosimetry concept for the assessment of the absorbed dose and the corresponding selection of the optimal RR option. Fig. 8 shows the flowchart of the proposed algorithm. The memory controller will read the dosimeter page before reading other pages from that block and determine the raw FBC by counting the number of flipped bits. If an all-zero data pattern is written on the dosimeter page, the controller needs to count the number of ones to find the raw FBC. If the raw FBC is within the ECC correction limit, the controller will proceed with the default read option and correct the data using ECC. However, if the raw FBC exceeds the ECC correction capability, the controller will choose the optimal RR option using a precharacterized lookup table information. The raw FBC on the dosimeter page will inform the controller which RR option to choose from the previously characterized lookup table.
To illustrate the effectiveness of the dosimeter page, we plot the average fails on the dosimeter page containing all-zero data as a function of the absorbed dose in Fig. 9(a). To account for chip-to-chip variation, we show FBC in the dosimeter page from three different chips. We find that the FBC in the dosimeter page monotonically increases with absorbed dose for all three chips. Fig. 9(a) shows the chip-to-chip variability in terms of radiation sensitivity of the dosimeter page. The advantage with our algorithm is that it will spontaneously take into account the chip-to-chip variability through dosimeter

page. It may be noted that the exact value of the TID exposure is not needed for the successful implementation of the algorithm. As long as the controller can correctly estimate the raw FBC value from the dosimeter page, it will be able to choose the optimal RR option.
We illustrate the benefit of the proposed algorithm by reading memory pages containing user data (random data pattern) using the default read method and the optimal RR option from an irradiated chip with TID = 20 krad (Si). Fig. 9(b) shows the comparison results, where red dots represent page FBC obtained with the default read method, and blue dots stand for the optimal RR method. One full memory block with 1024 pages is used for this comparison. We find that the optimal RR method corrects almost 98% FBC from the irradiated chip. Several important points can be inferred from this result. First, we note that substantial error mitigation is possible with the RR method. This will significantly enhance the TID tolerance of the storage system assuming that the peripheral circuitry including charge pump remains functional. Second, error mitigation with the RR method confirms that the bit errors caused by the TID exposure are not irrecoverable. Third, we observe a “U”-shaped FBC dependence with the default read method which was reported in our previous publication [21]. The physical reason for such FBC trend was explained by layer-dependent voltage shifts caused by TID [21]. But the “U” shape was not visible with the proposed algorithm as it accounts for the different amount of voltage shifts on different layers of the memory stack.
Next, we evaluate the proposed algorithm for different TID exposure. Fig. 9(c) shows the average page FBC obtained with the default read method and the proposed algorithm for different TID values. We find a significant reduction of FBC for all the TID exposure levels with the proposed method. Since the default read is optimal on an unirradiated chip, FBC obtained with the proposed read method coincides with the default read for TID = 0 krad (Si). With the increasing TID exposure, the FBC obtained with default read increases significantly. Interestingly, most of the errors are corrected with the proposed algorithm. For example, the average page FBC reduces from 171 (default read) to below 5 (RR method) on the irradiated chip indicating a ∼98% correction rate at TID of 20 krad (Si). Similarly, at TID = 50 krad (Si), almost all the bytes in the memory chip are found corrupted when read with default read, whereas almost 95% of the bytes are corrected with the RR method. Since 5% FBC might be correctable with stronger ECC engines, data can be recovered from the chip using RR technique even after 50 krad (Si) exposure.
Nevertheless, FBC increases with TID exposure, even with the proposed algorithm, indicating the fact that not all the errors are correctable by the RR method. Note that more variables such as data retention time and operating temperature should be included in the algorithm to make it work in a real situation. For the sake of simplicity, in this work, we limit our analysis only to TID effects to illustrate the benefit of the RR method to recover data in the radiation-prone environment. In addition to FBC, higher TID exposure affects the timing characteristics of the chip, such as erase time. We observed significant increase in the erase time [from 4 ms

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMARI et al.: RADIATION-INDUCED ERROR MITIGATION BY RR TECHNIQUE FOR MLC 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

1039

Fig. 9. (a) Average dosimeter page FBC with error associated with it is shown for different radiation TID. (b) Comparison between the default read and the proposed algorithm is shown for fails at different pages of the same block. (c) Comparison between the default read and the proposed algorithm is shown for average FBC at different TID.

(preirradiation) to 12 ms (postirradiation)] for TID = 50 krad (Si). The peripheral circuits such as charge pumps, decoders, and sense amplifiers might get affected with higher TID, eventually turning the chip nonfunctional. More thorough analysis of the TID effects on the peripheral circuits, leakage current, and the timing characteristics remains an important topic of our future research.
IV. CONCLUSION
We conclude that the RR method is an efficient approach to minimize the TID-induced bit errors in the high-density MLC NAND flash memory. However, efficient implementation of the RR method in the storage system requires detailed characterization of bit error pattern as a function of several variables including absorbed dose, page type, and the location of the page in the 3-D layer. Based on our experimental findings, we propose an algorithm to efficiently implement the RR method in the NAND memory controller. Experimental evaluation shows that the proposed algorithm can ensure data integrity for TID up to 50 krad (Si), which will significantly enhance the radiation tolerance of high-density 3-D MLC NAND-based memory system. The proposed method is easy to implement, does not require any hardware modification, and can be applied in tandem with the existing ECC-based error correction technique.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-mission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology and Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International, Inc. The views expressed in this article do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. DOE or the United States Government.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Gerardin et al., “Radiation effects in flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 1953–1969, Jun. 2013.
[2] M. J. Kay, M. J. Gadlage, A. R. Duncan, D. Ingalls, A. Howard, and T. R. Oldham, “Effect of accumulated charge on the total ionizing dose response of a NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 2945–2951, Dec. 2012.
[3] F. Irom, D. N. Nguyen, R. Harboe-Sorensen, and A. Virtanen, “Evaluation of mechanisms in TID degradation and see susceptibility of singleand multi-level high density NAND flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 2477–2482, Oct. 2011.

[4] J. R. Schwank et al., “Radiation effects in MOS oxides,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1833–1853, Aug. 2008.
[5] P. Kumari et al., “State-of-the-art flash chips for dosimetry applications,” in Proc. IEEE Nucl. Space Radiat. Effects Conf. (NSREC), Jul. 2018, pp. 136–139.
[6] L. T. Clark, D. W. Patterson, C. Ramamurthy, and K. E. Holbert, “An embedded microprocessor radiation hardened by microarchitecture and circuits,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 382–395, Feb. 2016.
[7] A. H. Roach, M. J. Gadlage, A. R. Duncan, J. D. Ingalls, and M. J. Kay, “Interrupted PROGRAM and ERASE operations for characterizing radiation effects in commercial NAND flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 2390–2397, Dec. 2015.
[8] J. D. Ingalls, M. J. Gadlage, A. R. Duncan, M. J. Kay, P. L. Cole, and K. K. Hunt, “Implications of the logical decode on the radiation response of a multi-level cell NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 4451–4456, Dec. 2013.
[9] S. Mittal and J. S. Vetter, “A survey of software techniques for using non-volatile memories for storage and main memory systems,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1537–1550, May 2016.
[10] F. Chen, T. Zhang, and X. Zhang, “Software support inside and outside solid-state devices for high performance and high efficiency,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1650–1665, Sep. 2017.
[11] H. Sun, W. Zhao, M. Lv, G. Dong, N. Zheng, and T. Zhang, “Exploiting intracell bit-error characteristics to improve min-sum LDPC decoding for MLC NAND flash-based storage in mobile device,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 2654–2664, Aug. 2016.
[12] J. Kim and W. Sung, “Low-energy error correction of NAND flash memory through soft-decision decoding,” EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process., vol. 2012, no. 1, p. 195, Sep. 2012.
[13] Home—ONFI. Accessed: Aug. 9, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.onfi.org/
[14] G. Cellere, A. Paccagnella, S. Lora, A. Pozza, G. Tao, and A. Scarpa, “Charge loss after /sup 60/Co irradiation of flash arrays,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 2912–2916, Oct. 2004.
[15] Sandia National Laboratories. Accessed: Feb. 23, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.sandia.gov/
[16] Z. Liu et al., “Analysis of bias effects on the total ionizing dose response in a 180nm technology,” Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res. A, Accel. Spectrom. Detect. Assoc. Equip., vol. 644, no. 1, pp. 48–54, Jul. 2011.
[17] D. N. Nguyen, S. M. Guertin, G. M. Swift, and A. H. Johnston, “Radiation effects on advanced flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1744–1750, Dec. 1999.
[18] A. Varotsou, “Revision: 0 document creation revision: 1 error bar analysis,” TRAD Test Radiat., France, Final Rep. TRAD/ESA/IR/SYN/ AS3/080615, 2015, pp. 1–88.
[19] A. Takeyama et al., “Radiation response of negative gate biased SiC MOSFETs,” Materials, vol. 12, no. 17, p. 2741, Aug. 2019.
[20] M. Bagatin et al., “Total ionizing dose effects in 3-D NAND flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 48–53, Jan. 2019.
[21] P. Kumari, S. Huang, M. Wasiolek, K. Hattar, and B. Ray, “Layerdependent bit error variation in 3-D NAND flash under ionizing radiation,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 2021–2027, Sep. 2020.
[22] M. J. Gadlage, D. I. Bruce, J. D. Ingalls, D. P. Bossev, M. Mckinney, and M. J. Kay, “Directional dependence of Co-60 irradiation on the total dose response of flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 148–154, Jan. 2019.
[23] A. Kavcic and A. Patapoutian, “The read channel,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 96, no. 11, pp. 1761–1774, Nov. 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

