2021 31st International Conference on Field-Programmable Logic and Applications (FPL)

2021 31st International Conference on Field-Programmable Logic and Applications (FPL) | 978-1-6654-3759-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/FPL53798.2021.00053

Optimizing Deep Learning Decoders for FPGA Implementation
E. Kavvousanos and V. Paliouras Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
University of Patras, Greece

Abstract—Recently, Deep Learning (DL) methods have been proposed for use in the decoding of linear block codes. While novel DL decoders show promising error correcting performance, they suffer from computational complexity issues, which prevent their usage with large block codes and make their implementation in digital hardware inefficient. The subject of the presented doctoral research is the design of DL decoding methods with low computational complexity and resource requirements, by applying compression and approximation techniques to the employed Neural Networks. Efficient hardware architectures are expected to be designed for these optimized DL decoders on FPGA devices, which will overcome the current performance limitations.
I. INTRODUCTION
Deep Learning (DL) and Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) have gained extensive attention and have seen extraordinary research accomplishments. Recent research trends in communications show that DL methods are expected to provide solutions to several open problems in the physical (PHY) and medium access control (MAC) layers, through novel extensions and modifications.
This doctoral research focuses on channel decoding, where DL techniques can be applied to develop novel decoding methods. Such decoding methods can rely principally on ANN for their functionality, creating generic decoding algorithms which can be trained to adapt to a specific code and channel. Alternatively, ANN can be integrated into existing decoding algorithms, enhancing their performance.
Nachmani et al. [1] adopt the operation of the Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm, used for decoding with LDPC codes, to construct an ANN that is the unfolded and weighted equivalent of the respective Tanner Graph. The weights of the ANN are obtained by training; therefore, the graph can be optimized for other classes of linear block codes such as BCH. In this work, the BP-NN decoder is shown to achieve maximum-likelihood decoding.
Bennatan et al. [2] propose a Syndrome-based DL decoding approach, which uses a Neural Network framework in accordance with modern Deep Learning techniques. The Syndromebased DL Decoder (SDLD) employs a noise estimation ANN, which identifies the erroneous bits in the received sequence. Similarly, SDLD is shown to achieve maximum-likelihood decoding.
The main issue with the presented methods is that they suffer from the “the curse of dimensionality” which renders the procedure of training and inference, computationally inefficient for moderate and large code block lengths.

As ANN are computationally intensive algorithms, there has been extensive research to compress their size in terms of storage and required computations in order to assist their deployment to low-resource devices. Model compression usually involves weight pruning and quantization to fixed-point words with short bit length. By compressing an ANN, efficient hardware accelerators can be designed that take advantage of the structure of those models [3].
II. OBJECTIVES
As stated, the main drawback of the DL decoding methods is the dimensionality problem, which prohibits the methods that have been proposed to scale to larger code lengths. However, short-length block codes are still of interest, as they can be used in applications which require low latency, such as the Ultra-Reliable Low Latency Communications (URLLC) feature of 5G [4].
The main objectives of the present doctoral research project can be summarized as follows: (i) The development of novel decoding algorithms empowered by DL methods which can be extended to larger block codes. Also, the enhancement of existing decoding schemes with DL methods. Particular interest exists in the utilization of these decoding methods with channels whose statistics are unknown and conventional algorithms fail. (ii) The design of new hardware architectures for the implementation of the DL techniques that meet contradicting design specifications: high performance, low latency and low energy requirements. (iii) The optimization of state-of-the-art ANN topologies for ASIC and FPGA prototyping.
To achieve these objectives, several demanding challenges are required to be successfully addressed, such as maintaining low computational complexity while targeting larger code block sizes. Moreover, low-energy special-purpose hardware for DL needs to be devised, while providing sufficient rates and processing power. Lastly, architectural issues in handling the large amount of memory and data commonly required in DL applications need to be resolved.
III. CONTRIBUTIONS IN THE CONTEXT OF THE THESIS
A main thesis focus, so far, is the optimization of the SDLD [2] in terms of computational complexity and memory requirements. Several preliminary contributions were made in this direction targeting the hardware implementation of this type of decoder. Optimizations have been proposed, applicable at several stages, such as the ANN topology and the training

978-1-6654-3759-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

271

DOI 10.1109/FPL53798.2021.00053

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:47:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I NUMBER OF PARAMETERS REQUIRED BY SYNDROME-BASED DL
DECODING SCHEMES FOR BCH(63,45) CODE

Syndrome-based DL Decoding Scheme
Original [2] Iterative [7]

Required Parameters
955, 485 368, 766

process. Also, post-training optimizations, such as compression, have a critical role to the implementation procedure.
Initially, in the thesis’ context, it was shown that simpler ANN topologies can be employed for the noise estimation stage of the SDLD, which require fewer computations with no significant impact on the achieved coding gain for the case of BCH(63,45) code and AWGN channel [5]. This reduction in computational complexity can reach up to 86% by applying elementary weight pruning and quantization techniques.
Furthermore, in the context of the thesis, a more advanced weight pruning and quantization methodology is applied to the SDLD as disclosed in [6], which involves the constraint of the weights during training. Remarkably, the noise estimation ANN functions without significant performance loss with 80% of its weights pruned. The final compressed Neural Network is then implemented in general purpose DL accelerators (Deep Learning Processing Units - DPU) on an FPGA device. The decoder is capable of achieving a throughput rate of 165 kbps, which means that further optimizations need to be applied in the RTL, to achieve higher rates.
We have also addressed the issue of the required memory to store the weights of an SDLD in [7], where an iterative decoding scheme is proposed based on the original SDLD. The weights are shared between iterations, decreasing by 2.6× the required memory footprint for the case of BCH(63,45) code as seen in Table I, while achieving maximum-likelihood decoding. The main advantage of this method is that more efficient hardware architectures can be designed with fewer memory resources and better memory reusability.
IV. FUTURE WORK
The main issue which needs to be addressed in the near future is the computational complexity and throughput of the SDLD when implemented in an FPGA device. While there have been attempts to compress its size, its computational and memory complexities are still significant.
One way to address this is to apply more aggressive quantization methods such as binary weights to the underlying neural network. When combined with iterative and progressive estimation schemes (cf. [7]), the employed neural network may be more robust to the precision reduction and thus its decoding performance will not be compromised. The main idea here is to trade the precision of the neural network weights for decoding iterations. That is, the SDLD will learn how to use the same low-precision weights recursively. A binary ANN can be implemented efficiently in a FPGA device, as the computationally expensive multiply-accumulate operations are converted to simple bitwise operations and additions.
Another approach, is to use Spiking Neural Networks (SNN). While the training of such networks is still an open

problem, techniques have been proposed which enable the conversion of a pretrained conventional ANN to an SNN. The event-driven functionality of this type of networks makes their hardware implementation more efficient. Several ASIC and FPGA SNN accelerators have been showcased [8],[9]. Experimental transformations from ANN to SNN will be applied to verify if equivalent SNN are good candidates for the specific application.
Following the algorithmic optimizations described above, efficient digital hardware architectures are anticipated, taking into consideration the computational complexity and memory requirements of the decoding algorithm. The inherent parallelism of the underlying ANN will be exploited, with respect to latency, throughput, power consumption and resource allocation. High Level Synthesis (HLS) tools can be used to accelerate the design space exploration and select the most appropriate architecture, which will be then fine-tuned in RTL. Furthermore, if SNN models are proven to be good replacements, then better power savings can be anticipated. The designed hardware will be prototyped on FPGA platforms for experimentation, verification and to provide quantitative and accurate metrics of the achieved contribution.
V. CONCLUSION
In this PhD thesis the main objective is to devise efficient hardware implementations of introduced and recently proposed DL decoders, which will have high performance and require low resources and power. To achieve that, optimizations are needed to the algorithmic, system and RTL levels. By combining weight pruning and quantization along with iterative functionality, with weight sharing between the iterations, the resulting SDLD is expected to overcome current performance bottlenecks. Feasibility of the results has been demonstrated by using extensive FPGA prototyping.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Nachmani, Y. Bachar, E. Marciano et al., “Near Maximum Likelihood Decoding with Deep Learning,” Jan. 2018.
[2] A. Bennatan, Y. Choukroun, and P. Kisilev, “Deep Learning for Decoding of Linear Codes - A Syndrome-Based Approach,” 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), 2018.
[3] S. Han, X. Liu, H. Mao et al., “EIE: Efficient Inference Engine on Compressed Deep Neural Network,” in Proceedings of the 43rd International Symposium on Computer Architecture, ser. ISCA ’16, 2016, pp. 243–254.
[4] M. Shirvanimoghaddam, M. S. Mohammadi, R. Abbas et al., “Short Block-Length Codes for Ultra-Reliable Low Latency Communications,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 130–137, 2019.
[5] E. Kavvousanos, V. Paliouras, and I. Kouretas, “Simplified DeepLearning-based decoders for linear block codes,” 2018 25th IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Circuits and Systems (ICECS), pp. 769–772, 2018.
[6] E. Kavvousanos and V. Paliouras, “Hardware Implementation Aspects of a Syndrome-based Neural Network Decoder for BCH Codes,” 2019 IEEE Nordic Circuits and Systems Conference (NORCAS), pp. 1–6, 2019.
[7] E. Kavvousanos and V. Paliouras, “An Iterative Approach to Syndromebased Deep Learning Decoding,” in 2020 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[8] J. Han, Z. Li, W. Zheng et al., “Hardware implementation of spiking neural networks on FPGA,” Tsinghua Science and Technology, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 479–486, 2020.
[9] M. Davies, N. Srinivasa, T. Lin et al., “Loihi: A Neuromorphic Manycore Processor with On-Chip Learning,” IEEE Micro, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 82–99, 2018.

272 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:47:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

