2021 2nd International Conference on Smart Electronics and Communication (ICOSEC) | 978-1-6654-3368-6/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICOSEC51865.2021.9591960

Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Smart Electronics and Communication (ICOSEC). IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP21V90-ART; ISBN: 978-1-6654-3368-6

Fault Organized Decoders Using Analog VLSI Implementations- A Survey

A.Deepika1 1 Research Scholar, Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, GITAM School of Technology, GITAM (Deemed to be University),
Rudraram-502329, Hyderabad. adeepika.745@gmail.co m

K.Manjunathachari2 2 Professor & HOD, Department of Electronics and
Communication Engineering, GITAM School of Technology, GITAM (Deemed to be University),
Rudraram-502329, Hyderabad.

Abstract— VLSI technology had a key role in the design of most of today's high-tech electronic circuits. Though smaller, less expensive, requiring less power, highly dependable, and full of functionality, VLSI design takes an extended amount of time to manufacture a high-risk product. The complexity of computing of such default coding systems however stands in the way of its application. Many researchers have shown that fault check ing decoders can be construed on the Probability Spread Network as a type of factor graph as a Sum-Product Algorithm operation. The most advanced communication systems are based on fault structured codes. The most famous codes of this kind include turbo codes, low-density parity tests and versions for performing the closest to the theoretical Shannon limit. These are decoded by the 'Generic Summary Model Probability' or by the versions thereof. In this document, many of the most often used fault organizing codes are fully analyzed and investigated.
Keywords: VLSI Technology, Fault Control Decoders, Signal To Noise Ratio, Fault Organized Codes, Optimization Process, Analog Circuits.

I.

INT RODUCT ION

VLSI is 'the approach of integrating thousands of transistors into a single chip' to create the Integrated Circuit (IC)." In 1970 VLSI was created with the introduction of communications and of a complex semiconductor. In reality, prior to the development of VLSI technology, the integrated circuit was quite unrestricted in terms of the functions it could perform. While the VLSI design is not expensive to design, it takes considerable time to arrive at the ideal solution. Additionally, it is necessary to use a number of separate des ign parameters throughout the design process. To find the best solution, the optimization approach utilizes these parameters as variables. It appears that the process was not successful because of the extremely long search method. A number of optimization strategies, particularly for the optimization of the traditional design parameters like whole wire length and area, were created to overcome the present issues in the VLSI design. Further VLSI advances focused on more design objectives and res trictio n s .

The decoding of the defective ordered codes has always been done in digital form, unlike various other signal processing

processes on the receiver. It has been noted recently, however, that the method of probability spread can be transferred naturally to fundamental transistor circuits. These circuits can be used to construct analogue VLSI decoders, low density parity and similar codes, for turbo codes. The advantage of such analogue decoders over digital decoders include better operation speeds or lower electrical usage or both.
More improved semi conductive techniques must be developed to boost processing speed in order to meet the growing computing effort. Unfortunately, the processing speed grows linearly with the clock frequency only if additional parallelism is included in the decoding algorithm. Moreover, the power consumption increased dramatically as complexity and processing speed increased, making the decoding technique not workable for machines and not acceptable for mobile devices.
The graph representations are observed to be fairly normal for fault control coding systems. Consequently, only a few single circuit cells can be duplicated for the appropriate circuits. This allows a circuit implementation to be produced using the files describing the system factor graph if a library providing the requisite circuit cells are provided. Automatic circuit-level synthesis and automatic simulation are difficult for analogue circuits, since analogue design generally is less formal and heuristic than digital design. The default control decoders, however, are general to generate the whole circuit with a few simple cells. This makes the automatic synthesis and modelling of circuits of this type extremely realistic.
The Fault Locator and the Fault Organized Units are both used to correct these errors. The Fault Location Unit determines the Fault location by the correct processing of the redundant bits. The Fault Structured Circuit corrects the errors and retrieves the original digital data for profit. Encoding and decoding units require an encoder circuit to produce redundant bits. This makes the circuit more complex. In order to reduce the difficulty, the Encoder Reuse Technique was implemented, where the same encoder is reused in the decoding section. This model is a primarily a study of the various widely used Fault Organized codes.
In 1950, Hamming introduced the first block codes, a type of block codes with a rich algebraic history. While there is little improvement to the Hamming codes, study into this area has persisted until a decade later the BCH and Reed - Solomon codes were established. The Viterbi algorithm then enhanced

978-1-6654-3368-6/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

506

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:46:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Smart Electronics and Communication (ICOSEC). IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP21V90-ART; ISBN: 978-1-6654-3368-6

the Convolutional Codes and their decoding. But turbo codes could not offer effective power efficiency communication near Shannon's theoretical limit until the 1990s. Shortly after that, another form of code, called the Low Density Parity Check (LDPC), was rediscovered, having the same property approximation capabilities. Turbo codes and LDPC codes are also closely approached using iterative decoding techniques on the sensor channels of the Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN).

Jing Guo et al. [7] suggested a downtime inverter and a PSO algorithm for failure. Such techniques cannot provide the requisite defect tolerance at high data rate if th ere are insufficient redundant elements to map every difficult error. The suggested codes are redundant more than conventional ECCs, the single-stage mainstream coding process is extremely quick and can be upgraded to accommodate many errors compared to BCH codes, which need multi-cycle decoding while giving the requisite degree of dependability.

II. LIT ERAT URE SURVEY
Schoeny, C et al.[1] showed that a number of significant errorcontrol coding techniques can be interpreted for probability networks as a factor graph. The system is composed of an encoder, a decoder, an error locator and a bug fix. In the decoder, the encoder is reused to simplify the device complexity. The encoder here accepts information and processes data to generate vertical and horizontal check bits. The data and the check bits are stored in the memory or transferred to data communication systems after creation of the check bits.
Das, A et al. [2] remarked that the summary product algorithm of probability propagation networks is well suited for analogue VLSIs with exponential current relationships. It's more successful than Hamming. For a word with a lower decoding time, MC corrects MCUs. In MC, hammers are capable of observing two bit faults, but only if two bits of vertical syndrome are enabled can these faults be repaired.
Das et al. [3] created similar BiCMOS-based decoders. The template can guarantee some performance, but strong error correcting codes are more complex and use lots of energy, an essential limit for interconnections in chips. In addition, FEC is unable to rectify errors and decoder faults when errors exceed the ability to fix the coding error.
The computer-aided design of integrated mixed signal and analogue circuit were studying by Alam, I et al.[5] and other scholars. Generally, they found that there were no robust commercial CAD tools that could other than circuit simulators support or automate analogue circuit design. Some of the key reasons for this lack of automation are that analogue design is generally seen as being less official, heuristic and knowledgeintensive than the digital design, and that analogue designers have yet to produce a high degree of abstraction which protects all data from high-level design at the device and on the process level.
In order to maximize the chances of a better solution being generated, Gherman et al.[6] has created a constrained overall optimization based on the League Championship Algorithm (LCA). Different bit errors because of non-persistent failures are permitted but decoding is slow and difficult. It can accept as many failures as spare columns can fix, which is insufficient in the current sense with a high bit error rate. In certain circumstances, review bits and replacement rows and columns are employed to create a combined fault tolerance.

To keep power consumption in the work plan and selection of voltage at low levels, Pedro Reviriego et al [8] have applied the Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) algorithm, lowering overall power in a multi-processor framework. In order to rectify a single error, the information is duplicated, and a parity check bit adding. To remedy two-bit burst mistakes, symbol error correcting codes are used. To strengthen the resilience to errors in case of bursting, a large bus can be broken up into smaller groups and the groups can be coded independently. In order to limit the possibility of several errors in the same group, the output of these small groups can be additionally interlaced. When several random and explosive errors occur, earlier techniques lose efficiency.
In the shift adder and subtractor design, Ahilán.A et al. [9] optimized the field of constant, digit-serial multiplication with the Gate level optimization field. A single bit error or two adjacent bits error, or a 3-bit explosion error may be corrected by the design, or a 4-bit explosion fault can be detected. This can be done by adding an additional code piece that takes longer.
In order to optimize the surface and the wire length, J. D. Warnock al. [10] provided an ACO method for the VLSI chip design. Parity checks and cyclic redunds controls are the models offered utilized for error detection methods (CRCs). The receiver uses the test sum according to the technique applied to the transmitter to execute an error detection procedure. If the recipient identifies mistakes, the recipient sends the transmitter with the feedback channel negative ACK Information (NACK). The addressee would otherwise send a positive reco gnition acknowledgement(ACK). The retransmission is continued until an error-free packet is received by the receiver. Moreover, if the receivers get notification in a specified interval, the transmitter transmits the packet.
In order to minimize design complexity of chips, J. Tausch et al. [11] suggested a Clock Tree Optimization for Stochastic Perturbing. A communication system uses the proposed concept. In a transmitter packet a controlled redundancy is utilized using an ECC which allows a specified amount of mistake on the receiver side to be detected and corrected. Channel encoding is a method for the transmitter to add redundancy in which the technique converts information bits to word code. During channel decoding, the error can be recognized and repaired to the recipient. The re-transmission is thus eliminated.

978-1-6654-3368-6/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

507

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:46:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Smart Electronics and Communication (ICOSEC). IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP21V90-ART; ISBN: 978-1-6654-3368-6

P. Reviriego et al. [12] enhanced the efficient use of colonial hybrid Tabouan modelling and produced a great convergence of the VLSI physical architecture. The established model req uires extra hardware that is surprisingly negligible as the interpreting equipment is employed in the same way to confirm it blurredly. For example, the extra region required to understand the course of action was essentially about 1 percent for huge word sizes.

are generated. This complete procedure is known as the process of writing. In addition to the initially specified control bits for data recovery, the machine gets stored or transferred data. The unit is now being reused so that a new set of check bits can be produced using the same way from the received data. This collection of test bits is known as better understanding s y n d ro mes .

In order to accelerate the run-time and obtain high chance of a DC fixed order compensator design, Chen et al. [15] addressed the constrained hybrid evolution optimization.. If the erroneous number of bits is t or fewer, the proposed model will correct quickly. If a value of one is received, the bit is incorrect and must be repaired. The 2 t check bits are re-calculated. Otherwise, the bit is correct. This ensures error correction, since the remaining t-1 mistakes affect the t-1 check bits in the worst case so that the majority of t+1 continues to enable the error bit correction.
Fault Organized Codes

In Chen, CL et al.[16] multi-target optimisation was utilised to optimise each group's positioning and automate the positioning task for analogue integrated circuit architectures. The amount of bits per symbol in this approach depends on the rate of coding. The code rate value is equal to one for the uncoded system, but for the coded system the code rate value is less than one. When comparing the results between uncoded and coded systems, the energy consumption should be considered because of encodings, decodes, redundancy transmission of extra bits and also the order of modulation. In contrast to transmission and decoding in most circumstances the energy consumption of the encoding is insignificant.

This section focuses on the concept of simple fault organizing mechanisms that are frequently found in storage and communication systems.
Method of Simple Hamming Codes
In the case of simple Hamming codes, the Fault is found by means of parity check bits. Parity check bits are created with reference to the location of the digital data bit. For example, 3 parity check bits are needed for 4-bit data. Whereas 5-bit data needs 4 parity check bits. Only single errors can be resolved by this code. In order to make the hamming code effective enough to correct single errors and detect double errors, an additional check bit is inserted at the end of the word to accept all data bits. The other check bits can only compare the positions of the specific bit.

Cheung et al. [17] have implemented Semi-defined Global Optimization-based programming to resolve the Multi-Row Facility Layout Problem in VLSI architecture. The model explains that a mathematical bit error rate model is derived for error-protected memory disorders -correcting and scrubbing codes. This model is compared to the predicted rate of SRAM sub-100 nm memory disturbances in space environments.
The Chia-Hsiang Chen et al.[18] space research has been further expanded using Nelder – Mead simplex optimization for analogue company IP with reduced computer time. This model is significantly higher than the previous technology. Due to the constraint of the scanning memory pace, single-bit ECC repairs become unfeasible. The overhead needed to safeguard the memory with a triple-bit ECC correction is evaluated in relation to a scaling penalty for location, speed and power of about 2X process generation.

Matrix Codes
Single Fault Correction, Double Fault Detection, Double Adjacent Fault Correction, Codes generally known as SFCDFD-DAFC Codes are implemented in order to address the limitation of previous Fault Correction Methods. Here, the data is organised in a matrix and is divided into several categories. From this arrangement, the parity bits are measured and these bits are applied to the word itself in an interleaving form. The biggest downside of these codes was that, under such special circumstances, neighbouring errors were not detected successfully. In particular, in cases of adjacent errors occurring at the extreme ends of two classes, it was not possible to detect faults. The explanation for this was the data grouping pattern.
The device comprises an encoder, a decoder, a fault locator and a fault fix. In the decoder, the encoder is reused to simplify the device complexity. The encoder here accepts information and processes data to generate vertical and horizontal check bits. The data or the control bits are saved in the memory or transferred via data communication systems when the check bits

Cho et al.[19] have reduced the vector test counting by applying fault-based test vector optimization to test the typical ISCAS circuits. A degree of redundancy is implemented in this architecture in order to detect errors. Code-based techniques work by providing a redundant representation of numbers with the property that certain errors can be identified and often corrected by evaluating and managing the resulting incorrect number.
The adaptive hybrid Memetic algorithm was employed by Alameldeen et al.[22] in order to optimize wire length, maximum temperature and mean chip temperature. Soft and hard errors can also cause more system-level gross-grained failures. Rare errors can be identified by the network interconnection fabric, but cannot be shielded from other layers of the device. In addition, entire nodes can become non responsive due to power failures or intermittent interface or runtime errors.
Cavalheiro et al. [23] have analysed some of the dynamic issues related to concurrent fault detection (CFD) circuits. These

978-1-6654-3368-6/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

508

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:46:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Smart Electronics and Communication (ICOSEC). IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP21V90-ART; ISBN: 978-1-6654-3368-6

equations are used in applications for signal processing. Some complex models are used to minimise computational complexity, delay, and region of circuit implementation. The chip area of the proposed scheme is too big. Datta et al. [24] introduced a minimal Overhead Detection and Correction (ODAC) technique. This will overcome the weak scalability and improve the throughput. This has been shown under 65 nm CMOS technology in terms of operation, voltage and temperature. Hamming et al. [25] introduced a digital time-todigital converter (DTDC) with improved resolution and throughput. On-chip digital calibration is processed with the help of the most important bits. The method is applied in compliance with the 0.13 μm CMOS technology.
The efficient log-like beliefs-decoding of LDPC codes and their reduced-complexity counterparts was presented in Hsiao et al.[26]. There are two main ways in the BP-based approximation to simplify check node updates by including either a standardization term or an additive offset term. Their results demonstrated that BP decoding algorithms, both offset and standardized, perform quite similarly with BP, while at the same time have advantages in terms of hardware implementation. The BCJR algorithm with the Turbo d ecoder can prove that the conviction of Pearl has propagated through the Bayesian network. The intricate probability features of numerous variables were calculated using a graph or a network relationship organization.
The LDPC decoder invented by Huang et al. [27] is a wave pipeline concept that decreases the decoding process delay. This study revealed a thorough internal architecture and its hardware use complexity. Their summary report revealed that the design line decreases overhead and overhead latency. Imani et al. [28] introduced the design for an LDPC memory-efficient decoder by lowering the duration of decoding information quantization by minimizing hardware complexity. In addition, the decoder design was designed to reduce the amount of memory bits by a short word length with assured bit error rate (BER) using two quantization methods. The results showed that the two quantification approaches decreased hardware complexity with extremely low decoding efficiency loss.
Martins et al. [29] have developed a fault detection module for complex multilevel sliding observer converters. Wilkerson et al. [30] proposed an error correction code survey in computer memory semiconductor applications. It defines four groups based on the structure of the error-correcting codes for the memory of the semiconductor. The implementation of Fault Detection and Correction shall be processed in this method by means of techniques designed to increase the ability to correct soft errors.
III. PROPOSED MODELS
It is clearly shown that graphic representations are often highly regular for fault-organized coding schemes. Consequently, only a few single circuit cells can be duplicated for the appropriate circuits. This allows a circuit implementation to be produced using the files describing the system factor graph if a library providing the requisite circuit cells is provided. Automatic circuit-level synthesis and automatic simulation are difficult for

analogue circuits, since analogue design generally is less formal and heuristic than digital design.
However, the challenges of modelling and implementation have not been examined adequately. In addition, no scientists have developed a general approach of design automation. On the basis of the inconvenience noticed in the survey, it is very necessary to present a model providing an analogous implementation methodology for fault-organized decoders that alleviate the problems mentioned in this report.
The development with typical fault-organized decoders (FOD) of the high level simulation approach. Because the Bit Fault Rate (BFR) curve requires a high level simulation approach and the development of an automatic simulation method, a substantial part of the simulation task is to achieve. Due to the possibility to describe fault organized decoders through their factor chart description, a tool is created to generate FOD simulation files from the analogue fault organized decoder factor graph describing. After designing the model, the design process for the organized analogue failure decoders needs to be much faster and cheaper than the present methods that increase performance.

IV. CONCLUSION
This paper analyses many current coding approaches used in digital systems to fix defects. The organized codes are an encoder and a decoder. In accordance with the fault organized scheme, the encoder unit creates redundant bits. The digital information is sent or stored in the memory after the redundant bits are formed. The redundant bits that have been formed before are compared to the superfluous bits just decoded. Any discrepancy in redundant bits indicates a mistake. Along with an adequate increase in the field and power analysis, some systems do not do a time analysis. There is no development in several of the other works that are evaluated. A fault-organized system can be built with more capacity, shorter overhead delays, reduced power consumption and reduced area use. The analysis can be effectively performed by piping existing algorithms to minimize the overhead delay. The area can also be lowered and power consumption can be significantly decreased by changing the adders and other elements used in the implementation.
REFERENCES

[1]. Schoeny, C.; Sala, F.; Gottscho, M.; Alam, I.; Gupta, P.;

Dolecek, L. Context-Aware Resiliency: Unequal

Message

Protection

for

Ran d o m-A cces s

Memories. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 2019, 65, 6146–

6159.

[2]. Das, A.; Touba, N.A. Low Complexity Burst Fault

Organized Codes to Correct MBUs in SRAMs. In

Proceedings of the ACM Great Lakes Symposium on

VLSI (GLSVLSI), Chicago, IL, USA, 23–25 May 2018;

pp. 219–224.

978-1-6654-3368-6/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

509

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:46:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Smart Electronics and Communication (ICOSEC). IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP21V90-ART; ISBN: 978-1-6654-3368-6

[3]. A. Das and N. A. Touba, "Systematic b-adjacent symbol Fault Organized reed-solomon codes with parallel decoding", Proc. IEEE VLSI Test Symp., pp. 1-6, 2018.
[4]. A. Das and N. A. Touba, "Low complexity burst Fault Organized codes to correct MBUs in SRAMs", Proc. ACM Great Lakes Symp. VLSI, pp. 219-224, 2018.
[5]. Alam, I.; Schoeny, C.; Dolecek, L.; Gupta, P. Parity++: Lightweight FaultCorrection for Last Level Caches. In Proceedings of the IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks Workshops (DSN-W), Luxembourg City, Luxembourg, 25–28 June 2018; pp. 114–120.
[6]. V. Gherman, S. Evain, N. Seymour, and Y. Bonhomme, Generalized parity-check matrices for SEC-DED codes with fixed parity, in Proc. IEEE On-Line Testing Symp., Jul. 2011, pp. 198–20.
[7]. Jing Guo, Liyi Xiao, Zhigang Mao, and Qiang Zhao ,Enhanced Memory Reliability against Multiple Cell Upsets Using Decimal Matrix Code, IEEE Transactions On Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, March 2014.
[8]. Pedro Reviriego, Salvatore Pontarelli, Juan Antonio Maestro, and Marco Ottavi, A Method to Construct Low Delay Single FaultCorrection Codes for Protecting Data Bits Only, IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 479 483, March 2013
[9]. Ahilan.A and Deepa.P ,Modified Decimal Matrix Codes in FPGA Configuration Memory for Multiple Bit Upsets, IEEE January 2015.
[10]. J. D. Warnock, Y.-H. Chan, S. M. Carey, H. Wen,P. J. Meaney, G. Gerwig and W. V. Huott ,Circuit and physical design implementation of the microprocessor chip for the Enterprise system, IEEE J. SolidState Circuits, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 151–163,Jan. 2012.
[11]. J. Tausch, Simplified birthday statistics and hamming EDAC, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 474– 478, Apr. 2009.
[12]. P. Reviriego, S. Liu, J. A. Maestro, S. Lee, N. A. Touba and R. Datta, "Implementing triple adjacent Faultcorrection in double Faultcorrection orthogonal latin square codes", Proc. IEEE Symp. Defect Fault Tolerance, pp. 167-171, 2013.
[13]. P. Reviriego, M. F. Flanagan, S.-F. Liu and J. A. Maestro, "Multiple cell upset correction in memories using difference set codes", IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.-I: Regular Papers, vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 2592-2599, Nov. 2012.
[14]. P. Reviriego, S. Pontarelli, A. Evans and J. A. Maestro, "A class of SEC-DED-DAEC codes derived from orthogonal latin square codes", IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 968-972, May 2015.
[15]. Chen, CH, Blaauw, D, Sylvester, D & Zhang, Z 2014, ‗Design and Evaluation of Confidence-Driven ErrorResilient Systems‘, in IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. no. 8, pp. 17271737.

[16]. Chen, CL & Hsiao, MY ‗Fault Organized codes for semiconductor memory applications: A state of the art review‘, IBM J. Res. Develop., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 124
[17]. Cheung, TSD, Long, JR, Vaed, K, Volant, R, Chinthakindi, A, Schnabel, CM, Florkey, J, He, ZX & Stein, K 2003, ‗Differentiallyshielded monolithic inductors,‖ in Proc. IEEE Custom Integr. Circuits Conf.,Sept. 2003, pp. 95–98.
[18]. Chia-Hsiang Chen 2014, ‗Low-Power and ErrorResilient VLSI Circuits and Systems‘, University of Michigan
[19]. Cho, H, Leem, L & Mitra, S 2012, ‗ERSA: Faultresilient system architecture for probabilistic applications ‘, IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 546–558.
[20]. Chowdhury, I & Ma, D 2009, ‗Design of reconfigurable and robust integrated SC power converter for selfpowered energy-efficient devices. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics‘, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 4018-4028.
[21]. Adalid, L.S.; Gil, P.; Gil-Tomás, J.; Gr, D.; BarazaCalvo, J.C. Ultrafast Single FaultCorrection Codes for Protecting Processor Registers. In Proceedings of the IEEE European Dependable Computing Conference (EDCC), Paris, France, 7–11 September 2015; pp. 144– 154.
[22]. Alameldeen, A.R.; Wagner, I.; Chishti, Z.; Wu, W.; Wilkerson, C.; Lu, S.-L. Energy-Efficient Cache Design Using Variable-Strength Error-Correcting Codes. In Proceedings of the ACM International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), San Jose, CA, USA, 4–8 June 2011; pp. 461–471.
[23]. Cavalheiro, D, Moll, F, & Valtchev, S 2016 ‗A batteryless, selfsustaining RF energy harvesting circuit with TFETs for µW power applications‘. In New Circuits and Systems Conference (NEWCAS), 2016 14th IEEE International, pp. 1-4.
[24]. Datta, R.; Touba, N.A. Post-Manufacturing ECC Customization Based on Orthogonal Latin Square Codes and Its Application to Ultra-Low Power Caches. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Test Conference, Austin, TX, USA, 2–4 November 2010.
[25]. Hamming, R.W. FaultDetecting and Fault Organized Codes. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 1950, 29, 147–160.
[26]. Hsiao, M.Y.; Bossen, D.C.; Chien, R.T. Orthogonal Latin Square codes. IBM J. Res. Dev. 1970, 14, 390– 394.
[27]. Huang, P.; Subedi, P.; He, X.; He, S.; Zhou, K. FlexECC: Partially relaxing ECC of MLC SSD for better cache performance. In Proceedings of the USENIX Annual Technical Conference, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 19–20 June 2014; pp. 489–500.
[28]. Imani, M.; Patil, S.; Rosing, T. Low Power Data-Aware STT-RAM Based Hybrid Cache Architecture. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Quality Electronic Design (ISQED), Santa Clara, CA, USA, 15–16 March 2016; pp. 88–94.
[29]. Martins, M.; Matos, J.M.; Ribas, R.P.; Reis , A.; Schlinker, G.; Rech, L.; Michelsen, J. Open Cell Library in 15nm FreePDK Technology. In Proceedings of the ACM International Symposium on Physical Design

978-1-6654-3368-6/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

510

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:46:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Smart Electronics and Communication (ICOSEC). IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP21V90-ART; ISBN: 978-1-6654-3368-6
(ISPD), Monterey, CA, USA, 29 March–1 April 2015; pp. 171–178. [30]. Wilkerson, C.; Gao, H.; Alameldeen, A.R.; Chishti, Z.; Khellah, M.; Lu, S.-L. Trading off Cache Capacity for Reliability to Enable Low Voltage Operation. In Proceedings of the ACM International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), Beijing, China, 21–25 June 2008; pp. 203–214.

978-1-6654-3368-6/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

511

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:46:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

