A100 Vol. 13, No. 1 / January 2021 / Journal of Optical Communications and Networking

Research Article

Hard-input FEC evaluation using Markov models for equalization-induced correlated errors in 50G PON

A

M

,* D

V ,N

K

A

L

W

, AND V

H

Nokia Bell Labs, 600 Mountain Avenue, Murray Hill, New Jersey 07974, USA *Corresponding author: amitkumar.mahadevan@nokia-bell-labs.com

,A D ,

Received 10 July 2020; revised 24 September 2020; accepted 25 September 2020; published 4 December 2020 (Doc. ID 402593)

Channel measurements for a 50G passive optical network (PON) show a significant amount of intersymbol interference (ISI) due to chromatic dispersion (CD) and the use of low-cost, bandwidth-limited 25 Gbaud class components. The channel characteristics at the input of the forward error correction (FEC) decoder are measured for several receiver equalization schemes, and the error correlation at the output of each equalizer is characterized using a sub-class of a Fritchman’s Markov model. This model is used to generate error sequences that match the observed correlation statistics, and these sequences are then used to evaluate the performance of a candidate low-density parity-check (LDPC) code with lifting factor 256 and hard-input decoding. It is shown that for a bandwidth-limited 50G PON system with 83 ps/nm dispersion, the optical power sensitivity penalty (OPSP) due to a reduction in error correction performance caused by correlated errors is 0.3–0.6 dB. Precoding, i.e., differential encoding of the input data and differential decoding, helps to reduce the OPSP for some equalizers, but the penalty increases for other equalizers. The use of a 256-bit segment-interleaver only marginally improves the decoding performance, whereas bit-interleaving across four codewords reduces the penalty to within 0.05 dB relative to the binary symmetric channel. © 2020 Optical Society of America
https://doi.org/10.1364/JOCN.402593

1. INTRODUCTION
Hard decision input low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been adopted for forward error correction (FEC) in several modern communications systems such as the IEEE 802.3ca 25 Gb/s per wavelength passive optical network (PON) [1]. The binary symmetric channel (BSC) model is predominantly used for FEC performance evaluation with hard decision inputs, while the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with binary signaling is the model of choice for soft decision inputs. Both these models ignore the correlation among errors that are expected at the input to the LDPC decoder in a realistic 50G PON system.
To address the concern of performance of LDPC codes for channels with correlated errors, the 802.3ca LDPC code performance was evaluated using a Gilbert burst error channel model consisting of a two-state Markov chain that emulates the error behavior at the output of a decision feedback equalizer (DFE) prior to FEC decoding [2]. A significant bit-error rate (BER) penalty was observed. This was addressed in the IEEE 802.3ca standard [1] by including two features: (a) the option to perform differential encoding/decoding, referred to as “precoding”; and (b) an interleaver operating on blocks of

256 bits using a scheme based on an Omega network [3], here referred to as -interleaving, in order to improve the LDPC code performance in the presence of correlated errors [2].
The ITU-T is currently developing a 50 Gb/s per wavelength PON standard, provisionally referred to as G.hsp [4]. Non-return to zero (NRZ) binary signaling, a reach of 20 km, and a downstream (DS) wavelength window of 1342 ± 2 nm have been agreed upon for 50G PON [4]. This implies that the PON downlink must tolerate a worst-case chromatic dispersion (CD) of 77 ps/nm [5]. At the time of writing, the IEEE 802.3ca [1] LDPC mother code is on the verge of being selected for G.hsp as well.
To keep costs low, leveraging components from the data center ecosystem is key [6]. Avalanche photodiodes (APDs) are likely to be widely used in 50G PON receivers. However, 50G class APDs are still under development and are not expected to be cost-effective in the foreseeable future. Hence, the use of lower bandwidth 25 Gbaud class APDs is anticipated. On the other hand, 50 Gbaud class data center electro-absorption modulator lasers (EMLs) are already available. Even though these do not operate at 1342 nm, it is expected that they can be

1943-0620/A2u1t/h0o1riAze1d0l0ic-e1n1seJdouusrenlaiml ©ited20to2:1YOonpsteici UalnSivo. Dcioewtynlooaf dAemd eornicJaune 24,2026 at 11:44:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Research Article

Vol. 13, No. 1 / January 2021 / Journal of Optical Communications and Networking A101

adapted to the 50G DS PON wavelength in the near future, paving the way for commercial use.
At the same time, 50G PON must minimally offer a similar range in reach and optical budgets as previous lower rate systems. Since the dispersion tolerance of optical systems scales inversely with the square of the symbol rate [7,8], 50G PON is much less tolerant to CD-induced intersymbol interference (ISI) as compared to lower rate systems. Further, for EMLs, the chirp, extinction ratio (ER), and transmit power are governed by the choice of bias voltage [9]. Typical chirp values are expected to range from near zero to positive; operation in the high-transparency region to meet the transmit power requirements may necessitate operation with positive chirp, which further reduces the CD tolerance at the considered DS wavelength [9]. Consequently, at these high symbol rates, complex receiver equalization schemes such as maximum likelihood sequence estimation (MLSE) or continuous-time linear equalizer (CTLE) with feed-forward equalizer (FFE) and DFE are necessary to combat the ISI introduced by limited bandwidth components as well as reduced tolerance to CD [7].
In our previous work [10], the benefits of receiver side equalization for bandwidth and dispersion limited 50 Gb/s NRZ PON were demonstrated for experimental measurements, and the error cluster distribution (ECD) was used as a metric to characterize the correlation among hard errors at the equalizer output (LDPC decoder input). A model based on Fritchman’s Markov chains [11] was developed to achieve an accurate fit to the ECD data from measurements, and then used as a generative model to evaluate LDPC code performance down to output BERs of 1E-12. The evaluations revealed a reduction in the input BER required to achieve the desired target output BER of 1E-12 for correlated errors as compared to the BSC, which translates to a reduction in receiver sensitivity at the target FEC output BER of 1E-12; this, in turn, leads to a non-negligible optical power sensitivity penalty (OPSP).
In this paper, we provide a detailed analysis of the work of [10] and extend the evaluation to consider the impact of precoding and -interleaving. In addition, we also evaluate the impact of bit-interleaving over multiple codewords, a technique that is well known in the literature. In the sequel, we refer to bit-interleaving across L codewords as L-interleaving, to clearly differentiate from -interleaving. Unlike -interleaving, L-interleaving does introduce significant additional memory requirements at both the transmitter and receiver as well as an associated processing latency burden; the latter is of particular concern as newer generation PON systems are also being considered as candidates for low-latency 5G X-haul [12]. Nevertheless, the transition to higher data rates, where the penalties due to correlated error become worse, also opens up the possibility for considering L-interleaving since the codeword duration and transmission latency scales inversely with the data rate for the same codeword length. In fact, the idea of L-interleaving as a possible solution to mitigate the penalty from correlated errors has recently gained traction in the G.hsp standardization community [13].
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the 50G PON transmission experiments and demonstrates the improvements obtained by advanced equalization schemes. Next, we characterize the error correlation at the equalizer

output using the ECD metric in Section 3. A methodology to accurately represent and reproduce the ECD from measurements using Fritchman’s Markov chain model (FMM) is presented in Section 4. Section 5 details the LDPC code evaluation framework using the FMM model and optional precoding, -interleaving, and L-interleaving. LDPC code performance results down to output BERs of 1E-12 (the target FEC output BER for PON systems) are presented and analyzed in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 provides the conclusions of this paper and suggestions for future research.
2. 50G PON TRANSMISSION EXPERIMENTS WITH RECEIVER EQUALIZATION
Figure 1 shows the experimental setup for optical transmission measurements with 50 Gb/s NRZ signaling at 1342 nm. The primary objective of the experiments is to study receiver equalization in order to compensate for receiver side bandwidth limitations and fiber dispersion in DS 50G PON. A full bandwidth Mach–Zehnder modulator (MZM) is employed since an EML with adequate bandwidth at the desired wavelength was not readily available. The ER of the MZM is tuned to about 6 dB to match that expected of typical 50G PON EMLs, while the chirp factor is adjusted to a value of −0.2 (near the lower end expected for typical 50G PON EMLs) to adopt a conservative approach for transmitter contribution to ISI in the presence of fiber dispersion. The transmit power at the MZM output is +3 dBm; here, we note that link-budget analysis is not a target of this study.
The receiver consists of a 25 Gbaud class APD and transimpedance amplifier (TIA); similar devices are expected to be used in DS 50G PON receivers. Measurements are performed for both back-to-back (b2b) transmission and transmission over 30 km of our standard single-mode fiber (SSMF) corresponding to 83 ps/nm of dispersion. In alignment with previous work in the literature [7], the fiber length was specifically chosen to ensure coverage for the worst case dispersion of 77 ps/nm for the 50G PON downlink. The received signal is captured by an oscilloscope and equalized offline using either (a) a three-tap MLSE or (b) a CTLE with a five-tap FFE and one-tap DFE (CTLE + DFE). The equalizers are trained until sufficiently converged before determining BER and error statistics.
Fig. 1. Experimental setup for 50G optical transmission at 1342 nm. DAC, digital-to-analog converter; ECL, external cavity laser; MZM, Mach–Zehnder modulator; APD, avalanche photodiode; TIA, trans-impedance amplifier.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:44:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A102 Vol. 13, No. 1 / January 2021 / Journal of Optical Communications and Networking

Research Article

Fig. 2. BER versus ROP with and without equalization: (a) CTLE + DFE, (b) three-tap MLSE. Note: (a) The performance of various schemes is compared at the FEC input BER of 1E-2 without considering the impact of correlated errors on the LDPC performance. (b) The 25 Gb/s NRZ measurement was carried out at 1310 nm where the APD responsivity was higher than at 1342 nm.

Figures 2(a) and 2(b) show the corresponding BER versus received optical power (ROP) for 50 Gb/s CTLE + DFE and MLSE (three-tap) equalization, respectively, in comparison to the unequalized 50 Gb/s performance. Curves are shown for b2b and 30 km SSMF transmission (83 ps/nm dispersion). The unequalized performance not only shows poor sensitivity, but also a large optical path penalty (OPP) of about 2 dB due to the insertion of 30 km SSMF. This penalty is in the same range as that reported from simulations in [14]. The BER versus ROP performance for 25 Gb/s NRZ with 25 Gbaud class components is also shown for reference (dark blue curve); note that this measurement was carried out at 1310 nm where the APD responsivity was higher.
If we compare the equalization schemes at an output BER equaling the typical LDPC hard decision input BER threshold of 1E-2, we see that the MLSE provides a gain of 3 dB in the b2b case and 4.4 dB for 30 km SSMF. A significant portion of the equalization is devoted to overcoming the bandwidth limitation; yet, the impact of CD is not negligible and leads to a 0.7 dB residual penalty after MLSE equalization. The CTLE + DFE performs slightly worse and provides a gain of 2.8 dB for b2b and 4.1 dB for 30 km SSMF, and the residual CD penalty is 0.8 dB.
We see that these receiver-side equalization schemes not only provide more than 4 dB sensitivity improvement for 30 km SSMF transmission at the hard-input BER threshold of 1E-2, but also reduce the OPP arising from the insertion of 30 km SSMF (as compared to b2b transmission) to less than 1 dB. Furthermore, in cases with positive chirp at the transmitter where the unequalized DS OPP may become excessive [14], it will likely be necessary to include equalization to obtain a working communication system. Clearly, receiver equalization schemes are expected to be a key enabler for 50G PON. Nevertheless, as we shall see in the following sections, comparing the equalization schemes at the fixed input BER to the LDPC decoder of 1E-2 is not accurate since it does not account for the adverse impact of correlated errors induced by the equalization schemes on the LDPC code performance.

3. ERROR CORRELATION CHARACTERIZATION
Equalization schemes typically use the received signals over multiple symbols to determine the value of the received signal at a specific symbol. It follows that this process is likely to introduce correlation among errors at the equalizer output. We employ the ECD, i.e., the distribution of probabilities of consecutive error events relative to the probability of single errors, as a metric to characterize correlation among errors at the equalizer output.
The ECD has been previously used to characterize the error behavior of PON systems [2,15]. In fact, the two-state Markov chain [16,17] used in [2] for evaluating LDPC codes models an ECD defined by a constant ratio between probabilities of consecutive errors for an arbitrary average probability of biterror. This framework was used as a model for characterizing error correlation at the output of a DFE.
Figure 3 shows the ECD as a function of the cluster length. For reference, the blue dashed line with open circles shows the ECD for a BSC with an average BER of p = 1E-2 (denoted as BSCp ); for the BSCp , the ECD can be approximated well by the function ECDBSCp (n) = pn−1, where n is the number of consecutive errors. A positive correlation among consecutive errors for the same average BER of p is indicated by an ECD that deviates to the right of ECDBSCp .
Solid lines with filled markers indicate ECD from measurement data for points in Fig. 2 near or above the 1E-2 BER threshold for cases with and without equalization. All plotted measurement data correspond to 50 Gb/s experiments unless noted otherwise.
When 25 Gb/s experiments are carried out with the same APD-TIA, the ECD of the b2b non-equalized received signal is very close to that of the BSC corresponding to the average BER, which is an indication that there is practically no correlation (ISI). However, even for a 50 Gb/s transmission system without equalization, the ECD deviates from that of the BSC, thus showing the effect of ISI. After MLSE equalization, the relative probability of longer error clusters

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:44:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Research Article
100 10-1 10-2

Vol. 13, No. 1 / January 2021 / Journal of Optical Communications and Networking A103

100

BSC (Pe=0.01)

MLSE b2b

Gilbert (b=0.5)

4-st. FMM fit

25G b2b uneq.

CTLE+DFE 30km

30km uneq.

4-st. FMM fit

b2b uneq.

CTLE+DFE b2b

MLSE 30km

4-st. FMM fit

4-st. FMM fit

50G Equalized

Prob. of cons. error event Prob. of cons. error event

10-3

25G

50G Unequalized

Fig. 3.

10-4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 Consecutive errors

10-1

2

3

Consecutive errors

ECD for 25 Gb/s and 50 Gb/s measurements and four-state FMM fit to post-equalization ECD data (zoomed-in view on right).

increases significantly. This effect is even more pronounced

with CTLE + DFE, where, for instance, after 30 km transmis-

sion with equalization, the probability of three clusters roughly

equals that of two clusters, and probabilities of longer clusters

decrease at a roughly constant relative ratio of about 0.46.

Note that the error data for the computation of the ECD was

extracted from measurements at a BER near 1E-2; this error

data consisted of about 3E4 errors. Consequently, points on

the ECD curves with probabilities around and below 1E-3 are

based on a smaller number of consecutive error events and have

a higher statistical variation.

The red dashed line with open squares also shows the ECD

for the Gilbert model with b = 0.5 [2]. This model is shown

in Fig. 4 for reference; it consists of two states: G, the good (or

error-free) state, and B, the bad (or error) state. The re-entrant

probabilities for G and B are g and b, respectively. The value

of b was chosen as 0.5, while the value of g was then deter-

mined

from

the

average

BER,

Pe ,

as

g

=

1−(2−b ) Pe 1− Pe

.

For

this

model, the ECD is independent of Pe and g ; it only depends

on b and can be expressed as ECDGb(n) = bn−1.

Markov models have been extensively used to characterize

the error propagation at the output of simple DFEs [18,19].

While 3M states are required in general for an M-tap DFE for

NRZ transmission [18], lumping error states at each DFE tap

Fig. 4. Two-state Gilbert model [2], where a transition into the bad state B results in an error (e = 1), while transition into the good state G does not result in an error (e = 0).

can reduce the number of required states to 2M [19]. Thus, a two-state Gilbert model captures the error behavior at the output of a simple one-tap DFE. Further, in this case, when the DFE tap magnitude exceeds half the cursor, the error bursts become severe even at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [18]; the two-state Gilbert model with b = 0.5 then models the ECD seen at the output of a single-tap DFE in the limit of infinite SNR. Nevertheless, from Fig. 3, we observe that the Gilbert model is not adequate for accurately representing the ECD observed at the equalizer output from realistic 50G optical transmission experiments. While this observation is rather obvious for the case with CTLE + DFE equalization, even in the case of MLSE equalization, a change of slope in the ECD is, in fact, noticed on closer inspection (see zoomed-in view of Fig. 3).
4. IMPROVED ECD MODELING: FRITCHMAN’S MARKOV MODELS
In order to more accurately represent the ECD from measurements, we employ a generalization of the Gilbert model due to Fritchman [11], who proposed the use of partitioned Markov chains to model the ECD and the error-free run distribution (EFRD), i.e., the gap between two errors, for communications channels. Subsequently, the FMM has been extensively used for error modeling in wireless communications [20].
The cumulative EFRD behavior from the 50G measurements after equalization is shown in Fig. 5. Unlike the ECD, in the case of the EFRD, we plot the cumulative distribution, since the EFRD for each run length exhibits noisy behavior due to the limited number of errors and the large spread of possible error-free run lengths. For the CTLE + DFE case, we see that the cumulative EFRD follows a roughly linear uniformly decreasing behavior, which is along expectations for an equalizer with a single feedback tap. Such EFRD behavior

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:44:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A104 Vol. 13, No. 1 / January 2021 / Journal of Optical Communications and Networking

Research Article

Fig. 6. Four-state Fritchman’s Markov model.

Fig. 5. Cumulative EFRD for equalized 50G measurements.

can be well approximated with an FMM having a single good state. In the case of the MLSE, we notice a change in slope at the error-free run length of 2, which is more pronounced in the 30 km scenario. This suggests a higher probability of single error-free runs as compared to longer error-free runs. Error events in MLSE decoding using the Viterbi algorithm are characterized by paths in the corresponding trellis that diverge from the intended path before merging back. A three-tap MLSE for binary signaling has four states; in this case, two consecutive non-errors are sufficient to cause any error event to merge back into the intended path of the trellis; on the other hand, error events can still have intervening single non-errors in them; this phenomenon likely explains the higher incidence of single non-errors in the MLSE case. In general, such EFRD behavior would require two good states for accurate characterization; however, for simplicity in the evaluation process, we limit ourselves to accurately modeling the ECD at the equalizer output.
Consequently, we focus our attention on a sub-class of N-state FMMs having a single good (error-free) state G, and N − 1 bad (error) states, Bi , where i ∈ 1, ... , N − 1. Further, the model is constrained such that (a) the good state is only allowed to transition to the first bad state B1 or to itself; (b) each of the N − 2 bad states Bi , i ∈ 1, ... , N − 2 can transition to G, to itself, or to the next bad state Bi+1; and (c) the last bad state B N−1 can transition only to itself or to G. A transition to a bad state results in a bit-error (binary ‘1’), while a transition into the good state indicates the absence of an error (binary ‘0’). Further, based on the post-equalized ECD in Fig. 3, we find it adequate to limit N to 4. The four-state FMM is specified by the transition matrix

 g 1 − ε1 − b1 1 − ε2 − b2 1 − b3 

A

=

 

1

− 0

g

b1 ε1

0 b2

0 0

, 

(1)

0

0

ε2

b3

where the element Ai, j in the ith row and j th column denotes the probability of transition from the j th state to the ith state. The corresponding four-state FMM is shown in Fig. 6.
We can show that the probability of an error cluster of length n, i.e., a sequence of exactly n “ones” bookended by “zeros,” denoted as pn is given as

p1 = (1 − g )(1 − ε1 − b1),
p2 = (1 − g )[b1(1 − ε1 − b1) + ε1(1 − ε2 − b2)],
pn = b1 pn−1 + (1 − g )b2n−2ε1(1 − ε2 − b2)
n−3
+ (1 − g )ε1ε2(1 − b3) b2i b3n−3−i , n ≥ 3. (2)
i =0

The parameters bi and εi model the relative cluster length probabilities with respect to p1 and may be determined by curve fitting techniques [20]. The parameter g serves as a normalizing factor to ensure that the desired average BER, Pe , is met. Given Pe , bi , εi , i = 1, 2, 3, the value of g is determined by

g

=

1

−

(1

−

(1 − b1)(1 − b2)(1 − b3)Pe Pe )(1 − b2 − b3 + b2b3 + ε1 − b3ε1

+

ε1ε2) .

(3)

Note that the two-state Gilbert model of [2] can be obtained from the four-state FMM by setting ε1 = ε2 = b2 = b3 = 0.
Next, we fit the ECDs from measurements with the fourstate FMM. We here use N = 4 states because the ECDs obtained from measurements show abrupt changes of slope up to cluster length 3, for which the statistical confidence is high. The observed behavior for a cluster length larger than 3 seems to be characterized by a constant slope. The latter characterization also takes into account that the statistical confidence is low for larger cluster lengths where the probabilities are around or below 1E-3. Hence, slope change behaviors in this low probability region do not warrant accurate modeling.
In Fig. 3, dotted lines with like colors show the ECD of corresponding fits using the four-state FMM obtained using Eq. (2); a zoomed-in view is shown at the right. The fit parameters for the different ECDs are shown in Table 1 and were manually determined, although curve fitting techniques may also be used to compute them. As motivated above, the goal of the fitting process was to accurately capture the relative behavior of error clusters of length 1 to 3 and then the asymptotic slope as the cluster length increased. It is clearly seen that the four-state FMM successfully models such behavior.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:44:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Research Article

Vol. 13, No. 1 / January 2021 / Journal of Optical Communications and Networking A105

Table 1. Coefficients Used to Fit Four-State FMM to ECD from Measurements

Four-State FMM Fit Parameters

Scenario

b1

ε1

b2

ε2

b3

Three-tap MLSE b2b 0.16 0.16 0.18 0.07 0.37

Three-tap MLSE 30 km 0.205 0.19 0.195 0.08 0.37

CTLE + DFE b2b

0 0.432 0 0.528 0.42

CTLE + DFE 30 km

0 0.567 0 0.65

0.46

5. LDPC CODE EVALUATION USING FOUR-STATE FMM AS A GENERATIVE MODEL
The LDPC code evaluation process is described in Fig. 7(a). The FMM parameters obtained by fitting to the measured ECD data as previously described (see Table 1) are programmed into a four-state FMM error generation process implemented in a field-programmable gate array (FPGA); the generated binary error stream is optionally processed by the precoder emulation block; the output of the precoder emulation block is XORed with the output of the LDPC encoder and then fed to the LDPC decoder. The encoder and decoder also optionally implement local -interleaving/de-interleaving within segments of 256 bits as specified in [1]. Decoding is accomplished via a layered min-sum decoder with a maximum of 14 iterations.
The precoding/de-precoding operation [1,2] is illustrated in the top part of Fig. 7(b); this is equivalently implemented using the precoder emulation block shown in the bottom part of Fig. 7(b). Note that, whenever precoding is employed in our model, the receiver equalizer is assumed to operate independent and separate from precoding; in other words, the equalizer does not incorporate any aspect of the de-precoding operation.
The -interleaver that operates locally on segments of 256 bits—the same number as the lifting factor Z of the code—is shown in Fig. 7(c), and is described in detail in Section 142.2.4.3 of [1]. At the transmitter, 256-bit data segments aligned with the LDPC code block structure are rearranged using Omega networks, which are multi-stage

interconnection networks [3], operating in parallel. The inter-

leaved data is then used to generate the parity bits, which are

rearranged using Omega networks as well. Finally, the unin-

terleaved data and interleaved parity are transmitted on the

channel. The inverse operation is performed at the receiver to

accomplish -de-interleaving. Each 256-bit interconnection

network is built using eight stages of switches, with each stage

comprising 128 switches. Each switch operates on a pair of

bits and is independently controlled to either pass the inputs

unchanged or swap the inputs at the output. The interleaving

pattern for each 256-bit segment was specifically designed to

improve the robustness of the chosen LDPC code to burst

errors taking into account its quasi-cyclic structure, while also

ensuring low hardware latency [2].

Bit-interleaving over L codewords, i.e., L-interleaving,

involves rearranging the encoded bits over a group of L

codewords prior to transmission over the channel. Let

c

l i

;

i

= 0, ... , (N

− 1); l

= 0, ... ,

L

−1

denote

the

i th

en-

coded bit of the l th codeword, where N is the code length; the

bits are then transmitted on the channel in the following order:

c

0 0

,

c

01,

.

.

.

c

L 0

−1,

c

0 1

,

c

1 1

,

.

.

.

,

c

0 N−1

,

c

1 N−1

,

.

.

.

,

c

L −1 N−1

.

The

in-

verse de-interleaving operation is performed in the receiver

to reconstruct the codewords prior to decoding. In our eval-

uations, we do not explicitly implement L-interleaving in

the FPGA framework; rather, we apply the de-interleaving

operation over successive L codeword blocks of the error

stream from measurements (or the error stream generated via

simulations using the specified FMM parameters), determine

the ECD for such a de-interleaved error stream, obtain a fit to

the ECD using the four-state FMM, and then use the fitted

coefficients to program the four-state FMM error generation

block in Fig. 7(a). Note that a similar approach is also used in

[21] to construct representative ECDs for L-interleaving.

The chief motivation for using an FPGA framework for

LDPC performance evaluation is to obtain LDPC output

BER results down to 1E-12—the target FEC output BER of

typical PON systems—or lower with adequate confidence in

a reasonable time-frame; specific details of the FPGA encoder

and decoder implementation are, however, beyond the scope of

this paper. The use of identical settings in the FPGA evaluation

Fig. 7. (a) LDPC code evaluation framework with precoder emulation and interleaving/de-interleaving, (b) implementation of precoder emulation. The circled plus symbol indicates the XOR operation. (c) Illustration of -interleaving at the transmitter (FEC encoder).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:44:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A106 Vol. 13, No. 1 / January 2021 / Journal of Optical Communications and Networking

Research Article

framework other than those explicitly varied (four-state FMM parameters, precoder emulation, and -interleaving) ensures that a consistent set of performance curves can be generated and compared.
6. LDPC CODE PERFORMANCE AND ANALYSIS
The code considered for 50G PON LDPC FEC performance evaluation is based on the LDPC mother code with a lifting factor of Z = 256 defined in [1]. The last two columns of parity are punctured, and no shortening is applied; thus, the code has a length of N = 67 × 256 = 17,152 bits and information length of K = 57 × 256 = 14,592 bits giving a code rate of R = 57/67 = 0.851.
Figure 8 shows the LDPC decoder output BER versus equalizer output BER for the code under consideration for different channels including those based on four-state FMM parameters fitted to ECD from measurements and for different scenarios. Note that, for results with precoding, the x axis represents the equalizer output BER, which is the BER prior to the deprecoding operation. On the other hand when precoding is disabled, the equalizer output BER is also the input BER to the LDPC decoder. In Fig. 8 and all subsequent decoder output BER versus equalizer output BER plots, each simulation point is based on at least 60 codeword error events, which ensures adequate confidence even at the lowest reported BERs.
In general, the ECD for a given equalization scheme varies as a function of the BER; however, these variations are observed to be minimal in the narrow window of average input BERs over which the LDPC code is evaluated; hence, the fixed sets of FMM parameters (other than g) as specified in Table 1 are used to generate each curve.
A. Performance with and without Precoding ( -Interleaving and L-Interleaving Disabled)
First, we discuss the code performance results without precoding, which are represented in Fig. 8 by solid lines. With the BSC channel, the target output BER of 1E-12 is achieved at an input BER of 1.03E-2, while with the Gilbert b = 0.5 channel, the input BER is 6.9E-3. For the four-state fit to the 30 km MLSE measurements, the input BER is 8.3E-3; referring to Fig. 2(b), this reduction in input BER with respect to the BSC

to achieve an output BER of 1E-12 translates to an OPSP of 0.3 dB due to correlated errors at the output of the MLSE. Even in the b2b MLSE case, the required input BER is 8.6E-3; this translates to an OPSP of about 0.15 dB. Similarly, with CTLE + DFE, the input BERs required to meet the target are 6.8E-3 and 7.4E-3 for 30 km and b2b, which translate to OPSPs of about 0.6 dB and 0.3 dB, respectively.
Table 2 captures the OPSPs with respect to the BSC for the various equalization scenarios arising from the reduction of the input BER from 1.03E-2 to achieve the output BER of 1E-12.
Further, from Fig. 8, we also note that the LDPC input BER versus output BER performance using the four-state FMM modeling realistic ECDs differs from that obtained using the Gilbert b = 0.5 model to varying degrees.
Next, we consider the impact of precoding. Curves with dashed lines and like colors in Fig. 8 show the performance when precoding emulation is enabled (without interleaving/de-interleaving). Table 2 also captures the OPSPs with respect to the BSC for the various equalization scenarios arising from the reduction of the input BER from 1.03E-2 to achieve the output BER of 1E-12 for the cases with precoding; as in the case without precoding, these penalties are obtained from the BER versus ROP curves in Fig. 2. We see from Fig. 2 and Table 2 that precoding helps reduce the OPSP in some cases (CTLE + DFE as well as the Gilbert burst model with b = 0.5) but causes the penalty to increase in other cases (MLSE). The reason for such behavior is discussed next.
The process of de-precoding at the receiver affects the error behavior at the input to the LDPC decoder in two important ways: (a) modification of the average BER, and (b) modification to the distribution of the number of bit-errors per codeword.
Modification of the average BER: The operation of deprecoding translates every error cluster event at its input into two bit-errors [2]. Consider a channel model measurement without precoding where E (n) represents the recorded number of error clusters of n bits during the transmission of T bits. The average un-precoded BER, BERU , and the average BER after the de-precoding operation at the receiver, BERP , can be expressed as

BERU

=

1 T

∞ n=1

n E (n);

BERP

=

2 T

∞ n=1

E (n) .

(4)

Then, the difference between precoded and un-precoded BER is given by

Fig. 8. LDPC output information BER versus average BER at the equalizer output for various channel models with and without precoding ( -interleaving and L-interleaving disabled).

1 BERP − BERU = T

∞
E (1) − (n − 2)E (n)

.

(5)

n=3

For a BSC with transition probability p 0.5, E (n) ≈ T pn, and we see that de-precoding results in almost doubling the average BER, since most error clusters at the channel output (and before the de-precoding operation) comprise a single error. For the Gilbert error model, E (n) = E (1)bn−1. Hence, we can simplify Eq. (5) as

E (1) BERP − BERU = T

∞
1 − (n − 2)b(n−1)

.

(6)

n=3

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:44:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Research Article

Vol. 13, No. 1 / January 2021 / Journal of Optical Communications and Networking A107

Table 2. OPSP due to Reduction in Input BER to Achieve LDPC Output BER of 1E-12 on Account of Correlated Errors with and without Precoding and with and without L-Interleavinga

Scenario

Sensitivity [dBm] at Equalizer Output BER = 1.03E-2

No L-Interleaving No Precoding

LDPC Input

BER

OPSP [dB]

No L-Interleaving Precoding
De-precoder Input BER OPSP [dB]

Three-tap MLSE b2b Three-tap MLSE 30 km CTLE + DFE b2b CTLE + DFE 30 km

–23.55 –22.80 –23.35 –22.50

8.6E-3

0.15

6.3E-3∗

0.45

8.3E-3

0.30

6.9E-3∗

0.50

7.4E-3

0.30

7.9E-3

0.25

6.8E-3

0.60

9.7E-3

0.05

aThe values marked with an asterisk were obtained using extrapolation. All results are with -interleaving disabled.

Interleaving (L = 4) No Precoding

LDPC Input

BER

OPSP [dB]

1.02E-2 1.02E-2 1.01E-2 1.00E-2

insignificant∗ insignificant
< 0.05∗ < 0.05

Fig. 9. Error loading for various channels and average BERs. Based on simulations with 1E7 17,152-bit codewords.
With b = 0.5, it is readily seen from Eq. (6) that de-precoding leaves the average error rate unchanged [2]; when b < 0.5, the average BER increases due to de-precoding, while when b > 0.5, the average BER decreases due to de-precoding.
Modification to the distribution of errored bits per codeword: For a fixed average BER, the distribution of the number of errored bits per codeword, or error loading, determines the FEC decoder performance. This is best illustrated in Fig. 9, where the error loading is simulated for three different channels at different average BERs: (i) the BSC, (ii) the Gilbert burst model with b = 0.5 without precoding, and (iii) the Gilbert burst model with b = 0.5 with precoding. For the BSC, the error loading may also be analytically determined by the binomial distribution; these curves are shown in Fig. 9 as well. For the Gilbert burst model with b = 0.5 and no precoding, we see that the error loading has a broader distribution. This implies that the probability of received codewords having a large number of input bit-errors is relatively higher leading to poorer LDPC decoder performance. Finally, for the Gilbert burst model with b = 0.5 and with precoding, while the average BER is maintained as described above, a narrowing of the error loading is observed compared to the case without precoding. This narrowing is the key factor that provides a significant improvement in the LDPC decoder performance when precoding is applied to the Gilbert burst model with b = 0.5. Notice that, with precoding, the error loading is dominated by even error counts since odd error counts only occur when an error cluster straddles two adjacent codewords.

In the case of the four-state FMMs as well, the actual performance of the LDPC decoder for a specific ECD is determined by the interplay of the above two factors. For the CTLE + DFE at 30 km, de-precoding not only reduces the average BER but also narrows the error loading, leading to a significant improvement in LDPC performance. In the case of CTLE + DFE b2b, although de-precoding increases the average BER, the narrowing of the error loading is more dominant at output BERs around 1E-12, thereby providing a slight improvement in FEC performance. In the case of MLSE b2b and 30 km, the impact of increased average BER due to de-precoding dominates, leading to worse performance.
In fact, the LDPC output performance with precoding for any ECD distribution and equalizer output BER may be approximated to a first order by first recording the BER after the de-precoding operation, and using this BER on the x axis to read the LDPC output BER from the Gilbert model b = 0.5 precoded curve (red dashed lines). As an example, for the CTLE + DFE b2b four-state FMM case with equalizer output BER of 8.3E-3, the recorded BER at the output of the de-precoding operation is 9.1E-3; using this as the x axis value and reading the LDPC output BER from the Gilbert model b = 0.5 precoded curve gives an LDPC output BER of 2.3E-11, which is very close to the evaluated BER of 2.5E-11 for the CTLE + DFE b2b case with precoding (light blue dashed lines).
We thus see that precoding helps reduce the OPSP for scenarios where strong error correlation is seen at the equalizer output (e.g., the CTLE + DFE), but increases the OPSP in scenarios where the correlation is less severe (MLSE). In DS PON, data for multiple users may be sent in the same codeword. In such a case, a common precoder setting must be applied to the entire DS codeword. As we have shown, the impact of precoding on LDPC decoder performance heavily depends on the ECD behavior seen at the equalizer output (de-precoder input); this, in turn, depends on the equalization method as well as the amount of ISI that must be mitigated. Optimizing the use of precoding is generally not possible for all DS end-users in a PON system.
B. Performance with and without -Interleaving
Next, we consider the impact of -interleaving both with and without precoding. Figure 10 shows results with precoding for CTLE + DFE, while Fig. 11 shows results for MLSE. Results

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:44:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A108 Vol. 13, No. 1 / January 2021 / Journal of Optical Communications and Networking

Research Article

with -interleaving enabled are represented by thin lines with like colors and the × marker.
From Fig. 10, we see that enabling -interleaving provides a small benefit for the Gilbert burst model (b = 0.5) without precoding, but the benefit is almost absent with precoding. These results are along the same lines as those reported in [22]. For the four-state FMM fitted to the CTLE + DFE 30 km ECD, a minuscule improvement due to -interleaving is seen both with and without precoding. Similar behavior is also observed for CTLE + DFE b2b. For the case of MLSE 30 km and b2b shown in Fig. 11, the improvement due to interleaving is almost absent both with and without precoding.
Interleaving of bits within a codeword or within a block of bits in a codeword neither alters the average BER nor the error loading. As such, its impact is expected to be less significant as compared to that of precoding/de-precoding. The goal of -interleaving is to distribute the errors more uniformly throughout the codeword and thereby minimize the detrimental effect of localized bursts on decoding that arise due to the quasi-cyclic structure of the LDPC code [2]. Further, since the interleaver that we consider rearranges bits within segments of 256 bits [1], the improvement it provides is expected to be less than a random interleaver that operates on the entire codeword.
Noting that the ECD for the CTLE + DFE case shows stronger error correlation as compared to the MLSE case, we
Fig. 10. LDPC performance for Gilbert burst model and CTLE + DFE with and without precoding and with and without
-interleaving.

can conclude that -interleaving appears to provide more benefit when the probability of longer error clusters is higher. Nevertheless, the best-case improvement due to interleaving is still small and barely quantifiable. For this reason, we have not specified OPSP values with -interleaving enabled in Table 2.
C. Performance with L-Interleaving
Next, we consider the impact of L-interleaving with both precoding and -interleaving disabled. We first focus on the CTLE + DFE 30 km scenario, which shows the highest amount of error correlation from our measurements. Figure 12 shows the ECDs obtained by applying L-interleaving for different L; the dashed lines with squares show results when de-interleaving is applied to measurement data, while the solid lines show results when de-interleaving is applied to an error stream generated using the four-state FMM with parameters for CTLE + DFE 30 km from Table 1 at a BER of p = 0.01. First, we see that for a given L, a good match is obtained between the ECD from measurements and from simulating with the four-state FMM fit. Second, as L increases, the ECD with L-interleaving approaches the ECD for the BSC with p = 0.01, which is also shown for reference. This indicates a progressive reduction in error correlation with increasing L. Four-state FMM fits to the ECD data from applying deinterleaving to the simulated error stream are shown with thin lines of like colors. We choose to fit to the simulated error stream rather than measurement data since the latter lacks a sufficient number of errors to accurately determine the ECD beyond a few consecutive errors, especially for larger L.
Figure 13 shows the error loading for the simulated error stream with L-interleaving for different L. L-interleaving does not alter the average BER since the errors are simply rearranged. However, increasing L causes a narrowing of the error loading; with L = 6, the error loading is very close to that of the BSC. The error loading with precoding and no L-interleaving is also shown for comparison, where we see that the mean of this distribution is lower corresponding to the reduction in average BER due to precoding to 8.9E-3.
Indeed, we expect the narrowing of the error loading due to L-interleaving to improve the LDPC decoder performance; this is confirmed by the curves in Fig. 14. For CTLE + DFE 30 km, a noticeable improvement is observed with L = 2, while for L = 4, the performance is even better than with precoding, implying that the OPSP is <0.05 dB; further, for

Fig. 11. LDPC performance for MLSE with and without precoding and with and without -interleaving.

Fig. 12. ECD with L-interleaving for CTLE + DFE 30 km.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:44:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Research Article

Vol. 13, No. 1 / January 2021 / Journal of Optical Communications and Networking A109

Fig. 13. Error loading with L-interleaving for CTLE + DFE 30 km at equalizer output BER p = 0.01. Note: With precoding, the BER decreases to 8.9E-3.

LDPC output BER

10-5

BSC CTLE+DFE 30km CTLE+DFE 30km Prec CTLE+DFE 30km L = 2 CTLE+DFE 30km L = 4 CTLE+DFE 30km L = 6

CTLE+DFE b2b CTLE+DFE b2b Prec CTLE+DFE b2b L = 2 CTLE+DFE b2b L = 4 BER out threshold

10-10

7

8

9

10

11

12

De-Precoder input/LDPC decoder input BER 10-3

Fig. 14. LDPC performance for CTLE + DFE with L -interleaving.

L = 6, the performance is almost identical to that of the BSC. Evaluation with L-interleaving was similarly carried out for the other scenarios as well. Figure 14 also shows the improvements with L-interleaving for CTLE + DFE b2b, while Fig. 15 shows the improvements for MLSE 30 km and b2b. While the improvement with L = 2 is substantial, the input BER to achieve output BER of 1E-12 is still below 1E-2; meanwhile, L = 4 achieves performance very close to the BSC with output BER of 1E-12 attained at input BER greater than 1E-2 for these cases.

10-5

BSC MLSE 30km MLSE 30km Prec MLSE 30km L = 2 MLSE 30km L = 4

MLSE b2b MLSE b2b Prec MLSE b2b L = 2 MLSE b2b L = 4 BER out threshold

10-10

LDPC output BER

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

De-Precoder input/LDPC decoder input BER 10-3

Fig. 15. LDPC performance for MLSE with L-interleaving.

The diminishing returns as L is increased suggest that a suitable value of L should be determined by a trade-off between increased complexity and latency versus performance. For all scenarios considered here (CTLE + DFE and MLSE), as shown in Table 2, L = 4 achieves output BER of 1E-12 at input BER ≥ 1E-2, and the residual OPSP is <0.05 dB; hence, bit-interleaving with L = 4 appears to be a reasonable choice.
7. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
From the above analysis, we conclude the following: (i) Receiver equalization schemes are effective at compensating for ISI arising from CD and bandwidth limitations in 50 Gb/s NRZ PON. (ii) The error correlation at the equalizer output may be characterized using the ECD. The four-state FMM is better suited to accurately modeling the ECD from measurements as compared to the simple Gilbert model. (iii) Correlated errors due to receiver equalization schemes such as CTLE + DFE and MLSE significantly reduce the average BER required at the LDPC decoder input to achieve the target output BER of 1E-12 as compared to uncorrelated errors. This reduction in BER at the decoder input translates into an OPSP for the equalization scheme. (iv) The impact of precoding on LDPC decoder performance depends heavily on the ECD behavior seen at the equalizer output; this, in turn, depends on the equalization method as well as the amount of ISI that must be mitigated. Precoding helps reduce the OPSP for scenarios where strong error correlation is seen at the equalizer output (e.g., the CTLE + DFE), but increases the penalty in scenarios where the correlation is less severe (MLSE), where increased OPSP values around 0.5 dB are observed. (v) interleaving within blocks of 256 bits is seen to provide a minuscule improvement for some of the scenarios considered. (vi) Meanwhile, L-interleaving provides significant improvements for all scenarios considered. For the scenario with the strongest error correlation (CTLE + DFE 30 km), L = 4 is sufficient to reduce the OPSP to within 0.05 dB, while the residual penalty is even lower for scenarios that exhibit lesser error correlation. Importantly, since L-interleaving narrows the error loading and makes it approach the binomial distribution when error clusters occur at the LDPC decoder input, it is expected to provide benefits with hard-input LDPC decoding for the general class of equalization schemes that produce error clusters.
Prior to the recent adoption of LDPC codes in PON standards, Reed–Solomon (RS) codes operating on 8-bit symbols and providing an output BER of 1E-12 at an input BER of 1E-3 for uncorrelated errors were the FEC code of choice. These codes readily accommodated correlated errors in the channel while simultaneously providing a small performance improvement [2]. The migration to longer binary LDPC codes with hard-input decoding provides significant improvements in coding gain allowing the system to operate at input BERs of 1E-2 to achieve the output BER of 1E-12, but this gain comes at the price of increased vulnerability to correlated errors. While precoding was adopted as a solution to the problem of correlated errors in IEEE 802.3ca, obtaining large scale benefits from such a scheme would likely require a tighter control of the entire PON system (e.g., requiring all DS receivers to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:44:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A110 Vol. 13, No. 1 / January 2021 / Journal of Optical Communications and Networking

Research Article

implement a specific type of equalizer), which is expected to be unrealistic. Furthermore, even when precoding provides a reduction in penalty, as we have shown, it is unlikely to recover the enitre penalty and restore the performance close to the levels observed with the BSC.
On the other hand, bit-interleaving over multiple codewords comes across as a solution that promises a significant reduction in penalty due to correlated errors and hard-input decoding. While the increased complexity and processing latency are obvious concerns with such a scheme, it is expected that the reduced codeword duration for the same codeword length at increased data rates make such a scheme more palatable for adoption in the G.hsp standard. In fact, at the recent ITU-T plenary meeting, there was general agreement among participants that bit-interleaving with L = 4 would be of interest for DS G.hsp [23].
With soft-input decoding also being considered for 50G PON in G.hsp, the use of L-interleaving is also being actively investigated for this case; here, the benefits appear to be less pronounced for certain equalization schemes such as the DFE due to the additional dimension of log-likelihood ratio distortion introduced by such equalizers [24]. The study of error correlation in a burst-mode receiver for upstream PON is an interesting area for future research as well. Additional considerations in this case include the impact of insufficient settling at the start of the burst and DC wander due to the use of smaller time constants in the burst-mode receiver; both these factors are likely to introduce temporal variations and asymmetric behavior in the BER and error correlation characteristics at the decoder input.
Acknowledgment. The authors thank Ed Harstead, Yannick Lefevre, and Jochen Maes for their input and valuable comments.
REFERENCES
1. “Standard for Ethernet—Amendment: physical layer specifications and management parameters for 25 Gb/s and 50 Gb/s passive optical networks,” IEEE 802.3ca (2020).
2. M. Laubach, S. Yang, R. Hirth, and G. Kramer, “FEC proposal for NGEPON,” IEEE P802.3ca contribution laubach_3ca_1_0517 (2017).
3. D. H. Lawrie, “Access and alignment of data in an array processor,” IEEE Trans. Comput. C-24, 1145–1155 (1975).
4. “50-gigabit-capable passive optical networks (50G-PON): physical media dependent (PMD) layer specification,” ITU-T G.HSP.50GPMD recommendation (2020).
5. “Characteristics of a single-mode optical fibre and cable,” ITU-T G.652 recommendation (2016).

6. V. Houtsma and D. van Veen, “Optical strategies for economical next generation 50 and 100G PON,” in Optical Fiber Communication Conference, San Diego, California, USA, 2019.
7. M. Tao, J. Zheng, X. Dong, K. Zhang, L. Zhou, H. Zeng, Y. Luo, S. Li, and X. Liu, “Improved dispersion tolerance for 50G-PON downstream transmission via receiver-side equalization,” in Optical Fiber Communication Conference, San Diego, California, USA, 2019.
8. V. Houtsma and D. van Veen, “A study of options for high-speed TDM-PON beyond 10G,” J. Lightwave Technol. 35, 1059–1066 (2017).
9. J. Johnson, “Chirp behavior of uncooled EMLs,” in IEEE 802.3 100 Gb/s per lane optical PHYs Study Group, March, 2019.
10. A. Mahadevan, D. van Veen, N. Kaneda, A. Duque, A. de Lind van Wijngaarden, and V. Houtsma, “50G PON FEC evaluation with error models for advanced equalization,” in Optical Fiber Communication Conference, San Diego, California, USA, 2020.
11. B. D. Fritchman, “A binary channel characterization using partitioned Markov chains,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 13, 221–227 (1967).
12. “Standard for packet-based fronthaul transport network,” IEEE Std. 1914.1 (2019).
13. F. J. Schaefer, G. Schedelebeck, R. Strobel, and V. Oksman, “Block interleaving for G.HSP,” in ITU-T Q2 Conference Call, June 9, 2020, paper 200609_D21.
14. R. Borkowski, H. Schmuck, G. Cerulo, J.-G. Provost, V. Houtsma, D. van Veen, E. Harstead, F. Mallecot, and R. Bonk, “The impact of transmitter chirp parameter on the power penalty and design of 50 Gbit/s TDM-PON,” in Optical Fiber Communication Conference, San Diego, California, USA, 2020.
15. D. van Veen, J. Galaro, and V. Houtsma, “CDR locking and error distribution at high BER for 25 Gb/s,” in 802.3ca Contribution, Orlando, Florida, USA, 2017.
16. E. N. Gilbert, “Capacity of a burst-noise channel,” Bell Syst. Tech. J. 39, 1253–1265 (1960).
17. E. O. Elliot, “Estimates of error rates for codes on burst-noise channels,” Bell Syst. Tech. J. 42, 1977–1997 (1963).
18. R. Narasimha, N. Warke, and N. Shanbhag, “Impact of DFE error propagation on FEC-based high-speed I/O links,” in IEEE Global Telecommunication Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, 2009.
19. M. Yang, S. Shahramian, H. Shakiba, H. Wong, P. Krotnev, and A. C. Carusone, “Statistical BER analysis of wireline links with non-binary linear block codes subject to DFE error propagation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I 67, 284–297 (2020).
20. C. Pimentel and I. F. Blake, “Modeling burst channels using partitioned Fritchman’s Markov models,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 47, 885–899 (1998).
21. X. Wu and X. Wang, “Interleaver simulation for correlated errors,” in ITU-T Q2 Conference Call, June 9, 2020, paper 200609_D23.
22. M. Laubach, Y. Han, S. Yang, R. Hirth, and G. Kramer, “More efficient LDPC parity code matrix and downstream FEC draft text (rev 1b),” IEEE P802.3ca contribution laubach_3ca_1b_0118 (2018).
23. F. Effenberger, “Report and minutes for Q2/15 meeting,” in ITU-T SG15 Q2 Plenary, September 7–18, 2020, paper SG15TD493/WP1.
24. W. van Hoof, Y. Lefevre, and A. Mahadevan, “Impact of bitinterleaving on 50G LDPC performance with DFE-induced errors,” in ITU-T Q2 Conference Call, July 6–10, 2020, paper 200710_D44.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:44:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

