JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 39, NO. 19, OCTOBER 1, 2021

6191

A Soft-Aided Staircase Decoder Using Three-Level Channel Reliabilities
Yi Lei , Member, IEEE, Bin Chen , Member, IEEE, Gabriele Liga , Member, IEEE, Alexios Balatsoukas-Stimming , Member, IEEE, Kaixuan Sun , and Alex Alvarado , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The soft-aided bit-marking (SABM) algorithm is based on the idea of marking bits as highly reliable bits (HRBs), highly unreliable bits (HUBs), and uncertain bits to improve the performance of hard-decision (HD) decoders. The HRBs and HUBs are used to assist the HD decoder to prevent miscorrections and to decode those originally uncorrectable cases via bit flipping (BF), respectively. In this paper, an improved SABM algorithm (called iSABM) is proposed for staircase codes (SCCs). Similar to the SABM, iSABM marks bits with the help of channel reliabilities, i.e., using the absolute values of the log-likelihood ratios. The improvements offered by iSABM include: (i) HUBs being classified using a reliability threshold, (ii) BF randomly selecting HUBs, and (iii) soft-aided decoding over multiple SCC blocks. The decoding complexity of iSABM is comparable of that of SABM. This is due to the fact that on the one hand no sorting is required (lower complexity) because of the use of a threshold for HUBs, while on the other hand multiple SCC blocks use soft information (higher complexity). The gains achieved by iSABM are up to 0.53 dB with respect to SABM and up to 0.91 dB with respect to standard decoding of SCCs at a bit error rate of 10−6. Furthermore, it is shown that using 1-bit reliability marking, i.e., only having HRBs and HUBs, only causes a gain penalty of up to 0.25 dB with a significantly reduced memory requirement.
Manuscript received February 24, 2021; revised May 25, 2021 and June 30, 2021; accepted July 7, 2021. Date of publication July 13, 2021; date of current version October 4, 2021. This work was supported in part by the NSFC under Grant 62001151 and by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grants JZ2020HGTA0072 and JZ2020HGTB0015, and by Anhui Provincial Natural Science Foundation under Grant 2008085QF282. The work of Gabriele Liga was supported in part by the EUROTECH postdoc programme under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Marie Skłodowska-Curie under Grant 754462). The work of Alex Alvarado was supported in part by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) via the VIDI Grant ICONIC under Grant 15685 and by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under Grant 757791. (Corresponding author: Bin Chen.)
Yi Lei and Bin Chen are with the School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009, China (e-mail: leiyi@hfut.edu.cn; b.c.chen@tue.nl).
Alexios Balatsoukas-Stimming is with Electronic Systems group, Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven 5612 AZ, The Netherlands (e-mail: a.k.balatsoukas.stimming@tue.nl).
Kaixuan Sun is with the State Key Laboratory of Information of Photonics and Optical Communications, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: sunkaixuan@bupt.edu.cn).
Gabriele Liga and Alex Alvarado are with the Signal Processing Systems (SPS) Group, Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven 5612 AZ, The Netherlands (e-mail: g.liga@tue.nl; a.alvarado@tue.nl).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2021.3096377.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JLT.2021.3096377

Index Terms—Optical fiber communications, forward error correction, log-likelihood ratios, staircase codes, quantization.
I. INTRODUCTION
A S TARGETED data rates exceed 400 Gbps, simple but powerful hard-decision (HD) forward-error-correction (FEC) codes have gained renewed interests in high-speed low-cost optical transport networks (OTNs). Staircase codes (SCCs), which use iterative bounded-distance-decoding (BDD), are the most popular ones [1]. So far, SCCs have been recommended for several OTN standards, e.g., G.709.2/Y.1331.2 [2], G.709.3/Y.1331.3 [3], and the implementation agreement approved by the Optical Internetworking Forum for 400ZR (as an outer code) [4]. Although SCCs have yielded quite high coding gains (when compared to other HD-FEC codes for example the recommendations in the subclauses of I.3, I.4 and I.5 of G.975.1 [1, Fig. 8]), there still exists a significant gap to the achievable information rates (AIRs) of HD-FEC as well as the AIRs of soft-decision (SD) FEC [5, Fig.1]. For this reason, the design of improved SCC decoders is a hot topic in recent years, with a particular focus on good performance-complexity tradeoffs.
Early works on improved SCC decoding took advantage of the staircase structure of SCCs [6]–[8]. Since each bit in the staircase structure is protected by two component codewords, one can identify (and prevent) miscorrections by checking conflicts between the two component codewords [6], [7], or locate (and solve via bit flipping) stall patterns through the intersections of nonzero-syndrome component words [8]. Although these methods are simple as they only operate on binary messages, their gains are limited. To obtain a higher gain, an extreme solution is to completely replace the BDD component decoder with an SD decoder. This was proposed in [9]–[12], where channel soft information, i.e., log-likelihood ratios (LLRs), were used. However, this solution has a greatly increased decoding complexity.
A new class of decoding schemes, called soft-aided HD (SAHD) decoders, have been shown to provide a good compromise between complexity and performance. The main principle of SA-HD decoders is to assist the HD decoding with channel LLRs, while keeping the message exchange between the component decoders binary. For example, the work in [13], [14] proposed to make a hard decision based on the weighted sum of the BDD output and the channel LLR. As an extension

0733-8724 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6192

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 39, NO. 19, OCTOBER 1, 2021

of [13], the work in [15] refined the combining rule by deriving a more accurate estimate of the reliability of the BDD outputs via density evolution. Lately, a so-called BEE-SCC algorithm was proposed in [16]. BEE-SCC extended the work in [15] by performing an extra decoding attempt based on error and erasure decoding of the component codes. The reported gain of BEE-SCCs over standard SCCs is up to 0.88 dB [16]. Due to the high coding gain and low complexity, SA-HD decoders are thought to be a promising decoding scheme towards the future high-throughput optical fiber communications [17].
Recently, a soft-aided bit-marking (SABM) algorithm is also proposed for SCCs [18], [19]. We will refer to this algorithm as SABM-SCC. Different from the methods proposed in [13]–[16], the SABM-SCC decoder only uses soft information to mark bits as highly reliable bits (HRBs) and highly unreliable bits (HUBs). Using HRBs, the SABM-SCC decoder prevents miscorrections by checking whether the flipped bits are in conflict with HRBs. Via the HUBs, the SABM-SCC decoder flips a certain number of HUBs, which are the most likely errors, to handle BDD failures and miscorrections. The results in [18], [19] show that the SABM-SCC decoder can yield up to 0.30 dB additional gain compared to standard SCC decoder at a bit-error ratio (BER) of 10−7.
The SABM algorithm with minor modifications was also demonstrated to perform well for another popular HD-FEC codes, i.e., product codes (PCs) [19]. Improvements of up to 0.5 dB were achieved with respect to standard decoding of PCs. By combining SABM with scaled reliability (SABMSR), the improvement can be increased to 0.8 dB via remarking bits over a certain number of iterations [20]. In addition, a voting strategy based on HRBs was also proposed for PCs to determine whether a BDD output is a miscorrection or not [21]. In this method, once the number of HRBs involved in the suspected errors (detected by BDD) exceeds a threshold, the decoding result will be regarded as a miscorrection.
Most of the work on FEC decoders (including the work above) is tested by simulations with floating-point computation. However, to reduce power and cost, practical implementations, e.g., using field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), convert the floating-point numbers to fixed-point numbers. The floatingpoint to fixed-point conversion, which can be seen as a quantization process, will result in finite-precision representations of the messages, which can cause a performance loss. At present, many works have studied the effect of finite-precision message representation on the performance of FEC codes that use SD decoders, e.g., low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [22]– [27], turbo codes [28], and polar codes [29], [30]. Typically, 6-bit quantization is considered as the best trade-off between performance and complexity for SD decoders. In the context of SA-HD decoders, the authors of [15] have briefly evaluated the effect of 4-bit and 3-bit LLR quantizations on the so-called iBDD-CR algorithm for PCs. In addition, the FPGA emulation with 6-bit LLR representation of the concatenated HD-based SCC and SD-based Hamming code (proposed for 400ZR), reveals an error flare [31, Fig. 11]. This is not observed in the floating-point simulations [31, Fig. 11].

Fig. 1. System model considered in this paper.

In this paper, a new SA-HD decoder based on an improved

SABM (iSABM) algorithm is proposed for SCCs, which we

call iSABM-SCC. The main motivation is to make the iSABM-

SCC decoder hardware-friendly yet still providing considerable

error-correcting performance gains. To achieve this, the idea of

sorting bits by reliability (required in the SABM-SCC decoder

for marking HUBs) is abandoned. This novel iSABM-SCC

decoder uses two reliability thresholds to classify the bits into

three types: HRBs, HUBs, and uncertain bits (UBs). To increase

gains, the iSABM algorithm randomly selects HUBs for flipping

and tackles more SCC blocks (rather than only the last 2 SCC

blocks used by the SABM-SCC decoder) within a window.

TrhAe mnaoivnecloinStAriBbuMti-oSnCs Cof

this paper are as follows: decoder is proposed, and

its

per-

formance under different modulation formats and error-

correcting capabilities of the component codes is studied.

Gains up to 0.91 dB with respect to standard decoding of

SCCs are reported. The achived gain is slightly higher than

r

that of the state-of-the-art BEE-SCC decoder; A basic analysis on the impact of uniform reliability quan-

tization on the performance of the iSABM-SCC decoder as

well as the SABM-SCC decoder is made for the potential

hardware implementation. Numerical results show that the

gain penalties caused by 1-bit reliability quantization are

r

only up to 0.25 dB; A detailed analysis

on

the

complexity

of

the

iSABM-

SCC decoder is discussed from the perspective of hard-

ware implementation. A complexity comparison between

iSABM-SCC and other two latest SA-HD decoders, i.e.,

the extension of the SABM-SR algorithm [20] for SCCs

and the BEE-SCC algorithm [16], is given as well.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In

Section II, we present the system model and review the SABM-

SCC decoder. In Section III, we introduce the proposed iSABM-

SCC decoder and show its performance with idealized three-

level channel reliabilities. The impact of reliability quantization

on the performance of the iSABM-SCC and SABM-SCC de-

coders is analyzed in Section IV. The decoding complexity is

discussed in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes this paper.

II. SYSTEM MODEL, SCCS AND SABM-SCC DECODER
A. System Model
Fig. 1 shows the system model considered in this paper. Information bits are encoded into coded bits bl,1, . . . , bl,m by an SCC encoder and then mapped to symbols xl taken from an

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: A SOFT-AIDED STAIRCASE DECODER

6193

Fig. 2. Flow chart (left) of the SABM-SCC decoder in the ith window, where L is the window size. rj is a received component word taken from one of the rows or columns of two neighbor SCC blocks, and cj is the corresponding output of the component decoder, j = 1, . . . , w. The right figures show the workflows of bit
marking and SABM decoding.

equally-spaced M -ary pulse amplitude modulation (PAM) constellation S = {s1, s2, . . . , sM } with M = 2m points, where l is the discrete time index, l = 0, 1, 2, . . .. The bit-to-symbol

cmisoaympl pp=ilnex√g wiρsxhtilht+ee Gbzialn,uawsrsyhiaernreeflnzeolcitisesedz(eGAroWra-myGceNoa)ndaeun.ndTith√-veρarreiiscaentihcveeeadcdhsdaiingtnniveaell

gain.

Based on the received signal yl, the HD-based demapper will estimate the coded bits ˆbl,1, . . . , ˆbl,m, which are then fed to the SA-HD SCC decoder. At the same time, the receiver calculates

the LLR value λl,k for each bit, defined as

λl,k =

(−1)¯b log

exp

−

(yl

−

√ρsi)2 2

,

(1)

b∈{0,1}

i∈Ik,b

with k = 1, . . . , m, and where ¯b denotes bit negation [32, eq. (3.50)]. In (1), the set Ik,b enumerates all the constellation points in S whose kth bit ci,k is b, i.e., Ik,b {i = 1, 2, . . . , M : ci,k = b}. The LLRs are then provided to the SA-HD SCC decoder.
Within the SA-HD SCC decoder, HD decoding is performed to decode the HD-estimated bits with the help of channel LLRs. The SA-HD SCC decoding can be performed in multiple ways, such as SABM-SCC [18], [19], BEE-SCC [16], etc. In what follows, we will review SCCs and the SABM-SCC decoder.

B. Staircase Codes
An SCC consists of a sequence of binary matrices Bi ∈ {0, 1}w×w, i = 0, 1, 2, . . ., which are concatenated like a staircase (as [19, Fig. 1(b)] shows). B0 is an initial block of an SCC with all zeros. For all i ≥ 1, each row of the matrix [BTi−1Bi] is a valid codeword in a component code C, where BTi−1 is the matrix transpose of Bi−1. In this paper, we consider Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) codes with parameters of (nc, kc, t) as the component codes C, where nc is the codeword

length, kc is the information length, and t is the error-correcting capability. The code rate of SCC is defined as R = 2kc/nc − 1, while the size of Bi is w = nc/2, where nc is assumed to be even.
Standard SCCs are decoded by using a sliding window covering L received SCC blocks {Y i, Y i+1, . . . , Y i+L−1}, as shown on the left side of Fig. 2. Y 0 is known to be all zeros and Y i with i ≥ 1 indicates the received block from the channel when Bi is transmitted. Within the window, BDD is used to iteratively decode each received component word from the bottom right to the top left. BDD is very simple, however, it can only handle the cases with at most t errors. In the case of more than t errors in the received component word, either a decoding failure or a miscorrection occurs. Miscorrection is a situation where BDD finds a codeword in the codebook with up to t different bits from the received one, but this codeword does not correspond to the transmitted one. That is, the received component word is erroneously decoded to another codeword in C. Miscorretion is known to degrade the performance, especially in the iterative decoding process.
C. The SABM-SCC Decoder
To improve the performance of SCCs, the SABM-SCC decoder is proposed in [18], [19]. Fig. 2 shows the flow chart of the SABM-SCC decoding in the ith window. For two neighboring SCC blocks, w component decoders are typically performed in parallel to decode the w component words rj, j = 1, . . . , w, i.e., the w rows or columns of the two neighbor SCC blocks. We treat the w component decoders as a group. Instead of using L − 1 groups of BDDs in the standard SCC decoder, the SABM-SCC decoder uses L − 2 groups of BDDs and one group of “special” BDDs, i.e., SABMs, at each iteration.
The SABM algorithm is based on the idea of marking bits. It uses the absolute LLR value |λl,k| to represent the reliability of a bit ˆbl,k (a higher value of |λl,k| indicates a more reliable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6194

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 39, NO. 19, OCTOBER 1, 2021

Fig. 3. Flow chart (left) of the proposed iSABM-SCC decoder in the ith window. The right figures show the workflows of bit marking and iSABM decoding. The patterned blocks show where the differences between the iSABM-SCC decoder and the SABM-SCC decoder (see Fig. 2) are.

bit). Based on this, the SABM-SCC decoder marks the HD-
estimated bits as HRBs, HUBs, or UBs. As shown in the top
right of Fig. 2, a threshold δ1 is used to classify HRBs, i.e., to fall within the HRB class, |λl,k| should be larger than δ1. To mark HUBs, the SABM-SCC decoder needs to sort the reliabilities
with the indices corresponding to the bits in each row of an SCC block. The aim of this is to find the sorted d0 − t − 1 bits (out of the w bits) with the smallest |λl,k| values, where d0 is the minimum Hamming distance of the component code C. The sorted d0 − t − 1 bits in each row are the HUBs, while the UBs are the bits that are neither HRBs nor HUBs. With the marked information in Y i+L−1 (where most errors are located), SABM is performed to decode the received component words in the last 2 SCC blocks, i.e., [Y iT+L−2Y i+L−1], within a window.
The bottom right of Fig. 2 shows the workflow of the SABM
algorithm to decode a received component word rj. Unlike standard SCC decoding, the SABM decoder does not trust
the output of BDD unconditionally. It will detect whether or
not the output of BDD is a miscorrection, if BDD declares success. One criterion is that no HRBs in Y i+L−1 should be flipped. As the successfully decoded component codeword has a zero syndrome, the errors detected by BDD in Y i+L−2 should not be in conflict with zero-syndrome component codewords in [Y iT+L−3Y i+L−2] either. Only when the two criteria are satisfied, the output of BDD will be accepted. Otherwise, it will
be regarded as a miscorrection and be rejected.
For the miscorrections, the SABM decoder will flip the most unreliable d0 − wH(ej) − t bits in rj in Y i+L−1, where ej is the error pattern detected by BDD and wH(·) is the Hamming weight. For the BDD failures, the SABM decoder will flip the most unreliable bit in rj in Y i+L−1. The intuition here is that bits with the lowest reliabilities are the most likely channel errors. In some cases, bit-flipping (BF) will make the resulted sequence r˜j

close enough to the transmitted codeword cj, i.e., dH(r˜j, cj) = t, where dH(·, ·) represents the Hamming distance. Thus, when the second BDD attempt is performed, the residual errors in r˜j can be corrected. In case that BF results in a wrong decision, i.e., the flipped bits are not errors, miscorrection detection will be performed to make a final check if the decoding succeeds. The achieved performance and increased complexity of the SABMSCC decoder were discussed in [19], [33].
III. THE ISABM-SCC DECODER AND ITS PERFORMANCE
Although the SABM-SCC decoder was shown to achieve considerable gains, it still presents some shortfalls which leave margins for improvement. In this section, we propose the iSABM-SCC decoder, which is shown in Fig. 3. The details of the iSABM-SCC decoder are given in what follows.
A. The Proposed iSABM-SCC Decoder
As shown in the top right of Fig. 2, sorting bits by reliability is required for marking HUBs. On the one hand, as pointed out in [33, Section 2.2], the sorting process plays a significant role in the complexity increase of the SABM-SCC decoding, as every row of an SCC block needs to be sorted by reliability. To reduce the complexity overhead, sorting bits should be avoided if possible. On the other hand, for hardware implementation, when the reliability is represented using a finite number of bits, reliabilities with close floating-point values will be quantized to the same fixed-point value. This will make it hard to find a unique set of sorted d0 − t − 1 HUBs out of the w bits in each row of an SCC block, in particular when the reliabilities are coarsely quantized. As a result, the sorting process can be heavily affected by a potential ordering ambiguity, which also depends on the exact hardware sorting network that is used.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: A SOFT-AIDED STAIRCASE DECODER

6195

We will explain more about this later with simulation results in

Section IV-C.

To make it simple and suitable for coarse reliability quan-

tization, we focus on improving the bit marking strategy for

the iSABM-SCC decoder. Similarly to the process of marking

HRBs, a second reliability threshold δ2 is introduced to classify

HUBs instead of sorting bits by reliability. This is shown with

a patterned decision block on the top right of Fig. 3. According

to the value of |λl,k|, the marking result (denoted by νl,k) for a

bit ˆbl,k is given by ⎧

⎨ HRB, if |λl,k| ≥ δ1

νl,k

=

⎩

UB, HUB,

if δ2 ≤ |λl,k| < δ1 . if |λl,k| < δ2

(2)

Another weakness of the SABM-SCC decoder is that the un-updated reliabilities will make some received component words have little chance to be corrected. For the decoding failures and miscorrections in the second BDD attempt, the SABM algorithm will return the received component word rj. If no errors in rj are corrected by the following component decodings, the first BDD attempt for rj in the next iteration will also be a failure or a miscorrection (as the number of errors in rj is still beyond the error-correcting capability of BDD). In the SABM algorithm, the most unreliable bits will then be flipped. However, as the reliabilities are not updated as iterations go on, the flipped bits are always the same as those in the previous iteration. This will make the second BDD attempt for rj suffer from the same experience with that in the previous iteration, i.e., decoding failure or miscorrection occurs.
To give more chances to decode the BDD failures and miscorrections, the iSABM-SCC decoder randomly selects HUBs for flipping. This will result in different bit flipping trials in different iterations. The number of flipped bits is identical to that in the SABM algorithm, i.e., d0 − t − wH(ej) and 1 for the miscorrections and failures, respectively. In some cases, the number of HUBs may be less than that of the required bit flips. For these cases, even if the decoder flips all the HUBs, the resulted sequence will not be close enough to the transmitted codewords. Therefore, the iSABM algorithm will give up BF and keep the component word unchanged. For the miscorrection detection, the iSABM algorithm follows the same rules as SABM: (i) no HRBs are flipped, and (ii) no suspected errors (detected by BDD) are in conflict with the zero-syndrome component codewords.
In addition, soft-aided decoding in the SABM-SCC decoder only tackles the last 2 SCC blocks, i.e., [Y iT+L−2Y i+L−1], to keep the complexity increase as low as possible. Moreover, the soft information in the last SCC block Y i+L−1 is used in the SABM algorithm, while the bits in the other SCC block Y i+L−2 get no benefit from the soft information. Although this limits the complexity increase, the performance improvement is limited as well.
To obtain more gains, more soft information in the SCC blocks can be utilized. As shown in Fig. 3 (left), the iSABM-SCC decoder uses the soft information in the last L − K SCC blocks, K = 0, . . . , L − 1. For K < L − 1, the iSABM-SCC decoder performs K groups of BDDs and L − K − 1 groups of iSABMs

at each iteration. In particular, K = 0 means all the SCC blocks are tackled by the iSABM algorithm. For K = L − 1, it is a special case that iSABM performs with half of marked bits in the component codewords, as only the soft information in Y i+L−1 is used. In this case, the iSABM-SCC decoder performs L − 2 groups of BDDs and one group of iSABMs at each iteration. This is similar to the SABM-SCC decoder. The only difference is that iSABM randomly selects HUBs for flipping, while SABM always selects the HUBs with the least reliabilities for flipping.
As the iterations go on, the marked information is not updated. This is mainly because the bits in the correctly decoded component codewords will be protected by the zero syndromes. Once a BDD output is in conflict with zero-syndrome component codewords, it will be regarded as a miscorrection and be rejected by the iSABM algorithm. Therefore, the correctly decoded bits have little chance to be wrongly flipped in the next decodings.
B. Numerical Results
In this section, the performance of the iSABM-SCC decoder is evaluated using numerical simulations over an AWGN channel. In the simulations, we first consider SCCs based on BCH (256, 239, 2) code. BCH (256, 239, 2) code is obtained by extending 1 parity bit based on BCH (255, 239, 2) code. The resulting SCC code rate is R = 0.87. The number of iterations is = 7, while the decoding window size is L = 9. The HRB and HUB marking thresholds are δ1 = 10 and δ2 = 2.5, respectively. The two thresholds are numerically optimized by testing different values at a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 6.45 dB for 2-PAM to have the best BER performance (the results were shown in [34, Fig. 4(a)]). In addition, we set the same two thresholds of δ1 = 10 and δ2 = 2.5 for all the bits, regardless of the unequal reliablity among the m bits of a symbol for higher order modulation.
Fig. 4 shows the BER performance of the iSABM-SCC decoding for 2-PAM against SNR. For comparison, it also includes two performance baselines: SABM-SCC decoding (square markers) and standard SCC decoding (circle markers). Moreover, we have also extended the SABM-SR algorithm proposed in [20] to SCCs, which is called SABM-SR-SCC, and have shown its performance with star markers in Fig. 4. A pseudocode for the SABM-SR-SCC decoding is given in the Appendix.
First of all, Fig. 4 shows that iSABM-SCC with L − K = 1 (i.e., K = 8) outperforms SABM-SCC, when both of them use the soft information in the last SCC block of a window. This benefit comes from the random selection of HUBs for flipping. As explained in the third and fourth paragraphs of Section III-A, random selection of HUBs can result in different bit flipping trials in different iterations. This gives more chances to the iSABM-SCC decoder to find the channel errors for flipping, when the decoding in the previous iteration is a miscorrection or a failure. However, the small gap between the curve of iSABM-SCC with L − K = 1 and the curve of SABM-SCC indicates that random BF is not enough for iSABM-SCC to obtain large gains.
To have more gains, soft-aided decoding combined with random BF is performed over more SCC blocks. The curve

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6196

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 39, NO. 19, OCTOBER 1, 2021

Fig. 4. Post-FEC BER vs. SNR for SCCs with BCH (256, 239, 2) component code. The resulting SCC code rate is R = 0.87 and the modulation format is 2-PAM.

Fig. 5. Post-FEC BER vs. SNR for SCCs with BCH (256, 239, 2) component code. The resulting SCC code rate is R = 0.87, and the modulation format is 8-PAM.

with triangle markers in Fig. 4 shows the BER performance of iSABM-SCC with L − K = 7 (i.e., K = 2). In this case, iSABM-SCC uses soft information in the last 7 SCC blocks of a window. As can be seen, iSABM-SCC can outperform SABM-SCC by up to 0.39 dB, while the overall additional gain is up to 0.68 dB when compared to standard SCC at a post-FEC BER of 10−6. It is found that this is the optimal performance of the iSABM-SCC decoder. Tackling beyond the 7 blocks (out of the 9 SCC blocks of the window) will degrade the decoding performance. This is mainly due to the inaccurate marked information and the mis-regarded miscorrections after multiple times of iterative decoding, which prevent the correct BDDs related to the blocks of Y i and Y i+1. In addition, Fig. 4 shows that SCC based on BCH (256, 239, 2) shows an error floor around a post-FEC BER of 10−8.
When compared to the SABM-SR-SCC decoder, the iSABMSCC decoder with L − K = 7 shows a slightly better performance. The optimization of the scaling weights for LLR update follows the same method in [20]. Since each bit is decoded twice by the component decoder at each iteration (one row component decoding and one column component decoding (see Fig. 3(left)), the scaling weight vector α for LLR update contains 14 elements in the case of = 7 iterations. The optimized scaling weight vector for the 14 elements we used is α = [8.6, 8.7, 8.4, 9, 9.7, 9.9, 10.5, 11.4, 12, 11.2, 11.5, 12, 13.4, 13.5]. The κth element in α corresponds to the optimum scaling weight for the κth decoding of the bits, κ = 1, 2, . . . , 2 .
The achieved performance for SABM-SR-SCC here may be suboptimal, as the optimization of the scaling weights did not consider the different reliability distribution among the SCC blocks of a window. Differently from PCs, where the component decoding is performed iteratively within the same block, the decoding of SCCs performs using a sliding window. The block,

which is closer to the oldest block of the window (i.e., Yi in the ith window shown in Fig. 3), is decoded more times, and thus is more reliable. As a result, when the SABM-SR algorithm is extended from PCs to SCCs, the scaling weights may be different for each SCC block needs to be considered to have optimum performance [14]. However, this will increase the dimensions of the scaling weight vector, and thus make the optimization process very time-consuming if Monte-Carlo simulations are used.
Fig. 5 shows the BER performance of iSABM-SCC decoding for 8-PAM. It is observed that the gains are somewhat higher than that for 2-PAM. The achieved additional gain of iSABMSCC can be up to 0.53 dB with respect to SABM-SCC, while the overall improvements are up to 0.89 dB when compared to standard SCC at the post-FEC BER of 10−6.
In practical applications, t = 3 or t = 4 BCH codes are more attractive. For example, the recommended SCC in OTN standards [2]–[4] uses BCH (1022, 990, 3) code to bring the BER down to 10−15. However, the very large block size (each SCC block contains 512 × 510 bits) combined with the 3-errorcorrecting capability of the component code makes it hard for software simulation. Therefore, iSABM-SCCs based on BCH (256, 231, 3) and BCH (256, 223, 4) codes are studied instead. The two BCH codes are 1-bit extended based on BCH (255, 231, 3) and BCH (255, 223, 4). The resulting SCC code rates are R = 0.80 and R = 0.74, respectively. Fig. 6 shows the simulation results for 2-PAM. To avoid having too many curves, only the results of iSABM-SCCs with L − K = 7 are shown. It can be seen that even with larger t, iSABM-SCC still outperforms SABM-SCC and SABM-SR-SCC. Specifically, iSABM-SCC offers additional gains of 0.30 dB and 0.20 dB for t = 3 and t = 4 with respect to SABM-SCC, respectively. The overall additional gains are increased to 0.49 dB and 0.30 dB, respectively, when compared to standard SCCs. With the same

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: A SOFT-AIDED STAIRCASE DECODER

6197

0.91 dB at the post-FEC BER of 10−6 for 2-PAM and 16-PAM, respectively. In addition, we have noted that the gap between iSABM-SCC and BEE-SCC vanishes as SNR increases. The intuition is that this is due to the fixed thresholds we used and can be avoided by adapting the thresholds for each SNR. A complexity comparison between iSABM-SCC and BEE-SCC will be presented in Section V.

IV. EFFECT OF UNIFORM RELIABILITY QUANTIZATION ON THE SABM- AND ISABM-SCC DECODERS

A. Hardware Considerations

Fig. 6. Post-FEC BER vs. SNR for SCCs with BCH (256, 231, 3) and (256, 223, 4) component codes. The resulting SCC code rates are R = 0.80 and R = 0.74, respectively, and the modulation format is 2-PAM.
Fig. 7. Post-FEC BER vs. SNR for SCCs with BCH (254, 230, 3) component code for 2-PAM and 16-PAM. The resulting SCC code rate is R = 0.811.
3-error-correcting capability, the expected gain of iSABM-SCC based on BCH (1022, 990, 3) upon standard SCC is smaller than that of iSABM-SCC based on BCH (256, 231, 3), i.e., 0.49 dB, due to the greatly increased block size.
To compare with the latest BEE-SCC decoder proposed in [16], SCCs based on BCH (254, 230, 3) code are also considered for 2-PAM and 16-PAM. The BCH code is obtained by shortening 1 information bit based on BCH (255, 231, 3). For the sake of fairness, we use the same parameters as [16, Fig. 11] and [16, Fig. 13], i.e., L = 7 window size and = 10 iterations. For iSABM-SCC, we use L − K = 5, i.e., K = 2. A random interleaver is employed within each SCC block. The results in Fig. 7 show that for the studied SNRs, iSABM-SCC presents a slightly better performance than BEE-SCC. The achieved gains of iSABM-SCC with respect to standard SCCs are 0.58 dB and

When taking the hardware implementation of the SABMand iSABM-SCC decoders into account, two aspects need to be considered. One is that a max-log approximation is often used for LLR calculations, as the implementation of exponentiation operation in (1) is usually quite complex in hardware. We have demonstrated in [33] that using the max-log approximation for the SABM algorithm only leads to negligible performance loss. Due to the removal of the sorting, the iSABM algorithm is less sensitive to the accuracy of the LLR values. We thus expect that the max-log approximation will not result in any penalties in the iSABM-SCC decoder either. The other important issue that needs to be considered for the potential hardware implementation is the fixed-point representation of the reliability values, i.e., reliability quantization.
In the SABM-SCC decoder, the reliabilties |λl,k| need to be stored to perform sorting for marking HUBs (see the top right of Fig. 2). As a result, the SABM-SCC decoder will encounter the problem of fixed-point representation of |λl,k|. Contrary to SABM-SCC, iSABM-SCC does not require storing channel reliabilities as no sorting is needed. Instead, the values of |λl,k| are directly sent to the bit marking unit for classification of the bits into three classes via two reliability thresholds (see the top right of Fig. 3). Bit marking in the iSABM-SCC decoder is then equivalent to a reliability quantizer. However, this is a nonuniform quantizer with two decision thresholds of δ1 = 10 and δ2 = 2.5. In hardware, nonuniform quantization is implemented at the cost of an increased complexity of the arithmetic operations [35, Section III-D]. In contrast, uniform quantization can be simply and readily implemented in hardware. Therefore, this section will study the effect of uniform reliability quantization on the performance of the iSABM-SCC decoder as well as the SABM-SCC decoder.
B. Uniform Reliability Quantization
Fig. 8 shows the reliability quantization we considered in the SABM- and iSABM-SCC decoders. In practice, the channel output yl is commonly quantized by a 6-bit or 7-bit analog to digital converter (ADC) [31], [36]. This will also result in a quantized LLR value. As we pay attention to the fixed-point quantization in the digital signal processing (DSP) block (after the ADC module), we assume that the value of yl is a floating-point number. Under this assumption, the value of |λl,k| is calculated using floating-point arithmetic according to (1), where |λl,k| ∈ [0, +∞). Then, a q-bit uniform quantizer Q(·) is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6198

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 39, NO. 19, OCTOBER 1, 2021

Fig. 8. Reliability quantization we considered in the (a) SABM-SCC and (b) iSABM-SCC decoders. T is the saturation threshold of the quantizer Q(·) with resolution of Δ.

used to convert |λl,k| into a fixed-point value |λl,k|q. With |λl,k|q, the SABM-SCC decoder sorts the bits ˆbl,k and marks them into HRBs, UBs, and HUBs (see Fig. 8(a)). In the iSABM-SCC decoder, the floating-point |λl,k| value is sent to the bit marking unit, i.e., the quantizer Q(·), for marking bits (see Fig. 8(b)).
Since only three reliability levels, i.e., HRBs, HUBs and UBs, are required, we first consider a 2-bit uniform quantizer. As |λl,k| is nonnegative, the quantizer is unsigned. In terms of the memory
and power consumption, 1-bit quantization is very interesting for
practical applications (see e.g., [25], [37]). Therefore, we will
also study the performance of iSABM-SCC as well as SABM-
SCC with 1-bit reliability quantization.
The quantization scheme is shown in the middle of Fig. 8, where T is the saturation threshold of the q-bit quantizer with resolution of Δ, with Δ = T /2q. The corresponding law is
given by

|λl,k |q

Q(|λl,k|) =

|λl,k | Δ

Δ, 0 ≤ |λl,k| < T − Δ ,

(3)

T − Δ, |λl,k| ≥ T − Δ

where · is the floor function that returns the largest integer
number smaller than or equal to its argument.
In order to minimize the performance loss, quantization
should not change the reliability levels of the bits with respect to
that without quantization. To meet this requirement as much as
possible, one possible way is to make the HRB threshold δ1 be one of the decision boundaries of the quantizer.1 Another reason
for this choice is that the iSABM algorithm as well as the SABM
algorithm is found to be very sensitive to the change of HRBs. According to (3), we know that mΔ, m = 1, . . . , 2q − 1, are
the decision boundaries of the quantizer. Therefore, δ1 = mΔ = mT /2q is considered. Further, m takes the maximum value, i.e., m = 2q − 1, or in other words, δ1 = T − Δ. This will result in the smallest value of Δ for a given δ1, thus minimizing quantization error. Therefore, we finally have

T

=

2q δ1 2q − 1 .

(4)

1This will ensure that the HRBs are immune from the reliability quantization, as their quantized reliabilities are still larger than or equal to the HRB threshold δ1.

Fig. 9. PDFs of the reliabilities |λl,k| and channel LLRs λl,k (positive part) at an SNR of 6.57 dB for 2-PAM: (a) without reliablity quantization, (b) with 2-bit reliability quantization, and (c) with 1-bit reliability quantization.
According to (4), if δ1 = 10, 2-bit quantization results in T = 40/3 and Δ = 10/3, while 1-bit quantization results in T = 20 and Δ = 10.
Fig. 9 shows the probability density functions (PDFs) of the reliabilities |λl,k| and channel LLRs λl,k (positive part) at an SNR of 6.57 dB, which corresponds to a post-FEC BER of 10−3 for the iSABM-SCC shown in Fig. 4. They are obtained by transmitting an all-one sequence, and thus there are mostly positive LLRs. Fig. 9(a) shows the proportion of HRBs, HUBs and UBs of iSABM-SCC without quantization, while Fig. 9(b) and 9(c) show that with 2-bit and 1-bit quantizations, respectively. The bold ticks on the x-axis of Fig. 9(b) and 9(c) indicate the decision boundaries of the quantizers, where δ2 denotes the equivalent HUB threshold for iSABM-SCC with the quantized reliabilities. The integral between the solid curve and the x-axis over [δ1, ∞) is the proportion of HRBs in the total bits, while that over [0, δ2) in Fig. 9(a) (or [0, δ2) in Fig. 9(b) and 9(c)) indicates the proportion of HUBs in the total bits (denoted by ϕ1). Let ϕ2 be the integral between the dashed line and the x-axis over [0, δ2) in Fig. 9(a) (or [0, δ2) in Fig. 9(b) and 9(c)). The ratio of (ϕ1 − ϕ2) to ϕ1 indicates the proportion of errors in the HUBs, where ϕ2 represents the wrongly marked HUBs (which are correct bits).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: A SOFT-AIDED STAIRCASE DECODER

6199

Fig. 9 shows that the HRBs are not affected by the 1-bit or 2-bit reliability quantization we proposed. This is not the case for the HUBs in the iSABM-SCC decoder. For the 2-bit quantization, the value of |λl,k| between 0 and 10/3 are not recognizable anymore, as they are all assigned a quantized value of 0. This will make the bits with |λl,k| between 2.5 and 10/3 added to the HUB class in the iSABM-SCC decoder. In other words, the HUB threshold is equivalently changed to 10/3, i.e., δ2 = 10/3. In this case, the change of the proportion of HUBs in the bits is very small, i.e., only from 2.54% to 3.52%. Therefore, we can expect a negligible performance loss for iSABM-SCC with this 2-bit reliability quantization. In the case of 1-bit reliability quantization, we have δ2 = δ1 = 10. It is equivalent to a binary decision on the bits: HUBs with |λl,k| < δ1 and HRBs with |λl,k| ≥ δ1. As shown in Fig. 9(c), the number of HUBs is significantly increased from 2.54% to 16.87%. More importantly, the proportion of errors in the HUBs becomes less, as the value of ϕ2 greatly increases. This will lead to that BF has a higher probability to flip the wrong bits, which potentially gives a larger performances loss.
With respect to HUBs in the SABM-SCC decoder, they are always the d0 − t − 1 bits with the smallest values of |λl,k| in each row of an SCC block. In the example of SCC with w = 128 and BCH (256, 239, 2), we have d0 − t − 1 = 3. However, Fig. 9(b) and 9(c) show that in the cases of 2-bit and 1-bit reliability quantizations for 2-PAM, 3.52% and 16.87% of bits (with the smallest |λl,k| values), i.e., 5 and 22 bits if w = 128, will all be quantized to 0, respectively. With the same quantized reliability values, even if sorting is performed, the SABM-SCC decoder cannot effectively find the most unreliable 3 bits (out of the 5 or 22 bits with |λl,k|q = 0). This will make BF more likely to flip the wrong bits, and thus cause a performance loss.
The analysis and discussion above give an intuition on the performance of the iSABM-SCC and SABM-SCC decoders with the proposed uniform quantization scheme. A precise comparison is presented in Section IV-C.
C. Numerical Results
Fig. 10 shows the results of iSABM-SCC decoding with 2-bit (dashed curve with triangle markers) and 1-bit (dash-dot curve with triangle markers) reliability quantization and L − K = 7. The modulation format is 2-PAM. Two baselines are: standard SCC decoding and iSABM-SCC decoding with an idealized three-level quantizer (as shown in Fig. 9(a)). In theory, the latter case requires q = log2 3 quantization bits, where q is used to denote the non-integer quantization bits. As predicted in the third to last paragraph of Section IV-B, iSABM-SCC with 2-bit reliability quantization suffers negligible performance loss, while that with 1-bit reliability quantization has a larger performance loss, i.e., 0.20 dB, at the post-FEC BER of 10−6. However, the latter can efficiently reduce the occupied memory for storing marked information by 50%.
Fig. 10 also shows the impact of reliability quantization on the performance of the SABM-SCC decoder. Differently from iSABM-SCC, the idealized case for SABM-SCC is that without

Fig. 10. Post-FEC BER vs. SNR for SABM- and iSABM-SCC decoding with 1-bit and 2-bit reliability quantization. The SCC code rate is R = 0.87, and the modulation format is 2-PAM.
quantization, or in other words, with q = ∞ quantization. As Fig. 10 shows, 1-bit reliability quantization will degrade the performance by 0.12 dB. Although the performance loss of SABM-SCC with 2-bit reliability quantization becomes smaller, there exists a clear gap to that without quantization. It indicates that SABM-SCC is more sensitive to the reliability quantization than iSABM-SCC. This is due to the fact that SABM-SCC needs the knowledge of the sorted most unreliable d0 − t − 1 HUBs. However, as explained in Section IV-B, the same quantized value of |λl,k|q of the HUBs makes the decoder unaware of which HUB is the most unreliable one. In this case, the decoder always simply takes the required number of HUBs from left to right in each row of an SCC block for flipping.
Fig. 11 shows the influence of uniform reliability quantization on the SABM- and iSABM-SCC decoders for 8-PAM. We can also find that 2-bit reliability quantization is enough to enable a negligible performance loss for iSABM-SCC decoding. To further relax the requirement on hardware, 1-bit reliability quantization is also feasible, but with 0.25 dB (0.21 dB) performance loss for the iSABM-SCC (SABM-SCC) decoders.
For SCCs based on higher error-correcting-capability BCH codes, iSABM-SCC plays a smaller role in the performance improvement. This is mainly due to the reduced miscorrection probability, as the value of t increases [38]. Therefore, a smaller gain of iSABM-SCC upon standard SCC is observed, when comparing the results shown in Fig. 6 (where t = 3, 4 BCH codes are used) with that shown in Fig. 4 (where t = 2 BCH code is used). As a result, we expect that the performance loss (due to the 1-bit reliability quantization) for iSABM-SCCs based on t = 3, 4 BCH codes will also be smaller than that with t = 2 BCH code, i.e., that shown in Fig. 10 and 11.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6200

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 39, NO. 19, OCTOBER 1, 2021

Fig. 11. Post-FEC BER vs. SNR for SABM- and iSABM-SCC decoding with 1-bit and 2-bit reliability quantizations. The SCC code rate is R = 0.87, and the modulation format is 8-PAM.

V. COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
The channel LLRs in SABM- and iSABM-SCC are only used to classify bits into HUBs, HRBs, and UBs. In general, the complexity of the SABM- and iSABM-SCC decoding is much lower than that of SD decoding (see e.g., [9]–[11]). Due to the fact that the SABM and iSABM algorithms need to have the HUB and HRB information, this overhead makes the SABM- and iSABM-SCC decoding more complicated than HD decoding (e.g., [6]–[8]). Compared to SABM-SCC, the most important part of the proposed iSABM-SCC decoder is that the time-consuming sorting is completely avoided. Some implementation aspects of the SABM-SCC decoding have already been discussed in [19, Section IV] and [33, Section II]. In what follows, we will mainly discuss the complexity increase of the newly proposed iSABM-SCC decoding, and compare with other two state-of-the-art SA-HD decoding methods: SABM-SR-SCC extended from the work in [20] and BEE-SCC [16].

A. Complexity Analysis

With respect to standard SCCs, a big contribution to the complexity increase of the iSABM-SCC decoder is the extra BDDs coming from the second BDD attempt after BF (see Fig. 3 (right)). Let N and Nsd be the number of BDDs in the iSABM-SCC decoding and standard SCC decoding within a window, respectively. The relative complexity increase caused by the additional BDDs is given by [19, eq. (4)]

η1

N − Nsd Nsd

=

N − w(L − 1) w(L − 1)

.

(5)

Considering for example an SCC with BCH (256, 239, 2) component code, Nsd equals to 7168 when L = 9 and = 7.

Since the number of BDDs within an iSABM-SCC decoding window is not deterministic, we calculated N as the average value of the first 10 000 windows. iSABM-SCC with K = 2 resulted in a η1 = 22.35% relative complexity increase at an SNR of 6.57 dB. It can be expected that this value will become smaller, as channel SNR increases. This is due to the reduced channel errors, which will result in less BDD failures and miscorrections in the first BDD attempt.
It should be mentioned that depending on how the algorithms in this paper are implemented, the complexity increase given by (5) could be an underestimation of the true complexity increase. The reason is as follows. BDD can be implemented as a syndrome-based decoder, which performs syndrome calculation first, and then estimates the error pattern using syndromes and corrects errors. We refer to this syndrome calculation, error estimation and correction as full BDD. When the calculated syndrome vector is zero, BDD stops as its input is a valid codeword. We refer to this as partial BDD, which is less complex than full BDD. The expression in (5) assume all decoding attempts are full BDD. However, standard SCC rarely needs full BDDs, as the code rate is often adapted to the channel condition. On the other hand, the extra BDDs in iSABM-SCC always need error pattern estimation, as their input is either a miscorrection or a failure (which corresponds to a nonzero syndrome). This makes the actual relative complexity increase potentially higher than that calculated from (5).
Let vsc and vep be the time required for syndrome calculation and error pattern estimation, respectively. For the ith window, a more accurate relative complexity increase (due to the extra BDDs) is

η2

h=1 h=1

Lp=−11(Dhpvsc

L−1 p=1

(Dhsdpvsc

+ P hpvep) + Phsdpvep)

−

1,

(6)

where Dhsdp and Dhp denote the number of syndrome calculations

of

component

words

in

[Y

T i+p−1

Y

i+p]

at

the

hth

iteration

of

standard SCC and iSABM-SCC decoding, respectively. In (6),

Phsdp and P hp denote the number of error pattern estimations of standard SCC and iSABM-SCC decoding, respectively. For

standard SCC, Phsdp ≤ Dhsdp ≤ w. Since iSABM is performed over the last L − K SCC blocks, P hp ≤ Dhp ≤ 2w for p > K (due to the extra BDDs), and P hp ≤ Dhp ≤ w for p ≤ K.
In (6), vsc and vep (or, equivalently, the ratio of vsc to vep) are the key to estimate η2 accurately. However, their exact values

depend on many implementation-specific details such as, for

example, the particular hardware architecture and the degree of

parallelization. Therefore, an objective and accurate analysis for

vsc and vep as well as η2 is beyond the scope of this paper and is

left as future work.

Another important contribution to the complexity increase

of the iSABM-SCC decoder is marking bits. For every HDestimated bit ˆbl,k, the iSABM-SCC decoder needs to mark

whether it is an HUB, HRB, or UB (see (2)). Bit marking occurs

only once before decoding. During decoding, the marked infor-

mation is not updated, which is statically stored in a data random

access memory (RAM). From a hardware implementation point

of view, this bit marking process is quite simple as only two

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: A SOFT-AIDED STAIRCASE DECODER

6201

TABLE I COMPLEXITY COMPARISON BETWEEN ISABM-, SABM-SR-, AND
BEE-SCC DECODERS
comparator circuits with thresholds of δ1 and δ2 are required. For the storage of the marked information, 2 bits are enough to indicate the three possibilities: HRB, HUB, and UB. To be a more hardware-friendly FEC code, the simulation results shown in Section IV-C have demonstrated that 1-bit representation of a |λl,k| value is also feasible at the expense of a small performance loss, but with 50% memory save.
In addition, the iSABM-SCC decoder also requires the syndrome information for each component codeword to perform miscorrection detection. However, this is costless, as BDD will naturally compute (and store) the syndromes for each component codeword.
To randomly determine the bit flippings at each iteration, the need for a random number generator (RNG) is also an overhead to the iSABM-SCC decoder. One of the most simple and common way to generate pseudo-random numbers is using linear-feedback shift register (LFSR). The potential problem is that the number of HUBs in each component codeword is not deterministic. If the worst case is considered, i.e., the 2w bits of a component codeword are all HUBs, the required number of bits for the LFSR is log2(2w + 1). Therefore, the accurate complexity of RNG depends on the practical hardware implementation, which is left for future work.
B. Approximate Complexity Discussion Table I shows a brief complexity comparison between the
iSABM-SCC, SABM-SR-SCC, and BEE-SCC decoders, which we will discuss below. They are three kinds of SA-HD decoders that have been proposed very recently, and present comparable performance (the performance comparison has been shown in Section III-B). However, we would like to highlight that the iSABM-SCC decoder proposed in this paper is the simplest one. The reasons for this can be explained from four aspects:

r Less BDD attempts: As Fig. 3 shows, iSABM-SCC per-

forms SA decoding over part of the SCC blocks within a

window, i.e., L − K out of L SCC blocks. This corresponds

to K groups of BDDs and L − K − 1 groups of iSABMs at

each iteration. SABM-SR-SCC is similar to iSABM-SCC,

but with L − K − 1 groups of SABMs with scaled relia-

bilities. By contrast, BEE-SCC performs L − 1 groups of

SA component decodings at each iteration. In terms of the

SA decoding, the three algorithms all need to perform BDD

multiple times to decode a component word. However, the

number of BDD attempts in iSABM-SCC and SABM-

SR-SCC is at most twice, while that in the BEE-SCC is

three times (one is from the upper branch shown in [16,

Fig. 9], while the other two are from the bottom branch due

to the erasure decoding). The accumulated large amount of

extra BDDs in BEE-SCC will result in a higher complexity

r

increase. No LLR

sorting

and

updating:

Both

SABM-SR-SCC

and BEE-SCC update their LLRs as a function of the

iterations. Using the updated LLRs, SABM-SR-SCC up-

dates the HRBs by comparing with a reliability threshold.

However, the HUBs are updated by performing reliability

sorting to determine the sorted d0 − t − 1 HUBs in each

component codeword. In the BEE-SCC decoder, reliability

sorting is also required to find the most unreliable 2 bits

to determine the 2 erasures in each component codeword.

It is well known that sorting process will greatly increase

the complexity of the algorithms. In contrast, the iSABM-

SCC decoder determines the HRBs and HUBs by simply

comparing the absolute LLR values with two reliability

thresholds. The marked reliability information are not up-

r

dated either. Reduced memory

usage:

In terms

of

the required

extra

memories (with respect to standard SCC), the iSABM-SCC

decoder needs to store 2-bit marked information for each bit ˆbl,k (rather than the LLRs). By contrast, the SABM-

SR-SCC decoder also requires to store the channel LLRs

with multiple bits, and so does BEE-SCC. In addition to

the channel LLRs, BEE-SCC also requires memory for

storing look-up tables (LUTs) and ternary messages (from

the output of BDD and error-and-erasure decoding (EED)

in [16, Fig. 9]) for LLR update. Although the storage of the

LUTs occupies little additional memory, the mathematical

computation of the elements in the LUTs also needs to be

r

considered [16, Eq. (13)]). Reduced data-flow: Compared to a standard SCC decoder

with only binary inputs, all SA-HD decoders have a greatly

increased input bandwidth arising from the input of soft

information (as shown in Fig. 1). In terms of the internal

data-flow, iSABM-SCC, SABM-SR-SCC and BEE-SCC

all only exchange binary bits between the component de-

coders. However, iSABM-SCC has a reduced data-flow

between the component decoder and data RAM. For the de-

coding of each component word, the iSABM-SCC decoder

only needs to read the 2-bit marked information for each bit ˆbl,k from a statically stored bit-marking database. By

contrast, SABM-SR-SCC requires to read the multiple-bit

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6202

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 39, NO. 19, OCTOBER 1, 2021

information. The retained gains are still much higher than those provided by the SABM-SCC decoder with infinite-bit reliability quantization. Due to the excellent performance and hardwarefriendly implementation, we believe iSABM-SCC will be a very appealing FEC solution for future high-speed low-cost optical fiber communication systems, especially now that SCCs have been recommended in the standards for 100 G and 400 G optical transport networks.

channel LLRs and the weight factors both from the data RAM first. After updating LLRs and remarking bits, the HRB and HUB information can then be delivered to the decoder to perform SABM decoding. Similarly, BEE-SCC needs to read the channel LLRs, LUTs, and ternary messages (from the output of BDD and EED) for LLR update.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a new soft-aided hard-decision decoder, called iSABM-SCC, is proposed to improve the decoding of staircase codes. The iSABM-SCC decoder is based on modifications of the soft-aided bit-marking algorithm with a simplified bit marking process and an improved bit flipping strategy. By performing soft-aided decoding over multiple SCC blocks, gains up to 0.53 dB with respect to SABM-SCCs and up to 0.91 dB with respect to standard SCCs are reported. The analysis of uniform reliability quantization on the performance of iSABM-SCC decoder show that 2-bit representation will cause negligible performance loss, while 1-bit representation causes a 0.25 dB gain penalty but with 50% memory saving for the storage of marked

APPENDIX

A pseudocode is given in Algorithm 1 to show how we extend

the SABM-SR algorithm proposed in [20] to SCCs. In this

example, the decoding is performed over the received blocks

{Y i, Y i+1, . . . , Y i+L−1} of the ith window with L − K − 1 groups of SABMs with scaled reliabilities and K groups of

BDDs at each iteration. The scaling weight vector is α =

[α1, α2, . . . , α2 ], where ακ denotes the scaling weight for the κth decoding of the bits, κ = 1, 2, . . . , 2 . The SABM-SR-SCC

decoder at the hth iteration, h = 1, 2, . . . , , works as follows:

Step 1 (Line 1): Initializing p to L − 1.

Step 2 (Lines 2–4): Decoding each row rj, j = 1, 2, . . . , w,

of

[Y

T i+p−1

Y

i+p]

using

SABM

with

an

output

of

cj

.

Step 3 (Lines 5–8): Mapping the successfully decoded bits 0

and 1 to −1 and +1, respectively, i.e., uj(g) = −1 if cj(g) = 0 or uj(g) = +1 if cj(g) = 1, where uj(g) and cj(g) refer to the gth element in the vector of uj and cj, respectively, g = 1, 2, . . . , 2w. If SABM fails, uj(g) = 0. This is not shown in
the pseudocode, as uj(g) = 0 means no update of the reliability

according to [20, eq. (1)].

Step 4 (Lines 9–13): Updating the reliabilities when rj is decoded. Let φhj be the scaled reliabilities corresponding to rj at
the hth iteration and ψj be the channel LLRs. In the ith window,

each bit is protected by two component codewords except that

in Yi+L−1. Therefore, when the component decoding performs over [Y Ti+p−1Y i+p], the first half of bits in rj (i.e., the bits in Y i+p−1) are decoded 2h − 1 times and thus we define the corresponding scaled reliabilities as φjh(1 : w) = α2h−1uj(1 : w) + ψj(1 : w). The notation of x(a1 : a2) with a1 ≤ a2 refers
to the elements in the vector of x from the locations of a1
to a2. For p < L − 1, since the second half of bits in rj are decoded 2h times, the scaled reliability is defined as φhj (w + 1 : 2w) = α2huj(w + 1 : 2w) + ψj(w + 1 : 2w). In the case of
p = L − 1, the scaled reliabilities for the second half of bits in

rj (i.e., the bits in Y i+L−1) are updated as φjh(w + 1 : 2w) = αhuj(w + 1 : 2w) + ψj(w + 1 : 2w). This is because the bits in Y i+L−1 are only involved in one component codeword and
thus are decoded h times at the hth iteration.

Step 5 (Line 14): Remarking bits according to φhj . At the same time, let p = p − 1. The decoder repeats the steps from line 2 to

line 14 until p = K + 1.

Step 6 (Lines 15–25): Performing K groups of BDDs to de-

code

[Y

T i+K

−1Y

i+K ],

[Y

T i+K

−2Y

i+K−1], . . . ,

[Y

T i

Y

i+1]

in

turn. One special case is that when the rows in [Y Ti+K−1Y i+K ]

are successfully decoded, the decoder updates the reliabilities

corresponding to Y i+K , which is defined as φhj (w + 1 : 2w) =

α2huj(w + 1 : 2w) + ψj(w + 1 : 2w), and remarks bits. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: A SOFT-AIDED STAIRCASE DECODER

6203

updated marked information for Y i+K is used for the SABM

decoding

of

[Y

T i+K

Y

i+K+1]

in

the

next

iteration.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their careful work and fruitful suggestions, which have helped us to greatly improve the quality of this paper.

REFERENCES
[1] B. P. Smith, A. Farhood, A. Hunt, F. R. Kschischang, and J. Lodge, “Staircase codes: FEC for 100 Gb/s OTN,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 110–117, Jan. 2012.
[2] ITU, “OTU4 Long-Reach Interface,” ITU-T Recommendation G.709.2/Y.1331.2, Jul. 2018.
[3] ITU, “Flexible OTN long-reach interfaces,” ITU-T Recommendation G.709.3/Y.1331.3, Jun. 2018.
[4] O. I. Forum, “Implementation agreement 400ZR,” Opt. Internetworking Forum, Mar. 2020.
[5] B. Chen, Y. Lei, G. Liga, C. Okonkwo, and A. Alvarado, “Hard-decision coded modulation for high-throughput short-reach optical interconnect,” Entropy, vol. 22, no. 4, Mar. 2020, Art. no: 400.
[6] B. P. Smith, “Error-correcting codes for fibre-optic communication systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Toronto: Toronto, ON M5S, Canada, 2011.
[7] C. Häger and H. D. Pfister, “Miscorrection-free decoding of staircase codes,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun., Gothenburg, Sweden, 2017, pp. 1–3.
[8] L. Holzbaur, H. Bartz, and A. Wachter-Zeh, “Improved decoding and error floor analysis of staircase codes,” Designs Codes Cryptogr., vol. 87, no. 2/3, pp. 647–664, Apr. 2018.
[9] X. Dou, M. Zhu, J. Zhang, and B. Bai, “Soft-decision based slidingwindow decoding of staircase codes,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes & Iterative Inf. Process., Hong Kong, China, 2018, pp. 1–5.
[10] L. Zhou, B. Feng, J. Jiao, K. Liang, S. Wu, and Q. Zhang, “Performance analysis of soft decoding algorithms for polar-staircase coding scheme,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Signal Process., Hangzhou, China, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[11] V. B. Wijekoon, E. Viterbo, and Y. Hong, “LDPC-staircase codes for soft decision decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf., Seoul, Korea (South), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[12] C. Condo, V. Bioglio, and I. Land, “Staircase construction with nonsystematic polar codes,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. Exhib., San Diego, CA, USA, 2020, pp. 1–3.
[13] A. Sheikh, A. Graell i Amat, and G. Liva, “Iterative bounded distance decoding of product codes with scaled reliability,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun., Rome, Italy, 2018, pp. 1–3.
[14] A. Sheikh, A. Graell i Amat, and G. Liva, “Binary message passing decoding of product-like codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 8167–8178, Dec. 2019.
[15] A. Sheikh, A. Graell i Amat, G. Liva, and A. Alvarado, “Refined reliability combining for binary message passing decoding of product codes,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 39, no. 15, pp. 4958–4973, Aug. 2021.
[16] A. Sheikh, A. Graell i Amat, and A. Alvarado, “Novel high-throughput decoding algorithm for product and staircase codes based on error-anderasure decoding,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 39, no. 15, pp. 4909–4922, Aug. 2021.
[17] A. Graell i Amat, G. Liva, and F. Steiner, “Coding for optical communications-can we approach the shannon limit with low complexity,” in Proc. 45th Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun., Dublin, Ireland, 2019, pp. 1–4.
[18] Y. Lei et al., “Decoding staircase codes with marked bits,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Hong Kong, China, 2018, pp. 1–5.

[19] Y. Lei et al., “Improved decoding of staircase codes: The soft-aided bit-marking (SABM) algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 8220–8232, Dec. 2019.
[20] G. Liga, A. Sheikh, and A. Alvarado, “A novel soft-aided bit-marking decoder for product codes,” in Proc. 45th Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun., Dublin, Ireland, 2019, pp. 1–4.
[21] W. Li, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “Improved soft-assisted iterative bounded distance decoding for product codes,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun., Chengdu, China, 2019, pp. 710–714.
[22] M. Baldi, F. Chiaraluce, and G. Cancellieri, “Finite-precision analysis of demappers and decoders for LDPC-coded m-QAM systems,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 239–250, Jun. 2009.
[23] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance: Quantization and algorithm choices,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 3258–3268, Nov. 2009.
[24] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Min-sum decoder architectures with reduced word length for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Regular Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 105–115, Feb. 2010.
[25] F. Steiner, E. Ben Yacoub, B. Matuz, G. Liva, and A. Graell i Amat, “One and two bit message passing for SC-LDPC codes with higher-order modulation,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 37, no. 23, pp. 5914–5925, Dec. 2019.
[26] S. K. Planjery, D. Declercq, L. Danjean, and B. Vasic, “Finite alphabet iterative decoders-part i: Decoding beyond belief propagation on the binary symmetric channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4033–4045, Oct. 2013.
[27] D. Declercq, B. Vasic, S. K. Planjery, and E. Li, “Finite alphabet iterative decoders-part II: Towards guaranteed error correction of LDPC codes via iterative decoder diversity,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4046–4057, Oct. 2013.
[28] U. Dasgupta and C. N. Georghiades, “Turbo decoding of quantized data,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 56–64, Jan. 2002.
[29] C. Leroux, A. J. Raymond, G. Sarkis, and W. J. Gross, “A semi-parallel successive-cancellation decoder for polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 289–299, Jan. 2013.
[30] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, A. J. Raymond, W. J. Gross, and A. Burg, “Hardware architecture for list successive cancellation decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II: Exp. Briefs, vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 609–613, Aug. 2014.
[31] Y. Cai et al., “FPGA investigation on error-flare performance of a concatenated staircase and hamming FEC code for 400G inter-data center interconnect,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 188–195, Jan. 2019.
[32] L. Szczecinski and A. Alvarado, Bit-Interleaved Coded Modulation: Fundamentals, Analysis, and Design. Chichester, U.K.: Wiley, 2015.
[33] A. Alvarado, G. Liga, Y. Lei, B. Chen, and A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, “Improving HD-FEC decoding via bit marking,” in Proc. 24th OptoElectron. Commun. Conf., Fukuoka, Japan, 2019, pp. 1–3.
[34] Y. Lei, B. Chen, G. Liga, and A. Alvarado, “On parameter optimization and reach enhancement for the improved soft-aided staircase decoder,” in Proc. 11th Int. Symp. Topics Coding, Montréal, Canada, 2021, pp. 1–5.
[35] D. A. Morero, M. A. Castrillón, A. Aguirre, M. R. Hueda, and O. E. Agazzi, “Design tradeoffs and challenges in practical coherent optical transceiver implementations,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 121–136, Jan. 2016.
[36] D. Truhachev, K. El-Sankary, A. Karami, A. Zokaei, and S. Li, “Efficient implementation of 400 Gbps optical communication FEC,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Regular Papers, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 496–509, Jan. 2021.
[37] R. Deng, J. Zhou, and W. Zhang, “Bandlimited communication with onebit quantization and oversampling: Transceiver design and performance evaluation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 845–862, Feb. 2021.
[38] J. Justesen, “Performance of product codes and related structures with iterated decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 407–415, Feb. 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

