2021 World Conference on Computing and Communication Technologies (WCCCT)

2021 World Conference on Computing and Communication Technologies (WCCCT) | 978-1-6654-4110-0/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/WCCCT52091.2021.00009

Minimum-Variance Importance Sampling Estimator for Fast Simulation of Linear Block Codes over Binary Erasure Channels

Jinzhe Pan Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Hong Kong SAR, China jpanad@ust.hk

Wai Ho Mow Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Hong Kong SAR, China eewhmow@ust.hk

Abstract—In this paper, the problem of efficiently evaluating the error performance of linear block codes over binary erasure channels (BECs) is considered. We propose a novel importance sampling (IS) estimator by deriving the optimal IS distribution of the erasure pattern size. Consequently, a corresponding iterative algorithm for fast simulation purpose is proposed. The effectiveness of the proposed IS algorithm compared to Monte Carlo simulation is demonstrated in estimating the block erasure rate of low-density parity-check codes, and IS gains of almost ten orders of magnitude is achieved.
Keywords—binary erasure channel, importance sampling, fast simulation
I. INTRODUCTION
Performance evaluation of the communication systems is a long-standing problem. Analytically predicting like using performance bounds is an efficient way to solve this problem. However, many practical decoders, such as the iterative decoders, do not have explicit expressions for analytically predicting its performance. The Monte Carlo (MC) simulation is an alternative way to estimate the performance for such scenarios. However, the number of generated samples required for reliable estimation at very low block erasure rate values, which are sometimes the regions of interest, is very large. For example, the bus coding in [1] with bus width 128 requires an error rate lower than 10-20. This level of error probability will make the use of MC simulation impractically time-consuming. For this kind of applications, it's common to set unreliable zoom to justify the received signal within the zoom as unreliable or erased. When the bit error is negligible, the channel can be regarded as an binary erasure channel. Hence, an efficient fast simulation method for very low erasure rate estimation is highly desirable.
Several mathematical techniques have been proposed in order to reduce the computational complexity of the MC simulation. Importance sampling (IS) is one of them for probability estimation of rare events, and it can also be used to improve the efficiency of the simulation process of communication systems [2]. The IS technique accelerates the simulation process by using a biased distribution to increase the occurance probabilities of the rare events. The optimal biased IS distribution is known but impractical since it depends on the

parameter to be estimated itself. Several IS schemes have been introduced based on side information of the coding scheme, with which the dominant error events that contribute to the error rate can be determined. For example, reference [3] exploits the knowledge of the minimum distance and design the IS distribution by mean translation. Reference [4] uses the errorcorrecting capability of codes to determine the space of error patterns, which is useful for concatenated codes like product codes. However, that kind of information is practically unobtainable in general cases.
In this paper, we extend our IS method in BSC case [5] and further consider the fast simulation of linear block codes over BECs. By deriving the optimal IS distribution of the size of the erasure patterns, an IS method that is applicable to all linear block codes is presented. The convexity of the variance of the IS estimator corresponding to the parameters of the IS distribution is proved and the optimal parameters are derived by minimizing the variance of the IS estimator. A corresponding fast simulation algorithm is proposed, which shows a better efficiency compared with the MC simulation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides some preliminaries of the MC, IS simulation and the relative error. The proposed IS estimator based on the size of the erasure pattern, and its corresponding fast simulation algorithm are shown in Section III. Some numerical results and discussions are listed in Section IV. Finally, some concluding remarks are given in Section V.
II. PRELIMINARIES
Consider the BEC with erasure probability G. For a linear block code with message length and blocklength , a codeword = ( , , … , ) is transmitted and a vector = ( , , … , ) is received. A transmitted symbol, 0 or 1, is either correctly received with probability 1 − G or erased with probability G. Denote ℰ = { , , … , } as the set consists of all the erased bits' locations in with 0 < < < ⋯ < < , which is called the erasure pattern [6]. Denote |ℰ| as the erasure pattern size (i.e., the cardinality of the set ℰ). An erasure pattern ℰ is said to be correctable if the value of each erased bit in ℰ can be uniquely determined.

978-1-6654-4110-0/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

6

DOI 10.1109/WCCCT52091.2021.00009

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:48:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Since the code is linear and the channel is symmetric, without loss of generality, assume all-zero codeword is transmitted (i.e., = ). Define ( ) as the function that
returns the erasure pattern size of the received vector . Since
follows the multi-variable Bernoulli distribution, the probability mass function (pmf) of takes the form ( ) = G ( )(1 − G) ( ). Denote Γ as the set that consists of all the possible received vectors and use the indicator function ( ) , which
equals 0 if the is correctable and 1 otherwise, to represent the
occurrence of the erasure event. Therefore, the block erasure rate
can be expressed as

= ( ) ( ),

(1)

∈

A. Importance Sampling
The MC estimator for block erasure rate is unbiased and can be written as

1 MC =

( ),

(2)

where are generated from the distribution ( ) and is the number of samples generated. It is well-known that the variance of the MC estimator is

(1 − )

var MC =

.

(3)

In IS simulation, the block erasure rate equation of (1) can be rewritten as

=

()

() ∗( )

∗( ),

(4)

∈

where the pdf ∗( ) is called the IS distribution. The IS

estimator is also unbiased and can be expressed as

1 IS =

() ( ) ∗( )

(5)

1 =

() ()

where are generated from ∗( ) and ( ) is denoted as the weighting function.

B. Relative Error
In this paper, we use the relative error [7] as the stopping criterion, which is defined as

var IS

κ≜

.

(6)

Hence, for a specific value of κ and channel parameters, both the IS estimator and MC estimator terminate with the same variance value
var IS = κ .

Specifically, the MC estimator can be regarded as an IS estimator with the original distribution ( ) as the IS
distribution. For the MC simulation, if we bring (3) into (6), we will get

1−

=

.

(7)

Hence, the number of samples needed for MC simulation can be written as

1−

=

.

(8)

When the error probability is small (i.e., ≪ 1), the number of samples needed to achieve a given κ can be approximated as

1

≃

(9)

Which means around ≃ 100/ samples required in order to obtain a reliable estimation result with relative error of 10 %.

III. PROPOSED IMPORTANCE SAMPLING SCHEME
In this section, we propose a novel importance sampling method for block erasure rate evaluation of linear block codes over BECs, based on which a fast simulation algorithm is presented.

A. Optimal IS Distribution
For a BEC channel with erasure probability , we define the erasure ratio ϕ( ) as the probability that a received vector conditioned on the erasure pattern size is uncorrectable

ϕ( ) ≜ Pr{ ( ) = 1| ( ) = }.

(10)

Since the vectors with the same erasure pattern size have the same probability to be received and adjusting the channel parameter δ would not influence this property, the erasure ratios ϕ( )'s are independent with δ for a given decoder. Regard the erasure pattern size of the received vector as a random variable which is denoted as . It follows the binomial distribution Bin( , δ). Denote ( ) = δ (1 − δ) as the pmf of .

According to the above conclusions, the block erasure rate (1) can be reformulated as

= ϕ( ) ( ),

(11)

Subsequently, the MC estimator can be represented w.r.t. , although the real generated samples are still in terms of ,

1

1

MC =

ϕ( ) = ϕ( )

()

(12)

1 =

( ) ( ),

where = ( ), ( ) is the indicator function with value 1 if ( ) = and value 0 otherwise, and

7 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:48:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

∑ ( )( )

ϕ( ) = ∑ ( ) .

(13)

We consider importance sampling over the erasure pattern size .

()

ϵ = ϕ( ) ∗( ) ( ),

(14)

=0

We can see that due to the randomness of the -dimensional received vector induces to which is one-dimensional, it can greatly reduce the computational complexity by considering the IS distribution of . At the same time, the erasure pattern size, which plays an important role in the block erasure rate performance, is mainly considered. Although the degree of freedom is reduced, the efficiency would not be deteriorated too much.

Assume ∗( ) is the applied IS pmf of the erasure pattern size . The IS distribution for sample generation of then becomes

∗( ) =

() ⋅ ∗ () ()

(15)

Therefore, the new IS estimator can be reformulated as

1

()

=

ϕ( ) ∗( )

(16)

() 1

=

∗( ) ⋅

( ) ( ),

where ∼ ∗( ). One advantage of this transformation is that the weighting function gets rid of the random vector , which simplifies the analysis of the variance of the estimator.

Consequently, our goal now becomes finding the optimal pmf ⋆( ) over all of the possible distributions of the erasure pattern size that minimizes the variance of the estimator. Consider the discrete distribution ∗( ; ) = for = 0,1, ⋯ , parameterized by the vector = { , , … , }. The corresponding IS distribution over BEC with parameter δ can be derived as

∗( ; ) =

() ( ) ⋅ ()=

( ).

(17)

()

The physical meaning of the above equation can be clarified as that we need to adjust the occurrence probability of the received vectors with each erasure pattern size from a binomial distribution to an optimized one .

Above all, the proposed IS estimator can be expressed as

IS( ) =

() 1 ⋅

( ) ( ).

(18)

In order to derive the expression of the variance of the above IS estimator, let us denote = ( )/ and define ( ) ≜
( ) ( ), whose physical meaning is the joint probability of the

occurrence of a decoding failure with an erasure pattern size . Its estimator is given by

( )=1

( ) ( ).

(19)

Based on (18), the variance of the estimator can be expressed as

var IS( ) = var

⋅ ()

=

var ( ; )

(20)

+

⋅ Cov ( ; ), ( ; ) ,

where the variance in the first term is easy to get

1

var ( ; ) = ( ; ) 1 − ( ; ) ,

(21)

and the covariance in the second term can be written as

Cov ( ; ), ( ; )

1 =−

(

; ) ( ; ).

(22)

By substituting (21) and (22) into (20), we will get the final expression of the variance of the IS estimator IS( ) with the importance sampling distribution ∗( ; ) over BEC w.r.t. erasure probability δ as

1 var IS( ) =

ϕ( ) ( ) − , (23)

The above equation expresses the variance of the IS estimator in terms of the IS distribution parameter . Therefore, the problem becomes finding the optimal that minimizes (23). The following theorem provides the general expression for the value of that minimizes the variance of the proposed IS estimator (i.e., the number of samples required to achieve a specific relative error is minimized).

We can determine the IS distribution by solving the optimization problem w.r.t. the parameter which is shown below.

Theorem 1. The IS distribution parameter that minimizes the

variance of the IS estimator given by (23) is

ϕ( ) ( )

=

, for = 0,1, … , .

∑ ϕ( ) ( )

(24)

Proof. The variance minimization problem can be formulated as max var IS( )

(25)

s.t.

=1

8 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:48:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

0 ≤ ≤ 1, for = 0,1, … , .

Since all the constraints are convex, here we only need to show the convexity of the objective function. The partial derivative of var IS( ) in (23) w.r.t. can be derived as

∂

1

1

∂ var IS( ) = − ϕ( ) ( ) ⋅ .

(26)

Its second partial derivative satisfies the properties

∂

2

1

∂ var IS( ) = ϕ( ) ( ) ⋅ > 0,

and

∂ ∂

var IS( ) = 0

(27)

As ≥ 0 and ϕ( ) and ( ) are both probabilities, which indicates its hessian matrix is definite. Thereafter, the problem is shown to be convex. The Lagrangian equation of the problem can be written as

ϕ ( ) = 1, ∀ = 1,2, ⋯ , . Then, the initial guess of IS distribution parameter is derived by bringing into (24). The block erasure rate is estimated inside the while loop until the relative error calculated by (6) meets the reliability requirement or the maximum number of iteration is reached.
In order to avoid the violation due to the insufficient number of samples during the first several iterations, we set the minimum number of samples N_min needed for both block erasure rate and to start an update. At the same time, a step size N_step is defined to control the update frequency of .
The algorithm can be extended to an SNR-invariant version by accurately estimating ϕ( ) during once simulation.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section, the block erasure rate performance and the number of the samples needed for reliable estimation of the proposed IS algorithm are investigated through simulation.

( , λ, μ, ν) = var IS( ) +

+

−

−1
(28) .

By setting the derivative of the Lagrangian equation to zero, we will derive the closed-form solution

ϕ( ) ( )

=

λ =1

1 ⇒ λ=

ϕ( ) ( )

(29)

ϕ( ) ( )

(a)

⇒=

.

∑ ϕ( ) ( )

B. Proposed Algorithm
In this section, we propose an IS algorithm for fast simulation, which we will show later have a great IS gain compared to the MC simulation. The proposed algorithm basically processes the parameter estimation and the block erasure rate estimation alternatively.
The sample generation from the IS distribution ∗( ; ) consists of two steps. During the first step, a random number is derived through pmf ∗( ; ) . Secondly, a sample is generated by randomly permuting the element order of an length binary vector with erasure pattern size to mimic the uniform distribution. Since all-zero codeword is assumed, the bits with value '1' are regarded as the erased bits.
The implementation of the proposed IS algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1. Initially, the sample number counter is set to be 0 and the relative error is 1. Since no side information about the coding scheme is provided, we assume the worst case that no erasure patterns can be corrected. Therefore, ϕ (0) = 0 and

(b)
Fig. 1. Simulation comparison of three representative LDPC codes [8], [9] with the peeling decoder [10] using the MC estimator and the proposed IS estimator. (a) Block erasure rate vs δ; (b) Sample size vs .

9 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:48:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I. LDPC codes [8], [9]

COMPARISON OF THE MC ESTIMATOR AND THE PROPOSED IS ALGORITHM IN TERMS OF THE SAMPLE SIZE USING LDPC CODES

(, ) (1008, 504) (512, 256) (504, 252)

Block erasure rate 1.60 × 10 6.91 × 10 1.09 × 10

MC
6.25 × 10 1.45 × 10 9.17 × 10

3.38 × 10 3.34 × 10 1.29 × 10

IS gain 1.85 × 10 4.34 × 10 7.11 × 10

We utilize the LDPC codes from the MacKay's code [8] and codes generated by the PEG algorithm [9]. In Fig. 1 (a), the block erasure rate vs the erasure probability δ is shown. Each curve is obtained by simulating under different channel parameters and stopping under the condition that relative error κ = 0.1. All the codes are decoded using the peeling decoder described in [10] with a maximum number of iterations equal to 20. The distribution parameter is firstly estimated with N_min = 500 generated samples and updated for each N_step = 100 iterations afterwards. The same N_min = 500 is used as the minimum to obtain a reliable estimation of the relative error. We can observe that the use of the IS estimator makes it practical to estimate very low block erasure rate.

the sample size for the proposed IS method proposed IS under the same block erasure rate and the same variance (i.e., the relative error values are equal). The results show that the proposed IS method can greatly accelerate the simulation process by almost ten orders of magnitudes.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper consider the efficient performance evaluation problem for the linear block codes over BECs. By importance sampling over the erasure pattern size, the dimensions of the randomness are reduced. This greatly benefits the search for the optimal IS distribution. At the same time, the erasure pattern size, which takes an important role in the block erasure rate performance, is fully utilized. A novel IS method is proposed based on the derived optimal IS distribution of the erasure pattern size. The IS gain of the proposed IS method compared with the MC simulation shows that our method can greatly reduce the computational complexity by almost ten orders if magnitude. A promising future work is to generalize the method to other channel models.

The total number of samples required for different LDPC codes vs the erasure probability δ are shown in Fig. 1 (b), where the curves for the MC simulation are approximated through (9). By fixing the erasure probability and compare the sample size for the MC estimator and the proposed IS estimator, we can see that impressively number of samples can be saved and the relative saving becomes larger as the erasure probability getting smaller. The reason is that our method allocates more samples to those dominant erasure pattern sizes. While insisting on the original distribution, the MC simulation needs to waste a large number of samples in parts whose contributions to the block erasure rate is almost negligible.
A summary of the total number of samples needed and the IS gains of the above examples is shown in Table I. The IS gain is used to show how the proposed IS estimators can improve the MC simulation in terms of the sample size [11]. It is defined as the ratio between the sample size for MC simulation MC and

REFERENCES
[1] S. R. Sridhara and N. R. Shanbhag. "Coding for system-on-chip networks: a unified framework." IEEE transactions on very large scale integration (VLSI) systems, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 655-667, 2005.
[2] M. Jeruchim, “Techniques for estimating the bit error rate in the simulation of digital communication systems,” IEEE Journal on selected areas in communications, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 153–170, 1984.
[3] M. Ferrari and S. Bellini, “Importance sampling simulation of concatenated block codes,” IEE Proceedings-Communications, vol. 147, no. 5, pp. 245–251, 2000.
[4] T. Yamane and Y. Katayama, “Bit error rate analysis on iterative two stage decoding of two dimensional codes by importance sampling,” in Communications, 2003. ICC’03. IEEE International Conference on, vol. 5. IEEE, 2003, pp. 3140–3144.
[5] J. Pan and W. H. Mow, “A new importance sampling algorithm for fast simulation of linear block codes over BSCs,” in 2019 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–5.
[6] Y. Y. Tai, L. Lan, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and K. A. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Algebraic construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for the AWGN and erasure channels,” IEEE Transactions on communications, vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1765–1774, 2006.
[7] R. Y. Rubinstein and D. P. Kroese, Simulation and the Monte Carlo method. John Wiley & Sons, 2016, vol. 10.
[8] D. MacKay, “Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes,” Available:
{http://www.inference.org.uk/mackay/codes/data.html}.
[9] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, 2005.
[10] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern coding theory. Cambridge university press, 2008.
[11] B. Xia and W. E. Ryan, “On importance sampling for linear block codes,” in Communications, 2003. ICC’03. IEEE International Conference on, vol. 4. IEEE, 2003, pp. 2904–2908

10 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:48:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

