108

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

A Hybrid Check Polytope Projection Algorithm for ADMM Decoding of LDPC Codes
Qiaoqiao Xia , Xin Wang, Huajun Liu, and Qing Lin Zhang

Abstract— The Euclidean projection onto check polytope is the most complicated and time-consuming operation in the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Existing approximate even-vertex projection algorithm (EVA) can simplify the projection operation, but yields poor decoding performance. By alternately adopting EVA and other accurate projection algorithms, this letter proposes an innovative and simple hybrid projection algorithm (HPA) which can increase the percentage of unuseful projections. Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm can substantially reduce the projection time while achieving better frame error rate (FER) performance when compared with the standard ADMM decoding and the ADMM penalized decoding in the case of avoiding the tedious work of penalty parameter optimization. More importantly, compared with cut search algorithm (CSA), the proposed algorithm can significantly save the average projection time by nearly 80%, and the average decoding time by about 85%.
Index Terms— Alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, check polytope projection, hybrid projection algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE linear programming (LP) decoding method for LDPC codes, having all-zeros assumption and maximumlikelihood (ML) certification property, was first proposed by Feldman in [1]. However, its development was limited by the excessive complexity. Recently, the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) with parallel potential was put forward by Boyd et al. in [2]. By combining the benefits of LP with the framework of ADMM, Barman et al. subsequently proposed an efficient LP decoding algorithm based on ADMM (ADMM-LP) [3]. Though the ADMM-LP has greatly improved the decoding efficiency, the decoding performance was actually worse than the BP at low signalto-noise ratio (SNR) regions. To enhance the frame error rate (FER) performance in [3], Liu et al. in [4] proposed an ADMM decoding algorithm using a weighted penalty function. However, the high complexity also existed in this algorithm. Since then, numerous studies have focused on reducing the computational complexity of ADMM-LP decoder.

It is worth noting that the Euclidean projection is the most complex part involved in the ADMM-LP decoder. Recently, Zhang et al. have proposed a simplification of the Euclidean projection by a cut search algorithm (CSA) described in [5]. Zhang et al. [6] demonstrated that the complex projection operation onto a check polytope can be transformed to a projection onto a simplex. Subsequently, the replacement of projection algorithm with a simple table lookup operation was presented by Jiao et al. in [7] to improve the efficiency of projection. As is shown in recent studies [8], a nonuniform quantization method of projection vector can be applied to reduce storage resources and facilitate hardware implementation. Moreover, an iterative check polytope projection algorithm was proposed by Wei et al. to achieve the goal of reducing the complexity of projection [9]. However, the convergence speed of the algorithm is slow when keeping the FER performance. Xia et al. recently in [10] have tried to further simplify the Euclidean projection with line segment projection algorithm (LSA), which made a projection onto a line segment consisting of two even-vertices to obtain an approximate projection. All of the ADMM-LP decoders above with low-complexity were based on simplified projection algorithms. Instead of simplifying the Euclidean projection, Wei et al. in [11] considered to avoid unuseful projections by a preset threshold.
In this letter, based on the even-vertex projection algorithm (EVA) in [10], we propose an efficient hybrid projection algorithm (HPA) by alternately using EVA and other accurate projection algorithms to increase the percentage of unuseful projections for the ADMM-LP decoder. In particular, the proposed algorithm can enhance the FER performance and save more decoding time when compared with the standard ADMM decoding and the ADMM penalized decoding in the case of avoiding the tedious work of penalty parameter optimization. Simulation results show that with regard to CSA, the average projection time can be saved by nearly 80% and the average decoding time can be saved by about 85%.
II. PRELIMINARIES

Manuscript received May 18, 2020; revised June 30, 2020 and August 11, 2020; accepted September 1, 2020. Date of publication September 11, 2020; date of current version January 8, 2021. This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province under Grant 2020CFB474 and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant CCNU20ZT002. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was B. Matuz. (Corresponding author: Qing Lin Zhang.)
The authors are with the College of Physical Science and Technology, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail: xiaqq@ mail.ccnu.edu.cn; 451924718@qq.com; liuhuajun@163.com; zhangqinglin@ mail.ccnu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2020.3023600

Consider an LDPC code C of block length n, is defined by
an m × n parity check matrix H. Let i ∈ I = {1, 2, 3, . . . , n} and j ∈ J = {1, 2, 3, . . . , m} be the indexes of the columns and rows of check matrix H, respectively. The degrees of the
variable node vi and check node cj are the number of 1s in the corresponding column and row of H, and are defined by di and dj, respectively. Let Ni(Nj) be the set of check nodes (variable nodes) adjacent to variable node vi (check node cj).
Suppose a codeword x = {xi ∈ {0, 1}|i ∈ I} is transmitted over a symmetric memoryless channel, and y = {yi|i ∈ I}

1558-2558 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIA et al.: HYBRID CHECK POLYTOPE PROJECTION ALGORITHM FOR ADMM DECODING OF LDPC CODES

109

is the received vector. The Pr[y|x] represents the conditional

probability. Let γ = {γi|i ∈ I} be the log-likelihood ratios

(LLRs)

vector

and

its

i-th

entry

be

γi

=

log(

Pr[yi Pr[yi

|xi=0] |xi=1]

).

The maximum log-likelihood (ML) decoding problem can be

formulated as follows [1], [3]:

n

arg max Pr[y|x] = arg max

x∈C

x∈C

log Pr[yi|xi]

i=1

n

=

arg

max
x∈C

(−γixi
i=1

+

log

Pr[yi|xi

=

0])

n

= arg min
x∈C

γixi

=

arg

min
x∈C

γT

x.

(1)

i=1

We construct the matrix Pj to denote compactly the subset

of coordinates of x participating in the j-th check node. So the

matrix Pj, selecting the dj components of x involved in the

j-th check node, is a dj ×n transfer matrix. For example, when

the j-th row of parity check matrix H is hj = (1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1),

the corresponding transfer matrix is

⎡

⎤

100000

Pj = ⎣ 0 0 0 1 0 0 ⎦ .

000001

The local codeword constraint can be relaxed to Pj x ∈ Pdj , j ∈ J , where Pdj is the convex hull of all permutations of a length-dj binary vector with even number of 1s, and is called the check polytope. i.e., Pdj =Δ conv({x ∈ {0, 1}dj | x has an even number of 1s}), where conv(·) denotes the operation of
taking a convex hull.
In general, it is so hard to solve the NP-hard problem (1).
However, Feldman et al. in [1] have shown that the ML
decoding problem in (1) can be relaxed to the following
optimization problem:

min γT x
x

s.t. Pjx ∈ Pdj , ∀j ∈ J .

(2)

In order to fit the ADMM algorithm framework, we construct the auxiliary vector zj , which corresponds respectively to each check node cj. Therefore, the LP decoding model with ADMM of (2) can be described as follows:

min γT x
x

s.t. Pjx = zj , zj ∈ Pdj , ∀j ∈ J .

(3)

The augmented Lagrangian function corresponding to for-

mula (3) can be presented as follows:

Lµ(x,z,λ) = γTx+ λjT(Pjx−zj)+μ2 Pjx−zj22 (4)

j∈J

j∈J

where λj ∈ Rdj is the Lagrangian multipliers, and μ > 0 is the penalty parameter. The iterative update rules of x, z and λ can be described as follows [3]:

xik+1 =

1 [0,1] di

j∈Ni

(zjk )i

−

1 µ

(λjk

)i

−

1 µ

γi

(5)

zj k+1 = Pdj Pj xk+1 + λjk/μ

(6)

λj k+1 = λkj + μ Pj xk+1 − zjk+1

(7)

where k ≥ 0 denotes the iteration number, while [0,1] is the projection to the interval [0, 1], and Pdj is the Euclidean projection onto the check polytopes.
III. ADMM-LP DECODING ALGORITHM WITH HYBRID PROJECTION ALGORITHM
In this section, we propose the innovative and simple HPA. First, we present our sources of innovation via analyzing the characteristics of EVA and other existing accurate projection algorithms. Then, we briefly describe the process of EVA. Last, the proposed HPA will be illustrated in detail.
A. Sources of Innovation
Based on [10], we found that the approximate projection algorithm EVA can dramatically reduce the complexity of the Euclidean projection. More importantly, EVA can save a lot of projection time because it does not require any operations of sorting and iteration. Regrettably, this advantage comes at a cost of extremely poor FER performance. To improve this defect, we consider to bring into the accurate projection algorithm as it can guarantee decoding performance. Therefore, the problem we concern is whether the two projection methods, EVA and an accurate projection algorithm, can be alternately used to obtain a more effective projection algorithm without negative impact on ADMM-LP decoder’s FER performance.
In fact, the results in section IV reveal that the alternate use of the two projection algorithms to improve projection efficiency of ADMM-LP decoder is feasible, which is based on the following observations. First, when the ADMM decoding algorithm tends to converge, most input vectors of Euclidean projections in the current iteration may be the same with those in the previous iteration, which are called unuseful projections [11]. Moreover, we found that EVA can drive HPA to quickly converge to 0 or 1, which can increase the proportion of unuseful projections during the early stages of iteration. In this case, it will most likely increase the percentage of unuseful projections relative to [11]. Second, EVA can enable savings of some projection time because it only involves simple arithmetic operations. Third, when EVA and accurate projection are used alternately, the projection error of EVA may be corrected by accurate projection. This implies that the FER performance of ADMM-LP with HPA may be better than that with EVA.
B. EVA Process
In this subsection, we refer to [10] to present the EVA procedure whose computational complexity is much lower than that of the accurate projection algorithm. The main thrust of the EVA is to directly regard the even-vertex (the vertex has an even number of 1s) in the check polytope closest to the input vector v ∈ Rdj as the approximate projection. Here we define a vertex vector O ∈ Rdj that satisfies Oi = (sgn (vi − 0.5) + 1) /2, where the sgn represents a sign function. It should be calculated (sgn (vi − 0.5) + 1) /2 = 1 if vi >= 0.5 and (sgn (vi − 0.5) + 1) /2 = 0 if vi < 0.5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

110

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

Algorithm 1 The ADMM-LP based on Hybrid Projection

1: Construct the log-likelihood vector γ based on received

word y

2: Construct the dj × n matrix Pj for all j ∈ J 3: Initialize λj as the all-zero vector, zj and vjold as the all
0.5 vector for all j ∈ J , iter = 0, the max iterations Imax
4: repeat

5: iter ← iter + 1

6: for all i ∈ I do

7:

Update xi ←

1 [0,1] di

8: end for

j∈Ni

z(ji)

−

1 µ

λ(ji)

−

1 µ

γi

9: for all j ∈ J do

10: vjnew ← Pj x + λj /μ 11: if vjnew = vjold then

12:

if (iter%L ! = 0) then

13:

Update zj ← even vjnew

14:

else

15:

Update zj ← Pdj vjnew

16:

end if

17: end if

18:

vjold ← vjnew

19: end for

20: for all j ∈ J do

21: Update λj ← λj + μ (Pj x − zj) 22: end for
23: until maxj Pjx − zj  < ( = paper) or iter >= Imax
24: return x

10−5 in this

If there is an even number of 1s in O, then it is identified as the approximate projection of v; Otherwise, we find the index i of the element in v the closest to 0.5 by i = arg min(abs(vi − 0.5)) and let Oi = 1 − Oi. At this time,
i∈[dj ]
O is determined to be the approximate projection of v.
C. Proposed HPA Details
Now, we investigate the details of the proposed HPA. The ADMM-LP decoding algorithm based on HPA is described in Algorithm 1. As is shown in Algorithm 1, Lines 12-16, since CSA has good calculation speed in the accurate projection algorithms, we alternately use EVA and CSA in accordance with different iteration numbers, where zj ←
Pdj vjnew denotes the CSA projection operation, likewise, zj ← even vjnew denotes the EVA projection operation.
In the algorithm, the L denotes the step size, whose value is critical for the proposed HPA, and through which we can change the mixing ratio of EVA and CSA. For example, EVA and CSA will be used in sequence if L = 2. That is to say, the larger the value of L is, the more times EVA will be used during the iterative process. The  denotes the threshold of decoding termination, which is obtained through optimization.
Intuitively, the high projection efficiency of the proposed HPA can be observed from two aspects. On one hand, inspired by the thought of suppressing unuseful projections in [11], before updating zj, we first compare the input vector of

Euclidean projections in the current iteration vjnew with that in the previous iteration vjold. If vjnew = vjold, the projection operation will be avoided at once. Notably, the elements in zj obtained from EVA each time will be 0 or 1. It is most likely to make λj and x unchanged during consecutive iterations, thereby increasing the number of cases where vjnew = vjold. In this case, more projection operations may be avoided than CSA alone. On the other hand, in the Algorithm 1, Lines 12-16, owing to that the EVA does not need complex calculations, part of projection time will be saved as long as EVA is used.
Moreover, the FER performance of the ADMM-LP decoder with HPA may also be maintained. As is shown in the Algorithm 1, Line 13, when EVA is used to perform projection operations in the current iteration, if zj seriously deviates from the accurate value, the resulting error may be corrected in the subsequent iterations by using CSA to perform projection operations. Therefore, the mutual influence of EVA and CSA during the decoding process implies that HPA may attain the correction of self-adaption.
Some remarks for the proposed HPA are as follows: 1) As shown in [11], the projection will be performed if
Δwj is larger than the parameter ε, where Δwj is a difference vector that requires extra calculations, ε is a preset threshold that needs to be selected carefully, as well as may be different for different codes. In the proposed algorithm, however, we just simply judge whether vjnew is equal to vjold. 2) It should be noted that EVA and CSA are partially similar. We can get the closest even-vertex easily by converting the indicator vector in CSA [5], which means that an extra projection algorithm is not necessary for the proposed HPA. Moreover, in addition to obtaining an enhanced projection algorithm by mixing EVA and CSA in the Algorithm 1, based on the simulation results, we found that EVA can also be mixed with many other accurate projection algorithms, even with other approximate projection algorithms like LSA proposed in [10]. 3) It is worth mentioning that zj can be seen as the copy of x due to Pjx = zj , and Pj is the selecting matrix. The projection of EVA will make zj be 0 or 1, which is equivalent to a penalty for x to keep it away from the fractional vertices. In addition, in the CSA projection of HPA, we use the projection results retained by the EVA of the last iteration if vjnew = vjold, which also makes a penalty for x to keep it away from the fractional vertices.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In our simulations, the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation is supposed. Meanwhile, we consider the irregular (576, 384) rate-2/3 code C1 from IEEE 802.16e standard [12] for the simulations. We conducted further experiments with the irregular (576, 480) rate-5/6 code C2 from IEEE 802.16e standard [12] and regular (2640, 1320) rate-1/2 Margulis code C3. And the results obtained were similar to that of the code C1, which are not presented in the letter due to space limitations. The check node degrees of C1 − C3 are {10, 11},

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIA et al.: HYBRID CHECK POLYTOPE PROJECTION ALGORITHM FOR ADMM DECODING OF LDPC CODES

111

Fig. 1. The FER performance curves of ADMM-HPA with various L for C1. Fig. 2. The FER performance comparison of different decoders for C1.

20 and 6, respectively. Besides, we utilize the parameter settings suggested in [10] and set the μ to 4.4, 5.0 and 3.8 for C1 − C3, respectively.
In the simulations, random codewords are adopted. The ADMM-PD denotes the ADMM algorithm with the l2 penalty method, and the penalty parameters are obtained via simulations according to the method in [4]. What’s more, since the over-relaxation operation is not adopted, the over-relaxation parameter is set to 1.0. The maximum number of iterations is set to 500 and the points plotted in all FER curves are obtained by generating at least 100 error frames.
Fig. 1 shows the FER performance of the proposed ADMM-HPA with different L for C1. The proposed ADMM-HPA will degenerate to ADMM-CSA if we set L = 1, and the FER performance is the same as that of ADMM-CSA in Fig. 2. Moreover, it can be observed that the FER performance of the proposed ADMM-HPA with L = 2 (equal proportional mixture of EVA and CSA in HPA) is the best under the simulated SNRs, and then it becomes worse as L increases. We think the reason is that the high proportion of EVA in HPA will lead to the increase in projection errors.
As a result of the poor FER performance of the proposed ADMM-HPA with the other mixing ratios (L = 3, 5, 9), we compare the remaining performance indicators for the proposed ADMM-HPA with L = 2.
Fig. 2 shows the FER performance of the ADMM-LP decoder with different projection methods and different BP decoders for C1. The FER performance of ADMM-CSA can be considered as the reference object because it can obtain the exact projection. It can be seen that the FER performance of the proposed ADMM-HPA is far superior to that of both ADMM-CSA and ADMM-PD-EVA. For example, when the FER = 1 × 10−4, performance gains for the proposed ADMM-HPA are about 0.7 dB and 1.0 dB compared to ADMM-CSA and ADMM-PD-EVA, respectively. Besides that, without any penalty parameters, performance gain for the proposed ADMM-HPA is about 0.3 dB compared to ADMM-PD-CSA when the FER = 1 × 10−5. Moreover, the proposed ADMM-HPA’s FER performance is basically the

Fig. 3. The percentage of unuseful projections as iterations increase for C1.
same as ADMM-PD-HPA. The reason is very possible that HPA is equivalent to a penalty for z or x which has been discussed in detail in Section III-C remark 3. Finally, there is about 0.2-0.4 dB SNR gap in high SNRs between the proposed ADMM-HPA decoder and BP decoder. Even compared to Non-saturating BP decoder, the proposed ADMM-HPA still has the FER performance advantage of 0.1 dB in high SNRs.
The percentage of unuseful projections as iterations increase for C1 is plotted in Fig. 3. It can be seen that the percentage of unuseful projections of the proposed ADMM-HPA far exceeds that of ADMM-CSA during the early stages of iteration at different SNRs, and the difference between them becomes larger and larger as the number of iterations increase. It indicates that the proposed ADMM-HPA plays a huge role in increasing the unuseful projections.
The left part of Fig. 4 shows the average projection time of each decoding iteration for C1 at different SNRs with different projection methods. The average projection time here is defined as the total projection time divided by the total number of decoding iterations, and the data

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

112

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

Fig. 4. The average projection time and the average decoding iterations comparison for C1.

regard to ADMM-CSA, by roughly 85% at 2.4 dB. And it can further save the average decoding time with regard to ADMM-PD-CSA, by roughly 50% at 2.8 dB. In addition, the average decoding time of the two BP decoders are longer than that of ADMM-CSA because more complex arithmetic operations are required such as tanh(·) and tanh−1(·). However, the BP algorithm has some simplified and effective algorithms like the min-sum (MS) algorithm, with the advantage of high-speed and easy hardware implementation. Currently, there is no effective hardware implementation of the ADMM decoding algorithm, which is also the direction of our follow-up research.

V. CONCLUSION
In summary, compared to existing projection algorithms, the proposed HPA can increase the percentage of unuseful projections, and greatly save the average projection time. What’s more, without any penalty parameters, the proposed algorithm can greatly reduce the decoding time while significantly improving the FER performance when compared with the standard ADMM decoding and the ADMM penalized decoding. Most important of all, we hope this work can provide another way for subsequent scholars to study the ADMM-LP decoder.

Fig. 5. The average decoding time comparison of different decoders for C1.
at each point in the curves are obtained by yielding over 50, 000 frames. We found that the proposed ADMM-HPA can achieve much less average projection time than ADMM-CSA and ADMM-PD-CSA. For example, the average projection time of the proposed ADMM-HPA is saved by roughly 80% than that of ADMM-CSA at 3.2 dB, and by roughly 70% than that of ADMM-PD-CSA at 3.6 dB. Besides, the proposed ADMM-PD-HPA is nearly equivalent to the ADMM-PD-EVA and both of them are less than the proposed ADMM-HPA in terms of the average projection time.
The right part of Fig. 4 shows the average decoding iterations comparison for C1 with various projection algorithms. All data are acquired by generating at least 50, 000 frames. As shown in the right part of Fig. 4, the proposed ADMM-HPA is significantly less than ADMM-CSA at 2.0-3.0 dB and slightly less than ADMM-PD-CSA at 2.0-3.6 dB for the average decoding iterations. It means that the convergence speed of the proposed ADMM-HPA is faster than that of ADMM-CSA and ADMM-PD-CSA.
In Fig. 5, we also plot the average decoding time comparison for C1 using different decoders. It can be seen that there is an obvious average decoding time gap between the proposed ADMM-HPA and ADMM-CSA, and a similar average decoding time gap between the proposed ADMM-HPA and ADMM-PD-CSA. For instance, the proposed ADMM-HPA can save the average decoding time with

REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[2] S. Boyd, “Distributed optimization and statistical learning via the alternating direction method of multipliers,” Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–122, 2010.
[3] S. Barman, X. Liu, S. C. Draper, and B. Recht, “Decomposition methods for large scale LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7870–7886, Dec. 2013.
[4] X. Liu and S. C. Draper, “The ADMM penalized decoder for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 2966–2984, Jun. 2016.
[5] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient iterative LP decoding of LDPC codes with alternating direction method of multipliers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2013, pp. 1501–1505.
[6] G. Zhang, R. Heusdens, and W. B. Kleijn, “Large scale LP decoding with low complexity,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 2152–2155, Nov. 2013.
[7] X. Jiao, J. Mu, Y.-C. He, and C. Chen, “Efficient ADMM decoding of LDPC codes using lookup tables,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 1425–1437, Apr. 2017.
[8] X. Jiao, Y.-C. He, and J. Mu, “Memory-reduced look-up tables for efficient ADMM decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 110–114, Jan. 2018.
[9] H. Wei and A. H. Banihashemi, “An iterative check polytope projection algorithm for ADMM-based LP decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 29–32, Jan. 2018.
[10] Q. Xia, Y. Lin, S. Tang, and Q. Zhang, “A fast approximate check polytope projection algorithm for ADMM decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1520–1523, Sep. 2019.
[11] H. Wei, X. Jiao, and J. Mu, “Reduced-complexity linear programming decoding based on ADMM for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 909–912, Jun. 2015.
[12] LDPC Coding for OFDMA PHY, IEEE Standard C802.16e-05/0066r3, 2005.
[13] W. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical Modern. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[14] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “Error floor approximation for LDPC codes in the AWGN channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 7416–7441, Dec. 2014.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

