IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

3

Construction of Irregular Protograph-Based QC-LDPC Codes With Low Error Floor
Bashirreza Karimi and Amir H. Banihashemi , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— In this article, we design finite-length irregular protograph-based quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with good waterfall performance and low error floor. To achieve a low error floor, we eliminate a targeted set of dominant elementary trapping sets (ETS) L in the Tanner graph of the code. For a given rate and girth, the codes are designed to be free of the largest set of problematic ETSs for a given block length, or to have the shortest block length while a given set of ETSs is avoided. The design is based on a search algorithm that identifies whether any instance of any structure within L exists in the Tanner graph of the constructed code or not. The search algorithm performs this task with minimal complexity, making it feasible to construct practical codes by running the search algorithm a large number of times. Simulation results are provided to demonstrate the superior performance of designed codes compared to similar state-of-the-art irregular QC-LDPC codes.
Index Terms— Irregular QC-LDPC codes, LDPC code construction, trapping sets, error floor, LDPC codes with low error floor.
I. INTRODUCTION
Q UASI-CYCLIC low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes are an important category of LDPC codes used in practice [1]–[3], due to their efficient implementation. The waterfall performance of LDPC codes is improved by introducing irregularity in the degree distribution of the codes. This improvement in the waterfall performance however, often comes at the expense of higher error floor. This is due to the increase in the variety of the problematic structures, called trapping sets (TSs) [4], that trap the iterative decoder in the error floor region. The design of irregular LDPC codes with low error floor is thus, in general, a challenging task. Nevertheless, there are a variety of applications for irregular QC-LDPC codes [1]–[3], [5], [6], many of them such as optical links, storage devices and space communications requiring low error floors.
Much of the existing work on the design of LDPC codes with low error floor uses indirect measures of the error floor
Manuscript received April 15, 2020; revised July 30, 2020 and September 13, 2020; accepted September 21, 2020. Date of publication October 2, 2020; date of current version January 15, 2021. This research was supported by the NSERC Discovery Grant of the second author. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was G. Liva. (Corresponding author: Amir H. Banihashemi.)
The authors are with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: bashirrezakarimi@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at https://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2020.3028302

performance as design criteria. Many such measures are related to the girth [7]–[12], the multiplicity of short cycles in the code’s Tanner graph [13]–[16], and how connected the short cycles are to the rest of the graph [7], [9], [10], [12], [17], [18].
There are also a number of papers that tackle the design of codes with low error floor by the direct elimination of TSs, see, e.g., [19]–[24]. In [19], small stopping sets [25] in irregular LDPC codes were eliminated by adding some new paritycheck equations. A modified progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [8] was proposed in [20] to avoid small stopping sets in the Tanner graph of irregular LDPC codes. In [21], [22], Asvadi et al. proposed a technique based on cyclic liftings to design both regular and irregular QC-LDPC codes by removing some dominant TSs of a base code. This was achieved at the expense of increasing the block length. In [23], PEG algorithm was modified to avoid some dominant TSs. In [24], small TSs were eliminated from regular QC-LDPC codes by imposing certain constraints on cycles of length 8.
Other techniques to reduce the error floor of LDPC codes include spatial coupling [26]–[28], and decoder design [29]–[33].
Most recently, in [34], we considered the problem of constructing regular QC-LDPC codes lifted from fully-connected base graphs that are free of a certain collection of leafless elementary trapping sets (LETSs) [35]. The LETSs are known to be responsible for the error floor of variable-regular LDPC codes over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [35], [36]. At the core of the design technique of [34] is a systematic and efficient search algorithm that can check whether a variable-regular Tanner graph contains any instance of any targeted set of LETS structures.
In this article, we consider the construction of irregular QCLDPC codes that are free of a certain collection of harmful ETSs. The category of ETSs includes LETSs, and is known to contain the problematic structures in the error floor of irregular LDPC codes over the AWGN channel [37]. The Tanner graphs of the codes constructed here are cyclic liftings of some irregular base graphs whose degree distributions and topology are designed for good waterfall performance. The superior error floor performance is then achieved through the design of the exponent matrix, that contains the cyclic permutation shifts assigned to different edges of the base graph. The most computationally expensive part of the design is a search algorithm that determines whether an irregular Tanner graph contains any instance of ETS structures that are targeted to

0090-6778 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

be eliminated from the code. This search algorithm would be used hundreds or even thousands of times in the construction process. The search algorithm is carefully devised in multiple layers using three simple expansion techniques of dot, path and lollipop. These expansions were originally introduced as part of the dpl characterization and search of ETSs in [35], [37]. Compared to the exhaustive dpl search algorithm of [37], the search algorithm proposed here is significantly less complex. There are two reasons for this lower complexity: (a) while the algorithm of [37] is devised to find all the ETSs within a certain collection of structures L, the algorithm designed here is intended to check whether any instance of any structure in L exists in the Tanner graph. The latter problem is fundamentally different from the former, and is simpler to solve. (b) The exhaustive search algorithm of [37] appears to have a lot of redundancy, in the sense that the same child structure can be searched for through multiple parents with different expansions, rather than through only one parent. This was due to the large variety of ETS structures in irregular graphs which made it difficult to establish such one-to-one correspondences between children and parents. In this work, however, by the careful inspection of parent/child relationships between different ETS structures, we establish such correspondences. Through these relationships/correspondences, we then find a minimal set of structures Lt within L that need to be searched for, and subsequently, a minimal set of structures outside L that are parents to the structures in Lt. To further reduce the complexity, we implement the search in multiple layers, where the structures of smaller size are searched for earlier.
To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to construct irregular QC-LDPC codes by the direct elimination of TSs. We demonstrate by a number of examples that the codes designed by the proposed technique are significantly superior to the existing irregular QC-LDPC codes with similar degree distributions, rates and block lengths.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Section II, we present some preliminaries about QC-LDPC codes, TSs and existing characterizations and search algorithms for ETSs. We also establish some relationships between LETSs and ETSs with leafs in this section. In Section III, we propose the low-complexity layered search algorithm for finding LETSs of an irregular QC-LDPC code. Section IV is devoted to the comparison between the proposed search algorithm and that of [37]. In Section V, a method for construction of irregular QC-LDPC codes with good waterfall performance and low error floor is described. We present some constructed codes and simulation results comparing them with similar existing codes in Section VI. Section VII is devoted to conclusions.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. QC-LDPC Codes and Trapping Sets
In this work, we consider protograph-based QC-LDPC codes whose mN × nN parity-check matrix H is an m × n array consisting of N × N circulant permutation matrices (CPMs) or N × N all-zero matrices. Suppose that there is a CPM A in the i-th row and the j-th column of the array,

0 ≤ i ≤ m−1, 0 ≤ j ≤ n−1, and that A is equal to the N ×N
identity matrix whose rows are cyclically shifted to the left by a permutation shift pij ∈ {0, 1, · · · , N − 1}. Furthermore, suppose that the notation pij = ∞ is used if an all-zero matrix is located in the i-th row and the j-th column of the array. The collection of parameters pij as a matrix is denoted by P = [pij ] and is called the exponent matrix of the code.
The Tanner graph G corresponding to the parity-check matrix H, whose structure was just described, can be con-
sidered as a cyclic N -lifting of a bipartite graph G , whose m × n bi-adjacency matrix H = [hij] is given by: hij = 1, if pij = ∞, and hij = 0, otherwise. The graph G is referred to as base graph or protograph, and the matrix H is called
base matrix.
A QC-LDPC code is called regular, if all variable nodes
(check nodes) in the code’s Tanner graph have the same degree dv (dc). Otherwise, the code is called irregular. Irregular QCLDPC codes are the subject of this article. We use notations δ(G) (Δ(G)) to denote the minimum (maximum) variable node degree in an irregular Tanner graph G.
A QC-LDPC code has a cycle of length 2 (2 -cycle) if and only if [38], [39]:

−1

(pmini − pmini+1 ) = 0 mod N,

(1)

i=0

where, n0 = n , mi = mi+1, ni = ni+1. The girth g of an LDPC code (Tanner graph) is the length of its shortest cycle(s).
In our constructions, when the goal is to find a QC-LDPC code with g ≥ g0, we choose pij values such that (1) is not satisfied for any < g0/2, and any sequence of 2 permutation shifts.
In a Tanner graph G, a subset S of variable nodes is called an (a, b) trapping set (TS) if |S| = a, and if the number of odd-degree (unsatisfied) check nodes in the subgraph G(S) induced by S in G is b. In this case, the TS S is said to belong to the (a, b) class. A TS is called elementary (ETS) if all the check nodes in G(S) have degree one or two. If each variable node in an ETS S is connected to at least two check nodes of degree two, then S is called a leafless ETS or LETS. Otherwise, if there is at least one variable node in the ETS S that is connected to only one degree-2 check node, then S is called an ETS with leaf or ETSL. ETSs are known to be the culprits in
the error floor region of irregular LDPC codes over the AWGN
channel, with the majority of errors being LETSs [37]. Consider the induced subgraph G(S) of an ETS S in a
Tanner graph G. Replace any degree-2 check node and its adjacent edges in G(S) with a single edge, and remove all the degree-1 check nodes from G(S). The resulted hypergraph is called the quasi-normal hypergraph of S [37], and is denoted by Gˇ(S) in this article. If one also removes the edges adjacent to degree-1 check nodes of G(S) from Gˇ(S), the resulted graph is called the normal graph of S [36], and is denoted by Gˆ(S) here. As an example, Fig. 1 shows a (5, 4) LETS structure along with its normal graph and quasi-normal hypergraph in an irregular Tanner graph G with δ(G) = 2 and Δ(G) = 4 (symbols ◦, , and represent variable nodes, satisfied check nodes, and unsatisfied check nodes,
respectively).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CONSTRUCTION OF IRREGULAR PROTOGRAPH-BASED QC-LDPC CODES WITH LOW ERROR FLOOR

5

Fig. 1. (a) A (5, 4) LETS structure S in an irregular Tanner graph G with Δ(G) = 4 and δ(G) = 2, (b) Gˆ(S), (c) Gˇ(S).
While there is a one-to-one correspondence between Gˆ(S) and S in variable-regular graphs, such correspondence does not, in general, exist in irregular graphs, i.e., in irregular graphs, multiple non-isomorphic1 structures can have the same normal graph. For irregular graphs, however, there is a one-to-one correspondence between S and Gˇ(S). When a number of non-isomorphic ETSs, with different quasi-normal hypergraphs, have the same normal graph, we say that those quasi-normal hypergraphs are projected into the normal graph.
B. Existing Characterizations/Search Algorithms for ETSs and LETSs
In recent years, a number of characterizations, and correspondingly, exhaustive search algorithms for ETSs and LETSs have been developed [34], [35], [37], [40], [41]. In [40], [41], a LETS structure was characterized as an embedded sequence of structures that starts from a simple cycle or a small prime structure, and is expanded one variable node at a time until it reaches the target structure. This was dubbed as layered superset (LSS) characterization. The expansion by the addition of one variable node was subsequently called dot expansion in [35]. In [35], two new expansions of path and lollipop were also introduced, and a new characterization of LETS structures in variable-regular Tanner graphs, called dpl, was proposed that was based on the three expansions dot, path and lollipop.2 The dpl characterization was then extended in [37] to LETS structures and ETS structures with leafs (ETSLs) of irregular codes. The goal in all the papers [35], [37], [40], [41] has been to develop an efficient algorithm that can exhaustively find all (a, b) LETSs or (a, b) ETSs within a certain range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. In a recent work [34], we studied a related but fundamentally different problem of finding out whether any instance from a collection of LETS structures exists in a given variable-regular LDPC code or not. We then devised an efficient dpl-based algorithm that can solve this
1Two graphs G1 and G2 are called isomorphic if there is a bijection f between the nodes of G1 and the nodes of G2 such that any two nodes u and v of G1 are adjacent if and only if f (u) and f (v) are adjacent in G2. Graphs that are not isomorphic are called non-isomorphic.
2More precisely, the notation dotkm is used when a variable node of degree k is appended to a parent structure S through m degree-1 check nodes of G(S) to produce a child structure. Notation pam is used for the expansion by a path of length m + 1 that is appended to the parent structure S through two degree-1 check nodes of G(S). Finally, the notation lom c is used for an expansion of a parent structure S by appending a lollipop walk of length m + 1 that includes a cycle of length c through a degree-1 check node of G(S).

problem, and used it to design QC-LDPC codes from fullyconnected3 base graphs.
In this work, we extend the algorithm of [34] to irregular LDPC codes and use it to design irregular protograph-based QC-LDPC codes. The extension from regular to irregular codes is a challenging task since the variety of LETS structures of irregular codes within a given class is often significantly larger than that of regular codes. This makes the study of parent/child relationships between the LETS structures of interest through the three dpl expansions complex. Establishing such relationships is an essential step in achieving the ultimate goal of devising a search algorithm with minimal complexity that can solve the problem of interest. To minimize the complexity of the search, one needs to find the minimum number of structures within the range of interest that need to be targeted. After that, one needs to devise a low complexity dpl-based search algorithm, starting from simple cycles, to systematically search for the targeted structures.
C. Removal of ETSLs
ETSLs can be partitioned into two categories: those with cycles, denoted by ETSL1, and those without any cycle, denoted by ETSL2 [37]. Based on our experiments with irregular QC-LDPC codes, for such codes, there are no ETSL2’s in the error floor region. In this work, we are thus only concerned about LETSs and ETSL1’s. The following proposition shows that removing LETSs within a certain range guarantees that all the ETSL1’s are also removed in that range.
Proposition 1: Consider an irregular Tanner graph G with δ(G) ≥ 2, and free of LETSs within the range of a ≤ amax, b ≤ bmax. Then, graph G is also free of ETSL1’s within the range a ≤ amax + 1, b ≤ bmax.
Proof: Let S be an (a, b) ETSL1 structure. The structure S then has at least one LETS substructure [37]. Call the largest LETS substructure of S, S , and suppose that S is in the (a , b ) class. We then have a < a and b ≤ b. Now, in contrast to the claim of the proposition, assume that G has an (a, b) ETSL1, S, within the range a ≤ amax + 1 and b ≤ bmax. This implies that the largest LETS subset of S is within the range a ≤ amax, b ≤ bmax, which is a contradiction.
Based on Proposition 1, in the rest of the paper, we only focus on the elimination of LETSs from the constructed codes.
III. EFFICIENT SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR FINDING LETSS OF AN IRREGULAR LDPC CODE
In this article, our goal is to design irregular protographbased QC-LDPC codes free of certain collection of LETS structures denoted by L. We achieve this goal in two steps. In the first step, we design a base graph with m check nodes and n variable nodes to obtain a code rate of R ≥ 1 − m/n. The degree distribution of the base graph is selected based on a constraint on the maximum variable node degree dvmax , and to obtain the best waterfall performance. In the second step, given the base graph, we design the exponent matrix
3A bipartite graph is called fully-connected if every node on one side of the graph is connected to all the nodes on the other side of the graph.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

for the best error floor performance. To obtain the noninfinity elements of the exponent matrix, we assign them column by column. Each time that a new column is added, we use the search algorithm devised in this section to find the answer to the following decision problem: Does there exist any instance of LETS structures in L in the Tanner graph constructed so far? If the answer is negative, we move on to assign the next column of the exponent matrix. Otherwise, a new candidate for the present column is selected. In the construction process, we may need to run the search algorithm hundreds or thousands of times. For the construction process to be feasible in practice, it is thus essential to have a low complexity search algorithm. A naive approach to perform the search would be to use the exhaustive search algorithm of [37], and see if the algorithm can find any instance of LETSs in L. This however appears to be prohibitively complex for our application. In this section, we thus develop an efficient algorithm to solve the decision problem, described above, for irregular Tanner graphs. Compared to the case of regular Tanner graphs considered in [34], this is considerably more challenging due to the much larger number of non-isomorphic structures within each class that need to be identified and enumerated, and the larger variety of parent/child relationships among different structures that need to be identified and then selectively chosen to minimize the search complexity.

A. Finding All Non-Isomorphic LETS Structures Within a Given Class of an Irregular Tanner Graph

To achieve a low error floor, the design problem is often

formulated such that TSs within a collection of dominant

classes are avoided. Such classes are often identified by the

range of their a and b values, i.e., a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. As the first step of the design, we thus need to obtain the

collection L of all the LETS structures within different classes

in the range of interest. To demonstrate the complexity of this

task for irregular codes in comparison with that of regular

codes, it is helpful to consider a variable-regular code with

dv = dvmax , where dvmax is the maximum variable node degree of the irregular code. The next proposition and the

example that follows demonstrate that corresponding to each

(a, b) LETS structure of the variable-regular code, there exist

a large number of (a, b ) LETS structures with b ≤ b in the

irregular code. Proposition 2: Consider the normal graph Gˆ(S) of an

(a, b) LETS structure S in a variable-regular Tanner graph

G with variable node degree dv. Also, consider all the nonisomorphic (a, b ) LETS structures S in an irregular Tanner

graph is also

G with Gˆ(S).

dvmax = If G can

Δ(G have

) = dv, whose normal graph all the variable node degrees

in the range [2, dv], then the multiplicity of such TSs (S ) is

in

iaG=ˆ1((Sd)v,

− dvi + and for

1), all

where dvi such TSs,

is we

the degree have b ≤

of b.

the

i-th

node

Proof: For the LETS of the variable-regular graph,

we have b = quasi-normal

ai=1(dv − hypergraph

Gdˇvi()S.

On the ) in G

other hand, for every , whose projection is

Gˆ(S), b =

a i=1

(dvi

− dvi ),

where

dvi

is

the

degree

of

the

i-th variable node in S . Since dvi ≤ dv, it can be concluded

Fig. 2. (a) Normal graph of a (5, 4) LETS structure in variable-regular
Tanner graphs with dv = 4, (b) quasi-normal hypergraphs of all possible LETS structures in an irregular Tanner graph with dvmax = 4 with the same normal graph as in Part (a).

that b ≤ b. Moreover, to obtain a quasi-normal hypergraph,

as an edges

inverse to the

image of Gˆ(S), one i-th node of Gˆ(S).

can add 0, . . . , dv − Since these choices

dvi for

different nodes of Gˆ(S) can be freely combined to obtain

different (non-isomorphic) quasi-normal hypergraphs, the total

number of quasi-normal hypergraphs is

a i=1

(dv

−

dvi

+

1).

Example 1: Consider the (5, 4) LETS structure in a

variable-regular LDPC code with dv = 4 whose normal graph

is shown in Fig. 2(a). Corresponding to this normal graph,

there can exist 12 non-isomorphic (5, b ) LETS structures with

b ≤ 4, in an irregular code with dvmax = 4, whose variable node degrees are 2, 3 or 4. The quasi-normal hypergraphs of

these structures are shown in Fig. 2(b).

Suppose that our goal is to find all non-isomorphic (a, b )

LETS structures of an irregular graph with maximum variable

node degree dvmax in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. To perform this task, for each (a, b) class with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, we first find the normal graphs of all the (non-
isomorphic) LETS structures within that class for variable-

regular Tanner graphs with dv = dvmax . For each value of a ≤ amax, we then go through all the classes with different
values of b, and based on Proposition 2, generate all the quasi-

normal hypergraphs that are the inverse images of the normal

graphs in those classes. As these quasi-normal hypergraphs are

generated, we correspondingly assign them to proper (a, b )

classes, depending on their b values. At the end of this

process, we have all the non-isomorphic LETS structures of

the irregular graphs within all the (a, b ) classes with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax.
We note that avoiding odd-degree variable nodes can sig-

nificantly reduce the variety of LETS structures, and thus the

complexity of the search algorithm. In addition, it can improve

the error floor as a result of smaller number of LETS structures

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CONSTRUCTION OF IRREGULAR PROTOGRAPH-BASED QC-LDPC CODES WITH LOW ERROR FLOOR

7

TABLE I
MULTIPLICITIES OF ALL POSSIBLE NON-ISOMORPHIC (a, b ) LETS STRUCTURES IN THE RANGE a ≤ 8 AND b ≤ 16 OF AN IRREGULAR TANNER GRAPH WITH g = 6 AND VARIABLE NODE DEGREES 2 AND 4

Fig. 3. The quasi-normal hypergraphs of all possible non-isomorphic LETS structures for irregular Tanner graphs with g = 6 and variable node degrees 2, 3 and 4. If variable node degrees are limited to 2 and 4, only the boldfaced structures remain.

Example 3: Table I shows the multiplicity of LETS structures of an irregular Tanner graph with g = 6 and dvmax = 4, and without any degree-3 variable nodes, within different (a, b ) classes in the range of a ≤ 8 and b ≤ 16. As an example, there are 72 non-isomorphic LETS structures in the (8, 0) class. The quasi-normal hypergraphs of such structures are obtained, based on Proposition 2, by finding the inverse images of the normal graphs of all possible (8, b) LETS structures with b ≤ 16 of a variable-regular Tanner graph with g = 6 and dv = 4, and then removing those that include any degree-3 variable nodes.

within a certain range of interest. These advantages come at

the expense of a rather small sacrifice in the performance of

the designed codes in the waterfall region.

Example 2: Fig. 3 provides all possible LETS structures

with a = 3 and a = 4 in irregular Tanner graphs with g = 6

and dvmax = 4. As can be seen, there are 10 and 45 structures with a = 3 and a = 4, respectively. If variable nodes with

degree 3 are avoided, the number of structures is reduced to

4 and 10, respectively. These structures are boldfaced in Fig. 3.

Proposition 3: In an irregular Tanner graph G with no

odd-degree variable nodes, there does not exist any (a, b )

ETS with odd value of b .

Proof: For an (a, b ) ETS S in the irregular Tanner

graph G , we have b =

a i=1

(dvi

− dvi ),

where

dvi

is

the

degree of the

of the i-th variable node in S , i-th node in the corresponding

and dvi normal

is the degree graph Gˆ (S ).

By the definition of normal graph, 2 × |E(Gˆ (S ))|, where E(Gˆ (S ))

we have is the set

a i=1

dvi

of edges

= of

Gˆ (S ). We thus conclude that

a i=1

dvi

By the assumption of the proposition,

is an even number.

a i=1

dvi

is

also

an

even number. Thus, since b is the difference of the two even

numbers, it must also be even.

Example 2 and Proposition 3 demonstrate the benefits of not

having odd-degree variable nodes in the code’s Tanner graph.

In the majority of our constructions, therefore, we consider

irregular LDPC codes without odd-degree variable nodes.

B. Parent/Child Relationships Among LETSs of Irregular Codes and the Determination of Minimal Target Set Lt of LETSs
After the determination of all the LETS structures L that are to be avoided in the constructed LDPC code, we need to efficiently solve the decision problem of whether any instances
of such structures exists in an irregular Tanner graph. For
this, we investigate the parent/child relationships among all the structures in L, with the aim to find a minimal subset Lt of L such that solving the decision problem for Lt would be equivalent to solving it for L. This minimal target set contains all the structures in L that are not child to any other structure in L. The reason is that, by the definition of Lt, any structure in L \ Lt is a child to at least one of the structures in Lt and thus avoiding all the structures in Lt implies that all the structures in L \ Lt are also avoided.
The following example demonstrates the variety of par-
ent/child relationships that can exist among different LETS
structures of an irregular code. Example 4: Consider the (6, 6) LETS structure of irregular
Tanner graphs with g = 6 and dvmax = 4 depicted in Fig. 4. This structure can be generated through the application of
different (series of) expansions to different parent structures.
Four such possibilities are shown in Fig. 4(a)-(d). Example 5: Consider irregular LDPC codes with g = 6
and variable node degrees 2 and 4, and the following

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

Fig. 4. Different possibilities that a (6, 6) LETS structure of an irregular Tanner graph can be generated from its parent structures.
embedded ranges for a and b values of LETS classes: r1 : a ≤ 3, b ≤ 3, r2 : a ≤ 4, b ≤ 3, r3 : a ≤ 5, b ≤ 3, r4 : a ≤ 6, b ≤ 3, r5 : a ≤ 7, b ≤ 3, and r6 : a ≤ 8, b ≤ 3. The sets Lt corresponding to these six ranges are provided in Table II. The entry i × (j, k) in the table indicates that i structures within the (j, k) class are part of the corresponding Lt. We note that for the largest range r6, we have |Lt| = 412 versus |L| = 766.
C. Finding the Minimal Set of Out-of-Range LETS Structures and the Layered Search Algorithm
The next step, after finding the set Lt, is to devise a lowcomplexity search algorithm that can solve the decision problem of whether any instance of any of the LETS structures in Lt exists in a Tanner graph. To solve this problem, we examine the out-of-range4 parent structures of the structures in Lt, and devise a recursive algorithm that can find a minimal set of such structures, going all the way back to simple cycles. The main tool to find such parent structures is the following lemma.
Lemma 1 [37]: In an irregular Tanner graph with girth g, structures in (a, b) LETS class can be generated through expansions dotkm with 2 ≤ m ≤ k, pam with m ≥ 2, and locm with m ≥ g/2 and g/2 ≤ c ≤ m, where the parent structures
4The term “out-of-range" is used to describe structures that are outside the set L of targeted structures.

are respectively in classes (a − 1, b + 2m − k), (a − m, b + 2 −

m i=1

(dvi

−

2)),

and

(a

−

m,

b

+

2

−

m i=1

(dvi

− 2)),

with

dvi

being the degree of the i-th variable node in the expansion.

If the number of odd-degree check nodes of the parent structure
is represented by b , for dotkm, pam, and locm expansions, we must have b ≥ 2, b ≥ 2, and b ≥ 1, respectively.

Example 6: Consider irregular LDPC codes with g = 6

and variable node degrees 2 and 4, and suppose that one is

interested in finding all the possible parent classes that can

generate LETS structures in the (8, 2) class. Using Lemma 1,

one can see that LETSs in (7, 2), (7, 4), (7, 4), and (7, 6) classes can potentially generate (8, 2) structures through dot24, dot43, dot22, and dot44, respectively. For path expansions, pa2 on (6, 2) and (6, 4) structures, pa3 on (5, 2) and (5, 4)
structures, pa4 on (4, 2) and (4, 4) structures, and pa5 on
(3, 2) and (3, 4) structures may generate LETS structures in the (8, 2) class. Finally, lo33, {lo34, lo44}, and {lo53, lo54, lo55} can possibly result in (8, 2) LETS structures from (5, 2), (4, 2), and

(3, 2) structures, respectively.

To find the out-of-range structures required for searching the

structures in Lt, we start from the structures in Lt with the largest size, and work our way down to the structures with

the smallest size. At the first step, we store the largest size

structures of Lt in S = S1, and among the set of all possible out-of-range direct parent structures P of these structures, we

look for a subset Π1 that can generate all the structures in S and has the minimum cardinality |Π1|, and a higher chance
of having a smaller multiplicity of instances in a code. In the

selection process of structures in Π1, if there are two parent classes (a1, b1) and (a2, b2) for the same child class in S, we prioritize them as follows: (i) if a1 = a2, the class with smaller b has higher priority; (ii) if b1 = b2, then the class with smaller a has higher priority; (iii) if a1 < a2 and b1 < b2, the priority is given to (a1, b1); (iv) finally, if a1 > a2 and b1 < b2, we give the priority to trapping set class (a1, b1).
Moreover, within a given parent class, the priority is given to

the structures with the largest number of children in S. The

reason for the choices (i)-(iv) is that the multiplicity of LETSs

often increases with the increase in the size and the number of

odd-degree check nodes, with the latter often having a more

dominant effect. At the second step, we store the structures

in Lt with the second largest size in S2, and choose S = S2 ∪ Πtemp, where Πtemp are those structures in Π1 that have the same size as those in S2. We then continue by finding the set of parent structures Π2 of S following the same criteria as explained for Π1. This ends the second step. This recursive
process continues until we cover all the LETS structures in

Lt down to those with size a = g/2. At step i, we have S = Si ∪ Πtemp, where Πtemp consists of all the structures in Π1 ∪ · · · ∪ Πi−1 that have the same size as those in Si.

A pseudo-code of this process in given in Algorithm 1. The

output of the algorithm is the set Π = Π1 ∪ · · · ∪ Πη, where η is the number of different TS sizes in Lt.
Finally, to make the search algorithm more efficient, similar

to [34], we implement the algorithm in multiple layers, where

all the structures in Π and Lt are partitioned into groups according to the size of the LETS structures. Groups con-

taining smaller size structures are then searched for earlier in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CONSTRUCTION OF IRREGULAR PROTOGRAPH-BASED QC-LDPC CODES WITH LOW ERROR FLOOR

9

TABLE II
MINIMAL SET OF TARGET LETS STRUCTURES FOR DIFFERENT RANGES OF LETS CLASSES IN AN IRREGULAR CODE WITH g = 6 AND VARIABLE NODE DEGREES 2 AND 4

the process. If an instance of a LETS structure in one group is found in the graph, the search will stop without any need to continue the search for structures within the groups that contain larger size structures. For further memory reduction, in each layer of the search algorithm, we only store those LETSs that are needed for the next layer(s) of the search algorithm.
Example 7: Consider the case of Example 5, where all LETSs in the range r6 are to be avoided. The set Lt for r6 is given in the last row of Table II. Accordingly, the set S1 consists of 7 structures in the (8, 0) class and 302 structures

Algorithm 1 Finding the out-of-Range Parent Structures

Needed to Search for LETS Structures in Lt

1: Input: Lt Structures in Lt belong to classes with sizes

a1, a2, . . . , aη, such that a1 < a2 < . . . < aη. 2: Initialization: S = ∅, Πtemp = ∅. 3: for k = 0, . . . , η − 1 do

4: Πk ← ∅.

5: end for

6: for i = η, . . . , 1 do

7: Sη−i+1 ← LETS structures in Lt with size ai. 8: S = Sη−i+1 ∪ Πtemp. 9: P ← all possible direct parents of structures in S.

For each value of i, structures in P belong to classes

(aji , bij), j = 1, . . . , θi, where classes with a smaller index j have a higher priority.

10: for j = 1, . . . , θi do

11:

Γj ← structures in P that are in class (aji , bji ).

12:

while Γj = ∅ do

13:

Choose ξ ∈ Γj with the largest number of direct

children in S.

14:

Πη−i+1 = Πη−i+1 ∪ {ξ}.

15:

Remove ξ from Γj, and remove all the direct

children of ξ from S.

16:

if S = ∅ then

17:

Break the for loop over variable j.

18:

end if

19:

end while

20: end for

21: Πtemp ← all structures in Πη−i+1 ∪ · · · ∪ Π1 with sizes

of ai−1.

22: end for

23: Π = Π1 ∪ . . . ∪ Πη. 24: Output: Π.

in the (8, 2) class. Set P in this case consists of structures in (3, 4), (4, 4), (5, 4), (6, 4), (7, 4), and (7, 6) classes which generate the structures of S1 through pa5, pa4, pa3, pa2, {dot22, dot43, dot44}, and dot44, respectively. These parent classes are also sorted in the same priority order that they will be selected as part of Π1. Following Algorithm 1, the set Π1 contains 1, 4, 7, 38 and 28 structures in (3, 4), (4, 4), (5, 4), (6, 4), and (7, 4) classes, respectively. For the second step of the recursion, we have S2 = {3 × (7, 0), 68 × (7, 2)}, following the same notation as in Table II. In this step, S = S2 ∪ Πtemp, where Πtemp contains the 28 (7, 4) structures of Π1. For this set S, the parent structures P are in classes (3, 4), (4, 4), (5, 4), (6, 4), (3, 6), (4, 6), (5, 6), (6, 6), and (6, 8), with corresponding expansions pa4, pa3, pa2, {dot22, dot24, dot43, dot44}, pa4, pa3, pa2, {dot22, dot34, dot44}, and {dot44}, respectively. In this case the set Π2 has 1, 4, 10, 7, 4 and 4 structures in (3, 4), (4, 4), (5, 4), (6, 4), (5, 6), and (6, 6) classes, respectively. This completes the second step of recursion. We continue this process until we reach down to TSs of size a = g/2 = 3. The resulting characterization/search process is summarized in Table III. In Table III, we have listed all the required LETS structures in different classes and their
corresponding expansions to search for all the target LETS structures of Lt. For each class, the top entry shows the multiplicity of non-isomorphic structures within the class that are
involved in the search process. The bottom entry of each class shows the expansions that will have to be applied to all the
instances of those structures. In some classes, there are two top
and bottom entries. In such cases, the first (second) top entry corresponds to the first (second) expansion(s) in the bottom entry. For example, for the (6, 4) class, we need to apply {dot43, dot44} and pa2 to 7 and 38 structures, respectively.
In Table III, the expansions corresponding to different
layers of the algorithm are identified by superscripts equal to the layer number in which they are applied. In this example,
the algorithm is implemented in 5 layers, corresponding to the
rows 2 to 6 of Table II. The algorithm starts by searching for the structures indicated in the first row of the table. These are
all cycles of length 6. After this initial step, the expansions are applied in layers. For example in Layer 1, expansions dot22 and dot34 are applied to the one structure in the (3, 4) class, and the one structure in the (3, 6) class.
IV. COMPARISONS WITH THE EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM OF [37]
In [37], two techniques for exhaustively finding all (a, b) LETSs of irregular LDPC codes within a certain range

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

TABLE III
PROPOSED CHARACTERIZATION/SEARCH TABLE OF (a, b) LETSS WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 8 AND b ≤ 3, FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES WITH g = 6 AND VARIABLE NODE DEGREES 2 AND 4 (SUPERSCRIPTS ON EXPANSIONS INDICATE THE LAYER IN WHICH THE EXPANSIONS ARE APPLIED)

TABLE IV
CHARACTERIZATION TABLE OF [37] FOR LETSS IN THE RANGE a ≤ 8, b ≤ 3 OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES WITH g = 6, AND VARIABLE NODE DEGREES 2 AND 4

a ≤ amax, b ≤ bmax, are proposed. Here, we focus on the more efficient technique of the two, which is presented in Section V of [37]. This technique is based on recursively finding upper bounds bamax on the b values of classes with different values of a ≤ amax, starting from a = amax and going all the way down to a = g/2. These upper bounds, for a fixed value of a ∈ [g/2, amax], identify any (a, b) class whose structures can eventually, through dpl expansions, result in at least one structure within the range a ≤ amax, b ≤ bmax. After the derivation of these bounds, for each class within the range of these upper bounds, one needs to identify all the expansions that if applied to at least one structure within the class can eventually result in at least one structure within the range of interest. The search algorithm is then devised based on the application of all the identified expansions for each class to all the structures within the class by starting from the simple cycles.
Compared to the carefully devised search algorithm in this work, the technique of [37] is significantly less efficient. The main reason is the abundance of redundancy that exists in the search process of [37]. For example, the same child may be generated/searched for through many different sequences of parent/child relationships, or some structures may be searched for that are neither of direct interest themselves nor are parents to any structure of interest.

Example 8: We consider the same scenario discussed in Example 7, where one is interested in the exhaustive search of all LETSs within the range of a ≤ 8, b ≤ 3, for an irregular LDPC code with g = 6 and variable node degrees 2 and 4. The characterization table for the search algorithm of [37] is shown in Table IV. In this table, for each class of LETSs, all the expansions at the bottom will need to be applied to all the non-isomorphic structures within the class. The multiplicity of such structures are given as the top entry for each class. In the table, for simplicity of notations, dot is used to represent dot22, dot42, dot43, or dot44 expansions. The multiplicity of dot expansions is then given in brackets. For example, notation dot(2) for a given class means that two of the four dot expansions are applied to the structures of that class. Similarly, notation lom(i) is used to show the application of i different locm expansions (with different c values). Compared to the proposed characterization of Table III, one can see that Table IV involves a larger number of structures within a larger range of a and b values, with many more expansions. For complexity comparison of our proposed search algorithm and the exhaustive search algorithm of [37], we use an approach similar to that of [34], i.e., we calculate the weighted sum of each expansion over different entries of the table, where the weights are the multiplicity of structures within the corresponding class. The results are listed in Table V. As an

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CONSTRUCTION OF IRREGULAR PROTOGRAPH-BASED QC-LDPC CODES WITH LOW ERROR FLOOR

11

TABLE V
COMPLEXITY COMPARISON BETWEEN THE PROPOSED SEARCH ALGORITHM AND THAT OF [37]

(base matrix) and the error floor performance is highly dependent on the design of the exponent matrix through the choice of permutation shifts. In the following, we discuss these two steps of the design.

example, consider the expansion pa4. By examining different entries of Table III, one can see that pa4 appears in only two entries corresponding to classes (3, 4) and (4, 4), with one and four structures, respectively. For the proposed search, therefore, the result in Table V is 1 + 4 = 5. In Table IV, however, pa4 appears in classes (3, 2), (3, 4), (3, 6), (4, 2), and (4, 4) with 1,1,1,2, and 4 structures, respectively. This corresponds to the entry 9 in Table V for the search algorithm of [37]. By comparing the results presented in Table V, it can be seen that both the variety of the expansions and the number of structures that they are applied to have decreased significantly in the proposed search algorithm compared to the exhaustive search algorithm of [37].
One should note that further advantage compared to the algorithm of [37] is gained through the layered implementation of the proposed search algorithm.
Finally, we note that, assuming that the degree distribution of the graph and the range of search are fixed, the complexity of the search algorithm of [37] increases linearly with the block length L in the worst case, and is a constant in L on average (not considering the complexity of finding the input simple cycles). Since the search algorithm proposed here is more efficient than the algorithm of [37], its worst-case complexity is at most linear in L and its average complexity is constant in L.
V. CONSTRUCTION OF IRREGULAR QC-LDPC CODES WITH GOOD WATERFALL PERFORMANCE AND LOW ERROR FLOOR
Our goal in this article is to design irregular QC-LDPC codes with good waterfall and error floor performance. The problem formulation is to design an LDPC code that is a cyclic N -lifting of a base graph with an m × n base matrix. The designed code is aimed to have a rate R ≥ R0 = 1 − m/n = d¯v/d¯c, and girth g ≥ g0. (The notations d¯v and d¯c denote the average variable and check node degrees of the code, respectively.) Our goal is also for the designed code to perform well in the waterfall region, and to be free of (a, b) LETSs in the range a ≤ amax, and b ≤ bmax, where amax is maximized. We further note that instead of a range for a and b values, one can use a list L of LETS structures to be avoided. This list, for example, can be obtained using software or hardware simulations of a code with similar characteristics in the error floor region. Another possible design scenario, as related to the error floor performance, is to consider a specific range a ≤ amax, b ≤ bmax, and minimize the lifting degree N such that the designed code has no (a, b) LETS in the range.
Our experiments show that the waterfall performance is mainly determined by the design of the base graph

A. Design of Base Matrix
The design of the base matrix H involves the determination of column degree distribution, and the construction of the base graph after the degree distribution is determined. The construction of the base graph is equivalent to specifying the exact location of zeros and ones in H . To determine the column degree distribution, we either use ensemble threshold [42], or the frame error rate (FER) of the lifted code in the waterfall region as the metric. Our simulations show that for the vast majority of cases where the block length is larger than about 500 bits, the two approaches result in the same degree distributions. For shorter block lengths, the latter approach provides a more accurate metric for the waterfall performance, see, e.g., [11]. To obtain the threshold of the protograph-based LDPC codes, we use the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) analysis of [43], referred to as PEXIT analysis. For the FER analysis, our experiments show that, for a given N , different random choices of permutation shifts have a rather small effect on the waterfall performance. We thus select the permutation shifts randomly to evaluate different degree distributions. We also note that the relative performance of different degree distributions is rather insensitive to the choice of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) as long as the performance is measured in the waterfall region.
After the column degree distribution of H is selected, we design the base graph to maximize the girth of the subgraph induced by the variable nodes corresponding to the columns of H with weight lower than m. Among candidates with the same maximum girth g , we then choose one with the smallest number of g -cycles. Alternatively, PEG algorithm [8] can be used to construct this subgraph. We call this approach in designing the base graph “cycle conditioning.”
To summarize, we evaluate a number of column degree distribution candidates by measuring the threshold of their corresponding base graphs, or the FER performance of their corresponding lifted base graphs in the waterfall region. The base graphs are constructed based on cycle conditioning. For the FER evaluation, the final graphs (codes) are obtained by a random cyclic lifting of the base graphs. The constructed codes are then evaluated for the FER performance in the waterfall region, and we select a column degree distribution/base graph that results in the best FER performance in the waterfall region.
B. Design of Exponent Matrix
After the base matrix is designed, we find the non-infinity elements of the exponent matrix P to eliminate all the instances of LETS structures in the range a ≤ amax, b ≤ bmax, or in the set L. To design P , similar to [34], we use a greedy search algorithm with backtracking in which the elements of P are selected column by column randomly. The sub-matrix of the parity-check matrix H corresponding to the selected

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

columns of P is then searched to see if the girth constraint is satisfied, and if no instance of the targeted LETS structures exists in the corresponding subgraph. To search for the LETSs in the subgraph corresponding to the sub-matrix of H at each step of the algorithm, we use the proposed layered search algorithm of Section III.

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we construct some irregular QC-LDPC codes

by the method explained in Section V, and compare their

performance with similar codes in the literature. For simula-

tions, we consider a binary-input AWGN channel, with noise

power spectral density N0/2, and a 5-bit min-sum decoder

with clipping threshold equal to 2 [44], and maximum number

of iterations 100. For each simulated point, at least 100 block

errors are collected, and we plot the frame error rate (FER)

of the code versus SNR defined as Eb/N0, where Eb is the

energy per information bit. While our design technique has

no limitation, in principle, in terms of variable node degrees,

here, we often limit the constructions to codes with dvmax = 4, and with no degree-3 variable nodes. The choice of dvmax = 4
reduces the complexity of the search algorithm significantly at

the cost of some rather small degradation in the waterfall per-

formance. The choice of avoiding degree-3 variable nodes is

beneficial from both the complexity viewpoint and error floor

reduction, and has little effect on the waterfall performance.

As the first experiment, we construct irregular QC-LDPC

codes with rate R ≥ R0 = 0.5 and g = g0 = 6. For this, we select a 4×8 base matrix. The column weights for the base

matrix can thus be 2 or 4. With only two possible weights for

the columns of H , there are only 7 possible irregular column

degree distributions. Among those, the one with four columns

of weight 2 and four columns of weight 4 with the following

base matrix happens to have the best FER in the waterfall

region:

⎡

⎤

10011111

H1 = ⎢⎣⎢01

0 1

1 1

0 0

1 1

1 1

1 1

11⎥⎦⎥.

(2)

01011111

We note that the application of PEXIT analysis also results in the same choice of base matrix, which has a threshold of 0.92 dB. To design the exponent matrix, we consider a similar irregular QC-LDPC code designed in [15] with the same size of base matrix. In [15], the irregular code was designed by masking a regular code constructed by array dispersion, and with the goal of minimizing the multiplicity of short cycles. The code of [15] has N = 72, R = 0.5, g = 6 and is free of LETSs in the range a ≤ 8, b ≤ 2. The base matrix of the code of [15] has seven columns of weight 3 and one column of weight 2, and a threshold of 1.07 dB. The FER and LETS distribution of this code are presented in Fig. 5 and Table VI, respectively. At SNR of 4.25 dB, all the LETSs that trap the decoder for this code have b = 3 with a values of 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11. In our designs that follow, all such LETSs will be eliminated as a result of Proposition 3.
Here, we consider two scenarios. In the first scenario, we aim at constructing a code with base matrix (2) that has

Fig. 5. FER comparison of the designed codes C1, C2, and C3 with the code of [15].

no LETS in the same range as the code of [15] (which is

a ≤ 8, b ≤ 2), and has the minimum lifting degree N . The

result is Code C1 with rate R = 0.5025 and N = 50, which

is much shorter than the code of [15] (400 vs. 576), and has

the following exponent matrix:

⎡

⎤

0 ∞∞ 0 0 0 0 0

P1 = ⎢⎢⎣∞0

∞ 9

7 1

∞ ∞

19 23

21 35

35 32

4329⎥⎦⎥.

(3)

∞ 35 ∞ 4 22 32 27 46

The FER performance of C1 is compared with that of the code of [15] in Fig. 5. It can be seen that although C1 has

slightly worse waterfall performance, due to the shorter block

length, the error floor performance is superior to that of the

code of [15]. The reason is that C1 is free of LETSs with b = 3 due to the lack of odd-degree variable nodes. The LETS

distributions of the two codes are also shown in Table VI,

which demonstrate the superiority of C1 in the error floor

region. It should be noted that based on our simulations at

SNR of 4.25 dB, the LETSs that trap the decoder for C1 all have b = 2, with sizes a ≥ 11.

In the second scenario, we aim at constructing a code that

in addition to the range a ≤ 8, b ≤ 3, is also free of LETSs

within the range a ≤ 5, b ≤ 5, and has the same lifting degree

N = 72 as the code of [15]. As a result, we design C2 with

R = 0.5017. The exponent matrices of C2 is given by:

⎡

⎤

0 ∞∞ 0 0 0 0 0

P2 = ⎣⎢⎢∞0

∞ 17

4 5

∞ ∞

13 39

30 12

33 52

4572⎥⎥⎦.

(4)

∞ 58 ∞ 64 6 1 24 29

The LETS distribution and FER performance of C2 are shown in Table VI and Fig. 5, respectively. As can be seen, with the same block length and slightly larger rate, C2 outperforms the code of [15], particularly in the error floor
region.
Finally, as the last part of this experiment, we construct a code C3 that has the exact same base matrix as the code of [15], but is free of all the LETSs within the range a ≤ 8, b ≤ 3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CONSTRUCTION OF IRREGULAR PROTOGRAPH-BASED QC-LDPC CODES WITH LOW ERROR FLOOR

13

TABLE VI MULTIPLICITIES OF (a, b) LETSS IN THE RANGE a ≤ 8 AND b ≤ 4 FOR DESIGNED CODES C1, C2, C3 , AND THE CODE OF [15]

TABLE VII MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS STRUCTURES IN THE RANGE a ≤ 8, b ≤ 3, FOR C4 , C5 , AND THE WIMAX CODE OF RATE R = 0.6667

The exponent matrix of C3 is given by

⎡

⎤

∞∞ 0 0 0 0 0 0

P3 = ⎣⎢⎢∞0

6 1

∞ 17

16 49

24 ∞

∞ 35

46 ∞

5276⎥⎥⎦.

(5)

0 26 56 ∞ 30 37 34 ∞

The FER and LETS distribution of C3 are provided in Fig. 5 and Table VI, respectively. As can be seen, while C3 has a waterfall performance similar to the code of [15], its error floor is lower due to the removal of a larger range of LETSs. The performance of C3 however is still inferior to C2 both in the waterfall and error floor regions.
As another example, we construct irregular QC-LDPC codes that have similar parameters to the well-known WiMAX standard code with rate R = 0.6667 and block length L = 576 [2], but have better waterfall and error floor performances. The WiMAX code has a base matrix of size 8 × 24 and lifting degree N = 24. The base graph has seven degree-2, one degree-3, sixteen degree-4 variable nodes, and the thresh-
old of 1.74 dB. LETS distribution of this code is shown
in Table VII. As can be seen, the code has many LETS structures with small values of a and b. To construct a code with similar R and L, we consider two different base matrix sizes of 4 × 12 and 8 × 24, with N = 48 and N = 24, respectively. For the two cases, we are able to remove all LETSs within the ranges a ≤ 7, b ≤ 3, and a ≤ 8, b ≤ 3, respectively. The exponent matrices of the designed codes C4 and C5 are shown at the bottom of the next page.
The two codes have thresholds of 1.66 dB and 1.67 dB, respectively. We have presented the LETS distributions of C4 and C5 in Table VII, and their FER performances in Fig. 6. As can be seen, in comparison with the WiMAX code, both designed codes have a superior LETS distribution and a better
performance particularly in the error floor region. As another example, we consider the irregular (576, 432)
QC-LDPC code with a base matrix of size 4 × 16, girth g = 6, and lifting degree N = 36 designed in [15]. The rate of this code is R = 0.75, and its base graph has two degree-2, twelve degree-3 and two degree-4 variable nodes.
The threshold for this base graph is 2.23 dB. To show the superiority of our design technique, we design a code with
exactly the same length, rate, girth, and base matrix size, but

Fig. 6. FER performance of the designed codes C4 and C5 in comparison with the similar code from the WiMAX standard.

with different degree distribution and exponent matrix. Using

the method described in Section V, we are able to remove all

the LETSs within the union of the ranges a ≤ 5, b ≤ 3, and

a ≤ 8, b ≤ 1. The exponent matrix of the designed code C6 is

as foll⎡ows: ∞∞ 0 0 ∞ 0 0 0

P6

=

⎢⎢⎣

∞ 0

2 ∞

∞ 22

5 ∞

7 1

10 12 14 3 23 26

0 18 ∞ ∞ ∞ 24 3 33

⎤

00000000

15 19

17 4

21 17

24 12

25 20

26 28

29 34

31 13

⎥⎥⎦.

28 5 27 16 23 25 30 2

The base graph for this code has the threshold of 2.14 dB. We have listed the multiplicities of (a, b) LETSs of both C6 and the code of [15], in range a ≤ 8, b ≤ 3, in Table VIII.
As can be seen, none of the dominant LETSs of the code of [15] with b = 0, b = 1 or b = 3 exists in C6. Moreover, the multiplicities of all the LETSs with b = 2 are smaller in C6 compared to those in the code of [15]. Consistent with these results are the FER comparison shown in Fig. 7, where C6 significantly outperforms the code of [15] in the error floor region.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

14

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

TABLE VIII MULTIPLICITIES OF (a, b) LETSS IN RANGE a ≤ 8, b ≤ 3, FOR C6 AND THE CODE OF [15]

Fig. 7. FER comparison of the designed code C6 and the similar code of [15].

Fig. 8. FER performance of the designed codes C7 and C8 compared with the similar codes of ITU-T G.9960 standard [3].

The examples provided so far all had relatively short block lengths. In the following, we provide some examples of codes with larger block lengths.
We consider two codes from ITU-T G.9660 standard [3]: a rate-1/2 code with L = 8640 and a rate-2/3 code with L = 6480. The base matrices of these codes have sizes 12 × 24 and 8 × 24, respectively, and the codes are cyclic liftings of the corresponding base graphs with lifting degrees N = 360 and N = 270, respectively. The base matrix of the first code has 10 columns of weight 2, 9 columns of weight 3, 5 columns of weight 6, and the threshold of 0.86 dB. For the second code, the base matrix has 6 columns of weight 2, 2 of weight 3, 16 of weight 4, and the threshold of 1.70 dB.
Our simulations for the first code show that, in the error floor region, the majority of sets that trap the decoder are LETSs within classes (6, 3), (6, 4), (7, 4), (8, 1), and (8, 4). Using the proposed technique, we have been able to design a code C7 with the exact same base matrix and lifting degree as the

standard code but free of LETSs within the range a ≤ 8, b ≤ 4. The exponent matrix of C7 is shown at the bottom of the next page. The FER curves of C7 and the standard code are given in Fig. 8. The comparison of the two curves show a large improvement in the error floor region of C7 over that of the standard code.
Our simulations of the rate-2/3 standard code in the error
floor region reveal that the dominant LETSs of this code are in the (4, 1) class. Using PEXIT analysis, and by employing only degree-2 and degree-4 variable nodes, we find a base matrix
with 10 columns of weight 2 and 14 columns of weight 4 that
has the best threshold (1.62 dB). We then design the exponent matrix P8, given at the bottom of the next page, to eliminate all the LETSs within the range a ≤ 8, b ≤ 3.
The FER of the designed code C8 together with that of the standard code are given in Fig. 8, and show the significant

⎡

⎤

∞∞ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

P4

=

⎢⎣⎢

∞ 0

1 7

∞ ∞

11 ∞

16 41

20 31

24 18

28 14

30 33

33 30

38 37

45 46

⎦⎥⎥,

⎡ 0 ∞ 28 ∞ 20 6 46 38 27 34 40 11

⎤

0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 22 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ 0 ∞ 0 0 ∞ 0 ∞ 0 0

P5

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢

0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

23 5 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

∞ 16 22 ∞ ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ 1 2 ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ 2 15 ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 11 7

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 18

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

23 7 21 ∞ ∞ ∞

0 13 18 6 ∞ ∞

∞ 0 15 23 17 ∞

∞ ∞ 0 3 10 2

∞ ∞ ∞ 0 11 10

∞ 13 ∞ 7 ∞ 20

0 ∞ 9 ∞ 14 ∞

22 ∞ ∞ 15 3 ∞

∞ 0 12 ∞ ∞ 17

∞ ∞ 8 ∞ ∞ 5

5 ∞ ∞ 23 ∞ ∞

∞ 0 2 19 ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ 18 17 10

0 16 ∞ 19 10 ∞

∞ 21 ∞ 3 ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ 4 ∞ 19 ∞

⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥.

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 2 17 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 1 ∞ 12 ∞ 5 21 8 14 ∞ ∞ 23 18

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CONSTRUCTION OF IRREGULAR PROTOGRAPH-BASED QC-LDPC CODES WITH LOW ERROR FLOOR

15

improvement that the former has over the latter in both error floor and waterfall regions.
As the last example, we consider the rate-1/2 accumulaterepeat-jagged-accumulate (ARJA) LDPC code of CCSDS standard [6]. This code has a 12 × 20 base matrix, N = 128, and L = 2048. The base matrix has 4 columns of weight 1, 4 of weight 2, 8 of weight 3, and 4 of weight 6. The bits corresponding to the columns of weight 6 are punctured. This base matrix has a threshold of 0.62 dB. Using the proposed technique, we design a code C9 with the exact same base matrix and lifting degree that is free of LETSs within the range a ≤ 9, b ≤ 4, and has the following exponent matrix are shown at the next of the next page.

In Table IX, we have compared the LETS distribution of C9 with that of the standard code in the range a ≤ 10, b ≤ 5. As can be seen, except for the (8, 5) class, in which C9 has a larger multiplicity of TSs, in all the other classes, the multiplicity of TSs are larger for the standard code. Finally, we construct another code C10 with a 12×20 base matrix and N = 128, but with a different degree distribution than the standard code. We consider column weights of 1, 2, 4 and 6 for the base matrix and optimize the threshold of the base matrix using PEXIT analysis. As a result, we find a base matrix with the threshold of 0.52 dB that has 4, 4, 8, and 4 columns of weights 1, 2, 4, and 6, respectively. We then design the exponent matrix to eliminate all the LETSs within the range a ≤ 10, b ≤ 5.

⎡

∞ 0 ∞ 0 ∞ 0 ∞∞∞∞ 0 ∞

P7

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢

∞ 0 ∞ ∞ 303 ∞ ∞ 188 ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ 230 36 ∞ 55 214 ∞ ∞ 240

0 40 ∞ ∞ 126 ∞ ∞ 27 151 ∞

∞ ∞ 0 113 ∞ 3 127 ∞ ∞ 319

0 ∞ ∞ 197 ∞ ∞ 253 ∞ ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ 183 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 309

∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 233 ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ 289 ∞ ∞ 240 ∞

∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ 281 ∞ ∞ ∞ 140

0 211 ∞ ∞ 11 ∞ ∞
5 56 ∞

298 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 280 ∞ ∞ ∞

0 64 ∞ ∞ 323 ∞ ∞ 112 347 ∞

∞ ∞ 297 ∞ ∞ ∞ 295 ∞ ∞ 98 ∞ 70

⎤

∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞∞∞∞∞

∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 138

39 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞∞∞∞ 230 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 263 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 230 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 176 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 216 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 188 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 75 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 202 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 38

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0

⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥.

36 269 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 103

⎡

0 ∞∞∞∞∞∞

P8

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢

134 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

0 70 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

∞ 0 115 ∞ ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ 0 80 ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ 0 166 ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 65

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0

0 ∞0∞ 0 ∞ ∞∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 44 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 25 ∞ ∞ 62 16 ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ 150 ∞ ∞∞∞ 6

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 171 206 10 ∞ 20 ∞ 0 ∞ 0 ∞∞ 0

⎤ 0 ∞∞0 0 ∞

∞ 37 69 ∞ 6 ∞

0 ∞ ∞ 29 ∞ 49

∞ 40 ∞ ∞ 105 ∞

0 20 76 ∞ ∞ 28

0 ∞ ∞ 21 102 63

∞ ∞ 32 168 ∞ ∞

30 ∞ ∞ 27 235 ∞

∞ 0 43 ∞ ∞ 216

∞ 0 8 26 11 ∞

16 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 27

44 170 40 ∞ ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ 0 42 39

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦.

∞ 233 28 ∞ ∞ 51 ∞ 136 ∞ 62 ∞ 7

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

16

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

TABLE IX MULTIPLICITIES OF (a, b) LETSS IN RANGE a ≤ 10, b ≤ 5, FOR C9 , C10 AND THE CODE OF [6]

corresponding to degree-6 variable nodes are punctured.) As can be seen, C10 outperforms the standard code in the waterfall region. Moreover, since C10 is free of LETSs within the range a ≤ 10, b ≤ 5, while the standard code has many LETSs
within different classes of this range, we expect the error floor of C10 to be much lower than that of the standard code. The FER of C9 is also given in Fig. 9 for comparison. While the waterfall performance of C9 is practically identical to that of the standard code due to having the same base matrix, we expect the error floor of C9 to be lower than that of the standard code based on the superior LETS distribution
provided in Table IX.

Fig. 9. FER comparison of the designed codes C9 and C10 and the code of CCSDS standard [6].
This code has the following exponent matrix are shown at the bottom of this page.
In Fig. 9, we have provided the FER of C10 in comparison with that of the standard code. (Note that all the bits

VII. CONCLUSION
In this article, we designed irregular QC-LDPC codes with good waterfall and error floor performance. The good waterfall performance was achieved through the proper design of the base matrix. The low error floor was obtained through the proper selection of cyclic permutation shifts within the exponent matrix to avoid any instance of LETSs within a targeted set of structures L. At the core of the technique used for the design of the exponent matrix was an efficient

⎡

⎤

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 63 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ 0

P9

=

⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢

∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ 28 ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ 43 ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ 57

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 21 96

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 20

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ 11 ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 2 126 ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

34 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

∞ 79 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ 110 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ 10 ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ 3 115 ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ 15 38

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ 5

65 ∞ ∞ 82 ∞ 103 27 119 ∞ ∞

0 91 ∞ 43 76 ∞ 17 ∞ 29 ∞

∞ 0 55 118 66 7 ∞ ∞ ∞ 96

∞ ∞ 104 ∞ 32 87 111 ∞ ∞ ∞

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥.

∞ ∞ ∞ 17 ∞ 40 119 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 53 ∞ ∞ 19 ∞ ∞ ∞ 12

⎡

⎤

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 0 ∞ ∞ 100 ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 0 ∞

P10

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢

∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ 28 ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ 104 ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ 123

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ 10 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 80 123

25 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 17

0 13 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 82 ∞ ∞

∞ 0 17 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 47 54 ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

81 ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ 27 ∞ ∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ 62 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞∞∞∞ ∞ ∞ ∞∞∞∞ ∞ ∞ ∞∞∞∞ ∞ ∞ ∞∞∞∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 1 12 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 85 56 23 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 118 123

∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 7 ∞ 74

∞ 0 7 19 ∞ 56 119 120 ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ 37 124 13 ∞ 65 ∞ 25 ∞

79 ∞ ∞ 6 104 64 ∞ ∞ ∞ 57

0 92 ∞ ∞ 44 72 102 ∞ ∞ ∞

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥.

∞ ∞ ∞ 8 ∞ 24 40 ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 35 ∞ 121 100 ∞ ∞ ∞ 9

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CONSTRUCTION OF IRREGULAR PROTOGRAPH-BASED QC-LDPC CODES WITH LOW ERROR FLOOR

17

search algorithm that was carefully devised to verify whether
an irregular Tanner graph has any instance of a LETS within L. While in this work the search algorithm was used within the framework of a greedy column-by-column search for the
exponent matrix, it can also be used in various other search
strategies that require a fast technique to search for LETSs of
an irregular Tanner graph. It was demonstrated through LETS
distributions and FER simulations that the designed codes are
superior to the existing irregular QC-LDPC codes, particularly
in the error floor region.
REFERENCES
[1] Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Specific Requirements, Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, IEEE Standard 802.11-2012, Mar. 2012.
[2] Air Interface for Broadband Wireless Access Systems, IEEE Standard 802.16-2009, 2009.
[3] Unified High-Speed Wireline-Based Home Networking TransceiversSystem Architecture and Physical Layer Specification, document ITU-T Std. G.9960 (12/2011), 2011.
[4] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[5] E. M. Kurtas, A. V. Kuznetsov, and I. Djurdjevic, “System perspectives for the application of structured LDPC codes to data storage devices,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 200–207, Feb. 2006.
[6] Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for Use in Near-Earth and Deep Space Applications, Orange Book, Issue 2, Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) Experimental Specification, document 131.1-O-2, Sep. 2007.
[7] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715–717, Dec. 2004.
[8] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[9] D. Vukobratovic and V. Senk, “Generalized ACE constrained progressive edge-growth LDPC code design,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 32–34, Jan. 2008.
[10] X. Zheng, F. C. M. Lau, and C. K. Tse, “Constructing short-length irregular LDPC codes with low error floor,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 2823–2834, Oct. 2010.
[11] I. E. Bocharova, B. D. Kudryashov, and R. Johannesson, “Searching for binary and nonbinary block and convolutional LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 163–183, Jan. 2016.
[12] C. T. Healy and R. C. de Lamare, “Design of LDPC codes based on multipath EMD strategies for progressive edge growth,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 8, pp. 3208–3219, Aug. 2016.
[13] J. Xu, L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of regular and irregular LDPC codes: Geometry decomposition and masking,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 121–134, Jan. 2007.
[14] G. Han, Y. L. Guan, and L. Kong, “Construction of irregular QCLDPC codes via masking with ACE optimization,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 348–351, Feb. 2014.
[15] H. Xu, D. Feng, R. Luo, and B. Bai, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes via masking with successive cycle elimination,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2370–2373, Dec. 2016.
[16] X. Liu, F. Xiong, Z. Wang, and S. Liang, “Design of binary LDPC codes with parallel vector message passing,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 1363–1375, Apr. 2018.
[17] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[18] D. Vukobratovic and V. Senk, “Transactions papers evaluation and design of irregular LDPC codes using ACE spectrum,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 2272–2279, Aug. 2009.
[19] G. Richter and A. Hof, “On a construction method of irregular LDPC codes without small stopping sets,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., vol. 3, Jun. 2006, pp. 1119–1124.
[20] X. Jiao, J. Mu, J. Song, and L. Zhou, “Eliminating small stopping sets in irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 435–437, Jun. 2009.

[21] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.
[22] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Design of finite-length irregular protograph codes with low error floors over the binary-input AWGN channel using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 902–907, Apr. 2012.
[23] S. Khazraie, R. Asvadi, and A. H. Banihashemi, “A PEG construction of finite-length LDPC codes with low error floor,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1288–1291, Aug. 2012.
[24] S. Naseri and A. H. Banihashemi, “Construction of Girth-8 QC-LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 1904–1908, Nov. 2019.
[25] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[26] D. G. M. Mitchell, L. Dolecek, and D. J. Costello, “Absorbing set characterization of array-based spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2014, pp. 886–890.
[27] H. Esfahanizadeh, A. Hareedy, and L. Dolecek, “Construction of regular QC-LDPC codes with low error floor by efficient systematic elimination of trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 1–11, Sep. 2016.
[28] H. Hatami, D. G. M. Mitchell, D. J. Costello, and T. Fuja, “Performance bounds for quantized spatially coupled LDPC decoders based on absorbing sets,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Vail, CO, USA, Jun. 2018, pp. 826–830.
[29] Y. Zhang and W. E. Ryan, “Toward low LDPC-code floors: A case study,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1566–1573, Jun. 2009.
[30] G. Bum Kyung and C.-C. Wang, “Finding the exhaustive list of small fully absorbing sets and designing the corresponding low errorfloor decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1487–1498, Jun. 2012.
[31] A. Tomasoni, S. Bellini, and M. Ferrari, “Thresholds of absorbing sets in low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 3238–3249, Aug. 2017.
[32] M. Ferrari, A. Tomasoni, R. Marenzi, and S. Bellini, “Thresholds of absorbing sets under scaled min-sum LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 6643–6651, Oct. 2019.
[33] H. Hatami, D. G. M. Mitchell, D. J. Costello, and T. E. Fuja, “A threshold-based min-sum algorithm to lower the error floors of quantized LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 2005–2015, Apr. 2020.
[34] B. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Construction of QC LDPC codes with low error floor by efficient systematic search and elimination of trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 697–712, Feb. 2020.
[35] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for leafless elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6713–6736, Dec. 2016.
[36] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
[37] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Characterization of elementary trapping sets in irregular LDPC codes and the corresponding efficient exhaustive search algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 3411–3430, May 2018.
[38] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[39] A. Tasdighi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M.-R. Sadeghi, “Efficient search of girth-optimal QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1552–1564, Apr. 2016.
[40] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5188–5203, Sep. 2014.
[41] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization and efficient exhaustive search of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 323–326, Mar. 2015.
[42] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Sep. 2001.
[43] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2007, pp. 3250–3254.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

18

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

[44] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
Bashirreza Karimi received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran, in 2011, and the M.A.Sc. degree in communications engineering from the Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, in 2014. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering at Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada. His research interests include graph theory, coding theory, and wireless communications.

Amir H. Banihashemi (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 1997.
In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, where he was a Post-Doctoral Fellow of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. He joined the Faculty of Engineering, Carleton University, in 1998, where he is currently a Professor with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include coding and information theory, digital and wireless communications, network coding, theory and implementation of communication algorithms, and compressed sensing and sampling. Prof. Banihashemi was a member of the NSERC’s Electrical and Computer Engineering Evaluation Group from 2013 to 2016, the last two years as the Section Chair. He was also a two-time recipient of the NSERC Discovery Accelerator Supplement in 2008 and 2013. He has served as the Co-Chair of the Communication Theory Symposium of GLOBECOM 2007 and the Canadian Workshop on Information Theory 2009, the TPC Co-Chair of the Information Theory Workshop 2007, and a member of the Organizing Committee for the International Symposium on Information Theory 2008. He also served as an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2003 to 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

