IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 29, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

51

A Multirate Fully Parallel LDPC Encoder for the IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax QC-LDPC Codes Based on
Reduced Complexity XOR Trees
Ahmed Mahdi , Nikos Kanistras , Member, IEEE, and Vassilis Paliouras , Member, IEEE

Abstract— This article proposes an encoding method based on a two-step encoding algorithm for the 12 quasi-cyclic (QC)low-density parity-check (LDPC) (QC-LDPC) codes specified in the IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax standards. The proposed approach jointly considers all codes of the particular set, instead of targeting each code separately. The proposed algorithm performs multiplication by inverse matrices. The complexity of the multiplications is significantly reduced by the introduced encoding method. It allows the implementation of full-parallel architectures that execute the encoding process within a single clock cycle, or more for pipelined implementations, for any of the supported codes. A corresponding VLSI encoding architecture based on XOR-gate trees is also proposed. The proposed solution exploits the structure and features of the involved matrices to extract common subexpressions (CSs) using common sub-expression sharing techniques (CSST). Such expressions result due to common features of the original matrices and the corresponding inverses, identified in this article. Innovative subexpression extraction procedures that target the specific codes as a set are introduced here. Furthermore, illustrative single-clock hardware encoders derived by the proposed technique are integrated into 90- and 45-nm technologies at 1 GHz occupying 125 and 107 KGates, respectively, achieving throughput rates up to 1.62 Tbps.
Index Terms— Common subexpression (CS), complexity reduction, encoding complexity, low-density parity-check (LDPC) encoding, matrix inversion, multi-Gbps throughput rate, quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC, VLSI architecture.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, introduced by Gallager [1], have been broadly improved in terms of their construction and performance. Due to their admirable error-correcting performance and their suitability for highly parallel decoders, LDPC codes have been gradually selected by numerous telecommunication, and not only, protocols including the digital video broadcasting (DVB-S2) standard, IEEE 802.16e, IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax, 10Gb Ethernet, mag-
Manuscript received February 18, 2020; revised June 15, 2020 and August 3, 2020; accepted September 7, 2020. Date of publication November 16, 2020; date of current version December 29, 2020. This work was supported by the European Union and Greek National Funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, through the call RESEARCH-CREATE-INNOVATE under Project T1EDK02551. (Corresponding author: Vassilis Paliouras.)
Ahmed Mahdi is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Thessaly, 38221 Volos, Greece (e-mail: ahmahdi@uth.gr).
Nikos Kanistras and Vassilis Paliouras are with the VLSI Design Laboratory, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Patras, 26500 Patras, Greece (e-mail: kanistras@ece.upatras.gr; paliuras@ece.upatras.gr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2020.3034046

netic storage, Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) standard, GB20600 standard, 5G New Radio (NR), among others.
The error-correction performance of LDPC codes has been shown superior to alternatives, yet efficient hardware implementations remain a challenge. This is mainly due to the large codeword sizes and complex random interconnections of hardware blocks, imposed by the random nature of the codes. Furthermore, realization of cost and speed-effective implementations of multiple LDPC codes, with various attributes, into a single core, has evolved into one of the most demanding problems in real-life applications especially in ultra-reliable and high-speed communication systems [2], [3].
A straightforward method to implement LDPC encoding is to multiply the information bits with the dense generator matrix derived from the sparse parity check matrix (PCM). The density of the generator matrix, and the typically large code length, make this straightforward method impractical due to the very high implementation complexity. Richardson and Urbanke (RU) [4] demonstrated that, if the PCM is approximate lower (or upper) triangular, the encoding complexity can be largely reduced by performing the encoding directly exploiting the sparse PCM. Most of the proposed low-complexity encoder hardware design schemes [5]–[7] essentially pursue this idea.
In order to reduce hardware complexity, structured codes have been exploited which confine code constructions to trade randomness for implementation efficiency. A class of such LDPC codes are the quasi-cyclic (QC)-LDPC codes. This family of LDPC codes has been adopted by almost all the international standards that employ LDPC error-correction systems. QC-LDPC codes have the advantage of linear encoding time and reduced decoding complexity [8]–[12]. A QC-LDPC PCM is composed of circulant submatrices (SMs) of size Z × Z , each defined by a particular permutation value, called shifting factor. Encoders for such codes can be efficiently implemented by using shift registers [13]–[15], while related decoder architectures require simple address generation mechanisms and localized memory access [16].
Li et al. [15] computed the generator matrix G in a systematic circular form and proposed encoding schemes that take advantage of this form. Encoding schemes for block-circulant codes based on the structure of the PCM and the generator matrix have been proposed by Andrews et al. [17], while Yasotharan and Carusone have presented a low-complexity

1063-8210 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

52

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 29, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

encoding architecture based on straightforward multiplication with the generator matrix [18].
This article proposes a design technique and a full-parallel encoder architecture which implements a two-step encoding procedure. The architecture has the capability of computing the parity bits of any of the 12 QC-LDPC codes required by the IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax standard, within one clock cycle. Furthermore it can be easily pipelined. It is based on XOR trees, the structure of which relies on shared and reused parts of the implemented hardware resources. The structure of the XOR trees is derived by applying common sub-expression sharing techniques. It exploits specific features of matrices identified in this article, allowing a cost-efficient implementation of the encoder. Common sub-expression elimination/sharing technique is widely used in circuits that perform multiple constant multiplications (MCM) [19]–[21]. The common subexpressions (CS), which correspond to the common partial products, are formed during the multiplication of a variable with the constants [22].
Herein, we take advantage of the concept of subexpression elimination; considering several QC-LDPC codes with different PCMs, but with structural similarity in terms of value and row/column index, subexpression sharing is performed, i.e., vector-matrix multiplications (VMM), where some columns/rows in a matrix are identical with parts of columns/rows in the same and/or another matrix.
To recapitulate, the proposed encoding technique exploits structural features of the IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax LDPC codes, taking advantage of newly observed distinctive attributes of the involved matrices. The proposed technique leverages the Common Sub-Expression Sharing Technique (CSST) to build an efficient encoding core. The derived architecture differentiates from prior art, since it is not based on the conventional shift registers and cyclic rotation widely used due to the structure of QC-LDPC codes. The innovative features of the proposed work are summarized as follows.
1) The proposed work presents a novel full-parallel encoder architecture for the 12 WiFi QC-LDPC codes, implemented in a single core.
2) The encoder requires the lowest latency, just one clock cycle, with a frequency up to 1 GHz targeting 45- and 90-nm CMOS standard-cell libraries.
3) A detailed CSST based on the structure of WiFi QC-LDPC codes is analyzed step-by-step.
4) The proposed technique can be successfully applied for QC-LDPC codes of similar structure as those of WiFi.
a) For different QC-LDPC codes’ family, the structure of which is not identical to WiFi codes, i.e., QC-LDPC codes of IEEE 802.16, IEEE 802.11ad, WiMedia 1.5 UWB, IEEE 802.15.3c, IEEE 802.22, or CCSDS, the proposed two-step encoding method can be efficiently applied in order to reduce the encoding latency.
b) Corresponding modifications on the CSST might be needed, considering the features of the involved matrices.

c) A joint consideration of the two-step encoding method and CSST results to a significant reduction of the processing units and the critical path delay.
5) The proposed implementation of the VMM unit is based only on reduced-complexity XOR trees. It can be applied efficiently into all the reported encoding algorithms, or in particular encoding step, since they all involve VMM steps to encode the messages.
The remainder of this article is outlined as follows. Section II reviews the structure of the IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax codes and introduces the proposed encoding procedure and the related architecture. Details on the applied CS extraction methods, the encoding core, and the respective hardware implementation of the proposed encoding procedure are given in Sections III–V. Section VI reports the complexity metrics of the proposed encoder and presents a comparison with related works. Finally, concluding remarks are drawn in Section VII.

II. QC-LDPC CODES AND PROPOSED ENCODING

A. LDPC Encoding Using PCM
In general, a systematic (n, k) LDPC code has k information bits and n coded bits with code rate r = k/n. The parity-check matrix H is of size m × n, where m = n − k, and it defines a set of equations by

H · cT = 0 (mod 2)

(1)

where c is a codeword. Let H1 and H2 be SMs of H of size m × k and m × m, respectively, such that H = [H1 H2]. Let codeword c be expressed as c = [s p], where s is a vector of k information bits and p is composed of the n − k parity bits.
From (1), it follows that

H1 · sT + H2 · pT = 0 (mod 2)

(2)

pT = (H2)−1 · (H1 · sT ) (mod 2).

(3)

Despite the extensive parallelism inherent in this algorithm, it is usually avoided due to the complexity imposed by the high density of matrix H2−1 in (3). High density leads to substantial hardware cost for the storage of the matrix. Furthermore, operations with dense matrices are computationally intensive and dominate the encoding complexity in comparison to multiplications by the matrix H1.
However, the efficient exploitation of the structure of the matrix, combined with suitable resource management, are key factors to significantly reduce the implementation cost of the required matrix-vector multiplications (MVM), and achieve a parallel implementation with reduced logic operators and logic path, as described in the following sections.

B. Representation of the IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax QC-LDPC Codes
First and foremost, the PCM of a QC-LDPC code consists of Z × Z nonzero circularly shifted identity SMs {I }, also called monomials [23], and Z × Z zero SMs. Such a PCM can be represented in a compact form by a shift base matrix, which contains either the shifting values of the monomials, or −1; i.e., a value that represents a zero submatrix. The order of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAHDI et al.: MULTIRATE FULLY PARALLEL LDPC ENCODER

53

Fig. 1. Common structure base shift matrix of matrices H2 of WiFi QC-LDPC codes. (a) Binary SMs circularly shifted by one position. (b) Iden-
tity submatrix. Entries (−1) correspond to zero SM.

base shift matrix is mb ×nb, where mb = m/Z and nb = n/Z . Thereby, the base shift matrices H1b and H2b, corresponding to H1 and H2, are of orders mb ×kb and mb ×mb, respectively. Fig. 1 depicts an example of such representation.
The IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax QC-LDPC codes family comprises
12 codes of three different codewords lengths (648, 1296, 1944). Each codeword length has four different code rates
(1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 5/6), with same size of permuted and zero SMs; i.e., Z1 = 27, Z2 = 54, and Z3 = 81 for codes of length 648, 1296 and 1944, respectively. Therefore, this family is divided into three subfamilies, 1 : {648, Z1}, 2 : {1296, Z2} and
3 : {1944, Z3}, each of them containing the four codes of identical codeword length and Z .
The PCMs of the IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax QC-LDPC codes have a common structure; they all are of Almost Lower
Triangular (ALT) form, and matrices H2 are stair matrices with identity SMs along the two diagonals. Also, a significant common characteristic of matrices H2, for all codes, is that the nonzero Z × Z SMs are composed of two shifting factors only, denoted by a and b, as depicted in Fig. 1.

C. Proposed Encoding Procedure
The proposed encoding method aims to minimizing the number of the required clock cycles by implementing a full-parallel encoding procedure, thus maximizing the obtained throughput rate, reducing at the same time required resources. According to (3), encoding is executed in two steps
I. qT = H1 · sT , II. pT = H2−1 · qT . The aforementioned algorithm allows full-parallel MVM by H1, and similarly, full-parallel MVM by H2−1, where the input vector is multiplied by all columns of the corresponding matrix at the same time. Note that there is no restrictive data dependence in the above algorithm, in contrast to other procedures, such as those based on Forward/Backward Substitution. However, as a two-step procedure, the only dependence here is that vector qT must be initially evaluated to subsequently derive the parity vector pT . Taking advantage of the sparse structure of the PCM, only multiplication by the nonzero elements is needed. Let Nz(A, ri ) be a function that returns the indices of the nonzero bits (aces) of each row ri of matrix A. Then, the above procedure is written as

k

qiT =

sNTz(H1,ri ) (mod 2)

(4)

i =1

Fig. 2. Overview of the full-parallel encoder architecture.

m

pTj

=

qT
Nz j =1

H2−1,r j

(mod 2).

(5)

Equations (4) and (5) allow the simplification of straightforward MVMs. Exploiting the identity law of the Boolean Algebra, B · 1 = B, where · denotes the logical AND operator and B is a logical variable, the bits of the input vector that correspond to nonzero elements (aces) of a certain row of the binary matrix (H1 or H2−1) are XORed in order to compute the corresponding result bit. A related architecture for a single-code encoder is proposed in [24] and [25] showing benefits when compared to other parallel architectures. However, the use of this architecture for each of the 12 WiFi codes separately, results in a hardware implementation with unaffordable area complexity. Herein, we propose a novel customized full-parallel architecture for multiple QC-LDPC codes based on CSST.
Since LDPC encoding is a finite-field multiplication of a constant matrix and a data vector, the number of operations can be reduced by using CS elimination. This can be performed by exploiting the common digit patterns that appear in the set of nonzero elements of the involved matrices. For the case of IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax LDPC encoder, there are 12 constant matrices and CSST can be applied not only on a single matrix, but also on each subfamily and even on the entire family of WiFi QC-LDCP codes.
Fig. 2 shows an overview of the proposed architecture, where the input and output registers have the lengths of the longest information and parity-bit vectors, which are 1620 and 972, respectively. The XOR trees corresponding to multiplications by matrices H1 and H2−1, for all the 12 matrices, compute all the intermediate results and the parity bits. The multiplexers in each stage pass only the required results according to the specified code length and code rate.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

54

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 29, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

III. PROPOSED UNIT FOR MULTIPLICATION BY H1

The efficiency of the proposed encoder is demonstrated

by the appropriate application of CSST to realize a

low-complexity encoding core. To extract the CS, and to build

the encoding core, we propose a CS-extraction methodology

based on several identified algebraic facts and features of the

involved matrices.

The first encoding step implements multiplications of the information word, sT , by a given matrix H1. From the circuit

point of view, and according to (4), the number of required

two-input XOR gates depends totally on the number of aces in

each row. However, a significant reduction of the total number

of required XOR gates can be attained when considering the

common aces, i.e., aces with same index, in the rows of a

single matrix. This reduction can be further extended if all the

rows of all the matrices H1, of each i , are jointly considered.

Seeking intersections between the rows of all H1’s that

belong to i , a matrix H1b i is formed by aggregating the four base matrices H1b of i , as follows:

⎡

[

H1b

i

=

⎣⎢⎢

[ [

⎤

H1b (1/2) H1b (2/3) H1b (3/4)

]

−1 ]

−1 −1 ]

−1

−1 −1

⎥⎦⎥

[

H1b (5/6)

]

(6)

Algorithm 1 Common-Expression Extraction Method

where H1b(r ) denotes the base matrix of code rate r in i .

Matrix H1b i is an image of a corresponding binary matrix

H1

,
i

that

is

composed

of

the

equivalent

binary

matrices

H1.

Note

that

matrices

H1,

as

well

as

H1

,
i

are

composed

of

Zi × Zi zero SM and Zi × Zi rotated identity SMs, Iσ , where

σ is the shifting factor. A nonempty intersection between any

two rows of H1 i exists, if a row has at least two aces with identical indices with any other two aces in the second row.

However, the sparsity

of H1

,
i

as well as

the high diversity

of

the shifting factors, have a definitive impact on the existence

of common aces, in terms of their column index, even if

there are two or more SMs, in a particular row, that have

the same column indices with other SMs in different matrix.

In particular, consider the four Iσ(i2, j2) , where i1 = i2 and j1

SMs, = j2

Iσ(i1, j1) , Iσ(i1, j2) , Iσ(i2 , j1) , are rows and columns

indices

of

H1b

,
i

respectively.

Feature 1: For any two Z × Z circularly right-rotated iden-

tity matrices, Iσ1 and Iσ2 , where σ1 and σ2 ∈ {0, 1, . . . , Z −1}, it holds that

rkIσ2 = rlIσ1 ∀k = [l + σ2 − σ1]Z

(7)

where [·]Z denotes the modulo-Z operation, and rkIσ represents the kth row of Iσ , k = 0, 1, . . . , Z − 1.

Therefore, according to Feature 1, although Iσ(i1,j1) and Iσ(i2,j1) have common rows, and therefore, common aces, the existence of a nonempty intersection between two rows of

H1

,
i

at

least

of

length

two,

requires

either

the

existence

of

another two SMs with identical corresponding column indices

(Iσ(i1, j2) , Iσ(i2, j2) ), or with a difference between their shifting factors equal to the respective difference between Iσ(i1,j1) and Iσ(i2,j1) , as summarized in the following Fact 1.

Fact 1: For any four SMs, Iσ(i1, j1) , Iσ(i1, j2) , Iσ(i2, j1) , Iσ(i2, j2) ,

e⎡acIσh(i1

of
, j1)

size Zi
··· Iσ(i1, j2)

×⎤

Zi

and

part

of

H1

,
i

thus

H1 i

=

⎣ ... ... ... ⎦, any of the binary rows r2 = i2 Z + l,

0

≤Iσ(il2 ,<j1)

···
Z,

Iσ(i2 , j2)
is identical

with

only

one

of

the

rows,

r1

=

i1Z +k,

0 ≤ k < Z , according to Feature 1, if and only if

[σ(i1, j1) − σ(i2, j1)]Z = [σ(i1, j2) − σ(i2, j2)]Z .

(8)

Note that as expected from Feature 1, l = [k + σ(i1, j1) − σ(i2, j1)]Z = [k + σ(i1, j2) − σ(i2, j2)]Z .
Proportionally, intersections of length greater than two, exist

if Fact 1 is utilized for a multitude of SMs. Thereafter,

given either the matrix common aces between

Hdi1ffberie,notrrothwesreosfpHec1tivie

binary

H1

,
i

that compose

respective common XOR expressions, are designated according

to the corresponding shifting factors of the SMs where these

aces belong. The proposed common expressions extraction

method for matrices H1 is described as Algorithm 1, which uses Algorithm 2 to identify the intersections between two

rows of a given base matrix.

Moreover, the required XOR gates for the first encoding step

can be further reduced; since Z1 = (Z2/2) = (Z3/3), more

common patterns can be detected amongst the 12 H1 matrices,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAHDI et al.: MULTIRATE FULLY PARALLEL LDPC ENCODER

55

Algorithm 2 Identify Intersections Between Two Base-Matrix Rows

IV. EXTRACTION OF THE COMMON SUBEXPRESSIONS FOR THE INVERTED MATRICES

The highest complexity of the two-step encoding procedure

is introduced by the multiplications with the inverted matrices

due to their increased density, thus requiring a high number of

XOR gates. In this section, we describe the common expression

extraction method for the 12 inverted matrices that reduces

the number of required XOR gates. The following feature is

observed after inversion of the 12 H2b matrices.

Feature 2: The fact that mon structure (see Fig. 1),

the 12 results

H2b matrices have a to corresponding 12

comH2−b1

matrices also with common structure.

Equation (9) depicts an example of the inverted base matri-

ces. The form of

common form of the H2−b1 the corresponding binary ⎡

reflects a common H2−1 matrices

compact ⎤

b

b

bbb

b

H2−b1

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢aaa

+ + +
a

b b b

a a+b a+b
a

a a a+b a

a a a a

a a a a+b

a

a a a +

b⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥.

(9)

a

a

a a a a+b

The entries a + b of (9) define a polynomial binary SM. It is specified by the addition of two monomial SMs (an identity SM represented by b and a one-position circularly shifted identity SM represented by a).

thus all codes are jointly considered. Hence, a matrix

⎡ [
H1b{ 1, 2, 3} = ⎣ [ [

H1b 1 H1b 2

] −1 −1 ⎤ ] −1 ⎦

H1b 3

]

is constructed and exhaustively searched for intersections. In this case, Algorithm 1 could be further evolved exploiting the relation between Z1, Z2 and Z3. Nevertheless, such a procedure would be complicated, and an exhaustive searching method could be alternatively applied. By thoroughly seeking common aces patterns in H1b{ 1, 2, 3}, it is found that a higher degree of optimization and XOR reduction can be accomplished. Table I reports the number of XOR gates for multiplication by H1b{ 1, 2, 3} . The proposed XOR tree, for the two encoding steps, reduces by almost 53% the total number of required XOR gates, in comparison to the case of a single XOR tree per matrix.

A. Matrix-Common Expression Method

The M-CE method works locally within a single matrix. The

common expression is derived as a function of multiplication

by certain rows to decrease the number of the required XOR

gates. Multiplications by the remainder of the rows are defined

as subexpressions of M-CE. Based on Feature 2, and assuming

the matrix of (9) as an example, we eliminate each H2−b1 to

produce a smaller condensed matrix which can be used to

cshoomFwapcnutte2th:tahAte ctschaoemrderionrwegssutoltosFf wemaittuahtrreHic22−ebs1a,nHadt2−fbao1rreaadrluelctehcdoemcHops2o−tb.s1e,dit

is of

two types of monomials and one type of polynomial SMs,

expressed as a linear function of the two monomials.

Following Fact 2, and since the two monomials a and b

are subcomponents of the polynomial, the multiplication by

the polynomial SM accommodates multiplication by the two

monomials. Furthermore, considering that intermediate multi-

plication results, by a and by b, are available, multiplication

by the polynomial can serve also the cases where only one of

the monomials is involved.

In that sense, the base matrix of (9) can be reduced and

represented polynomial Henceforth,

fHby2=−b1aais+cdboenriidsveuensdseebddytosreoelwxecptrimensgastferoiaxrcehaHec2lh−eb1me,leenwmtheoenfrteHof2−tbiht1es.

rows the appropriate terms of the condensed matrix elements,

i.e., a, b or a + b. Proposition 1 summarizes this statement. Proposition 1: For any row of H2−b1 composed of a and/or
b and/or a + b, a term of the form f = a + b can be used to express the entries a and/or b, thus the matrices H2−b1 can be expressed using only mb entries of the form f = a + b.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

56

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 29, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

As a result of Fact 2 and Proposition 1, matrix H2−b1 of (9) is represented by the following condensed matrix:
H2−b1 = [ f (1) f (2) f (3) f (4) f (5) f (6)] (10)
where f ( j) denotes the j th column element. As an example, assume the implementation of a XOR
subtree per each binary row. A multiplication by two entries in a matrix row and another multiplication by two entries of the same column indices, but in a different row, require the same resources (same multiplicands, common expression). In other words, the common partial result is defined by the multiplication by the common monomial SM, i.e., a, in addition to the multiplication by the second monomial, i.e., b. Furthermore, in order to simplify the XOR subtrees, as well as to efficiently utilize XOR gates, Propositions 2 and 3 are stated. Section V details the application of these propositions.

B. Subfamily-Common Expression ( -CE)

Inverse matrices H2−b1 referring to the four code rates

supported in each family, can be written as

⎡

⎤

b bbb

H2−b1(5/6)

=

⎢⎢⎣

f f

a f

a a

a a

⎥⎥⎦

a aa ⎡

f 4×4

⎤

b b bbb b

H2−b1(3/4)

=

⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢

f f f a

a f f a

a a f a

a a a a

a a a f

a a a f

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥

a a aaa ⎡

f 6×6

⎤

b b b bbb b b

H2−b1(2/3)

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢

f f f f a a

a f f f a a

a a f f a a

a a a f a a

a a a a a a

a a a a f a

a a a a f f

a a a a f f

⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

a ⎡

a

a

aaa

a

f 8×8 ⎤

b b b b b bbb b b b b

H2−b1(1/2) = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢aaaaffffff

a f f f f f a a a a

a a f f f f a a a a

a a a f f f a a a a

a a a a f f a a a a

a a a a a f a a a a

a a a a a a a a a a

a a a a a a f a a a

a a a a a a f f a a

a a a a a a f f f a

a a a a a a f f f f

a a a a a a f f f f

⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

a a a a a a a a a a a f 12×12 (11)

where f denotes the polynomial SM a + b. Before proceeding to the optimization of the XOR subtrees,
we seek a common expression of each subfamily 1, 2, 3.

However, since these three subfamilies share the same four code rates and the same corresponding sizes and structure of the base SM H2b, a common expression for one subfamily can be used for others as well. The only difference here is that these subfamilies have different sizes Z of the circulant SMs. Therefore, Fact 2 and Proposition 1 stand for each matrix H2−b1, thus a respective condensed inverse base matrix for each code, H2−b1(5/6), H2−b1(3/4), H2−b1(2/3), H2−b1(1/2), can be derived following (10).
Proposition 2: Since the condensed matrices H2−b1 of each i are of different sizes but composed of identical entries, the largest one can be successfully utilized to express the smaller ones; thus H2−1(1/2) is a representative matrix for the other three matrices, the multiplications by which are determined as a subexpression of multiplication by tbfHHooe22r−−Fbret11u1hf(fir.ea1tchr/Ffieie2eorrnn)srm.tetleroryoodrwweue,ds,ferrotd1o2r,,ttdoohtefhedtaeecelrolsmficmmrrisinpabteutertpiZacaoteinilosyypnnHaroroo2i−mftwby1tihaiibenlni,tp(sH(1aawr12−ib)th+1,yi.ocbFbnhio)ltycs1r,o,SerHixMrne2a−bssm1pHbopc2−nlaobend1f, is required, while for the remaining entries, only the SMs a are involved to compute the Zi parity bits which correspond to r2. Similarly for the remainder of the rows. The next section details a technique to compute the parity bits using the condensed inverted matrices. It also presents the proposed derivation of the corresponding XOR trees by exploiting the structure of both H2−1 and H2−1.

V. PROPOSED XOR TREE FOR THE INVERTED MATRICES

For the determination of a parity bit pi , an XOR subtree per

row i of that, the

the corresponding condensed matrix

mHa2−tr1i(x1/H22)−1isisutrieliqzueidretdo.

Instead of derive the

Basic XORs as described by Proposition 3, which is presented

later in this section. Subsequently, the Basic XORs are suitably

shared and interconnected to perform XORing of the required

bits of the intermediate vector q for each code. XOR gates

are connected, and shared, according to the nonzero indices of each row of the binary matrices H2−1, as depicted in Fig. 3.

A. Determination of Basic XOR Subtrees

The binary matrix H2−1(1/2) is of order Zi ×(12Zi ), where

Zi is the size of the corresponding circulant SMs in each

subfamily i . Thus, an XOR subtree is implemented per row

i , and the number of these subtrees is Zi .

Feature 3: Due to the structure of the condensed matrices

H2−1, the row rk, k

indices of nonzero elements (aces), NzInd, in each = 1, . . . , Zi , of each H2−1, are defined as follows:

NzInd(rk ) = 0 × Zi + k, 0 × Zi + [k + 1]Zi

1 × Zi + k, 1 × Zi + [k + 1]Zi

...

,

...

(mb − 1) × Zi + k, (mb − 1) × Zi + [k + 1]Zi

= (c × Zi + k, c × Zi + [k + 1]Zi )

(12)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAHDI et al.: MULTIRATE FULLY PARALLEL LDPC ENCODER

57

Fig. 3. Basic XOR Gates—Shared XOR subtree of the first binary row for H2−1(1/2) and Zi = Z1 = 27. Identical subtrees are implemented also for the remaining rows, r2, . . . , rZi , as detailed in Fact 4 and Fig. 4, by employing the corresponding bits of vector qT.

where the expressions c × Zi + k, and c × Zi + [k + 1]Zi represent the indices of aces regarding the SMs b and a,

respectively. c = 0, . . . , mb−1, and [·]Z denotes the modulo-Z

operation. Note that (12) returns indices of all aces in H2−1. However,
as described in the clarification following Proposition 2, for a

certain group of parities, p(c×Zi)+k , k = 1, . . . , Zi , for each c = 0, . . . , mb − 1, only aces existing in the corresponding rows of H2−1 are involved in the computation of the respective parity bits. The indices of these aces are determined by (12),

and they belong either to corresponding b or to a SMs.

Proposition 3: For all the required, for XORing, bits of

the intermediate vector q, the indices of which are defined by Nz(H2−1, ri ), i = 1, . . . , Z , the bits that belong to the corresponding monomials are separately XORed.

Two individual XOR subtrees process the bits that corre-

spond to binary SMs a and b. Proposition 3 ensures that the

implemented XOR subtrees can be efficiently used to determine

the corresponding parity bits. Therefore, to compute a certain

parity bit, the required bits of q might regard only to SMs a

and/or b.

Fact 3: According to the structure of the four matrices

of (11), the first (mb/2) + 1 rows of a small matrix constitute

an identical part of the corresponding rows of the next larger

matrix.

prfooawurTtrshirunoosfwt,htHseh2eo−fibf1firs(rHt2st/t2−h3btrh1)e(re3eaen/r4dor)owHwas2ns−obdo1f(fH1HH/22−−2b2b−11b)1((. 3(25///436)).),

compose an identical Similarly for the first and for the first five

Fig. 3 depicts an example XOR subtree of Basic XORs

implementation for the first row, r1, of H2−1(1/2), and for

the subfamily 1. It shows that the computation form of

the p1 of a small matrix H2−1 in i , i = 1, 2, 3, com-

poses a subexpression of the form required to compute p1

of the next larger H2−1 in the same subfamily, as reported

in Fact 3.

Fact 4: Since b and a represent a Zi × Zi identity SM {I } and a Zi × Zi identity {I1} circularly shifted by one-position SM, respectively, therefore a row i of {I1} is identical with the row [i + 1]Z of {I }, where i = 1, . . . , Z , as defined in

Feature 1.

Fig. 4. Organization of the XOR subtrees of each row ri based on the intersections. Boxes with the clues ri ∩ r j refer to the shared XORs between
the two rows ri and r j , as reported in Fact 4. The indices are determined
according to (12).

Fact 4 reports that there is an intersection between each two subsequent rows of H2−1(1/2), thus half of the nonzero entries in ri are an identical part of the set of the nonzero entries in

r[i+1]Z . Therefore, each couple of such two rows shares half of the XOR gates. Also the indices of nonzero elements per

row, can be simply extracted due to the circulant structure of

the SMs in Due to

H2−1(1/2), as the structure

shown in Fig. of H2−1(1/2),

4. and

using

Fact

4,

the number of Basic XOR gates is further reduced; while each

binary row in H2−1(1/2) has 24 aces, thus requiring 11 gates

for the SMs a and another 11 for SMs b, the intersections

between the rows contributes to reducing the needed gates.

As a result, the Number of Basic XOR gates, NBXi , per i can be computed as follows:

NBXi = 22 + 11 × (Zi − 2)

(13)

where only the first binary row in H2−1(1/2) of each i requires 22 XOR gates, as illustrated in Fig. 3 for 1. For the remaining Zi − 1 rows, r2, . . . , rZ , only 11 gates are required,
due to the intersections.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

58

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 29, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

Fig. 7. Illustrative utilization of previously built XORs subtrees to compute the parity bit p3TZi +1, assuming Zi = 27. A similar concept is followed to build the XOR subtrees that determine the bits p3TZ+2, . . . , p4TZ .

Fig. 5. Illustrative utilization of the Basic XORs subtrees to compute the parity bit pTZ+1, where Z = 27. A similar concept is followed to build the XOR subtrees that determine the bits pTZ+2, . . . , p2TZ .

matrices in the subfamily. Therefore, the XOR subtrees of the corresponding binary rows, 3Z + 1, . . . , 4Z , differ in the
required XOR gates interconnection. The architecture of the XOR subtrees for 3Z + 1, . . . , 4Z of H2−1(5/6) resembles that of Fig. 5, by employing the corresponding bits; i.e., parity bit p3Z+1(5/6) is computed as

p82(5/6) = ((q2 ⊕ q29) ⊕ (q56 ⊕ q83)) ⊕ q82

= p2(5/6) ⊕ q82

(15)

Fig. 6. Illustrative utilization of the Basic XORs subtrees to compute the parity bit p2TZ+1, where Z = 27. A similar concept is followed to build the XOR subtrees that determine the bits p2TZ+2, . . . , p3TZ .

B. Extended Basic XOR Subtrees

To compute the subsequent parity bits, the existence of the polynomial SM f in H2−b1 requires an extra operation than the Basic XOR subtree. Particularly for pZ+1, . . . , p2Z , f is pre-

sented as first element in the second rows, of matrices of (11).

This means extension of the Basic XORs, and additionally, one

extra XOR gate is required per row to involve the extra ace.

In particular, since the second row of matrices of (11) is of

the form [ f a a . . . a], the architecture of the Basic XORs

subtrees can be suitably modified by utilizing the Basic XORs

regarding SMs a, as shown in Fig. 5.

A similar scheme is followed to compute the parity bits

p2Z+1, . . . , p3Z , as depicted in Fig. 6. Therefore, the compu-

tation of parity bits pTZi +1, . . . , p3TZi , of the four codes per i ,

requires

AXG

p3TZi pTZi +1

Additional

XOR

Gates

AXG

p3TZi

p

T Zi

+1

=

8

×

Zi.

(14)

Based on Fact 3, the first three rows of H2−b1(5/6) compose an identical part in the first three rows of the other matrices of the same subfamily. The fourth row in H2−b1(5/6) has a different structure than the corresponding rows of

where ⊕ is the binary XOR operator, Z1 = 27, and p2(5/6) is previously determined as shown in Fig. 3. Note that at this

point, the determination of all the parity bits of the codes

with the code rate 5/6 is performed.

To compute the remaining parity bits of the remaining

three codes, of code rates 3/4, 2/3, and 1/2, per subfamily,

a similar approach is followed; as long as Fact 3 stands for the

remaining rows, we build XOR subtrees as described for parity

bits with

p1T , . that

.. of

,tph3eTZlia. sOt tohneerwiniseH, 2−fo1r(5r/o6w),s

of an

similar structure expression corre-

sponding to (15) is formulated. In particular, and excluding

matrix H2−1(5/6), to compute the next p3TZi+1, . . . , p4TZi , and due to the fact that the corresponding rows are composed of

three polynomial SMs, one polynomial more than those of

rows 2Z + 1, . . . , 3Z , the resulting parity bits of Fig. 6 are

utilized together with the remaining bits that correspond to the

extra polynomial SM. As an example, Fig. 7 illustrates the

organization of the XOR gates required for the computation

of p82 of 1. Therefore, according to (15) and Fig. 7,

the Additional XOR Gates p3Zi+1, . . . , p4Zi , for each

AiX, Garppe43TTZZdiie+fi1 ,nerdeqausirfeodllotowsc:ompute

AXG

p4TZi p3TZi

+1

=

4

×

Zi.

(16)

A similar concept with that used for the last Zi rows of H2−1(5/6) is followed for the last 2Zi rows of H2−1(3/4). In particular, parities p4Zi+1(3/4) and p5Zi+1(3/4), for Zi = 27, are computed as follows:

p109(3/4) = ((q2 ⊕ q29) ⊕ (q56 ⊕ q83) ⊕ (q110 ⊕ q137))

⊕ (q109 ⊕ q136)

= p2(3/4) ⊕ (q109 ⊕ q136)

(17)

p136(3/4) = ((q2 ⊕ q29) ⊕ (q56 ⊕ q83) ⊕ (q110 ⊕ q137))

⊕ q109

= p2(3/4) ⊕ q136

(18)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAHDI et al.: MULTIRATE FULLY PARALLEL LDPC ENCODER

59

Fig. 8. Indicative utilization of available XOR subtrees to compute the parity bit p4TZi +1, with Zi = 27. A similar concept is followed to build the XOR subtrees for p4TZ+2, . . . , p5TZ .

where p2(3/4) and the intermediate term (q109 ⊕ q136) are computed as shown in the right and left part of Fig. 3, respectively. Thus, each parity p4Zi+1(3/4), . . . , p6Zi (3/4) requires one extra XOR gate in addition to those of the Basic
XORs. Implementation of (17) is shown in Fig. 8. Multiplications by the rows 4Zi + 1, . . . , 5Zi , of the
remaining two matrices, H2−1(2/3) and H2−1(1/2), are implemented by utilizing the XOR subtrees of the previ-
ous rows, of the same matrices. In particular, and excluding matrix H2−1(3/4), parities p4TZi+1, . . . , p5TZi (2/3), (1/2) , are computed by using the XOR gates used for parities p2TZi+1, . . . , p3TZi (2/3), (1/2) , without any changes, and one extra XOR gate per row due to the extra two polynomials in the corresponding rows of H2−1(2/3) and H2−1(1/2). Fig. 8 depicts the corresponding XOR subtree, including implemen-
tation of (17). Multiplications by these rows require Additional
XOR Gates, for the three matrices, given as

AXG

p5TZ p4TZ

i i

+1

=

3×

Zi.

(19)

For and

the subsequent H2−1(1/2), the

parity bits, p5TZi+1, . . . , p6TZi , computation of p136(3/4) is

of H2−1(2/3) based on the

multiplication by a row member of rows group with only one

polynomial at the their end. This polynomial has one ace that

belongs to the Basic XORs Gates regarding SMs b, thus one

extra XOR gate is required to combine it with logic for SMs

a, as defined in (18).

The existence of three polynomials at the rightmost part of

tHhe2−b1c(o2r/r3es)pionnd(1in1g)],rorwepsreosfenHts2−t1h(e2/e3x)i,st[esneceethoef

sixth three

row of SMs b

in addition to those of a. These three SMs have three aces,

the last two of which are already XORed, as shown in Fig. 3,

and two additional XOR gates are required for XORing the

third one. For the corresponding parities of H2−1(1/2), the XORs
of the previous parities, p4TZi+1, . . . , p5TZi , can be efficiently exploited, since the rows r5i +1, . . . , r6Zi differ from the rows r4i +1, . . . , r5Zi by one extra polynomial SM at the leftmost
part. The implementation of a XOR subtree for the parity p136,

for the three inverted matrices, is shown in Fig. 9. By building

such Zi XOR subtrees, all the parity bits of the codes with rate (3/4) are carried out. The Additional XOR Gates required to

Fig. 9. Indicative utilization of available XOR subtrees to compute the parity bit p5TZi +1, with Zi = 27. A similar concept is followed to build the XOR subtrees for p5TZ+2, . . . , p6TZ . The parity bit p163(2/3) belongs to the next group of parities and is added for clarity.

compute the aforementioned parities of the three remaining codes, are counted as follows:

AXG

p6TZi p5TZi

+1

=

Zi

+2×

Zi

+

Zi

=

4

×

Zi

(20)

since Zi , 2Zi , and Zi gates are required for matrices H2−1(3/4), H2−1(2/3), and H2−1(1/2), respectively.
To compute the next group of the parity bits, particularly, the seventh group ( p6TZi+1, . . . , p7TZi ) for the two remaining codes (2/3) and (1/2), the following two cases are observed.
1) Since rows r6 and r7 of matrix H2−b1(2/3) differ only in the sixth entry, each row of the corresponding seventh group of Zi binary rows, has 12 aces that belong to the SMs of type a, and two aces only that belong to the SMs of type b. These aces are already, and individually, XORed, as proposed in Proposition 3, and exemplified in Fig. 3. Therefore, only one extra XOR gate is required to interconnect these separated XOR subtrees. However, since this extra gate is also required to determine the sixth Zi parities, computations of the seventh Zi parities constitute a subexpression of the sixth Zi parities’ equations, as illustrated in Fig. 9.
2) The row r7 of matrix H2−b1(1/2) is composed of six polynomials and six SMs of type a. This row has one extra polynomial comparing to the previous one, r6 of the same matrix. As a result, the XOR subtrees that implement multiplications by the pairs of aces of SMs a, and those of aces of SMs b, for the sixth Zi parity bit subword, are identically utilized to determine the seventh Zi parity bit subword, combined with one extra gate to interconnect them; i.e., for 1

implementation shown in Fig. 6

p136(1/2) = p55(1/2) ⊕q109 p163(1/2) = p55(1/2) ⊕ q109 ⊕ q136

Basic XOR Gate (Fig. 3). (21)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

60

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 29, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

Therefore, the Additional XOR Gates, required to compute the parities p6TZi+1, . . . , p7TZi are defined as

AXG

p7TZ p6TZ

i i

+1

=

Zi.

(22)

Correspondingly, for the eighth group of Zi parity bits ( p7TZi+1, . . . , p8TZi ), which forms the last parity bit subword for the code (2/3), multiplications by the corresponding binary
rows are defined as a subexpression of multiplications by
the immediately previous group; these two groups differ in
the seventh SM only. Furthermore, the eighth group of Zi rows of H2−1(2/3) comprises seven SMs of type a, and one polynomial at the end, thus the Basic XOR Gates respecting SMs a, of Fig. 3, of H2−1(2/3) are required, plus one extra gate, per row, to XOR it with the bit that belongs to SM b of the polynomial. For example, to compute parity p190(2/3) for
1, the required corresponding Basic XOR Gates determine the parity p2(2/3), and the bit of b has the index 7 × Zi + 1 = 7 × 27 + 1 = 190, as defined by (12). Therefore,

p190(2/3) = p2(2/3) ⊕ q190.

(23)

Details for computations of the corresponding eighth group of Zi parity bits of the code with the rate (1/2) are given below.
For the last five groups of Zi parities of the code (1/2), it is shown that the corresponding rows form a stair structure where, as shown in H2−b1(1/2) of (11), where each row r(2+(mb/2)+i) has one less polynomial than the next row r(3+(mb/2)+i), i = 0, . . . , 3. Therefore, the multiplications by a group of Zi rows, that correspond to r(3+(mb/2)+i), can be defined as subexpressions of multiplications by the
corresponding rows of r(2+(mb/2)+i), following exactly the same methodology as described in the two observed cases
when computing the seventh group of the parity bit of both (2/3) and (2/3) codes.
Fig. 10 depicts the organization of the XOR subtrees that
execute the multiplications by the last five groups of Zi rows of the code (1/2), and by the eighth group of Zi rows of the code (2/3). It is shown that the longest path, i.e., the path with the highest number of XORs, is that of the eighth Zi parities’ group of the code (1/2). This is due to the existence of five polynomials at the corresponding rows. However, this path
is exploited to determine parities of different groups, namely
9th and 11th groups, without requiring any additional XORs
for these computations, by simply utilizing the intermediate
results. The Additional XOR Gates required to determine the
parity bits of Fig. 10, are

AXG

p8TZ p7TZ

i i

+1

=

Zi

+

3×

Zi

=

4×

Zi

(24)

since Zi and 3 × Zi gates are required and H2−1(1/2) respectively, and

for

matrices

H2−1(2/3)

AXG

p1T2 Z i p8TZi +1

=

0+

Zi

+0

+

Zi

=

2×

Zi

(25)

as 0, Zi , 0, and Zi gates are required for the 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th group, respectively. The aforementioned XOR subtrees compute the parity bits for the entire subfamily i . These

Fig. 10. Indicative utilization of available XOR subtrees to compute parity bits p7TZi +1, p8TZi +1, p9TZi +1, p1T0Zi +1, p1T1Zi +1, Zi = 27, of code (1/2), and p7TZi +1 for the code (2/3). A similar approach is followed to build the XOR subtrees that determine the next parities.

XOR subtrees constitute intermediate trees, the aggregation of which, modularly forms the XOR trees for matrices H2−1 of each i , as shown in Fig. 2.
The number of the required XOR gates for shared H2−1 per i is reported in Table I. It is shown that the required XORs
according to the proposed sharing technique is negligible when
compared to the nonshared XOR trees.

C. Multiplexing Computed Results

At the end of each XOR subtree, respecting XOR gates of
each i of each encoding step, there is a tree of multiplexers that forward the required computed bits, defined by a specific code rate, of the corresponding vectors, qT and pT . The

number of these multiplexers depends on the sizes of the

involved matrices, particularly on the numbers of their rows. Therefore, there are two such trees, of same size, one for each

encoding step, the complexity of which is evaluated as follows:

⎧

⎫

⎨ 4 × Zi (4-to-1) + ⎬

#

MUXrate

=

2

×

⎩

2 2

× ×

Zi Zi

(3-to-1) (2-to-1)

+⎭

(26)

for all Zi ∈ {27, 54, 81}, where the expression (x-to-1) denotes a multiplexer of x inputs to one output. In addition to these multiplexers, a second level of multiplexers is

implemented at the input of the encoder’s output shift register;

the particular multiplexers forward to the output register the required parity bits, that result from each XOR subtree of each
i , according to the required code word length. The number of these multiplexers is defined as follows:

# MUXlength = 324(3-to-1) + 324(2-to-1).

(27)

The pipelined core requires an additional level of # MUXlength multiplexers in order to feed the pipeline register by the appropriate bits.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAHDI et al.: MULTIRATE FULLY PARALLEL LDPC ENCODER

61

TABLE I NUMBER OF XOR GATES OF THE PROPOSED ENCODER WITH SHARED XOR
TREES COMPARED TO SINGLE XOR TREE PER CODE. THE XOR GATES ARE SUMED FOR EACH SUBFAMILY
VI. EVALUATION OF THE PROPOSED ENCODER
The proposed encoding method and hardware architecture target applications that require scalability, high throughput rate, and low area complexity. The implemented encoding algorithm allows the exploitation of a great degree of freedom in terms of MVM, or VMM, parallelism, while the exploitation of subexpression sharing techniques ensures an area-efficient design. The encoder supports 12 combinations of three block lengths (648, 1296, 1944 bits) and four code rates (1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 5/6), as specified in IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax Standard.
A. Complexity Evaluation of the Proposed WiFi Encoder
A fully functional IEEE 802.11n/ac LDPC encoder, supporting shortening, puncturing and repetition, has been verified on an FPGA device using a suitable LDCP codec’s evaluation system [26]. The overall system consists of an IEEE 802.11n/ac LDPC decoder [8], an AWGN Channel, and a circuit for the BER performance evaluation. The system has been designed in Verilog and mapped into Virtex7-XC7VX485T FPGA (VC707 evaluation board) using the Xilinx design flow. The corresponding complexity of the proposed pipelined encoder is reported in Table II.
Table II reports also the hardware resources required to implement the nonpipelined IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax LDPC encoder of Fig. 2, onto various application specific integrated circuit (ASIC) CMOS technologies, as a function of the operating frequency. It is illustrated that the proposed encoder can be used in applications of different technologies and for a variety of high operation frequency requirements without any significant area increase.
The proposed procedure is based on multiplications by the matrices H1 and H2−1, where H1 and H2 are parts of the PCM of a particular LDPC code. The matrix multiplications are performed by XOR operations only, the number of which is defined by the density of the corresponding matrices and the proposed subexpression representation and elimination. The high-degree parallelism competency of the proposed encoding procedure, provides a fast QC-LDPC encoder of very high throughput since the entire encoding is executed within one clock cycle only.
The fact that the QC-LDPC codes of each i share the same size Zi , allows to jointly consider them. Therefore, all the SMs H1 ∈ i are treated as a single matrix. On the other side, multiplications by the respective matrices H2−1 ∈ i are simply handled by expressing them on terms of multiplications by a representative eliminated matrix, H2−1, retrieved from the

original H2−1. The obtained matrix H2−1 has a such common structure which successfully serves as an exemplary matrix, the multiplications by which, partially and/or completely, define the multiplications by the different rows of the original matrices.
This joint consideration has a significant impact on the complexity of the entire IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax QC-LDPC encoder; Table I reports the number of the required XOR gates per i according to the proposed XOR Trees. It is shown that the proposed encoder requires less than the half XOR gates when comparing to an encoder based on individual XOR trees for multiplications by each SM. A remarkable reduction of the required XOR gates is observed when multiplying by the dense matrices H2−1, as shown in Table I.
The operation frequency of the proposed encoder depends on the adopted technology, and synthesis and implementation platform. The critical path delay of the encoder depends on the number of XOR stages of both H1 and H2−1 XOR trees, as well as, the multiplexers’ trees between the encoding steps

Cpath = log2 22 tXOR + log2 7 tXOR + 2t(12-to-1)mux (28)

where tXOR, a XOR delay, and t(12-to-1)mux a mux tree delay. Finally, the processing throughput, Tr, of an LDPC encoder, is determined as a function of number of the processed bits, the clock frequency CF, and the number of clock cycles, CC, required to compute all the parity bits. Therefore, for a given codeword length, of length n and code rate r , Tr is

Tr = n × r × CF bits/sec

(29)

CC

where n × r = k, and k is the length of the information bits.

Therefore, for a frequency of 1 GHz, the obtained through-

put of the proposed single-clock encoder is up to 1620 Gbps

(1.62 Tbps), for the codeword length 1944 with codeword

rate 5/6. Moreover, since the proposed encoder requires only

one clock cycle to compute all the parity bits, the throughput

rate for a given message length k, depends only on the clock

frequency. Consequently, the obtained throughput rates of the

proposed encoder per k, is computed as (CF ×k) bps. The

obtained Throughput Rates, for each codeword length, are

reported in Table II.

B. Comparison With Related Works
Table II quantitatively compares proposed encoders to related prior art. Literature on prior encoders reports different metrics per code length (n, k) and code rate r , while for the proposed encoder, the metrics refer to the entire WiFi code family. Throughput values achieved by the proposed method for each codeword length, are summarized in Table III. While prior art summarized in Table II target specific applications, the proposed method can be applied to different family codes if modified appropriately, considering the features of the applications’ PCMs.
In general, there are four common methods to implement encoding and to compute the parity bits; RU, forward substitution (FS) based on the lower triangular form of the PCM, straightforward multiplication by the generator matrix G, and the two-step encoder as the proposed herein.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

62

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 29, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

TABLE II
ASIC AND FPGA COMPLEXITY COMPARISONS OF QC-LDPC ENCODERS. CC DENOTES THE NUMBER OF CLOCK CYCLES AND CF DENOTES THE CLOCK FREQUENCY. FOR A: ASIC IMPLEMENTATION, NUMBER OF (NAND2×1) GATES IS ESTIMATED BY THE SYNOPSYS SYNTHESIS TOOL

TABLE III THROUGHPUT RATES PER CF AND k , (TrCk F), FOR CC = 1
The RU method requires the implementation of a set of computations, where data dependence occurs in each computation step, restricting the parallelism degree. Also, this method suffers from a long critical path, which could make the LDPC encoder unsuitable for high throughput applications [27]. The FS method requires the computation of (i −1)’st bit in order to proceed with the i th bit, introducing data dependence where parallelism degree is also limited.
On the other side, multiplication by G, which is a conventional approach for systematic encoding, is based on simple vector-matrix multiplication. However, this matrix is very dense, and the cost of serial, or parallel, multiplication is forbidden in terms of time and cost. Furthermore, one main drawback related to this method is that the storage overhead is dramatically increased for large block sizes, and for multiple frames, which limits its practical applicability [27].
The two-step encoder has been also avoided so far, since it involves multiplication by an inverse matrix, the density of which is high. To decrease the multiplication cost by the inverse matrix, matrix decomposition techniques can be applied to reduce its density [25].
Many architectures have been proposed where advanced scheduling methods and processing units are presented in order to reduce the area complexity and to increase the processing throughput. A recent work that describes these methods and compare them, for various code lengths of CCDS LDPC codes, is presented in [31]. [31, Table VII] reports that the

two-step encoder, called Partitioned-H in [31], outperforms the other methods in terms of required resources and obtained throughput, for several code lengths. This two-step encoder could achieve better results, and much higher throughput for long codewords of this standard, and for all the codes together, if an appropriate CSST, as the proposed herein, was adopted, combined with efficient organization of the XOR gates.
Furthermore, note that the structure of the QC-Z × Z SMs allows computing Z -bits per clock cycle. Based on this ability, and using various encoding methods, different works present parallel techniques to compute multiple sets of Z -bits in parallel. The common processing unit is based on shift-register-adder-accumulator (SRAA) which requires to store the shifting factor of each SM in order to apply the rotation on the corresponding Z -bits of the multiplied vector.
When the number of the QC-Z × Z SMs is small, which depends on the PCM, then thus architectures will require small number of clock cycles. On the other side, if Z is of high order, the corresponding SRAA will be of a higher complexity. Therefore, parallelism in such architectures will have a corresponding significant area-time tradeoff due to memory usage and data dependence. This issue appears to be more critical when considering multiple codes. Recent works, utilizing SRAA logic, try to moderate this tradeoff by further exploiting code features [37], or even to avoid it [38] [31], in order to reduce area complexity, required number of clock cycles, and the large critical path of such parallel logic.
Additionally, and in contrast to prior works [7], [13], [15], [35], [36], [39], [40], the proposed encoder does not employ any memory for storing the shifting factors or any information relative to the PCMs of the implemented codes. Besides that, it has a constant processing time for all the supported codes, since only one clock cycle (or more in case of pipeline) is needed in order to compute the parity bits of any code. This fast processing catapults the obtained encoding throughput beyond multihundreds of Gbps, allowing the proposed architecture for high throughput applications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAHDI et al.: MULTIRATE FULLY PARALLEL LDPC ENCODER

63

Note that the PCMs of WiFi codes are block-structured, where the H2 SMs have a simple deterministic structure of staircase form. Prior works exploit this form to implement low-area encoders based on FS. This method is followed by most designers [7], [30], [35], [36], [39], [40], since it avoids operations with matrix inverse. However, data dependencies in FS restrict parallelism, hence the maximum obtained throughput.
To maximize the encoding throughput, Jung et al. [30] proposed a relatively high throughput encoder for these codes mainly performing FS with partially parallel processing. They perform parallel vector-matrix multiplication in the first encoding step, where the message sT is multiplied by each row of H1 in parallel, using a configurable shifter followed by an accumulator (SRAA-like). Therefore, considering serial multiplication, the number of the required clock cycles for this encoding process depends on the maximum row degree of H1. On the other side, and for full-parallel multiplication, this implementation scheme would require a very large number of shifters and accumulators, the number of which, depends totally on the number of nonzero SMs of the involved matrices. Therefore, single-code architectures based on this procedure can be complexity-efficient, with a moderate area-time tradeoff, however in case of encoder implementation for several LDPC codes under challenging specifications, such as low-power, low-area, multi-Gbps throughput, memory needs and size of operation cores have to be considered.
The proposed method resolves the problem of multiple computations steps and restrictive data dependence; it runs two encoding steps, with a dependence that connects them. Also, the implementation cost of the multiplications by H2−1 is significantly reduced due to the proposed CSST. Additionally, since all the reported encoding algorithms execute VMMs to encode the information message, the adoption of the CSST into their implementation can significantly reduce complexity.
VII. CONCLUSION
As the IEEE standards 802.11n/ac, 802.11ax and 802.11ah evolve, the upgradability of existing architectures for WiFi devices becomes more and more a necessity. Furthermore, high-throughput yet small-size consumer devices are highly requested. The proposed Wi-Fi LDPC encoder is shown to meet the challenging specifications of the new generations of Wi-Fi Gigabit Ethernet. The features of high operation frequency and the Gbps processing throughput of the introduced encoder, allow it to be a strong candidate for implementation of the 802.11n/ac/ax physical layer for all the supported channel bandwidths, at the cost of almost 100 Kgates, for the inhere employed CMOS technologies.
The proposed encoding method and architecture are based on Common Sub-expression Sharing Technique to implement straightforward VMMs. Algebraic features of the involved matrices are efficiently exploited after suitable propositions in order to identify the common patterns and merge them, aiming to reducing the required hardware resources by sharing computations and avoiding the cost of implementing multiple copies of identical expressions. Furthermore, despite the fact

that multiplications by inverted matrices have been avoided
due to the drawback of high density, it is shown here that it is possible to convert the dense multiplications by those
matrices into low-complexity multiplications, if the structure
of the matrices is efficiently considered. Thus the complexity of the complete encoder is found to be very small.
Finally, the proposed implementation can be used with
different encoding algorithms of multiple QC-LDPC codes, since they all execute VMM to encode the messages. It can
also be applied for different families of QC-LDPC codes, by considering appropriate modifications based on the cor-
responding features of the involved matrices.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] R. El Hattachi and J. Erfanian, Eds., “5G white paper, v1.0,” NGMN Alliance, Feb. 2015. Accessed: Sep. 7, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.ngmn.org/wp-content/uploads/NGMN_5G_White_Paper_ V1_0.pdf
[3] IMT Vision–Framework and Overall Objectives of the Future Development of IMT for 2020 and Beyond, document ITU-R Rec. M.2083-0, Sep. 2015.
[4] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[5] E. Eleftheriou and S. Olcer, “Low-density parity-check codes for digital subscriber lines,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Conf., vol. 3, Apr./May 2002, pp. 1752–1757.
[6] T. Zhang and K. Parhi, “Joint (3,k)-regular LDPC code and decoder/encoder design,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1065–1079, Apr. 2004.
[7] S. Kopparthi and D. Gruenbacher, “Implementation of a flexible encoder for structured low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Pacific Rim Conf. Commun., Comput. Signal Process. (PacRim), Aug. 2007, pp. 438–441.
[8] I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras, “A reconfigurable LDPC decoder optimized for 802.11n/ac applications,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 182–195, Jan. 2018.
[9] A. Verma and R. Shrestha, “A new partially-parallel VLSI-architecture of quasi-cyclic LDPC decoder for 5G new-radio,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. VLSI Design 19th Int. Conf. Embedded Syst. (VLSID), Jan. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[10] O. Boncalo and A. Amaricai, “Ultra high throughput unrolled layered architecture for QC-LDPC decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Annu. Symp. VLSI (ISVLSI), Jul. 2017, pp. 225–230.
[11] T. T. B. Nguyen and H. Lee, “Low-complexity multi-mode multi-way split-row layered LDPC decoder for gigabit wireless communications,” Integration, vol. 65, pp. 189–200, Mar. 2019.
[12] M. Li et al., “An area and energy efficient half-row-paralleled layer LDPC decoder for the 802.11AD standard,” in Proc. SiPS Proc., Oct. 2013, pp. 112–117.
[13] A. E. Cohen and K. K. Parhi, “A low-complexity hybrid LDPC code encoder for IEEE 802.3an (10GBase-T) Ethernet,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 4085–4094, Oct. 2009.
[14] H. Fujita and K. Sakaniwa, “Some classes of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: Properties and efficient encoding method,” IEICE Trans. Fundam. Electron., Commun. Comput. Sci., vol. 88, no. 12, pp. 3627–3635, Jan. 2005.
[15] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[16] Y. Chen and K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004.
[17] K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Encoders for block-circulant LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Sep. 2005, pp. 2300–2304.
[18] H. Yasotharan and A. C. Carusone, “A flexible hardware encoder for systematic low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 52nd IEEE Int. Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst., Aug. 2009, pp. 54–57.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

64

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 29, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

[19] R. I. Hartley, “Subexpression sharing in filters using canonic signed digit multipliers,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Analog Digit. Signal Process., vol. 43, no. 10, pp. 677–688, Oct. 1996.
[20] I.-C. Park and H.-J. Kang, “Digital filter synthesis based on minimal signed digit representation,” in Proc. 38th Conf. Design Autom. (DAC), 2001, pp. 468–473.
[21] C.-Y. Yao, H.-H. Chen, T.-F. Lin, C.-J. Chien, and C.-T. Hsu, “A novel common-subexpression-elimination method for synthesizing fixed-point FIR filters,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 2215–2221, Nov. 2004.
[22] P. Flores, J. Monteiro, and E. Costa, “An exact algorithm for the maximal sharing of partial terms in multiple constant multiplications,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), Nov. 2005, pp. 13–16.
[23] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[24] A. Mahdi and V. Paliouras, “Simplified multi-level quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for low-complexity encoders,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., Oct. 2012, pp. 1–6.
[25] A. Mahdi and V. Paliouras, “A low complexity-high throughput QC-LDPC encoder,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 2696–2708, May 2014.
[26] P. Sakellariou, I. Tsatsaragkos, N. Kanistras, A. Mahdi, and V. Paliouras, “An FPGA-based prototyping method for verification, characterization and optimization of LDPC error correction systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Embedded Comput. Syst. (SAMOS), Jul. 2012, pp. 286–293.
[27] T. T. B. Nguyen, T. Nguyen Tan, and H. Lee, “Efficient QC-LDPC encoder for 5G new radio,” Electronics, vol. 8, no. 6, p. 668, Jun. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/8/6/668
[28] X. Zhang and Y. Tai, “Low-complexity transformed encoder architectures for quasi-cyclic nonbinary LDPC codes over subfields,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1342–1351, Apr. 2017.
[29] N. Talati, Z. Wang, and S. Kvatinsky, “Rate-compatible and highthroughput architecture designs for encoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2017, pp. 1–4.
[30] Y. Jung, C. Chung, J. Kim, and Y. Jung, “7.7Gbps encoder design for IEEE 802.11n/AC QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. SoC Design Conf. (ISOCC), Nov. 2012, pp. 215–218.
[31] D. Theodoropoulos, N. Kranitis, A. Tsigkanos, and A. Paschalis, “Efficient architectures for multigigabit CCSDS LDPC encoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 1118–1127, May 2020.
[32] D. Chen, P. Chen, and Y. Fang, “Low-complexity high-performance lowdensity parity-check encoder design for China digital radio standard,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 20880–20886, 2017.
[33] A. V. Lazarenko, “FPGA design and implementation of DVB-S2/S2X LDPC encoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Electr. Eng. Photon. (EExPolytech), Oct. 2019, pp. 98–102.
[34] A. A. Al Hariri, F. Monteiro, L. Sieler, and A. Dandache, “Configurable and high-throughput architectures for quasi-cyclic low-density paritycheck codes,” in Proc. 21st IEEE Int. Conf. Electron., Circuits Syst. (ICECS), Dec. 2014, pp. 790–793.
[35] Z. Cai, J. Hao, P. Tan, S. Sun, and P. Chin, “Efficient encoding of IEEE 802.11n LDPC codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 42, no. 25, pp. 1471–1472, Dec. 2006.
[36] J. Perez and V. Fernandez, “Low-cost encoding of IEEE 802.11n,” Electron. Lett., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 307–308, Feb. 2008.
[37] S.-W. Yen, S.-Y. Hung, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, S.-J. Jou, and C.-Y. Lee, “A 5.79-Gb/s energy-efficient multirate LDPC codec chip for IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 2246–2257, Sep. 2012.
[38] P. Zhang, Q. Jiang, S. Du, and C. Liu, “Fast encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes in IEEE 802.15.3c,” Electron. Lett., vol. 51, no. 21, pp. 1713–1715, Oct. 2015.
[39] Y. Sun, M. Karkooti, and J. Cavallaro, “High throughput, parallel, scalable LDPC encoder/decoder architecture for OFDM systems,” in Proc. IEEE Dallas/CAS Workshop Design, Appl., Integr. Softw., Oct. 2006, pp. 39–42.
[40] Y. H. Chen, J. Hsuan Hsiao, and Z. Yi Siao, “Wi-Fi LDPC encoder with approximate lower triangular diverse implementation and verification,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Multi-Conf. Syst., Signals Devices (SSD), Feb. 2014, pp. 1–6.

Ahmed Mahdi is currently an Adjunct Lecturer with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Department of Computer Science and Telecommunications, University of Thessaly, Thessaly, Greece. He is a member of Ph.D. Advisory Committee of two Ph.D. students, and he has supervised three diploma theses.
His research interests are in the areas of high throughput-low complexity VLSI architectures for digital signal processing, and algorithm modeling and hardware implementation co-design. His current research focuses on efficient implementation of digital telecommunication modules, while he also works as digital IC design engineer consultant for different industrial companies.
Nikos Kanistras (Member, IEEE) received the diploma degree in electrical and computer engineering, the M.Sc. degree in signal processing systems, and the Ph.D. diploma degree in iterative decoding techniques on digital receivers from the University of Patras, Patras, Greece.
His research interests include error correction coding focusing on iterative decoding algorithms for LDPC codes, finite-word length impact on communication systems efficiency, and hardware-oriented implementation of reception processing algorithms. He currently works on efficient implementation of advanced-receivers and signal processing for industrial companies.
Vassilis Paliouras (Member, IEEE) is currently a Full Professor with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Patras, Patras, Greece. His research interests are in the areas of VLSI architectures for signal processing and communications, low-power digital design and computer arithmetic. He has authored or coauthored more than 150 research articles in international journals, conferences, and book chapters and has edited three books. He is advisor to three Ph.D. students, and has supervised four Ph.D., 36 masters, and 40 diploma theses. Prof. Paliouras has received the IEEE CASS Guillemin—Cauer Best-Paper Award for the year 2000. He has served as the General Co-Chair for International Workshop on Power and Timing Modeling, Optimization and Simulation (PATMOS 2004). He has also served as a Technical Program Chair of PATMOS 2005, the IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems Implementation (SiPS) 2005, and Technical Program Co-Chair of the IEEE International Conference on Electronics Circuits and Systems (ICECS) 2010 and a European liaison for the IEEE ISCAS 2012, South Korea. He has served in editorial boards of journals and technical program committees of numerous conferences in the areas of signal processing, circuits, systems, and communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

