28

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

Error Floor Estimation of QC-LDPC Coded Modulation With Importance Sampling

Mingyang Zhu , Student Member, IEEE, Ming Jiang , Member, IEEE, and Chunming Zhao , Member, IEEE

Abstract— This letter presents a low-complexity error floors estimation method for bit-interleaved coded modulation with quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Using surrogate bit-channels (SBCs) as hypothetic equivalent channels, the importance sampling method based on the stable trapping sets is applied to evaluate the error floors. It is shown that the error floors of bit-interleaved coded modulation systems can be effectively estimated, and the presented method is appropriate for various types of modulators and interleavers.
Index Terms— Bit-interleaved coded modulation, LDPC codes, error floor, importance sampling, surrogate channels.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, have been extensively investigated due to the capacity-approaching performance and high-throughput implementation. However, the LDPC codes usually suffer from performance degradations in the high SNR region called error floors, which typically limit the applications of LDPC codes in high-speed com-

recording channels are researched in [21] and [22]. While there is extensive literature on the performance estimation of LDPC codes, the error floor estimation of the coded modulation system is also significant but more difficult. It is desirable to use high-order modulations for high spectral efficiency and high data-rate communications, so the error floor is an important indictor to measure system performance at the high SNR region. But, the asymmetry of the modulation channel makes it very difficult to apply the existing methods. Recently, an IS method for calculating the random coding union bound of coded modulation is presented [4]. It focuses on the performance limit rather than the error floor estimation. In [8], Ramamoorthy extended Richardson’s method to predict the upper and lower bounds of error floors of bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM). It showed the upper bound of the (1008, 504) MacKay code with 8PAM can be tight. However, the complexity of this method will grow to a very high level for the quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes with long blocklength.

munications. It is widely recognized that the error floors of Inspired by using the surrogate channels to design the LDPC LDPC codes under message-passing decoding are usually due codes in [9], we develop a low-complexity IS method based

to the trapping sets (TSs). In [1], Richardson emphasized a semi-analytical methodology to estimate the error floor. His methodology is a variant of importance sampling (IS), estimating TS’s contributions to the error rate over binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (biAWGN) channels. IS methods can achieve high simulation gains with negligible loss in the accuracy if a proper bias scheme is applied. Several authors

on surrogate bit-channels (SBCs) to evaluate the performance of QC-LDPC coded BICM at the error floor regions. Our method is simple and effective for QC-LDPC codes, which usually have plentiful TS multiplicities [1], with different interleaving and modulation types. The proposed IS method has been applied to the (2304, 1920) WiMAX and (13440, 8448) 5G-NR QC-LDPC codes with 16QAM and 256QAM

have developed the IS methods to evaluate the decoding performance of LDPC codes at very low frame or bit error rate (FER or BER) regions, see, e.g., [5]–[7].
In addition to the category of IS methods, several analytical techniques have been proposed to estimate the error floor. Sun [3] proposed a code independent method based on a linear state-space model of decoder dynamics on the TS. Butler and Siegel [2] revised the check node gain model using a modified mean gain of the check node, and achieved more precise approximations for saturating decoders. In [18], the IS method is locally applied to the message-passing algorithm, which improves the accuracy of the linear state-space model. Furthermore, the error floors of LDPC codes on magnetic
Manuscript received July 2, 2020; revised July 29, 2020; accepted September 1, 2020. Date of publication September 4, 2020; date of current version January 8, 2021. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61771133. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was B. Matuz. (Corresponding author: Ming Jiang.)
The authors are with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China, and also with the Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 211111, China (e-mail: zhumingyang@seu.edu.cn; jiang_ming@seu.edu.cn; cmzhao@seu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2020.3021764

respectively. The simulation results show that our method achieves high accuracy, while a little overestimation occurs when the modulation order is relatively high.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In an LDPC coded BICM, the code sequence c is sent to the interleaver π before the signal labeling. Assume the modulation order is 2m, the interleaved sequence π(c) is split into m-bit tuples. The i-th m-bit tuple is mapped onto the signal xi in the constellation X . We denote the m bit-levels of the signal xi by {B0, B1, . . . , Bm−1}, and B0 is the most-significant bit-level. Each bit of the interleaved sequence π(c) is transmitted over one of m bit-channels.
It is well known that the decoding failures of LDPC codes in the high SNR region are mainly caused by TSs [1]. A (a, b) TS is a set of a variable nodes which includes b odd-degree check nodes neighbors in the subgraph. Let |T | denote the size of the TS, which is equal to a. TSs with small values of a and b usually have relatively high contributions to the error rate.
A QC-LDPC code is defined by a base matrix B, which is an mb × nb array of Z × Z circulant permutation

1558-2558 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF QC-LDPC CODED MODULATION WITH IS

29

Fig. 1. m parallel bit-channels for different bit-levels.

matrices (CPMs). For QC-LDPC codes, if a (a, b) TS is identified, other Z − 1 isomorphic TSs can be found by circularly shifting the variable nodes in the TS. Throughout the letter, to express more accurately, we use “TS class” or “TS group” to refer to a class of (a, b) TSs or Z isomorphic TSs constructed by circular shifts. Most estimation methods are evaluated by the stable errors [15]. Similar to the stable error, the stable trapping set [8] is defined as follows,
Definition 1 (Stable Trapping Set): If the hard decisions of the coded bits (variable nodes) in the trapping set are the same for the last several iterations, this trapping set is called as a stable trapping set.

Fig. 2. Densities of posteriori LLRs for (a) 16QAM and (b) 256QAM after 50 iterations (SPA decoding) at SNR = 8dB and 17dB respectively.
Fig. 3. Performance curves of SPA and NMSA in (a) 16QAM and (b) 256QAM channels and corresponding SBCs.

III. ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION VIA SBCS
Compared to the biAWGN case, the error floors of BICM are more difficult to be estimated. Many of the previous methods for biAWGN channel can not be directly applied to BICM due to a series of reasons, the asymmetry of the channel, the uncertain direction of the biased noise, etc. Richardson’s semi-analytical methodology is extended to BICM in [8], which obtains a tight upper bound on the FER for the (1008, 504) Mackay code with 8PAM. However, to obtain the upper bound, we need to search for the possible constellation point choices of the bits in the TS to find the worst and the second worst subsets, thus we can determine the direction of the biases and apply semi-analytical methodology to each subset. This method may not be appropriate for the long blocklength QC-LDPC codes, since the complexity nonlinearly grows with a factor of Z × |T |. Therefore, we propose a simplified error floor estimation method of BICM via SBCs, where the calculation complexity can be significantly reduced by using all-zero codeword.
A. Surrogate Bit-Channels
The surrogate channels are used to design LDPC codes [9], [11], and the surrogate-optimized codes perform well in the real channel. In [10], the observations indicate that some LDPC codes share the similar performance on different channels when the mutual information (MI) between channel input and output is the same. We follow the surrogate channel model in [9], using parallel and independent biAWGN channels as SBCs for high-order modulation channels. Each SBC is a uniform binary-input and symmetric-output surrogate. The model of parallel bit-channels is shown in Fig. 1. In [9], the SBCs are constructed by the rate backoff [19] which is given by (1)
H Bi|Li = H (Bi|Li), i = 0, 1, . . . , m − 1. (1)

For the uniform BICM systems, the equivalence of the conditional entropies can be simplified to the equivalence of the MIs. We construct SBCs such that
I Bi; Li = I (Bi; Li), i = 0, 1, . . . , m − 1 (2)

where Bi (Li) and Bi (Li) denote the input bit (soft information) of the i-th SBC and the i-th bit-level, respectively.
The capacity of a biAWGN channel is represented by J (σch) in [14], where σch = 2/σi and σi is the variance of Gaussian noise. Using the approximate expression of J−1 (·), the noise variance of the i-th SBC is calculated by

σi = 2 J −1 (I (Bi; Li)).

(3)

For example, the SBCs are constructed for 16QAM and 256QAM. We measure the densities of the a posteriori log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) of both the 16QAM channel and the biAWGN SBCs by Monte Carlo (MC) simulation. The (13440, 8448) 5G-NR code is used in the MC simulation to evaluate the densities for two channels. Fig. 2(a) shows the densities of two channels are closely matched that supports the equivalence assumption. Half of the bit-levels are omitted in Fig. 2 since the equal error protection in Gray labeling. For the case of 256QAM, Fig. 2(b) shows the densities of the strongest two bit-levels are mismatched, while the other densities are closely matched. The equivalence hypothesis is further supported by the simulation results in Fig. 3, where the solid curve and the dashed curve correspond to FER and BER, respectively. We simulate the (2304, 1920) WiMAX code by floating-point decoders using both sum-product algorithm (SPA) and normalized min-sum algorithm (NMSA). Fig. 3(a) shows that the performance of the 16QAM channel and SBCs are quite close. For the 256QAM case, a slight performance degradation of the SBCs is observed in the waterfall region. It is an unavoidable consequence that the equivalence of two channel models become worse with the increase of the modulation order. The similar simulation result is shown

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

30

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

in [9]. This degradation may cause the overestimation for the case of high-order modulation.

TABLE I COMPARISON OF THE STD-IS AND THE SIMP-IS

B. IS Method for QC-LDPC Coded BICM

Compared to the traditional MC simulations, IS simulations achieve the lower FER region with significantly less run time. More details of the IS method can be found in [6], [12] and [13]. Based on the surrogate channel model, the IS method can be employed since we can precisely bias the distribution associated with the TS bits by the SBCs. The TSs with the same graph structure generally have similar fail rates [1] for the case of the biAWGN channel, which effectively reduces the estimation complexity. However, for the case of high-order modulation, even the isomorphic TSs have different fail rates due to the unequal error protection for each bit. Further, the bit interleaving pattern also has a noticeable impact on the fail rate of each TS. It is quite difficult to obtain all the fail rates for the long blocklength QC-LDPC codes with large lifting factor Z. Hence, we develop a simple IS method for QC-LDPC coded BICM, based on calculating the average fail rate, denoted by Ω, of the TS group.
Given an LDPC code that is described by discrete set of codewords xi ∈ C. Let w (xi) denote the weight function for unbiasing the IS estimator [6]. For a linear code with blocklength n through the SBCs, μi is the associated bias for the i-th bit. The weight function can be rewritten as

w (r) = exp

n (ri − (si + μi))2 − (ri − si)2

i=1

2σi2

(4)

where si is the i-th BPSK symbol, and σi2 is the noise variance of the associated SBC for the i-th bit. The polarity of μi depends on si, which shifts the distribution toward the error region. In the IS method, the fail rate for the i-th TS of the TS group is estimated by

fi

=

1 Ni

Ni
IE
j=1

(xj) w (xj )

(5)

where Ni is the number of transmitted frames, and IE (xj ) is defined as the indicator function of the error set E

IE(x) =

1 0

if x ∈ E if x ∈ E.

(6)

The average fail rate Ω can be estimated as follows

⎛

⎞

Ωˆ

=

1 Z

Z
fi
i=1

=

1 Z

Z ⎝1 i=1 Ni

Ni
IE
j=1

(xj) w (xj )⎠.

(7)

Similar to the MC simulation, IS simulation should also achieve a small normalized error [6, Sec. II]. Applying IS simulation to each TS of the TS group may require too much time, and the normalized error of IS is sometimes unable to converge for some TSs with very small fail rates. Some TSs in the TS group may have the same error protections of all the bits, which depends on the interleaving scheme, thus repeated simulations of these TSs are unnecessary. We develop a simplified IS simulation of the TS group, which combines the effects of Z isomorphic TSs and only calculate one normalized

error. For each simulation loop (one frame), we select one TS as the targeted TS to bias. The targeted TS is selected from Z isomorphic TSs one by one for each simulation loop, thus the biased vector also will be changed in each simulation loop determined by the targeted TS. Therefore, the normalized error of IS is jointly determined by the simulation results of these TSs. For a large enough number of the simulation loops, we approximately have

N1 = N2 = . . . = NZ

(8)

where Ni is defined in (5). Thus, the IS estimator for the

simplified IS simulation is given by

⎛

⎞

Z

Ni

Z

Pˆ = ⎝ IE (xj) w (xj )⎠

Ni

(9)

i=1 j=1

i=1

with the constraint in (8). Obviously, Pˆ estimator is equivalent to the Ωˆ estimator. Hence, it can be considered as applying a variant of IS simulation for the Ω, if the number of simulation loops is large enough. The error rate contribution, denoted by Ξ, of one TS group is calculated as Ξ = Ω × Z.
To obtain the error rate contribution of a TS group, the standard IS schemes perform independent simulations on each TS, and guarantee the the normalized error for each simulation. We use “STD-IS” and “SIMP-IS” to refer to the standard IS simulation and the simplified one, respectively. We compare the STD-IS and the SIMP-IS in terms of accuracy and complexity. These two different IS simulations are applied to the (2304, 1920) WiMAX code with 16QAM, and the set of {287, 839, 866, 1095, 1530, 1944, 2248}-th variable nodes is taken as the targeted TS. The decoding parameters of the comparison is the same as the first example in Sec. IV. If the normalized error become less than 0.1, the IS simulator is terminated. The comparison results in Table I show that the SIMP-IS has a significant loop gain over the STD-IS, with negligible accuracy loss.

IV. EXAMPLES OF ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION
We present two estimation examples of WiMAX and 5G-NR LDPC coded BICM with 16QAM and 256QAM, respectively. Further, different bit-interleaving patterns are considered for evaluating the error floors of 5G-NR LDPC coded BICM. It is known that the saturating level has a strong influence on error floors for some LDPC codes, e.g., Margulis codes. In these two examples, a high-resolution (1, 6, 8) quantization scheme for channel LLRs is used, which makes the quantized decoder tend to the floating-point algorithm. In the first example, FER simulations are performed on a layered NMS docoder with the normalized factor of 0.75 and 30 iterations. In the second example, to evaluate lower FERs, a hardware flooding NMS simulator is used, where the normalized factor is set to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF QC-LDPC CODED MODULATION WITH IS

31

TABLE II
ESTIMATED ERROR RATE CONTRIBUTIONS OF DIFFERENT TS CLASSES IN THE (2304, 1920) WIMAX CODE WITH 16QAM

TABLE III
ESTIMATED ERROR RATE CONTRIBUTIONS OF DIFFERENT TS GROUPS IN THE (13440, 8448) 5G-NR CODE WITH 256QAM AND MODE-1

0.75 and the number of iterations is set to 50. Notice that the same decoding scheme is used in the IS simulation and the MC simulation. All-zero codeword is used in the IS simulation, so we equally set strong bias values to −1.
A. A Moderate-Length LDPC Coded BICM With 16QAM
The (2304, 1920) WiMAX code with 16QAM is taken as an example of the error floor estimation by the proposed method. An exhaustive search algorithm for finding dominant TSs of irregular LDPC codes is proposed [20], which is effective for the WiMAX LDPC codes. Due to the high error floors and the moderate blocklength, we can easily find the dominant TSs by the MC simulation. The MC simulation indicates that a large number of TSs of this code have significant contributions to the error rate. In the MC simulation, 109 TS groups have been found. It still takes too much time to use the proposed IS method to estimate the average fail rate for each TS group. A common method to reduce the complexity is simulating only one TS in a TS class [1]. However, unlike the case of BPSK, even the TSs belonging to the same TS class have unequal contributions to the error rate. To achieve an accurate estimation, we simulate all the TS groups belonging to the TS class which has small size. For the other TS classes with large size, their contributions to the error rate are quite small, so we randomly choose one TS group in the TS class to perform simulation, and then multiply the estimation result by the number of TS groups in this TS class. In general, the error contributions of larger TSs are lower than those of the most dominant TSs by several orders. Here, we simula√te all the TS groups for the (a, b) TS class if a < 8 and b < a.
Table II shows some estimation results of different TS classes with the most significant impact on the error rate. The error rate contribution Ξ of each TS class is calculated by the average fail rates. All the values of Ξ are summed to estimate the FER curve in the error floor region. Fig. 4 shows the FER curves of SBCs and 16QAM channel are closely matched, so an accurate estimation result with negligible loss is achieved. Moreover, our estimation results show higher accuracy than the upper bound for the (1008, 504) Mackay code with 8PAM in [8], which only considers five dominant TSs.

Compared with the previous work [8], our proposed estimation method is more universal and simple. Ramamoorthy’s approach uses a hypothesis that a modulation symbol contains at most one bit in a TS, which is usually not valid for the irregular QC-LDPC codes. The binary-input and symmetric-output SBCs greatly simplify the error floor estimation, especially remove the impact of all possible combinations of constellation points for the TS. The complexity of the proposed SIMP-IS to simulate one TS group is much smaller than O (Z), while the complexity of Ramamoorthy’s approach is O (Z |T |).
B. A Long-Length LDPC Coded BICM With 256QAM
Different interleaving schemes for 5G-NR LDPC coded BICM with 256QAM are considered. The (13440, 8448) 5G-NR code with Z = 384 defined by base graph 1 [17] is used. To discuss the error floors for different interleaving schemes, the row-column interleaver used in 5G-NR is tested by various modes. Here, the row-column interleaver with r rows is called mode-r interleaver, which is usually matched to 2rQAM.
The 5G-NR LDPC coded BICM with 2rQAM and moder interleaver usually can obtain near optimal performance at waterfall region, but high error floors are unavoidable for these threshold-based BICM schemes. From the simulation results at high SNR region, we observe that the error patterns are highly diverse for these schemes. For example, mode8 interleaving scheme is applied for 256QAM in 5G-NR, which has a superior threshold, but most of the decoding errors in the high SNR region are unstable errors.
In general, the stable TSs are the most harmful errors in the error floor region, e.g., mode-1 and mode-4 interleavers. However, for mode-8 interleaver, thousands of TS groups are collected in the high SNR region, and most of them are the unstable TSs of which the fail rates are too low to be estimated. For this reason, we only give a relaxed lower bound based on a few stable TSs for mode-8 interleaver. Furthermore, to test the estimation accuracy, we concatenate the mode-8 interleaver with a bit-labeling mapper using water-filling (WF) strategy [16], which greatly reduces the diversity of errors caused by the unstable TSs of mode-8 interleaver.
The dominant TSs of mode-1 and their error rate contributions are listed in Table III. These TSs are also the dominant TSs of the other interleaving shemes. Fig. 5 shows the FER

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

32

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2021

mainly caused by stable trapping sets. The error floors of the WiMAX and 5G-NR LDPC coded BICM systems are estimated by the presented method. For the cases considered in this work, the simulation results indicate that a great accuracy is achieved.

Fig. 4. Error floor estimation for (2304, 1920) WiMAX code with 16QAM.
Fig. 5. Error floor estimation for the (13440, 8448) 5G-NR code with 256QAM and different interleaving schemes.
and error floors estimation results for mode-1, mode-4, mode-8 and mode-8-WF interleaving schemes. The FER simulations are provided by a high-resolution quantized NMS decoder, implemented in FPGA platform. The IS method is also carried out with the same NMS decoder, implemented in a quantized C program. For 256QAM, the surrogate channel model errors, that have been mentioned, considerably affect the estimation results. The estimated FERs of mode-1 and mode-4 interleavers are overestimated due to the performance degradation of the surrogate channel model. For mode-8 and mode-8-WF interleaving schemes, the estimated results are much closer to the simulations of error floors, which are lower bounds given by a few stable TSs. It is interesting to note, the gap between the decoding performance of the QAM channel and the SBCs is different in various FER levels. We observe that the gap in the waterfall region is noticeably larger than that at error floor, as shown by the FER curves of QAM channel and SBCs for mode-8-WF interleaving scheme in Fig. 5. Although the SBCs or unstable TSs lead to a slight overestimation or underestimation of the simulation results, our proposed IS method still provides a simple and efficient approach to estimate the error floor of QC-LDPC coded modulation with long blocklength codes and high-order constellations.
V. CONCLUSION In this letter, a low-complexity error floors estimation method for QC-LDPC coded BICM is proposed. Surrogate bit-channels are used to effectively apply an importance sampling approach, which estimates the average fail rates of trapping sets. This simple method is appropriate for any types of modulations and interleavers if the error floors are

REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[2] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “Error floor approximation for LDPC codes in the AWGN channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 7416–7441, Dec. 2014.
[3] J. Sun, “Studies on graph-based coding systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., Ohio State Univ., Columbus, OH, USA, 2004.
[4] J. Font-Segura, A. Martinez, and A. Guillen i Fabregas, “Importance sampling for coded-modulation error probability estimation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 289–300, Jan. 2020.
[5] B. Xia and W. E. Ryan, “Estimating LDPC codeword error rates via importance sampling,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Chicago, IL, USA, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 473.
[6] E. Cavus, C. L. Haymes, and B. Daneshrad, “An IS simulation technique for very low BER performance evaluation of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 2006, pp. 1095–1100.
[7] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Evaluation of the low frame error rate performance of LDPC codes using importance sampling,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Sep. 2007, pp. 202–207.
[8] A. Ramamoorthy and N. Varnica, “Error floors of LDPC coded BICM,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Glasgow, U.K., Jun. 2007, pp. 839–844.
[9] F. Steiner, G. Bocherer, and G. Liva, “Protograph-based LDPC code design for shaped bit-metric decoding,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 397–407, Feb. 2016.
[10] M. Franceschini, G. Ferrari, and R. Raheli, “Does the performance of LDPC codes depend on the channel?” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 2129–2132, Dec. 2006.
[11] F. Peng, W. E. Ryan, and R. D. Wesel, “Surrogate-channel design of universal LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 480–482, Jun. 2006.
[12] B. Xia and W. E. Ryan, “On importance sampling for linear block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Anchorage, AK, USA, vol. 4, May 2003, pp. 2904–2908.
[13] C. Cole, S. Wilson, E. Hall, and T. Giallorenzi, “A general method for finding low error rates of LDPC codes,” 2006, arXiv:cs/0605051. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0605051
[14] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[15] N. Varnica, M. P. C. Fossorier, and A. Kavcic, “Augmented belief propagation decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1308–1317, Jul. 2007.
[16] Y. Li and W. E. Ryan, “Bit-reliability mapping in LDPC-coded modulation systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–3, Jan. 2005.
[17] 3rd generation Partnership pProject; Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; NR; Multiplexing and Channel Coding (Release 15), 3GPP, document TS 38.212 V15.5.0, Mar. 2019.
[18] A. Farsiabi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error floor estimation of LDPC decoders—A code independent approach to measuring the harmfulness of trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 2667–2679, May 2020.
[19] G. Bocherer, F. Steiner, and P. Schulte, “Bandwidth efficient and rate-matched low-density parity-check coded modulation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 12, pp. 4651–4665, Dec. 2015.
[20] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Characterization of elementary trapping sets in irregular LDPC codes and the corresponding efficient exhaustive search algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 3411–3430, May 2018.
[21] X. Hu, Z. Li, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, and R. Barndt, “Error floor estimation of long LDPC codes on magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1836–1839, Jun. 2010.
[22] A. Hareedy, B. Amiri, R. Galbraith, and L. Dolecek, “Non-binary LDPC codes for magnetic recording channels: Error floor analysis and optimized code design,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 8, pp. 3194–3207, Aug. 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

