2015 International Conference on Control,lnstrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

PAPR Reduction in OFDM Systems Using Quasi Cyclic Invertible Subset LDPC Codes

Ciya Thomas
PG Student, ECE Department
Sree Narayana Gurukulam College ofEngineering
Kerala, India
ciyathomas@gmail.com
Abstract--- Wireless communication is one of the important aspects of long distance communication. Along with the progress in technology rapid changes has been achieved in the field of wireless communication. Recent advances in wireless communication systems have increased the throughput and reliability of wireless channels. But still the bandwidth and spectral availability demands are endless. Researches in this field show that Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) has become the modulation choice for high data-rate communication systems. But OFDM has the disadvantage ofhaving large fluctuations in signal amplitude which has resulted in a high Peak-to-Average-Power Ratio (pAPR). High PAPR is a major drawback of multicarrier transmission system which leads to power inefficiency in RF section of the transmitter. The important PAPR reduction techniques for multicarrier transmission includes amplitude clipping and filtering, coding, partial transmit sequence and selected mapping. Among which, coding based approaches have inherent error control capability and simplicity of implementation. But this approach has limitations like an exhaustive search to fmd the best codes and to store large lookup tables for encoding and decoding. We are proposing a novel coding method called as Quasi Cyclic Invertible Subset LDPC (QC-IS-LDPC) codes for PAPR reduction in OFDM systems with low searching complexity and good error correcting performance. An intensive study will be done to compare the PAPR reduction capability and BER performance of QC-IS-LDPC coded OFDM with other PAPR reduction methods. Through this work we also examine the impact of different modulation schemes and coding rate on PAPR reduction.
Keywords- OFDM, PAPR, QC-1S-LDPC
I. INTRODUCTION
Rapid development in multimedia demands high data rate transmission. Inter Symbol Interference (ISI) will act as a main limiting factor in high data rate transmission. To mitigate this problem, multicarrier communication is introduced in modem wireless communication standards. Multicarrier modulation divides the input data stream into several low rate parallel sub streams and each sub streams are modulated using different carriers. These modulated sub streams are frequency multiplexed and transmitted

Dr. C.D Suriyakala
Professor, ECE Department Sree Narayana Gurukulam College of Engineering
Kerala, India drcdsk@yahoo.in
simultaneously. Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) is a promising multi carrier modulation technique which is capable for transmitting large amount of digital data. The word orthogonal indicates the mathematical relationship between the frequencies of carriers in the system. Basic steps involved in OFDM modulation are explained in [1]. High data rate multicarrier transmission in mobile applications is the main advantage of OFDM systems. As we said earlier in OFDM systems independently modulated subcarriers are added coherently. At some points the inphase components of subcarriers are added up and it results in high Peak to Average Power Ratio (PAPR). It is considered as the major drawback in OFDM systems.
PAPR can be defmed as the ratio between the maximum power of a sampie in a given OFDM transmit symbol to the average power of that OFDM symbol. High PAPR will complicate the radio frequency front end design [16]. Signals with high PAPR will enter to the nonlinear region of the High Power Amplifiers (HPAs) and it causes in-band distortion and out-of-band radiations. Power amplifiers with wide linear rage are required to solve this problem but its implementation is more complicated. Here comes the relevance of PAPR reduction in OFDM systems.
Different methods are developed for PAPR reduction in OFDM systems. These methods mainly classified as PAPR reduction with signal distortion and PAPR reduction without signal distortion. Classification of PAPR reduction is explained in [1]. Various schemes developed to address PAPR issue is discussed in [1], [2] and [3]. Most widely used and simplest method for PAPR reduction is clipping [4]. This method clips the signal such that the peak amplitude becomes limited to a desired level. But this method increases the bit error probability. Selective Mapping [5] and Partial Transmit Sequences [6]-[7] are non distortion PAPR reduction methods. This method

978-A1u-t4ho6r7iz3e-d9li8ce2n5s-e1d/u1s5e/l$im3i1te.d0t0o:©Yo2n0se1i5UnIiEv.EDEownloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 602

2015 International Conference on Control,lnstrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

selects an OFOM signal with mInImum PAPR for transmission among a number of subcandidates having the same information. Another PAPR reduction method suggested in [8], which is based on block coding scheme. Coding based PAPR reduction has inherent error control capability. It helps to improve the BER performance of the system. The survey includes different coding methods of PAPR reduction done by various researchers [9]-[ I0]-[12]. Survey highlights that the Low-density parity-check (LOPC) codes [13] shows the theoretical limit values attain closer to the Shannon limit and perform good role in the PAPR reduction of OFDM systems [14]. But this approach has limitations like an exhaustive search to find the best codes. This limitation can be overcome by the using quasi cyclic property of LDPC codes [15]. Also inversion operation helps to reduce PAPR to a lower level [14]. This paper proposed a new coding scheme known as Quasi Cyclic Invertible Subset LOPC (QC-IS-LOPC) codes, which will be an effective solution for PAPR reduction with low searching complexity and good error performance.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 11 describes about an overview of coding based PAPR reduction. Section III describes the proposed QC-IS-LDPC coded OFDM system. Section IV discuss about the simulation results. Finally, Section V concludes this paper.

11. OVERVIEW OF CODING BASED PAPR REOUCTION

Coding based PAPR reduction has become a subject of numerous studies and various schemes have been developed to address this issue. Linear Block coding, Convolutional coding and Turbo coding schemes are the more acceptable coding methods for PAPR reduction. Mathematical expression for PAPR is giyen in equation l.

maxlx(tW

PAPR = E[lx(t)l2]

(1)

where x(t) is the OFDM signal and E[.] denotes the expectation operator. Only small fraction of x(t) is affected by high PAPR. This high PAPR can be eliminated by using coding scheme. Coding is the simple method for PAPR reduction. It is distortion less method and has inherent error handling capability. In general, coding based PAPR reduction chooses only those codes which have minimum PAPR. This method

generates a code word for each OFOM symbols and reduces the PAPR below some desired level. Of course for smaller desired PAPR level, the coding rate should be reduced. A PAPR of the maximum 3dB for the 8carrier OFDM system can be achieved by 3/4-code rate block coding by mapping a 3- bit data word into a 4- bit code word [8]. From the set of permissible code words the transmitter chose those code words with lowest PAPRs in the time domain. Survey highlights that the transmission rates of LOPC codes are close to the theoretical maximum. Also PAPR reduction capability is high for LDPC codes. The highlights of coding method are the possibility for both PAPR reduction and forward error correction.
The main drawback of coding method is that it needs to perform an exhaustive search to find the optimum code. The usefulness of these coding techniques is limited to the multicarrier systems with a small number of subcarriers. In general, the exhaustive search of a good code for OFOM systems with a large number of subcarriers is intractable, which limits the actual benefits of coding for PAPR reduction in practical OFDM systems. So an effective technique has to be developed to reduce PAPR with optimization in BER and transmitter and receiver complexity. Therefore we introduce a new family of Low Density Parity Check (LOPC) codes, called as Quasi Cyclic Invertible Subset LDPC (QC-IS-LDPC) codes for PAPR reduction in OFDM systems. LDPC codes are strong competitors of other codes used in communication system. Inversion operation in LDPC helps to improve the PAPR reduction capability. Quasi cyclic property will help to reduce the searching complexity. Therefore the proposed Quasi Cyclic Invertible Subset LOPC coded system will be an effective solution for PAPR reduction with low searching complexity and good error performance.
III. PROPOSED QC-IS-LDPC CODED OFDM SYSTEM
The OFDM system with an QC-IS-LDPC code for PAPR reduction is iIIustrated in Fig. I. The inherent capability to provide error detection and correction of LDPC coding scheme makes it a desirable choice to perform PAPR reduction. By modifying this coding scheme we can achieve better PAPR performance and lower searching complexity.

978-A1u-t4ho6r7iz3e-d9li8ce2n5s-e1d/u1s5e/l$im3i1te.d0t0o:©Yo2n0se1i5UnIiEv.EDEownloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 603

2015 International Conference on Control,lnstrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (lCCICCT)

Inversion Operation r-------,
I

Rando m Serial to Input - Parallel
Signal Convertor

QC-LDPC Eneoder

I Label Bit I Insersion and Phase Optimisation

Modulation ( 16 QAM)

IFFT

Cyclic

Parallel to

Extension - Serial

Conversion

~ Channel

AWGN Noise

Label Bit

Output Parallel to - QC-LDPC [t Extraction and Demodulation

FFT

Signal Serial

Decoding I Phase

I ( 16 QA.M )

Conversion

I Optimisation I

Remove Cyelie Extension

Serial to Parallel Convertor

Fig. I. Block diagram of Quasi Cyclic Invertible Subset LDPC coded OFDM system

The serial input data stream is divided into frames ofNfbits. These Nfbits are arranged into N groups, where N is the number of subcarriers. The number of bits in each of the N groups determines the consteUation size for that particular subcarrier. For example, if aU the subcarriers are modulated by QPSK then each of the groups consists of 2 bits, if 16-QAM modulation is used each group contains 4 bits. This scheme is called as fixed loading.
Here we are transmit a data having length 2048 bits and uses 16 QAM modulation scheme. Therefore choose Nf = 4 and N = 512. In OFDM each symbol multiplied with subcarriers after that it sampled at T= nTsIN. These operations are replaced by IFFT. IFFT size is also equal to the number of subcarriers. PAPR calculation is done after IFFT operation by using the equation 1. PAPR analysis is done by graphical methods. For that we introduce Complementary Cumulative Distribution Function (CDDF) [16]. When the OFDM signal is passed through a multipath fading channel, the channel may introduce Inter Symbol Interference (lSI) and Inter Carrier Interference (lCI) to the signal. These effects should be removed from the signal in order to receive correct data at the demodulator. ISI can be avoided by insertion of a guard time at the beginning of each OFDM symbol. Guard time should be longer than the maximum possible delay spread of the channel. In order to avoid ICI, the last part of the

OFDM symbol can be added to the beginning ofthe symbol. This part is caUed the cyclic prefix. The length of guard time or cyclic prefix are depends up on the RMS delay spread of the channel. Here we consider fading channel and it also added AWGN noise to the signal. In order to create an accurate channel model in the specific environment, we must have fuU knowledge on the characteristics of retlectors, including their situation and movement, and the power of the retlected signal, at any specified time. Since such full characterization is not possible in reality, we simply resort to the specific channel model, which can represent a typicalor average channel condition in the given environment. [17] shows the RMS delay spread values for different test environment based on ETSI UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access (UTRA) evaluation report. According to this cyclic prefix duration will depended on these RMS delay spread value and it is chosen as the I/4th of useful symbol duration. Receiver side will do the reverse operations and reproduce the transmitted signal.
A. Construction ofQC-IS-LDPC Codes
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes have been the subject of intense research lately because of their capacity-achieving performance and linear decoding complexity. They were invented and proposed in 1962 by Robert GaUager [18]. LDPC codes are represented by a sparse parity-check

978-A1u-t4ho6r7iz3e-d9li8ce2n5s-e1d/u1s5e/l$im3i1te.d0t0o:©Yo2n0se1i5UnIiEv.EDEownloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 604

2015 International Conference on Control,lnstrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

matrix with a constant number of ones (weight) in each column and row. Quasi-Cyclic (QC)-LDPC has been proposed to reduce the complexity of the LDPC while obtaining the similar performance [19]. An (n,k) linear block code of dimensions n = mno and k= mko, is known as Quasi-Cyclic if every cyclic shift of a codeword by p positions is another codeword. Therefore, a cyclic code is a QC code with p = I. The length of block n of a Quasi-Cyclic code is a multiple of p, or n = m x p. This type of codes contains many good linear codes. Every cyclic code has a unique property of idempotent, which means unchanged when it is multiplied by itself. The formation of the QC codes is same as of cyclic codes but the analysis is slightly different. The length of the codeword and message bits is signified by mnO and the mkO, where m is a positive integer. It has also found that the QC code will have the same rate for various lengths of codes. Cyclic matrices (circulants) are basic constituents in the generator matrix for a Quasi-Cyclic code. An m x m cyclic or circulant matrix is given by:

C=

Co Cm - l Cm - 2

Cl Co Cm - l

Cm - l Cm -2 Cm - 3
(2)

C2
Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes are universally precised by their parity-check matrices. The QCLDPC code parity-check matrices are specified as an array of sparse circulant of the same size. A square matrix consists of each row in the cyclic shift of the row above is a circulant, and the first row is normally the cyclic shift of the last row. It's all columns is the downward cyclic shift of the column on the left and first column is the cyclic shift of last column. The weight w of the row and column of a circulant are equal. If the weight W of circulant is equal to 1, then the circulant is called circulant permutation matrix. The generator ofthe circulant is characterized by the first row or the first column of the same circulant.
Like all linear block codes Quasi Cyclic LDPC codes encoding can also be described via matrices. Initially generate a random matrix P is generated. It is known as the parity matrix which satisfies all properties of LDPC codes and each rows of the

matrix will be the one time cyclic shift of previous row. From the parity check matrix the generator matrix G can be constructed. If the structure of the generator matrix is such that the code word made by this has split parity bits and information then this type of generator matrix is said to be in systematic circulant form. The generator matrix can be represented as:

G=[IP]

(3)

The encoding takes place with the message or information (M) by using G matrix. The result is stored in codeword (W). This means:

(4)

The message is the information, which is going to transmit in the digital transmission system.The encoding procedure secures the information by the help generator matrix (G) of the quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. The final outcome named as codeword (W) sends from the channel. The codeword consists of two parts. The first k bits of the codeword are equal to the bits of the source message. The other n-k bits ofthe codeword are the so-called parity-check bits.

There are two types of iterative decoding for this coding method i.e. hard and soft decision decoding which followed by various techniques such as sum product algorithm, Gallager hard decision bit flipping and weighted bit flipping algorithm. The idea of using different technique is to get more appropriate Bit Error Rate from AWGN channel. Fig. 2 is showing the complete layout of the digital transmission system. This diagram IS more understandable at this stage as all the components of the encoder and decoder have been iIIustrated. In Fig. 2, the received vector is represented r which is decoded by decoder. The Syndrome is represented by S, which check the decoding sequence whether the received vector has still error or not. The error free information after decoding is checked with codeword (e).

Different techniques used of decoding to verify the performance of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. This includes sum product algorithm which is a soft decision decoding method. Second method is Gallager's hard decision decoding algorithm. We choose Gallanger's hard decision decoding. Gallager proposed the bit flipping algorithm, which works professionally for LDPC Cyclic codes.

978-A1u-t4ho6r7iz3e-d9li8ce2n5s-e1d/u1s5e/l$im3i1te.d0t0o:©Yo2n0se1i5UnIiEv.EDEownloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 605

2015 International Conference on Control,Instrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

Sender
Dataword
Ia31a21al l aol

Encoder

II I I I Ir ' I !Gellera"or
,....-
IParity' bi
I a3a121allaol ro
Codeword

Ul1Ireli bl tra n~ miss Ion

Oe<:odel'

DaitawQrd
§3,1a21all aol

A«ept
[)e.sig l1
SYndIOmer f logic
I Checker
~

= ~ ~ "E
- ' .C~I

I
b31b2 1blbl~ goi
Coc:Ieword

Fig, 2, Layout ofencoder and decoder circuit ofQuasi Cyclic LOPC

The whole algorithm is based on the calculation of syndrome elements

(5)

Where, an (n-k) is the number ofrows in the parity check matrix H. The received block is represented by:

hl,l

h 1 •n

H=

(6)

element of syndrome is I.
• Calculate the number of unsatisfied parity checks for each ofthe n bits.
• Flip the bit of r which are contained in the largest number of unsatisfied parity checks; reset the resulting r in to r '.
• Again compute syndrome s, repeat the iteration I, 11, 111 until S=O or the maximum number of iteration is reached. The final r is the decoded received vector at a certain number ofiteration.

(7)

And the syndrome is calculated according to the well-known formula:

S = H * rT

(8)

If the value of s =0 then the received block is pretend to be correct. The decision of decoder is c=r, where c is codeword. Otherwise the algorithm takes the non-zero syndrome elements and flips the unsatisfied bits in received block in such manner defined in algorithm so that the received block is refer as r T. In Gallager hard decision algorithm the received vector is r, parity check matrix is H, and codeword is C. The algorithm steps are as follows:

• Calculate syndrome S=H* rT and find out the number of unsatisfied parity checks, the

B. Properties 01 QC-IS-LDPC Codes and Reduction in Searching Complexity
Quasi cyclic property is one of the major advantage of QC-IS-LDPC codes. A code word is known as Quasi-Cyclic if every cyclic shift of a codeword by any positions is another codeword. This property helps to reduce the searching complexity.
We show in the followings how code structure affect the searching complexity. Consider a data stream of length M. Which can be coded using LDPC codes and a new codeword is generated for each data words. Length of codeword is depend up on the coding rate and it will be different from data word. Assume new codeword has a length of U bits. Then there exist 2u possible code words. PAPR of each OFDM symbol cannot be independently treated; therefore searching among entire code words is necessary, which means 2u searching complexity. Quasi Cyclic property will reduce the searching

978-A1u-t4ho6r7iz3e-d9li8ce2n5s-e1d/u1s5e/l$im3i1te.d0t0o:©Yo2n0se1i5UnIiEv.EDEownloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 606

2015 International Conference on Control,lnstrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

complexity. In OFOM systems a codeword and its any position cyclic shifted code exhibit same PAPR. Therefore QC-IS-LDPC code reduces the searching complexity and provides better PAPR reduction.

these different combinations select signal with minimum PAPR for transmission. The signal generated at the adder circuit can be mathematically represented in equation 10.

C. PAPR Reduction with Inversion Operation

Inversion operation effectively helps to reduce the PAPR of the OFOM systems. This method is very much similar to partial transmit technique. This method changes the phase of coded signal and reduces the chances of phase addition in OFOM systems. At the transmitter side the encoded signal is subdivided into fOUf groups. Insert zero bits to each subgroup. These zero bits are called as label bits which indicate the phase information of each subgroup. Each subgroups are then multiplied with a phase factor bi where i =1,2, 3 and 4. The values of bi are:

bi = {l,-l,j,-j}

(9)

Fig. 3 shows the inversion operation at transmitter side. After multiplication with phase

Ao

.It

\lI

AI t1\
\11
.....apulBnsr~C-.LD-P~C~
----~n[oaer ~ Al 11\ \lI
Al ./rt..
w

Inversion Operation r--------1

1
..0. I

1

\3

1

1

tA · I

I

VI

I

I

I

I

1
I

1

t1I I

v

I

I

"~

1

I

I

I Ibh bJb4 I

-

~

~
; Given 10

j=

Moaulalo
r--+

~

~
h~t0
-~ 1~
<~

-

P(k) = bl * Ao + bz * Al + b3 * Az + b4

* A3

(10)

Where P(k) represent the generated signal, Ai represent each subblocks and bi is the phase factors and k = 1,2,... 256. Optimum PAPR selector will select a signal Popt(K) among the 256 different signals, which has minimum PAPR and it will be used for transmission
Fig. 4 represents the receIver side inversion operation. At receiver side the inversion operation is done after demodulation. Operation is same as that done at transmitter side. The output obtained from the demodulator are divided into subgroups. Then label bits are extracted from each subgroup. At receiver side bi used for inversion operation is depends upon the extracted label bit values. If label bits are all zero the receiver side also uses the same bi values which used at transmitter side.

Given10

. - Decoder Inversion +- Operation

LabelBn
I+- Ertracnon

Demodulator (16 QA.M)

I

I Phse

I

Insel

I Opfunisation I

Zero Bi~

1 for PAPR I

I Reauction I
I

LabelBns

Fig. 3. Inversion operation at transmitter
optimisation factor each subblocks are combined the adder. Depends upon the bi value we get 256 at different combinations for the OFDM signal. From

Fig. 4. Inversion operation at receiver

978-A1u-t4ho6r7iz3e-d9li8ce2n5s-e1d/u1s5e/l$im3i1te.d0t0o:©Yo2n0se1i5UnIiEv.EDEownloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 607

2015 International Conference on Control,lnstrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

TABLE I. Simulation parameters and values

With the help of MATLAB a comparative study will be carried out to analyses the PAPR reduction capability of the proposed system. Result analysis is done by plotting Complementary Cumulative Distribution Function (CCDF) of PAPR and Bit Error Rate (BER) graphs. Table 1 show the parameters values used for the OFDM system simulation. The PAPR of an OFDM system is depends on the messages which are transmitting. Here we are transmitting a 2048 bits random data.
A. PAPR Reduction by Clipping

Parameter
FFT Size Operating Frequency
Bandwidth (B) Useful Symbol Duration (T)
Guard Interval (Tg)

Value
512 2GHz 4096 kHz 125/ls 1/4 (31.25 /ls)

Clipping is the simplest method suggested for PAPR reduction. In this method we predetermine a signal power. This power level is known as Clipping Level (CL). Any signal power greater than CL will be clipped off. Mathematical expression for clipping method is:

-CL
yen) = { x(n):
CL,

if x(n) < -CL
if - CL ~ x(n) ~ CL (11)
if x(n) > CL

The effect of clipping operation is analysed by plotting the CCDF graph. Fig. 5 shows the effect of clipping in PAPR reduction. From the graph it is clear that clipping will effectively reduces the PAPR. Ifwe compare PAPR of clipped signal to original signal there is around 3dB difference.

Total Symbol Duration (Tsymbol) Coding Rate
Sub carrier spacing Channel

156.25 /ls (with GI = T/4)
1/2 8kHz AWGN Channel

The amount of PAPR reduction is clearly depends on the predetermined clipping level. Main disadvantage of this method is that signal will be distorted. We also plot the BER vs SNR graph to know about the bit error rate performance which is shown in Fig. 6. From graph it is clear that clipping method will degrade the system BER performance. For 16dB SNR clipped signal give only 10-1 BER value.

BER comparlson
100 r---.----.--..----.-~-..._--.---.--_.__

2

3

4

5

6

PAPRo(dB)

Fig. 5. PAPR of clipped signal

B

104~~-~-~~-~-~~-~-~~

o2

6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20

SNR

Fig. 6. BER performance of clipped signal

978-A1u-t4ho6r7iz3e-d9li8ce2n5s-e1d/u1s5e/l$im3i1te.d0t0o:©Yo2n0se1i5UnIiEv.EDEownloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 608

2015 International Conference on Control,lnstrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

B. Effects ofDifferent Modulation Schemes in PAPR Reduction
PAPR values in OFDM systems are related to the modulation scheme selected for signal transmission. We consider three different digital modulation schemes such as BPSK, QPSK and 16 QAM. OFDM systems are modulated using this modulation schemes and calculated the PAPR also plot CCDF graph. Fig.7 shows the CCDF graph. For the selection of a better modulation scheme also consider the BER performance and spectral efficiency. The number of subcarriers and phase difference between the subcarriers used for modulation has a major role in PAPR value. If the number of subcarriers are increased the chances of phase addition also increased. This will in turn increase the PAPR. For the PAPR analysis of different modulation schemes we are transmit a random signal having 2048 bits and this signal is modulated using BPSK, QPSK and QAM modulations. From Fig. 7 it is clear that QPSK modulation scheme shows higher PAPR compared to the other modulation techniques. 16- QAM has lowest PAPR. Because, QAM modulation changes the carrier amplitude. 16 QAM and BPSK has slight difference in their PAPR. PAPR value of 16 QAM is around 20 dB, for BPSK it is around 21dB. PAPR ofQPSK is 34 dB. Selection of better modulation scheme is not only depends on the PAPR reduction capability. Along with PAPR reduction capability BER performance also evaluated. Fig. 8 shows the SNR vs BER graph which used to analyses the BER performance of BPSK, QPSK and 16 QAM modulation schemes.

modulation schemes. BSPK has 10-3 BER at 6.3dB SNR. QPSK achieves 10-3 BER rate at 10 dB SNR. 16 QAM has the highest bit error rate compare to other modulations. 16 QAM achieves 10-3 BER rate at 16.5 dB SNR.
Spectral efficiency is the another criteria used for modulation scheme selection. Spectral efficiency is directly proportional to the number of bits in a symbol. In BPSK modulated OFDM system one symbol consist of one bit, in QPSK one symbol consist of two bits and in 16 QAM one symbol is consist of fOUf bits. Therefore spectral efficiency is high for 16 QAM. The three criteria are compared in Table 2 and from the table we can concluded that 16 QAM modulation scheme is better choice in PAPR reduction.
BER comparlson 10° .--~~~-~-~----'~-~-~-~-----,

10~ L--~~~_~_~_~_~_~_~-----'

o2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18

SNR

Fig. 8. BER comparison of different modulation schemes

TABLE 2. Comparison of different modulation schemes

Modulation

Criteria

BPSK

BER

PA PR

Spectral

Reduction Efficiency

Low

Intermediate

Low

1O . 2L---~-~-~--~-~-~----'

o

10

15

20

25

30

35

PAPRO indB

QPSK

Intermed iate

Low

Intermediate

16QAM

High

High

High

Fig. 7. PAPR comparisons of different modulations schemes
Graph shows that BPSK modulation scheme has C. PAPR Reduction by Convolutional Codes minimum error compare to QPSK and 16 QAM

978-A1u-t4ho6r7iz3e-d9li8ce2n5s-e1d/u1s5e/l$im3i1te.d0t0o:©Yo2n0se1i5UnIiEv.EDEownloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 609

2015 International Conference on Control,lnstrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

Proper encoding of data stream will help reduce the PAPR. Convolutional coding chooses a code with minimum PAPR for transmission. In OUf work convolutional codes are used for encoding and analyse the effect of coding in PAPR reduction by plotting the CCDF curve. Fig. 9 shows the effect of convolutional coding in PAPR reduction. From the graph it is clear that convolutional codes can reduce the PAPR of the system upto 6.5 dB.
D. Quasi Cyclic lnvertible Subset LDPC Codes For
PAPR Reduction
The input data stream of length 2048 bits are encoded with LDPC codes and measure the PAPR. From the result we clear that LDPC coding scheme is an effective method for PAPR reduction. LDPC codes are further modified by inversion operation and observed that inversion operation provide a better result in PAPR reduction. But the searching complexity is high in invertible subset LOPC codes. For eliminating this problem we introduce quasi cyclic invertible subset LDPC codes. In quasi cyclic codes we can generate another codeword by applying cyclic shift to the code. This property will reduce the searching complexity. The PAPR reduction efficiency of proposed method is analysed by compare CCDF plot. Fig. 10 shows the comparison graph. From the graph it is clear that by using the proposed method we can reduce the PAPR upto 10dB when compare to the convolutional coding scheme.
CCDF curve

CawokJUoNlI c:oded OFOM ~ IS·LDPC OfOM

--"J- QC·IS·LOPC

10.2L---L_--'-_-'--=:-e:-L:O=P;C::::::;:=~

6

10 12

14 16 18 20

PAPRO in db

Fig. 10: PAPR comparison for different coding schemes

PAPR Comparlson 100 ~,,:;;:=-'~~~~~~-'--~~~~-~~
]

'Cl
."r

"o ]

'S
.!!1
C.,

~ 10' \

~ E
u"
i!'
~
§

g.

- - Orignal OFDM signal

8E 10.2 L_~~_~__--,-_:-=e=- =EnC=Cde:d:s:tg:n=lll :::J

o

10

15

20

25

30

PAPRo(dB)

Fig.9. PAPR performance of convolutional coded OFDM system

Quasi Cyclic Invertible Subset LOPC coded system has minimum PAPR compare to other OFOM systems. From the Fig. 9 it is clear that the convolutional code achieves 6.5 dB reduction in PAPR. By combining these results the PAPR reduction capability of different techniques are compared in Table 3. From the table it is clear that clipping method shows the lowest PAPR reduction. The PAPR values of OFDM signal varies with the information content. The proposed coding method will reduce 17.64 dB PAPR from the original signal.
TABLE 3. PAPR reduction capability of diflerent techniques

Techniques Used

PAPROf Original OFDM Signal
(dB)

Clipping Method Convolutional Coding LDPC Coding Invertible Subset LDPC Coding Quasi Cyclic Invertible Subset LDPC Coding

6.525 26.231 26.231 26.231
26.231

PAPROf Signal After ApplingThe Reduction Technique
(dB) 4.473
19.671
13.895
9.664
8.585

Amount Of
Reduction (dB)
2.052
6.560
12.336
16.567
17.646

978-A1u-t4ho6r7iz3e-d9li8ce2n5s-e1d/u1s5e/l$im3i1te.d0t0o:©Yo2n0se1i5UnIiEv.EDEownloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 610

2015 International Conference on Control,lnstrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

Simulation result shows that the PAPR reduction capability of coding scheme is depended on the coding rate. Fig. 11 shows the simulation result. Graph shows that Quasi Cyclic Invertible Subset LOPC coding scheme with coding rate Yz has better PAPR reduction capability compare to the same coding scheme with co ding rate %. The code rate must be reduced to decrease the desired level of PAPR. Code length should be increased to reduce the PAPR of the system. BER performance of the proposed system also evaluated and observed that the proposed system shows better error performance compare to the other systems. Fig. 12 shows the comparison graph. Proposed coding scheme achieves aBER value of 10-4 at 3 dB SNR. At BER=10-\ QC-IS-LOPC code has 2 dB better performance than IS-LOPC and 4 dB than LOPC. Graph shows that the QC-IS-LOPC coding is stronger than IS-LDPC and LDPC, since it has higher capability to correct more errors.
CCDF curve
100 r--..,....--1,......~;::::::::-r------r--,--------,

6'
Cl:
~
A
~ 10-' uuuoa:.-

-'f1- Codlng Ra'•• 314 _ _ Codlng Ral • • 112

10.2 L-_---""_ _--'--_ _"--_---""_ _--'--_----.J

55

65

7

7.5

8

85

PAPRO lndb

Fig. 11. PAPR comparison for different coding rates

V. CONCLUSION ANO FUTURE WORKS
PAPR is an important factor in determining the performance of an OFDM system. PAPR reduction is necessary to avoid the non linear distortions in high power amplifiers without compromise the power efficiency and system design costs. In this paper, we propose QC-IS-LOPC codes for PAPR reduction in OFOM systems. The observations obtained from this work could be summarized as follows:
• Compare with the c1ipping method, convolutional coding, LOPC coding and Invertible Subset LDPC coding the proposed Quasi Cyclic Invertible Subset LDPC codes shows better PAPR reduction. Through this method we can achieve around 17.5 dB reduction in PAPR.
• The PAPR of the signal depended on the modulation scheme. 16- QAM has lowest PAPR. QPSK modulation scheme shows higher PAPR compared to the other modulation techniques. PAPR value of 16 QAM is around 20 dB, for BPSK it is around 21dB and for QPSK it is 34 dB.
• The code rate must be reduced to decrease the desired level of PAPR. Quasi Cyclic Invertible Subset LDPC coding scheme with coding rate Yz has better PAPR reduction capability compare to the same coding scheme with coding rate 31..
• Compared with the IS-LDPC coding
schemes, the proposed scheme reduces the searching complexity. For a code length of n the IS-LOPC codes needs to search over 2n possible codewords. The Quasi Cyclic property of proposed system will reduced the searching complexity.

• The QC-IS-LOPC codes exhibit good error performance compare to other coding schemes.

Cl: W ill

10-5 L-------'--~--~--"---~------"

1

2

4

6

SNR

Fig. 12. BER comparison of different encoding schemes

Because of its lower searching complexity good PAPR reduction capability and error performance, the proposed QC-IS-LDPC codes are capable of support large number of candidate for PAPR reduction, which is important for OFOM systems. Therefore, the proposed PAPR reduction scheme based on QC-ISLOPC codes could serve as an attractive PAPR reduction solution for future multicarrier communication systems.
In the future works, we are to improve the error performance of QC-IS-LDPC codes with the use of

978-A1u-t4ho6r7iz3e-d9li8ce2n5s-e1d/u1s5e/l$im3i1te.d0t0o:©Yo2n0se1i5UnIiEv.EDEownloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 611

2015 International Conference on Control,lnstrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

quantised min-sum decoders. This reduces the error floor for LOPC codes and the proposed PAPR reduction method can be used with MIMO OFOM system.

REFERENCES

[I] Ciya Thomas , Dr C. D Suriyakala,"Effects of High PAPR and

PAPR Reduction

Techniques in OFDM Systems - A

Survey ",International Journal of Advanced Research in

Computer Science and Software Engineering, Volume 5, Issue

7, July 2015

[2] S. H. Han and 1. H. Lee, "An overview of peak-to-average power ratio reduction techniques for multicarrier transmission," IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 56-65, Apr. 2005.

[3] T. Jiang and Y. Wu, "An overview: peak-to-average power ratio reduction techniques for OFDM signals," IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 257-268, June 2008.

[4] Shilpa Bavi and Sudhirkumar Dhotre , "PA PR Reduction in OFDM System Using Clipping and Filtering Method ," International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering, Vol.5, Issue 2, Feb.2015

[5] y. Xin and I. 1. Fair, "Error-control selective mapping coding for PA PR reduction in OFDM systems," Proc. 2004 IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf Fall

[6] S. H. Han and 1. H. Lee, "PAPR reduction of OFDM signals using a reduced complexity PTS technique," IEEE Signal Process. Lelt., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 887-890, Nov. 2004.

[7] S. H. Muller and J. B. Huber, "OFDM with reduced peak-toaverage power ratio by optimum combination of partial transmit sequences," lEE Electron. LeU., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 3669, Feb. 1997.

[8] A. E. Jones, T. A. Wilkinson, and S. K. Barton, "Block coding scheme for reduction of peak to mean envelope power ratio of multicarrier transmission schemes," lEE Electron. Lelt., vol. 30, pp. 2098-2099, Dec. 1994.

[9] K. U. Schmidt, "On cosets ofthe generalized first-order ReedMuller code with low PMEPR," IEEE Trans. In! Theory, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 3220-3232, July 2006.

[10] T. Jiang and G. X. Zhu, "Complement block coding for reduction in peak-to-average power ratio of OFDM signals," IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 43, no. 9, pp. SI7-S22, Sept. 2005.
[11] M. Sabbaghian, Y. Kwak, and V. Tarokh, "New codes from dual BCH codes with applications in low PA PR OFDM," IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 3990-3994, Dec. 2011.
[12] Y. C. Tsai, S. K. Deng, K. C. Chen, M. C. Lin, "Turbo coded OFDM for reducing PAPR and error rates," IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 84-89, Jan. 2008.
[13] R. G. Gallager, "Low density parity check codes," IRE Trans. In! Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[14] Daiming Qu, Li Li, and Tao .liang, "Invertible Subset LDPC Code for PA PR Reduction in OFDM Systems with Low Complexity," IEEE Trans.Commun., vol. 13,no. 4, April 2014.
[15] S P Vimal ,and Shankar kumar, "PAPR Reduction in OFDM Systems using Quasi Cyclic LDPC codes", AJSR Trans. Comm.,6(4),715-725,Aug 2013.
[16] Pameet Kaur, Ravinder Singh,"Complementary Cumulative Distribution Function for Performance Analysis of OFDM Signals", IOSR Journal of Electronics and Communication Engineering, ISSN : 2278-2834 Volume 2, Issue 5 (Sep-Oct 2012), pp 05-07
[17] IEEE Std 802.11 alD7.0 1999, Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications: High Speed Physical Layer in the 5GHz Band.
[18] R. G. Gallager, "Low density parity check codes," IRE Trans. Inf Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[19] Mohammad Rakibul Islam, Syed Iftekhar Ali," Encoding Schemes for Memory Etlicient Quasi Cyclic Low Density Parity Check Codes" WSEAS Transactions On Communications, E-ISSN: 2224-2864,lssue 6, Volume 11, June 2012.
[20] M. Sabbaghian, Y. Kwak, B. Smida, and V. Tarokh, "Near Shannon limit and low peak to average power ratio turbo block coded OFDM," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 2042-2045, Aug. 2011.
[21] D. Vukobratovic and V. Senk, "Evaluation and design of irregular LDPC codes using ACE spectrum," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 2272-2278, Aug. 2009.

978-A1u-t4ho6r7iz3e-d9li8ce2n5s-e1d/u1s5e/l$im3i1te.d0t0o:©Yo2n0se1i5UnIiEv.EDEownloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 612

