Further Results on LDPC Decoding Scheduling for Faster Convergence

Huang-Chang Lee∗, Yen-Ming Chen†, Yeong-Luh Ueng∗‡, and Jen-Yuan Hsu§
∗Dept. of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C. †Dept. of Electronic Engineering, Chung Yuan Christian University, Chung Li City, Taiwan, R.O.C. ‡Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C. §Information and Communications Research Laboratories, Industrial Technology Research Institute, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C.

Abstract—This paper presents a listed maximum mutual information increase (LM2I2)-based algorithm, which is used to arrange low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoding schedules for faster convergence. The increments in the predicted mutual information for the messages to be updated is used to guide the arrangement of the fixed decoding schedule. Consequently, by looking ahead for several decoding stages, a high-order prediction can be realized. For each decoding stages, the searching branches can be trimmed to fit a predetermined size of list, and the efficiency in the selection of update candidates is thus increased. Comparing to previous algorithms, the proposed LM2I2-based algorithm can be used to arrange the decoding schedules converged in the same speed with lower complexity, or accelerate the convergence with the same computation cost.
Index Terms— Belief propagation, messages-passing schedule, error-control codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. list decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, low-density parity-check (LDPC) [1] codes have drawn significant attention because they can provide a nearcapacity performance using a simple iterative Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm. For a specified LDPC code, the decoding schedules of the BP algorithm can affect the convergence speed of the error rate in the waterfall region. For the fully parallel flooding schedule, all decoding messages are simultaneously propagated in each iteration. On the other hand, following serial schedules, the decoding messages can be generated according to the information produced during the same iteration, and then the convergence speed can be accelerated. Layered BP (LBP) [2][3] and shuffled decoding [4] are commonly used serial schedules which, respectively, arrange the decoding process in the order of the check nodes or the variable nodes in the code graphs. These node-wise sequential schedules improves the convergence speed by about twice that of the flooding schedule [5][6].
The decoding messages are propagated along the connecting edges in the code graphs. Then, besides the nodewise schedules, the decoding messages can also be updated following edge-wise schedules. For the protograph codes, the messages associated to the same type of edges can be updated

at a single decoding stage, then the protograph-based edgewise schedules can be arranged using the maximum mutual information increase (M2I2)-based algorithm [10]. Based on the concept that a fast convergence of decoding is correlated to a rapidly increase in mutual information, the M2I2-based algorithm is designed to predict the increments in the mutual information of the updates associated to all edges, indicate the edge with the maximum value, and successively record the indices of the edges as the schedule. The prediction is not limited to only the next decoding stage, a high-order prediction is introduced to observe ahead for several stages, and the resultant schedules can be further refined. The simulation results show that the decoding schedules arranged using the M2I2-based algorithm can outperform the LBP schedule, and reduced the number of iterations by over 60% compared to the conventional flooding schedule. However, the M2I2based algorithm indicates the edge associated to the maximum increment by brute-force search, i.e., all the edges in the code graph are considered. When the high-order prediction is introduced, each edge becomes the root of the tree whose branches are connecting to all the edges of the next decoding stage. Consequently, the computation complexity increases exponentially.
In this paper, the listed-M2I2 (LM2I2)-based algorithm is proposed by referring to the concept of list decoding [11]. Instead of expending the searching trees for all the edges, only few of them with the maximum increase in the current stage can be selected in the list and initiate the high-order predictions. Consequently, for each stage, the complexity of the schedule arrangement is determined according to the size of the list, instead of the edges in the protograph. Our experiments show that, with the same prediction order, only negligible performance loss is introduced when a small list is adopted. On the other hand, considering the same computational resource, a higher prediction order can be adopted by the the proposed LM2I2-based algorithm, and the decoding schedules which provides a faster convergence can be arranged comparing to the original M2I2-based algorithm.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly reviews the protograph-based LDPC codes and the M2I2-based algorithm. The proposed LM2I2-based algorithm is presented in Sections III. Sections IV shows the comparison

978-1-4673-7218-3/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE

ICICS 2015

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:08:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. The Tanner graph for the LDPC code constructed according to the base matrix B in (1).

between the original M2I2-based and the proposed LM2I2based algorithms. Finally, Section V concludes this work.

II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Protograph-based LDPC codes
Protograph-based LDPC codes [7] are preferred for practical implementations because they can be presented by much simpler base matrices and the corresponding protographs, instead of the parity-check matrices and code graphs. A protograph contains the “type” of the variable nodes, the check nodes, and the connective edges. The element bi,j at the ith row and the j-th column of an Mp-by-Np base matrix B denotes the number of type-(i, j) edges between the type-i check node and the type-j variable node in a protograph. A binary LDPC code consisting of N variable nodes and M check nodes can be constructed by “lifting” the protograph z times, where z is the lifting factor, and N = Np · z, and M = Mp · z. The type-(i, j) edge in the protograph with a non-zero bi,j expands to a z-by-z sub-matrix hi,j, whose row weight and column weight are equal to bi,j, and each of the zero elements in the base matrix expands to a z-by-z all-zero matrix. Then, the connections of the same type of nodes in the different copies of the protograph permutated.
An example of the base matrix B for Mp = 3 and Np = 4 is shown in (1). Each connection bi,j is corresponding to a z-by-z sub-matrix hi,j. If all hi,j are constructed using the circulant shift of the a z-by-z identity matrix Iz×z, then a QC-LDPC code, which is the special case of protograph-based LDPC codes, H is consructed. In the case of z = 3, the code graph corresponding to H is shown in Fig. 1.

⎡

⎤⎡

⎤

1110

h1,1 h1,2 h1,3 0z×z

B=⎣ 1 1 1 1 ⎦ , H=⎣ h2,1 h2,2 h2,3 h2,4 ⎦ .

0101

0z×z h3,2 0z×z h3,4

(1)

B. Decoding schedule arrangement using the M 2I2-based algorithm

The M 2I2-based algorithm can be applied to the protograph codes and be used to arrange a protograph-based edge-wise schedule, where the messages updated in each decoding stage can be indicated by the index of the corresponding protograph edge. The schedule is described using a sequence S, whose elements contain the indices of the protograph edges. As the decoding process progresses, the decoding messages are updated following the order of sequence S.
The M 2I2-based algorithm is designed to arranged the schedule according to the increase in the C2V mutual information, i.e., the mutual information provided by the C2V messages. The C2V mutual information of the type-(i, j) edges is denoted as IE,C (i, j), and the increase can be defined as:

r(i, j) = IEp ,C (i, j) − IE,C (i, j).

(2)

Here IEp ,C (i, j) denote the predicted C2V mutual information for the next decoding stage The pre-computations and the
increase will be evaluated for all protograph edges, and the
protograph edge with the maximum increase can be identified
among them:

r(i∗,j∗)≡max {r(i, j)|i=1,· · ·, Mp, j =1,· · ·, Np, bij =0} . (3)
Index (i∗, j∗) will then be stored in S, and the process of (2) and (3) are repeated to find the next element, i.e., the indicator for the next decoding stage. The arrangement process will progress until the value of the cumulative mutual information ICMI (j) for each variable node converges to one. The detail computations for the value of IE,C (i, j), IEp ,C (i, j) and ICMI (j) are presented in [8], [9] and [10].
Since the updated messages in the current decoding stage will affect all successive stages, rather than only the immediately subsequent one. Therefore, the high-order prediction has been introduced in the M 2I2-based algorithm. When the prediction order is set as P , then the mutual information provided by the messages produced during P successive decoding stages are predicted in order to determine each element of sequence S.
Take the base matrix B in (1) as an example. When an order-2 M2I2-based algorithm has been applied, as shown in Fig. 2 branches corresponding to all the edges of the next (Depth-2) decoding stage have expended from each edge of the current (Depth-1) one. The the maximum value of the depth-2 increment of the branch expended from the type-(i, j) edge is denoted as Δ(i, j). After collecting Δ(i, j) for all (i, j), the order-2 increment can be evaluated as:

rΔ(i, j) = IEp ,C (i, j) − IE,C (i, j) + Δ(i, j) = r(i, j) + Δ(i, j), (4)
which is the combination of the order-1 increment and the maximum depth-2 increment. A higher order increment can be recursively generated in the form of this order-2 increment,
which is presented in detail in Algorithm 2 of [10].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:08:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. Applying the order-2 M2I2-based algorithm to the protograph corresponding to the base matrix B generated in (1).
With the assistance of the high-order prediction, the sequence S can be more precisely determined for an even faster convergence.
III. THE PROPOSED LM 2I2 SCHEDULING
It can be observed that, in order to complete the arrangement of the schedule using the order-P M2I2-based algorithm, a depth-P tree search should be performed. Since for each decoding stage, the number of the branches on each node is equal to the size of the protograph EB, the complexity of the predictions and comparisons is O(EBP ). Then the M2I2-based algorithm with high-order prediction can be unattractive due to the exponentially increasing complexity.
In order to reduce the computation retirement of each decoding stage, the concept of list decoding [11] can be introduced. For the search tree, the branches on each node can be considered as the candidates of a list, then for the original M2I2-based algorithm, the size of the list can be considered to be the number of edges in the protograph, i.e., EB. The major difference between the proposed LM2I2-based algorithm and the M2I2-based algorithm is that only EL edges are remaining in the list, the complexity of the predictions for the order-P increment can be reduced from O(EBP ) to O((EL)P ).
For the order-P LM2I2-based algorithm, the size of the lists of all the decoding stages are fixed to EL. For each decoding stage, the EL edges with maximum increment in C2V mutual information are selected from all the EB edges as the candidates in the list. The detail process of the proposed LM2I2-based algorithm is presented as Algorithm 1. It is worth noting that, when EL = EB, the operations of the LM2I2-based algorithm is identical to the original M2I2-based algorithm, then the M2I2-based algorithm can be regarded as a special case of the LM2I2-based algorithm.
For the base matrix B in (1), Fig. 3 shows the example of that the proposed LM2I2-based algorithm has been applied to the base matrix B in (1), where EL = 3 and P = 2. The list size is 3, and supposed that r(2, 1), r(2, 3) and r(3, 4) are the three maximum increments in the C2V mutual information of

Algorithm 1 Proposed LM2I2-based schedule arrangement

Initialization:

Set the size of the list equals EL Set the the prediction order equals P .

1: for(i = 1, · · · , Mp, j = 1, · · · , Np, and bi,j = 0)

2: 3:

Generate Generate

IrE(pi,,Cj()i,=j)I.Ep ,C (i,

j)

−

IE,C (i, j).

4: for the EL edges with the maximum r(i, j):

5: Recursively evaluate rΔ(i, j) using (4);

6: end for

7: end for 8: Determine (i∗, j∗) based on (3), S(s) = (i∗, j∗). 9: IE,C (i∗, j∗) = IEp ,C (i∗, j∗). 10: Evaluate ICMI (j) for all j = 1, · · · , Np. 11: if ICMI (j) == 1 for all j = 1, · · · , Np
12: Terminate.

13: else

14: Increase s by 1, position = 1.

15: end if

Fig. 3. The search tree for EL = 3
the first decoding stage. Then only three branches expand in the second decoding stage. Comparing to the case shown in Fig. 2, where the original M2I2-based algorithm was applied, the required number of predictions has been obviously reduced.
The benefit obtained from the additional parameter EL is not limited to reduced the complexity. When the available computational resource is limited, or the same amount of complexity is allowed, the prediction order can be increased when a small list size determines the complexity of each decoding stage. Then, with large P and small EL the proposed LM2I2based algorithm can be used to arrange a protograph-based edge-wise schedule that provide faster decoding convergence than using the M2I2-based algorithm
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In order to evaluate the influence of the list size on the decoding performance, distinct schedules were arranged using the LM2I2-based algorithm based on different EL values. When the LM2I2-based algorithm is applied to the protograph of the length-8640 G.hn code [13], where the number of the edges is EB = 76. the trajectories of the ICMI values

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:08:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 4. The convergence behavior of the average ICMI when the LM2I2based algorithm using different list sizes of EL are adopted. (rate-0.5 G.hn code, P = 4, EB = 76, additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, Eb/N0 = 0.85 dB)

Fig. 6. The convergence behavior of the average ICMI when the LM2I2based algorithm using different list sizes of EL and different prediction order of P are adopted. (rate-0.5 Margulis code, EB = 720, AWGN channel, Eb/N0 = 1.12 dB)

Fig. 5. The convergence behavior for the FER and BER performance when schedules arranged using different list sizes of EL. (rate-0.5 G.hn code, P = 4, EB = 76, AWGN channel, Eb/N0 = 1.40 dB)
evaluated using these schedules are shown in Fig. 4. It can be observed that with a small list size, such as EL = 3 or EL = 5, the convergence speed for the ICMI values slows down significantly. As the size of the list increases, e.g., when EL > 10, the convergence speed for the ICMI values is close to that obtained using the full-size list, i.e., using the original M2I2-based algorithm. The schedule arranged using EL = 40 can provide a performance which is the same as that arranged using EL = 76, however, reduce the required number of predictions to 1/10.
The FER (and BER) results versus the number of iterations are shown in Fig. 5, where the decoding process follows a schedule using different EL values. A trend similar to that presented using the ICMI values can be observed in Fig. 5, where the error-rate performance of the LBP schedule is also appended. It is worth noting that a much faster convergence can be achieved, even the decoding schedules are arranged using the low-cost LM2I2-based algorithm.

The example provided in Figs. 4 and 5 demonstrates that, considering about 1/10 of the computation complexity, a decoding schedule can be arranged using the proposed LM2I2based algorithm that has the same performance as that arranged using the original M2I2-based algorithm. Consequently, if the same computation complexity is adopted in the LM2I2based algorithm, a much higher prediction order is allowed to
enhanced the performance of the resultant schedules.
For the (2640, 1320) Margulis code [14], the number of the edges on its protograph is EB = 720. If the decoding schedule is arranged using the original M2I2-based algorithm, only a small prediction order P can be adopted, due to the high computational complexity. In contrast, a small list size EL can be selected when the proposed LM2I2-based algorithm takes over, and a higher prediction order is possibly adopted.
When different combinations of the list size EL and the prediction order P are adopted, Fig. 6 shows the average ICMI convergence behavior for the schedules arranged using the LM2I2-based algorithm. Consider the schedule arranged using all edges, i.e., EL = 720,with a prediction order P = 2, a total branch number of 7202 = 518400 is expanded as the candidates for determining the indicator of each decoding stage. If the prediction order is increased to P = 3 and the list size is reduced to EL = 90, a faster convergence and be achieved, but the total number of candidates is also increased to 903 = 729000. The decoding convergence can be further accelerated when the combination of P = 4 and EL = 25 is adopted, along with a reduction in the number of candidates as 254 = 390625. However, the convergence cannot be guaranteed to further speed up as the prediction order increased. For the combination of P = 5 and EL = 15, the convergence speed is even slower than that of the combination of P = 3 and EL = 90.
Fig. 7 shows the FER (and BER) performances versus the number of iterations, which corresponds to the ICMI

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:08:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 7. The convergence behavior for the FER and BER performance when schedules arranged using different list sizes and prediction orders. (rate-0.5 Margulis code, AWGN channel, Eb/N0 = 2.1 dB)
convergence behavior shown in Fig. 6. Again, a trend similar to that presented using the ICMI values can be observed. For all the combination of P and EL values, the resultant decoding schedules can achieve a much faster convergence speed comparing to that of the LBP schedule.
The examples considering the G.hn standard code and the Margulis code show that, with a proper list size of EL, the LM2I2-based algorithm can be used to arrange a schedule which provides almost the same decoding performance as that provided by the schedule arranged using the original M2I2based algorithm, and the computation complexity can be significantly reduced. On the other hand, when the computational resource is limited, a faster convergence decoding can be achieved using the schedule which is arranged through the proposed LM2I2-based algorithm with a proper combination of P and EL values.
V. CONCLUSION
Combining the concepts of the list decoding and the M2I2based algorithm, a LM2I2-based algorithm is presented in this paper. According to a predetermined size of the list, the maximum few candidates of updates in each decoding stage is selected, and the decoding schedules can be arranged with almost the same performance but a much lower complexity, when compared to the conventional LBP schedule. On the other hand, with the same computational resource, the resultant schedule of the proposed LM2I2-based algorithm can provide a faster decoding convergence than that arranged using the original M2I2-based algorithm. Consequently, a efficient trade-off between the resultant schedule performance and computational complexity is provided in this paper.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan under grants MOST 104-2218-E-033003-MY2 and MOST 103-2221-E-007-025-MY3.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” M.I.T. Press, 1963. [2] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic´, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput
low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBCOM), San Antonio, TX, pp. 3019-3024, Nov. 2001. [3] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol 11, pp. 976-996, Dec. 2003. [4] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209-213, Feb. 2005. [5] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial message-passing scheduleds for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4076-4091, Nov. 2007. [6] E. Sharon, N. Presman, and S. Litsyn, “Convergence analysis of generalized serial message-passing schedules,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communication, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1013-1024, Aug. 2009. [7] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” JPL INP, Tech. Rep., Aug. 2003, 42-154. [8] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 52, pp. 670-678, Apr. 2004. [9] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” Proc. 2007 IEEE GlobeCom Conf., pp. 3250-3254, Nov. 2007. [10] H.-C. Lee and Y.-L. Ueng, “LDPC decoding scheduling for faster convergence and lower error floor,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3104-3113, Sept. 2014. [11] V. Guruswami, “List decoding of error-correcting codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2001. [12] IEEE 802.16e WiMAX standard, IEEE P802.16e-2005, Oct. 2005. [13] ITU-TG.hn Standard forWiredHome Networking, [Online].Available: http://www.homegridforum.org/home/ . [14] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cyclesand low-density codes,” Combinatorica 2, vol. 1, pp. 71-78, 1982.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:08:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

