A Novel Fast LDPC Decoder Using APP-based Dynamic Scheduling Scheme
Tian Xia, Hsiao-Chun Wu, Fellow, IEEE, and Scott C.-H. Huang, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are favorable in modern telecommunication technologies due to its superior error-correction capability especially when the codeword length is large. The commonly-used LDPC decoders are based on the belief-propagation (BP) algorithms. It is well known that the layered (serial) belief-propagation (LBP) decoding algorithms can reduce the number of iterations by half in comparison with the flooding (parallel) BP decoding algorithms. Further reduction in total number of iterations can be achieved by using the informed dynamic scheduling techniques, such as residual BP (RBP) and node-wise residual BP (NWRBP) methods. However, the incurred additional computation of residuals is far from trivial. In this paper, we propose a novel efficient dynamic scheduling scheme, called a posteriori probability RBP (APPRBP) algorithm, which offers more flexibility to leverage the performance-complexity trade-off using a threshold parameter. The simulation results demonstrate that the average iteration numbers for our proposed APPRBP algorithm can be remarkably reduced especially in the low Eb/N0 (signal-energy-per-information-bit to noise-powerspectral-density ratio) conditions while the bit-error rate (BER) performance is subject to slight degradation.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, beliefpropagation (BP) decoding, serial scheduling, informed dynamic scheduling.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are one kind of modern graph codes and exhibit excellent error-correction capabilities [1], [2]. The LDPC decoding procedure is usually carried out using the low-complexity belief-propagation (BP) algorithms [3]. In practice, an LDPC code is of finite length and the Tanner graph representation of its paritycheck matrix (PCM) inevitably has cycles [4]. As a result, the BP algorithms for LDPC decoding are iterative processes. The conventional BP decoding is undertaken in a “flooding” (parallel) fashion [3]. That is, in one iteration, all variable (check) nodes are updated in parallel, and subsequently all check (variable) nodes are then updated in parallel [3]. On the contrary, serial BP decoding schemes can be carried out by sequentially updating the variable nodes [5] or the check nodes [6]. The serial BP decoding approach in which the check (variable) nodes are updated in a fixed order is also called layered BP (LBP) decoding [7]. The updating order of the nodes is often referred to as “scheduling” in LDPC decoders. Since the scheduling techniques in LDPC decoders greatly influence the bit-error-rate (BER) performance and the total
Tian Xia and Hsiao-Chun Wu are with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA (e-mail: txia5@lsu.edu; wu@ece.lsu.edu).
Scott C.-H. Huang is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan (e-mail: chhuang@ee.nthu.edu.tw).

number of iterations (computational complexity), we would like to focus on the scheduling problem in this paper.
The advantage of the serial scheduling approach is that the updated extrinsic information of any node can take immediate effect for other nodes’ updates later on within the same iteration. Compared to the flooding BP (FBP) scheduling approach, it is demonstrated by analysis and simulation that fixed-order serial (LBP) scheduling schemes can reduce the required number of iterations by half and thus converge twice faster [7], [8]. To make a fair comparison among different scheduling schemes, we need to define the terminologies of “iterations” and “sub-iterations”. For FBP decoding, one iteration consists of updating all variable and check nodes once, and there is no sub-iteration. For check-node (variable-node) based serial scheduling algorithms, one iteration is counted when the number of check-node (variable-node) updates is equal to the total number of check (variable) nodes, and each check-node (variable-node) update is called a sub-iteration. Note that in serial scheduling schemes, there is no restriction that every check (variable) node needs to be updated exactly once in each iteration. Some check (variable) nodes may be updated as many times as possible while some other check (variable) nodes may not have opportunities to be updated.
An example for illustrating the importance of scheduling is given by Figure 1, which is duplicated from [4]. Circles and squares represent variable and check nodes, respectively. It can be seen that three erasures (labeled as “?” in the figure) are recovered correctly by the FBP decoding method using three iterations. The order of the erasures being corrected by the FBP decoding algorithm (see Figure 1 (a) to (d)) actually implies how the sequential order for the serial scheduling should be. That is, first, we update the bottom check node (shown as Iteration 1), then update the top check node (shown as Iteration 2), and finally update the middle check node (Shown as Iteration 3). Therefore, if the LBP scheduling scheme is used instead, only one iteration is needed to correct these three erasures depicted in Figure 1.
The optimal serial schedule becomes difficult to obtain when we consider LDPC codes with codeword lengths in magnitude of thousands and channels other than binary erasure channel, such as additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels, are present. The number of possible serial schedules exponentially increases with respect to either the number of check (variable) nodes or the number of “edges” (the non-zero entries in the corresponding PCM). To the best of our knowledge, hardly exists any study on addressing the optimal serial schedules so far. As a matter of fact, it is still an open question whether such optimal serial schedules are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o7w9n9lo-a5d9e5d2o-n5/J1u5ne/$2341,2.00026©a2t 1061:510I:E23EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

variable nodes to check nodes

̂y 00 ?? 00 11 ?? ?? 00

(a) Iteration 0

variable nodes to check nodes

̂y 00 ?? 00 11 ?? 1? 00

(b) Iteration 1

variable nodes to check nodes

̂y 00 ?? 00 11 1? 1? 00

(c) Iteration 2

variable nodes to check nodes

̂y 00 1? 00 11 1? 1? 00

(d) Iteration 3

Fig. 1. The illustration of the flooding BP decoding to correct erasures using three iterations [4]. The channel is binary erasure channel (BEC). The received signal is denoted by y, and the estimated codeword is denoted by cˆ. The solid line represents messages of 0 or 1, and the dashed line represents the messages of erasure after each iteration.

available or not. Alternatively, informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) algorithms were proposed in the existing literature [9], [10], which were basically greedy algorithms and were thus optimal only for the one-step updates. In this paper, we would like to propose a new IDS algorithm to have more flexibility of maneuvering the performance-complexity trade-off.
In the rest of this paper, we first survey several existing state-of-the-art serial scheduling algorithms in Section II and introduce a variable-node-wise RBP (VNWRBP) scheduling algorithm. In Section III, we propose a novel efficient IDS algorithm, called a posteriori probability (APP) based residual BP (APPRBP) method. The simulation results are exhibited in Section IV to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed new APPRBP scheduling algorithm. Concluding remarks are finally drawn in Section V.
Nomenclature: A (column) vector is denoted by a boldface lower-case symbol such as g while a matrix is denoted by a bold-face upper-case symbol such as G.
II. EXISTING SERIAL SCHEDULING ALGORITHMS
Serial scheduling algorithms for LDPC decoders ensued in early 2000s soon after the renaissance of LDPC codes [6], [11]. In [5], a serial BP decoding scheme was proposed to update the variable nodes sequentially. In [6], [7], it was suggested to serially update the check nodes. Throughout this paper, we choose the LBP scheduling algorithm in [7] as a typical example for these fixed-order serial scheduling algorithms.

Check-node based IDS algorithms, namely residual BP (RBP) and node-wise RBP (NWRBP) scheduling algorithms, were proposed in [9], [10] in which the updating order of check nodes was determined by the maximum residual. Note that the terminology “residual” may have different definitions in different scheduling algorithms. For example, the residual in [9], [10] is defined by “the absolute difference between the check-to-variable messages before and after the update”. Consequently, the order to update check nodes varies for each iteration in the IDS algorithms. The simulation results in [9], [10] have shown that the NWRBP scheduling algorithm not only converges faster than the LBP scheduling algorithm but also provides superior BER performance compared to the FBP scheduling algorithm. The reduction in the number of iterations arises from the “greedy” nature of the NWRBP scheduling algorithm by updating the check node having the maximum residual. The BER performance improvement is due to the fact that the NWRBP scheduling algorithm has the capability of overcoming the trapping sets when it serially updates the check nodes [10].
Several other IDS algorithms were later proposed. In [12], a normalized residual was defined and used to establish an efficient dynamic schedule for layered LBP decoding of LDPC codes; the check nodes connecting to a variable node with maximum relative message residual were chosen to be updated [12]. In [13], an IDS method called informed variableto-check RBP (IVCRBP) scheduling scheme was proposed; it utilized not only the instability (the hard decisions before and after one update are different) of the variable nodes but also the residual of the variable-to-check message to locate the message to be updated first. In [14], a new dynamic node-to-be-updated selection strategy was proposed where the unsatisfied syndrome checks were inspected. An oscillation processing method was also proposed in [14] to suppress the oscillating behaviors (instability behaviors) of variable nodes.
One common feature of the aforementioned IDS algorithms is that after each sub-iteration, a stopping criterion will be checked. Note that the conventional stopping criterion, namely the syndrome check (see [3]), is computationally cumbersome especially when it needs to be frequently undertaken for IDS algorithms.
To facilitate the illustration of our proposed new scheduling algorithm in Section III, here we present the variable-nodewise RBP (VNWRBP) scheduling algorithm (as the baseline of our work) which is the counterpart of the NWRBP scheduling algorithm stated in [10]. Denote the “messages” (extrinsic information values in log-likelihood ratio) from the jth variable node to the ith check node before and after the update by αi,j and α′i,j, respectively. Then the variable-to-check residual ri,j for each edge (i, j) can be expressed by

ri,j =def α′i,j − αi,j .

(1)

Consequently, each variable node j can be assigned a metric rj∗ which is the maximum residual of ri,j among all check nodes i which are connected to the variable node j. Denote
the set of the neighboring check nodes of a variable node j

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:10:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Input: The initial LLR values µj, ∀j and the corresponding PCM H

Output: The estimated codeword cˆ

1: Initialize αi,j = µj, βi,j = 0, and ri,j = |µj|, for all i, j 2: for k = 1 to n do 3: Find j∗ according to Eqs. (2) and (3)

4: for every check node i ∈ Cj∗ do

5:

Generate and propagate αi,j∗ (see [10] for details)

6:

Reset rj∗∗ = 0

7:

for every variable node j ∈ Vi\j∗ do

8:

Generate and propagate βi,j (see [10] for de-

tails)

9:

Update ri,j according to Eq. (1)

10: Generate cˆ according to the APP-based hard-decision

(see [3] for details) and then check the stopping criterion

given by [3]

11: if the stopping criterion is not satisfied then

12: Go back to Line 2

13: else

14: return cˆ

Fig. 2. The VNWRBP scheduling algorithm.

additional computational complexities cannot be neglected,

which arise from the calculation of the residuals and the

often checking operations on the stopping criterion. Since the

check-node processing is more complex than the variable-node

processing in the LDPC iterative decoding algorithms [3], the

check-node based RBP scheduling algorithms usually involve

higher computational complexity than the variable-node based

RBP scheduling algorithms.

To address the aforementioned drawbacks inherent in the

existing IDS algorithms, in this section, we devise a novel

efficient variable-node based IDS algorithm called the “a pos-

teriori probability RBP (APPRBP) scheduling algorithm”. A

threshold parameter δ is introduced in the APPRBP scheduling

algorithm to determine if a variable node needs to be updated

or can remain as it is. The BER performance and the number of

iterations (complexity) of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm

can thus be maneuvered by adjusting δ.

Denote the LLR of APP for the variable node j before and after the update by ρj and ρ′j, respectively. The APP residual for the variable node j, denoted by ξj, can thus be expressed

by

ξj =def ρ′j − ρj .

(4)

by Cj. The metric rj∗ can thus be expressed by

rj∗

=

max
i∈Cj

{} ri,j .

(2)

A variable node j∗ will be selected for update if

j∗ = arg max {rj∗}, j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n},

(3)

j

where n is the total number of variable nodes, i.e., the codeword length. According to Eqs. (2) and (3), the variable node will be updated if it has the maximum of the residuals ri,j’s among all (i, j) pairs.
Denote the initial log-likelihood ratio (LLR) for the variable node j by µj, the corresponding PCM by H with dimension m × n, and the message (extrinsic information in LLR) from the ith check node to the jth variable node by βi,j. Denote Vi the set of the neighboring variable nodes of the ith check node, and Vi\j excludes the jth variable node from Vi. The pseudocode of the VNWRBP scheduling algorithm can then be illustrated in Figure 2.
Note that the stopping criterion is checked after updating variable nodes n times in the VNWRBP scheduling algorithm. Thus, if both VNWRBP and FBP scheduling algorithms are executed for the same number of iterations, they require the same number of operations on syndrome checks. However, the existing IDS algorithms may require around m times (checknode based) or n times (variable-node based) more operations on syndrome checks than VNWRBP and FBP scheduling algorithms.

III. OUR PROPOSED NEW APPRBP SCHEDULING ALGORITHM
Although the IDS algorithms, for instance, the NWRBP scheduling algorithm, can further reduce the number of iterations compared to that of the LBP scheduling algorithm, their

The pseudocode of our proposed APPRBP scheduling algorithm is illustrated in Figure 3. The threshold parameter δ is included as one input. The number of iterations executed by the APPRBP scheduling algorithm is recorded as the output Nused. In Line 1, a counter C is initialized to 0, which is used to record the number of variable-node updates. In Line 2, reset a queue Q to be empty. In Line 4, the APP residuals ξj are duplicated to ηj, ∀j so that the following manipulations on ηj will not change ξj. In Line 5, ηj is reset to 0 for the variable nodes whose indices j are in the queue Q. By doing this, it can avoid the possibility that some variable nodes are updated more often than others. In Line 6, the variable node j∗ is chosen to be updated, which has the maximum of ηj among all variable nodes. In Line 7, the threshold δ is compared with the current maximum APP residual ηj∗ . If ηj∗ < δ, then the forloop indexed by k will break as shown by Line 8. The intuition behind this threshold-controlled termination is as follows. As the index k of the for-loop increments, ηj∗ becomes smaller and smaller due to the confinement of the queue Q in Line 5. Thus, at some point, ηj∗ is very small so that there is no significant change even after the update of variable node j∗. Hence, no further increment in k is required and the for-loop terminates thereby.
On the other hand, if ξj∗ > δ, we place the index j∗ into the queue Q as stated by Line 9. Lines 10 to 13 are the same as Lines 4, 5, 7, and 8 of the VNWRBP scheduling algorithm described in Figure 2. In Line 14, ξj is updated according to Eq. (4).
After the k-for-loop finishes (it runs through k = n or terminates for some k = k0 at Line 8), in Line 15, the counter C will be incremented by k, which indicates the number of variable-node updates. In Line 16, the hard decision on the LLR of APP will be performed to generate the estimated codeword cˆ and then a stopping criterion is checked if cˆ is a legitimate (hopefully correct) codeword [3]. If the stopping

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:10:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Input: The initial LLR values µj, ∀j, the corresponding PCM H, and the threshold parameter δ

Output: The estimated codeword cˆ, and the number of iter-

ations executed Nused 1: Initialize αi,j = µj, βi,j = 0, ξj = |µj|, for all i, j, and
a counter C = 0

2: Reset an empty queue Q

3: for k = 1 to n do

4: Duplicate ξj to ηj, for j = 1, 2, . . . , n

5: Set ηj = 0, for j ∈ Q

6: Find j∗ = arg max {ηj}, j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}
j

7: if ηj∗ < δ then

8:

break

9: Append j∗ into Q

10: for every check node i ∈ Cj∗ do

11:

Generate and propagate αi,j∗ (see [10] for details)

12:

for every variable node j ∈ Vi\j∗ do

13:

Generate and propagate βi,j (see [10] for de-

tails)

14:

Update ξj according to Eq. (4)

15: Increment the counter by C = C + k

16: Generate cˆ using the APP-based hard-decision and then

check the stopping criterion according to [3]

17: if the stopping criterion is not satisfied then

18: Go back to Line 2

19: else

20: return cˆ and Nused = C/n

Fig. 3. The APPRBP scheduling algorithm.

criterion is not satisfied, the APPRBP scheduling algorithm will go back to Line 2 where the queue Q will be reset to empty again. Otherwise, the estimated codeword cˆ and the number of iterations Nused = C/n will be returned as outputs in Line 20. Note that the number of variable-node updates C is normalized by the total number of variable nodes n to obtain Nused according to the definition of iteration stated in Section I.
The key merits of our proposed new APPRBP scheduling algorithm can be summarized as follows. The APP residual is calculated for each variable node rather than each edge in our scheme. Thus, the number of residuals is greatly reduced and the computational complexity for finding the maximum residual is reduced thereby. The calculation of the APP residual ξj is straightforward, which is the absolute difference between the messages from the check node i to the variable node j before and after the update, i.e., βi,j − β′i,j . This calculation is valid for there is no cycle of length 4 in the corresponding Tanner graph of the PCM H, which is usually the case when an LDPC code is constructed [15].
It can be perceived that the APP residual calculation in the APPRBP scheduling algorithm involves the least computational complexity over all IDS algorithms. The threshold δ can also be adjusted to further reduce the number of iterations and thus speed up the convergence. Note that when the threshold δ is set to 0, the condition stated by Line 7 in the APPRBP

scheduling algorithm will never be true. An appropriate value of δ which leads to remarkable reduction in the number of iterations will be pursued via computer simulations in the next section.
IV. SIMULATION
In this section, computer simulations are carried out to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed APPRBP scheduling algorithm described in Section III. The performances of the conventional FBP scheduling algorithm in [3], the LBP scheduling algorithm in [7], and the NWRBP scheduling algorithm in [10] are also investigated for comparison. Since the VNWRBP scheduling algorithm (variablenode based) is the counterpart of the NWRBP scheduling algorithm (check-node based), these two algorithms lead to almost the same performance according to our simulations. Thus, for clarity of illustration, the performance of the VNWRBP scheduling algorithm is not shown here. The maximum iteration number, denoted by Niter, is set to 50 for all examined scheduling algorithms.
Two LDPC codes defined in the IEEE 802.11 standard (see [16]) with the same codeword length n = 1944 but different code rates R = 1/2 and R = 5/6 are taken as examples here for the simulations. For each LDPC code, ten thousand Monte Carlo experiments are carried out for a particular Eb/N0 value. In each trial, a codeword is constructed from a randomly generated binary sequence of 972 bits for R = 1/2 and 1620 bits for R = 5/6, respectively. An AWGN channel is considered with the focused signal-energy-per-information-bit to noise-power-spectral-density ratios Eb/N0 ranging from 1 to 2 dB for R = 1/2 and 3 to 4 dB for R = 5/6, respectively.
The BERs for the aforementioned methods over different Eb/N0 values are evaluated using the averages over Monte Carlo trials. Figure 4 depicts the BER performances of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm for the LDPC code with n = 1944 and R = 1/2 drawn from [16] using different thresholds δ = 0, 0.1, 0.2. When δ = 0, the BER performance of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm is almost the same as that of the NWRBP scheduling algorithm. When δ = 0.1, the BER performance of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm is very close to that of the LBP scheduling algorithm. When δ = 0.2, the BER performance of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm is a little worse than that of the FBP scheduling algorithm. It is clear that the larger the threshold δ, the worse the BER performance of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm. The reason is that when δ is larger, the condition in Line 7 will be more likely satisfied. As a result, the APPRBP scheduling algorithm would be terminated before converging to the correct codeword.
Figure 5 illustrates the average iteration numbers (AINs) of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm for the LDPC code with n = 1944 and R = 1/2 drawn from [16] using different thresholds δ = 0, 0.1, 0.2. When δ = 0, the AIN curve of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm lies between that of the LBP scheduling algorithm and that of the NWRBP scheduling algorithm. When δ = 0.1, the AIN curve of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm stays below that of the NWRBP scheduling algorithm in the low Eb/N0 region (Eb/N0 < 1.4 dB).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:10:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10−1

30

FBP

LBP

NWRBP

25

10−2

APPRBP, δ = 0 APPRBP, δ = 0.1

APPRBP, δ = 0.2

20

FBP LBP NWRBP APPRBP, δ = 0 APPRBP, δ = 0.1 APPRBP, δ = 0.2

Average Iteration Numbers

BER

10−3

15

10 10−4
5

10−5 1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

0 1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

Eb/N0 (dB)

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 4. The BER performances of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm for the LDPC code with n = 1944 and R = 1/2 drawn from [16] using different thresholds δ. The BER performances of the FBP scheduling algorithm, the LBP scheduling algorithm, and the NWRBP scheduling algorithm are also depicted for comparison.

Fig. 5. The AINs of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm for the LDPC code with n = 1944 and R = 1/2 drawn from [16] using different thresholds δ. The AIN performances of the FBP scheduling algorithm, the LBP scheduling algorithm, and the NWRBP scheduling algorithm are also depicted for comparison.

When δ = 0.2, the AIN of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm further decreases when Eb/N0 < 0.4 dB. On the other hand, when Eb/N0 > 1.4 dB, the AINs of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm using δ = 0.1 and δ = 0.2 are almost the same as that of the NWRBP scheduling algorithm. When Eb/N0 = 1 dB, the APPRBP scheduling algorithm using δ = 0.1 reduces the AIN resulting from the NWRBP scheduling algorithm by almost half. This remarkable AIN-reduction phenomenon is not found in the existing literature addressing IDS algorithms, while the BER performance of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm is almost the same as that of the LBP scheduling algorithm and is very close to that of the NWRBP scheduling algorithm.
Figures 6 and 7 illustrate the BER and AIN performances of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm for the LDPC code with n = 1944 and R = 5/6 drawn from [16] using different thresholds δ = 0, 0.01, 0.05, respectively. Similar to the results in Figures 4 and 5, one can observe that as δ increases, the BER performance of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm degrades while the AIN of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm decreases.
According to Figures 4–7, there appears to be more flexibility using our proposed APPRBP scheduling algorithm for maneuvering the performance-complexity (BER-AIN in our simulations) trade-off by adjusting the threshold δ. The appropriate ranges of δ may be different for LDPC codes with different codeword lengths and/or different code rates.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a new efficient informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) algorithm is proposed for LDPC (low-density paritycheck) decoders, called a posteriori probability residual belief propagation (APPRBP) scheduling algorithm. A threshold parameter is incorporated in our proposed algorithm to maneuver the performance-complexity trade-off. The computational

10−2

FBP

LBP

NWRBP

10−3

APPRBP, δ = 0 APPRBP, δ = 0.01

APPRBP, δ = 0.05

10−4

BER

10−5

10−6

3

3.2

3.4

3.6

3.8

4

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 6. The BER performances of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm for the LDPC code with n = 1944 and R = 5/6 drawn from [16] using different thresholds δ. The BER performances of the FBP scheduling algorithm, the LBP scheduling algorithm, and the NWRBP scheduling algorithm are also depicted for comparison.

burden involved in the residual calculation of the proposed APPRBP scheduling algorithm is smaller than other existing IDS algorithms. The remarkable complexity reduction in terms of the average iteration numbers shown by the simulation results demonstrates that our proposed APPRBP scheduling algorithm is capable of providing excellent flexibility for maneuvering the performance-complexity trade-off compared to other existing scheduling schemes for LDPC decoding.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:10:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

25

FBP

LBP

20

NWRBP APPRBP, δ = 0

APPRBP, δ = 0.01

APPRBP, δ = 0.05

15

Average Iteration Numbers

10

5

0

3

3.2

3.4

3.6

3.8

4

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 7. The AINs of the APPRBP scheduling algorithm for the LDPC code with n = 1944 and R = 5/6 drawn from [16] using different thresholds δ. The AIN performances of the FBP scheduling algorithm, the LBP scheduling algorithm, and the NWRBP scheduling algorithm are also depicted for comparison.

[2] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[3] W. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[5] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[6] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM’01), 2001, pp. 3019– 3024 vol.5.
[7] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SIPS’2004), Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[8] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial message-passing schedules for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4076–4091, Nov. 2007.
[9] A. Vila Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC’07), Jun. 2007, pp. 932–937.
[10] ——, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470–3479, Dec. 2010.
[11] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Conference Record of the Thirty-Sixth Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers 2002, vol. 1, Nov 2002, pp. 8–15 vol.1.
[12] G. Han and X. Liu, “An efficient dynamic schedule for layered beliefpropagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 950–952, Dec. 2009.
[13] Y. Gong, X. Liu, W. Yecai, and G. Han, “Effective informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2683–2691, Oct. 2011.
[14] X. Liu, Y. Zhang, and R. Cui, “Variable-node-based dynamic scheduling strategy for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 147–150, Feb. 2015.
[15] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[16] Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, IEEE Std. 802.11n-2012, 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:10:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

