2074

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Approximated Box-Plus Decoding of LDPC Codes
Stylianos Papaharalabos and Fotis Lazarakis

Abstract—The problem of how to approximate effectively the box-plus operation used in sum-product algorithm (SPA) decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes has been widely investigated over the past years of research. This letter deals, for the first time, with a totally different approach where a very simple, yet efficient, decoding algorithm for LDPC codes is proposed. The tremendous savings, in terms of required number of operations, offered by the proposed algorithm and its near optimal SPA performance are making it appealing in practical applications requiring very low complexity LDPC decoding architectures.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, sum-product algorithm (SPA).
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes are advanced channel coding schemes with remarkable error rate performance in both the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and binary erasure channels [1], [2]. Due to their affordable implementation complexity, they have found nowadays practical applications in certain communication standards, either as mandatory or optional use, ranging, for instance, from wireless terrestrial [e.g., IEEE 802.11n (Wi-Fi), IEEE 802.16e (Wi-MAX), DVB-T2], to satellite (e.g., CCSDS, DVB-S2), and power line (e.g., ITU-T G.9960) systems [3].
It is commonly perceived that LDPC codes can be decoded iteratively by the means of the so-called sum-product algorithm (SPA). This algorithm makes use of the message-passing principle and it is optimal when the bipartite graph of the code does not contain any cycles [4]. The authors in [5] have been among the first to investigate reduced complexity decoding algorithms for LDPC codes. Their research work was extended in [6] and unified later in [7] where the min-sum, normalized min-sum and offset min-sum algorithms were analyzed and compared with each other. A novel low complexity LDPC decoding algorithm, known as look-up sum algorithm, was proposed in [8] by using look-up tables (LUTs) and avoiding operations, such as divisions, exponential and logarithmic. The same authors introduced next the so-called box-minus operation, a complementary to the box-plus operation, and extended the low complexity decoding capabilities of the look-up sum algorithm [9]. Another
Manuscript received May 13, 2015; revised October 15, 2015; accepted October 15, 2015. Date of publication October 26, 2015; date of current version December 8, 2015. This research is part of the ‘SYNAISHISI’ project results. The project is co-financed by the Greek General Secretariat for R&T, Ministry of Culture, Education & RA and the European RDF of the EC under the Operational Program “Competitiveness and Entrepreneurship” (OPCE II), in the action of Development Grants For Research Institutions (KRIPIS). The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was E. Paolini.
The authors are with the Laboratory of Wireless Communications, Institute of Informatics and Telecommunications, National Centre for Scientific Research “Demokritos,” 15310 Athens, Greece (e-mail: spapaha@iit.demokritos.gr; flaz@iit.demokritos.gr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2015.2492965

low complexity algorithm, termed as λ-min, was proposed in [10] showing that only the λ lowest magnitudes of extrinsic information need to be computed in check node update of SPA. In yet another contribution, a low complexity LDPC decoding algorithm was reported in [11] based on the efficient combination of both the box-plus and approximate (a)-min∗ operations. The latter was previously known in [12], as a means of reducing the complexity of SPA by computing only the two least reliable outgoing magnitudes in check node update of SPA.
As it can be analyzed, in all the above mentioned research works the reduction in LDPC decoding complexity results from approximating the box-plus operation, used in check node update of SPA, in various ways. To the best of our knowledge, in this letter, a totally new approach in low complexity LDPC decoding is proposed, for the first time, in the open technical literature. It is simply shown that the box-plus operation can be approximated, in practice, by using as little as two multiplication operations. As a consequence, this has a tremendous effect in LDPC decoding complexity savings by avoiding known operations used in the previous art, such as signum, minimum, absolute, addition, exponential, logarithmic and LUT. At the same time, as it is the case in most of the reduced complexity LDPC decoding algorithms, there exist small degradation, in terms of error rate performance, against the optimal SPA. However, this trade-off between LDPC decoding complexity and code performance is considered to be the best reported in the open technical literature so far, thus making the proposed approximation much attractive in applications requiring very low complexity LDPC decoder architectures.
II. SPA AND ITS KNOWN APPROXIMATIONS
Let us assume a (N, K) binary LDPC code that is described by a sparse parity-check matrix H of size M × N, where M = N − K is the parity-check nodes corresponding to the paritychecks of a bipartite graph and N is the variable nodes corresponding to the encoded bits. Moreover, each variable node is connected to dc parity-check nodes and each parity-check node is connected to dv variable nodes, i.e., a regular LDPC code is considered.
In following, M(n) denotes the set of check nodes connected to variable node n and N(m) denotes the set of variable nodes participating in the m-th parity-check equation, respectively. Additionally, M(n) \ m represents the set M(n), excluding the m-th check node and N(m) \ n represents the set N(m), excluding the n-th variable node, respectively. Moreover, m→n(un) denotes the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of the message that the m-th check node sends to the n-th variable node based on all bits checked by m except n, and similarly λn→m(un) denotes the LLR of the message that the variable node n sends to check node m based on all checks involving n except m.

1558-2558 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licensSeede uhsttep:li/m/witwedwt.oie: eYeo.onrsge/ipUubnlivic. aDtioownnsl_osatdaneddaorndsJ/upnuebl2ic4a,2ti0o2n6s/aritg1h6t:s0/i6n:d46exU.hTtCmlfrofomr mIEoErEe Xinpfloorrme.atRioens.trictions apply.

PAPAHARALABOS AND LAZARAKIS: APPROXIMATED BOX-PLUS DECODING OF LDPC CODES

2075

Let us now assume that after LDPC encoding a codeword u of size N is obtained that is binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulated and transmitted over an AWGN channel. Let y denotes the received noisy symbols to be decoded at the

TABLE I MEAN SQUARE ERROR (MSE) AMONG THE PROPOSED APPROXIMATION, MIN-SUM AND OFFSET MIN-SUM AGAINST THE BOX-PLUS OPERATION
USED IN SPA FOR DIFFERENT THRESHOLD VALUES (TH) OF |x1|, |x2|

receiver. The SPA is composed of three steps: (i) Initialization;

(ii) Iterative process; and (iii) Hard decision. Step (ii) includes

the check node and variable node updates. These updates can

be computed, respectively, from [6], [7]

⎧

⎫

⎨

⎬

m→n(un) = ⎩

sign [λn →m(un )]⎭

n ∈N(m)\n ⎧

⎫

⎨

⎬

·φ⎩

φ [|λn →m(un )|]⎭ (1)

n ∈N(m)\n

where c and TH are predefined constant values. By comparing the corresponding 3-D graphical illustrations of Eqs. (4) and (5) when the latter has, for instance, TH = 3 and c = 0.35, it can be observed that the two functions have the same shape and match well with each other. Nevertheless, there are certain regions

and

where g1(x1, x2) has greater values than g(x1, x2). Thus, when

λn→m(un) = L(un) +

m →n(un)

m ∈M(n)\m

the proposed approximation is applied to LDPC decoding, (2) small performance degradation is expected compared to the
optimal SPA. Furthermore, an error floor may be noticed in

where φ(x) = − log[tanh(x/2)], x > 0. In Eq. (2) L(un) denotes the a posteriori probability of each variable node n after transmission through the channel, i.e., L(un) = 2/σ 2 · yn where σ 2 is the noise variance of the AWGN channel.
In another approach, the check node update can be computed
in pairs of incoming messages in recursive form. It is based on
the fact that for two random variables U and V, with LLR values L(U) and L(V), the following formula exists:

the error rate performance at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) values, due to high LLR values.
Table I depicts the mean square error (MSE) between the proposed approximation, i.e., g1(x1, x2), against the box-plus operation, i.e., g(x1, x2) used in SPA, for different values of TH and optimized corresponding values c. For comparison, the MSE of min-sum and offset min-sum algorithms with the same TH values is depicted. As it can be observed, for low values of TH the proposed approximation has the smallest MSE among re-

m→n(un) = g (xn−1, g (xn−2, . . . , g(x2, x1))) (3) duced complexity algorithms but this increases for higher values of TH, so that both min-sum and offset min-sum algorithms

where xi, i ∈ {1, du − 1} represents the incoming message have, in this case, smaller MSE.

λn →m(un ), n ∈ N(m) \ n and

Note that in practice, good selection of TH value for min-

g(x1, x2) = log

1 + exp(x1 + x2) exp(x1) + exp(x2)

= sign(x1) · sign(x2)

· min (|x1|, |x2|) + log

1 + exp (−|x1 + x2|) 1 + exp (−|x1 − x2|)

.

(4)

sum and offset min-sum algorithms is TH = 10 with negligible LDPC code performance degradation compared to using no TH. Even in this case of TH value, the MSE of min-sum and offset min-sum algorithms against SPA is 0.052 and 0.032, respectively. These values of MSE are still higher or comparable with

The logarithm in the right part of Eq. (4) can be stored in memory by using LUT, which requires both the sum and the difference of x1, x2. The function of Eq. (4) is usually referred to as box-plus operator, i.e., g(x1, x2) L(x1 x2).
In min-sum algorithm the logarithm of Eq. (4) is omitted. In practice, the LLR values in min-sum algorithm are always greater than those from SPA. Two well known approaches to improve the performance of min-sum algorithm are the normalized min-sum and offset min-sum algorithms [6], [7]. Both are based on computing the minimum as in min-sum algorithm, but the former makes use of a constant normalization factor (e.g., sc = 0.8), whereas the latter makes use of a subtraction with a positive constant value β (e.g., β = 0.15).

the MSE obtained with the proposed approximation in Table I, in case of TH = 3 and 4.
The use of TH in Eq. (5) implies that the input values x1, x2 need to be clipped before check node update with g1(x1, x2) takes place, so that the inequality that appears in Eq. (5) always
holds. In practice, the value of TH needs to be not too low
to avoid overflow during iterative decoding process and also not too high since the MSE between g1(x1, x2) and g(x1, x2) is increased. Empirically, good selection of TH, found by preliminary LDPC performance evaluation results, is either TH = 4 or TH = 5 and these values have been used in computer-based simulations shown in the next section.
A simple comparison, in terms of required operations, of the
proposed method against the box-plus operation used in SPA

III. APPROXIMATED BOX-PLUS OPERATION

and its approximations is depicted in Table II. As shown, the savings offered by those algorithms against SPA without LUT

A novel and very simple approximation of the box-plus operator is proposed, which holds especially when |x1|, |x2| have small values. That is, Eq. (4) can be approximated as

are: (i) 50% with offset min-sum; (ii) 61.11% with min-sum; and (iii) 88.88% with the proposed approximation. When SPA is implemented with LUT the required operations are reduced but extra memory storage is needed. Even in this case, the

g1(x1, x2) = c · x1 · x2, |x1|, |x2| < TH

(5) proposed approximation requires only 1/5 of the total SPA

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:06:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2076
TABLE II NUMBER OF REQUIRED OPERATIONS OF THE PROPOSED APPROXIMATION AGAINST THE BOX-PLUS OPERATION
USED IN SPA AND ITS APPROXIMATIONS

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 2. As in Fig. 1 but with (N, K) = (4000, 2000) LDPC code.

Fig. 1. BER/FER performance comparison between the proposed approximation and SPA. (N, K) = (816, 408) LDPC code, BPSK modulation, AWGN channel and maximun 100 iterations.

operations without any LUT. Clearly, the operations savings Fig. 3. As in Fig. 1 but with (N, K) = (8000, 4000) LDPC code. offered by the proposed approximation are far the best reported

in the open technical literature.

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION RESULTS

rate (BER) performances and dashed lines depict frame error rate (FER) performances, respectively. Following [14], to further improve the performance of the proposed approximation,

In all performance evaluation results presented in this section constant scaling is applied in the extrinsic information, i.e.,

LDPC coded bits are BPSK modulated and transmitted with bit energy Eb over an AWGN channel with single-sided power spectral density No. At the receiver side, the decoder assumes that the SNR value is known.
Three randomly constructed regular LDPC codes, obtained from [13], are considered with block sizes (N, K) = (816, 408), (4000, 2000), and (8000, 4000), where K represents the information block size and N represents the coded block size, respectively. The column weight is equal to three and the coding rate is R = 1/2, whereas the decoder assumes maximum 100 ite-

after check node update, which is denoted as sc. In each of
the these figures, three curves are depicted with the proposed approximation: i) No scale, TH = 5; ii) Constant scaling with sc = 0.85 and TH = 5; and iii) Best combination of sc and TH. In the latter case, in the first two figures (Figs. 1 and 2), sc = 0.8 and TH = 4 was used at low to moderate Eb/No values and after that, case ii) was used at high Eb/No values. In the third figure (Fig. 3), sc = 0.8 and TH = 4 was used in the whole region of Eb/No. Note that in the absence of SNR knowledge at the receiver, the decoder can still operate but the values of TH and

rations. To produce reliable simulation results, 50 frame errors sc need to be optimized again.

are counted in the high Eb/No region.

As shown in Figs. 1–3, the proposed approximation has

In Figs. 1–3, the proposed approximation is compared approximately 0.8 dB performance degradation against SPA

against the optimal SPA decoding. Solid lines depict bit error at BER (FER) of about 1E-05 (1E-04). However, constant

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:06:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAPAHARALABOS AND LAZARAKIS: APPROXIMATED BOX-PLUS DECODING OF LDPC CODES

2077

approximation can be increased to three times, so that both algorithms have about the same complexity. Eventually, the proposed approximation outperforms the normalized min-sum algorithm by 0.1 dB at BER of 1E-06 with 150, instead of 50 iterations and its performance is very close to that of SPA, i.e., 0.15 dB degradation at the same BER value.

V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 4. BER performance comparison between the proposed approximation, min-sum, normalized min-sum, and SPA. DVB-S2 LDPC code, R = 1/3, normal frame size (64800 bits), BPSK modulation and AWGN channel.

It was shown that the box-plus operation used in SPA decoding of LDPC codes can be approximated with a very simple method, where only two multiplication operations are required. This is, to the best of our knowledge, the lowest reduced complexity scheme proposed in the open technical literature so far. When constant scaling is applied in the extrinsic information, combined with appropriate selection of TH value, makes the proposed approximation to perform very close to the optimal SPA. This remarkable trade-off between required number of operations and performance foresees the proposed approximation quite appealing in practical LDPC decoding architectures.

scaling improves significantly the error rate performance and

REFERENCES

with this enhancement, the proposed approximation is less than 0.1 dB inferior to SPA at about the same BER (FER) value. Furthermore, the best combination of scaling and TH improves further the code performance, especially at low to moderate Eb/No values. Thus, near optimal SPA performance is essentially obtained.
Note that in [15] the normalized belief propagation (BP) algorithm was proposed that makes use of constant scaling, e.g., sc = 0.95, from variable nodes to check nodes messages. Hence, the performance of the SPA can be improved at high Eb/No values, e.g., by 0.1 dB at BER of 1E-05, in case of LDPC codes with short block lengths and cycles on graphs. However, in the simulated code of Fig. 1 the performance with this algorithm is not depicted.
Although not shown in the performance results of Figs. 1–3, the normalized min-sum and offset min-sum algorithms were also evaluated. The proposed approximation with the best selection of TH value and scaling factor: (i) Performs similarly or even outperforms both of them for (N, K) = (4000, 2000), and (8000, 4000) block sizes, and (ii) It is inferior to both of them for (N, K) = (816, 408) block size and the high Eb/No region, since the performance of this code can be further improved, as noted above.
Furthermore, let us consider a practical LDPC code that is used in DVB-S2 system. Performance evaluation results with this code having R = 1/3, normal frame size option of 64800 coded bits, and different decoding algorithms are depicted in Fig. 4. The scaling factor in normalized min-sum was equal to sc = 0.9, whereas the proposed approximation assumes TH = 5 and sc = 0.95. As shown in Fig. 4, the proposed approximation is 0.15 dB inferior to the normalized min-sum algorithm and the same number of (i.e., 50) iterations. However, as it requires roughly less than 1/3 of the operations needed by the normalized min-sum algorithm (see Table II and the min-sum algorithm comparison, where the effect of scaling operation is not taken into account), the number of iterations in the proposed

[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] E. Paolini, M. F. Flanagan, D. Declercq, M. Fossorier, and E. Biglieri, “Channel coding: Theory, algorithms, and applications,” in Academic Press Library in Mobile and Wireless Communications, ser. LDPC Code Constructions. Waltham, MA, USA: Academic, 2014.
[4] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[5] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[6] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D.-M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, San Antonio, TX, USA, Nov. 2001, pp. 1036–1036E.
[7] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reducedcomplexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[8] T. Clevorn and P. Vary, “Low-complexity belief propagation by approximations with lookup-tables,” in Proc. 5th Int. ITG Conf. SCC, Erlangen, Germany, Jan. 14–16, 2004, pp. 211–216.
[9] T. Clevorn and P. Vary, “The box-minus operator and its application to low-complexity belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. IEEE 61st VTC—Spring, Stockholm, Sweden, May 30–Jun. 1, 2005, vol. 1, pp. 687–691.
[10] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, and J. L. Danger, “λ-min decoding algorithm of regular and irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Rel. Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 451–454.
[11] M. Viens and W. E. Ryan, “A reduced-complexity box-plus decoder for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Rel. Topics, Lausanne, Switzerland, Sep. 1–5, 2008, pp. 151–156.
[12] C. Jones, E. Vallés, M. Smith, and J. Villasenor, “Approximate-min constraint node updating for LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. IEEE MILCOM, Boston, MA, USA, Oct. 13–16, 2003, pp. 157–162.
[13] D. J. C. MacKay, “Online database of low-density parity-check codes.” [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/ data.html
[14] J. Vogt and A. Finger, “Improving the max-log-MAP turbo decoder,” Electron. Lett., vol. 36, no. 23, pp. 1937–1939, Nov. 2000.
[15] M. R. Yazdani, S. Hemati, and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improving belief propagation on graphs with cycles,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 57–59, Jan. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:06:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

