4276

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

[7] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson, Matrix Analysis. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1985.
[8] Y. Jiang, X. Zheng, and J. Li, “Asymptotic performance analysis of V-BLAST,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., GLOBECOM, 2005.
[9] H. Zhang, H. Dai, and B. L. Hughes, “On the diversity-multiplexing tradeoff for ordered SIC receivers over MIMO channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., ICC, 2006.
[10] Y. Jiang, M. K. Varanasi, X. Zheng, and J. Li, “Performance analysis of V-BLAST at high SNR regime,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., submitted for publication.
[11] A. Tulino and S. Verdú, “Random matrix theory and wireless communications,” Found. Trends in Commun. Inf. Theory, vol. 1, no. 1, June 2004.
[12] E. Sengul, E. Akay, and E. Ayanoglu, “Diversity analysis of single and multiple beamforming,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf., 2005, VTC, Spring.
[13] L. Zheng and D. N. C. Tse, “Diversity and multiplexing: A fundamental tradeoff in multiple-antenna channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1073–1096, May 2003.
Iterative List Decoding of Some LDPC Codes
Jørn Justesen, Member, IEEE, Tom Høholdt, Fellow, IEEE, and Johann Hjaltason
Abstract—We present an iterative list decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. In particular we apply this decoder to a class of LDPC codes from finite geometries and show that the (73; 45; 10) projective geometry code can be maximum-likelihood (ML) decoded with low complexity. Moreover, the list decoding approach enables us to give a theoretical analysis of the performance. We also consider list bit-flipping (BF) decoding of longer LDPC Codes.
Index Terms—Bit flipping (BF), finite-geometry codes, iterative decoding, list decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION

(ML) decoded with low complexity. Moreover, the list decoding ap-

proach enables us to give a complete analysis of the performance in

this case. We also discuss the performance of the list bit-flipping algo-

rithm for longer LDPC codes.

We consider hard-decision iterative decoding of a binary (n; k; d)

0 Hcoyde0,.

For a received vector y, we calculate where H is a parity-check matrix, but

an extended syndrome s usually has more than n

= k

rows. Let r denote the length of the syndrome. The idea of using ex-

tended syndromes was also used in [5]. Our approach is based on one

of the common versions of bit flipping (BF) [3], where the schedule is

such that the syndrome is updated after each flip. In each step, we flip

a symbol chosen among those positions that reduce the weight of the

extended syndrome, which we refer to briefly as the syndrome weight

u. A decoded word is reached when u = 0. In this correspondence,

we consider a variation of the common algorithm in the form of a

tree-structured search. Whenever there is a choice between several bits,

all possibilities are tried in succession. The result of the decoding algo-

rithm is, in general, a list of codewords, obtained as leaves of the search

tree. This form of the BF algorithm leads naturally to a solution in the

form of a list of codewords at the same smallest distance from y [6].

This list decoding concept is somewhat different from list decoding in

the usual sense of all codewords within a certain distance from y.

The outline of the correspondence is as follows. In Section II, we

consider regular LDPC codes and discuss the relations between the

weight of an error pattern and the weight of the corresponding syn-

drome. The section also contains results on the performance of the

standard BF algorithm. Section III contains the new iterative list de-

coding algorithm. In Section IV, we recall the LDPC codes from finite

geometries and give some results on the number of minimum-weight

words of these codes. In Section V, we give a complete analysis of the

performance of the list BF algorithm used on the (73; 45; 10) projec-

tive geometry code and show that the decoder is ML. Since so little is

known on complete decoding (of for instance Bose–Chaudhuri–Hoc-

quenghem (BCH) codes) we felt it appropriate to do this by using the

introduced methods. Section VI contains results on the complexity of

the decoder from Section V and in Section VII, we treat the (63; 37; 9)

Euclidean geometry code. In Section VIII, we discuss the performance

of the list BF algorithm for longer regular LDPC codes.

In the last decade two old methods for decoding linear block codes have gained considerable interest, iterative decoding as first described by Gallager in [1] and list decoding as introduced by Elias [2]. In particular, iterative decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, has been an important subject of research, see, e.g., [3] and the references therein. “Good” LDPC codes are often randomly generated by computer, but recently codes with an algebraic or geometric structure have also been considered, e.g., [3] and [4]. The performance of the iterative decoder is typically studied by simulations and a theoretical analysis is more difficult.
In this correspondence, we combine the two decoding methods and present an iterative list decoding algorithm. In particular, we apply this decoder to a class of LDPC codes from finite geometries and show that the (73; 45; 10) projective geometry code can be maximum-likelihood

II. ERROR PATTERNS AND SYNDROMES
We consider a regular LDPC code given by a parity check matrix,
0 possibly with more than n k rows, and the corresponding syndromes.
All syndromes associated with single errors, i.e., the columns of the parity-check matrix, have the same low weight 
. For any pair of columns, there is at most one row where both have a one, so the girth of the Tanner graph for the code is at least 6, and any two rows have at most one 1 in common.
An error pattern of weight w has syndrome weight u where

w
 0 w(w 0 1)  u  w
:

(1)

It follows that the minimum distance of the code is lower-bounded by

Manuscript received November 20, 2005; revised January 9, 2007. the ma-

terial in this correspondence was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Seattle, WA, July 2006.

d  
 + 1:

(2)

J. Justesen is with COM, The Technical University of Denmark, DK 2800

Lyngby, Denmark (e-mail: jju@com.dtu.dk).

T. Høholdt is with the Department of Mathematics, The Technical University If we approximate the distribution of ones in a row by independent

of Denmark, DK 2800 Lyngby, Denmark (e-mail: T. Hoeholdt@mat.dtu.dk). J. Hjaltason is with INOPI, DK 2630 Tästrup, Denmark (e-mail:jh@emer-

variables

with

probability


 r

we

get

the

average

syndome

weight

to

be

gens.dk). Communicated by T. J. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2007.907485

u = r
i odd

w i

0 

r

i

1


 r

w0i
:

(3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:07:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

4277

For small w we have

u  w
e0 :

(4)

As

w

increases,

u

approaches

r 2

.

Lemma 1: A unique closest codeword is found by the BF algorithm

if

w



(


+ 2

1) :

(5)

and the syndrome weight is

u=

bi:

i=1;3;5111

The values of bi further satisfies the inequality
bii(i 0 1)  w(w 0 1)
i
since a pair of positions can be on at most one line.

Proof: Since two columns of H both have 1’s in at most one row, the syndrome weight will decrease if an error position is flipped and increase if any other position is flipped. Thus, the algorithm must correct one of the error positions is each step.

Lemma 3: The parity failures f (j) in the set of error points J satisfy

(ibi) = f (j):

(6)

i=1;3;5111

j2J

When the lower bound on the minimum distance is satisfied with Proof: Follows from counting the 1’s in H in the rows that have equality, this is the well-known result [7, p. 33] that BF or majority nonzero syndrome bits and the error columns.

decision decode error patterns of weight less than half the minimum distance. However, for general LDPC codes, the minimum distance can be much greater, but it does not follow that more errors are corrected by BF. In any case, we are interested in correcting more errors. We use the

The following result demonstrates the relation between syndrome weight and BF.
Theorem 1: If u > w2, the errors are corrected by the BF algorithm

 terminology that any minimal-weight word in a coset is called a coset and there is a unique coset leader.

leader.

Proof: If 2w 
 the conclusion follows from Lemma 1 without

We refer to a coset as (u; w) when the weight of a coset leader is w, the assumption, so we only need to consider the case where 2w > 
.

and the syndrome weight is u. These parameters serve as a first coarse From Lemma 3, we have

characterization of the coset. The success of the BF depends on the assumption that u, which can be observed, increases with w, which is not known.

f (j) =

(ibi) 

bi = u:

j2J

i=1;3;5...

i=1;3;5...

A more detailed description relevant to the BF algorithm is based Thus, there is at least one position j with f (j) > w and it follows from

on the distribution of parity failures. Each position is checked by the 
 Lemma 2 that this is an error position. After this position is corrected,

rows of the parity-check matrix which have a one in the corresponding the new syndrome has weight

column. We refer to the number of these rows that give a one in the syndrome, f (j), as the number of parity failures for position j. By adding the rows corresponding to ones in the syndrome (using integer

u0  u 0 f(j)  u 0 
  w2 + 1 0 
  (w 0 1)2 + 2w 0 
 > (w 0 1)2

addition), we find the number of parity failures for each code position, which is the information used for selecting which bit to flip. A coset since 2w > 
. The proof now follows by repeating this argument.

may be characterized by the parity failure distribution fi, which indicates the number of positions with i parity failures. Cosets with the same parity failure distribution may be expected to show similar properties when decoded by the BF algorithm.
Lemma 2: If for a given syndrome and some position j; f (j) > w, any error pattern of weight w with that syndrome must include position j.
Proof: At most one of the rows that check a given position can have a one in any of the error positions. Thus, a correct position can have at most w parity failures.

Lemma 4: Suppose that for each of the at most

w 2

lines through

pairs of error points a list of the error points on the line is given, then it

is possible to determine the f (j)’s for the error points, and hence which

bit to flip, and from this to construct the corresponding information for
0 the w 1 remaining error points.

Proof: For each error point j, we know then the number of lines with

three or a larger odd number of error points. Since the total number of

lines through j is 
, we can find the number of lines where j is the

only error point. Thus, f (j) is known, and if it exceeds 
=2, it will

eventually be flipped. After position j is flipped, it is removed from the

list of points and from the relevant lines. Lines which now have only

For a position that is not an error position, the distribution of ones in

the relevant 
 syndrome bits is approximately binomial with average

u r

.

In

the

error

positions

since there is a known one

in the error positions, and

we get the complement of this

in each row. Thus, f (j)

>


 2

on

in the remaining positions f (j)

distribution

the average

<


 2

on the

average.

It is convenient to adopt a geometric terminology and refer to a po-

sition in a received word as a point and the set of positions where a row

in H has 1’s as a line. Thus, two lines intersect in at most one point

and there is at most one line through any two points.

We use the geometric terminology to give a partial description of an

error pattern, which includes just the amount of detail that is needed to

predict the actions of a BF algorithm. Let b(j) indicate the number of

errors on line j, and let bi be the number of lines with exactly i errors. The total number of 1’s in the columns of H that correspond to errors is

one error point are removed from the list, and in this way, the geometric
0 description of the remaining w 1 points is obtained.
III. THE ITERATIVE LIST DECODING ALGORITHM
We first consider the basic version of the list decoding algorithm. Given the syndrome associated with a given coset, the number of parity violations involving position j; f (j), is computed from s and H. This state serves as the root of the decoding tree. Each node in the tree is characterized by the parent node, the extended syndrome, the syndrome weight u, and an ordered list of positions with f (j) > 
=2. From each node we can produce several offspring nodes by flipping a bit at position ^j on the list, calculating the new syndrome by adding column ^j and recalculating u and the f (j)’s. Eventually, we reach a leaf which is a decoded word when u = 0, and no solution if u > 0 and it is impossible to reduce the syndrome weight. The algorithm then backtracks to

ibi = 
w
i

the first node where a different bit can be flipped. It terminates when all nodes have been explored.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:07:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

The rationale for studying the list version of the BF algorithm is that of iterative list decoding with such codes, and in addition, we derive

we can describe all codewords that can be reached by the algorithm some detailed properties of the codes. In this section, we characterize

while avoiding selection of an arbitrary coset leader. Since the syn- and enumerate the minimum-weight codewords in some of these

drome weight is reduced when a new node is created, the algorithm

is clearly finite. The algorithm can be modified to reduce the size of

the search tree or to cover special situations. In particular, the condi-

tion f (j)

>


 2

can be replaced by a higher threshold, or we can flip

positions with high values of f (j) first. Similarly, the conditions for

stopping the search along a particular branch can be modified. We dis-

cuss such modifications in relation to specific codes later.

f g Theorem 2: Let F = Ji be a set of error patterns such that any 2 subset of Ji is also in F:F is decoded by the list BF algorithm if and
only if for every error pattern Ji F there is at least one position such
that f (j) > 
=2.

Proof: The condition is necessary since for an error pattern not sat-

isfying the condition, the algorithm will either stop or flip a bit that is

not in the error pattern. Sufficiency follows by induction on the weight of the error pattern. It is obvious for w = 0. Assume that error patterns in F of weight w < w0 are decoded. The condition ensures that in an error pattern of weight w0 one bit will eventually be flipped, and the

result is a pattern that is decoded.

Note that the proof of list decoding is simple because the decoding

codes.

Let PG (2; q) and EG (2; q) denote the projective and Euclidean plane, respectively, over the finite field with q = 2s elements. (For the

definitions and basic facts on these planes see [3]).

Choose a numbering of the points P1; P2; . . . ; Pn and of the lines L1; L2; . . . ; Lb and let H be the incidence matrix of lines versus points,

i.e.,

22 H = (huv) where huv =

1; if Pv Lu 0; if Pv = Lu:

Here, n = b = 22s + 2s + 1 and any row and column of H has exactly 2s + 1 ones and any pair of rows (and any pair of columns) has
exactly one 1 in common. Let C(s) be the code with H as a parity-check matrix, it is well
known (e.g., [3]) that C(s) has the following parameters:

Length Number of parity bits Dimension Minimum distance

n = 22s + 2s + 1
0 n k = 3s + 1 0 k = 22s + 2s 3s
dmin = 2s + 2:

of a particular error patterns does not depend on the properties of other It is also well known that the numbering of points and lines can be error patterns in the same coset. For codes with a favorable distribution chosen such that H is circulant and C(s) is a cyclic code.

of syndrome weights, a proof of successful decoding can be based on the following result:

Lemma 5: For any error pattern of weight w in a coset with syn-

drome weight u, the list decoding algorithm will flip at least one error

position if

u > wb
=2c:

(7)

Example 1: With s = 2 we get a (21; 12; 6) code C(2), with s = 3 we get a (73; 45; 10) code C(3) and with s = 4 we get a (273; 191; 18) code C(4).
If a line together with its points are removed from PG (2; q) one obtains EG(2; q). By further removing a point P and all the lines through
0 0 that, there remain 22s 1 points and 22s 1 lines. If H^ denotes the

Proof: Since the syndrome is the sum of the w columns, one has at least u=w ones in rows where the syndrome is nonzero.
On the average, it follows from (7) that the condition of the lemma is satisfied as long as w
 < rln(2).
The goal of the iterative list decoding algorithm is to find all coset leaders in the coset that contains the received word. The ideal situation is described in the following definition.
Definition 1: A Maximum-Likelihood List Decoding Algorithm

incidence matrix of lines versus points of this configuration then any row (and any column) has exactly 2s ones and any pair of rows (and

any pair of columns) have at most one 1 in common.
Let C^(s) be the code with H^ as a parity-check matrix, it is well known (e.g., [3]) that C^(s) has the following parameters:

Length Number of parity bits Dimension Minimum distance

0 n = 22s 1 n 0 k = 3s 0 1 0 k = 22s 3s
dmin = 2s + 1:

takes an arbitrary received vector as input and produces as output a list Again, it is well known that the numbering of points and lines can be

of coset leaders in the coset that contains the received word.

chosen such that H^ is circulant and C^(s) is a cyclic code.

For w within the Hamming bound, the lists can be rather short, and they could be useful in decoding an outer code in a concatenated scheme. If a codeword is found close to y, codewords at larger distances would have significantly lower conditional probability, and attempts to include them in the list could lead to long lists. The list BF algorithm as described in this section may produce error patterns of different weights. If so we may discard the ones that are not minimum weight.
If the search for a complete list is impractical, the algorithm is still useful for finding one or a small list of codewords at minimum distance. The tree search is necessary to avoid wrong choices among several candidates with the same number of parity failures.

Example 2: With s = 2 we get a (15; 7; 5) code C^(2), this is the double error correcting quasi-perfect BCH code, with s = 3 we get a (63; 37; 9) code C^(3) and with s = 4 we get a (255; 175; 17) code C^ (4).
Using standard coding terminology, a code C^(s) is obtained from C(s) by shortening 2s information positions and one parity-check position and then expurgating one parity position.
The minimum-weight codewords of both C(s) and C^(s) are characterized by the following observation, where 
 = 2s + 1 for the codes C(s) and 
 = 2s for the codes C^(s).
O Lemma 6: Let c be a codeword of minimum weight. The set of

points corresponding to the nonzero positions satisfy

IV. CODES FROM FINITE GEOMETRIES The terminology used for characterizing error patterns was mo-

1) any two points lie on a (unique) line;
O 2) any line has either 2 or 0 points in common with ;
and if we have a set of 
 + 1 points satisfying 1) and 2), the incidence

tivated by the decoding of codes derived from finite projective and vector corresponds to a minimum-weight codeword. Euclidean planes. In the next two sections, we discuss the performance Of course, the first condition is superfluous in PG (2; q).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:07:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

4279

Proof: It follows immediately from the fact that HcT = 0 or H^ cT = 0 that there must be an even number of ones in common between c and every row of H(H^ ). From the cyclic structure of the
matrix it is also clear that there is a line (which by construction must be unique) with two or more points in common with c. To finish the proof, let  > 1 be the number of ones that c has in common with a fixed line L. For each one that L and c have in common there are
0 
 1 other lines that have a one that has to be canceled, and we 0 have 
 + 1  remaining ones to do that. But for  > 2 we have 0 0  
 + 1  < 
 1 so this is impossible. Therefore,  2. The reverse
statement is obvious.

TABLE I SYNDROME WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF COSETS FOR THE (73; 45; 10) CODE

This observation means that the set of points corresponding to a minimum-weight codeword in C(s) constitutes a q + 2 arc in PG (2; q)
and that the same is true for the set of points corresponding to a minimum-weight word of C^(s) together with P . It is known that q +2-arcs in PG (2; q) for q = 2; 4; 8 are so-called regular ovals [8] consisting of a quadric and its nucleus, but for larger values of q there are others. Only for q = 16 and 32 a complete classification is known. We list the
results on the minimum-weight words obtained from the known facts
in the following.

Theorem 3: The number of minimum-weight words in

C(2) is

168

C(3) is

32704

C(4) is 119; 857; 920

C^(2) is

18

C^(3) is

1960

C^(4) is 3; 704; 400:

The first two numbers are from [8, pp. 371 and 379] and the third is calculated using the fact from [8, Theorem 8.35] that in PG (2; 16)
D O there are precisely two projectively distinct ovals (T 2) and 0. The 1 0 group that leaves the first invariant has size 16 (162 1) [8, p. 186]
wanhdertehaesgPrGouLp(t3h;aqt)lehaavsessizthee(sqec0o1n)(dqqin00vq1a)r(iqan0tqha) s. size 36 [8, p. 190]
The last three numbers are the first three multiplied with the factor

0 q2 + q + 1

q+2

2

q2 + q + 1

1 0 q + 2 q2 + q + 1 (q + 1)

where the first factor is the number of lines in PG (2; q)—the number of lines formed by a pair of points on the q + 2-arc divided by the number of lines in PG (2; q) and the second factor is the number of points on the q + 2-arc divided by the number of points in EG(2; q).

0 weight w 1. The second step is to compare the number of cosets to
the total syndrome weight distribution. Because of the symmetry of the code it is possible to infer the number of coset leaders in the low-weight cosets, and in this way it is verified that all cosets are accounted for.
The analysis of the PG code is simplified by the property that two lines always intersect in exactly one point. The extended 73 by 73 parity-check matrix may be written in cyclic form, and each row and column has weight 
 = 9.
The set of syndromes is the column space of H, and for this particular matrix the weight distribution is also the weight distribution of the dual code. With a moderate amount of computation this distribution is found by generating all vectors. The distribution is given in Table I.
It is useful to have at least the number of codewords of low weight,

V. COMPLETE ML DECODING OF THE (73; 45; 10) PG CODE
In this section, we give details of iterative list decoding of the (73; 45; 10) projective geometry code and prove that the decoding

and they are readily found by the MacWilliams relations
A(z) = 1 + 32704z10 + 171696z12 + 3532032z14
1 1 1 + 42068148z16 + :

can be ML in the list decoding sense. Even though the PG codes are

known to have excellent performance with iterative decoding [3], All codewords of weight 12 have 1’s on four points on each of three

[9], [11], this is an unexpected property. The analysis developed in lines. The number of codewords of this type is readily calculated to

Section III leads to a complete characterization of the coset leaders. be 171 696. It is clear that the weight distribution of the syndromes

The derivation and the description of the cosets up to weight 6 are is symmetric. The all-ones syndrome indicates a coset, which includes

given in this section, while the details of the remaining cosets are
placed in an Appendix. To our knowledge, such a description of the
cosets and their decoding beyond half the minimum distance has been
0 possible only for codes with significantly smaller values of k or n k.
The first step in proving that error patterns of weight w are decoded

73 error patterns of weight 9. Each set consists of the positions on a

particular line. Thus, b9 = 1, and b1 = 72. Clearly, no other vectors in

the coset can have lower weight.

0 u;

Gwi0v)ecnoase(tub; ywa)dcdoisnegt

we can one of

find a vector the weight 9

in the error

corresponding (73 patterns. Clearly, we

by the list decoding algorithm is to enumerate the error patterns for each minimize the weight of the result by choosing the line of maximum
0 geometric type. The geometry determines the syndrome weight and the weight v, and changing that to 9 v. The other error positions are
number of parity failures, and as such it is sufficient to determine that unchanged. The code itself has (u; w) = (0; 0), and (73; 9) is the

one of the error positions will be flipped, leading to an error pattern of complementary coset with list size 73.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:07:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4280

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

There are 73 cosets with single errors (u; w) = (9; 1). Each coset cosets. Flipping a bit in a (25; 5) coset leads to either (24; 4) or (24; 6)

also contains some error patterns of weight 9, which can be found as which can easily be distinguished by the distribution of parity failures.

the number of minimum-weight codewords with a 1 in a particular po- If a (24; 6) coset is reached, the algorithm should backtrack to the pre-

sition, 4480. The complementary cosets (64; 8) have list size 9.

vious node. In a (24; 4) coset, the remaining four errors are immedi-

There are 2628 double errors, which are all coset leaders in the only ately identified by having six parity failures. After returning to the root,

cosets of syndrome weight u = 16. The number of weight 8 error pat- the algorithm should not flip any of the five positions in the identified

terns in each of these cosets, 560, is obtained as the number of weight error pattern, since they cannot be part of any other weight 5 error pat-

10 words with 1’s in two given positions. The complementary cosets tern. Thus, in addition to the 15 nodes leading to the three solutions, at

(57; 7) also have unique coset leaders.

most three nodes have to be created in the decoding tree.

There are two types of triple errors: If the three error positions are not on a line, the error pattern is part of a minimum-distance codeword, the syndrome weight is 21, and each error position has seven parity failures. There are 56064 such patterns, and in each of the corresponding cosets, which are the only ones with u = 21, there are 70 weight 7 error patterns. If three positions are on a line, the syndrome weight is 25, and

Example 3: The projective plane PG (2; 8) contains many copies of the 7 point plane PG (2; 2), and these configurations are useful for describing some of the error patterns. If one point is removed, we get a (40; 6) pattern with three errors on four lines. All six error points have eight parity failures.

each error position has niine parity failures. There are 6132 such cosets.

Since the positions are not part of minimum-weight codewords, there

are no weight 7 patterns in these cosets. The complementary cosets are

(48; 6).

Four errors can give three different syndrome weights, 32; 28;

and 24. These configurations may be distinguished by the vectors

(b2; b3; b4), and in each case the number of error patterns is readily

calculated: There are 9198 (32; 4) cosets with b = (0; 0; 1) (since

four points on a line can be chosen in

9 4

2 73 ways), 392 448 (28; 4)

cosets have b = (3; 1; 0), and 686 784 (24; 4) have b = (6; 0; 0). Only

the last cosets also contains weight 6 error patterns, and there are 10

in each coset. The vectors of parity failures f = (f0; f2; f4; f6; f8)

(only the even or the odd terms can be nonzero), are unique and are

easily found to be (5; 0; 64; 0; 4); (0; 27; 42; 1; 3); (3; 36; 30; 4; 0).

As observed in Lemma 5, if u > 4w, at least one error position has five or more parity failures. Since the number of parity failures is even for w even and odd for w odd, at least one position has six parity failures for even w. For odd w, we can have at most three parity failures or at least five, which implies that for odd w, if u > 3w, at least one error position has five or more parity failures. Thus, we can already conclude that error patterns of weight 7 and 9 are decoded if they are coset leaders.
In the Appendix, we continue the analysis of cosets to get a complete distribution of coset weights for this code, and in particular we prove the following.
Lemma 7: For cosets of minimum weight w = 8 the syndrome weight is at least u = 36.

This leaves 2 060 352 error patterns of weight 6 and syndrome weight 24 in 98112 cosets. Thus, there are 21 of these patterns in each coset, which turn out to be the only cosets where no error position has more than four parity failures.
There are four cases for w = 5: There are 9198 (41; 5) cosets with five error positions on a line, 2 649 024 (33; 5) cosets with b = (4; 2; 0) or (4; 0; 1), and 8 241 408 (29; 5) cosets with b = (7; 1; 0). u = 33 is

Theorem 4: The modified list BF algorithm is complete and ML. The list includes all coset leaders.
Proof: It follows from Lemma 5 that all coset leaders contain at least one error position that will be flipped by the algorithm, and the result follows from Theorem 1. Thus, the algorithm performs ML list decoding in the sense of Definition 1.

either a line with four errors or two lines with three errors such that one

VI. COMPLEXITY AND PERFORMANCE

is at the intersection. Thus, the number of error patterns is calculated as The complexity of the list decoding algorithm is highly dependent on

9

9

73 1

1 64 + 73 1

1 64 1 3 1 7=4:

4

3

the structure of the code. We shall consider the complexity of decoding the (73; 45) code in two cases: finding a single ML result and finding the complete list. In both cases, the complexity will be measured as the

number of nodes in the decoding tree.

The 1 373 568 (25; 5) cosets are the only type of w = 5 patterns that To find a single ML result, we flip one of the positions with the

can be part of a minimum-weight codeword. Each coset contains three largest number of parity failures. If there are four or fewer errors

error patterns while all other weight 5 cosets have unique coset leaders. remaining, the unique result is found. With five errors, one of the

The vector of parity failures can be found by observing that the 10 lines error positions is chosen if u > 25. In the (25; 5) cosets there are 18

through two error points intersect in 15 other points. This leaves 40 positions with five parity failures. Thus, the worst case result is that

points on one of these lines and 13 points not on any of the lines. Thus, the first three nodes are dead ends, and the total complexity is eight

the vector (odd values only) is (15; 40; 18; 0; 0). Among the 18 points nodes. With w = 6, an error bit is always chosen if u > 36, and

with five parity failures, 15 are the possible error positions, and flipping we shall consider the remaining cases one by one. For u = 24, any

any of the three remaining positions leads to a (24; 6) coset.

position with four parity failures can be flipped to give a (25; 5) coset

The 98 112 (24; 6) cosets were identified earlier. These error pat- since no coset with u = 25 has higher weight. For all other values of

terns of weight 6, where no three points are on a line but are not a part u, the syndrome weight decreases, and in particular, from (28; 6) we

of a minimum-weight codeword, are the complete 6-arcs in the pro- also reach a (25; 5) coset. In the (32; 6) cosets there are two cases:

jective plane [4]. We can solve the equations for the number of parity Either there is a position with eight parity failures, and this bit may

failures and find that there are 42 positions with four parity failures. be flipped to give a (25; 5) coset, or there are 16 positions with six

Thus, the basic BF algorithm would stop in this case. However, if we parity failures, and these are all positions in one of the four solutions.

want to proceed to find the 21 error patterns of weight 6, we can flip Thus, it cannot happen that we flip a correct position and arrive in

one of the positions to get to a (25; 5) coset.

a (29; 7) cosets, although these have very similar error patterns. In

If we compare the number of cosets with u  25 to the number (36; 6) cosets there is always at least one position with eight parity

of syndromes, we see that all cosets have been identified. The corre- failures, and it follows from Lemma 2 that this is an error position.

sponding minimum-weight error patterns can be decoded by the BF al- Thus, 6 errors are always corrected with at most nine nodes in the

gorithm, although a special step has to be included to deal with (26; 6) tree. To correct 7 errors we only have to consider u  37, since no

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:07:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

4281

weight 8 coset has u < 36. All error patterns with u = 37 have where B(u; w) is the number of (u; w) cosets, and we use the shorter

points with seven parity failures, and flipping such a bit leads to notation

u = 32, which is always a weight 6 coset. However, from (41; 7) we may reach a (36; 8) coset. Similarly, there are (45; 7) cosets with

3 0 0 w

q(w) = p

(1

nw

p)

:

a maximum of seven parity failures. In both of these cases, the ML solution is unique, but we have 18 or 27 candidate positions of which only six are errors. In the remaining 12, respectively 21, cases, we reach a dead end in a (24; 6) coset after flipping two additional bits, but the situation can be detected earlier and only 11, respectively 7, extra nodes are actually required. With eight errors, the only transition that requires consideration is (52; 8) to , (45; 9) but the geometry of the error patterns do not match. Thus, in addition to the w nodes leading to the ML solution, there are in many cases at most three nodes associated with exploring (25; 5) cosets, but in two situations with seven errors (and a unique solution), there may be as many as 11 additional nodes on branches leading to dead ends. The average decoding time can be significantly improved by correcting the last four errors in one step by majority decisions. A single ML decision can always be obtained with at most 20 nodes.
If the entire tree of L ML solutions is developed, there are close to Lw nodes on branches leading to the L solutions of weight w. The additional nodes associated with dead ends are unchanged, from the analysis of finding a single solution, since these branches are developed only once. The new problem associated with finding a list of solutions is that we may develop the same solution several times by flipping the symbols in different order. Thus, for the (25; 5) coset we might end up with 3(1 + 5!) = 363 nodes unless steps are taken to avoid multiple copies of the same solution. The first step is to note that in a code with minimum distance d, two solutions of weight w can share at most
0w d=2 bits. Thus, once the first solution is found, and thus w is known, 0 we can terminate any branch that shares more than w 5 positions with

To illustrate the differences between different decoding algorithms we

consider a binary-symmetric channel with error probability 2=73; i.e.,

on the average two errors in each codeword. For this channel, the word

error probability becomes , 0:0175 where most of the errors occur in

(25; 5) and (28; 6) cosets. In [10], a version of the BF algorithm is

discussed where all bits with the maximum number of parity failures

are flipped in each step. The effect of such a step can be predicted for

each type of cosets using our description, however, the loss is closely

approximated by assuming that only cosets with unique coset leaders

are decoded (actually, there are cases where the decoding fails even

when the coset leader is unique). This gives an added decoding error

probability of , 0:0055 and the major difference is that our algorithm

correctly decode some weight 5 and 6 cosets with a small number of

coset leaders.

If we allow list decoding, the result is considered in error only if

tpL (hur(eo;wbw ca0o;)brw icrleot)ycsitenbtcyscowocdsoeietnwhtssoiwdordef< reiinasw gcnh0to.httIyefpontenhu,emtwhnbeeuemcrliabosntef.rfieTornrhfdousrtushp,ceahwtetperearrotcntrasenpronrffioswbnisadebaigtlchihtoeytnw eastrs0aroninrt

Pe =

0

0

B(u; w)L(w ; w)q(w ):

w u;w<w

0 Above, we have
cosets of weight

counted the
w = 10

w nu0mfobrerwof=er1ro; r2;p3a;ttearnnds

of

weight

0
w

in

4. We also gave

the number of weight 7 error patterns in weight 5 cosets. It is a good

approximation to count all error patterns of weight > 8 as causing de-

a known solution. By maintaining a suitable sorted list of solutions, coding error. What remains is to estimate the distribution of weight 8

this condition can be tested without much additional computation. The errors in cosets of lower weight. This can be done when the distribution

second step refers to the situation where several solutions share the of coset weights is found, and we get a sufficient accuracy by sampling
0 first w 5 points. In this case, we only need to flip this combination these weights. Based on this estimate, we can find the last contribution

of bits first. We may label each node with the set of positions that were from weight 8 error patterns in weight 6 cosets, and the error proba-

flipped on the path to the node. One should then avoid developing a bility is found to be . 0:0017

node if the label already exists. Clearly, the first step is sufficient to re- One way of making a choice between codewords on an output list
 duce the number of nodes to a value close to Lw for w 6. The last would be to use any available reliability information for the received

step is mostly useful for reducing the amount of computation associated bits. This approach makes the result similar to that of weighted BF de-

with the moderately long lists that can occur for w = 8–9. Since the coding as described in [9]. The advantage of list decoding becomes

list size increases as u decreases, we get the worst case in the (36; 8) questionable when the lists are very long. Thus, the performance esti-

cosets (the special error patterns in the few cosets of weight 9 lead to mate could be modified to allow lists of a certain size only. The result

easier computations). In the first step we have 10 + 25 or 3 + 19 candi- can readily be estimated using the information on the list sizes given

dates with eight, respectively six, parity failures, and these all have to prevoiusly: Error patterns of weight 8 would not be decoded, weight 7

be flipped. If the positions with eight parity failures are developed first, is decoded only for high syndrome weights, and the (24; 6) cosets may

we get (29; 7) cosets each with 49 solutions. These sets can be found be considered nondecodable. Even with this change, the advantage over

efficiently by noting that two solutions can share only two positions (in ML decoding is significant. Thus, the advantage of the approach taken

fact, for each such pair there is the same number of solutions). By flip- here is not just that the performance of the algorithm is better, but also

ping a position in the received vector with six parity failures, we go to that the effect of modifications can be followed in each step of the de-

a (33; 7) coset, where we have four to six candidates with seven parity coding.

failures, but also 36 to 42 positions with five parity failures. Since many

candidates are common to these two stages, it is useful to avoid flip-

VII. DECODING OF THE (63; 37; 9) EG CODE

ping the same pairs twice. This still leaves a few hundred combination with six remaining errors, but the duplicate solutions have mostly been eliminated.
If the tree search described here is used to obtain a single solution, the result is ML decoding in the usual sense, and the probability of correct decoding follows directly from the weight distribution of the coset leaders.

As discussed in Section IV, the EG code is obtained in a simple way by shortening and expurgating the PG code. However, some situations in the BF decoding are changed considerably. In this section, we shall consider some of these differences without giving a complete discussion of the decoding.
The analysis of the EG code is slightly more complicated because some lines are parallel, and certain pairs of points are not connected by

01 Pe =

B(u; w)q(w)

u;w

a line. Specifically the 63 points may be divided into nine sets of seven points such that no two points in such a set are connected by a line. For convenience, we refer to these sets as n-lines (these are the lines

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:07:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4282

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

TABLE II SYNDROME WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF COSETS FOR THE (63; 37; 9) CODE

drops from 21 to 14 and two such cosets are merged. The minimum weight is 9. It follows from this analysis that no position has more
than two parity failures, and these cosets appear as dead ends in the
BF decoding of the EG code. We briefly describe the relation between the geometry of error pat-
terns of weight 5 and their decoding. The syndrome weight for w = 5 can be 40 (five points on an n-line), 36, or any even number from 20 to 32. It follows from Lemma 1 that all cases with u  26 are decoded to the unique coset leader. This leaves three cases: u = 24 can be three points on a line or two pairs on n-lines, u = 22 occurs with a pair on an n-line, and u = 20 implies that all pairs are on distinct lines. It follows from Lemma 4 that for u  22, at least one error position can be flipped, and thus the errors are decoded. For three errors on a line, the result is unique, in the other two cases the list size is 2 or 3. When u = 20, all error points have four parity failures, and flipping a bit will not change the syndrome weight. The number of weight 5 error patterns in weight 4 cosets (those that are part of minimum-weight codewords)
can be calculated as 1960 1 126 = 246 960. The remaining 142 884 are in 65 079 weight 5 coset with list size 2 or 3. If we allow the BF algo-
rithm to try positions with four parity failures, we can reach a weight 4 coset, but some bits lead to other cosets of weight 5 or to (20; 6) cosets where the BF algorithm eventually reaches a dead end in one of the (14; 7) cosets described earlier. It may be noted that the special (24; 6) cosets in the PG code have been merged with weight 5 cosets, and are not particularly important in the EG code.

VIII. LONGER CODES

For longer codes, it is not practical to attempt any exhaustive enumer-

ation of classes of syndromes or cosets. However, the performance of

the list decoding algorithm and properties of the code can be assessed

from estimates of the parameters introduced in previous sections. In through P in EG (2; q)), since they are used in accounting for pairs of particular, by permuting a fixed number of errors, a large number of

errors although they do not contribute to the syndrome. The extended random syndromes can readily be generated, and, thus, the distribution

63 by 63 parity-check matrix may be written in cyclic form, and row of syndrome weights can be accurately estimated. Error patterns with

and column has weight 
 = 8.

particular syndrome weights can be further analyzed.

The set of syndromes is the column space of H, and the weight dis- For the (273; 191) PG code, such a sampling of cosets with weight

tribution is again the weight distribution of the dual code. This distri- 9, shows that close to 0.12% have syndrome weight 81. If the number

bution is give in Table II.

of positions with nine parity failures is less than 18, there is only one

The minimum-weight codewords of the code were discussed in Sec- solution, whereas decoding experiments indicate that there are at least

tion IV.

two solutions in other cases. There are cosets with list size 3, but they

Error patterns with at most four errors are unique coset leaders, and account for less than 0.2% of these cases. From these observations,

they are easily counted by syndrome weight. There are more cases to the number of minimum weight codewords could be estimated as

consider than in the PG code since pairs of error points can be either on lines or n-lines. Thus, of the 1953 double errors, 1764 have syndrome weight u = 14, but 189 are on n-lines and have syndrome weight 16. Similarly, there are four cases for w = 3; u = 18; 20; 22; 24, where 20 corresponds to one pair on an n-line, and 24 to all three errors on an n-line.

119 000 000 (the exact number was given in Section IV). Among error patterns with w = 10–13 there are some with syn-
drome weight u = 80–65. These may be parts of minimum-weight
codewords, but there are also maximal arcs, which play a role similar to the (24; 6) patterns in the (73; 45) code. Thus, no positions have more than 
=2 parity failures. The number of such cosets is too small

Comparing the number of low-weight error patterns to the number to be estimated from random samples, but it is known from the literaof syndromes with u < 20, we find that 36 cosets with u = 14 and ture [6]. However, there are also other rare cosets with fewer than 
=2 1764 cosets with u = 18 are missing. The first sets are particularly parity failures.

important and may serve to describe the way cosets are changed in the For error patterns of weight 12, the syndrome weights can be process of shortening and expurgation. If two errors in the PG code are 72; 76; 80; . . .. The estimated distribution from weight 84 to 136 is

located on the line at infinity, the same coset contains error patterns of given in Tabel III.

weight 8, which correspond to the remaining part of a minimum-weight Thus, 98% of these error patterns satisfy Lemma 4, and would be word. In the process of shortening, the line at infinity is removed, and decoded by BF. Sampling of the error patterns with u = 96 shows that

all cosets with odd weight on this line are discarded. Those that have most have error positions with at least 10 parity failures, and the real even weight are reduced to 23 1 7 patterns. Thus the 36 cosets that had probability of decoding failure is at least an order of magnitude lower.

two errors on the line at infinity now have minimum weight 8. When the The Hamming bound for the code is 15, and below this weight most

parity symbol at position 0 is expurgated, the lines through this point error patterns are successfully decoded by the list BF algorithm. Error

are no longer parity checks, and pairs of cosets are merged. Thus, the patterns of weight at most 13 usually decoded with a small number of

syndrome weight of the cosets drop from 16 to 14. If the original coset nodes in the search tree, but as the number of errors increases, a main

had an additional error in position 0, the syndrome weight similarly concern is the total number of positions with many parity failures and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:07:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

4283

TABLE III
w FREQUENCY OF SYNDROME WEIGHTS FOR = 12

counted by their value of u. The amount of computation is still far smaller than what would be required to decode all cosets. The main difficulty is related to finding the number of minimum weight patterns in each coset. In general, that would be a hard task for a code of this size, but we obtain the result using various special properties of the code.
For w = 6, the extreme cases u = 48 and u = 24 have been discussed previously. If the syndrome weight is at least 36, the coset leader is unique. This follows from Lemma 2 and the observation that at least one position has eight parity failures. There are two types of (40; 6) cosets. 588 672 error patterns have a line of weight 5, and the remaining 73 1 49 1 6 1 32 = 686784 have four lines of weight 3. For u = 36, the vector b = (b2; b3; b4) can be (6; 1; 1) or (6; 3; 0). In both cases, the intersections between the lines with three or four errors have to be error points. The number of error patterns (and thus the number of cosets) is readily calculated as

73 1 72 1 8 1 8 + 73 1 64 1 72 1 6 = 24724224:

3

2

2

3

the corresponding large search tree. In order to reduce the search it is practical to flip only positions with more than 10 parity failures. If no such positions are found, the algorithm backtracks. From a sample of error patterns we estimate the average number of positions above this threshold is nine, and of these four are among the positions in the error pattern. These numbers demonstrate that BF is likely to reduce the number of errors with a small number of attempts. Simulations indicate that the performance is close to that reported for weighted BF with a similar code used with soft decisions [9].
The estimates above demonstrate that parameters of the code can be easily obtained with good accuracy and that the performance of the BF algorithm can be predicted in this way. If 
 is fixed and the maximum number of errors corrected is w, where w 1 
 = r, the probability of a party failure can be calculated approximately from the Poisson distribution as discussed earlier. For this relation between the parameters we find the probabilities to be 0:568 for the error positions and 0:432 for the other positions. If the number of parity failures follows a binomial distribution, we can get a good separation between error positions and correct positions with 
 = 16. In this case, a threshold of 12–13 gives a limited number of candidate positions, and approximately half of them are error positions. Suitable codes with lengths 103 to 104 can be found by extending the geometric constructions or by using matrices consisting of circulant submatrices, which have been suggested in the literature.
IX. CONCLUSION
In this correspondence, we have emphasized the analysis of specific codes using the approach introduced in Section II. We have discussed in detail what happens in each step of the BF algorithm, and we have characterized the cosets which are critical in various respects.

As mentioned in Section V, it is convenient to find high-weight cosets as complements, often by taking the complement of a single line. Thus, the complements of (40; 6) cosets with a line of weight 5 are (33; 5). However, for error patterns with a small number of errors on several lines, we do not get a coset leader in this way. As an alternative approach, we find patterns of weight 13 which also belong to the coset with the all-ones syndrome. In a codeword of weight 12, the points are on three lines intersecting in a single point with four points on each line. A line through two points on different lines intersects the third line in a point that is not on the codeword, since all lines must have even parity. If one of the lines is complemented, we get a pattern of weight 13, again with four points on each of three lines, but in this case there is also a point on the intersection. The syndrome is the all-ones vector since the pattern was obtained by complementing a line in a codeword. Using this pattern, we obtain the complements of the (24; 6) cosets as (49; 7), and the error patterns are versions of the seven-point plane with three errors on seven different lines. This is the only possible configuration for (49; 7), and there is a unique coset leader. Similarly, the second type of (40; 6) cosets have (33; 7) complements.
In the remaining cases, we find the number of w = 6 error patterns as

u = 32 : 73 1

9

35 1 64 1 +

73

4

2

2

82

73

82

1

+

1

1 30

3

2

2

= 80353728u

9

42 20

= 28 : 73 1

1 64 1

1

3

23

= 54942720:

APPENDIX
In this appendix, we characterize the remaining cosets of the (73; 45) code. The number of cosets of each syndrome weight were given earlier as the weight enumerator of the dual code. This enumerator can be found by generating the codewords taking some of the symmetries of the code into account. For each combination of (u; w), the possible b-vectors can be found, and in most cases the number of error patterns of each type can be readily calculated. To check and supplement these

Proof of Lemma 7: For u = 28 we have generated all error patterns modulo cyclic shifts and found that there are only two types of f-vectors: (1; 27; 36; 9) and (3; 21; 42; 7). These give nine and seven solutions, and the average value is exactly 27=4. Thus there are 6 279 168 cosets, and there cannot be any (28; 8) cosets. The case u = 32 can be analyzed by considering how the error patterns are located on weight 12 codewords: If there is an error on the intersection
of two lines with three errors each, this point has eight parity violations, and it can be corrected first. In the resulting (25; 5) coset, there

calculations, the error patterns of a fixed weight can be generated and are three solutions, and thus the number of cosets is 20 603 520. Error

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:07:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4284

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

patterns with four errors on a line plus two additional errors and with three errors on two lines give the same vector of parity violations. In fact, a coset in most cases contains one solution of each type. However, if four errors are chosen on one of the lines of a weight 12 word and the remaining two errors on one of the other lines, the coset contains four solutions of this type. By calculating the number of error patterns of each type we find that there are 8 241 408 cosets with two solutions and 515 088 with four. This accounts for all cosets of weight 32, and consequently there are no (32; 8) cosets, which proves the lemma.

TABLE IV COSET WEIGHT ENUMERATION FOR THE (73; 45; 10) CODE

All cosets with w = 6 have been identified, and the remaining

even-weight cosets have minimum weight 8. In the proof in Section IV

that BF decoding is complete, we noted that a coset leader of weight 9

must have at least one position with at least five parity failures. Thus,

a transition can be made from any (u; 9) coset to a (u0; 8) coset with

0 u

<

u.

Thus,

a

coset

with

minimum

weight

9

must

have

u

>

36.

We have seen that all cosets with syndrome weight 21 have weight 3.

Error patterns of weight 7 with u = 25 are not part of minimum-weight

codewords, and consequently are not in weight 3 cosets. The remaining

cosets with u = 25 have w = 5, so all weight 7 error patterns must be

in these cosets, which gives (on the average) 58 in each. Thus, we only

need to decode error patterns of syndrome weight at least 29.

Of the error patterns with u = 29, most are in weight 5 cosets.

The decoding experiments indicate that the number is 37 in each coset,

which gives a total of 304 932 096. This number can also be calcu-

lated directly. The observed list size in the remaining (29; 7) cosets

is 49, which gives 2 354 688, and accounts for the remaining u = 29

cosets. Lemma 4 indicates that there is always at least one bit that can be

flipped. If a position with seven parity failures exists, it can be flipped

to produce a (24; 6) coset. However, to reach all error patterns it is nec-

essary to flip some bits with five parity failures. The complements are

(44; 8).

For w = 7 and u > 45, there is a unique coset leader. This is also

the case for u = 45 since these are complements of (28; 4) cosets.

The weight 7 error patterns with u = 37 and all higher values have

to be in weight 7 cosets. In particular, (41; 7) error patterns are not

in (41; 5) cosets. Of the three cases with u = 41; b = (8; 1; 0; 1) is

the complement of (32; 6) with four errors on a line. Three errors

on each of five lines can be obtained in two ways, one of which is

to have an error at the intersection point between three lines and the

other six errors at the points where these three lines intersect two

other lines. In this case, the first error has nine parity failures, and

when this is flipped, the result is a (32; 6) coset with three errors on

each of two lines. Thus, we get the same number of cosets with lists

of two and four solutions as discussed for (32; 6) cosets, 8 756 496.

The other error patterns with three errors on five lines can be obtained

by removing a point from a subfield plane. That leaves six points

and four lines with three points. The fifth line is obtained by adding

a point on one of the three lines that only have two points, but not

the point that was removed. This gives 12 362 112 error patterns and

4 120 704 cosets. The two original points where the last error was

added, have nine parity violations and must be flipped. After that

there are five errors, no three of which are on a line, and we have

reached a (25; 5) coset with three solutions. Finally, we can have a

line with four errors and three with three errors. This error pattern

is constructed from a subfield plane by removing a point (leaving

again six points and four lines with three points), and adding an error

on one of the lines with three points. This gives 16 482 816. These

cosets have a unique coset leader. All cosets with u = 41 are now

accounted for, and there are no (41; 9) cosets.

There are several types of (37; 7) cosets, and the list sizes are 6 to

9. We shall not attempt a detailed description here. If a (37; 9) coset

should exist, all positions should have at most five parity failures. There

are error patterns of weight 9 with only five parity failures in each points (three lines with four errors, one with three, and a few other similar patterns), however, the equations for the remaining points show that there have to be points with only a single line through two error points. Thus, some other points have seven parity failures, and the coset is impossible. Consequently, there are no (37; 9) cosets, and all cosets with u = 37 have minimum weight 7.
The total number of (33; 7) cosets is 33 652 416 with a list size of 21. We have not discussed the list sizes for w = 8 and 9 except for the largest values of u. But at this point, we can give a complete enumeration of the cosets for each combination of (u; w). The result is presented in Table IV.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] P. Elias, List Decoding for Noisy Channel MIT, Cambridge, MA, Tech. Rep. 335, 1957.
[3] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[4] Z. Liu and D. A. Pados, “LDPC codes from generalized polygons,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, pp. 3890–3898, Nov. 2005.
[5] M. Bossert and F. Hergert, “Hard-and soft-decision decoding beyond the half minimum distance—an algorithm for linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-32, no. 5, pp. 709–714, Sep. 1986.
[6] J. Hjaltason, “List Decoding of LDPC Codes,” M. Eng. thesis, Dep. Math., Tech. Univ. Denmark, Lyngby, Jan. 2005.
[7] J. van Lint, Coding Theory (Lecture Notes in Mathematics). Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1971, vol. 201.
[8] J. W. P. Hirschfeld, Projective Geometries Over Finite Fields, 2nd ed. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Science, 1998.
[9] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[10] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Contol Coding, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2004.
[11] N. Miladinovic and M.P. C. Fossorier, “Improved bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1594–1605, Apr. 2005.
[12] E. J. Weldon, Jr., “Difference-set cyclic codes,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 45, pp. 1045–1055, 1966.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:07:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

