2084

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Generic Description and Synthesis of LDPC Decoders
Fre´de´ric Guilloud, Member, IEEE, Emmanuel Boutillon, Member, IEEE, Jacky Tousch, Member, IEEE, and Jean-Luc Danger, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Through a rapid survey of the architecture of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) decoders, this paper proposes a general framework to describe and compare the LDPC decoder architectures. A set of parameters makes it possible to classify the scheduling of iterative decoders, memory organization, and type of check-node processors and variable-node processors. Using the proposed framework, an efficient generic architecture for nonflooding schedules is also given.
Index Terms—Binary low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, decoder implementation, iterative decoding, VLSI.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] perform very close to the Shannon limit. Therefore, they are being proposed more and more frequently to standardization committees. The first one to choose the LDPC codes as a standard was the update of the digital video satellite broadcasting named DVB-S.2. After some years of theoretical studies, LDPC codes are now entering the industrial range of interest.
The performance of the LDPC codes can be obtained thanks to a probabilistic and iterative decoding of the received codewords. Many different LDPC decoders have been described in the literature, and many LDPC codes have been designed for a given LDPC decoder architecture, such as in [2] and [3]. A brief review can be found in [4]. However, there is no classification of these different architectures. It is quite difficult to compare them and, thus, to design a specific decoder that fits certain given specifications. Moreover, to our knowledge, all the published decoders use the flooding schedule for the belief propagation algorithm (BP), except for the decoder of Mansour [5] and Hocevar [6]. In fact, no architecture has been proposed so far for shuffle BP scheduling [7], [8]. Finally, the complexity of the LDPC code decoders is quite difficult to evaluate. Only the complexity of the check-node processors has been studied so far [9], [10], but the complexity of the check node is only a
Paper approved by F. Fekri, the Editor for Coding Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received September 23, 2005; revised March 20, 2006 and July 27, 2006. This work was supported by the E.U. under Project SPRING IST 1999-12342.
F. Guilloud is with Department of Signal and Communications, GET/Ecole Nationale Supe´rieure des Te´le´communications (ENST) Bretagne, Technopˆole Brest-Iroise, CS 83818, 29238 Brest Cedex 3, France (e-mail: frederic.guilloud@enst-bretagne.fr).
E. Boutillon is with LESTER, Universite´ de Bretagne Sud, BP 92116, 56325 Lorient Cedex, France (e-mail: emmanuel.boutillon@univ-ubs.fr).
J. Tousch is with TurboConcept SAS, 29280 Plouzane´, France (e-mail: jacly.tousch@turboconcept.com).
J.-L. Danger is with GET/Ecole Nationale Supe´rieure des Te´le´communications (ENST) Paris, 75013 Paris, France (e-mail: jean-luc.danger@enst.fr)
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.908517

part of the answer. We suggest also considering the complexity of the LDPC code itself.
The first part of the next section presents the notations that will be used throughout this paper. It also recalls briefly the bipartite graph representation, which is very convenient when dealing with the LDPC codes. In the second part of Section II, the decoding algorithm for LDPC codes is briefly recalled, independent of scheduling.
In Section III, three classical different schedules are presented: the flooding schedule and the two shuffle schedules (the horizontal one and the vertical one from [7] and [8]). In Section IV, an evaluation of the complexity for decoding the LDPC codes is proposed. The purpose is to compare different LDPC codes and help the designer to evaluate the messagepassing structure that is to be proposed to suit the required specifications.
In Section V, a generic architecture for LDPC code decoders is proposed. It is specified by several parameters related either to the datapath or to the processing modes of variable and check nodes. We show that the combination of these parameters enables us to describe most of the published LDPC decoders, and, hence, to compare them. Based on this generic architecture, the synthesis of a new architecture for LDPC code decoders is proposed, implementing a fast converging decoding algorithm. Section VII summarizes the results and concludes this paper.
II. DECODING ALGORITHMS
The most popular LDPC decoding algorithm is the belief propagation (BP) algorithm, which is optimal if the graph of the code does not contain any cycles. Although the graph of the LDPC codes does contain cycles, this algorithm is still used and is considered as a reference. Before describing this algorithm, we introduce the notations that will be used hereafter.
A. Notations, Bipartite Graphs
An LDPC code or a repeat-accumulate (RA) code of size N and rate R can be represented as a bipartite graph, where the N bits are represented by N variable nodes vn . Each variable node is connected to some of the M parity-check nodes, M ≥ (1 − R) × N . We denote by M(n) (resp. N (m)) the set of all the parity-check indices (resp. variable indices) that are connected to the variable vn (resp. parity-check cm ). We denote also by M(n)\m (resp. N (m)\n) the set of the parity-check (resp. variable) indices that are connected to the variable vn (resp. parity-check cm ) without the parity-check cm (resp. variable vn ). A cycle on the graph is defined as a closed path. Finally,

0090-6778/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:05:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUILLOUD et al.: GENERIC DESCRIPTION AND SYNTHESIS OF LDPC DECODERS

2085

we denote by |A| the cardinal of the set A. Thus, the parity-check cm is connected to |N (m)| variables and the variable-node vn is connected to |M(n)| check nodes. The degree of a node is the number of edges connected to it; so the variable-node vn has degree |M(n)| and the check-node cm has degree |N (m)|. An LDPC code is said to be regular if the degree dv of its variable nodes and the degree dc of its check nodes are constants.

B. Decoding With the BP-Algorithm

Let Em,n denote the message from check cm to variable vn . Similarly, let Tn,m denote the message from variable vn to check cm . Each node of the graph (check node or variable node) is replaced by a processor whose input–output ports are the connections of the graph. The BP algorithm describes the behavior of each type of processor:
1) a variable-processor Vn has to compute the output messages Tn,m using the input messages Em,n according to

Tn,m = In + En − Em ,n

(1)

where En =

Em,n is the extrinsic information of

m ∈M(n )
the variable vn . The variable In associated with each variable vn is called the intrinsic information. In = 2yn /σ2

in the case of a binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) mod-

ulation over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel of variance σ2, where yn is the observation of the nth received symbol of the codeword.

2) a check-processor Cm has to compute the output messages

Em,n using the input messages Tn,m according to the

function F: Em ,n = F (Tn ,m ) defined by [1]
n ∈N (m )\n





 |Em ,n | = f −1 

 f (Tn ,m )

n ∈N (m )\n

 sign (Em ,n ) =

sign (Tn ,m )

(2)

n ∈N (m )\n

where f (x) = − ln(tanh(|x|/2)). The processors can process independently: they sample their input messages and process their output messages. For a graph without cycles, the algorithm converges toward a unique solution whatever the sample times are.

III. DECODING SCHEDULES
When the graph of the code contains cycles, the order of the sample times between the processor will have an influence on the results of the message-passing algorithm. The schedule denotes the given order of the sampling times between all the node processors. Not all the schedules yield the same results: the unavoidable existence of cycles in an LDPC code of finite length generates a correlation between the outgoing and incoming messages and yields some self-information behavior that decreases the performance of the iterative decoding process [11], [12] and introduces pseudocodewords [13]. The loss in performance

increases as the length of the cycles becomes shorter. The smallest cycle length in the graph is called the girth. A probabilistic schedule that achieves good performance was first presented by Mao and Banihashemi [14]. It will not be addressed, however, in this paper, since we only consider schedules updating all the edges in one iteration.
A. Flooding Schedules
The most popular schedule associated with the BP algorithm is the flooding schedule (FS). All the variable-processors sample their input at the same time and, then, all the check-processors sample their input at the same time. Once all the messages have been processed, one decoding iteration has been completed. Iterations are repeated as long as required. The flooding schedule is summed up in Algorithm 1. It can be noted that in this scheduling, the computation of the extrinsic information En(i) of a given variable vn is performed in one step of the algorithm (line number 7).
It is possible to have a different and equivalent representation of the FS, closer to some hardware implementations, combining the operations processed in the check nodes and in the variable nodes. For example, the variable-node processing can be distributed during the whole iteration, while the check nodes are processed sequentially (singly or in groups of P ). More precisely, the computation of the extrinsic information is not processed in a single step, as indicated in Algorithm 2 on line 10. In this case, memories are required in the variable-node processor to save the accumulation of the check-to-variable messages of both the current and the previous iteration (En(i−1) and En(i), respectively). This schedule will

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:05:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2086

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

be denoted the parity-check flooding schedule (FS-P). It is also possible to process the variables sequentially with the processing of the check-processors being distributed. It is, then, denoted by the variable flooding schedule (FS-V).

B. Fast Converging Schedules

Two other schedules are used, which will be called the hor-

izontal and vertical shuffle schedules (HSS and VSS) [4], [7],

[8].

The VSS was proposed independently by Kfir and

Kanter [15], and Zhang and Fossorier [7], [8]. One of the main

advantages of the VSS is that it enables the decoding conver-

gence to speed up. In flooding-like schedules, we observe that

the processing of the check-to-variable messages Em(i),n at itera-

tion (i) is based upon the variable-to-check messages Tn(i,m−1) at

the

previous

iteration

(i

−

1).

However,

certain

values

of

Tn(i,

) m

could already be computed based on the partial computation

of

Em(i),n

and,

then,

be

used

instead

of

Tn(i,

−1 m

)

to

compute

the

remaining messages Em(i),n [7], [8]; hence, the shuffling of the

check-node update and the variable-node update. The VSS is

described in Algorithm 3.

The HSS is the converse of the VSS: the roles of check nodes

and variable nodes are swapped. It is a turbo-decoding like

schedule, where the component codes are the rows or groups of

rows of the parity-check matrix. A complete historical view of

this schedule class can be found in [6]. An LDPC HSS decoder

was generalized by Boutillon et al. [16]. This schedule also

enables the decoding convergence to speed up.

Note that these schedules force the node processing to be

serial. The use of parallelism (P > 1) leads to implementing

the group-shuffled approach [7].

IV. ANALYSIS OF COMPLEXITY
The decoding complexity of an LDPC code is directly linked to the number of messages to be processed per iteration, i.e., to the number of edges within the bipartite graph of the code, or equivalently, to the number of nonzero entries of the paritycheck matrix (two messages per edge), whatever the scheduling is: the scheduling is in fact only a partitioning of the different edges to be processed.

A. Processing Power
One decoding iteration involves processing all the Tn,m and Em,n messages, related to the edge between the variable vn and the parity-check cm . Let E denote the total number of edges inside the bipartite graph of the code. For a regular (dv , dc ) LDPC code of length N , for example, the total number of edges is given by

E = dv M = dc N.

(3)

Let Pc denote the required processing power to decode the LDPC codes, defined as the number of edges to be processed per clock cycle (we assume the decoder is implemented on synchronous-logic hardware, using a single clock). We can derive Pc from the following parameters:
1) number K of information bits to be transmitted per codeword;
2) rate R of the code; 3) information throughput D required; 4) maximum number1 of iterations imax ; 5) clock frequency fclk .

1Our analysis assumes a fixed maximum number of iterations. The results can be easily generalized to a variable number of iterations (e.g., using the well-known syndrome-based convergence test), replacing im ax by the average number of iterations actually performed. See also [17].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:05:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUILLOUD et al.: GENERIC DESCRIPTION AND SYNTHESIS OF LDPC DECODERS

2087

Fig. 1. Generic node processor: implementation for “total sum” and “trellis” schemes. (a) Total sum first Implementations, (b) Trellis Implementations.

We will assume hereafter that the matrix is full rank, that is M = (1 − R)N . The number of variables ([var]) to be processed at each clock cycle is the number of variables per second (D/R [var/s]) multiplied by the duration of a cycle, which yields to: D/fclk R [var/cycle] Moreover, there are E × imax edges to be processed to decode the N -bit length codeword, i.e., Eimax /N [edges/var]. So, the number of edges to be processed per clock cycle is equal to

Pc

=

D [var/cycle] ×
fclk R

Eimax [edges/var] N

(4)

= Eimax D [edges/cycle]

(5)

K fc lk

Pc can also be expressed using the average variable-node degree dv = E/N and the rate R = K/N of the code

Pc

=

d¯v imax D . fclk R

(6)

B. Example

To illustrate the results of the theoretical study, let us consider a regular LDPC code of length N and rate R = 1/2, with parameters (dv , dc ) = (3, 6). Assume that this code is decoded with a binary throughput D = 10 Mbits/s by means of a decoder with a clock frequency of 100 MHz. What is the minimum number of edges to be processed by the architecture per clock cycle to achieve the throughput if a maximum of imax = 20 iterations is specified?
The code being regular, the number E of edges is E = 3N . Considering that K = N/2 (code rate is 1/2), the numerical application of (5) yields

Pc

=

E imax D K fc lk

=

3N × 20 × (10 × 106 ) (100 × 106 ) × N/2

=

12

[edges/cycle].

Thus, at each clock cycle, an average of 12/3 = 4 variable nodes and 12/6 = 2 parity-check nodes have to be processed. The architecture of the decoder has to use a parallelism of at least two check-processors and four variable-processors to achieve the specifications.

V. GENERIC ARCHITECTURE OF LDPC CODE DECODERS
We propose now to define a generic architecture for an LDPC code decoder, associated with various parameters. The aim of this section is to define a parametric and generic architecture

of LDPC decoders that embeds most of the existing published architectures. This architecture is based on node processor architectures, the position and type of memory, the algorithm schedules, and the level of parallelism.

A. Generic Node Processors

1) Data Paths: The generic node processor is made up of d input/output ports (ej , sj ), j ∈ {1, · · · , d}. Internal memory banks allow input or output messages to be saved inside the node processor. The processing of an output port sj is performed according to: sj = i=j {ei}, where is a generic associative operator. Many architectures can be implemented for this processor: for example, the trellis architecture [2], [18] in Fig. 1(b) or the “total sum” architecture [19], [20] in Fig. 1(a) with both parallel and serial implementations. The total sum implementation involves computing first the “total sum,” which is defined as: s = i {ei}. Then, the jth input is inversed so as to compute sj from s. This implementation is interesting when the degree of the processor is high, since a lot of common computations are grouped. But, it is possible only when the operator can be reversed. These are detailed in [4]. Note that these different architectures can have either a parallel implementation or a serial implementation. Registers can also be added to pipeline the processing and, thus, decrease the critical path length. The generic operator may be either the sum ( ), or the star ( ). The star operator between two log-likelihood ratios is defined as the function F applied on them [21]

ei

ej

=

1 + exp (ei × ej ) . exp (ei) + exp (ej )

2) Update Modes: There are three steps to be handled inside a generic node processor: input message reading (or sampling), computation of the output messages, and output of the outgoing messages. There are mainly two types of approaches that can be defined to manage these three steps differently for the d input/output ports of the processor: grouped update and spread update.
The grouped update involves computing the output messages if and only if all the input messages have been sampled. So, a typical scheme is first to wait for all the inputs to be updated and to save them. Then, all the output messages are to be computed, and finally to be output. Then, a new cycle can start again by waiting for all the inputs to be updated in the memory, erasing the previous ones.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:05:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2088

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

TABLE I SCHEDULES ASSOCIATED WITH THE DIFFERENT COMBINATIONS OF UPDATES
FOR VARIABLE- AND CHECK-NODE PROCESSORS

Fig. 3. The possible locations of the interconnection network. The datapath for the sign (.) processing of the messages is omitted in this figure.

Fig. 2. Generic message passing architecture.
The spread update is a kind of on-demand control. It means that, for example, the node processor can be asked for a given output message, and, then, it can be asked to take into account a new input message. Two spread update modes can be defined, depending on the memory inside the node processor: the straight one and the delayed one. When a new input message on a given edge has to be taken into account, either the previous message related to this edge is erased and replaced by this new one (straight update), or there are two memories (delayed update) denoted input-memory and compute-memory: the new message is saved in the input-memory while the previous one has been saved in the compute-memory. When the input-memory is full, then the roles of the two memories are swapped. In the straight update case, the same memory is used to save the new incoming inputs and to compute the output messages. Hence, the last output message will be processed with the most recent input messages. The straight spread update is implemented to speed up the propagation of the messages as in shuffle schedules.
To summarize, there are three ways of handling the processing steps in a generic node processor: the straight spread update, the delayed spread update, and the grouped update. When combining these three steps on the check- and variable-node processors, it is possible to span all the known schedules of LDPC decoding. These are summed up in Table I.
B. Message Passing Architecture
The generic processors are instantiated so as to create the global architecture of the decoder, as illustrated in Fig. 2.

The variable-processors Vi and the check-processors Ci are instances of the generic node processor with different values of parameters. P check-processors with dc input/output ports are instantiated. So, each of them is able to process a parity check of degree dc within α = dc /dc clock cycles.
The interconnection network represented in the bipartite graph of an LDPC code is materialized through a shuffle or a routing network π and its inverse π−1. The complexity of the interconnection network depends on the structure of the parity-check matrix. From an implementation point of view, it seems desirable to have simple interconnections such as a barrel shifter, like in [22] and [6]. Depending on specific hardware constraints, this network can be implemented on different alternative locations, as illustrated in Fig. 3: depending on the check-node generic operator (star or sum operator), up to four different locations are presented (dashed lines) separating the variable node processors from the check-node processors. With the use of the star operator (the input and the output of the paritycheck node processors have the dimension of LLRs), there is only one possible location. But, with the sum operator, there are four different locations, whether the inputs and the outputs of the node processors are in the Fourier domain or not.
The optimal number of variable-processors having dv input/output ports is given by the fact that the interconnection network has a determinate number of inputs and outputs. Each of the variable-processors is able to process a parity-check of degree dv within β = dv /dv clock cycles.
Such a generic message passing architecture has a complexity Pc , as defined by (5), which is equal to

Pc = P × dc = P × dc /α.

(7)

Thus, if we take the example of Section IV-B, where Pc = 12, a solution with P = 2 check-processors is possible if the check-processors are able to process at least dc = Pc /P = 6 inputs/outputs per clock cycle (α = 1), {i.e.}, if P = 2 parallel generic processors are used. If serial generic processors are to be used (α = dc = 6), then P = 12 check-processors would have to be instantiated to achieve the specifications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:05:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUILLOUD et al.: GENERIC DESCRIPTION AND SYNTHESIS OF LDPC DECODERS
TABLE II EXAMPLES OF THE PARAMETER VALUES FOR SEVERAL PUBLISHED IMPLEMENTATIONS OF LDPC DECODERS AND FOR A NEW ONE

2089

VI. ARCHITECTURE ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS FOR LDPC CODE DECODERS
A generic architecture for LDPC decoders was proposed in Section V. In this section, some examples from the literature are taken to illustrate the versatility of the generic architecture. Then, we show that shuffling the parameters of the generic architecture can even yield a new architecture for the VSS schedule.

A. Architecture Analysis

The parameters specifying the architecture of the LDPC code

decoders have been defined in the previous sections. They are

listredNaosdfeolplorowcse:ssors:

1) three possible architectures (direct, trellis, total sum)

2) four possible locations for the interconnection network

3) three possible update modes (grouped, straight, or

r

delayed spread) Message passing architecture:

1) three parameters for the parallelism specification

(P, α, β)

Some combinations of values for these parameters have

already been used or implemented in the LDPC decoders.

Some other combinations are new and yield interesting new

implementations.

Due to the limited number of pages, we cannot present a

classification of all the published decoder architectures, so we

present only three of them hereafter: they fairly illustrate the

diversity of the published architectures. Note that the parameters

we propose for the description of the following architectures are

summed up in the first three columns of Table II.

The first one is from Zhang and Parhi [23]. It is a decoder

implemented on an FPGA Xilinx Virtex 2600 having a through-

put of 54 Mbit/s, for a regular code of length N = 9216 bits

and of rate R = 0.5. We can note that the node processors are

completely parallel. The scheduling is the FS, and the locations

of the interconnection network are such that lookup tables are

required in both the check nodes and the variable nodes (location

number 2).

The second example is an architecture proposed by Chen

and Hocevar [24] implemented on an application-specific in-

tegrated circuit (ASIC) 0.11 µ and having a throughput of

376 Mbit/s. The length of the code is N = 8088, the rate is

also R = 0.5, but the code is irregular. In this implementation,

the check-node processors are parallel whereas the variable node

Fig. 4. New architecture proposal associated with the vertical shuffle schedule of the BP algorithm (serial implementation for both check- and variable-node processors, magnitude processing on the check side).
processors are serial. The location of the interconnection network is classical (the lookup tables are in the check-node processors). The scheduling is the flooding one over the variables (FS-V).
The third example is an architecture proposed by Mansour [25] implemented on an ASIC 0.18 µ and having a throughput of 192 Mbit/s. The length of the code is N = 2304, the rate is R = 2/3, and the code is also irregular. In this implementation, the check-node processors and the variable-node processors are both serial. The location of the interconnection network is classical (the lookup tables are in the check-node processors). The scheduling is the shuffled one over the parity checks (HSS).
B. Architecture Synthesis
1) Example of A New Architecture: The architecture family generated by our framework also encompasses new efficient architectures. An example of an application of this formalism is given in the last column of Table II. The algorithm performed by this architecture is exactly the VSS, as specified in Table I. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first published architecture implementing this algorithm. It is depicted in Fig. 4, where only the magnitude processing is illustrated. Algorithm 4 is applied: it is a hardware-oriented description of the algorithm 3 for the magnitude part only. The messages have changed: the variable-to-check message magnitudes are now denoted

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:05:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2090

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007
TABLE III MEMORY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE THREE DIFFERENT SCHEDULES

E = dv average N = 3N . We also assume that all the messages are coded using the same fixed-point format on w bits. Finally, we omit the input/output buffers, which would add two memories of N w bits each. The HSS has the lowest required memory size. The VSS memory size is a function of the code rate: for high code rates, it is possible to use almost the same amount of memory as for the HSS. It is to be noted that the FS-P has a higher memory requirement than the two shuffle schedules HSS and VSS. However, the main part of the memory is used to save the edge messages. This issue can be addressed using suboptimal algorithms such as the (scaled or offset) BP-based algorithm [10], [26] the λ−min algorithm [21], or the A−min* algorithm [27].

Qn,m = f (Tn,m ), and the check-to-variable message magnitudes are denoted |Em ,n | = f −1 (Rm ,n ). They are the function of the previous Em,n and Tn,m messages through the f function. The Qn,m messages are saved in the memory either on the
variable side (dotted lines in the figure) or on the parity-check
side. They are read from this memory and are subtracted from
the Rm value to obtain the Rm,n message. The straight spread update is performed on the check-processor side: the values Rm relating to the parity-checks cm are saved in memory. If we assume that N (m) = {n1 , · · · , ndc }, then Rm(i) is updated dc times during a decoding iteration. If we denote the Jth update of Rm(i) by Rm(i,J ) , then we have

J

dc

Rm(i,J ) =

Q(nij),m +

Q(nij−,m1)

(8)

j=1

j=J +1

J

dc

=

f

Tn(

i) j,

m

+

f Tn(ij−,m1)

(9)

j=1

j=J +1

where J is a positive integer varying from 1 to dc during the iteration. The Rm,n messages are fed to the variable-node processor, where the Tm,n values are processed and transformed into Qn,m messages. These new Qn,m messages replace in memory the message of the previous iteration. Also, the Rm value is updated by subtracting the old Qn,m and adding the new one (see algorithm 4, line 13). This architecture requires saving (N + M + E) values for the In , Rm , and Qn,m data, respectively. Note that the architecture associated with the HSS requires only saving (N + E) values for the In + En and Em,n data.
2) Comparison of Memory Requirements for the Different
Schedules (Table III): We assume that an LDPC code of length N has an average variable degree of dv average = 3. Then

VII. CONCLUSION
A lot of LDPC code decoders have been proposed in the literature. However, it is difficult to compare them. We have proposed a global framework for the description, analysis and synthesis of low-density parity-check (LDPC) code decoders. It is based on a generic model of a decoder described by parameters, related to a generic node processor and to a generic message passing architecture. A quantification of the complexity required by the decoding of an LDPC code has also been proposed. This framework makes it possible to describe several published LDPC decoder implementations using the same model and parameters. It also makes it possible to ensure a good match between algorithm and scheduling on the one hand, and decoder architectures on the other hand, as illustrated by the new efficient architecture proposed in this paper.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. David Declercq for interesting comments on an earlier draft of this paper, and the anonymous reviewers for their interesting comments. Many thanks also to Janet Ormrod for her contributions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] E. Boutillon, J. Castura, and F. Kschischang, “Decoder-first code design,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Relat. Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 459–462.
[3] F. Verdier and D. Declercq, “A LDPC parity check matrix construction for parallel hardware decoding,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Relat. topics Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 235–238.
[4] F. Guilloud, “Generic architectures for LDPC codes decoding” Ph.D. dissertation, Telecom Paris, Paris, France, Jul. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:05:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUILLOUD et al.: GENERIC DESCRIPTION AND SYNTHESIS OF LDPC DECODERS

2091

[5] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “Turbo decoder architectures for lowdensity parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 17–21, 2002, pp. 1383–1388.
[6] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS 2004), Oct. 13–15, pp. 107–112.
[7] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Conf. Rec. 36th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Nov. 3–6, 2002, pp. 8–15.
[8] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[9] T. Theocharides, G. Link, E. Swankoski, N. Vijaykrishnan, M. Irwin, and H. Schmit, “Evaluating alternative implementations for LDPC decoder check node function,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Annu. Symp. VLSI, Feb. 19–20, 2004, pp. 77–82.
[10] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1298, Aug. 2005.
[11] D. MacKay and R. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” in Proc. 5th IMA Conference Cryprography Coding. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1995, pp. 100–111.
[12] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Low density parity check codes over GF(q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165–167, Jun. 1998.
[13] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs” Ph.D. dissertation, Linko¨ping University, Linko¨ping, Sweden, 1996.
[14] Y. Mao and A. Banihashemi, “Decoding low-density parity-check codes with probabilistic scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 414–416, Oct. 2001.
[15] H. Kfir and I. Kanter, “Parallel versus sequential updating for belief propagation decoding,” Physica A, vol. 330, pp. 259–270, Dec. 2003.
[16] E. Boutillon, J. Tousch, and F. Guilloud, “LDPC decoder, corresponding method, system and computer program,” U.S. Patent pending, Dec. 2003.
[17] A. Martinez and M. Rovini, “Iterative decoders based on statistical multiplexing,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Relat. topics, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 423–426.
[18] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “Low-power VLSI decoder architectures for LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Low Power Electron. Des., Aug. 12–14, 2002, pp. 284–289.
[19] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mw 1-gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 lowdensity parity-check code decoder,” J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[20] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic´, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 25–29, 2001, pp. 3019– 3024.
[21] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, and J.-L. Danger, “λ-min decoding algorithm of
regular and irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Relat. Topics, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 1–4. [22] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications, ETSI EN 302 307 v1.1.1, Mar. 2005. [23] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “An FPGA implementation of (3,6)-regular lowdensity parity-check code decoder,” EURASIP J. Appl. Signal Process., Special Issue Rapid Prototyping DSP Syst., vol. 2003, no. 6, pp. 530–542, May 2003. [24] Y. Chen and D. Hocevar, “An FPGA and ASIC implementation of rate 1/2, 8088-b irregular low density parity check decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 1–5, 2003, pp. 113–117. [25] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003. [26] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic´, and I. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity-check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999. [27] C. Jones, E. Valle´s, M. Smith, and J. Villasenor, “Approximate-min∗ constraint node updating for LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Military Commun. Conf. (MILCOM), Oct. 13–16, 2003, pp. 157–162.

Fre´de´ric Guilloud (S’02–A’04–M’04) was born in Tassin-La-Demi-Lune, France, on January 18, 1975. He received the Diploma in engineering from the Ecole Nationale Supe´rieure de l’Electronique et de ses Applications (ENSEA), Cergy-Pontoise, France, in 1998, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and telecommunications from the Ecole Nationale Supe´rieure des Te´le´communications (ENST) Paris, Paris, France, in 2004. He is currently engaged in research on field-programmable gate array (FPGA) implementations for low-density parity-check (LDPC) code decoders. He is a former student of the Ecole Normale Supe´rieure (ENS) de Cachan, Cachan, France, and was a Professeur Agre´ge´ in 1999. In 2004, he joined the Department of Signal and Communications, ENST Bretagne, Brest, France, as an Associate Professor. His current research interests include channel coding, both on the physical and on the application layers.
Emmanuel Boutillon (A’05–M’05) was born in Chatou, France, on November 2, 1966. He received the Diploma in engineering in 1990 and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and telecommunications 1995, both from the Ecole Nationale Supe´rieure des Te´le´communications (ENST) Paris, Paris, France.
In 1991, he was an Assistant Professor in the Ecole Multinationale Supe´rieure des Te´le´communications, Dakar, Senegal. In 1992, he was a Research Engineer at the ENST, where he was engaged in research on very large-scale integrated circuits (VLSI) for digital communications. In 1998, he spent a sabbatical year at the University of Toronto, ON, Canada. In 2000, he joined the laboratory LESTER, Universite´ de Bretagne Sud, Lorient, France, as a Professor. He is currently the Head of the LESTER. His current research interests include the interactions between algorithm and architecture in the field of wireless communications. In particular, he works on Turbo Codes and LDPC decoders.
Jacky Tousch (A’01–M’01) received the M.Sc. degree in telecommunications and electronics from ENST Bretagne, Brest, France, in 1999.
In 1999, he cofounded TurboConcept SAS, Plouzane´, France, where he is currently the Chief Technical Officer and is engaged in research on intellectual property core design of turbo codes and LDPC modules. He is involved in several European Space Agency research projects. He is the holder of a patent on LDPC receiver architecture. His current research interests include algorithms and VLSI implementation for telecommunication standards.
Jean-Luc Danger received the degree in electrical engineering from the Ecole Supe´rieure d’Electricite´, Paris, France, in 1981.
After 12 years in industrial laboratories (Philips, Nokia), he joined the Ecole Nationale Superieure des Telecommunications (ENST) Paris, Paris, in 1993, where he is currently the Professor and Head of the Digital Electronic System Research Group and is engaged in research on configurable architectures of digital communication algorithms. His current research interests include secured embedded fieldprogrammable gate arrays (FPGAs), asynchronous logic, and energy detection ultra-wideband (UWB) receivers.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:05:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

