Two-Stage Hybrid decoding for Low-Density Parity-Check codes
Hany R. Zeidan Maha M. Elsabrouty Faculty ofInformation Engineering & Technology, German University in Cairo,
Cairo, Egypt.

Abstract
Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes are gaining increased attention in information theory field. However one of the main problems facing usage of these codes in communication systems is its high complexity decoding scheme that results in high decoding delay. Such a delay is not acceptable in many applications. This paper presents, a new hybrid decoding scheme. The proposed scheme mixes between soft-decision and hard-decision algorithms and
provides a good tradeoff between error performance
and decoding delay as proved by simulation results.
1. Introduction
The family of low-density parity check codes (LDPC) was first discovered by Gallager [1], [2] in the early 1960s. It has been shown that these codes have remarkable performance with iterative decoding that is very close to Shannon limit. They become strong competitors for turbo codes [3] for error control for many digital communication systems. LDPC have attracted substantial research interest in the field of information theory. LDPC codes have been included in many applications such as DVS-S2 [4], which is a standard for digital satellite video broadcast because of its brilliant Bit Error Rate (BER) performance. These codes are expected to be part of many future standards as well.
There are many types of decoding algorithms that can be used to decode LDPC codes and have good performance. These algorithms can be categorized as soft-decision decoding algorithm such as the sum-

product algorithm (SPA) or hard-decision decoding algorithm such as bit-flipping algorithms which have many versions [7], [8], [9].
The high complexity of the sum-product algorithm was shown to achieve a good capacity performance. However, this high complexity takes much decoding time (delay) that may be a critical case for some applications especially for those who are greatly affected by the delay such as video and audio transmission.
So, modified versions of these decoding algorithms have been investigated to perform a trade-off between error-performance and the decoding delay to be suitable for applications that is sensitive to time delay and do not require ultimate performance. The algorithm proposed in this paper falls in this category of algorithms. However, it selects the most suitable soft decision and hard decision algorithm to provide improved performance when compared to other algorithms present in literature.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section (2), presents the background on Sum Product Algorithm (SPA) and reliability-ratio based weighted bit-flipping algorithm. These algorithms provide the basis for the proposed algorithm. Section (3), then, presents the new hybrid decoding algorithm. Section (4) presents simulation results compared to the original algorithms.
2. Theoretical background
A key point to understand the improved performance of the proposed hybrid algorithm is to review the two decoding algorithms involved. The hybrid algorithm selects the best performing soft-decision and hard-

978-1-4244-1841-1/08/$25.00 02008 IEEE 650
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

decision algorithms, namely the SPA algorithm and the Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping algorithm (RRWBF), respectively. The following two subsections present a brief overview of these two algorithms.

2.1. Sum-Product algorithm (SPA)

Among the family of soft decision decoding

algorithms for LDPC, the SPA algorithm stands as the

best performing decoding method [6], [11], [12]. The

sum-product algorithm (SPA) has been known by

Mackay and Neal as in [5]. Before their research,

LDPC was decoded by a simple way of bit-flipping

algorithm which was proposed by Gallager [1]. It is an

iterative decoding algorithm based on belief

propagation [6] which is extremely efficient for

decoding LDPC codes. This algorithm is based on

decoding LDPC code using Tanner graphs [10]. This

algorithm is a soft-decision algorithm and is proved to

perform the best among all other decoding algorithms

(either soft-decision or hard-decision).

The SPA is a symbol-by-symbol soft-in/soft-out

decoding algorithm. It processes the received symbols

iteratively to improve the reliability of each decoded

code symbol based on the parity check sums computed

from the hard decisions of the received symbols and the

parity-check matrix H that characterizes the code. The

reliability of a decoded symbol can be measured by its

marginal posteriori probability, its Log Likelihood

Ratio (LLR), or the value of its corresponding received

symbol. The computed reliability measures of code

symbols at the end of each decoding iteration are used

as inputs for the next iteration. This decoding iteration

algorithm continues until a certain stopping criterion is

satisfied. Then, based on the computed reliability

measures of code symbols, hard decisions are made.

If we consider LDPC code of length n specified by a

parity check matrix H with J rows, hl,h2. h.. The
implementation of the SPA decoding is based on

calculation of marginal a posteriori

probabilities P(v, y) 's forO < I < n . Then the LLR

for each code bit is given by:

L(vj) =lgP(v1 Ily)(1

P(Vj = O 5

1

))

also, p° = P(v1 0) and p= P(v= 1) be the

priori probabilities of v, = 0 and v, = 1, respectively.

The algorithm continues with priori probabilities

until the a posteriori probabilities are computed. Using

syndrome condition, the hard decision decoded vector

is checked if it satisfies the condition:

Hod=O

(2)

where H is the parity-check matrix for a given LDPC code of dimension Jxn where J is the number of rows and n is the number of columns. d is the decoded vector obtained at the end of each decoding iteration of dimension lxn.
From [7], the computational complexity of each
iteration is of order 0(2Jp0+4ny) where J is the
number of rows of the parity-check matrix H, p is the
number of ones per row, n is the number of columns and / is the number of ones per column. This
complexity is multiplied by the number of iterations used by the algorithm.
So, the sum-product algorithm gives excellent performance but as a drawback, this algorithm need high complexity to implement which requires large decoding delay which is not favorable for some applications.
2.2. Reliability ratio based weighted bitflipping algorithm (RRWBF)
As has been mentioned before, the other category of LDPC decoding algorithms is the hard decision based family. As the SPA is the best soft decision algorithm, the Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping algorithm (RRWBF) is the best performing hard decision algorithm [9].
This algorithm is one of the hard-decision algorithms that are used to decode LDPC codes. It performs the best among all other algorithms of bitflipping based algorithms as weighted bit-flipping [7], modified bit-flipping [8]. It is based on avoiding the drawback of the last two algorithms. A drawback of the modified weighted BF algorithm is the dependence on a (a real number representing weighting factor, where
u>0, that has to be found optimally for each particular column weight and for each individual SNR) that has to be found optimally for each particular column weight and for each individual SNR. Also, both algorithms consider only the specific check-node based
information, which depends on the message node
having the lowest soft-value Iy,1. However, all message
nodes participating in certain parity check are contributing, i.e. all message nodes might be subjected to change. However, for two different message nodes participating in the same violated parity check, the probability that the check is violated owing to the message node having a high soft magnitude is lower than that associated with the message node having a low soft magnitude.
The above, hard-decision decoding, algorithm is in a way soft-decision decoding scheme [9]. The

651
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

computational complexity of the RRWBF algorithm is
O(Jp + n /) for each decoding iteration. Since
Jp (orn)) is the total number of 1- entries in the
parity check matrix, the computational complexity of reliability ratio weighted BF is linearly proportional to the total number of 1-entries in H.
3. The proposed algorithm: Two-stage hybrid decoding
This modified algorithm is a mixture between soft-decision decoding algorithm (represented in SPA as it is the best soft-decision algorithm among all existing algorithms) and hard-decision decoding algorithm (represented in RRWBF as it is the best hard-decision algorithm among all existing algorithms).
As we have seen, the SPA is computationally expensive. Each decoding iteration requires many real number computations. If decoding of LDPC code decoded by SPA converges slowly, it will take a large number of iterations to achieve the desired performance. As a result, a large number of iterations lead to a large number of computations and long decoding delay. Also, LDPC codes can't be decoded by RRWBF algorithm only as its performance is somehow limited and don't achieve great performance as it is a hard-decision algorithm. However, for LDPC codes, this difficulty can be overcome to a large extent by using a two-stage hybrid soft/hard decoding scheme.
At the first stage, the code is decoded using SPA with a small fixed number of iterations, say I. At the
completion of the ph iteration, hard decision of decoded
symbols is made based on their LLR (log-likelihood ratio). This results in a binary sequence of estimated bits. Then, this sequence is decoded by reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping algorithm for the remaining number of iteration till the defined maximum number of iterations.
This two-stage hybrid soft/hard decoding scheme offers a good tradeoff between error performance and decoding complexity which in turn reduces decoding delay. As for the computational complexity of the twostage hybrid decoding scheme, the complexity computed for the SPA is of order
0(2Jp + 4ny) multiplied by N1 where N1 is the
number of iterations assigned for the SPA. On the other hand, the complexity for the RRWBF algorithm
isO(Jp + ny) multiplied by N2 where N2 is the
number of iterations assigned for the RRWBF algorithm. So, if the total number of iterations assigned to the algorithm is N, it is divided into:

N=N1+N2

(3)

where N1 and N2 as defined before. The decoding complexity of the SPA using the N iterations will be
O(N (2Jp + 4ny)) and the decoding

complexity of the RRWBF algorithm the N iterations
will be O(N (Jp + niy)) . As for that of the hybrid

decoding scheme, the complexity will be for each

decoding

iteration

is

of

order

O(N1(2Jp + 4ny) + N2(Jp + ny)) which is

less than the decoding complexity of the SPA given before and greater than that of the RRWBF algorithm than the decoding complexity of the SPA. This leads to reducing decoding delay to be applicable for some applications which are sensitive to delay such as audio and video transmission.

4. Simulation results

Comparison was made between different numbers of iterations for different decoding algorithms. The three schemes were used for decoding (60,30,3) and (200,100,3) regular LDPC code using a BPSK modulation scheme communicating over an AWGN channel where for an LDPC code of (n, k, v), the n stands for the code word length, k is the message length, and v is the number of '1's per colunm in the parity check matrix H.
Since two LDPC codes having different block lengths are utilized in this experiment, we allow a different number of iterations for the (60,30,3) and (200,100,3) LDPC codes, respectively.
Figure 1 presents the performance of two-stage hybrid decoding for (60, 30) LDPC code along with the SPA and RRWBF algorithms using 10 iterations assigned for each algorithm. The 10 iterations assigned for the new hybrid algorithm is divided as 2 soft iterations and 8 hard iterations for the first run and 4
soft iterations and 6 hard iterations for the 2nd run. As it can be seen from the results, a close performance to the soft decision SPA algorithm is realized with less complexity needed.
In figure 2, the same is repeated but for 25 iterations and the performance is observed to be improved. . It is clear from the figure that the performance of the hybrid decoding gets closer more to that of the SPA as the number of iterations increase conserving the same number of iterations for the SPA part in the hybrid decoding constant with increasing number of iterations assigned to the RRWBF part in the hybrid decoding scheme. The results of this setup also show that the

652
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

proposed hybrid decoding scheme gives excellent tradeoff and is suitable for most applications.
Figure 3 presents the results for the performance of the (200,100) decoding using the three algorithms using 10 iterations assigned for all algorithms. From the figure, it can be seen the close performance of the

hybrid decoding algorithm to the performance of the SPA algorithm when dedicating only 4 iterations for soft decoding and the rest for hard decoding. The value of the proposed algorithm is magnified in such a setup as it leads to a reduction in the complexity to less than 20% of the SPA algorithm.

10b

isio

ra

(6 ,3

ith

(1

(60.30) with hybrid (2 itr soft,8 itr hard)

e (60,30) vvith hybrid (4 itr soft,6 itr hard)

10 Fo

(60,30) with SPA(l 0 iteratiohs)
...

10m
10-2

10-31

1 ,-,--4

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

SNR

Figure 1: Two-stage hybrid decoding for (60,30) for 10 iterations

10,

.......................................................................I............... ......:,.

-

..

...

I'

isio

(60,30) with RRWBF (25 iterations)

.........................................

(60,30) with hybrid(2 itr soft,23 itr hard)

I 60

...

e (60,30) WI-th hybrid(5 itr soft,20 itr hard)

(60 ,30) With hybrid(l 0 itr soft, 1 itr a5 td h

)

..........

...

,3 vvith

itetio ra(2

10o-

10-2

...

..

...

10 -

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

Figure 2: Two-stage hybrid decoding for (60,30) for 25 iterations

653
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

lo 10 I
i 00
10

I

I~~

...............................................

~~~~~ ~~ ~~ ~~ ~~ ~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ Uncode transmission
(200,100) with RRWBF (10 iterations) (200,100) with hybrid (2 itr soft,8 itr hard) (200,100) with hybrid (4 itr soft,6 itr hard) (200,100) with SPA (10 iterations)

...

...

1o-2
LLI In
10-3

........... :............ m.

10-4

l0-5

10-6

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

1

SNR

Figure 3: Two-stage hybrid decoding for (200,100) for 10 iterations

5. Conclusion and future work
A new decoding scheme is proposed in this paper that combines between soft-decision algorithm (SPA) and hard-decision algorithm (RRWBF) that provides a good tradeoff between decoding complexity and decoding delay (time). This new decoding scheme has average decoding complexity between that of SPA and that of RRWBF algorithm. This scheme is so useful for some digital communication applications that are so sensitive to time such as video and audio transmission.
As for the future work, this two-stage hybrid decoding scheme can furthermore improved to decrease decoding time more and more by decreasing average number of iterations per each signal-to-noise ratio.
6. References
[1] R. G. Gallager, "Low density parity check codes," IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962. [2] Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963. [3] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, "Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo

codes," in Proc. 1993 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064- 1070. [4] J. Dielissen, A. Hekstra, V. Berg, "Low cost LDPC decoder for DVB-S2" [5] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, "Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes," Electronics Letters, vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645-1646, 1996. [6] David J. C. MacKay "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399-432, Mar. 1999. [7] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, "Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711-2736, Nov. 2001. [8] Zhang, J., and Fossorier, M.P.C.: 'A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes', IEEE Commun. Lett., 2004, 8, (3), pp. 165-167 [9] Guo, F., and Hanzo, L.: 'Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for low-density parity-check codes', Electron. Lett., 2004, 40, (21), pp. 1356-1358 [10] R. M. Tanner, "A recursive approach to low complexity codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533547, Sept. 1981.

654
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

