4076

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Efficient Serial Message-Passing Schedules for LDPC Decoding
Eran Sharon, Simon Litsyn, Senior Member, IEEE, and Jacob Goldberger

Abstract—Conventionally, in each low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoding iteration all the variable nodes and subsequently all the check nodes send messages to their neighbors (flooding schedule). An alternative, more efficient, approach is to update the nodes’ messages serially (serial schedule). A theoretical analysis of serial message passing decoding schedules is presented. In particular, the evolution of the computation tree under serial scheduling is analyzed. It shows that the tree grows twice as fast in comparison to the flooding schedule’s one, indicating that the serial schedule propagates information twice as fast in the code’s underlying graph. Furthermore, an asymptotic analysis of the serial schedule’s convergence rate is done using the density evolution (DE) algorithm. Applied to various ensembles of LDPC codes, it shows that for long codes the serial schedule is expected to converge in half the number of iterations compared to the standard flooding schedule, when working near the ensemble’s threshold. This observation is generally proved for the binary erasure channel (BEC) under some natural assumptions. Finally, an accompanying concentration theorem is proved.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, density evolution, factor graph, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, message-passing decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE most attractive feature of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is their ability to achieve a significant fraction of the channel capacity using iterative decoding at relatively low implementation complexity. In this work, we analyze the convergence rate of message-passing iterative decoding algorithms. These algorithms operate on the bipartite graph representation of the code by iteratively exchanging messages along the graph edges between variable and check nodes.
The order of passing the messages along the graph edges is referred to as an updating rule or schedule. The standard message-passing schedule is the flooding schedule [11], where in each iteration all the variable nodes, and subsequently all the check nodes, pass new messages to their neighbors. Even though the flooding schedule is very popular, it is not efficient in terms of convergence rate. Alternative schedules, which are based on
Manuscript received June 12, 2005; revised May 1, 2007. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 4th International Symposium on Turbo Codes, Munich, Germany, April 2006.
E. Sharon and S. Litsyn are with the School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail: eransh@eng.tau.ac.il; litsyn@eng.tau.ac.il).
J. Goldberger is with the School of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel (e-mail: goldbej@eng.biu.ac.il).
Communicated by T. J. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of Figures 1–7 in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2007.907507

a serial updating order have been considered in various papers. Zhang and Fossorier [24] and Kfir and Kanter [10] developed a decoding algorithm which is based on a sequential schedule involving a serial update of variable nodes’ messages. Both papers provided convincing empirical results indicating a fast convergence of the serial schedule. However, these observations were not supported by a theoretical analysis. Mansour and Shnabhag [18] proposed a turbo decoding algorithm for a generalization of Gallager’s codes, where the LDPC code is constructed as an intersection of several supercodes. This algorithm utilizes a dual decoding schedule to the one suggested in [24], [10] involving a serial update of the supercodes. The authors [22] and Hocevar [9] presented a similar decoding algorithm generalized for LDPC codes and proposed efficient implementation of the algorithm.
Adaptive scheduling techniques, which change the message updating order based on the graph structure or the specific channel realization were also considered in several papers. Mao and Banihashemi [17] proposed a probabilistic variant of the flooding schedule, which reduces the error floor and the number of undetected errors by taking into account the loop structure of the underlying code’s graph. A lazy scheduling approach in which not all messages are updated every iteration, and the probability of updating a message is a function of its reliability and updating history, was described in [13].
In this paper, we consider nonadaptive, fixed scheduling techniques. We use several approaches for analyzing the convergence rate of serial and flooding decoding schedules. The analysis quantifies and confirms empirical observations about the convergence rate of serial and flooding schedules from previous papers.
The paper is organized as follows. Background on LDPC codes and message passing decoding schedules is provided in Section II. In Section III, we analyze the decoding computation tree evolution under serial scheduling and show that it grows twice as fast in comparison to the flooding schedule, indicating that the serial schedules propagate information on the code’s graph twice as fast. Asymptotic convergence rate analysis of serial scheduling based on the density evolution (DE) algorithm is described in Section IV. Based on it, we prove that under certain likely assumptions, for the binary erasure channel (BEC), asymptotically in the code’s length and when working near the decoder’s threshold, the serial schedule is expected to converge in half the number of iterations compared to the standard flooding schedule. To complete the asymptotic analysis, a concentration theorem for serially scheduled decoding is proved.

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON et al.: EFFICIENT SERIAL MESSAGE-PASSING SCHEDULES FOR LDPC DECODING

4077

II. BACKGROUND

LDPC codes are linear error-correcting codes defined by

sparse parity-check matrices [8]. Alternatively, they can be

defined by a sparse bipartite undirected graph consisting of

variable and check nodes. We will denote the sets of variable

nodes, check nodes, and graph edges by , , and , respec-

tively. A variable node, denoted by , represents a bit in the

transmitted codeword and a check node, denoted by , repre-

sents a parity-check constraint. Each check node is connected

by an edge to the variable nodes it checks.

A regular

-LDPC code is a code that is defined by

a regular bipartite graph, such that each variable node is con-

nected to check nodes and each check node is connected to

variable nodes. The ensemble of regular

-LDPC codes

of length is denoted by

. An irregular LDPC code [14]

is represented by an irregular bipartite graph, where the degrees

of variable nodes and check nodes may differ. An ensemble

of irregular LDPC codes is defined by the variable nodes’ and

check nodes’ degree distributions. Let

and

be the generating functions of the de-

gree distributions for the variable and check nodes, respectively,

where and are the fractions of the edges belonging to de-

gree- variables and check nodes, respectively. We denote the

ensemble of irregular

-LDPC codes of length by

.

LDPC codes can be efficiently decoded using iterative mes-

sage-passing decoding algorithms. These algorithms operate on

the bipartite graph representation of the code by iteratively ex-

changing messages between the variable and check nodes along

the edges of the graph. Even though the results derived in this

paper can be applied to any message passing algorithm, we will

mainly concentrate on the belief propagation (BP) algorithm

[19], [8] with log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages. We denote

the channel message for a variable node by , the message

sent from a variable node to a check node by , and the

message sent from to by . The BP algorithm utilizes the

following message computation rules:

(1)

(2)

where

denotes the set of neighbors of a node , and

(3)

(4)

Note that

and its computations are defined on the group

.

The order of passing the messages between the nodes is re-

ferred to as an updating rule or a schedule. The BP paradigm

does not require utilizing a specific schedule. In this paper, we

consider fixed, nonadaptive, decoding schedules, where in each

iteration messages are passed along all edges in both directions.

In these schedules, the decoding complexity is proportional to

the expected number of iterations required for the decoder to

converge to a valid codeword. Hence, it is of interest to analyze

the decoder’s convergence rate.

In the case of cycle-free graphs, the situation is simple and

well understood. Given any iterative schedule, the BP algorithm

will converge after a finite number of iterations to the exact a

posteriori probabilities. The number of iterations is bounded by

where is the diameter (length of the longest path) of the

graph. In case of cycle-free graphs, we can even construct an

optimal schedule [12] in the sense of the minimum number of

messages that have to be sent until the convergence is achieved.

The number of messages passed in the optimal schedule is pre-

cisely , where is the number of graph edges, and exactly

one message will pass in each direction over each edge. Hence,

a single iteration is needed for convergence. However, graphs

defining good LDPC codes contain cycles. In these graphs, the

behavior of iterative decoding is less clear. BP produces inaccu-

rate a posteriori probabilities and may even not converge. Nev-

ertheless, it exhibits excellent empirical performance.

The standard message-passing schedule for decoding LDPC

code, already presented by Gallager [8], is the flooding schedule

[11], in which in each iteration all the variable nodes, and sub-

sequently, all the check nodes, pass new messages to their

neighbors. Even though the flooding schedule is popular,

there is no evidence that it is optimal and provides a good

complexity–performance tradeoff. Actually, on cycle-free

graphs the flooding schedule will converge exactly after

iterations. Hence, in terms of the number of iterations it can be

considered as the worst schedule, converging in the maximum

number of iterations.

Serial schedules, in contrast to the flooding schedule, enable

immediate propagation of messages, resulting in faster conver-

gence. We consider two serial scheduling strategies, referred

to as serial-V and serial-C schedules. The serial-V schedule is

based on a serial update of variable nodes’ messages. Instead

of sending all the messages from variable nodes to check nodes

and then all the messages from check nodes to variable nodes,

as done in the flooding schedule, the two phases are interleaved.

The variable nodes are traversed in some order and for each vari-

able node

the following messages are sent:

1) for each

(send all messages into the

node );

2) for each

(send all messages from the

node ).

The shuffled BP decoding algorithms proposed in [24] and [10]

and the “lazy scheduled” decoding in [13] utilize the Serial-V

schedule.

The serial-C schedule is based on a serial update of the check

nodes’ messages, hence, it can be seen as dual to the serial-V

schedule. The check nodes are traversed in some order and for

each check node

the following messages are sent:

1) for each

(send all messages into the

node );

2) for each

(send all messages from

node ).

The turbo decoding algorithm [18], the serial-C decoding algo-

rithm [22], and the layered BP decoding [9] use the Serial-C

schedule.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4078

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Fig. 1. Simulation results for a length 2400, irregular (0:1316x + 0:5365x + 0:3319x ; x )-LDPC code over the Gaussian channel with maximum of 10 iterations: (a) average iterations versus E =N . (b) Block error rate versus E =N .

Serial schedules have several important advantages over the the semi-serial schedule coincides with the flooding schedule

flooding schedule. The main advantage is faster convergence. and if the check nodes are divided into subsets

sat-

Simulation results indicate that they converge approximately in isfying (5) it coincides with some serial schedule.

half the number of iterations (see Fig. 1(a)). This means that a Sections III and IV include an analysis of the convergence

decoder utilizing a serial schedule requires approximately half rate of serial and semi-serial schedules. We present the analysis

the processing hardware in order to achieve a given decoding for serial-V schedules. However, the same analysis applies to

throughput, compared to a flooding-based decoder. Moreover, serial-C schedules as well.

in practical applications, the maximal number of allowed decoding iterations is usually limited due to latency or throughput constraints. Hence, a serially scheduled decoder provides better

III. COMPUTATION TREE EVOLUTION UNDER SERIAL SCHEDULING

error rate performance as shown in Fig. 1(b). Another advantage In this section, we examine the evolution of the message-

of serial schedules is that they can be efficiently implemented passing algorithm’s computation tree under serial scheduling.

with significantly lower memory requirements [22], [9], [13]. Consider a message passed from a variable node to a check

One might argue that the disadvantage of serial schedules node along the edge

of a given graph during mes-

is that they do not allow for a parallelized decoder hardware sage-passing decoding. Depending on the iteration number, this

implementation due to their serial nature, while the flooding message is a function of a subtree that is derived from the code’s

schedule can be fully parallelized (i.e., all variable- and check- graph by spanning a tree from the edge toward the variable

node messages can be updated simultaneously). However, the node and of the received channel observations for variables

serial schedule can be partially parallelized. Messages from sets that are contained in the subtree. We refer to this subtree as the

of nodes can be updated simultaneously. For instance, in the se- computation tree of , and denote it by . We will refer to a

rial-V schedule, if the sequence of variable nodes is divided into computation tree without cycles as an acyclic computation tree.

the subsets

, such that no two variable nodes in a Note that the computation tree for a graph with cycles will con-

subset are connected to the same check node, i.e.,

tain replicated nodes. For example, the computation tree of an

arbitrary edge after the first decoding iteration of a length

(5) regular

-LDPC code under the flooding and the serial-V

schedules is shown on Fig. 2.

then there is no difference whether the variable nodes within the It is easy to see that the computation tree of the flooding

subsets are updated serially or in parallel. Since a fully parallel schedule is always a balanced tree, and its depth is increased by

implementation is usually not possible due to the complex inter- at each iteration. On the other hand, the computation tree of a

connect fabric between the memory and computation nodes, the serial schedule is not balanced and its depth with respect to each

partially sequential nature of the serial schedule is not limiting. of its leaves grows by at least at each iteration. Thus, the com-

There is also a possibility to use a hybrid schedule of the putation tree of an edge under a serial schedule always contains

flooding and serial schedules, in which an iteration involves a the computation tree of the edge under the flooding schedule.

serial update of subsets of nodes,

, such that the This implies that for cycle-free graphs a serial BP decoder will

nodes in each subset are updated simultaneously. We will refer converge faster (or at least not slower) compared to the flooding

to this schedule as a semi-serial schedule. Note that if

, BP decoder. Similar arguments were used in [24] to prove this

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON et al.: EFFICIENT SERIAL MESSAGE-PASSING SCHEDULES FOR LDPC DECODING

4079

Fig. 2. (a) Bipartite graph of an arbitrary length 4 regular (2; 4)-LDPC code. (b) Computation tree of edge e after the first flooding iteration. (c) Computation tree of edge e after the first serial-V iteration with the serial schedule fv ; v ; v ; v g.

claim. We refine this claim by analyzing exactly how fast the se- Let -

denote the acyclic computation tree spanned

rial schedule computation tree grows compared to the flooding from edge after iterations of semi-serial schedule

.

schedule computation tree. For that purpose we would like to Consider a sequence of numbers

. We say that

determine the probability that a variable at graphical dis- the transition between and is an ascent if

.

tance from a root variable node is contained in the serial The following proposition provides a method for testing

schedule computation tree spanned from the edge

whether a variable node belongs to the computation tree

after iterations. Throughout the rest of this subsection we consider acyclic
computation trees. We define the ensembles of serial-V and semi-serial-V schedules as follows.
Definition III-1 (Serial Schedules’ Ensemble): is a bijection

spanned from an edge

leaf of

:

, and whether it is a

Proposition III-3: Let denote a sequence of numbers representing the order of updating the variable nodes along the path
between and according to serial schedule .

The variable node belongs to the computation tree

There are equally probable serial schedules.

spanned from edge

iff the number of

Definition III-2 (Semi-Serial Schedules’ Ensemble):

ascents in is less than or the number of ascents in is equal to and the last transition in is an ascent.

The variable node is a leaf of

iff the number of

There are

equally probable semi-serial schedules. In

order to generate a semi-serial schedule, we randomly choose

for each variable node a number from

independently

with equal probability. This is the number of the subset to which

ascents in is equal to and the last transition in is an ascent. Proof: Follows directly from the definition of the serial
schedule. In each iteration the computation the tree is extended along up to the next ascent in .

the variable node belongs. The subsets are updated serially ac-

cording to their subset number, i.e., we first update subset 1, then

subset 2, and so on, till subset . We use this definition for the

semi-serial schedule since it simplifies the analysis.

Let

denote the acyclic computation tree spanned from

For example, a path between two variable nodes and

is shown in Fig. 3. The order of updating the variable nodes

along the path is

. In each iteration, the com-

putation tree spanned from the edge along is extended up

to the next ascent in . Thus, the computation tree will include

edge after flooding iterations (the index is omitted for after two iterations.

brevity). Let

denote the acyclic computation tree Let

denote the set of permutations of

spanned from edge after iterations of serial schedule

. having ascents. The cardinality of

, denoted by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4080

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Fig. 3. The advance of the computation tree along the path P for a serial schedule in which the variable nodes fv ; v ; v ; v ; v g are updated in the order f g. v ; v ; v ; v ; v

, is known as the Eulerian number [3], [6]. The Eulerian numbers can be computed using the recursion

Alternatively, they can be computed explicitly by By definition, the Eulerian numbers satisfy the equality

Note that Proposition III-4 as well as (6) and (8) imply that

(6)

for

and that

for , which

is obvious since the computation tree of an edge under a serial

schedule always contains the computation tree of the edge under

the flooding schedule. (7)

Proof: Let denote the indicator function. Then

(8)

Let

denote the set of permutations of

having ascents for which the last transition is an ascent. We

denote the cardinality of

by

.

Proposition III-4: The numbers

can be computed

using the recursion

Proof: All permutations in

can be generated

in one of the following ways: 1) add to a permutation in

as the first number or between two consecutive

ascending numbers, but not between the last two ascending

numbers; 2) add to a permutation in

be-

tween two consecutive descending numbers; 3) add as the last

number of a permutation in

.

The sets of permutations generated in each way cannot

overlap since is located either between two ascending num-

bers, two descending numbers, or as the last number. Thus

The fourth equality follows directly from Proposition III-.3. Similarly, we have

Let

denote the graphical distance between variable

nodes and . Let

denote the probability that a variable

node at graphical distance from the root of

is a leaf of

. Let

denote the probability that a variable node at

graphical distance from the root of

belongs to

.

Then,

and

are given by the following.

Proposition III-5:

Proposition III-5 shows that the serial schedule’s computation tree grows twice as fast compared to the flooding schedule’s computation tree. To see this we can examine the expected fraction of variable nodes at tier which are

included in

compared to the expected fraction of

variable nodes at tier which are included in

. As can

be seen in Fig. 4, for a fixed , the expected fraction of variable

nodes which belong to

tends to zero as

increases. This indicates that the serial schedule propagates

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON et al.: EFFICIENT SERIAL MESSAGE-PASSING SCHEDULES FOR LDPC DECODING

4081

Fig. 4. The expected fraction of variable nodes at tier 2t which belong to T , T (d e), and T (d

e) for  = 0:1 and l = 20; 140.

information twice as fast on the code’s graph, explaining its faster convergence.
By considering the asymptotic properties of Eulerian numbers, this observation can be quantified.

Theorem III-6: For any

, there exists such that for

any and any integer , the expected fraction of variable

nodes in tier that belong to

is lower-bounded by

the expression shown at the bottom of the page. Hence

Proof: Asymptotic properties of Eulerian numbers were studied in [2], [4]. Bender [2] proved a local limit theorem, showing that Eulerian numbers have a normal asymptotic behavior
(9)

(11) (12) From (10), we have

The function

attains its maximum at

for

even and

for odd , corresponding to

.

It is symmetric, monotonically decreasing around its maximum,

and reaches the value at

and

, corre-

sponding to

. We are interested in studying the be-

havior of

near its maximum.

Studying the function

we can see that it has a single

minimum at

and that

By taking the first two terms in the Taylor series expansion of

(10) we can obtain a lower bound on for

,

where

(13)

Using (13) we can obtain a simple lower bound on (11) for

(10)

and sufficiently large as shown in Fig. 5. This is

if

and if

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4082

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Fig. 5. B(k; n) and its lower bound.

done by taking the first term in the Taylor series expansion of From Proposition III-5 and (8) we have the expression at the

, and substituting (13) instead of

bottom of the page. For

we can use the

monotonicity of

and (15) to get

(14)

We can now use (14) to upper-bound (9) for

and

sufficiently large. To further simplify the expression, we use the

first term in the series expansion of

around

, in order to obtain a tight bound near the maximum of

(i.e., near

)

(15) We can further simplify the bound on

for

Note, that although we prove (15) only for large , we observe

that it is also valid for any

(hence, we conjecture that

it is valid for any ).

and

if
if
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON et al.: EFFICIENT SERIAL MESSAGE-PASSING SCHEDULES FOR LDPC DECODING
Finally, since , we have for any

4083
is an increasing function of

Let

denote the expected fraction of leaf

variable nodes in tier of a tree in

. Next, we derive an

upper bound on

that is used in Section IV for asymptotic and

analysis of the serial schedule’s convergence rate.

Lemma III-.7: For any , there exists such that for any

and any

, the expected fraction of variable node

leaves in tier of

is upper-bounded by

if and bounded by
if Thus, for any

Similar analysis can be performed for the computation tree

evolution of the semi-serial schedule. Since the definition of an

ascent also includes the case of two identical subsequent num-

bers, we can use Proposition III-3 in order to test whether a vari-

able node belongs to a computation tree -

spanned

from an edge

and whether it is a leaf of -

.

Based on Proposition III-3, we can obtain an expression for

for the semi-serial computation tree, however, the ex-

pression involves cumbersome recursions and is hard to analyze.

Instead, we show that

- tends to

as

the number of subsets increases, indicating that the semi-se-

rial schedule should have similar convergence rate as the serial

schedule. This is not surprising since the semi-serial schedule

becomes closer to the serial schedule as the number of subsets

increases.

Proposition III-8:

-

Proof: From Proposition III-5 we have

For any

, if

-

then

(16)

if and
if

Hence, using Theorem III-6 and (15) we conclude that for

any

there exists such that for any

and any

Proof: Consider a path of length , where

,

in the computation tree -

spanned from the edge

. Let denote the sequence of numbers representing the

subset numbers of the variables along the path . Let denote

the probability that no number appears in more than once.

Then

(17)

Assuming

, we get

(18)

Using (17) we can lower-bound the probability that is in

-

by

-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4084

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Note that the analysis in this section has not assumed anything about the bipartite graph which generates the computation tree and applies to both regular and irregular graphs.
IV. ASYMPTOTIC CONVERGENCE ANALYSIS
LDPC codes exhibit a threshold phenomenon—as the codeword length tends to infinity, the bit-error probability can be made arbitrarily small if the noise level is below some constant threshold. This phenomenon, first observed by Gallager for binary-symmetric channel channels [8], was shown to exist in irregular LDPC codes by Luby et al. [14], [15] and was further generalized by Richardson and Urbanke [20] to a large range of symmetric, memoryless, binary-input channels and to various message-passing decoding algorithms. Richardson et al. developed an algorithm for determining the threshold for various message-passing decoders based on flood scheduling over various channels called density evolution (DE) [20], [21], [5]. The algorithm is based on iterative calculation of the densities of messages passed by the decoder in each iteration. The calculation is simplified tremendously by taking advantage of several assumptions as follows.
• The “local tree assumption”—the local neighborhood of an edge is cycle-free. This assumption is justified by the general concentration theorem that was proved in [20] showing that the decoder’s performance on random graphs converges exponentially with the code length to its expected performance. This expected performance in the limit of infinitely long codes can be determined from the corresponding cycle-free bipartite graph.
• The channel is memoryless. Combined with the local tree assumption, this assumption implies that the messages entering a node are statistically independent.
• The zero codeword was transmitted—as shown in [20], for symmetric channels the decoder’s performance is independent of the transmitted codeword.
Let , , and denote the conditional probability density functions (pdf) assuming the zero codeword was transmitted, of a channel message and a variable-to-check and check-to-variable messages at the th iteration, respectively.
Theorem IV-9: DE of the flooding schedule for a -LDPC codes ensemble is given by [5], [20], [21]

with error probability greater than zero (defined by the probability of being negative). If we are interested in the threshold computation, the flooding DE algorithm can be used for analysis of the serial schedule as well, since under the cycle-free graph assumption all possible schedules converge to the exact a posteriori value after a finite number of iterations. Thus, the threshold under the flooding schedule and the serial schedule is the same. However, we are interested in the DE algorithm for prediction of the average number of iterations needed for convergence, which depends on the specific schedule used even under the cycle-free graph assumption.

A. Density Evolution Algorithm for the Semi-Serial Schedule

In this subsection, we derive a DE algorithm for asymptotic

analysis of the semi-serial schedule. Similarly to the flooding DE,

the analysis is based on the “local tree” assumption, justified by

the general concentration theorem proved in Section IV-C and on

the assumption that the channel is memoryless and symmetric.

According to Definition III-2 of the semi-serial schedules

ensemble, a schedule is generated by assigning a subset to

each variable node, where is chosen independently and ran-

domly with equal probability from the set

for each

node. The subsets are updated serially in each iteration (i.e., first

, then , and so on, until ). When a subset is updated,

messages are simultaneously sent to all of its variable nodes and

then messages are simultaneously sent from all of its variable

nodes. Let denote the expected pdf of a variable-to-check

message sent from a variable node belonging to the th subset

at the th iteration given that the zero codeword is transmitted.

Expectation is taken over all graph edges, all tree-like graphs from

the ensemble, all semi-serial schedules, and all decoder inputs.

A variable-to-check message from a variable node belonging to

the subset is a function of messages that emanated from the

subsets that have already been updated ( ,

) and of mes-

sages from the subsets that have not been updated yet ( , ).

Taking into account that subset assignments are chosen indepen-

dently and with equal probability and that messages entering a

node are statistically independent and identically distributed (due

to standard DE assumptions) we get the following algorithm.

Theorem IV-A.1: DE of a semi-serial schedule with sub-

sets for a

-LDPC codes ensemble is given by the

equation at the top of the following page.

B. Density Evolution Algorithm for the Serial Schedule

where,

.

Here

Let

denote the ensemble of com-

putation trees spanned from edge of a given cycle-free graph

after iterations of the serial schedule. Knowing whether a

and

The operator denotes convolution. The operator is defined

so that for a real random variable with density , the density

of

is

. The DE algorithm is run iteratively, starting

with a fixed channel parameter (determining ), until either

the pdf tends to “point mass at infinity” (corresponding to

zero error probability) or converges to a fixed point of the pdf

variable node belongs to a computation tree affects the probability that other variable nodes belong to the computation tree. For example, consider variable node at tier

of

, and assume it is a descendant of variable node at

tier

. We know that has probability

to be a leaf

of

. However, once we know it is a leaf, the probability of

a neighboring variable node at tier which is a descendent of

to be a leaf is higher than

and vice versa. Thus,

variable nodes which are descendants of the same ancestor are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON et al.: EFFICIENT SERIAL MESSAGE-PASSING SCHEDULES FOR LDPC DECODING

4085

where

positively correlated. Unfortunately, due to these statistical de-

pendencies between variable nodes it is hard to analyze the

computation trees ensemble

. In order to overcome this

problem, we consider a pseudoserial ensemble of computation

trees, denoted by , which is more amenable to analysis.

We show that the pseudoserial ensemble provides a lower bound

on the asymptotic performance of the serial schedule in certain

cases. We conjecture that this is true in general, i.e., for any en-

semble over any channel.

We define the pseudoserial ensemble as follows.

Theorem IV-B.2: Density evolution of the pseudo-serial en-

semble

for a

-LDPC codes ensemble

where is computed by the following recursion:

Definition IV-B.1: For a given graph and an edge with a

cycle-free neighborhood whose depth is at least , a pseudo-se-

rial ensemble

of acyclic computation trees

is de-

fined by the following procedure for generating a tree from the

ensemble.

1. Span a balanced computation tree of depth from edge

of the graph .

2. For

do:

for each undeleted variable node at tier decide inde-

pendently with probability

if is a leaf. If so,

delete the subtree below .

Note that

for

, so the first

steps in the procedure for generating a pseudo-serial

computation tree can be skipped.

Let

denote the expected fraction of incorrect or erased

messages passed along an arbitrary edge with an acyclic com-

putation tree at iteration of the flooding BP decoder, averaged

over the bipartite graph ensemble, the graph edges, and the de-

coder inputs. Note that the flooding DE algorithm [20], [21],

described in the beginning of this section, computes

. Let

denote the expected fraction of incor-

rect or erased messages passed along an arbitrary edge with an

acyclic computation tree at iteration of the serial BP decoder,

averaged over the bipartite graph ensemble, the graph edges, the

serial schedules, and the decoder inputs. Let denote

the expected fraction of incorrect or erased messages computed

and

.

The fraction of erroneous messages as a function of the

number of iterations as predicted by the DE algorithm for

the flooding schedule, the semi-serial schedule with various

values of , and the pseudo-serial schedule for a -LDPC

code over a BEC with channel parameter

, and

for a -LDPC code over a Gaussian channel with channel

parameter

1.12 dB are shown in Fig. 6. We applied

the DE algorithms for analysis of various regular and irreg-

ular LDPC ensembles over the BEC and the additive white

Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and obtained similar results

for all ensembles. The semi-serial and pseudo-serial ensembles

converge in approximately half the number of iterations com-

pared to the flooding schedule, when working near the capacity

of the ensemble. Furthermore, the semi-serial convergence rate

improves as the number of subsets increases, approaching

some bound. We conjecture that this bound is the convergence

rate of the serial schedule, since as the number of subsets in

the semi-serial schedule increases it becomes closer to the

serial schedule as indicated by Proposition III-8. Finally, the

results provide a strong indication that the convergence rate

of the pseudo-serial schedule can serve as a lower bound on

the one of the serial schedule. For all the ensembles we tested,

the convergence rate of the pseudo-serial ensemble was slower

than the convergence rate of the semi-serial ensemble with

. Unfortunately, generally proving this claim is hard.

by a pseudo-serial computation tree, averaged over the bipar- Hence, we prove it for a

-LDPC ensemble over the

tite graph ensemble, the graph edges, their computation tree en- BEC.

semble in , and the decoder inputs.

Proposition IV-B.3: For

We derive a DE algorithm for computing by tracking the BEC and for any

expected pdf of messages sent from each tier of variable nodes,

-LDPC ensemble over the

starting from tier (the farthest off from the tree root) and

finishing in tier (which represents the root). Let denote

the expected pdf of a variable-to-check message sent from tier

Proof: Let

denote the serial computation tree

. Then can be computed as a function of

based of the edge

in the graph and serial schedule

on Definition IV-B.1 of the ensemble .

after iterations, truncated at tier . Obviously,

is a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4086

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Fig. 6. (a) Density evolution for a (3; 4)-LDPC code over the BEC channel. (b) Density evolution for a (3; 6)-LDPC code over the Gaussian channel.

degraded computation tree compared to the nontruncated serial

computation tree

with respect to its expected erasure

probability for any and . Hence,

.

Consider BEC with erasure probability . Let denote a vari-

able node at tier of

and denote the neighboring

check node of at tier

. Let

denote an indicator

function for the event that is a leaf of

. Let

denote the expected erasure probability of a variable-to-check

message sent from tier of

, averaged over the

-ensemble graphs, the serial schedules and the decoder

inputs. Then is given by (19) at the bottom of the page.

Here

is the expected erasure probability of a variable-

to-check message sent from the th descendant of variable node

at tier

, averaged over all decoder inputs. Due to the

positive correlation between neighboring variable nodes in the

serial schedule we can upper bound (19) by

(20)

Since (20) describes an identical recursion to the one defined by Theorem IV-B.2, we get

We note that this proof holds only for ensembles with degree variable nodes, for which information combining is performed only at the check nodes. Motivated by the DE results and by Proposition IV-B.3 we conjecture the following.

Conjecture IV-B.4: For any integers

and

regardless of the graph ensemble and the channel.

We conclude this section by proving that for BEC, asymptot-

ically in the code length and when working near the decoder’s

capacity, the pseudo-serial ensemble is expected to converge in

half the number of iterations compared to the flooding schedule.

Let us consider a BEC parameterized by erasure probability

. The BEC is monotone with respect to the BP decoder [20],

i.e., convergence of the decoder for parameter implies conver-

gence of the decoder for any parameter

. Let denote

the decoder’s threshold as predicted by the DE algorithm. The

value is given by [14], [15]

where

.

for

(21)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(19)

SHARON et al.: EFFICIENT SERIAL MESSAGE-PASSING SCHEDULES FOR LDPC DECODING

4087

Fig. 7. Visualization of the BP convergence process over a BEC with parameter  as predicted by the DE algorithm.

where,

is the BEC version of the

DE recursion function defined in Theorem III-9. Note that is

independent of the particular scheduling applied by the decoder,

since for cycle-free graphs, the decoder converges to the exact

a posteriori probabilities after a finite number of iterations for

any schedule.

Let

be defined as

(22)

For proving Theorem IV-B.5 we need several auxiliary lemmas.
Lemma IV-B.6: For any
(24)

Proof: Based on (23) and since function of , we have

is a continuous

Then

is the erasure probability of a variable-to-check

message at which fixed point of the DE algorithm (Theorem

IV\-9) occurs. At this point we have

(23)

The convergence process of the flooding BP decoder as pre-

dicted by the BEC DE algorithm can be visualized on a graph

showing the variable-to-check message erasure probability at

iteration as a function of the erasure probability at iteration

as shown in Fig. 7.

Let

denote the minimal number of iterations required

by the decoder to achieve an expected message erasure proba-

bility less or equal to over an arbitrary edge with an acyclic

computation tree, when working over a BEC with parameter .

(25)

Assume that at some point the expected variable-to-check mes-

sage erasure probability is , then the expected erasure prob-

ability will decrease in the following iteration by

(see Fig. 7). Since

is a contin-

uous function of and due to (25), near

the decrease

in erasure probability in each iteration approaches zero as

approaches , and the number of iterations for attaining any

tends to infinity.

Lemma IV-B.7: For any

and any

Theorem IV-B.5: For any

and

, there exists

where

.

such that for any

and for any

:

Proof of Lemma IV-B.7: Consider a segment

on

which

. By definition (22) of the fixed

point

, we have

. Hence,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4088

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

. Furthermore, if the stability condition [21]

is satisfied, i.e., if

, then the

fixed point

is also not in

. Thus, the number of

iterations within

is bounded (it can be bounded by an

explicit function of , , , and ) and

is bounded for

any . Use of Lemma IV-B.6 completes the proof.

Lemma IV-B.8: For any that for any

and , there exists such

The third inequality follows from Proposition III-7 and from

considering the first two terms in the Taylor series of

around

.

The term

can be upper-bounded by a con-

stant depending only on and . Furthermore, we will show

that

can be made arbitrarily small as increases. Hence,

for any

there exists such that for any

and any

we have

(28)

Proof: For a given

-LDPC ensemble, decoded

using BP decoder over BEC with erasure probability , we

can compute

using the DE algorithm described

in Theorem IV-B.2. Let denote the expected erasure prob-

ability of a variable-to-check message sent from tier to tier

of

. Then,

and is

computed according to the following recursion:

The recursion (28) can be unfolded and upper-bounded. Define , then for any

(26) The maximal value of the derivative

and

.

Similarly, let denote the expected erasure probability of

a variable-to-check message sent from tier to tier

of

. Then,

and

can be computed using

the recursion

can be bounded by a constant

(27)

where Let

. denote the difference between the

expected erasure probability of variable-to-check messages sent

from tier of

and . Note that

for

any

and

. Then

Thus
Choosing that for any

and using Lemmas III-7 and IV-B.7 we get

and

there exist such that for any

where

Proof of Theorem IV-B.5: According to Lemma IV-B.6,

for any there exists

such that for any

and

for any

we have

. Furthermore,

according to Lemma IV-B.8, for any

and

there

exists such that for any we have

Thus, for any

and

there exists

that for any

and for any

. such we have

.

Modulo Conjecture IV-B.4 for any LDPC ensemble, or using

Proposition IV-B.3 for

-LDPC ensembles we get the

following.

Corollary IV-B.9: For any

and

, there exists

such that for any

and for any

.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON et al.: EFFICIENT SERIAL MESSAGE-PASSING SCHEDULES FOR LDPC DECODING

4089

C. Concentration Theorem

In the previous section, we saw how the expected behavior

of a given semi-serially or serially scheduled decoder can be

determined using the DE algorithm, by assuming that the graph

does not contain cycles. In this section, we follow [20] and prove

a concentration theorem for the semi-serial and serial schedules,

showing that the behavior of the decoder for a randomly chosen

graph, schedule, and decoder input is concentrated around its

expected behavior.

For the sake of simplicity, we prove the concentration the-

orem for the ensemble

of regular

-LDPC codes

of length . Consider a message passed along an edge during

the th decoding iteration. This message is a function of the com-

putation tree and of the received channel observations for

the variables contained in it. Let denote the depth of . As discussed in Section III, the computation tree depth of any edge for the flooding schedule grows by at each iteration, i.e.,

. For the semi-serial schedule, the depth of the computation tree after iterations is not fixed and depends on the graph, the schedule by which the sets of variable nodes are updated, and the specific edge. However, it is easy to see that it

is bounded by

, where is the number of subsets.

Due to the bounded computation tree size a similar concentra-

tion theorem to the one proved in [20] for the flooding schedule

applies to the semi-serial schedule.

Theorem IV-C.1: (Concentration theorem for the semi-se-

rial schedule). Over the probability space of all graphs

,

all semi-serial schedules with variable node subsets and all

channel realizations, let be the number of incorrect messages

among all variable-to-check messages sent in the th de-

coding step. Furthermore, let be the expected number of in-

correct messages passed along an arbitrary edge with an acyclic

computation tree at the th decoding step, as determined by the

DE algorithm. Then there exist positive constants , , such that

for any

and

(29)

Proof: Follows the lines of [20], except the final step,

where Azuma’s inequality [1] is used for showing concentra-

tion. This step is similar to the final step in the proof of the

serial schedule’s concentration theorem described below. The

constant can be taken as

where

The constant can be taken as

.

Unfortunately, for a serial schedule, the computation tree of an edge cannot be bounded by a constant and can grow with . As a result, the flooding concentration theorem [20] cannot be applied directly to the serial schedule and some additional arguments are needed. The resulting theorem that we were able to prove is weaker, showing the concentration with a probability approaching inverse polynomially in (instead of exponentially). However, we believe that an exponential concentration is valid for the serial schedule as well.
We start by proving some auxiliary lemmas.

Lemma IV-C.2: For a code with sufficiently large length and for a randomly chosen serial schedule

(30)

Proof: We consider the first iteration and bound the proba-

bility that the computation tree spanned from edge

is

of depth greater than or equal to . Let denote a path from

to another variable node at graphical distance from . The

probability that the computation tree contains is the prob-

ability that the variable nodes along the path are unique

(no repetitions) and are updated one after another starting from

and ending in . This probability is smaller then . Note, that

in case some variable nodes along repeat (cyclic computa-

tion tree), then will include only the variable nodes in

up to the first repetition. So, the limiting case is the acyclic com-

putation tree. Using the union bound we get the equation shown

at the bottom of the page, where

.

Now, if the depth of the computation tree after the first iter-

ation is bounded by for all edges, then it can increase by at

most at each iteration, and after iteration it is bounded by

. Thus

Finally, choosing large

, we get that for sufficiently

and

variables along are updated serially
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4090

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Next, we use a slightly modified version of a lemma proved in [20] in order to bound the probability that the computation tree of an edge is cyclic.

Lemma IV-C.3: Let be an edge in a randomly chosen ele-

ment of

and let be the computation tree of at the

th iteration with depth , then

is cyclic the depth of is

messages passed along edge . From symmetry and expecta-

tion linearity we get

and

is not cyclic

is not cyclic

is cyclic

is cyclic

Now, we can lower- and upper-bound

is not cyclic

is not cyclic and

where

(31)

is not cyclic

is cyclic or

where

.

and

Further, note that

by definition,

thus using Lemmas IV-C.2 and IV-C.4 we get

Combining Lemmas IV-C.2 and IV-C.3 we obtain the following result.

Lemma IV-C.4: Let be an edge in a randomly chosen

element of

decoded using a randomly chosen serial

schedule and let be the computation tree of at the th

iteration with depth . Then, for a sufficiently large

Hence,

. It follows that if

, which is the case for large enough , then

.

Next, we bound the left term on the right-hand side of (34)

(32) Proof:

where

We are now ready to prove the concentration theorem for the serial schedule.

Theorem IV-C.5: (Concentration theorem for the serial

schedule). Over the probability space of all graphs

, se-

rial schedules, and channel realizations, let be the number of

incorrect messages among all variable-to-check messages

sent in the th decoding step. Furthermore, let be the expected

number of incorrect messages passed along an arbitrary edge

with an acyclic computation tree at the th decoding step. Then

for any

and sufficiently large

(33)

Proof: As in the flood concentration theorem, we can write

can be tightly bounded using Azuma’s inequality [20]. This is done by constructing the following Doob’s martingale:
, where
and
such that in the first steps we expose the edges of the graph, in the following steps we expose the order by which the variable nodes are updated, and in the last steps we expose the
decoder inputs. Since by condition the depth of the computation tree

(34) is bounded by

it can contain at most

where

is the expected value of over all graphs, all se-

rial schedules and all decoder inputs. We bound the terms on

the right-hand side of (34), starting with the right term. Let

, be the expected number of incorrect

distinct edges. Hence, the difference between consecutive random variables in the martingale is bounded by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON et al.: EFFICIENT SERIAL MESSAGE-PASSING SCHEDULES FOR LDPC DECODING

4091

Next, we expose the order by which the variable nodes are updated, such that in each step we reveal the next variable node that is updated. By revealing the serial schedule in that way, an ex-

posed variable node can affect at most the

com-

putation trees it appears in. It does not provide any information

on the update order of the remaining variable nodes or on the

computation trees that do not contain it. Thus

Finally, we consider the decoder inputs one by one. Again, each exposed decoder input can affect only the computation trees that contain its corresponding variable node, i.e., at most
computation trees

Since the martingale differences are bounded, Azuma’s inequality can be applied to produce

for some positive constant and sufficiently large . Finally, we have

proving the theorem.
V. CONCLUSION
We analyzed the convergence rate of the semi-serial and serial schedules. We showed that the computation tree under serial scheduling grows asymptotically in the number of iterations, twice as fast compared to the flooding schedule. We derived DE algorithm for asymptotic analysis of the serial schedule’s convergence rate and proved an accompanying concentration theorem. We proved that for BEC under some likely assumptions, asymptotically in the code’s length, and when working near the decoder’s capacity, the serial decoder is expected to converge in half the number of iterations compared to the flooding decoder.

REFERENCES
[1] N. Alon, J. Spencer, and P. Erdös, The Probabilistic Method. New York: Wiley, 1992.
[2] E. A. Bender, “Central and local limit theorems applied to asymptotic enumeration,” J. Combin. Theory, vol. 15, pt. Ser. A, pp. 91–111, 1973.
[3] L. Carlitz, “Eulerian numbers and polynomials,” Math. Mag., vol. 32, pp. 247–260, 1959.
[4] L. Carlitz, D. C. Kurtz, R. Scoville, and O. P. Stackelberg, “Asymptotic properties of Eulerian numbers,” Z. Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und Verw. Gebiete, vol. 23, pp. 47–54, 1972.
[5] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun.Lett, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[6] L. Comtet, “Permutations by number of rises; Eulerian numbers,” in Advanced Combinatorics: The Art of Finite and Infinite Expansions. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer, 1974, pp. 51 and 240–246.
[7] G. D. Forney, Jr, “On iterative decoding and the two-way algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 1997, pp. 12–15.
[8] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[9] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Processing and Systems (SIPS.04), Austin, TX, Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[10] H. Kfir and I. Kanter, “Parallel versus sequential updating for belief propagation decoding,” Physica A, vol. 330, pp. 259–270, 2003.
[11] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[12] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum–product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[13] D. Levin, E. Sharon, and S. Litsyn, “Lazy scheduling for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 70–72, Jan. 2007.
[14] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and belief propagation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory), Cambridge, MA, Auf. 1998, p. 117.
[15] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. S. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, El Pao, TX, May 1997, pp. 150–159.
[16] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Decoding low-density parity-check codes with probabilistic scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 414–416, Oct. 2001.
[17] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A new schedule for decoding lowdensity parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE GlobeCom, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1007–1010.
[18] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Highthroughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–995, Dec. 2003.
[19] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[20] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[21] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[22] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “An efficient message-passing schedule for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. 23rd IEEE Conv., Tel-Aviv, Israel, Sep. 2004, pp. 223–226.
[23] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complextity code,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[24] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Proc 36th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 2002, vol. 1, pp. 8–15.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

