2007 IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing and Communications (ICSPC 2007), 24-27 November 2007, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

IMPROVING BER PERFORMANCE OF LDPC CODES BASED ON INTERMEDIATE DECODING RESULTS

Esa Alghonaim, Mohamed Adnan Landolsi, and Aiman El-Maleh
King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals Dhahran 31261, Saudi Arabia

ABSTRACT
The paper presents a novel approach to reduce the bit error rate (BER) in iterative belief propagation (BP) decoding of low density parity check (LDPC) codes. The behavior of the BP algorithm is first investigated as a function of number of decoder iterations, and it is shown that typical uncorrected error patterns can be classified into 3 categories: oscillating, nearly-constant, or randomlike, with a predominance of oscillating patterns at high Signal-to-Noise (SNR) values. A proposed decoder modification is then introduced based on tracking the number of failed parity check equations in the intermediate decoding iterations, rather than relying on the final decoder output (after reaching the maximum number of iterations). Simulation results with a rate 12 (1024,512) progressive edge-growth (PEG) LDPC code show that the proposed modification can decrease the BER by as much as 10-to-40%, particularly for high SNR values.
Index Terms- LDPC codes, BER performance, Belief Propagation iterative decoding, Error correction coding.
1. INTRODUCTION
One of the leading families of error-correcting codes is known as Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes, which were first introduced by Gallager in [1]. LDPC codes have been found to rival other state-of-the-art coding families (such as Turbo Codes), and demonstrate performance that can asymptotically achieve the information-theoretic limits, while at the same time having the distinct advantage of low-complexity, nearoptimal soft message-passing iterative decoding based on the Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm (also known as the Sum-Product algorithm) [2,3].
One of the advantageous features of LDPC codes is that error detection is always achieved as a by-product of the BP decoding, without the need of extra cyclic redundancy check-CRC codes (unlike other FEC families, like turbo, for example). This is because decoder failures, after reaching a maximum pre-set number of iterations, are always known. From an error correcting perspective, decoder failures clearly lead to a frame (or packet) error, which also implies a number of

bit errors. Typically, both frame error rate (FER) and bit error rate (BER) curves are used to characterize LDPC and other coding families. It should be pointed out that in the case of LDPC codes, the number of bit errors for a given frame error occurrence (after exhausting the maximum number of allowable iterations) can vary considerably with the intermediate iterations. Although most previous works consider performance results for a given number of maximum iterations (usually in the range of 100), a few researchers have addressed this bit error variation aspects, as in [4] where the bit error transitions probabilities are considered. Also, in [5], a modified BP decoding algorithm based on error oscillation is presented.
In this paper, a more thorough categorization of the evolution of bit error patterns as a function of decoder iterations is first presented, particularly highlighting the importance of using intermediate decoder results to minimize BER. Following that, a simple approach for deciding at which stage to output decoded bits is presented. This is based on tracking the number of unsatisfied check node equations, which correlate strongly with increased bit error occurrences.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, in Section 2, a brief review of LDPC codes and their iterative decoding are introduced. In Section 3, we investigate the characteristics of error patterns resulting from BP decoding failures. Then in Section 5, the proposed method for improving BER is presented. Experimental results are given in Section 6, and final conclusions in Section 7.
2. OVERVIEW OF LDPC CODES
LDPC codes are a class of linear block codes that use a sparse, random-like parity-check matrix [1,2]. LDPC codes can also be represented by bi-partite factor graphs having two types of nodes: variable bit nodes and check nodes, interconnected by edges whenever a given check bit appears in the parity check equation of the corresponding information bit. The iterative messagepassing belief propagation algorithm [2,3] can used for decoding LDPC codes, and is shown to achieve optimum performance when the underlying code graph is cyclefree In the following, a brief description of this algorithm is given based on the notation in [2], and this will be

1-4244-1236-6/07/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE 1547 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:08:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

subsequently used in discussing the codes' BER performance characterization.
The elements of a codeword c are referred to as bits, and the rows of the parity matrix H are designated as checks. The set of bits / that participate in check m is denoted by
L(m) = {1: Hm. = 1}, and the set of checks involving bit
/ is denoted byM() ={m: Hm =1}. A set L(m) in which bit / is excluded is denoted byL(m) \ 1, and likewise M(l) \ m refers to M(l) without check m. The decoding algorithm has two alternating parts in which soft information qml and rml associated with each nonzero element of H are iteratively updated. The
quantity q' I can be thought of as the probability that bit
node / sends to check node m indicating Pr(x/ = i) with i=O, 1. On the other hand, the quantity K1/ is meant to be
the probability that the mth check node gathers about the
/th bit of x being xl = i when the other bits have
probabilities given by {qm,1 :1 e L(m) \ l}. The
iterative steps of the BP algorithm are summarized next.
1. Initialization: The variables q,l and qm1 are
initialized to the probabilities pl and pl that code bit
xl is 0 or 1, respectively. Then, for every non-zero entry
in the matrix H, we have the following: q I p.

2. Horizontal Step: Each check node m gathers all
information q I/, and updates the belief on the /th bit
based on other bits that participate in check equation m.

rm, = Z P({xl,} xl = i,H)x flJq, (1)

x1 :l'eL(m)\l

l'eL(m)\l

for i=0,1. The exclusion of the term qml in the

computation of rml is necessary in order to only keep

"extrinsic" information about the /th bit from the m parity

check equation. The function P({x1, } xl = i, H) is an

indicator function given by:

P({x1}I xl = i H) =1 if( 3 {xl ,i} = 0

(2)

0, otherwise

where E (9 represents modulo-2 summation.

3. Vertical Step: The computed values qi are used to
update information that each bit node / propagates back to check node m. In doing so, the information coming from check node m itself is not be included, giving
m cM(m(3) m'EM(l)\m

for i=O, 1. The term am is used as a normalization factor

qml to ensure 0 + q 1 1. Each bit / collects probability

information from the check nodes that connect to it, and

updates its a posteriori probabilities (APP):

ql -=. aatIpl mlcfM7((1ml)4)

(4)

for i=O, 1. The term a is chosen such that qo + ql 1.

It is noted that two parts contribute to the APP: intrinsic

information fromp/, and an extrinsic one from the rml
terms. After each vertical-horizontal iteration, a hard

decision is made on each bit APP ql, resulting in a

tentative decoded vector c. This is then used to decide whether to stop the decoding algorithm as outlined next.

4. Stopping Criterion: The decoded vector c is used to
check ifHc = 0, in which case it is declared as a valid
codeword. If not, iterative decoding continues until it is eventually successful, or a preset number of maximum iterations is reached.

An illustration of the iterative LDPC decoding algorithm is shown in Figure 1. A log-domain implementation (omitted here for brevity) of this algorithm can also used to further reduce computational requirements.

Bit Nodes
0

B 't Nodes
a

a
Check Nodes
0
0

0
Check Nodes
Q'9*3

Dr q
0 7; ,, IE
0
0
0 (a) Message passing fom
bit node. 5 to check node 2

I r' r1
D
I' "
A'
a a
(b) Message passing from
check node 2 to bit node 5

Figure 1: Illustration of LDPC Decoding by BP algorithm.

3. ERROR PATTERNS OF BP-LDPC DECODING
As a first step to characterize the BER performance of LDPC BP decoding, we performed extensive simulations with a rate 12 (1024,512) progressive-edge-growth (PEG) LDPC code [6] over AWGN channels for various SNR values. We point out here that we also considered other random-like LDPC code constructions as well, and

1548 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:08:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

similar conclusions were observed. Hence, for brevity, we only present results with the PEG LDPC code example. A block is considered to be in error if the maximum decoding iteration is reached without
satisfying the check equations, i.e. the syndrome c-His non-zero. With the help of simulation results, frame errors could be classified into three patterns, described as follows:
I- Oscillating error pattern: with a nearly periodic change between maximum and minimum values. An important feature of this error pattern is the high variation in bit error count as a function of decoding iteration number.
II- Nearly-constant error pattern: where the bit error count becomes quasi-constant after only a few decoding iterations.
III-Random-like error pattern. where the error count evolution follows a random shape, characterized by low variation range.

Figure 2 shows one example for each of the three error patterns obtained from simulation results of a (1024, 512) LDPC code.

300
- Oscillating error pattern Near Constant error pattern

250

--- Random-like error pattern

~,200-

150
00 z io-o~~~~~~~~Ieato
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Iteration
Figure 2. Illustration of the three error patterns
It is of interest to investigate the relative fraction of these error patterns, and this is illustrated in Table 1 for the (1024,512) PEG code that we consider in this paper. It is seen that that the oscillating error pattern increases with SNR, and becomes clearly dominant around 3dB. Since the oscillating error pattern has maximum variation in the number of uncorrected codeword bits (i.e. maximum peak to peak difference), it is therefore expected that this error pattern that will be most critical for optimizing overall BER performance. For example, as shown in Figure 2, if we set the number of maximum iterations to 60, then decoding failure gives around 30 bits in error. On the other hand, setting the maximum iterations to 50 results in nearly 210 bit errors. This observation motivates the search for a way to get the best intermediate error bits for a given frame decoding error.

In the following section, we further discuss this idea in detail.

Table 1. Percentage of error patterns among total frame errors

_

Error nattern tvne

-11

SNR Oscillating Near-constant Random-like

(dB)

2.25

4%

00%

960%

2.50

12 %

0%

88 %

2.75

24 %

1%

75 %

3.00

630%

3%

340%

4. PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT
The proposed improvement to the BP decoding algorithm is based on the use of intermediate decoding results. For each decoder iteration, we compute the number of bits in error and we store the estimated bit values corresponding to the minimum number of bits in error. As an example, consider the decoding of a block that gave the oscillating pattern shown in Figure 1. Iteration 74 corresponds to minimum number of bits in error. In this example, the proposed algorithm returns estimated bits (ci) resulting
from iteration 74 (not from the last iteration, as with common decoding). However, from a practical perspective, a normal question arises, namely: since we do not know the correct values of bits, how we decide when to pick the intermediate results (in order to achieve minimum bit error count)?. In this work, our extensive numerical results show that, by tracking the evolution of the failed check equations (check nodes in the bipartite graph), we can get a very good indication on how to optimally produce bit error estimates. Indeed, it is found that there is a strong correlation between the non-zero entries in the syndrome Hc and the number of bit errors.
Figure 3 illustrates this fact for the case of oscillating error patterns (as discussed previously), and similar observations also applied for the other cases as well.

Iteration Number
Figure 3. Correlation between uncorrected codeword bits and number of failed parity check equations

1549 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:08:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

To summarize, a formal description of the proposed method to improve the BP decoding based on intermediate decoding iteration results is given below:
BP-LDPC (conventional) decoding Initialize variable nodes Loop Update check and variable nodes Compute estimated variable nodes vector c Compute syndrome vector: Hc Until Hc =O or maximum iterations reached Return
BP-LDPC decoding with the proposed improvement Initialize variable nodes Set Minimum number of check nodes Loop Update check and variable nodes Compute estimated variable nodes vector c Compute syndrome vector: Hc Check Errors = number of non-zero elements in Hc
If Check Errors < Minimum then Minimum= Check Errors
m =c
Until Check Errors = 0 or maximum iterations reached Return m
5. NUMERICAL RESULTS
We performed extensive simulations to verify the effectiveness of the proposed idea. Since simulation of LDPC is time consuming, especially at high SNR, a parallel computing simulation platform was developed to run the LDPC simulations on 130 nodes on a departmental LAN network. Figure 4 shows the simulation results for a PEG code of block size 1024 and a rate of 12. This code, free of 4 and 6 cycles and with minimized 8 cycles [6], was chosen as a representative example, but similar observations applied with other constructions, as will be reported in future work. From Figure 4, it is seen that the difference in BER achieved from the proposed method increases with SNR. This is because the percentage of the oscillating patterns increases as SNR increases, as shown in Table 1.
6. CONCLUSION
The paper presented a method to improve the residual BER level in belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes. A thorough categorization of the evolution of bit errors as a function of decoder iterations was presented, and results showed that uncorrected error patterns can be classified into 3 categories: oscillating, nearly-constant, or random-like, with a predominance of oscillating patterns at high SNR.

10-3F
BER with conventional decoding - BER with the proposed improvement
io-4
LU o-5 -~~~~~~~~~ -s^ -------
m 10
C-
LU 10
.

0o-7

4

108

2.25

2.5

2.75

3

SNR (dB)

Figure 4. BER results for the (1024,512) PEG LDPC code, with and without the proposed improvement.

These observations highlighted the importance of using intermediate decoder results to minimize BER. A simple approach for deciding at which stage to output decoded bits was introduced based on tracking the number of unsatisfied check node equations, which correlate well with bit error occurrences. Numerical results with rate 12, block size 1024 PEG code were used to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, and it was found that BER reduction of to 40% can be achieved, for SNR levels around 3dB.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors thank King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals for support of this work under project no. EE/DENSITY/387.

REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, "Low Density Parity-Check Codes". MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1963.

[2] D.J.C. MacKay, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.45, pp.399431, March 1999.

[3] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference, San Mateo: CA, Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

[4] S.H. Lee et al, "Bit probability transition characteristics of LDPC code," in Proc. 10th Int'l. Conf on Telecommunications 2003, ICT'03, vol.1, pp.553-557, 2003.

[5] S. Gounai, T. Ohtsuki, and T. Kaneko, "Modified Belief Propagation Decoding Algorithm for Low-Density Parity Check Code Based on Oscillation," in Proc. IEEE Vehic. Tech. Conf Spring 2006. Vol. 3, pp. 1467-147 1.

[6] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, "Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs," in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM 2001, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 995-1001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 1Ju5n5e 024,2026 at 05:08:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

