A Bit-Node Centric Architecture for Low-Density Parity-Check Decoders

Ruwan N.S. Ratnayake School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University Cambridge, MA 02138 Email: ratnayak@fas.harvard.edu

Erich F. Haratsch LSI Corporation
Allentown, PA 18109

Gu-Yeon Wei School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University Cambridge, MA 02138 Email: guyeon@eecs.harvard.edu

Abstract—A bit-node centric decoder architecture for lowdensity parity-check codes is proposed. This architecture performs the optimum sum-product algorithm. A bit node processing unit computes the bit-to-check node messages sequentially, while the computation of the check-to-bit node messages is broken up into several steps. A stand-alone decoder architecture, and a decoder architecture for a concatenated detector-decoder system are presented. The proposed stand-alone decoder architecture requires significantly less memory compared to other known serial architectures. The hardware requirements are reduced even further for the concatenated detector-decoder system.
I. INTRODUCTION
The phenomenal performance of turbo codes based on iterative decoding and belief propagation has revitalized the interest in low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2]. Though Gallager first discovered LDPC codes several decades ago [3], until recently these codes were not considered for practical applications due to their immense computational complexity. The near Shannon limit performance of LDPC codes, as shown by Chang et. al. [4] makes them a strong competitor to turbo codes. Although various architectures have been proposed in the past years for the implementation of LDPC codes, there is still a need for more efficient architectures for area-constrained applications, such as magnetic recording.
Inherently, LDPC codes have less structure compared to other codes such as trellis or turbo codes. An LDPC code is fully defined by a parity-check matrix, which determines the internal connections within the decoder. The sparse, randomlike nature of the matrix makes the implementation of these connections challenging. In contrast, turbo codes have a more regular structure. Though randomizing the messages is a necessary feature in turbo codes, it is fulfilled by an external interleaver. Because the computation of messages and message passing are performed separately in turbo codes, the decoder primarily consists of computational circuitry. On the other hand, randomness is inherent to the LDPC code and the message passing is defined by the code itself. Therefore, the message computations and message passing are inseparable, which complicates the implementation of LDPC codes.
One approach for the implementation of the LDPC decoder is a fully parallel architecture, where the exact copy of the bi-partite graph of the code is laid out in hardware. Each bit and check node are constructed as combinational logic and the

wires represent the edges of the graph, which connect the bit and check nodes. A fully parallel architectures achieves high throughput since an entire code word is processed simultaneously. However this approach has several disadvantages. One drawback is the lack of decoding flexibility. Since the decoder is hardwired it can generally decode only a single code. Another significant disadvantage is the enormous complexity associated with the wire connections. The number of messages passed along the edges is large in a typical LDPC code, and for an adequate resolution each message needs to be represented with a sufficient number of bits. Therefore, the number of wires required to connect the nodes exceeds tens of thousands even if the code word length is moderate and in the range of about one thousand bits. A significant portion of the chip needs to be allocated simply for wiring, which reduces area utilization. The paper by Blanksby et al. [5] describes a fully parallel LDPC decoder designed and implemented in 0.16µm technology. The chip measures about 53.5mm2 and half of the area is allocated for wire routing. Moreover this excessive wiring complexity is typically associated with non-uniform delays and cross talk issues which further diminish the merits of the fully parallel approach.
The wiring and computational complexity associated with the fully parallel architecture can be avoided with a serial architecture. In this approach, the wiring overhead is reduced by saving the messages in dedicated memory. Furthermore, bit and check node messages are computed sequentially by reading the relevant messages from the memory, processing them and writing the results back into the memory. Additionally, since the message passing in not hardwired, the decoder can accommodate more than a single code. Recently, several serial architectures have appeared in the literature [6], [7], [8]. In particular, the papers by Wu et al. [9] and Hocevar [10] present serial architectures, which process either the check node or bit node computations on the fly. The architecture proposed in this paper performs the check node computations on the fly. However, our architecture implements the optimum sumproduct algorithm while requiring significantly less memory and in certain instances less latency compared to the other serial architectures.
The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II we explain the considered LDPC decoding

265 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ1.9D3o0w-n5l2oa9dXe/d0o7n/$J2u5ne.0204,©2022600a7t 0I5E:0E6E:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE GLOBECOM 2007 proceedings.

algorithm. Afterwards in Section III we give an in-depth description of our proposed architecture. The memory requirements, throughput characteristics and a comparison of the proposed architecture with other architectures are given in Subsections III-A and III-B, respectively. Section IV describes the proposed architecture for a concatenated detector-decoder system. Final concluding remarks are given in Section V.

II. SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM FOR LDPC DECODING

An LDPC code is defined by a binary parity-check matrix consisting of n columns and m rows. The matrix is typically
large in size, but sparse. The parity-check matrix can be
mapped to a bi-partite graph composed of nodes and edges. A
given column in the matrix corresponds to a unique bit node
and a given row in the matrix corresponds to a unique check node. A bit node i is connected to a check node j by an edge if the element at the (j, i)th position in the parity-check matrix
is non-zero. The set of check nodes connected to a given bit node i is denoted by Bi. These are the non-zero positions in the ith column in the matrix. In the same manner the set of bit nodes connected to a given check node j is denoted by Cj, which corresponds to the non-zero elements in the jth row. The cardinality of Cj and Bi are called row and column degrees and denoted by dr and dc, respectively. For simplicity we consider only regular codes, where the row and column
degrees are constant, independent of the row or column index. A message passed from bit node i to check node j is denoted by Qi,j, where j ∈ Bi. Similarly, a message from check node j to bit node i is denoted Rj,i, where i ∈ Cj.
LDPC codes can be decoded iteratively using the sum-
product algorithm. The algorithm consists of four main steps.
In the following, iterations internal to the decoder are indexed as k. The a priori and a posteriori log-likelihood ratios (LLR) of the bit i are denoted by λi and Λi, respectively:
1) Initialization All the messages from check node j to bit node i are initialized to zero, i.e. Rj0,i = 0.
2) Bit node processing For each i ∈ {1, ..., n}, j ∈ Bi compute Qik,j based on the messages from check nodes generated in the previous
iteration and the a priori LLR,

Qki,j =

Rlk,−i 1 + λi

(1)

l∈Bi ,l=j

3) Check node processing

For each j ∈ {1, ..., m}, i ∈ Cj compute Rjk,i,





Rjk,i = sjk,i × φ−1 

φ |Qlk,j | 

(2)

l∈Cj ,l=i

where the sign bit skj,i is given by

skj,i =

sign(Qkl,j )

(3)

l∈Cj ,l=i

a priori LLR

LDPC a posteriori

Decoder

LLR

Fig. 1. LDPC decoder in stand-alone mode.

and

φ(x) = − log

tanh x 2

= log

ex + 1 ex − 1

= φ(x)−1

4) A posteriori LLR computation After K iterations, the a posteriori LLR for each bit i is computed as

ΛKi +1 =

RlK,i + λi.

(4)

l∈Bi

The equations (1) - (4) are well known and cited here for reference. Fig. 1 shows the decoder in stand-alone mode where iterations are performed internal to the decoder.

III. BIT-NODE CENTRIC ARCHITECTURE FOR A STAND-ALONE LDPC DECODER
This paper proposes to break up the check node computations in (2) and (3) into several steps so that check-to-bit node message can be computed on the fly:

ρik,j = φ(|Qik,j |)

j ∈ {1, ..., m}, i ∈ Cj (5)

σik,j = sign(Qik,j) j ∈ {1, ..., m}, i ∈ Cj (6)

Pjk =

ρkl,j

j ∈ {1, ..., m}

(7)

l∈Cj

Sjk =

σlk,j

j ∈ {1, ..., m}

(8)

l∈Cj

where ρik,j is the transformed magnitude of the bit-to-check node message Qi,j and | | is the notation for magnitude. Based
on these quantities, the sign and magnitude of the message
from check node j to bit node i is given by:

|Rjk,i| = φ(Pjk − ρki,j )

(9)

sign(Rjk,i) = Sjk × σik,j

(10)

The check node computations are performed in signmagnitude format, while the bit node computations can be performed in 2’s complement format.
Fig. 2(a) illustrates the block diagram of the proposed architecture. The block diagram is for a simplified example where dc = 3, Bi = {j1, j2, j3}. At each time cycle the bit node processing unit (BNPU) performs computations pertaining to a single bit node and generates dc number of bit-to-check node messages. The messages from the dc check nodes to the same bit node are computed on the fly using equations equations (5) - (10). Hence this approach is called bit-node centric architecture. Given that the decoder processes dc bitto-check node messages and dc check-to-bit node messages, it

266 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ1.9D3o0w-n5l2oa9dXe/d0o7n/$J2u5ne.0204,©2022600a7t 0I5E:0E6E:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE GLOBECOM 2007 proceedings.

takes n cycles to process the entire code of length n. Within the first time cycle, the first bit node (i = 1) is computed. Then at (n(k − 1) + i)th time cycle, the decoder is computing the ith bit node at the kth iteration and produces messages Qki,j , ∀j ∈ Bi.
The bit-to-check node messages generated by the BNPU are
converted from 2’s-complement to sign-magnitude format. The
magnitude values of the messages are sent to combinational
logic units that perform the function φ and the outputs from these units are the transformed magnitudes, ρki,j, j ∈ Bi as defined in (5). The sign values are σik,j, j ∈ Bi as defined in (6). Without loss of generality it is assumed that each
message is represented by q bits, where both the magnitude and transformed magnitude consist of q − 1 bits and the
sign comprises 1 bit. The sign and transformed magnitude pairs, denoted by [σik,j, ρik,j], are fed to the type-1 update processing units (UPU1) as shown in 2(a). Each pair [σik,j, ρik,j] corresponds to a message from the ith bit node to the jth check
node, and is a q-bit sign-magnitude quantity.
The type-1 update processing unit comprises simple cir-
cuitry, which includes an adder and an XOR gate and is
connected to suitable memory as shown in Fig. 2(b). A single
memory element stores a q-bit quantity. At each cycle the bank
of UPU1s can access any dc number of memory elements from m memory elements. The UPU1s update the relevant memory elements such that at the end of an iteration (i.e. nkth time cycle) the values [Sjk, Pjk], ∀j ∈ {1...m} as defined in (7) and (8) are stored in the m memory elements. In other words,
each memory element keeps a running product of the σ’s and
a running sum of the ρ’s. If the intermediate value in the memory element j ∈ {1...m} for the kth iteration is given by [Sjk(i), Pjk(i)] for i ∈ {1...n}, then all the running products and sums saved in the memory at the (n(k − 1) + i)th time
instance are given by:

Sjk(i) =

Sjk(i − 1) × σik,j if j ∈ Bi

Sjk(i − 1)

else

(11)

Pjk(i) =

Pjk(i − 1) + ρki,j if j ∈ Bi

Pjk(i − 1)

else.

(12)

At the end of an iteration the memory contains:

Sjk = Sjk(n)

j ∈ {1...m}

(13)

Pjk = Pjk(n)

j ∈ {1...m}.

(14)

Fig. 2(b) shows the circuitry for UPU1. At each cycle each
UPU1 accesses a q-bit memory element, where the sign value Sjk(i − 1) is fed to the XOR gate and the magnitude value Pjk(i − 1) is fed to the adder. The quantities σik,j and ρik,j generated within the current cycle are also fed to the XOR gate and adder, respectively. The output of the XOR gate, Sjk(i) and the output of the adder, Pjk(i) are paired as [Sjk(i), Pjk(i)] and written back to the q-bit memory element.
The transformed magnitude and sign bit pairs [σik,j, ρik,j] are also fed into the first-in first-out (FIFO) buffer as shown in Fig.
2(a). Since dc number of such pairs are computed at each time cycle, the buffer requires dc × q bits per row. At each cycle

memory

UPU2

UPU2

UPU2

SM-2's

SM-2's

SM-2's

BNPU

2's-SM

2's-SM

2's-SM

FIFO buffer

UPU1

UPU1
memory

UPU1

memory

memory

UPU1

UPU2

Fig. 2. Bit-node centric decoder architecture for dc = 3, Bi = {j1, j2, j3}. (a) block diagram, (b) type-1 update processing unit (UPU1), (c) type-2 update processing unit (UPU2).
the messages fill in one row of the buffer. Since the decoder saves information pertaining to the entire code, the buffer has n such rows.
At time cycle n(k −1)+i, the set of pairs [σik,j, ρik,j], j ∈ Bi

267 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ1.9D3o0w-n5l2oa9dXe/d0o7n/$J2u5ne.0204,©2022600a7t 0I5E:0E6E:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE GLOBECOM 2007 proceedings.

is fed to the bottom of the buffer and the set of pairs [σik,−j 1, ρik,−j 1], j ∈ Bi from the previous iteration is read from the top of the buffer. After completing n such cycles, i.e. at nkth time cycle, the buffer contains σik,j and ρki,j, ∀i ∈ {1...n}, j ∈ Bi. Row i in the buffer contains the information pertaining to bit node i. The bottom row of the buffer contains [σ1k,j, ρk1,j], j ∈ B1, and the top row contains [σnk,j, ρkn,j], j ∈ Bn. At this time cycle the updated memory contains the corresponding final signs Sjk and magnitudes Pjk, ∀j ∈ {1...m}.
The check-to-bit node messages Rjk,−i 1 are computed based on the values computed in the previous iteration, namely [Sjk−1, Pjk−1], j ∈ {1...m} saved in the memory and [σik,−j 1, ρik,−j 1], j ∈ Bi saved in the FIFO buffer. These quantities are fed to the type-2 update processing unit (UPU2). UPU2 consists of an adder and an XOR gate as shown in Fig. 2(c). At each iteration, Sjk−1 and σik,−j 1, ∀j ∈ Bi are read from the memory and the FIFO buffer, respectively and the product (Sjk−1 × σik,−j 1) is computed using XOR gates. These are the sign values of the corresponding messages from the dc check nodes to the ith bit node for the previous iteration, namely sign(Rjk,−i 1), j ∈ Bi according to (10).
The magnitude of the check-to-bit node messages is evaluated in a similar manner. At the kth iteration, the values Pjk−1 and ρik,−j 1, j ∈ Bi pertaining to bit node i are read from the memory and FIFO buffer, respectively. The relevant intermediate results (Pjk−1 − ρik,−j 1) are computed for each j ∈ Bi and passed to combinational units that perform the function φ. The outputs of these functional units are the magnitudes of the messages from the corresponding check nodes to the ith bit node for the previous iteration, namely |Rjk,−i 1|, ∀j ∈ Bi according to (9). The sign and magnitude values are passed through combinational logic that converts from the sign-magnitude to 2’s-complement format. The results Rjk,−i 1, ∀j ∈ Bi are the inputs to the BNPU for the ith bit node from the previous iteration.
A. Memory Requirements and Throughput
The FIFO buffer requires ndcq memory bits. The memory capacity needed to store all the pairs [Sj, Pj], ∀j ∈ {1...m} is 2mq memory bits. The multiplication factor 2 is due to the need to save the current computations pertaining to iteration k while simultaneously reading the values from the previous iteration k−1. Thus the decoder requires a total of (2m+ndc)q memory bits.
At each time cycle the proposed architecture computes dc number of check-to-bit node messages and dc number of bit-to-check node messages. Thus it takes n cycles to process a code of length n using a single BNPU and dc number of UPU1s and UPU2s.
B. Advantages over Other Architectures
The proposed architecture performs the sum-product algorithm as defined by the equations (1) to (4). Therefore, this ar-

TABLE I ARCHITECTURE COMPARISON

Architecture

Memory

Clock cycles Low code rate High code rate †

Yeo

2ndcq

2n

2n

CNC

(2n + mdr)q

m

≈n

BNC

(2m + ndc)q

n

n

Yeo: Serial architecture proposed in [6]

CNC: Check-node centric architecture

BNC: Bit-node centric architecture † : Assumes maximum of dc parallel memory accesses

per memory bank per cycle

chitecture achieves better bit error rate performance than other

architectures that implement the min-sum decoding algorithm

such as [9], where only the minimum values are considered for

the message computation. Moreover the architecture described

in [9] is for a concatenated detector-decoder system only.

Hocevar describes an architecture in [10] that also computes

both bit-to-check and check-to-bit messages within one cycle.

However, Hocevar’s architecture is check-node centric since it

uses a check node processing unit and breaks up the bit node

computations. Mansour et al. [8] also describe an architecture

that is very similar to the one in [10]. The check-node centric architecture described in [10] requires (2n + mdr)q memory bits to save the required messages and intermediate values. On the other hand, our bit-node centric architecture requires (2m+ ndc)q memory bits. The difference in memory requirements is 2(n − m)q bits, since mdr == ndc. Thus the bit-node centric architecture always requires less memory than the check-node
centric architecture since m < n. The memory savings are

particulary significant for high code rates, which are desirable

in magnetic storage systems. Assuming dc = 3 and a code rate

equal

to

8 9

(which

in

turn

dictates

dr

= 27

for

regular

codes)

the check-node centric architecture needs 45mq memory bits

whereas the proposed architecture needs only 29mq bits. Thus

in this typical scenario, the check-node centric architecture requires close to 50% more memory compared to the bit-node

centric approach.

Furthermore, a check node processing unit needs to sum

dr number of messages whereas a bit node processing unit only needs to sum up dc number of messages. For high code rates dr is considerably larger than dc. Thus, for such codes the check-node centric architecture would need a significantly

larger adder tree. To alleviate a resulting speed bottleneck the

adder tree in the check-node centric architecture may need to

be pipelined.

For minimum decoding latency, both the bit-node centric

and check-node centric architecture need to access the memory

multiple times within a cycle. In the bit-node centric architec-

ture, the decoder needs to access dc memory elements from a bank of m elements within a cycle. Although this memory

access can be serialized at the cost of increased number of

268 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ1.9D3o0w-n5l2oa9dXe/d0o7n/$J2u5ne.0204,©2022600a7t 0I5E:0E6E:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE GLOBECOM 2007 proceedings.

channel Channel outputs

SISO Detector

a priori LLR

LDPC Decoder

memory

extrinsic information

Fig. 3. LDPC decoder concatenated with a soft-input soft-output detector.
cycles per iteration, for high code rates dc is small (e.g. 3 or 4) making parallel access a feasible option. On the other hand, if the check-node centric architecture processes one check node within a cycle it needs to randomly access any permutation of dr memory elements from n elements. Typically, in magnetic recording applications both dr and n are prohibitively large (long codes and high code rates) making such parallel access impractical to implement. Therefore, for such applications the memory access may need to be serialized for check-node centric decoders. This significantly increases the number of cycles needed per iteration compared to the m required cycles if parallel access is feasible.
Table I summarizes the memory requirements and number of required clock cycles for different architectures. For comparison, we have also considered the serial architecture proposed by Yeo et. al. [6]. This architectures has one bit node processing unit and dc number of pipelined check node processing units. Each check node processing unit needs dr number of cycles to complete the computations for a single check node. Thus it takes n cycles to process all check nodes and another n cycles to process all bit nodes. The scheme switches read and write operations between two memory banks. At each cycle it reads messages from one memory bank and writes the results to the other.
For low code rates with small dr, the check-node centric architecture requires less cycles per iteration compared to the bit-node centric architecture. However for high code rates, this advantage diminishes since the memory access may need to be serialized. If we consider a fixed number of memory accesses per cycle then both the bit-node and check-node centric architectures require approximately the same number of cycles per iteration. The last column in the table shows the number of cycles needed per iteration when parallel memory access is restricted to dc elements per cycle.
IV. BIT-NODE CENTRIC ARCHITECTURE FOR AN LDPC DECODER IN A CONCATENATED SYSTEM
A receiver where the LDPC decoder is concatenated with a soft-input soft-output (SISO) detector is shown in Fig. 3. The SISO detector takes in channel outputs and extrinsic information from the LDPC decoder and produces its own extrinsic information which becomes the a priori LLR (λi) for the LDPC decoder at the next iteration. Within one iteration through the concatenated system, the data is processed once by both the detector and LDPC decoder. (In some receiver systems the LDPC decoder performs additional internal decoding iterations. In this paper we only consider one single local decoding iteration for each global iteration through the

UPU2

UPU2

UPU2

SM-2's

SM-2's

SM-2's

BNPU

SISO

channel outputs

2's-SM

FIFO buffer

UPU1

UPU1
memory

UPU1

Fig. 4. Block diagram of the proposed architecture for a concatenated detector-decoder system where dc = 3, Bi = {j1, j2, j3}.

system). In this concatenated system, LDPC decoding involves passing the a priori LLRs along the edges to the check nodes, processing the check nodes and computing extrinsic information at the bit nodes.
Since the LDPC decoder performs only one local iteration per global iteration, the processing inside the LDPC decoder is given by equations (1) - (4) where the LDPC iteration index equals k = 1. Further, since Ri0,j = 0, ∀i, j based on (1), the messages passed along the edges from bit node i to check node j are given by:

Qˆi,j = Q1i,j = λi, ∀j ∈ Bi.

(15)

Thus, at each pass through the LDPC decoder, all the messages from bit node i to its check nodes, namely Qˆi,j, ∀j ∈ Bi are equal to the a priori LLR of the bit node i. The global iteration
index is not shown in (15). Denoting the global iteration index

269 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ1.9D3o0w-n5l2oa9dXe/d0o7n/$J2u5ne.0204,©2022600a7t 0I5E:0E6E:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE GLOBECOM 2007 proceedings.

as t and the a priori LLR pertaining to the ith bit node as λti, the messages from the ith bit node to the jth check node at the tth iteration are given by:

Qˆti,j = λti, ∀j ∈ Bi.

(16)

Considering this simplification, the transformed magnitude and sign bit information needed to be saved per bit node are given by:

ρˆit = φ(|λti|)

(17)

σˆit = sign(λit).

(18)

Utilizing these quantities the check-to-bit node messages, Rjt−,i1, j ∈ Bi are computed in a similar fashion as described in Section III. Based on these check-to-bit node messages, the
extrinsic information can be calculated as

Λte,i =

Rlt,−i 1

l∈Bi

(19)

and is passed to the SISO detector for the next iteration.
Fig. 4 shows the block diagram of the proposed architecture
for the concatenated detector-decoder system. In the Figure, the exemplary case is considered where dc = 3, Bi = {j1, j2, j3}. The BNPU calculates the extrinsic information according to (19). The UPU1s and UPU2s are implemented
as shown in Fig. 2(b) and Fig. 2(c), respectively.
Since the messages from a given bit node to all its check
nodes are the same, the FIFO buffer storage capacity is reduced by a factor of dc. Hence, the buffer requires q bits per row to save the intermediate messages pertaining to a single bit node. Storing all [Sjt, Pjk] and [Sjt−1, Pjk−1], j ∈ {1...m} requires 2mq memory bits. The total storage requirement is (2m + n)q. At each time cycle the proposed architecture computes dc check-to-bit node messages and a single extrinsic information value.
The advantages of the proposed bit-node centric architecture
are significant for concatenated detector-decoder systems: No
additional delay is needed for LDPC decoding. The delay for
the decoder is in fact absorbed by the SISO detector. The detector generates extrinsic soft outputs, λtis which are immediately processed in the same order by the decoder without
the need for buffering. Moreover the extrinsic information
values generated by the decoder are in the same order as
the channel outputs and can be immediately processed by the
SISO detector for the next iteration.
On the other hand, the check-node centric architecture is
less hardware-efficient in a concatenated detector-decoder
system. The check-node centric architecture processes the extrinsic soft outputs from the channel, λtis in a different order than they are generated by the detector. This is due to the fact that the dr number of λtis required for each check node are different. Therefore, first, the λtis need to be buffered before check node computations are performed. The extrinsic
information can be computed on the fly by updating a bank of memory. The decoder needs m cycles in addition to the delay for the SISO detector. The serial architecture proposed

by Yeo et al. [6] suffers from the same disadvantages when used in a concatenated detector-decoder system. Also Wu et al. [9] considered a concatenated detector-decoder system. There however, an architecture for the min-sum decoding algorithm was presented, which in general achieves worse bit error rate than the sum-product algorithm implemented by our architecture.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presented a serial LDPC decoder architecture that performs the sum-product algorithm. Two applications were considered, namely a stand-alone LDPC decoder and an LDPC decoder concatenated with a SISO detector. The proposed architecture uses a standard bit node processing unit, while the check node computations are broken up and computed on the fly. This bit-node centric architecture requires significantly less memory than other serial architectures, especially for LDPC codes with high code rate. A simplified version of the architecture targeted at concatenated detectordecoder receivers was also proposed, which further reduces memory requirements and is associated with less latency than other architectures.
REFERENCES
[1] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[2] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[3] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Info. Theory, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[4] S. Y. Chang, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 db of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[5] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 lowdensity parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[6] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “VLSI architectures for iterative decoders in magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Mag., vol. 37, pp. 748–755, Mar. 2001.
[7] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, vol. 5, pp. 3019–3924, Nov. 2001.
[8] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Systems, vol. 11, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[9] Z. Wu and G. Burd, “Equation based LDPC decoder for intersymbol interference channels,” IEEE Int’l Conf. on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), vol. 5, pp. 757– 760, Mar. 2005.
[10] D. E. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware implementation,” IEEE Int’l Conf. on Comm. (ICC), vol. 4, pp. 2708–2712, May 2003.

270 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ1.9D3o0w-n5l2oa9dXe/d0o7n/$J2u5ne.0204,©2022600a7t 0I5E:0E6E:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE GLOBECOM 2007 proceedings.

