IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

4059

Turbo Decoding on the Binary Erasure Channel: Finite-Length Analysis and Turbo Stopping Sets
Eirik Rosnes, Member, IEEE, and Øyvind Ytrehus, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper is devoted to the finite-length analysis of turbo decoding over the binary erasure channel (BEC). The performance of iterative belief-propagation decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over the BEC can be characterized in terms of stopping sets. We describe turbo decoding on the BEC which is simpler than turbo decoding on other channels. We then adapt the concept of stopping sets to turbo decoding and state an exact condition for decoding failure. Apply turbo decoding until the transmitted codeword has been recovered, or the decoder fails to progress further. Then the set of erased positions that will remain when the decoder stops is equal to the unique maximum-size turbo stopping set which is also a subset of the set of erased positions. Furthermore, we present some improvements of the basic turbo decoding algorithm on the BEC. The proposed improved turbo decoding algorithm has substantially better error performance as illustrated by the given simulation results. Finally, we give an expression for the turbo stopping set size enumerating function under the uniform interleaver assumption, and an efficient enumeration algorithm of small-size turbo stopping sets for a particular interleaver. The solution is based on the algorithm proposed by Garello et al. in 2001 to compute an exhaustive list of all low-weight codewords in a turbo code.
Index Terms—Binary erasure channel (BEC), improved decoding, stopping set, turbo decoding, uniform interleaver, weight spectrum.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes as opposed to turbo codes have been studied extensively on the binary erasure channel (BEC). In [1], an iterative decoding algorithm for LDPC codes over the BEC was proposed, and it was shown that this scheme approaches channel capacity arbitrarily close. Although carefully optimized irregular LDPC codes with iterative decoding can achieve channel capacity on the BEC as the code length tends to infinity, there is still some performance loss compared to maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding of a given fixed code of finite length. Recently, some progress has been made toward efficient ML or near-ML decoding of LDPC codes over the BEC [2]–[4]. The Tanner graph representation of
Manuscript received February 20, 2006; revised January 4, 2007. This work was carried out within NEWCOM and supported in part by Nera Networks AS, and in part by the Norwegian Research Council (NFR) under Grants 156712/ 220, 164803/V30, and 146874/420. The material in this work was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Adelaide, SA, Australia, September 2005.
The authors are with the Selmer Center, Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, Norway (e-mail: eirik@ii.uib.no; oyvind@ii. uib.no).
Communicated by G. Zémor, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of Figures 1–5 in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2007.907496

an LDPC code is a bipartite graph with left (variable) and right (check) nodes. The left nodes correspond to codeword bits. The right nodes correspond to parity-check constraints. It is known that iterative belief-propagation (BP) decoding fails if and only if the set of erased variable nodes contains a stopping set [5]. A stopping set is a subset of the variable nodes such that all neighboring check nodes are connected to the set at least twice.
In this work, we consider turbo decoding over the BEC. Turbo codes have gained considerable attention since their introduction by Berrou et al. [6] in 1993 due to their near-capacity performance and low decoding complexity. Here, we consider the conventional turbo code, which is the parallel concatenation of two identical recursive systematic convolutional encoders separated by a pseudorandom interleaver. To accurately describe turbo decoding on the BEC, we introduce the concept of a turbo stopping set, and we identify an exact condition for decoding failure. Assume that we transmit codewords of a turbo code over the BEC. Apply turbo decoding until either the codeword has been recovered, or the decoder fails to progress further. Then, the set of erased positions that will remain when the decoder stops is equal to the unique maximum-size turbo stopping set which is also a subset of the set of erased positions. Stopping sets for turbo decoding on the BEC have also been considered independently of this work by Lee in [7]. Both works have common motivations and complementary results, to a large extent.
We also consider improved turbo decoding on the BEC. The algorithm applies turbo decoding until the transmitted codeword is recovered, or the decoder fails to progress further. Then, an unknown systematic bit-position is identified and its value is guessed, after which turbo decoding is applied again. Thus, the algorithm is based on guessing bit-values in erased bit-positions when turbo decoding does not progress further and has the same structure as the algorithms in [4].
Recently, several algorithms have been introduced to compute the first few terms of the weight distribution of both parallel and serial turbo codes. Both exact algorithms (e.g., [8]–[10]) and approximate algorithms (e.g., [11]–[13]) have been presented. We will argue that basically all trellis-based algorithms can be adapted to find the first few terms of the turbo stopping set size enumerating function. In particular, we have considered in detail how to adapt the algorithm by Garello et al. introduced in [9] and the improved version of this algorithm from [8]. Also, an expression for the (average) turbo stopping set size enumerating function under the uniform interleaver assumption is presented.
Using linear programming (LP) to decode binary linear codes has recently been considered by Feldman et al. [14]. See also the seminal papers [15], [16] where LP decoding of turbo-like codes is considered. In particular, repeat–accumulate (RA) codes are

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4060

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

considered. A description of LP decoding of arbitrary concatenated codes is given in [17, Ch. 6]. The obvious polytope for LP decoding is the convex hull of all codewords, in which case LP decoding is equivalent to ML decoding. However, the convex hull has a description complexity that is exponential in the codeword length for a general binary linear code. Thus, Feldman et al. [14] proposed a relaxed polytope which contains all valid codewords as vertices, but also additional noncodeword vertices. The vertices of the relaxed polytope are basically what the authors called pseudocodewords in [14]. One desirable property of the LP decoder is the ML certificate property, i.e., when the LP decoder outputs a codeword, it is guaranteed to be the ML codeword. Experimental results with LDPC codes typically show, depending on the specific code under consideration, that the performance of the relaxed LP decoder is better than with the iterative min-sum algorithm, but slightly worse than with iterative BP decoding.
Some understanding of the performance of iterative decoding of finite-length LDPC codes over general memoryless channels have recently been developed. Finite graph covers of the Tanner graph and the codes defined by these covers play an essential role in the analysis [18]. The low complexity of iterative decoding is due to the fact that the algorithm operates locally on the Tanner graph of the code. This property is also the main weakness of iterative decoding, since the decoder cannot distinguish if it operates on the original Tanner graph or on any of the finite covers. Hence, codewords in the code defined by a finite cover of the Tanner graph will have influence on iterative decoding. These codewords are basically what Vontobel and Koetter referred to as pseudocodewords in [18]. It turns out that the set of pseudocodewords of all finite covers of the Tanner graph is equal to the set of points where all entries are rational numbers from the relaxed polytope of LP decoding of LDPC codes as introduced by Feldman et al. in [14]. A similar connection between the relaxed polytope of LP decoding of turbo codes, as described in [17, Ch. 6], and the pseudocodewords of all finite covers of the turbo-code factor graph [19] was established in [20]. Furthermore, it was also shown in [20] that there is a many-to-one correspondence between these pseudocodewords and turbo stopping sets in the following sense. The support set of any pseudocodeword, i.e., the set of nonzero coordinates, is a turbo stopping set, and for any turbo stopping set there is a pseudocodeword with support set equal to the turbo stopping set. A similar connection also holds between pseudocodewords of finite graph covers of Tanner graphs and stopping sets [18], [21].
For LDPC codes it has been observed that stopping sets, to some degree, also reflect the performance of iterative decoding for other channels than the BEC [22], [18]. It is therefore our hope that the notion of turbo stopping sets also can provide some useful insight into turbo decoding on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel or on other memoryless channels.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we define some basic notation and describe simplified turbo decoding on the BEC. Section III introduces the concept of a turbo stopping set. We further give some of the basic properties and show that turbo stopping sets characterize exactly the performance of

Fig. 1. Graphical representation of the mappings  ;  ; ; and for the
turbo code from Example 1.

turbo decoding on the BEC. An improved turbo decoding algorithm on the BEC is introduced in Section IV, and its superiority compared to conventional turbo decoding is illustrated by simulation examples. Finally, in Section V, we consider enumeration of small-size turbo stopping sets for a particular interleaver and under the uniform interleaver assumption. Conclusions and a discussion of future work are given in Section VI.

II. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we introduce the channel, define some basic notation, and describe convolutional codes, trellises, and finally, simplified turbo decoding on the BEC.

A. The BEC
The BEC model was introduced by Elias [23] in 1955. The channel has recently been used for modeling information transmission over the Internet. The BEC is a two-input, three-output discrete memoryless channel. Each input bit is erased with probability , or received correctly with probability .

B. Some Definitions and Basic Notation

Let

denote a parallel concatenated con-

volutional code (PCCC), or turbo code, with information length

, constituent encoders and of rate

, and inter-

leaver . In this work, we consider dual termination [24], which

implies that the length of the interleaver

where is

the constraint length. We assume here that is a multiple of .

Let and denote the lengths of the constituent codes. The

length of the turbo code is denoted by . For an unpunctured

turbo code,

and

. In general,

the values of , , and depend on the puncturing pattern

and the termination scheme.

We will now define some useful mappings, but we advise

the reader that the formal definitions below will be easier to

understand after taking a look at Fig. 1 .

Define two mappings

and

, where

for a positive integer

. The mapping gives the index in the first constituent code-

word of the turbo codeword index if such a relation exists, or

if not. Similarly, the mapping gives the index in the second

constituent codeword of the turbo codeword index if such a re-

lation exists, or if not. Note that for turbo codeword indices

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES AND YTREHUS: TURBO DECODING ON THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

4061

that correspond to systematic bits, the interleaver is used to get

the correct constituent codeword index for the second encoder.

Define two mappings

and

. The mapping gives the systematic sequence index

of the first constituent codeword index if such a relation ex-

ists, or if not. Similarly, the mapping gives the interleaved

systematic sequence index of the second constituent codeword

index if such a relation exists, or if not.

induced by the partition in (1) is called the time axis for . The

partition in (1) also induces a partition

of the edge set , where is the subset of edges that begin at

a vertex in and end at a vertex in .

Define

and

, and

and

. The vertex set is

a vector space of dimension

Example 1: Consider a turbo code composed of two identical

nominal rate- constituent convolutional codes. The inter- from which it follows that

leaver length

and parity bits from the two constituent set is also a vector space of dimension

encoders are punctured alternatively to create a nominal

. The edge

rate- turbo code. The lengths of the first and second con-

stituent codes are

. The interleaver is defined by

(i.e.,

, and so on). The ordering

of bits in the turbo codeword is

Let be the subset of with the property that without loss of generality, that

consisting of all integers . Furthermore, we assume,
, which implies that

. Let

, for every

, where is the

largest nonnegative integer less than or equal to

such

where and denote, respectively, the th systematic and

parity bit (before puncturing) from the first constituent code,

and denotes the th parity bit (before puncturing) from the

second constituent code. The mappings

and are

depicted graphically in Fig. 1.

that

. As argued, for instance in [27],

[28], there are time instances

in which there is

only a single edge out of each vertex in . By sectionalization,

the depth of the trellis module can be reduced to . This re-

duced trellis module is called an information bit-oriented trellis

module and is denoted by

C. Convolutional Codes and Trellises

where

and

. The

An edge-labeled directed graph is a triple

, con-

sisting of a set of vertices, a finite set called the alphabet,

and a set of ordered triples

, with

and

, called edges. The edge

begins at , ends at ,

and has label .

Let denote a linear

convolutional code over some

finite field of elements, where is the constraint length or

the code degree. In this work, the convolutional code symbols

are taken from the binary field

GF . A convolutional

code can be defined by an

polynomial parity-check

matrix

. We assume in general a canonical parity-check

matrix [25]. The maximum degree of the polynomials in the th

edge set is the set of paths that begin at a vertex in and

end at a vertex in . The label of an edge in is the label

sequence along the defining path, which is a -ary sequence of

length . The edge set is a vector space of the same dimen-

sion as .

In the trellis module there are edges out of each vertex

in

. Thus, we can assign a -ary input label to each edge

, and the trellis module can be used for encoding.

A trellis constructed as the infinite composition of the

trellis module (with an initial transient due encoder initial-

ization) has paths that are in one-to-one correspondence with

codewords of .

row is the th row degree, denoted by .

Let be the matrix

, and let

be the matrix

with

. When a matrix

is given an integer interval subscript we mean the submatrix

consisting of the columns with indices in the interval. The

columns in a matrix are indexed from left to right with positive

integers.

The minimal trellis of can be constructed from a parity-

check matrix of the code as outlined in [26]. The minimal trellis

can be regarded (after an initial transient) as the infinite compo-

sition of a basic building block which is called the trellis module.

The trellis module

of is an edge-labeled di-

rected graph with the property that the vertex set can be par-

titioned as

D. Turbo Decoding on the BEC
The aim of turbo decoding on the BEC is to find a set of paths through each constituent code trellis that is consistent with the received sequence. The decoding starts with a set of all paths and iteratively eliminates those that are inconsistent. This iterative process continues until either there is only one possible path left in each constituent trellis (successful decoding), or there is no change from one iteration step to the next. We will describe the basic algorithm, but remark that the BEC version of turbo decoding allows more efficient implementations. For simplicity, we omit the details. The interested reader is referred to [29] for one way to efficiently implement the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [30] on a trellis for the BEC. Turbo decoding on the BEC was also described

(1) in [7]. Let

denote an information bit-oriented trellis for con-

such that every edge in begins at a vertex in and ends at stituent code

, constructed as a finite composition

a vertex in , for some

. The depth of of the trellis module of described in Section II-C above.

the trellis module is . The ordered index set

The number of trellis depths in is , i.e., there is one

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4062

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

trellis section for each systematic bit. Below, denotes the com-

plement of

.

Like turbo decoding for an AWGN channel, the constituent de-

coders work with a forward and a backward pass through the con-

stituent code trellis , and during these passes the state metric

(resp.,

) for vertex at trellis depth , at the

th iteration,

, is updated. In more detail, the state metric

is the joint probability of

and

being in vertex at trellis depth in at the th iteration [30],

where

is the current estimate of the trans-

mitted sequence, and is the number of label bits on any par-

tial path in from the all-zero vertex at trellis depth to any

output label bit-position, then the corresponding bit in remains

erased.

We remark that the description above is equivalent to con-

ventional turbo decoding using the BCJR algorithm on the con-

stituent trellises on the BEC.

The codeword is said to be recovered if

, where de-

notes an erasure, for all such that

and

. The decoder is said to fail to progress further if,

for

, the state metrics

and

, for some

positive integer , are equal to the state metrics

and

, respectively, for all vertices at trellis depth

in

.

vertex at trellis depth . The state metric

is the con-

ditional probability of

given being in

vertex at trellis depth in at the th iteration [30]. Since

the BEC does not introduce errors, some of these probabilities

are zero, while the remaining nonzero probabilities are equal for

any given trellis depth . Thus, for the BEC, the state metrics are

actually Boolean and define forward (resp., backward) paths that

are consistent with the current estimate of the transmitted se-

quence. The decoding for constituent code is performed as

follows.

Initially, we set

;

for all vertices at trellis depth

in

; and

III. TURBO STOPPING SETS
In this section, we will introduce the concept of a turbo stopping set. A turbo stopping set is the equivalent of an LDPC stopping set when turbo decoding and not iterative BP decoding is performed.

Definition 1: Let denote a given PCCC with interleaver .

A set

is a turbo stopping set if and

only if there exist two linear subcodes

and

of dimension greater than zero with

support sets

and

, respectively, such that

for every nonzero vertex at trellis depths

and , respectively, in . Finally, set the estimate of the

transmitted sequence equal to the received sequence.

Then the forward pass calculates, for

and

for each vertex at trellis depth in

and subse-

quently,

AND

. Here

is a Boolean variable which is true if there exists, in the

th

trellis section of , an edge consistent with , with right

vertex , and left vertex such that

. Ini-

tially, prior to the forward pass, we set

for all vertices at trellis depth in .

In a similar way, the backward pass calculates

for

all vertices at trellis depth in

. In more

detail, the backward pass calculates, for

and

for each vertex at trellis depth in

and subse-

quently,

AND

. Here

is

a Boolean variable which is true if there exists, in the th trellis

section of , an edge consistent with , with left vertex ,

and right vertex such that

. Initially,

prior to the backward pass, we set

for

all vertices at trellis depth in .

Finally, the estimate of the transmitted sequence is updated

so that only bit-values consistent with legal edges remain, and

control is passed to the other constituent decoder. An edge is

said to be legal if and only if the -value of its left vertex and the

-value of its right vertex both are true after the backward pass.

If all legal edges within a trellis section agree for a particular

output label bit-position, then the corresponding bit is uniquely

determined and the corresponding entry in the current estimate

of transmitted sequence is updated accordingly. However, if

there are at least two legal edges that do not agree for a particular

(2)

The size of a turbo stopping set is its cardinality.

The lemmas below state some of the properties of a turbo stopping set.

Lemma 1: Let denote a given PCCC with interleaver . The

support set of any nonzero codeword from is a turbo stopping

set of size equal to the Hamming weight of the given codeword.

Thus, the minimum turbo stopping set size is upper-bounded by

the minimum Hamming weight.

Proof: Denote the nonzero turbo codeword by and the

corresponding first and second constituent codewords by

and , respectively. Furthermore, let

and

, where denotes an all-zero sequence of

length

. The result follows immediately from

Definition 1, since both and have dimension greater than

zero,

, and

.

Lemma 2: Let denote a given PCCC with interleaver ,

and let

denote a turbo stopping set. If and

can both be decomposed into direct sums of linear subcodes of

dimension one with disjoint support sets, then is the support

set of a turbo codeword of Hamming weight . The converse

is also true.

Proof: Assume that and can both be decomposed

into direct sums of linear subcodes of dimension one with dis-

joint support sets. In more detail

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES AND YTREHUS: TURBO DECODING ON THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

4063

and

node in corresponding to the th bit in first

or

second

constituent codeword, is an LDPC stopping set

in any Tanner graph of , since

is the support

where and are nonnegative integers. The codewords

set

(from Definition 1) of some subcode of of

dimension greater than zero. We have here used the fact that

and

the variable nodes corresponding to the support set of a nonzero

codeword constitute an LDPC stopping set. Furthermore, the set

have support sets

and

, re-

spectively, since the support sets of the direct sum subcodes are disjoint. Since the two sets

and

(3)

and

is an LDPC stopping set in the Tanner graph of the turbo code

are equal (from Definition 1), there exists a turbo codeword

due to the last condition in Definition 1. The cardinality of the

with first and second constituent codewords and , respec- LDPC stopping set in (3) is .

tively. Thus, the turbo stopping set is the support set of a turbo

codeword of Hamming weight , since

.

We prove the converse using the following argument. The

turbo stopping set is the support set of a turbo codeword .

The corresponding first and second constituent codewords are

denoted by and , respectively. Then, there exist subcodes

Note that the converse is not necessarily true (i.e., for an LDPC stopping set in any Tanner graph for from the class of Tanner graphs from Construction 1, there is not necessarily a turbo stopping set). The following theorem states an exact condition for decoding failure.

and

, both of Theorem 1: Let denote a given PCCC with interleaver

dimension one, which satisfy the constraints in (2) with

that we use to transmit information over the BEC. The received

, and the result follows. (The codewords and may or vectors are decoded using turbo decoding until either the code-

may not be further decomposed.)

word has been recovered, or the decoder fails to progress further.

Construction 1: Let

and

denote two arbitrarily chosen Tanner graphs for the first and

second constituent codes, respectively. The node set can be

partitioned into three disjoint subsets

and , corre-

sponding to systematic bits, parity bits, and parity-check equa-

tions, respectively, where

. There is an edge

connecting a node

to a node

if and only if the first

or second

constituent

codeword bit represented by is checked by the parity-check

equation represented by . Next, define

Then the set of erased positions that will remain when the decoder stops is equal to the unique maximum-size turbo stopping set which is also a subset of , where denotes the subset of erased positions.
Proof: We will prove the result under the assumption of transmitting the all-zero codeword, since the set of erased positions that will remain when the decoder stops is independent of the transmitted codeword. This can be seen, for instance, by regarding each iteration of turbo decoding on the BEC as solving two systems of linear equations. The first system is based on the constraints of the first constituent code, and the second system

is based on the constraints of the second constituent code. The

columns of the coefficient matrix correspond to the current set

of erased positions with respect to one of the constituent code-

words, and the rows correspond to a set of linearly independent

where denotes the th node in corresponding to the th binary parity-check constraints imposed on these positions by

bit in the input sequence

or interleaved input sequence the constituent code. The right-hand side of the system of linear

. Then, the graph

is a equations depends on the nonerased bit-values in the current es-

Tanner graph for the turbo code.

timate of the transmitted constituent codeword and will there-

We remark that the construction of a Tanner graph of a turbo code given above is due to MacKay [31]. Also, note that for a given binary linear code there exist in general several fullrank parity-check matrices, and thus several (distinct) Tanner graphs. The minimum stopping set size is in general a function of the Tanner graph [32]–[34]. Note that Construction 1 gives a specific class of Tanner graphs for a turbo code that is a proper subset of the class of all Tanner graphs of the given turbo code. We will consider this specific class of Tanner graphs below.

fore depend on the actual transmitted codeword.

Let the set of erased positions in the current estimate of the

first and second constituent codeword be denoted by and ,

respectively. Initially, prior to decoding,

, is obvi-

ously independent of the transmitted codeword and only depen-

dent on . Let us assume that the sets and are independent

of the transmitted codeword prior to solving the system of linear

equations based on the constraints of the first constituent code at

the th iteration. The positions of erased bits recovered are inde-

pendent of the transmitted codeword, since both the coefficient

Lemma 3: Let denote a given PCCC with interleaver . For matrix and (using the induction hypothesis) are independent

any turbo stopping set

there is an LDPC stopping set of the transmitted codeword. Obviously, the right-hand side in-

of cardinality in any Tanner graph for from the class of fluences only the recovered bit-values and not which positions

Tanner graphs from Construction 1.

are recovered. The recovered positions are removed from ,

Proof: We use the notation introduced in Construction 1. and the interleaved recovered systematic positions are removed

The set

, where denotes the th from . Thus, the sets and remain independent of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4064

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Fig. 2. Turbo stopping set of size 17 for the example (155; 64; 18) turbo code. The direct sum of the two upper (lower) sets of binary vectors (extended to length I with zeros) is the systematic part of the subcode C (C ).

transmitted codeword after solving the system of linear equa- which is also a subset of , since the union of two turbo stop-

tions based on the constraints of the first constituent code. The ping sets is also a turbo stopping set. Conversely, if the decoder

same argument holds when solving the second system of linear terminates at a set , then there will exist subcodes

equations based on the constraints of the second constituent and

of dimension greater than zero with support sets

code. It follows that the sets and remain independent of

and

, respectively. Since the turbo

the transmitted codeword after completion of the th iteration, decoder terminates, the two sets

and

and the result has been shown using induction.

are equal. From Definition 1, it follows

Now, we give the proof under the assumption of transmitting that is a turbo stopping set and, since no erased bit-positions

the all-zero codeword. The proof given here is inspired by contained in a turbo stopping set can be determined by the

the proof given by Di et al. in [5, Lemma 1.1] in the context turbo decoder, it must be the maximum-size turbo stopping set

of an LDPC stopping set. Let be a turbo stopping set con- which is also a subset of .

tained in . The claim is that the basic turbo decoder cannot

determine the bits corresponding to the positions in the turbo

stopping set . Assume that all other bits are known. Turbo

decoding starts by activating the first constituent decoder. For

the first constituent decoder, the forward–backward algorithm

will determine

possible paths through the trellis.

Here, is the subcode of highest cardinality that satisfies

From Lemma 3, Theorem 1, and Lemma 1.1 in [5], it follows that the erasure probability after iterative BP decoding, using a Tanner graph from the class of Tanner graphs of a turbo code from Construction 1, is greater than or equal to the erasure probability after turbo decoding on the BEC for any channel erasure pattern.

Definition 1. The support set of these possible paths is equal to , and they are all equally likely. Consequently, no

A. A

Turbo Code

additional codeword bits can be determined. Thus, the extrinsic In [35], a particularly nice -regular LDPC code of length

probability distributions for systematic bits in positions in

, dimension , and minimum Hamming distance was

are uniform. For the second constituent constructed. The underlying Tanner graph has girth which

decoder, the forward–backward algorithm will determine makes the code an excellent candidate for iterative decoding.

possible paths through the trellis. Here, is the This is the reason behind the selected code parameters.

subcode of highest cardinality that satisfies Definition 1. The The turbo code is obtained by puncturing of a nominal

support set of these possible paths is equal to

and, rate- turbo code with nominal rate- , constraint length

since the a priori probability distributions for systematic bits

constituent codes defined by the parity-check matrix

in positions in

are uniform, and the

. The last polyno-

two sets

and

mial which is irreducible and primitive has been chosen as the

are equal (see Definition 1), all paths are equally likely. Conse- parity polynomial making the constituent encoders recursive.

quently, no additional codeword bits can be determined. Thus, The information block size is , the interleaver length is

the extrinsic probability distributions for systematic bits in due to dual termination [24], and the interleaver is a dithered

positions in

are uniform. One iteration relative prime (DRP) interleaver [11], [36]. The puncturing

of the basic turbo decoding algorithm has been performed, pattern is designed using the algorithm in [37], and the code’s

and no additional codeword bits have been determined. Since minimum distance of has been computed using the algo-

there is no new information available to the first constituent rithm in [8]. For this code there exists a turbo stopping set of

decoder, no additional bits will be determined in the next round size . The turbo stopping set is depicted in Fig. 2. In Fig. 2,

of turbo decoding either. It follows that the decoder cannot the two upper rows of nodes correspond to the first constituent

determine the bits corresponding to the positions in the unique encoder, while the two remaining rows of nodes correspond

maximum-size turbo stopping set which is also a subset of . to the second constituent encoder. The nodes in row number

Note that there is a unique maximum-size turbo stopping set

and correspond to parity and systematic bits,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES AND YTREHUS: TURBO DECODING ON THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

4065

respectively, from constituent encoder

. The white

nodes with a dark number correspond to unpunctured bits that

are not erased (both systematic and parity bits), the gray nodes

with a dark number correspond to punctured parity bits, and

finally, the dark (red in the online version) nodes with a white

number correspond to erased bits (both systematic and parity

bits). Note that the number inside a node in row number one

and four (two and three) is the index of the corresponding bit in

the parity (systematic) sequence of, respectively, the first and

second constituent codeword. The ordering of bits in the turbo

codeword is as follows. First all systematic and (unpunctured)

parity bits from the first constituent codeword are taken. Then,

the (unpunctured) parity bits from the second constituent

codeword are appended. The bits are taken in the natural order,

i.e., in the order in which they appear on the trellis paths in

the constituent trellises. The arrows in between the upper two

rows and the remaining two rows correspond to interleaving of

erased information bits. The remaining part of the interleaver

is of no concern for the following discussion. In fact, possible

choices for and are the linear subcodes spanned by

it is possible to find an exhaustive list of all turbo stopping sets of size less than some threshold using a modification of the algorithm in [8]. The details of the algorithm are outlined in Section V. For this code there are two turbo stopping sets of size and 13 of size .
B. Remarks
From Fig. 2, it is apparent that some of the punctured bits can be reinserted without increasing the size of the depicted turbo stopping set. In fact, 27 out of the 31 punctured parity bits from the first constituent code can be reinserted. For the second constituent code, 19 out of the 30 punctured parity bits can be reinserted. The minimum distance of of the resulting turbo code has been determined by the algorithm in [8]. Note that this is a constructed example, since it is possible to design a puncturing pattern of weight that will give a length- and dimension- turbo code of minimum distance using the same mother code and the algorithm in [37]. The minimum distance of the unpunctured mother code is .
Finally, note that the code considered in Section III-A is not a rare example in the sense of having turbo stopping sets of size smaller than the minimum distance. We have found several examples of excellent turbo codes with this property. For further examples, see Section V-E.

IV. IMPROVED TURBO DECODING and
In [4], Pishro-Nik and Fekri consider improved iterative BP

decoding of LDPC codes on the BEC. When standard iterative

BP decoding fails, the improved algorithm chooses one of the

unknown variable nodes and guesses its value. The decoding

continues until either the transmitted codeword is recovered, the

decoder does not progress further, or the decoder reaches an in-

consistency. The decoder is said to reach an inconsistency if all

the variable nodes connected to a check node are known, but the

check node is not satisfied. If the decoder has reached an incon-

sistency, then the value of the guessed variable node is changed

and the decoding is repeated. This time the decoder will not

reach an inconsistency, but the decoding can stop again. A more

respectively. The symbol indicates that the bit-position has sophisticated algorithm for improved iterative BP decoding of

been punctured. From Fig. 2, we get

LDPC codes on the BEC was recently proposed by Vellambi

and Fekri in [2]. This algorithm improves upon the algorithms

in [4]. In more detail, the algorithm in [2] uses the Tanner graph

representation of the LDPC code actively to identify equivalent

bit-positions when iterative BP decoding has stopped in a stop-

ping set. Two bit-positions are said to be equivalent if and only

if the knowledge of one of the bits implies the knowledge of the

other bit after a series of message passing in the subgraph of the

Tanner graph composed of all unknown variable nodes and the

neighboring check nodes of degree two.

Improved turbo decoding, described below, has the same

structure as the algorithms in [4]. In more detail, it is based

on guessing unknown systematic bits and then decode until

Furthermore, it holds that

either the transmitted codeword is recovered, the decoder does

, and

, not progress further, or the decoder reaches some kind of

which shows that is a turbo stopping set.

inconsistency. In the context of turbo decoding, however, the

The turbo stopping set depicted in Fig. 2 is given as an ex- unknown bit-position to guess can be chosen more efficiently

ample to illustrate the concept of a turbo stopping set. Actually, than in the context of improved iterative BP decoding of LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4066

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

codes, since the forward and backward passes on the constituent 5) If

, or the decoder has not reached an incon-

trellises give information on legal paths. Bit-position selection

sistency and

for all such that

and

is considered in more detail in Section IV-A. Before stating the algorithm, we introduce below each

, make a decision based on , and terminate the algorithm.

variable and notation used inside the description. The variable 6) Delete

.

, denotes the number of vertices of

at 7) If the decoder has not reached an inconsistency, do the

trellis depth that are legal after the th iteration. Also, is the maximal number of allowed iterations, and the variable
denotes the current estimate of the transmitted codeword. The local variables and keep track of the total number of decoding attempts and the total number of decoding iterations performed so far, respectively. The algorithm uses a list
to keep track of the guessed codeword positions and the corresponding guessed values. In more detail, the elements of

following.

a) Compute

for

and select a

bit-position to guess based on these values. See

Section IV-A below for details.

b) Add the two elements

and

to the list , and initialize

and

with .

the list are sets of -tuples. The general form of a set from

is

, in which

the first components are guessed codeword positions with the

corresponding guessed values in the second components. The

current estimate should be updated with these guessed values

prior to decoding. Finally, the variable

keeps

track of the current estimate . In particular, the current estimate

should be initialized with

prior to decoding.

The algorithm is as follows.

Step 4 (Repeating): Repeat Step 3.
The list in improved turbo decoding can be implemented as a last-in first-out queue or as a first-in first-out queue. The first-in first-out implementation requires more memory than the last-in first-out implementation. The efficiency of an improved decoding algorithm with the above structure is very dependent on the selection of bit-positions to guess. Below, when describing bit-position selection, we assume systematic and recursive constituent convolutional encoders.

Step 1 (Initialization):

In general, it is difficult to say something analytical about the

1) Choose the maximal number of iterations . 2) Initialize and with zero.

complexity of the above algorithm, since it is closely related to the code properties that the algorithm attempts to discover.

Step 2 (Original turbo decoding; bit-position selection):

However, in Section IV-D, we will present some numerical re-

1) Run turbo decoding as described in Section II-D, with sults that also take into account decoding complexity.

a maximum of iterations, until either the codeword is recovered, or the decoder fails to progress further. Let A. Bit-Position Selection for Improved Turbo Decoding

denote the number of iterations carried out and

increment with .

2) If

, or the codeword is recovered, make a decision

based on , and terminate the algorithm.

3) Compute

for

and select a bit-posi-

tion to guess based on these values. See Section IV-A

below for details.

4) Initialize a list with the ordered sets

and

.

5) Initialize and with .

Step 3 (Performing additional iterations; bit-position selec-

When turbo decoding fails to progress further, the unknown

bit-positions constitute a turbo stopping set. Thus, guessing a

bit-position in

will free at least one additional bit. Some

of the positions in

can be determined from the numbers

of legal vertices in

( is the iteration number). In

particular, the th systematic bit is unknown if

and

, or

and

. See Lemma 4 below

for a proof. When selecting a bit-position to guess we would

also like to free as many unknown bit-positions as possible. We propose the following bit-position selection algorithm.

tion):

1) For

do the following.

1) Increment .

a) Let be the number of indices with the property

2) and removed from .
3) Initialize with

is chosen and set equal to

that

and

.

b) Let

be the largest nonnegative integer such

that there exists an index with the property that

where

and

.

4) Run turbo decoding as described in Section II-D with a

maximum of

iterations, but without assigning

values to in the initialization step of the algorithm, until

the decoder fails to progress further, or there is a trellis

depth in which all vertices in have false forward or

backward state metrics for some

. In this case,

the decoder is said to have reached an inconsistency. Let

denote the number of iterations carried out

and

.

c) Let

be the largest nonnegative integer such

that there exists an index with the property that

and

.

d) Let

.

2) If

, or

and

, then set

.

Otherwise, set

.

3) If

, then is set equal to

if

and

if

. Otherwise, is set equal to if

and increment with .

and

if

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES AND YTREHUS: TURBO DECODING ON THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

4067

B. Remarks

We remark that several variations of the above bit-position se-

lection algorithm are possible. In particular, one could use both

the number of legal edges in each trellis section, or equivalently,

the edge entropy, and the number of legal vertices for each trellis

depth, or equivalently, the vertex entropy, in combination with

the interleaver and the structure of the constituent trellises to

improve the algorithm. For instance, if we choose a bit-position

with the property that both and

are within vertex

entropy transitions from one level to a different level, then the

performance can be improved.

Finally, we remark that the simple version described in Sec-

tion IV-A provides good results as indicated in Section IV-D

below.

C. Some Properties of Improved Turbo Decoding

In this subsection, we establish some basic properties of improved turbo decoding as described above. The following lemma is simple, but important, since the bit-position selection algorithm in Section IV-A is based on this result.

Lemma 4: Apply improved turbo decoding as described

above using the bit-position selection algorithm in Sec-

tion IV-A. Then, the value in the current estimate cor-

responding to the selected systematic bit-position is an

erasure.

Proof: The bit-position selection algorithm in Sec-

tion IV-A selects only systematic bit-positions

with the property that

for

or , where

for

and

for . If the value in the current estimate corresponding to

the selected bit-position is not erased, then we know the th

systematic bit with probability one. Since the th systematic

bit is known with probability one, and both constituent trellises

are information bit-oriented, there is only a single legal edge out

of each legal vertex at trellis depth

for

or . Thus,

the number of legal trellis vertices at trellis depth

is at most equal to the number of legal trellis vertices at trellis

depth

. Furthermore, since the constituent encoders are

systematic and recursive, the number of legal trellis vertices

at trellis depth

is at least equal to the number of

legal trellis vertices at trellis depth

. This follows from

the vector space properties of a trellis section. Consequently,

the number of legal trellis vertices at trellis depth

is equal to the number of legal trellis vertices at trellis depth

, and the result follows.

not reach an inconsistency, then denote the set of erased positions that remain when the decoder stops by . If the decoder does not reach an inconsistency in either of the

two cases above, then the two sets and are equal.

Proof: When the decoder stops in a turbo stopping set ,

the set of possible paths

through the first (second) con-

stituent trellis corresponds to a coset of

whose coset

representative is the first (second) constituent transmitted code-

word. To be more precise, the label sequences of the paths in

, constitute the actual coset, and and are the

highest cardinality subcodes that satisfy Definition 1.

Now, fix the bit-value in bit-position to where

or .

Then the number of possible paths in the first constituent trellis

is immediately reduced by a factor of two, since the subcode

is linear. Let this reduced set of legal paths in the first constituent

trellis be denoted by . Furthermore, the forward–backward algorithm on the first constituent trellis will determine additional bit-positions (which are previously unknown) contained

within a set . For a given bit-position

, all paths

in will have the same bit-value of (depending on the value of ) in this bit-position. Since the subcode is linear,

all paths in , where denotes the complement of , will also have a fixed bit-value of in bit-position . Thus, it holds

that

, from which it follows that

,

since and both are arbitrarily chosen. Note that the set

of additional bit-positions determined by the forward–backward

algorithm is independent of the actual coset representative. Fur-

thermore, the label sequences of the possible paths in the first

constituent trellis after the forward–backward algorithm consti-

tute a coset of the subcode of obtained by constraining

with zeros at the bit-positions in

. The actual coset

representative is dependent on . Now, if we fix an additional

unknown bit-position, say bit-position , to , then the set of

additional unknown bit-positions that will be determined by the

forward–backward algorithm will be the same for all the binary

-tuples , since the above argument is independent of the

actual coset representative.

For the second constituent code, we may actually need to fix

several unknown bit-positions due to extrinsic information from

the first constituent code. It is straightforward to see that we

can apply the same type of arguments as above to show that

the sequence of additional bit-positions determined by the for-

ward–backward algorithm on the second constituent trellis is

independent of , as long as no inconsistency is reached. The re-

sult follows by applying these arguments in an iterative fashion

until there is no further progress.

Lemma 5: Let denote a given PCCC with interleaver . Let Lemma 6: Apply improved turbo decoding as described

denote a turbo stopping set, and erase all bit-positions above with the bit-position selection algorithm in Section IV-A.

in . Then, choose any bit-position

, and do the following. For any two elements

1) Fix the bit-value in bit-position to and perform turbo de-

coding until either the decoder fails to progress further, or

the decoder reaches an inconsistency. If the decoder does and not reach an inconsistency, then denote the set of erased

positions that remain when the decoder stops by .

2) Fix the bit-value in bit-position to and perform turbo de-

coding until either the decoder fails to progress further, or with the property that

, it holds that

for

the decoder reaches an inconsistency. If the decoder does all

, i.e., the actual bit-values in the guessed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4068

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

bit-positions do not influence which bit-positions are selected

next by the bit-position selection algorithm in Section IV-A, as

long as no inconsistency is reached.

Proof: We use the same notation as in Lemma 5 and as-

sume that the basic turbo decoder has stopped in a turbo stop-

ping set . Furthermore, we assume that bit-position is se-

lected by the bit-position selection algorithm in Section IV-A.

From Lemma 5, it follows that as long as no inconsistency is

reached, the two turbo stopping sets and (reached

after first guessing the bit-value in bit-position and then per-

forming turbo decoding) are equal, i.e., a new turbo stopping

set is reached that does not depend on the guessed bit-value.

For convenience, let

. Furthermore, from

the proof of Lemma 5, it follows that the set of possible paths

(reached after first guessing the bit-value in bit-position and

then performing turbo decoding) in the first (second) constituent

trellis is a coset, whose coset representative depends on the

guessed bit-value, of the subcode of

obtained by con-

straining

with zeros at the bit-positions in . Here, and are the highest car- Fig. 3. FER on the BEC of the (155; 64; 18) turbo code from Section III-A.

dinality subcodes that satisfy Definition 1 when the turbo stop-

ping set is . Since these subcodes, obtained by constraining

and with zeros at the bit-positions in

and

, respectively, are independent of the guessed

bit-value (the only dependence is through the coset represen-

tative), the number of legal edges in each trellis section and

the number of legal vertices for each trellis depth (after de-

coding) will be independent of the guessed bit-value for both

constituent trellises. Consequently, the next bit-position selected

by the bit-position selection algorithm in Section IV-A is inde-

pendent of the guessed bit-value in bit-position , and the result

follows.

word, are equally likely to have been transmitted. Thus,

improved turbo decoding is ML decoding.

2) As the algorithm proceeds, erased bit-positions are

guessed. Each time an element is removed from the list

, turbo decoding is performed. If the decoder does not

reach an inconsistency and

for some such that

and

, then

a new erased bit-position is guessed (see the bit-position

selection algorithm in Section IV-A and Lemma 4 for

details). The decoder will always terminate, since there is

a finite number of bit-positions to guess.

We remark that due to Lemma 6 we can reduce the number of times we need to run the bit-position selection algorithm in D. Numerical Results

Section IV.A when performing improved turbo decoding.

Here we present some simulation results of improved turbo

Theorem 2: Improved turbo decoding is ML decoding on the

BEC when

.

Proof: The proof is twofold. First, we prove that if the al-

gorithm terminates, then we have an ML decoder. Secondly, we

prove that the algorithm will always terminate.

1) It follows from the algorithm above (Step 2, item 2), and

Step 3, item 5)) that if the algorithm terminates, then the de-

coder has not reached an inconsistency and

for all

such that

and

,

since

. The original turbo decoding algorithm

will not introduce bit errors. Furthermore, the improved al-

gorithm will not terminate if the decoder has reached an

inconsistency (Step 3, item 5)), and no further guessing is

performed if this is the case (Step 3, item 7)). Thus, if the

improved turbo decoding algorithm terminates, then the

transmitted codeword is recovered, or there exists a dif-

ferent turbo codeword with support set

where

denotes the subset of remaining erased bit-positions. In

the latter case, the transmitted codeword is not recovered.

An ML decoder will not be able to determine the trans-

decoding on the BEC. The simulated frame-error rate (FER)

is presented in Fig. 3 for the

turbo code intro-

duced in Section III-A. We have used the bit-position selection

algorithm described in Section IV-A in the simulations. The

truncated union bound (TUB) in Fig. 3 is computed from the

first five nonzero terms of the code’s weight distribution. The

near-ML decoding curve is obtained using improved turbo de-

coding with a large number for . In Table I we have tabu-

lated, for different values of the channel erasure probability ,

the empirical value of such that improved turbo decoding

is near-ML decoding. In this context, improved turbo decoding

is near-ML decoding when the fraction of ML-decodable frame

errors observed in the simulation is

. The corresponding

estimated values of the expected number of iterations are

tabulated in the third row of the table. The gap between the

TUB and the performance curve for near-ML decoding at mod-

erate-to-high values of is due to the fact that only a limited

number of codewords are taken into account in the summation

of the TUB. The two remaining curves show the FER for two

different values of . Observe that when is increased,

mitted codeword in the latter case either, since both code- the performance improves. In Table II, estimated values of

words and

, where denotes the transmitted code- of improved turbo decoding are tabulated for different values

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES AND YTREHUS: TURBO DECODING ON THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL
TABLE I ESTIMATED EXPECTED NUMBER OF ITERATIONS E[T ] AND EMPIRICAL l SUCH THAT IMPROVED TURBO DECODING IS NEAR-ML DECODING FOR THE
(155; 64; 18) TURBO CODE FROM SECTION III-A

4069

TABLE II ESTIMATED EXPECTED NUMBER OF ITERATIONS E[T ] OF IMPROVED TURBO DECODING FOR DIFFERENT VALUES OF  AND l FOR THE (155; 64; 18)
TURBO CODE FROM SECTION III-A

Fig. 4. (a) Basic trellis module T , and (b) extended trellis module T of the convolutional code from Example 2.

of and . From Table II, we observe that the difference in

the estimated values of

for

and

decreases when decreases. In particular, for

, there

is almost no difference in the expected number of iterations.

However, as can be seen from Fig. 3, there is a large difference

in performance. The numbers in Tables I and II are based on

more than 1000 observed frame errors for

,

and , and more than 100 frame errors for

. Sim-

ilar performance improvements have been observed for the

turbo code from [11].

V. TURBO STOPPING SET ENUMERATION

A. Trellis Representation of Subcodes of Convolutional Codes

In Section II-C, we described how to construct an information

bit-oriented trellis of a convolutional code . In this sub-

section, we will describe how to construct a trellis representation

of subcodes of . The notation is the same as in Section II-C.

A trellis representing subcodes of can be written (after

an initial transient) as the infinite composition of an extended

trellis module

, where

and

are partitions of and , respectively.

Each vertex of corresponds to a subspace of , where is

defined in (1), and each edge of corresponds to a subspace of

, where is the subset of edges in the trellis module , de-

scribed in Section II-C, that begin at a vertex in and end at a

vertex in . The number of distinct -dimensional subspaces

of an -dimensional vector space over some finite field of

elements,

, denoted by

, is [38, p. 444]

and (4)

The left (resp., right) vertex of an edge is denoted by

(resp.,

). The label of an edge is denoted by . Note

that the edge could either be an edge in the trellis module ,

described in Section II-C, or in the extended trellis module .

The connections in the extended trellis module are estab-

lished as follows. An edge

corresponds to a subspace

of of dimension

and basis

.

The vertex in that corresponds to the vector space spanned

by

is connected to the vertex

in

that corresponds to the vector space spanned by

by the edge . The binary

label of is one if at least one of the -ary labels

of

, is nonzero. Otherwise, it

is zero.

Note that an information bit-oriented extended trellis module

can be obtained by sectionalization, as described in Sec-

tion II-C. A trellis constructed as the infinite composition

of the trellis module (with an initial transient due encoder

initialization) has paths that are in one-to-many correspondence

with subcodes of . The label sequence of a path in is a

binary sequence where the set of -positions is equal to the sup-

port set of the subcodes represented by the given path. Since

distinct subcodes could have equal support sets, there could be

paths in that have equal label sequences.

Input labels can be assigned to the edges in the trellis module

, and thus can be used for encoding, but the encoding

is not one-to-one, since there could be more than one path in

with the same input (and output) label sequence.

from which it follows that

Example 2: Consider the

binary convolutional code

defined by the parity-check matrix

. The trellis module and the extended trellis module

are both depicted in Fig. 4. Note that the trellis module

is nonlinear.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4070

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

TABLE III
VERTEX AND EDGE COMPLEXITIES OF THE TRELLIS MODULES T FOR (n; 1; ) BINARY CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

AND T

enumerates subcode classes of different parity support set sizes

associated with a particular input support set size. The condi-

tional SIRSEF

and the SIRSEF

are related

to one another through the following pair of expressions:

and

The numbers of vertices and edges of an information bit-oriented (extended) trellis module divided by are called the vertex and edge complexities of , and are given, respectively, by
and

Let

, denote the conditional SIRSEF of the

constituent code of a given PCCC with interleaver length

. We assume that the interleaver is uniform. With a uniform

interleaver, the possible sequences of length and weight

occur with equal probability at the output of the interleaver when

the interleaver is fed with a length- and weight- sequence.

Let

denote the input-redundancy turbo stopping set

size enumerating function (IRTSSEF) of . The IRTSSEF has

the form

The vertex and edge complexities of and are tabu-

lated in Table III for different values of for

binary

convolutional codes.

Finally, we remark that the above construction could give ex-

tended trellis modules with parallel edges with the same label.

Then it is sufficient to keep only one of the edges, which implies

that the actual edge complexity could be smaller than indicated

in Table III. Furthermore, the expression for given in (4)

is strictly speaking only an upper bound on , and equality

holds if and only if no parallel edges with the same label occur.

B. The Uniform Interleaver

Consider an

systematic convolutional code which is

terminated to the all-zero vertex at trellis depth

in where is assumed to be a multiple of . The resulting

linear block code has length

and dimension .

When

, the convolutional code is actually a linear block

code in which case we choose

.

Partition all the subcodes of of dimension

, into equivalence classes based on their support sets. In partic-

ular, all subcodes within a specific subcode class are required to

have the same support set, but the subcodes may have different

dimensions.

We define the subcode input-redundancy support size enu-

merating function (SIRSEF) of . The SIRSEF has the form

where is the number of turbo stopping sets of of input size and parity size . The conditional IRTSSEF

enumerates turbo stopping sets of different parity sizes asso-

ciated with a particular input size. The conditional IRTSSEF

and the IRTSSEF

are related to one another

through the following pair of expressions:

and

A PCCC with a uniform interleaver has a uniform probability of

matching a given support set in

with any given support

set in

. Thus, it follows that the conditional IRTSSEF of

is

where is the number of subcode classes of of input support set size and parity support set size . When analyzing the performance it is useful to group the terms in the SIRSEF according to input support set size. The conditional SIRSEF

The turbo stopping set size enumerating function (TSSEF) of is
where

and is the number of turbo stopping sets of size . If only one-

dimensional subcodes are considered in the constituent condi-

tional SIRSEFs

and

, then we get the weight

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES AND YTREHUS: TURBO DECODING ON THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL
TABLE IV IRTSSEFS, TSSEFS, AND WEFS OF THE PCCCS CONSTRUCTED USING ALL THE 4! = 24 POSSIBLE INTERLEAVERS AND
WITH THE (7; 4) HAMMING CODE AS THE CONSTITUENT CODES

4071

enumerating function (WEF) of without the constant term cor-

responding to the all-zero codeword.

1) The

Hamming Code: We consider the

Ham-

ming code in its cyclic form (with primitive element and

), in which case

and

.

Also, the three leftmost bits are used as parity bits. The SIRSEF

of the Hamming code is

The IRTSSEF of the PCCC with a uniform interleaver is

We can check the result in (5) by computing the IRTSSEFs of

the PCCCs constructed using all the

possible inter-

leavers. The results are tabulated in Table IV. Only two types of

IRTSSEF are possible. It is easy to verify that the average over

all possible interleavers is equal to the expression in (5). Note

that the WEF is dependent on the interleaver while the noncode-

word TSSEF is the same for all interleavers.

2) Convolutional Codes as Constituent Codes: Let

, enumerate all subcode classes

of constructed from trellis paths in constituent trellis

leaving the all-zero vertex at trellis depth zero, and remerging

into the all-zero vertex at or before trellis depth , with possible

remerging into the all-zero vertex at other depths in between,

subject to the constraint that, after remerging, the paths leave

the all-zero vertex at the same trellis depth. In general

(5)

from which the TSSEF can be calculated. The result is

where

is the number of subcode classes of of input

support set size and parity support set size constructed from

trellis paths of length , and with remergings with the all-zero

Note that the WEF of is

vertex. Notice that each subcode class in

of

input support set size and parity support set size constructed

from trellis paths of length , and with remergings with the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4072

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

all-zero vertex, gives rise to

subcode classes with the Garello et al. in [9] to solve

. We will refer to this al-

same input and parity support set sizes. Thus, the conditional gorithm as the GPB algorithm. However, there are some differ-

SIRSEF

can be written as

ences that we will discuss below.

/* Find all words of of Hamming weight */ (6) Add an empty constraint set to a

previously empty list of constraint sets.

Finding a closed-form expression for the conditional SIRSEF (as we did in Section V-B1 when the constituent codes were Hamming codes) for a given (large) value of the interleaver length is difficult. For this reason, we will use an algorithmic approach to compute the most significant terms of the condi-

is empty, terminate the process.

Otherwise,

choose and take out a constraint set from .

, then

the length of is equal to then:

The single vector in

produces

tional SIRSEF in (6). One approach is to use the algorithm to be

low-weight words in which are saved.

described in Section V-C with only one constituent code. See

Otherwise,

Section V-C below for details.

construct two new constraint sets:

and

.

C. Enumeration of Small-Size Turbo Stopping Sets for a

Add and to .

Particular Interleaver

Repeat from .

Let and denote the information bit-oriented and the

information bit-oriented extended trellis modules of constituent

code

. We assume that

and

both have

input and output labels assigned to the edges. The trellises con-

structed from the trellis modules and are denoted by

and , respectively.

Let be the subset of words generated by the constituent

encoder when the input vectors are contained in , and

let

be the minimum Hamming weight of . Select any

vector from as an input sequence of . After time

units, the encoder has reached a subset

of

Let denote the subset of

of label sequences of cardinality of the set of trellis vertices of at trellis depth

paths that begin and end at the all-zero vertex at trellis depths

. The trellis path of from the all-zero vertex at trellis

and , respectively, of the trellis

. Finally, let depth to vertex at trellis depth of minimum Ham-

denote the PCCC with information length , constituent encoders and , and interleaver
. Note that the support sets of the nonzero words of are in one-to-one correspondence with all turbo stopping sets of
. Thus, the minimum Hamming weight of is equal to the

ming weight is denoted by . Let

be the Hamming

weight of , and let

be the minimum Ham-

ming weight of any path from vertex at trellis depth to the all-zero vertex at trellis depth . In general, it holds that

minimum turbo stopping set size of . In general, the set of

(7)

turbo stopping sets can be obtained by turbo encoding using the

constituent encoders and . Note that there could exist

several paths in with the same input label sequence, from

which it follows that the complexity of turbo encoding could be

more than linear in .

Let

be the problem of finding all words of of

Hamming weight at most . This problem is equivalent to that

of finding an exhaustive list of all turbo stopping sets of size at

most . To simplify notation, we assume below that the

redundant systematic bits appear at the end of the input block.

A constraint set is a set

,

where

is a set of distinct positions. For

any constraint set , let be the set of length- vectors

if

if

The weights

can be computed in a prepro-

cessing stage using the Viterbi algorithm. Actually, the weights

depend only on the vertex

if

is not

too close to and is noncatastrophic. This reduces the

memory requirements. Note that the trellis is always non-

catastrophic, since the trellis is systematic. The weights

have to be computed during the course of the algorithm. In

general, the weights

can be computed by a constrained

Viterbi algorithm. Note that in the original GPB algorithm there

is no need to apply a constrained Viterbi algorithm here, since

, and there is a unique path in from the all-zero

vertex at trellis depth to the vertex at trellis depth .

. Let the length

be the number of constraints. We Similarly, let

be the subset of words generated by the

will start with a constraint set of length of the form

constituent encoder when the input vectors are contained

, i.e., it applies consecutively to the first in

. Also, let

be the minimum Hamming parity

positions. When the turbo interleaver acts on , we obtain a weight of

. We have

new constraint set

, where in general the

constrained positions are scattered over the input block.

Let

be the subset of that is obtained by encoding Note that

is a lower bound on

, since the

the input vectors in , let

be the minimum Hamming sequence of input bits giving the minimum-weight path in

weight of , and let

be any lower bound for

. the second constituent encoder trellis

is not necessarily

An algorithm to solve

is given below. Note that the an interleaved version of the sequence of input bits giving

algorithm has the same structure as the algorithm proposed by the minimum-weight path in the first constituent encoder

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES AND YTREHUS: TURBO DECODING ON THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

4073

Fig. 5. Minimum distance and minimum turbo stopping set size as a function of interleaver length for optimum (in terms of turbo-code minimum distance and multiplicity) DRP interleavers with a dither length of 4.

trellis . The value of

can be determined by the

use of a constrained Viterbi algorithm. Since the positions

of are in general not consecutive, the complexity of

calculating the value of

by a constrained Viterbi algo-

rithm is larger than the complexity of calculating the weights

, needed in (7).

In [8], we outlined several improvements to the basic GPB al-

gorithm for solving

. All of the improvements described

in the context of solving

can be applied when solving

.

From Table III, we observe that the edge complexity of

is large compared to the edge complexity of even for

. To reduce complexity, we propose to remove some of the

edges from . For instance, all edges in that correspond

to edge subspaces of

of dimension at least , for some

integer

, can be removed.

et al. in [11]. The code has an optimized minimum distance, is

based on a DRP interleaver, and is constructed from nominal

rate-

constituent codes defined by the parity-check

matrix

. The last polyno-

mial which is irreducible and primitive has been chosen as the

parity polynomial making the constituent encoders recursive.

For this code there are 59 , 58 , and 283

turbo

stopping sets (codewords) of size (weight)

and , re-

spectively. The minimum turbo stopping set size is smaller than

the code’s minimum distance. This is typically what happens for

both short- and moderate-length distance-optimized DRP inter-

leavers. With the uniform interleaver, however, there are

D. Remarks

We remark that in principle every trellis-based turbo-code

weight spectrum computation or estimation algorithm can

be adapted in a straightforward manner to find small-size turbo stopping sets (codewords) of size (weight)

turbo stopping sets. The only requirement is that the basic

and , respectively. Thus,

trellis module is substituted with the extended trellis module small-size turbo stopping sets are not a problem with the uniform

introduced above. We have considered the impulse methods interleaver for these parameters. This observation is consis-

by Berrou and Vaton [13], Vila-Casado and Garello [12], and tent with the results in [7], where only the uniform interleaver

Crozier et al. [11] with promising results.

approach and not designed interleavers have been considered.

E. Numerical Results

As another example, consider an interleaver length of . In [11], Crozier et al. constructed an impressive DRP interleaver of

We have applied the algorithm from Section V-C with the length with a dither length of . The corresponding turbo

improvements from [8] on a few example codes. The example code has length , dimension , and minimum distance

codes are constructed without considering turbo stopping sets. . For this code we have found turbo stopping sets of size .

Consider the

turbo code constructed by Crozier Results for a wide range of interleaver lengths are given in Fig. 5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4074

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

The turbo codes are constructed from the same nominal rate-

REFERENCES

constituent codes as the

code above. For each

interleaver length between and , in which is a divisor, the

minimum distance with optimum (in terms of turbo-code min-

imum distance and multiplicity) DRP interleavers with a dither

length of is plotted in Fig. 5. Also, for the same interleavers we

have found the minimum turbo stopping set sizes. These results

are also plotted in Fig. 5. Note that for several interleaver lengths

the minimum turbo stopping set size is smaller than the minimum

distance.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we have considered the finite-length analysis of turbo decoding on the BEC. In the same way as iterative BP decoding of LDPC codes is simpler on the BEC than on other channels, turbo decoding can also be simplified on this channel. Based on this simplified turbo decoding algorithm we have introduced turbo stopping sets by adapting the concept of stopping sets from the theory of iterative BP decoding of LDPC codes. These turbo stopping sets characterize turbo decoding on the BEC, and an exact condition for decoding failure has been established as follows. Apply turbo decoding until the transmitted codeword has been recovered, or the decoder fails to progress further. Then the set of erased positions that will remain when the decoder stops is equal to the unique maximum-size turbo stopping set which is also a subset of the set of erased positions. Furthermore, we have presented some improvements of the basic turbo decoding algorithm on the BEC. The proposed improved turbo decoding algorithm has substantially better error performance as illustrated by simulation examples. In the second part of the paper, an expression for the turbo stopping set size enumerating function under the uniform interleaver assumption was derived. Also, an efficient enumeration algorithm of small-size turbo stopping sets for a particular interleaver was given. The solution is based on the algorithm proposed by Garello et al. in [9] to compute an exhaustive list of all low-weight codewords in a turbo code. In fact, it turns out that every trellis-based weight spectrum computation or estimation algorithm for turbo codes can be adapted to the case of finding small-size turbo stopping sets. In particular, the impulse methods by Berrou and Vaton [13], Vila-Casado and Garello [12], and Crozier et al. [11] can be adapted in a straightforward manner.
One interesting topic for future work is the design of interleavers that avoid both low-weight codewords and small-size turbo stopping sets. Trellis-based interleaver design algorithms can in a similar manner be adapted to this problem using the extended trellis module.
Finally, we remark that the findings in this paper can be adapted in a fairly straightforward manner to other turbo-like codes, e.g., RA codes, serial concatenated convolutional codes, and product codes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewer for suggestions that improved the quality of the manuscript.

[1] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[2] B. N. Vellambi and F. Fekri, “Results on the improved decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1510–1520, Apr. 2007.
[3] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “An efficient maximum-likelihood decoding of LDPC codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2837–2844, Nov. 2004.
[4] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “On decoding of low-density parity-check codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 439–454, Mar. 2004.
[5] C. Di, D. Proietti, ˙I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[6] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes. 1,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[7] J. W. Lee, “Study of turbo codes and decoding in binary erasure channel based on stopping set analysis,” IEICE Trans. Commun., vol. E89-B, no. 4, pp. 1178–1186, Apr. 2006.
[8] E. Rosnes and Ø. Ytrehus, “Improved algorithms for the determination of turbo-code weight distributions,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 20–26, Jan. 2005.
[9] R. Garello, P. Pierleoni, and S. Benedetto, “Computing the free distance of turbo codes and serially concatenated codes with interleavers: Algorithms and applications,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 800–812, May 2001.
[10] L. C. Perez, J. Seghers, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “A distance spectrum interpretation of turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1698–1709, Nov. 1996.
[11] S. Crozier, P. Guinand, and A. Hunt, “Computing the minimum distance of turbo-codes using iterative decoding techniques,” in Proc. 22th Biennial Symp. Communications, Kingston, ON, Canada, May/Jun. 2004, pp. 306–308.
[12] A. Vila-Casado and R. Garello, “The all-zero iterative decoding algorithm for turbo code minimum distance computation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), Paris, France, Jun. 2004, vol. 1, pp. 361–364.
[13] C. Berrou and S. Vaton, “Computing the minimum distances of linear codes by the error impulse method,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Lausanne, Switzerland, Jul. 2002, p. 5.
[14] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[15] J. Feldman and D. R. Karger, “Decoding turbo-like codes via linear programming,” in Proc. 43rd Annu. IEEE Symp. Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Nov. 2002, pp. 251–260.
[16] J. Feldman, D. R. Karger, and M. J. Wainwright, “Linear programming-based decoding of turbo-like codes and its relation to iterative approaches,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.
[17] J. Feldman, “Decoding Error-Correcting Codes Via Linear Programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dep. Elec. Eng. Comp. Sci., Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[18] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/0512078/, submitted for publication
[19] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[20] E. Rosnes, “On the connection between finite graph covers, pseudocodewords, and linear programming decoding of turbo codes,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006.
[21] C. Kelly and D. Sridhara, “Pseudo-codewords of Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/ 0504013/, submitted for publication
[22] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES AND YTREHUS: TURBO DECODING ON THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

4075

[23] P. Elias, “Coding for two noisy channels,” in Proc. 3rd London Symp. Information Theory, London, U.K., 1955, pp. 61–76.
[24] P. Guinand and J. Lodge, “Trellis termination for turbo encoders,” in Proc. 17th Biennial Symp. Communications, Kingston, ON, Canada, May/Jun. 1994, pp. 389–392.
[25] R. J. McEliece, “The algebraic theory of convolutional codes,” in Handbook of Coding Theory, V. S. Pless and W. C. Huffman, Eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier/ North-Holland, 1998, ch. 12, pp. 1065–1138.
[26] V. Sidorenko and V. Zyablov, “Decoding of convolutional codes using a syndrome trellis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 1663–1666, Sep. 1994.
[27] E. Rosnes and Ø. Ytrehus, “On maximum length convolutional codes under a trellis complexity constraint,” J. Complexity, vol. 20, no. 2–3, pp. 372–403, Apr.–Jun. 2004.
[28] P. CharnKeitKong, H. Imai, and K. Yamaguchi, “On classes of rate k=(k + 1) convolutional codes and their decoding techniques,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 2181–2193, Nov. 1996.
[29] B. M. Kurkoski, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Exact probability of erasure and a decoding algorithm for convolutional codes on the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Francisco, CA, Dec. 2003, vol. 3, pp. 1741–1745.
[30] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.

[31] D. J. C. MacKay, “Turbo codes are low density parity check codes,” Jul. 2002 [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/ mackay/turbo-ldpc.pdf
[32] M. Schwartz and A. Vardy, “On the stopping distance and the stopping redundancy of codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 922–932, Mar. 2006.
[33] H. D. L. Hollmann and L. M. G. M. Tolhuizen, “On parity-check collections for iterative erasure decoding that correct all correctable erasure patterns of a given size,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 823–828, Feb. 2007.
[34] J. H. Weber and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Stopping set analysis for Hamming codes,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Rotorua, New Zealand, Aug./Sep. 2005, pp. 244–247.
[35] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Communication Theory and Applications (ISCTA), Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001.
[36] S. Crozier and P. Guinand, “Distance upper bounds and true minimum distance results for turbo-codes designed with DRP interleavers,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 169–172.
[37] E. Rosnes and Ø. Ytrehus, “On the construction of good families of ratecompatible punctured turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Adelaide, SA, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 602–606.
[38] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

