IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

4013

Pseudocodewords of Tanner Graphs
Christine A. Kelley, Member, IEEE, and Deepak Sridhara, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a detailed analysis of pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs. Pseudocodewords arising on the iterative decoder’s computation tree are distinguished from pseudocodewords arising on finite degree lifts. Lower bounds on the minimum pseudocodeword weight are presented for the BEC, BSC, and AWGN channel. Some structural properties of pseudocodewords are examined, and pseudocodewords and graph properties that are potentially problematic with min-sum iterative decoding are identified. An upper bound on the minimum degree lift needed to realize a particular irreducible lift-realizable pseudocodeword is given in terms of its maximal component, and it is shown that all irreducible lift-realizable pseudocodewords have components upper bounded by a finite value t that is dependent on the graph structure. Examples and different Tanner graph representations of individual codes are examined and the resulting pseudocodeword distributions and iterative decoding performances are analyzed. The results obtained provide some insights in relating the structure of the Tanner graph to the pseudocodeword distribution and suggest ways of designing Tanner graphs with good minimum pseudocodeword weight.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, min-sum iterative decoder, pseudocodewords.
I. INTRODUCTION
I TERATIVE decoders have gained widespread attention due to their remarkable performance in decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. However, analyzing their performance on finite length LDPC constraint graphs has nevertheless remained a formidable task. Wiberg’s dissertation [1] was among the earliest works in characterizing iterative decoder convergence on finite-length LDPC constraint graphs or Tanner graphs. Both [1] and [2] examine the convergence behavior of the min-sum iterative decoder [3] on cycle codes, a special class of LDPC codes having only degree two variable nodes, and they provide some necessary and sufficient
Manuscript received April 5, 2005; revised July 15, 2007.The work of C. A. Kelley was supported by a Center for Applied Mathematics fellowship from the University of Notre Dame and also in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant CCR-ITR-02–05310. The work of D. Sridhara was supported by the Indian Institute of Science Institute of Mathematics Initiative fellowship and by a DRDO-India grant and also in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-ITR-02–05310. The material in this paper was presented in part at IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004 and the International Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications, Parma, Italy, 2004. This work was performed while C. A. Kelley was with the University of Notre Dame and the Institute of Mathematics, University of Zurich, and when D. Sridhara was with the Indian Institute of Science.
C. A. Kelley is with the Department of Mathematics, The Ohio State University Columbus, OH 43210 USA (e-mail: ckelley@math.ohio-state.edu).
D. Sridhara is with the Seagate Technology, Pittsburgh, PA 15222 USA (e-mail: deepak.sridhara@seagate.com).
Communicated by G. Zémor, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of Figures 2–7, 9, 11, 13–15, and 20–30 in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2007.907501

conditions for the decoder to converge. Analogous works in [4] and [5] explain the behavior of iterative decoders using the lifts of the base Tanner graph. The common underlying idea in all these works is the role of pseudocodewords in determining decoder convergence.
Pseudocodewords of a Tanner graph play an analogous role in determining convergence of an iterative decoder as codewords do for a maximum likelihood decoder. The error performance of a decoder can be computed analytically using the distance distribution of the codewords in the code. Similarly, an iterative decoder’s performance may be characterized by the pseudocodeword distance. Distance reduces to weight with respect to the all-zero codeword. Thus, in the context of iterative decoding, a minimum weight pseudocodeword [4] is more fundamental than a minimum weight codeword. In this paper we present lower bounds on the minimum pseudocodeword weight
for the BSC and AWGN channel, and further, we bound the minimum weight of good and bad pseudocodewords separately.
Reference [5] characterizes the set of pseudocodewords in terms of a polytope that includes pseudocodewords that are realizable on finite degree graph covers of the base Tanner graph, but does not include all pseudocodewords that can arise on the decoder’s computation tree [1], [6]. In this paper, we investigate the usefulness of the graph-covers-polytope definition of [5], with respect to the min-sum iterative decoder, in characterizing the set of pseudocodewords of a Tanner graph. In particular, we give examples of computation trees that have several pseudocodeword configurations that may be bad for iterative decoding whereas the corresponding polytopes of these graph do not contain these bad pseudocodewords. We note, however, that this does not mean the polytope definition of pseudocodewords is inaccurate; rather, it is exact for the case of linear programming decoding [7], but incomplete for min-sum iterative decoding.
As any pseudocodeword is a convex linear combination of a finite number of irreducible pseudocodewords, characterizing irreducible pseudocodewords is sufficient to describe the set of all pseudocodewords that can arise. It can be shown that the weight of any pseudocodeword is lower bounded by the minimum weight of its constituent irreducible pseudocodewords [5], implying that the irreducible pseudocodewords are the ones that are more likely to cause the decoder to fail to converge. We therefore examine the smallest lift degree needed to realize irreducible lift-realizable pseudocodewords. A bound on the minimum lift degree needed to realize a given pseudocodeword is given in terms of its maximal component. We show that all liftrealizable irreducible pseudocodewords cannot have any component larger than some finite number which depends on the structure of the graph. Examples of graphs with known -values are presented.

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

The results presented in this paper are highlighted through

several examples. These include an LDPC constraint graph

having all pseudocodewords with weight at least

(the

minimum distance of the code), an LDPC constraint graph

with both good and low-weight (strictly less than ) bad

pseudocodewords, and an LDPC constraint graph with all bad

noncodeword-pseudocodewords. Furthermore, different graph

representations of individual codes such as the

and

Hamming codes are examined in order to understand

what structural properties in the Tanner graph are important for

the design of good LDPC codes. We observe that despite a very

small girth, redundancy in the Tanner graph representations of

these examples can improve the distribution of pseudocode-

words in the graph and hence, iterative decoding performance.

This paper is organized as follows. Definitions and termi- Fig. 1. Graph and its computation tree after two iterations of message passing.

nology are introduced in Section II. Lower bounds on the

pseudocodeword weight of lift-realizable pseudocodewords

are derived in Section III, and a bound on the minimum lift

degree needed to realize a particular lift-realizable irreducible

pseudocodeword is given. Section IV presents examples of

codes to illustrate the different types of pseudocodewords that

can arise depending on the graph structure. Section V analyzes

the structure of pseudocodewords realizable in lifts of general

Tanner graphs. Finally, the importance of the graph represen-

tation chosen to represent a code is highlighted in Section VI,

where the

and

Hamming codes are used as

case studies. Section VII summarizes the results and concludes

the paper. For readability, the proofs are given in the Appendix.

the desired number of layers corresponding to decoding itera-

tions. A computation tree enumerated for iterations and having

variable node acting as the root node of the tree is denoted by

. The shape of the computation tree is dependent on the

scheduling of message passing used by the iterative decoder on

the Tanner graph . In Fig. 1, the computation tree

is

shown for the flooding schedule [8]. (The variable nodes are the

shaded circles and the constraint nodes are the square boxes.)

Since iterative decoding is exact on cycle-free graphs, the com-

putation tree is a valuable tool in the exact analysis of iterative

decoding on finite-length LDPC codes with cycles.

A binary assignment to all the variable nodes in the computa-

II. BACKGROUND

In this section we establish the necessary terminology and

notation that will be used in this paper, including an overview of

pseudocodeword interpretations, iterative decoding algorithms,

and pseudocodeword weights. Let

be a bipartite

graph comprising of vertex sets and , of sizes and ,

respectively, and edges

. Let

represent a binary LDPC code with minimum distance .

Then is called a Tanner graph (or, LDPC constraint graph)

of . The vertices in are called variable nodes and represent

the codebits of the LDPC code and the vertices in are called

constraint nodes and represent the constraints imposed on the

codebits of the LDPC code.

tion tree is said to be valid if every constraint node in the tree is

connected to an even number of variable nodes having value .

A codeword in the original Tanner graph corresponds to a

valid assignment on the computation tree, where for each , all

nodes representing in the computation tree are assigned the

same value. A pseudocodeword , on the other hand, is a valid

assignment on the computation tree, where for each , the nodes

representing in the computation tree need not be assigned the

same value.

For a computation tree , we define a local configuration

at a check in the original Tanner graph as the average of

the local codeword configurations at all copies of on

.

A valid binary assignment on

is said to be consistent if

all the local configurations are consistent. That is, if a variable

Definition 2.1: A codeword in an LDPC code represented by a Tanner graph is a binary assignment to the variable nodes of such that every constraint node is connected to an even number of variable nodes having value , i.e., all the parity check constraints are satisfied.

node participates in constraint nodes and , then the coordinates that correspond to in the local configurations at and , respectively, are the same. It can be shown that a consistent valid binary assignment on the computation tree is a pseudocodeword that also lies in the polytope of [5] (see (3)), and therefore realizable on a lift-graph of . A consistent valid bi-

A. Pseudocodewords

nary assignment on representation

also has a compact length vector such that if a check node

1) Computation Tree Interpretation: Wiberg originally for- has variable nodes

as its neighbors, then

mulated pseudocodewords in terms of the computation tree, as projecting onto the coordinates

yields the local

described in [1], and this work was extended by Frey et al. in configuration of on the computation tree . An inconsis-

[6]. Let

be the computation tree, corresponding to the tent but valid binary assignment on

on the other hand has

min-sum iterative decoder, of the base LDPC constraint graph no such compact vector representation. The computation tree

[1]. The tree is formed by enumerating the Tanner graph from an therefore contains pseudocodewords some of which that lie in

arbitrary variable node, called the root of the tree, down through the polytope of [5] and some of which that do not.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KELLEY AND SRIDHARA: PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF TANNER GRAPHS

4015

3) Polytope Representation: The set of all pseudocodewords

associated with a given Tanner graph has an elegant geometric

description [5], [7]. In [5], Koetter and Vontobel characterize

the set of pseudocodewords via the fundamental cone. For each

parity check of degree , let denote the

simple parity check code, and let be a

matrix with

the rows being the codewords of . The fundamental polytope

at check of a Tanner graph is then defined as

Fig. 2. Pseudocodeword in the base graph (or a valid codeword in a lift).

2) Graph Covers Definition: A degree cover (or, lift) of is defined in the following manner.

Definition 2.2: A finite degree cover of

is a bipartite graph where for each vertex

,

there is a cloud

of vertices in ,

with

for all

, and for every

, there are edges from to in connected

in a

manner.

Fig. 2 shows a base graph and a degree four cover of .

A codeword in a lift graph of a Tanner graph is defined

analogously as in Definition 2.1.

Definition 2.3: Suppose that

(2) and the fundamental polytope of is defined as

(3)

We use the superscript GC to refer to pseudocodewords

arising from graph covers and the notation

to denote

the vector restricted to the coordinates of the neighbors of

check . The fundamental polytope gives a compact charac-

terization of all possible lift-realizable pseudocodewords of a

given Tanner graph . Removing multiplicities of vectors, the

fundamental cone

associated with is obtained as

is a codeword in the Tanner graph representing a degree lift

of . A pseudocodeword of is a vector

ob-

tained by reducing a codeword , of the code in the lift graph ,

in the following way:

, where Note that each component of the pseudocodeword is merely the number of -valued variable nodes in the corresponding variable cloud of , and that any codeword is trivially a pseudocodeword as is a valid codeword configuration in a degree-one lift. Pseudocodewords as in this definition are called lift-realizable pseudocodewords and also as unscaled pseudocodewords in [9]. We will use this definition of pseudocodewords throughout the paper unless mentioned otherwise.

A lift-realizable pseudocodeword as in Definition 2.3 corre-

sponds to a point in the graph-covers polytope

.

In [7], Feldman also uses a polytope to characterize the

pseudocodewords in linear programming (LP) decoding and

this polytope has striking similarities with the polytope of [5].

Let

denote the set of all configurations that satisfy the

code (as defined above). Then the feasible set of the LP

decoder is given by

Remark 2.1: It can be shown that that the components of a

lift-realizable pseudocodeword satisfy the following set of in-

equalities. At every constraint node , that is connected to vari-

able nodes

, the pseudocodeword components

satisfy

Remark 2.2: It can be shown that the polytopes of [5] and [7]

are identical, i.e.,

[10].

Definition 2.5: The support of a vector

,

denoted

, is the set of indices where

.

Definition 2.6: [11] A Stopping Set in is a subset of

where for each , every neighbor of is connected to at

...

least twice.

The size of a stopping set is equal to the number of ele-

(1) ments in . A stopping set is said to be minimal if there is no

smaller sized nonempty stopping set contained within it. The

Definition 2.4: A pseudocodeword that does not correspond smallest minimal stopping set is called a minimum stopping set,

to a codeword in the base Tanner graph is called a noncodeword and its size is denoted by . Note that a minimum stopping

pseudocodeword, or nc-pseudocodeword, for short.

set is not necessarily unique. Fig. 3 shows a stopping set in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4016

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

That is, the log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) from the channel for

the codebits

are

, respectively. Then

the optimal maximum likelihood (ML) decoder estimates the

codeword

= Fig. 3. Stopping Set S fv ; v ; v ; v g in G.

Let be the set of all pseudocodewords (including all code-

words) of the graph . Then the graph-based MS decoder es-

graph. Observe that

and

are two min- sentially estimates [5]

imum stopping sets of size

, whereas

is a minimal stopping set of size .

On the erasure channel, pseudocodewords of are essentially stopping sets in [4], [5], [7] and, thus, the nonconvergence of the iterative decoder is attributed to the presence of stopping sets. Moreover, any stopping set can potentially prevent the iterative decoder from converging.
One useful observation is that the support of a lift-realizable pseudocodeword as in Definition 2.3 forms a stopping set in . This is also implied in [5] and [7].
Lemma 2.1: The support of a lift-realizable pseudocodeword of is the incidence vector of a stopping set in .

We will refer to the dot product

as the cost-function of

the vector with respect to the channel input vector . Thus,

the ML decoder estimates the codeword with the lowest cost

whereas the suboptimal graph-based iterative MS decoder esti-

mates the pseudocodeword with the lowest cost.

The SP decoder, like the MS decoder, is also a message

passing decoder that operates on the constraint graph of the

LDPC code. It is more accurate than the MS decoder as it takes

into account all pseudocodewords of the given graph in its

estimate. However, it is still suboptimal compared to the ML

Definition 2.7: A pseudocodeword

is irre-

ducible if it cannot be written as a sum of two or more codewords

or pseudocodewords.

Note that irreducible pseudocodewords are called minimal

pseudocodewords in [5] as they correspond to vertices of the

polytope

, and in the scaled definition of pseudocode-

words in [5], any pseudocodeword is a convex linear combina-

tion of these irreducible pseudocodewords. We will see in Sec-

tions II-B and C that the irreducible pseudocodewords, as de-

fined above, are the ones that can potentially cause the min-sum

decoder to fail to converge.

decoder. Thus, its estimate may not not always correspond to a single codeword (as the ML decoder), or a single pseudocodeword (as the MS decoder). A complete description, along with the update rules, of the MS and SP decoders may be found in [3].
In this paper, we will focus our attention on the graph-based MS iterative decoder, since it is easier to analyze than the SP decoder. The following definition characterizes the iterative decoder behavior, providing conditions when the MS decoder may fail to converge to a valid codeword.
Definition 2.8: [2] A pseudocodeword is good if for all input weight vectors

B. Pseudocodewords and Iterative Decoding Behavior

to the min-sum iterative decoder, there is a codeword that has

The feature that makes LDPC codes attractive is the exis- lower overall cost than , i.e.,

.

tence of computationally simple decoding algorithms. These al-

gorithms either converge iteratively to a suboptimal solution that

may or may not be the maximum likelihood solution, or do not

converge at all. The most common of these algorithms are the

min-sum (MS) and the sum-product (SP) algorithms [3], [12].

These two algorithms are graph-based message-passing algo-

rithms applied on the LDPC constraint graph. More recently,

linear programming (LP) decoding has been applied to decode

LDPC codes. Although LP decoding is more complex, it has the

advantage that when it decodes to a codeword, the codeword is

guaranteed to be the maximum-likelihood codeword (see [7]).

A message-passing decoder exchanges messages along the

edges of the code’s constraint graph. For binary LDPC codes,

the variable nodes assume the values one or zero; hence, a mes-

sage can be represented either as the probability vector

,

where is the probability that the variable node assumes a

value of 0, and is the probability that the variable node as-

sumes a value of 1, or as a log-likelihood ratio (LLR)

,

in which case the domain of the message is the entire real line .

Definition 2.9: A pseudocodeword is bad if there is a

weight vector such that for all codewords ,

.

Note that a pseudocodeword that is bad on one channel is not

necessarily bad on other channels since the set of weight vectors

that are possible depends on the channel.

Suppose the all-zeros codeword is the maximum-likelihood

(ML) codeword for an input weight vector , then all nonzero

codewords have a positive cost, i.e.,

. In the case

where the all-zeros codeword is the ML codeword, it is equiva-

lent to say that a pseudocodeword is bad if there is a weight

vector such that for all codewords ,

but

.

As in classical coding where the distance between codewords

affects error correction capabilities, the distance between pseu-

docodewords affects iterative decoding capabilities. Analogous

to the classical case, the distance between a pseudocodeword

and the all-zeros codeword is captured by weight. The weight

of a pseudocodeword depends on the channel, as noted in the

following definition.

Let

be a codeword and let

Definition 2.10: [4] Let

be a pseu-

be the input to the decoder from the channel. docodeword of the code represented by the Tanner graph ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KELLEY AND SRIDHARA: PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF TANNER GRAPHS

4017

Fig. 4. Tanner graph and computation tree (CT) for the [4; 1; 4] repetition code.

and Let be the smallest number such that the sum of the are

and

, for some positive integer ; thus,

largest s is at least

. Then, the weight of is as fol-

lows:

•

for the binary erasure channel

(BEC);

•

for the binary symmetric channel (BSC) is

this graph has no nc-pseudocodewords. Even on the computation tree, the only valid assignment assigns the same value for all the nodes on the computation tree. Therefore, there are no nc-pseudocodewords on the graph’s computation tree as well.
Suppose we add a redundant check node to the graph, then we obtain a new LDPC constraint graph, shown in Fig. 5, for

if

the same code. Even on this graph, the only lift realizable pseu-

if

docodewords are

and

, for some positive

integer . Therefore, the polytope of [5] contains

and

where •

is the sum of the largest s.

as the vertex points and has no bad pseudocodewords

(as in Definition 2.9). However, on the computation tree, there

for the additive white are several valid assignments that do not have an equivalent rep-

Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.

resentation in the graph-covers-polytope. The assignment where

Note that the weight of a pseudocodeword of reduces to

the traditional Hamming weight when the pseudocodeword is a

codeword of , and that the weight is invariant under scaling

of a pseudocodeword. The minimum pseudocodeword weight

of is the minimum weight over all pseudocodewords of

and is denoted by

for the BEC (and likewise, for other

channels).

all nodes on the computation tree are assigned the same value,

say , (as highlighted in Fig. 5) corresponds to a codeword in

the code. For this assignment on the computation tree, the local

configuration at check is

corresponding to

, at

check it is (1, 1) corresponding to

, at check it

is

corresponding to

, at check it is

cor-

responding to

, and at check it is

corre-

sponding to

. Thus, the pseudocodeword vector

Remark 2.3: The definition of pseudocodeword and pseu-

corresponding to

is consistent locally

docodeword weights are the same for generalized Tanner with all the local configurations at the individual check nodes.

graphs, wherein the constraint nodes represent subcodes in- However, an assignment where some nodes are assigned dif-

stead of simple parity-check nodes. The difference is that as ferent values compared to the rest (as highlighted in Fig. 6) cor-

the constraints impose more conditions to be satisfied, there responds to a nc pseudocodeword on the Tanner graph. For the

are fewer possible nc-pseudocodewords. Therefore, a code assignment shown in Fig. 6, the local configuration at check

represented by an LDPC constraint graph having stronger sub- is , corresponding to

, as there are two check

code constraints will have a larger minimum pseudocodeword nodes in the computation tree with

as the local code-

weight than a code represented by the same LDPC constraint word at each of them. Similarly, the local configuration at check

graph having weaker subcode constraints.

is

, corresponding to

, as there are three

C. Graph-Covers-Polytope Approximation

nodes on the computation tree, two of which have

as the

local codeword and the third which has

as the local code-

In this section, we examine the graph-covers-polytope defi- word. Similarly, the local configuration at check is

nition of [5] in characterizing the set of pseudocodewords of a corresponding to

, the local configuration at check is

Tanner graph with respect to min-sum iterative decoding. Con-

corresponding to

, and the local configuration

sider the

-repetition code which has a Tanner graph rep- at check is

corresponding to

.

resentation as shown in Fig. 4. The corresponding computation Thus, there is no pseudocodeword vector that is consistent lo-

tree for three iterations of message passing is also shown in the cally with all the above local configurations at the individual

figure. The only lift-realizable pseudocodewords for this graph check nodes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4018

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Fig. 5. Modified Tanner graph and CT for the [4; 1; 4] repetition code.

Fig. 6. Modified Tanner graph and CT for the [4; 1; 4] repetition code.

Clearly, as the computation tree grows with the number of

decoding iterations, the number of nc-pseudocodewords in the

graph grows exponentially with the depth of the tree. Thus, even

in the simple case of the repetition code, the graph-covers-poly-

tope of [5] fails to capture all min-sum-iterative-decoding-pseu-

docodewords of a Tanner graph.

Fig. 7 shows the performance of MS iterative decoding on the

constraint graphs of Figs. 4 and 5 when simulated over the bi-

nary input additive white Gaussian noise channel (BIAWGNC)

with signal to noise ratio

. The ML performance of

the code is also shown as reference. With a maximum of

decoding iterations, the performance obtained by the iterative

decoder on the single cycle constraint graph of Fig. 4 is the

same as the optimal ML performance (the two curves are one

on top of the other), thereby confirming that the graph has

no nc-pseudocodewords. The iterative decoding performance

deteriorates when a new degree four check node is introduced

as in Fig. 5. (A significant fraction of detected errors, i.e., errors

due to the decoder not being able to converge to any valid

codeword within iterations, were obtained upon simulation

of this new graph.)

This example illustrates that the polytope

does not

capture the entire set of MS pseudocodewords on the computa-

tion tree. In general, we state the following results.

Claim 2.1: A bipartite graph representing an LDPC code

contains no irreducible nc-pseudocodewords on the computa-

tion tree

of any depth if and only if either 1) is a tree,

or 2) contains only degree two check nodes.

nc-pseudocodewords if either 1) is a tree, or 2) there is at least

one path between any two variable nodes in that traverses only

via check nodes having degree two.

Note that condition 2) in Claim 2.2 states that if there is at

least one path between every pair of variable nodes that has

only degree two check nodes, then contains at most one irre-

ducible lift-realizable nc-pseudocodeword. However, condition

2) in Claim 2.1 requires that every path between every pair of

variable nodes has only degree two check nodes.

For the rest of the paper, unless otherwise mentioned, we will

restrict our analysis of pseudocodewords to the set of lift-real-

izable pseudocodewords as they have an elegant mathematical

description in terms of the polytope

that makes the

analysis tractable.

III. BOUNDS ON MINIMAL PSEUDOCODEWORD WEIGHTS
In this section, we derive lower bounds on the pseudocodeword weight for the BSC and AWGN channel, following Definition 2.10. The support size of a pseudocodeword has been shown to upper bound its weight on the BSC/AWGN channel [4]. Hence, from Lemma 2.1, it follows that
. We establish the following lower bounds for the minimum pseudocodeword weight.
Theorem 3.1: Let be a regular bipartite graph with girth and smallest left degree . Then the minimal pseudocodeword weight is lower bounded by

Claim 2.2: A bipartite graph representing an LDPC code contains either exactly one or zero irreducible lift-realizable
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

odd even.

KELLEY AND SRIDHARA: PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF TANNER GRAPHS

4019

Fig. 7. Performance of different representations of [4; 1; 4] repetition code over the BIAWGNC.

Note that this lower bound holds analogously for the minimum

distance of [13], and also for the size of the smallest

stopping set, , in a graph with girth and smallest left de-

gree [14].

For generalized LDPC codes, wherein the right nodes in

of degree represent constraints of a

subcode,1 the

above result is extended as follows.

Theorem 3.2: Let be a -right-regular bipartite graph with

girth and smallest left degree and let the right nodes repre-

sent constraints of a

subcode, and let

.

Then see the first equation at the bottom of the page.

Definition 3.1: A stopping set for a generalized LDPC code

using

subcode constraints may be defined as a set of

variable nodes whose neighbors are each connected at least

times to in .

1Note that k and  are the minimum distance and the relative minimum distance, respectively of the subcode.

This definition makes sense since an optimal decoder on an

erasure channel can recover at most

erasures in a linear

code of length and minimum distance . Thus if all constraint

nodes are connected to a set , of variable nodes, at least

times, and if all the bits in are erased, then the iterative de-

coder will not be able to recover any erasure bit in . Note that

Definition 3.1 assumes there are no idle components in the sub-

code, i.e., components that are zero in all the codewords of the

subcode. For the above definition of a stopping set in a gener-

alized Tanner graph, the lower bound holds for also. That

is, the minimum stopping set size in a -right-regular bi-

partite graph with girth and smallest left degree , wherein

the right nodes represent constraints of a

subcode with

no idle components, is lower bounded as shown in the second

equation at the bottom of the page, where

.

The max-fractional weight of a vector

is de-

fined as

. The max-fractional weight

of pseudocodewords in LP decoding (see [7]) characterizes the

odd even.
odd even
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

performance of the LP decoder, similar to the role of the pseu-

docodeword weight in MS decoding. It is worth noting that for

any pseudocodeword , the pseudocodeword weight of on the

BSC and AWGN channel relates to the max-fractional weight of

as follows:

Lemma 3.1: For any pseudocodeword ,

.

It follows that

, the max-fractional dis-

tance which is the minimum max-fractional weight over all .

Consequently, the bounds established in [7] for

are also

lower bounds for . One such bound is given by the fol-

lowing theorem.

Theorem 3.3: (Feldman [7]) Let

(respectively, )

denote the smallest left degree (respectively, right degree) in

a bipartite graph . Let be a factor graph with

,

, and girth , with

. Then

Fig. 8. Graph with all pseudocodewords having weight at least d .
If such a is known, then Theorem 3.6 may be used to obtain the smallest lift degree needed to realize all irreducible lift-realizable pseudocodewords. This has great practical implications, for an upper bound on the lift degree needed to obtain a pseudocodeword of minimum weight would significantly lower the complexity of determining the minimum pseudocodeword weight .

Corollary 3.4: Let be a factor graph with

, and girth , with

. Then

Corollary 3.7: If is any lift-realizable pseudocodeword , and is the maximum component, then the smallest lift degree
needed to realize is at most .

Note that Corollary 3.4, which is essentially the result obtained in Theorem 3.1, makes sense due to the equivalence between the LP polytope and GC polytope (see Section II).
Recall that any pseudocodeword can be expressed as a sum of irreducible pseudocodewords, and further, it has been shown in [5] that the weight of any pseudocodeword is lower bounded by the smallest weight of its constituent pseudocodewords. Therefore, given a graph , it is useful to find the smallest lift degree needed to realize all irreducible lift-realizable pseudocodewords (and hence, also all minimum weight pseudocodewords).
One parameter of interest is the maximum component which can occur in any irreducible lift-realizable pseudocodeword of a given graph , i.e., if a pseudocodeword has a component larger than , then is reducible.

Definition 3.2: Let be a Tanner graph. Then the maximum component value an irreducible pseudocodeword of can have is called the -value of , and will be denoted by .
We first show that for any finite bipartite graph, the following holds:

Theorem 3.5: Every finite bipartite graph representing a finite length LDPC code has a finite .

Theorem 3.6: Let be an LDPC constraint graph with largest

right degree and -value . That is, any irreducible lift-real-

izable pseudocodeword

of has

,

for

. Then the smallest lift degree

needed to

realize all irreducible pseudocodewords of satisfies

Example 3.1: Some graphs with known -values are:

for cycle codes [1], [2],

for LDPC codes whose Tanner

graphs are trees, and

for LDPC graphs having a single

cycle, and

for tail-biting trellis codes represented on

Tanner-Wiberg-Loeliger graphs [1] with state-space sizes

and

.

We now bound the weight of a pseudocodeword based on

its maximal component value and its support size

.

Lemma 3.2: Suppose in an LDPC constraint graph

reducible lift-realizable pseudocodeword

with support set has components

, for

then: (a)

, and (b)

.

every ir,

For many graphs, the -value may be small and this makes the above lower bound large. Since the support of any pseudocodeword is a stopping set (Lemma 2.1), can be lower bounded in terms of and . Thus, stopping sets are also important in the BSC and the AWGN channel.
Further, we can bound the weight of good and bad pseudocodewords (see Definitions 2.8, 2.9) separately, as shown here.

Theorem 3.8: For an

code represented by an

LDPC constraint graph : (a) if is a good pseudocodeword

of , then

,

and (b) if is a bad pseudocodeword [2] of , then

, where is as

in the previous lemma.

IV. EXAMPLES

In this section we present three different examples of Tanner

graphs which give rise to different types of pseudocodewords

where the maximum is over all check nodes in the graph and and examine their performance on the binary input additive

denotes the variable node neighbors of .

white Gaussian noise channel (BIAWGNC), with signal to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KELLEY AND SRIDHARA: PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF TANNER GRAPHS

4021

Fig. 9. Performance of Example 4.1—LDPC code: MS, SP, ML decoding over the BIAWGNC.

assigning value to the nodes in the outer and inner rings and assigning value to exactly one node in the middle ring, and zeros elsewhere.
Fig. 9 shows the performance of this code on a BIAWGNC with MS, SP, and ML decoding. It is evident that all three algorithms perform almost identically. Thus, this LDPC code does not have low weight (relative to the minimum distance) bad pseudocodewords, implying that the performance of the MS decoder, under independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) Gaussian noise, will be close to the optimal ML performance.

Example 4.2: Fig. 10 shows a graph that has

both good and bad pseudocodewords. Consider

. Letting

, we obtain

and

for all codewords . Therefore, is a bad

Fig. 10. Graph with good and bad pseudocodewords.

pseudocodeword for min-sum iterative decoding. In particular, this pseudocodeword has a weight of

on both the BSC and the AWGN channel. This LDPC graph

noise ratio

, with MS, SP, and ML decoding. The MS

and SP iterative decoding is performed for 50 decoding itera-

tions on the respective LDPC constraint graphs.

results in an LDPC code of minimum distance

,

whereas the minimum stopping set size and minimum

pseudocodeword weight (AWGN channel) of the graph are ,

i.e.,

, and the -value is .

Example 4.1: Fig. 8 shows a graph that has no pseudocode- Fig. 11 shows the performance of this code on a BIAWGNC

word with weight less than

on the BSC and AWGN with MS, SP, and ML decoding. It is evident in the figure that the

channel. For this code (or more precisely, LDPC constraint MS and the SP decoders are inferior in performance in compar-

graph), the minimum distance, the minimum stopping set size, ison to the optimal ML decoder. Since the minimal pseudocode-

and the minimum pseudocodeword weight on the AWGN word weight

is significantly smaller than the minimum

channel, are all equal to , i.e.,

, and distance of the code , the performance of the MS iterative

the -value (see Definition 3.2) is . An irreducible nc-pseu- decoder at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) is dominated by

docodeword with a component of value may be observed by low-weight bad pseudocodewords.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4022

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Fig. 11. Performance of Example 4.2—LDPC code: MS, SP, ML decoding over the BIAWGNC.

on whether is even or odd. The minimum pseudocodeword

weight is

, and the LDPC constraint

graph has a -value of .

Figs. 13 and 14 show the performance of the code for odd

and even , respectively, on a BIAWGNC with MS, SP, and

ML decoding. The performance difference between the MS (re-

spectively, the SP) decoder and the optimal ML decoder is more

pronounced for odd . (In the case of even ,

is

not a bad pseudocodeword, since it is twice a codeword, unlike

Fig. 12. Graph with only bad nc-pseudocodewords.

in the case for odd ; thus, one can argue that, relatively, there

are a fewer number of bad pseudocodewords when is even.)

Since the graph has low weight and bad pseudocodewords, in

Example 4.3: Fig. 12 shows a graph on

variable nodes, comparison to the minimum distance, the performance of the

where the set of all variable nodes except form a minimal MS decoder in the high SNR regime is clearly inferior to that of

stopping set of size , i.e.,

. When is even, the only the ML decoder.

irreducible pseudocodewords are of the form

, Fig. 15 shows the performance of Example 3 for

where

and is even, and the only nonzero code- and

over the BSC channel with MS iterative decoding.

word is

. When is odd, the irreducible pseu- Since there are only

different error patterns possible for

docodewords have the form

, where

, the BSC channel, the performance of MS decoding for each

and is odd, or

, and the only nonzero code- error pattern was determined and the average number of output

word is

. In general, any pseudocodeword of this errors were computed. The figure shows that all four-bit or less

graph is a linear combination of these irreducible pseudocode- error patterns were corrected by the MS and the ML decoders.

words. When is not 0 or 1, then these are irreducible nc-pseu- However, the average number of output bit errors for five-bit

docodewords; the weight vector

, where error patterns with MS decoding was around for the

,

, and

, shows that code and was around for the

code, while the ML

these pseudocodewords are bad. When is even or odd, any decoder corrected all five-bit error patterns for both the codes.

reducible pseudocodeword of this graph that includes at least The average number of output bit errors for six-bit error patterns

one irreducible nc-pseudocodeword in its sum, is also bad (ac- with MS decoding was for the

code and for

cording to Definition 2.9). We also observe that for both the the

code, whereas the ML decoder corrected all six

BSC and AWGN channel, all of the irreducible pseudocode- bit errors for the

code and yielded an average number

words have weight at most

or

, depending of output bit errors of

for the

code. The figure

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KELLEY AND SRIDHARA: PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF TANNER GRAPHS

4023

m = Fig. 13. Performance of Example 4.3—LDPC code for

11: MS, SP, ML decoding over the BIAWGNC.

m Fig. 14. Performance of Example 4.3—LDPC code for = 10: MS, SP, ML decoding over the BIAWGNC.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4024

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

m = m Fig. 15. Performance of Example 4.3—LDPC code for

11, = 12 with MS and ML decoding over the BSC.

also shows that MS decoding is closer to ML decoding for the

code than for the

code.

This section has demonstrated three particular LDPC con-

straint graphs having different types of pseudocodewords,

leading to different performances with iterative decoding in

comparison to optimal decoding. In particular, we observe that

the presence of low weight irreducible nc-pseudocodewords,

with weight relatively smaller than the minimum distance of

the code, can adversely affect the performance of iterative

decoding.

V. STRUCTURE OF PSEUDOCODEWORDS
This section examines the structure of lift-realizable pseudocodewords and identifies some sufficient conditions for certain pseudocodewords to potentially cause the min-sum iterative decoder to fail to converge to a codeword. Some of these conditions relate to subgraphs of the base Tanner graph. We recall that we are only considering the set of lift-realizable pseudocodewords and that by Definition 2.3, the pseudocodewords have nonnegative integer components, and hence are unscaled.

Lemma 5.2: A pseudocodeword

can be

written as

, where

,

are (not necessarily distinct) codewords and is some residual

vector, not containing the support of any nonzero codeword in

its support, that remains after subtracting the codeword vectors

from . Either is the all-zeros vector, or is a

vector comprising of or even entries only.

This lemma describes a particular composition of a pseu-

docodeword . Note that the above result does not claim that

is reducible even though the vector can be written as a sum

of codeword vectors

, and . Since need not be

a pseudocodeword, it is not necessary that be reducible struc-

turally as a sum of codewords and/or pseudocodewords (as in

Definition 2.7). It is also worth noting that the decomposition of

a pseudocodeword, even that of an irreducible pseudocodeword,

is not unique.

Example 5.1: For representation B of the

Ham-

ming code as shown in Fig. 19 in Section VI, label the

vertices clockwise from the top as , , , , , , and

. The vector

is

an irreducible pseudocodeword and may be decomposed as

Lemma 5.1: Let

be a pseudocodeword

in the graph that represents the LDPC code . Then the vector

, obtained by reducing the entries in , modulo 2,

corresponds to a codeword in .

and also as

. In each

of these decompositions, each vector in the sum is a codeword

except for the last vector which is the residual vector .

The following implications follow from the above lemma. • If a pseudocodeword has at least one odd component,
then it has at least odd components.

Theorem 5.1: Let

be a pseudocodeword. If

there is a decomposition of as in Lemma 5.2 such that

,

then is a good pseudocodeword as in Definition 2.8.

• If a pseudocodeword has a support size

Theorem 5.2: The following are sufficient conditions

, then it has no odd components.

for a pseudocodeword

to be bad, as in

• If a pseudocodeword does not contain the support of Definition 2.9:

any nonzero codeword in its support, then has no odd 1)

;

components.

2)

;

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KELLEY AND SRIDHARA: PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF TANNER GRAPHS

4025

2 Fig. 16. Minimal stopping set with property .

Fig. 17. Nonminimal stopping set as in Case 2(b)2) of Theorem 5.3.

3) if is an irreducible nc-pseudocodeword and

, where is the number of distinct codewords whose

support is contained in

.

Intuitively, it makes sense for good pseudocodewords, i.e.,

those pseudocodewords that are not problematic for iterative de-

coding, to have a weight larger than the minimum distance of Fig. 18. Minimal stopping set as in Case 2(a) of Theorem 5.3. the code, . However, we note that bad pseudocodewords

can also have weight larger than .

Definition 5.1: A stopping set has property if contains at least one pair of variable nodes and that are not connected by any path that traverses only via degree two check nodes in the subgraph of induced by in .

2) If there is at least one codeword whose support is contained in , then we have the following cases: (a) if is minimal, (i) there exists a nc-pseudocodeword with support equal to iff has property .

Example 5.2: In Fig. 10 in Section IV, the set

is a

(ii) all nc-pseudocodewords with support equal to

minimal stopping set and does not have property , whereas the

are bad.

set

is not minimal but

(b) if is not minimal,

has property . The graph in Fig. 16 is a minimal stopping set

(i) and contains a problematic node such that

that has property . The graph in Example 4.1 has no minimal

for any proper stopping set2

, then there ex-

stopping sets with property , and all stopping sets have size at

ists a bad pseudocodeword with support . More-

least the minimum distance .

over, any irreducible nc-pseudocodeword with sup-

Lemma 5.3: Let be a stopping set in . Let denote the

largest component an irreducible pseudocodeword with support

may have in . If is a minimal stopping set and does not

have property , then a pseudocodeword with support has

maximal component or . That is,

or .

Subgraphs of the LDPC constraint graph may also give rise

to bad pseudocodewords, as indicated below.

port is bad. (ii) and does not contain any problematic nodes, then every variable node in is contained in a minimal stopping set within . Moreover, there exists a bad nc-pseudocodeword with support iff either one of these minimal stopping sets is not the support of any nonzero codeword in or one of these minimal stopping sets has property .

Definition 5.2: A variable node in an LDPC constraint The graph in Fig. 17 is an example of Case 2(b)(ii) in The-

graph is said to be problematic if there is a stopping set orem 5.3. Note that the stopping set in the figure is a disjoint

containing that is not minimal but nevertheless has no proper union of two codeword supports and therefore, there are no ir-

stopping set

for which

.

reducible nc-pseudocodewords.

Observe that all graphs in the examples of Section IV have The graph in Fig. 18 is an example of Case 2(a). The graph

problematic nodes and conditions 1 and 3 in Theorem 5.2 are has property and therefore has nc-pseudocodewords, all of

met in Examples 4.2 and 4.3. The problematic nodes are the which are bad.

variable nodes in the inner ring in Example 4.1, the nodes in Example 4.2, and in Example 4.3. Note that if a graph

A. Remarks on the Weight Vector and Channels

has a problematic node, then necessarily contains a stopping set with property .
The following result classifies bad nc-pseudocodewords, with respect to the AWGN channel, using the graph structure of the underlying pseudocodeword supports, which, by Lemma 2.1, are stopping sets in the LDPC constraint graph.

In [6], Frey et al. show that the max-product iterative decoder (equivalently, the MS iterative decoder) will always converge to an irreducible pseudocodeword (as in Definition 2.7) on the AWGN channel. However, their result does not explicitly show that for a given irreducible pseudocodeword , there is a weight vector such that the cost is the smallest among all pos-

Theorem 5.3: Let be an LDPC constraint graph representing an LDPC code , and let be a stopping set in . Then, the following hold:
1) If there is no nonzero codeword in whose support is contained in , then all nc-pseudocodewords of , having support equal to , are bad as in Definition 2.9. Moreover,

sible pseudocodewords. In the previous subsection, we have given sufficient conditions under which such a weight vector can explicitly be found for certain irreducible pseudocodewords. We believe, however, that finding such a weight vector for any irreducible pseudocodeword may not always be possible. In particular, we state the following definitions and results.

there exists a bad pseudocodeword in with support equal 2A proper stopping set S of S is a nonempty stopping set that is a strict

to .

subset of S.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4026

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Definition 5.3: A truncated AWGN channel, parameterized

by and denoted by

, is an AWGN channel

whose output log-likelihood ratios corresponding to the re-

ceived values from the channel are truncated, or limited, to the

interval

.

In light of [15], [16], we believe that there are fewer problem- Fig. 19. Three different representations of the [7; 4; 3] Hamming code.

atic pseudocodewords on the BSC than on the truncated AWGN

channel or the AWGN channel.

Definition 5.4: For an LDPC constraint graph that defines

an LDPC code , let

be the set of lift-realizable

pseudocodewords of where for each pseudocodeword in the

set, there exists a weight vector such that the cost on the

AWGN channel is the smallest among all possible lift-realizable

pseudocodewords in .

and is more structured (it results in a circulant parity check matrix) and contains 4 redundant check equations compared to , which has none, and , which has one. In particular, and are subgraphs of , with the same set of variable nodes. Thus, the set of lift-realizable pseudocodewords of is contained in the set of lift-realizable pseudocodewords of and , individually. Hence, has fewer number of lift-realizable pseudocodewords

Let

and

be defined analogously than or . In particular, we state the following result:

for the BSC and the truncated AWGN channel, respectively.

Then, we have the following result:

Theorem 5.4: For an LDPC constraint graph , and

,

we have

Theorem 6.1: The number of lift-realizable pseudocodewords in an LDPC graph can only reduce with the addition of redundant check nodes to .
The proof is obvious since with the introduction of new

check nodes in the graph, some previously valid pseudocode-

words may not satisfy the new set of inequality constraints

The above result says that there may be fewer problematic irreducible pseudocodewords for the BSC than over the TAWGN(L) channel and the AWGN channel. In other words, the above result implies that MS iterative decoding may be more accurate for the BSC than over the AWGN channel. Thus, quantizing or truncating the received information from the channel to a smaller interval before performing MS iterative decoding may be beneficial. (Note that while the above result considers all possible weight vectors that can occur for a given channel, it does not take into account the probability distribution of weight vectors for the different channels, which is essential when comparing the performance of MS decoding across different channels.) Since the set of lift-realizable pseudocodewords for MS iterative decoding is the set of pseudocodewords for linear-programming (LP) decoding (see Section II), the same analogy carries over to LP decoding as well. Indeed, at high enough signal to noise ratios, the above observation has been shown true for the case of LP decoding in [15] and more

imposed by the new check nodes. (Recall that at a check node

having variable node neighbors

, a pseudocodeword

, must satisfy the following inequalities

, for

(see (1))) However,

the set of valid codewords in the graph remains the same, since

we are introducing only redundant (or, linearly dependent)

check nodes. Thus, a graph with more check nodes can only

have fewer number of lift-realizable pseudocodewords and

possibly a better pseudocodeword-weight distribution.

If we add all possible redundant check nodes to the graph,

which, we note, is an exponential number in the number of lin-

early dependent rows of the parity check matrix of the code, then

the resulting graph would have the smallest number of lift-real-

izable pseudocodewords among all possible representations of

the code. If this graph does not have any bad nc-pseudocode-

words (both lift-realizable ones and those arising on the com-

putation tree) then the performance obtained with iterative de-

coding is the same as the optimal ML performance.

recently in [16].

Remark 6.1: Theorem 6.1 considers only the set of lift-realiz-

able pseudocodewords of a Tanner graph. On adding redundant

VI. GRAPH REPRESENTATIONS AND WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION check nodes to a Tanner graph, the shape of the computation

In this section, we examine different representations of in-

dividual LDPC codes and analyze the weight distribution of

lift-realizable pseudocodewords in each representation and how

it affects the performance of the MS iterative decoder. We use

the classical

and

Hamming codes as exam-

ples.

Fig. 19 shows three different graph representations of the

Hamming code. We will call the representations , ,

and , and moreover, for convenience, also refer to the graphs in

the three respective representations as , , and . The graph

is based on the systematic parity check matrix representation of

tree is altered and thus, it is possible that some new pseudocode-

words arise in the altered computation tree, which can possibly

have an adverse effect on iterative decoding. The

repe-

tition code example from Section II-C illustrates this. Iterative

decoding is optimal on the single cycle representation of this

code. However, on adding a degree four redundant check node,

the iterative decoding performance deteriorates due to the in-

troduction of bad pseudocodewords to the altered computation

tree. (See Fig. 7.) (The set of lift-realizable pseudocodewords

however remains the same for the new graph with redundant

check nodes as for the original graph.)

the

Hamming code and hence, contains three degree one Returning to the Hamming code example, graph can be ob-

variable nodes, whereas the graph has no degree one nodes tained by adding edges to either or , and thus, has more

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KELLEY AND SRIDHARA: PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF TANNER GRAPHS

4027

Fig. 20. Pseudocodeword-weight (AWGN) distribution of representations A,B,C of the [7; 4; 3] Hamming code.
Fig. 21. Pseudocodeword-weight distribution (BEC and BSC channels) of representations A, B, C of the [7; 4; 3] Hamming code.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4028

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Fig. 22. Representation A.

cycles than or . The distribution of the weights of the ir- verge to an nc-pseudocodeword rather than to any valid code-

reducible lift-realizable pseudocodewords for the three graphs word.

, , and is shown3 in Fig. 20. (The distribution considers Representation has a significant detected error rate,

all irreducible pseudocodewords in the graph, since irreducible whereas representation shows no presence of detected er-

pseudocodewords may potentially prevent the MS decoder to rors at all. All errors in decoding were due to the decoder

converge to any valid codeword [6].) Although, all three graphs converging to a wrong codeword. (We note that an optimal

have a pseudocodeword of weight three4, Fig. 20 shows that ML decoder would yield a performance closest to that of the

has most of its lift-realizable pseudocodewords of high weight, iterative decoder on representation .) This is interesting since

whereas , and more particularly, , have more low-weight the graph is obtained by adding redundant check nodes to

lift-realizable pseudocodewords. The corresponding weight dis- the graph . The addition of these 4 redundant check nodes to

tributions over the BEC and the BSC channels are shown in the graph removes most of the low-weight nc-pseudocodewords

Fig. 21. has a better weight distribution than and over that were present in . (We note here that representation

these channels as well.

includes all possible redundant parity-check equations there are

The performance of MS iterative decoding of , , and for the

Hamming code.) Representation has fewer

on the BIAWGNC with signal to noise ratio

is shown in number of pseudocodewords compared to . However, the set

Figs. 22–24, respectively. (The maximum number of decoding of irreducible pseudocodewords of is not a subset of the

iterations was fixed at .) The performance plots show both set of irreducible pseudocodewords of . The performance

the bit error rate and the frame error rate, and further, they also of iterative decoding on representation indicates a small

distinguish between undetected decoding errors, that are caused fraction of detected errors.

due to the decoder converging to an incorrect but valid code- Fig. 25 compares the performance of min-sum decoding

word, and detected errors, that are caused due to the decoder on the three representations. Clearly, , having the best

failing to converge to any valid codeword within the maximum pseudocodeword weight distribution among the three represen-

specified number of decoding iterations, in this case. The tations, yields the best performance with MS decoding, with

detected errors can be attributed to the decoder trying to con- performance almost matching that of the optimal ML decoder.

3The plots considered all pseudocodewords in the three graphs that had a maximum component value of at most 3. Hence, for each codeword c, 2c and 3c are also counted in the histogram, and each has weight at least d . However, each irreducible nc-pseudocodeword p is counted only once, as p contains at least one entry greater than 1, and any nonzero multiple of p would have a component greater than 3. The t-value (see Section V) is 3 for the graphs A, B, and C of the [7; 4; 3] Hamming code.
4Note that this pseudocodeword is a valid codeword in the graph and is thus
a good pseudocodeword for iterative decoding.

Fig. 26 shows the performance of the three different repre-

sentations over the BSC channel with MS iterative decoding.

Since there are only

different error patterns, the per-

formance of MS decoding for each error pattern was determined

and the average number of output errors were computed. Rep-

resentations A and C failed to correct any nonzero error pattern

whereas representation B corrected all one-bit error patterns.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KELLEY AND SRIDHARA: PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF TANNER GRAPHS

4029

Fig. 23. Representation B.

Fig. 24. Representation C.

The performance of MS decoding using representation B was check matrix in the standard systematic form and thus, the cor-

identical to the performance of the ML decoder and the MS de- responding Tanner graph has variable nodes of degree one.

coder always converged to the ML codeword with representa- Representation includes all possible redundant parity check

tion B. This goes to show that representation B is in fact the equations of representation and has the best pseudocodeword-

optimal representation for the BSC channel.

weight distribution. Representation includes up to order-two

Similarly, we also analyzed three different representations of redundant parity check equations from the parity check matrix

the

Hamming code. Representation has its parity of representation , meaning, the parity check matrix of rep-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4030

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Fig. 25. Comparison between representations.

resentation contained all linear combinations of every pair worthwhile to relate the results in Section VI to the stopping re-

of rows in the parity check matrix of representation . Thus, its dundancy, as introduced in [18]. Since this paper primarily dealt

(lift-realizable) pseudocodeword-weight distribution is superior with lift-realizable pseudocodewords, the results presented are

to that of but inferior to that of (see Fig. 30.)

also applicable in the analysis of LP decoding. We hope the in-

The analogous performance of MS iterative decoding of rep- sights gained from this paper will aid in the design of LDPC

resentations , , and of the

Hamming code on a codes with good minimum pseudocodeword weights.

BIAWGNC with signal to noise ratio

is shown in Figs.

27–29, respectively. (The maximum number of decoding iter-

ations was fixed at .) We observe similar trends in the performance curves as in the previous example. shows a prominent detected error rate, whereas and show no presence of detected errors at all. The results suggest that merely adding order two redundant check nodes to the graph of is sufficient to remove most of the low-weight pseudocodewords. Inferring from the empirical results of this section, we comment that LDPC codes that have structure and redundant check nodes, for example, the class of LDPC codes obtained from finite geometries [17], are likely to have fewer number of low-weight pseudocodewords in comparison to other randomly constructed LDPC graphs of comparable parameters. Despite the presence

APPENDIX

Proof of Lemma 2.1: Consider the subgraph of in-

duced by the set of vertices

. Observe that every

cloud of check nodes in the corresponding cover of is con-

nected to either none or at least two of the variable clouds in the

support of . If this were not the case, then there would be a

cloud of check nodes in the cover with at least one check node

in that cloud connected to exactly one variable node of bit value

one, thus, leaving the check node constraint unsatisfied. There-

fore, the corresponding variable nodes in the base graph sat-

isfy the conditions of a stopping set.

of a large number of short cycles (i.e., -cycles and -cycles), the class of LDPC codes in [17] perform very well with iterative decoding. It is worth investigating how the set of pseudocodewords among existing LDPC constructions can be improved, either by adding redundancy or modifying the Tanner graphs, so that the number of (bad) pseudocodewords, both lift-realizable ones as well as those occurring on the computation tree, is lowered.

Proof of Claim 2.1: Let represent the constraint graph of an LDPC code . Suppose is a tree, then clearly, any pseudocodeword of can be expressed as a linear combination of codewords of . Hence, suppose is not a tree, and suppose all check nodes in are of degree two. Then the computation tree contains only check nodes of degree two and hence, for a valid assignment on the computation tree, the value of any child variable node on the computation tree that stems from a parent

VII. CONCLUSION

check node is the same as the value of the variable node which is the parent node of . Thus, the only local codeword

This paper analyzed pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs, with configurations at each check node is the all-ones configurations

the focus on the structure, bounds on the minimum pseudocode- when the root node of the tree is assigned the value one. Hence,

word weight, and iterative decoding performance. It would be the only valid solutions on the computation tree correspond to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KELLEY AND SRIDHARA: PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF TANNER GRAPHS

4031

Fig. 26. Performance of the [7; 4; 3] Hamming code representations with MS decoding over the BSC.

the all ones vector and the all zeros vector—which are valid

codewords in .

Conversely, suppose is not a tree and suppose there is a

check node of degree in . Let

be the variable

node neighbors of . Enumerate the computation tree rooted at

for a sufficient depth such that the node appears several

times in the tree and also as a node in the final check node layer

of the tree. Then there are several possible valid assignments in

the computation tree, where the values assigned to the leaf nodes

that stem from yield a solution that is not a valid codeword

in . Thus, contains irreducible nc-pseudocodewords on its

computation tree.

Proof of Claim 2.2: Let represent the constraint graph

of an LDPC code . Suppose is a tree, then clearly, any pseu-

docodeword of can be expressed as a linear combination of

codewords of . Hence, suppose is not a tree, and between

every pair of variable nodes in there is a path that contains

only degree two check nodes in . Then contains only lift-re-

alizable pseudocodewords of the form

, where is

a positive integer. Hence, the only irreducible pseudocodewords

in are the all-zeros vector

and either the all-ones

vector

or the all-twos vector

(if the

all-ones vector is not a codeword in ).

Proof of Theorem 3.1: Case: odd. At a single constraint node, the following inequality holds (see (1) and Fig. 31):

where corresponds to variable nodes in the first level (level 0) of the tree. Similarly, we have
and so on, until
Since the LDPC graph has girth , the variable nodes up to level 5 are all distinct. The above inequalities yield

Without loss of generality, let us assume, to be the dominant components in . That is,

we have

. Since, each is at most , This implies that

Applying this inequality in the LDPC constraint graph enumerated as a tree with the root node corresponding to the dominant pseudocodeword component , we have

Since

, the result follows. (The case when is

even is treated similarly.)

0 5Note that L refers to the level for which the exponent of the (d 1) term
is i.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4032

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Fig. 27. Representation A.
AWGN case: Let
Since

Proof of Lemma 3.1: Let

be a pseu-

docodeword of , and without loss of generality, let

. To establish the inequality for the AWGN channel,

we need to show

we can write

where is some non- Since

, this

negative quantity. Suppose

. implies

Then, since we have

we get

Hence,

.

To establish the bound for the BSC, let be the smallest

number such that

. Then

. First suppose . More-

over,

(The case larly.)

is treated simi-

Proof of Theorem 3.2: As in the proof of Theorem 3.1,

Now suppose , we have

where we note that for a single constraint with neighbors

having pseudocodeword components

, we have the that

following relation (for ,

):

.

. Each .
. Then, for some . We have
. Note . Thus,

Proof of Corollary 3.4: Follows from Lemma 3.1 and Theorem 3.3.

Proof of Theorem 3.5: In the polytope representation intro-

The result follows by applying this inequality at every constraint duced by Koetter and Vontobel in [5], irreducible pseudocode-

node as in the proof of Theorem 3.1.

words correspond to the edges of the fundamental cone, which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KELLEY AND SRIDHARA: PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF TANNER GRAPHS

4033

Fig. 28. Representation B.

Fig. 29. Representation C.

can be described by

and

above inequalities with equality. Together with the hyperplane

for all check nodes and all variable equality, meets at least inequalities with equality. The re-

nodes in . Consider the polytope that is the intersection sulting system of linear equations contains only integers as co-

of the fundamental cone with the hyperplane

. efficients. By Cramer’s rule, the vertex must have rational co-

The vertices of this polytope have a one-to-one correspondence ordinates. Taking the least common multiple of all denomina-

with the edges of the fundamental cone. Let be a fixed vertex tors of all coordinates of all vertices gives an upper bound on .

of this new polytope. Then satisfies at least

of the Therefore, is finite.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4034

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Fig. 30. Comparison between representations.

Proof of Lemma 3.2: (a) AWGN case: Let be the number

of ’s that are equal to , for

. The pseudocode-

word weight is then equal to

Now, we have to find a number such that

. Note however, that

.

This implies that for an appropriate choice of , we have

or

Fig. 31. Single constraint node and a d-left regular (bipartite) tree enumerated from an arbitrary variable node.

Note that

in the above. Clearly, if we set to be the

Proof of Theorem 3.6: Let be the minimum degree lift

needed to realize the given pseudocodeword . Then, in a de-

gree lift graph that realizes , the maximum number of

active check nodes in any check cloud is at most . A check

cloud is connected to

active variable nodes from

minimum over all

such that

,

then it can be verified that this choice of will ensure that

is true. This implies

(for , ).

However, observe that left-hand-side (LHS) in can be

written as the following LHS:

the variable clouds adjoining check cloud . (Note that

represents all the variable clouds adjoining .) Since every ac-

tive check node in any check cloud has at least two (an even

number) active variable nodes connected to it, we have that

. This quantity can be upper-bounded

by since

, for all , and

, for all .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KELLEY AND SRIDHARA: PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF TANNER GRAPHS

4035

Now, using the inequality

, can be taken

as the minimum over all

such that

. The smallest value

of for which this inequality holds for all

is

given by

, thereby proving the lemma in the

AWGN case.

BSC case: Since

, we have from

Lemma 3.1 that

. (Note

that the ’s are nonnegative integers.) Therefore,

.

Proof of Theorem 3.8: Let be a good pseudocodeword.

This means that if for any weight vector we have

for all

, then,

. Let us now consider the

BSC and the AWGN cases separately.

BSC case: Suppose at most errors occur in channel.

Then, the corresponding weight vector will have

or fewer components equal to and the remaining com-

ponents equal to . This implies that the cost of any

(i.e., ) is at least since there are

at least

’s in support of any

. Since

is a good pseudocodeword, it must also have positive

cost, i.e.,

. Let us assume that the ’s occur

in the dominant positions of , and without loss of

generality, assume

. (Therefore,

.) Positive cost of

implies

.

So we have

, where is as defined in the pseu-

docodeword weight of for the BSC. The result follows.

AWGN case: Without loss of generality, let be domi-

nant component of . Set the weight vector

. Then it can be verified that

for

any

. Since is a good pseudocodeword, this

implies also must have positive cost. Cost of is

. Note

that the right-hand side (RHS) is

; hence, the

result follows from Lemma 3.1.

Now let us consider to be a bad pseudocodeword.

From Lemma 2.1, we have

. Therefore,

(since

is the maximum com-

ponent of ), and hence, the result follows by Lemmas 3.1

and 3.2.

Proof of Lemma 5.1: Consider a graph having a single

check node which is connected to variable nodes

.

Suppose

is a pseudocodeword in , then

corresponds to a codeword in a lift of . Every check node

in is connected to an even number of variable nodes that are

assigned value , and further, each variable node is connected

to exactly one check node in the check cloud. Since the number

of variable nodes that are assigned value is equal to the sum

of the ’s, we have

.

Let be the corresponding lift of wherein forms a

valid codeword. Then each check node in is connected to

an even number of variable nodes that are assigned value .

From the above observation, if nodes

participate

in the check node in , then

.

Let

, for

( being the number of

variable nodes, i.e., the block length of , in ). Then, at every

check node , we have

. Since

is a binary vector satisfying all

checks, it is a codeword in .

Proof of Lemma 5.2: Suppose

is in the support of

, then form

. If contains a codeword in its sup-

port, then repeat the above step on . Subtracting codewords

from the pseudocodeword vector in this manner will lead to a de-

composition of the vector as stated. Observe that the residual

vector contains no codeword in its support.

From Lemma 5.1,

is a codeword in . Since

, we have

. But since , this implies

. However,

since contains no codeword in its support,

must be

the all-zero codeword. Thus, contains only even (possibly )

components.

Proof of Theorem 5.1: Let be a pseudocodeword of a

code , and suppose may be decomposed as

, where

is a set of not necessarily

distinct codewords. Suppose is bad. Then there is a weight

vector such that

but for all codewords

,

. Having

implies that

, for some positive real value . So there is

at least one for which

, which is a contradiction.

Therefore, is a good pseudocodeword.

Proof of Theorem 5.2: Let be an arbitrarily large finite

positive integer.

1) If

, then is a bad pseudocode-

word by Theorem 3.8.

2) If

, then there is no codeword in the

support of , by Lemma 5.1. Let

, be a

weight vector where for

if

()

if

( ).

Then

and for all codewords ,

.

3) Suppose

is a irreducible nc-pseudocode-

word. Without loss of generality, assume

, i.e., the first

positions of are nonzero and the rest are zero. Suppose

contains distinct codewords

in its

support. Then if

, we define a weight wector

as follows. Let

for

. Solve for

from the following

system of linear equations:

...

The above system of equations involves unknowns

and there are

equations. Hence, as

long as

, we have a solution for the ’s. (Note

that for the case

, when the

matrix containing the first components of the codewords

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4036

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

and the pseudocodeword as its rows, has a

nonzero determinant, there is exactly one solution for the

’s and when this determinant is zero, there is either zero

or more than one solution.)

Thus, there exists a weight vector

such that

and

for all codewords in the code. This proves that

is a bad pseudocodeword.

Proof of Theorem 5.3: Let be an arbitrarily large finite positive integer.
1) Let be a stopping set. Suppose there are no nonzero codewords whose support is contained in . The pseudocodeword with component value in the positions of , and elsewhere is then a bad pseudocodeword on the AWGN channel, which may be seen by the weight vector , where for
if if .

In addition, since all nonzero components have the same

value, the weight of on the BSC and AWGN channel is

.

Suppose now that is a nc-pseudocodeword with support

. Then the weight vector again shows that is bad,

i.e.,

and

for all

.

2) Suppose there is at least one nonzero codeword whose

support is in .

a) Assume is a minimal stopping set. Then this means

that is the only nonzero codeword whose support is

in and

.

(i) Suppose has property , then we can divide the

variable nodes in into disjoint equivalence classes

such that the nodes belonging to each class are con-

nected pairwise by a path traversing only via degree

two check nodes in . Consider the pseudocodeword

having component value in the positions corre-

sponding to all nodes of one equivalence class, compo-

nent value for the remaining positions of , and com-

ponent value elsewhere. (It can be quickly verified

that this is indeed a pseudocodeword by considering

the subgraph induced by . In this subgraph, variable

nodes from different equivalence classes will be con-

nected together at check nodes of degree greater than

two. Since there is a nonzero codeword with support

in , all such check nodes have even degree. This im-

plies that the pseudocodeword inequalities of the form

(see (1)) at each check node is satisfied,

implying that the chosen is a pseudocodeword.) Let

, and let denote the index of the first nonzero

component of and denote the index of the first

nonzero component in

. The weight

vector

, where for

if ,

ensures that is bad as in Definition 2.9, and it is easy

to show that the weight of on the AWGN channel is

strictly less than .

Conversely, suppose does not have property . Then

every pair of variable nodes in is connected by a

path in that contains only degree two check nodes.

This means that any pseudocodeword with support

must have all its components in of the same value.

Therefore, the only pseudocodewords with support

that arise have the form

, for some positive in-

teger . (By Theorem 5.1, these are good pseudocode-

words.) Hence, there exists no bad pseudocodewords

with support .

(ii) Let be a nc-pseudocodeword with support . If

contains a codeword in its support, then since

is minimal

. Let denote the number of

times occurs in the decomposition (as in Lemma 5.2)

of . That is,

. Note that is nonzero since

is a nc-pseudocodeword. Let denote an index of the

maximal component of , and let denote the index

of the first nonzero component in

.

The weight vector , defined above, again ensures

that is bad.

b) Suppose is not a minimal stopping set and there

is at least one nonzero codeword whose support

is in .

(i) Suppose contains a problematic node . By def-

inition, assume that is the only stopping set among

all stopping sets in that contains . Define a set as

there is a path from to

containing only degree two check nodes in

Then, the pseudocodeword that has component value

on all nodes in , component value on all nodes

in

and component value everywhere else is a

valid pseudocodeword. (It can be quickly verified that

this is indeed a pseudocodeword by considering all the

check nodes in the graph induced by in . Any check

node that is in the path from some

to is

either of degree two, in which case the inequality in (1)

is satisfied, or is of degree greater than two, in which

case the check node is possibly connected to a variable

node in

and to at least two variable nodes in

. The choice of the components guarantee that the

pseudocodeword inequality in (1) is still satisfied at

this check node. For any other check node in , the

degree is at least two, and it is easy to verify that the

inequality in (1) is satisfied.) Let be the index of

the variable node in , and let be the index of

some variable node in

. Then, the weight vector

, where for

if

if

if

otherwise

otherwise

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KELLEY AND SRIDHARA: PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF TANNER GRAPHS

4037

ensures that

and

for all nonzero

nodes in the supports of these codewords outside of .

codewords in . Hence, is a bad pseudocodeword

(Note that we choose the smallest number

of in-

with support . This shows the existence of a bad pseu-

dices such that each codeword contains one of the vari-

docodeword on .

able nodes

in its support.) The following

Suppose now that is some irreducible nc-pseu-

weight vector

ensures that is a

docodeword with support . If there is a nonzero

bad pseudocodeword.

codeword such that has support in and contains in its support, then since is a problematic node in , cannot lie in a smaller stopping set in . This
means that support of is equal to . We will show that is a bad pseudocodeword by constructing a

if if if otherwise.

suitable weight vector . Let be the index of some

variable node in

. Then we can define a weight

vector

, where for

(Note that can be chosen so that

and it is

clear that

for all codewords in the code.)

Now suppose contains the support of a codeword

if

and has property , then we can construct a bad

pseudocodeword on using the previous argument

if otherwise.

and that in Case 2(a)(i) above (since is minimal)

and allow the remaining components of in

to

have a component value of . It is easy to verify that

(Note that since is a irreducible nc-pseudocodeword

and contains in its support,

.) This weight

vector ensures that

and

for all

nonzero codewords

. Thus, is a bad pseu-

docodeword.

If there is no nonzero codeword such that has sup-

port in and also contains in its support. Then, the

weight vector

, where for

,

such a pseudocodeword is bad.

Conversely, suppose every minimal stopping set

within does not have property and contains the

support of some nonzero codeword within it.

Then, this means that

and that be-

tween every pair of nodes within there is a path

that contains only degree two check nodes in .

Then, for any pseudocodeword with support ,

there is a decomposition of , as in Lemma 5.2, such

that can be expressed as a linear combination of

if

codewords ’s. Thus, by Theorem 5.1, there are no

if

bad pseudocodewords with support .

otherwise

Proof of Lemma 5.3: Suppose is minimal and does not

ensures that

and

for all nonzero

codewords

. Thus, is a bad pseudocodeword.

This proves that any irreducible nc-pseudocodeword

with support is bad.

(ii) Suppose is not a minimal stopping set and sup-

pose does not contain any problematic nodes. Then,

have property . Then each pair of nodes in are connected by

a path via degree two check nodes, and hence all components

of a pseudocodeword on are equal. If is the support of a

codeword , then any pseudocodeword is a multiple of , and so

. If is not the support of a codeword, then the all-two’s

vector is the only irreducible pseudocodeword, and

.

any node in belongs to a smaller stopping set within . We claim that each node within belongs to a
minimal stopping set within . Otherwise, a node belongs to a proper nonminimal stopping set and is not contained in any smaller stopping set within
—thereby, implying that the node is a problematic node. Therefore, all nodes in are contained in minimal stopping sets within .

Proof of Theorem 5.4: Let the LDPC code represented

by the LDPC constraint graph have blocklength . Note

that the weight vector

has only or

components on the BSC, whereas it has every component

in the interval

on the truncated AWGN channel

TAWGN , and has every component in the interval

on the AWGN channel. That is,

To prove the last part of the theorem, suppose one of

these minimal stopping sets, say , is not the sup-

port of any nonzero codeword in . Then, there ex-

ists a bad nc-pseudocodeword

with

support , where

, for an appropriately chosen

positive even integer that is at least , for

and

for

, and

for

.

Let be the index of a variable node in . If

there are distinct codewords

whose

supports contain and whose supports are contained It is clear from the above that, for

,

in , then let

be the indices of variable

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4038

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank J. Rosenthal, P. Vontobel, and the two reviewers for their careful reading of the paper and their insightful comments which have considerably improved this paper. They also thank Reviewer 1 for providing an elegant proof of Theorem 3.5.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[2] G. A. Horn, “Iterative decoding and pseudocodewords,” Ph.D. dissertation, Calif. Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, 1999.
[3] G. D. Forney, Jr., “The forward-backward algorithm,” in Proc. 34th Ann. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 1996, pp. 432–446.
[4] G. D. Forney, Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models. New York: Springer, 2001, pp. 101–112.
[5] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding of finite length codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Applications, Brest, France, Sep. 2003.
[6] B. J. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, “Signal-space characterization of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 766–781, Feb. 2001.
[7] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, Mass. Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[8] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[9] R. Koetter, W.-C. W. Li, P. O. Vontobel, and J. L. Walker, “Pseudocodewords of cycle codes via zeta functions,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, San Antonio, TX, Oct. 2004.

[10] T. D. Coleman, Pseudocodewords Presentation Cambridge, MA, Tech. Rep., M.I.T, 2003.
[11] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. Teletar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[12] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeligar, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[13] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[14] A. Orlitsky, R. Urbanke, K. Vishwanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping sets and the girth of Tanner graphs,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun.–Jul. 30-5, 2002, pp. 2–2.
[15] J. Feldman and C. Stein, “LP decoding achieves capacity,” in Symp. Discrete Algorithms (SODA), Vancouver, Canada, Jan. 23–25, 2005.
[16] J. Feldman, R. Koetter, and P. O. Vontobel, “The benefits of thresholding in LP decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2005 IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 4–9, 2005.
[17] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[18] M. Schwartz and A. Vardy, “On the stopping distance and the stopping redundancy of codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Mar. 2005, submitted for publication.
[19] C. Kelley, D. Sridhara, J. Xu, and J. Rosenthal, “Pseudocodeword weights and stopping sets,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun.–Jul. 27-3, 2004, pp. 150–150.
[20] J. L. Gross and T. W. Tucker, Topological Graph Theory. New York: Wiley, 1987.
[21] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.
[22] C. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Structure of pseudocodewords in Tanner graphs,” in Proc. 2004 Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Applications, Parma, Italy, Oct. 10–13, 2004.
[23] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On the relationship between linear programming decoding and min-sum algorithm decoding,” in Proc. 2004 Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Applications, Parma, Italy, Oct. 10–13, 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:06:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

