2015 International Conference on Advances in Computer Engineering and Applications (ICACEA) IMS Engineering College, Ghaziabad, India
Modified Approximate Lower Triangular Encoding of LDPC Codes

Arijit Dutta
ETCE Department IIEST, Shibpur Howrah, India
arijit.dutta67@gmail.com
Abstract— LDPC codes have become the most popular error control code in various fields like telecommunication, magnetic recording etc. due to their high error correcting capability. The Approximate Lower Triangular (ALT) encoding is the most commonly used encoding technique of LDPC codes. This technique though elegant suffers from the shortcoming that when a particular sub matrix of the H matrix obtained after ALT encoding is singular, the technique fails. In this paper a new algorithm is proposed to handle this shortcoming. In this work a new algorithm is proposed to bring any rectangular sparse LDPC matrix into a rectangular part and a square upper triangular part. This algorithm is implemented to encode a general H matrix. This algorithm is further appended to the ALT format of LDPC encoding and another efficient encoding technique is proposed for LDPC code. Both the proposed techniques have a pre-processing step followed by the actual encoding step. Scatter plots of the H matrices (after preprocessing) are shown. BER performance of the new Modified ALT technique is compared with the existing Systematic Approximate Lower Triangular method. The proposed algorithm gives better BER performance.
Keywords—LDPC encoding; Approximate Lower Triangular; Systematic Approximate Lower Triangular; Modified Approximate Lower Triangular; Belief Propagation

Ankita Pramanik ETCE Department
IIEST, Shibpur Howrah, India pramanikankita@gmail.com p, the two vectors are appended and the codeword C is generated i.e. C = [u p]. This codeword is sent through the channel and information vector is regenerated by iterative decoding algorithm. The most popular encoding technique of LDPC has been proposed by Richardson and Urbanke in [4]. This method aims at solving the equation (1) with linear complexity in the block length (n). Before the actual encoding step, [4] proposes to bring the H matrix in a specific format called the ALT (Approximate Lower Triangular) format, fig.1.
Fig. 1. H matrix in ALT format

I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes proposed by Gallager in his Ph. D [1] thesis have found a wide range of applications in present times. These codes of sufficient length when decoded by belief propagation with sufficient number of iterations, achieve near Shannon limit performance [2]. LDPC codes are typically constructed pseudo – randomly however, some work has shown that good LDPC codes can also be constructed algebraically [3], [7], [8]. Much work has been done in the construction and decoding of LDPC codes.

The LDPC codes are represented by their parity check matrix or H matrix. Alternatively they can be represented by Tanner graphs. LDPC codes are linear block codes. For encoding of LDPC code this property is utilized. In practice the following equation is used for obtaining the parity bit vector-

H*C' = 0

(1)

The encoding problem reduces to finding the parity vector p, given an information vector u. After finding the parity vector

978-1-4673-6911-4/15/$31.00©2015 IEEE

This method gives an efficient way of encoding. In this encoding technique, a term phi is defined as follows:
Φ = -E T -1 B + D
To calculate the parity bits by this method, the inverse of the matrix phi needs to be calculated. It has been observed that for some LDPC matrices, phi becomes a singular matrix and hence its inverse does not exist and so the encoding technique fails. The algorithm in [4] suggests some random row and column permutations to make phi non singular in the cases where the matrix phi becomes singular. Due to this randomness some modifications on this method becomes relevant.
A modification on this method has been proposed in [6]. In [6], the lower part of the H matrix obtained in ALT format is deleted by brute force as shown in fig. 2.

364
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:12:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2015 International Conference on Advances in Computer Engineering and Applications (ICACEA) IMS Engineering College, Ghaziabad, India

Fig. 2. H matrix in AML format

undertaken for encoding of LDPC codes. In this paper we propose two techniques for encoding LDPC codeword. Both the encoding techniques require a preprocessing step followed by the actual encoding step. In the first encoding technique, a novel way of permuting the rows and columns of a LDPC H matrix to get an upper triangular matrix is proposed. In the second technique, the above encoding technique is applied to the LDPC matrices after bringing them into the ALT format [4].

As a result of this deletion, the parity vector length is compromised.
Another modification to [4] is given in [5] called the Systematic Approximate Lower Triangular(SALT) encoding. In the first step of encoding the H matrix, the algorithm proposes the H matrix to be converted into the ALT format. After this step, the E sub matrix is proposed to be made into a zero matrix and the D sub matrix into an identity matrix through Gaussian Elimination as shown in fig. 3.

A. Preprocessing for encoding
In this section a new algorithm is proposed for upper triangulation of the whole H matrix of a LDPC code. This algorithm is mainly based on row and column permutation. Let a LDPC code be denoted by its rectangular Parity check matrix H, which in general may be considered to be consisted of two sub matrices C and D as follows-
H = [C D]

Fig. 4. H Matrix

Fig. 3. H matrix in SALT format

But it has been observed that making D an identity matrix through Gaussian Elimination is not an easy task, especially for the cases where the block length is large.
This paper proposes an encoding technique in general and also proposes a modified version of the proposed algorithm to find a general algorithm to bring the D sub matrix into a non singular matrix. The proposed algorithm removes the difficulties of the different encoding procedures as mentioned above.
Section I of the paper gives a brief introduction about the existing LDPC encoding techniques and their shortcomings. Section II of the paper proposes a novel algorithm for bringing a rectangular sparse matrix into a rectangular part and a square upper triangular part. The matrix obtained by this procedure can be used for LDPC encoding. Section III of the paper gives a technique for removing the shortcoming of the encoding technique given in [4]. Section IV of the paper gives the BER simulation and the discussion on the results.

I.

ENCODING OF THE WHOLE H MATRIX

Much study has been undertaken for LDPC code construction and decoding, but not much work has been

The proposed algorithm works on the D sub matrix. The algorithm proceeds to make the D sub matrix an upper triangular matrix. In the first step of the algorithm, the entry corresponding to the first row and first column of the D matrix is checked. If the entry is 1, then all the subsequent rows of C and D which have ‘1’ in that particular column position are added by the first row of the H matrix and then the algorithm proceeds as given in the flow chart. If the entry at the said location of D sub-matrix is not ‘1’ then all the columns of the 1st row of the C sub-matrix are searched for ‘1’. If ‘1’ is obtained then the first column of D is swapped with that column of C and then the newly obtained 1st row of the H matrix is added with each of the subsequent rows of the H matrix which have ‘1’ in that particular column position. If no ‘1’ is found in that row of C, the algorithm searches for ‘1’ in the next row of C sub-matrix and also the D sub-matrix. It must be noted that at least 1 column in the C and D submatrices should have ‘1’ in it else the row will have all zero entries and hence should be removed from the H matrix. After this initial step, upper triangulation for the subsequent rows is performed by the proposed algorithm given below. To start the algorithm, the ith row and the jth column is the one immediately after the row or column of the matrix for which the upper triangulation has been performed.

365
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:12:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2015 International Conference on Advances in Computer Engineering and Applications (ICACEA) IMS Engineering College, Ghaziabad, India
Fig. 6. Final H matrix
A rate half (648,324) LDPC H matrix is generated by the technique given in [3]. The scatter plot of the H matrix after the proposed row and column permutation is shown below.

Fig. 7. H matrix after the row and column permutation but with gap present

It must be noted that in the above algorithm addition is done only for those rows which have ‘1’ in that particular column location. After the algorithm is performed on H, the matrix H can be considered to be made of 3 sub-matrices C', D' and E' as follows-

As can be seen the rightmost part of the permuted matrix is not strictly upper triangular. The rightmost columns are permuted left to the upper triangular matrix to get the rightmost part of the whole H matrix in the upper triangular format. The scatter plot of the final matrix obtained after all the permutations is shown below.

Fig. 5. Intermediate H matrix
As shown in the figure, some all zero rows (r) will be formed because of the various operations performed on the matrix H. These rows are removed. Apart from the sub-matrix C', an upper triangular square matrix D' (m-r * m-r) and another matrix E' right to D' are obtained. For ease of encoding the sub matrix E' is shifted in between C' and D'. It must be noted that the shifting of the sub-matrix E' is merely an elementary column permutation operation. The modified matrix would look like as follows-

Fig. 8. Final H matrix
So by the proposed algorithm any rectangular matrix can be broken into two sub matrices - a systematic part and an upper triangular part whose inverse is to be calculated by back substitution.
B. Encoding Technique The pre – processing step of the above subsection is
followed by the actual encoding procedure. Let the sub-

366
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:12:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2015 International Conference on Advances in Computer Engineering and Applications (ICACEA) IMS Engineering College, Ghaziabad, India

matrices C' and D' be together considered as matrix A and the other sub-matrix D' as matrix T. So the final matrix is [A T] where the size of A is (m-r * n-m+r) and that of T is (m-r * mr). So the information bit vector u is of size (1 * n-m+r) and the parity bit vector p of size (1 * m-r). Finally the following matrix equation is used to calculate the (m-r) number of parity bits-

H*C' = 0

where H = [A T] and C = [u p] the codeword. From (1) it can be easily derived that,

A*u' + T*p' = 0

or T*p' = A*u'. As the matrix T is of upper triangular form the (m-r) number of p parity bits are obtained by back substitution (details are given in [4]):

nmr

mr

¦ ¦ p(l)

Al, j * u j  Tl, j * P ( j)

(2)

j1

j l 1

for l = (m-r),(m-r-1),...1 (all arithmetic operations are modulo2).

By this algorithm the encoding of LDPC code might be done. But if this method is performed on the entire H matrix, then in a large area of H matrix the addition operation i.e., effectively bitxor operation will be performed. As a result the sparsity of the H matrix will be affected and the BER performance of the code will be affected. This effect has been shown in the result part.

matrix (the all zero matrix) is reduced accordingly. For row permutation and bit xor operation in the [C D] block, the [A B] block which is the upper half of the block [C D] is unaltered. However for column permutation the columns of the [A B] part alters accordingly.
The E sub matrix can be converted to all zero matrix by adding its rows with the rows of T sub matrix i.e., by performing bitxor operation on the rows of E with the rows of T. In general after performing the above operations, the number of rows of H matrix obtained is lesser than the original H matrix or the gap of the resultant parity check matrix is smaller than that obtained after bringing the parity check matrix into the ALT format. Also the modified D sub matrix is an upper triangular matrix and the E sub matrix is a zero matrix. The scatter-plot of a rate half (648,324) LDPC H matrix obtained after applying the Modified ALT technique is shown below.
Fig. 9. After MALT encoding

II. MODIFIED ALT
In this section, the preprocessing algorithm proposed in Section II is modified for efficient implementation in the ALT format and a new encoding technique called the Modified ALT is proposed. This encoding technique also consists of a pre-processing technique and then the actual encoding technique. For encoding of the H matrix obtained after the ALT format, it is assumed that the sub matrix D was nonsingular. But in reality it may not be the case. So, for efficient encoding the D sub-matrix is proposed to be converted into an upper triangular format, which ensures non- singularity. Due to this operation some of the linearly dependent rows will be eliminated.

B. Encoding Technique After preprocessing the H matrix looks like as follows:

A. Preprocessing Algorithm for encoding of H matrix in ALT format
For the pre processing of a H matrix, the below mentioned procedure is proposed-
1. The ALT format of the H matrix by the algorithm described in [5] is obtained.
2. The E sub matrix is converted to an all zero matrix.
3. All the zero rows are removed from the H matrix.
4. The proposed algorithm of section II is applied on the matrix [C D] and the original sub matrices (C and D) are replaced by the modified matrix. The number of rows in E sub

Fig. 10. H matrix after preprocessing
For the structure obtained, the codeword C is assumed to consist of three parts namely the information vector part, the parity part 1 and the parity part 2, similar to the structure as described in [4],[5].
c = [u p1 p2]
However, in the proposed algorithm back substitution is needed for calculating both p1 and p2. Vector u is of size (1 *

367
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:12:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2015 International Conference on Advances in Computer Engineering and Applications (ICACEA) IMS Engineering College, Ghaziabad, India

n-m), vector p1 is of size (1 * g) and vector p2 is of size (1*mg). Two different matrix equations are obtained to calculate the values of p1 and p2:

C1*u'+D1*p1'=0

(3)

A*u'+B*p1'+T* p2'=0

(4)

Value of p1 is to be obtained first by back substitution (details are given in [4]):

nm

g

¦ ¦ p1(l)

C1l, j * u j  D1l, j * P1( j)

(5)

j1

j l 1

for l = g,g-1,...1 (all arithmetic operations are modulo-2).

Then the value of p2 might be obtained from (4) in a similar way as described in [4]:

nm

g

l 1

¦ ¦ ¦ p2(l)

Al, j 
 u j  Bl, j * p1( j)  Tl, j * p2 ( j) (6)

j1

j1

j1

for l = 1,2,....,m-g (all arithmetic operations are modulo-2).

For the proposed MALT encoding technique if r number of linearly dependent rows have been deleted then the modified gap of the code is (g-r), where g is the gap obtained after bringing the H matrix in the ALT format. So, the modified information vector for MALT is of size n-m+r ((code vector length)-(parity vector length)). Whereas for the technique that is proposed in [4], information vector is of size n-m. As a result the code rate of H matrix encoded by MALT is improved i.e. code rate for [4] is (n-m)/n and Designed code rate by the proposed method is (n-m+r)/n.

Fig. 11. Bit Error Rate for rate 1/2 (648,324) H matrix – Encoding with the algorithm proposed in Section II

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
The algorithm used to decode LDPC codes was discovered independently several times and is known by different names. The most common ones are the belief propagation (BP) algorithm, the message passing algorithm and the sum-product algorithm [7].
The encoding method that has been proposed in section II is very simple to implement but it suffers from high encoding complexity. Also the sparseness of the H matrix is lost to some extent by performing the operations on the entire H matrix so the BER performance is not so good.
However the encoding method that has been proposed in section III is a very efficient one. A rate half (648,324) LDPC H matrix is generated by the technique given in [3]. The BER performance of this H matrix encoded by the proposed Modified ALT technique is compared with that encoded by SALT technique and is shown in the following figure.
The BER performance of the proposed encoding technique is much better than the existing SALT technique. After

Fig. 12. BER performance of rate half (648,324) with proposed MALT and SALT
performing the bitxor operation of the rows of D matrix, it can be changed from an upper Triangular Matrix to an identity matrix and the resultant matrix is equivalent to the one presented by the SALT technique. In SALT technique, the identity matrix is formed by Gaussian elimination. So in other words, an additional operation is needed to reach to SALT format [5] from the proposed MALT format. Due to this additional operation on the D sub-matrix, the C sub-matrix becomes denser. So to remove the shortcoming of the ALT paper, making D an upper triangular matrix will give much better performance compared to making it an identity matrix. BER simulation also shows that a code performs better when D matrix is kept an upper triangular matrix as is proposed by the MALT, rather changing it to Identity matrix.

368
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:12:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2015 International Conference on Advances in Computer Engineering and Applications (ICACEA) IMS Engineering College, Ghaziabad, India

IV. CONCLUSION
The algorithm that has been discussed in section II can be applied to convert a general rectangular matrix(it may have linearly dependent rows) into a systematic part and an upper triangular part. Section III proposes to make sub matrix D into an upper triangular matrix instead of an identity matrix as proposed by [5]. In Section V we have shown that this alteration results in better performance.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” Ph. D. Thesis, Dept. of Electrical Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA:MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, "Near Shannon limitperformance of low density parity check codes," IEE Electron Letters, vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] J. Fan, Y. Xiao, and K. Kim, “Design LDPC Codes without Cycles of Y Length 4 and 6”, Research Letters in Communications, vol. 2008, Article ID 354137, 5 pages, 2008, doi:10.1155/2008/- 354137.

[4] T. J. Richardson R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density paritycheck codes, ” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001
[5] H. Qi and N. Goertz, “Low-Complexity Encoding of LDPC
Codes: A New Algorithm and its Performance”, Institute for Digital
Communications, Joint Research Institute for Signal & Image Processing, School of Engineering and Electronics, The University of Edinburgh.
[6] M. R. Islam and J. Kim, “Linear encoding of LDPC codes using approximate lower triangulation with postprocessing”, Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications Symposium (PIMRC), Tokyo, Japan, September 13-16, 2009
[7] A. Pramanik, G. Patil, L. Borman, “Small length Quasi-Cyclic LDPC code for wireless applications,” Proceedings of AICERA 2013, Kerala, India.
[8] S. Johnson, “Low - Density Parity – Check Codes from Combinatorial Designs,” Doctor of Philosophy, School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, The University of Newcastle Callaghan, Australia, 2004.

369
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:12:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

