IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

771

Highly Reliable Coding Methods for Emerging Applications: Archive and Enterprise Solid-State Drives (SSDs)
Shuhei Tanakamaru, Member, IEEE, Yuta Kitamura, Senju Yamazaki, Student Member, IEEE, Tsukasa Tokutomi, and Ken Takeuchi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper proposes highly reliable coding methods

for applications in two extreme conditions. -out-of-8 level cell

is proposed for archival applications which require signifi-

cantly long data-retention time with small write/erase cycle. On the

other hand, for applications with large write/erase cycle and short

data-retention time (enterprise application, etc.), universal asym-

metric coding (UAC) is proposed.

reduces the number of

memory states to improve the reliability with low cost overhead. In

7LC, the bit-error rate (BER) reduction will be 79% after 1k-year

data retention while seven memory states are efficiently used out

of eight states. By considering

with error-correcting codes

(ECCs), the optimum number of cell levels can be determined

to minimize the bit-cost with given acceptable data-retention time.

In UAC, the coding method is changed according to the write/erase

cycle and data-retention time to keep the BER low. As a result,

BER is reduced by 52% at maximum, compared with the original

random pattern.

Index Terms—Archive, enterprise, NAND flash memory, reliability, solid-state drive, SSD.

I. INTRODUCTION
S OLID-STATE drives (SSDs) with NAND flash memories are attracting much demand due to their high performance, low power and small form factor. In NAND flash memory, a strong reliability trade-off exists between write/erase cycle and data-retention time [1]. The requirements of the write/erase cycle and data-retention time for SSDs are different among applications. Cold Flash is the storage of data that is infrequently updated such as photos in social-networking services [2]. Archive and Digital Rosetta Stone (DRS) keep data for an extremely long time ( 30 years) [3]. These applications require a long data-retention time but only a few write/erase cycles (e.g., write once read many (WORM) flash [2]). On the other hand, cloud, enterprise, or security-camera applications allow short data retention but require high endurance (write/erase
Manuscript received June 26, 2014; revised September 19, 2014 and November 04, 2014; accepted November 24, 2014. Date of current version February 23, 2015. This work was supported in part by CREST/JST. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor V. Chandra.
S. Tanakamaru is with the Research and Development Initiative, Chuo University, Tokyo, 112-8551 Japan, and also with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Graduate School of Engineering, University of Tokyo Tokyo, 113-8656 Japan (e-mail: tanakamaru@takeuchi-lab.org).
Y. Kitamura is with Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Communication Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo, 112-8551 Japan.
S. Yamazaki, T. Tokutomi, and K. Takeuchi are with Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Communication Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo, 112-8551 Japan (e-mail: yamazaki@takeuchi-lab.org; tokutomi@takeuchi-lab. org; takeuchi@takeuchi-lab.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2014.2380640

cycle) since the data is frequently updated. Generally, error-cor-

recting code (ECC) is implemented in the SSD controller to

correct memory-cell errors [4]. The targets of the endurance

and data-retention time for enterprise multi-level cell (MLC,

2 bit/cell) NAND flash with ECC are 5k to 30k cycles and 1

to 3 months, respectively [5]. In conventional consumer SSDs

with consumer MLC NAND flash, the required endurance and

data-retention time are 1k to 3k cycles and 1 year, respectively

[5].

To enhance the reliability of SSDs and expand the market, this

paper proposes the highly reliable coding methods for archive

and enterprise storage [6]. The key observation is that the phys-

ical mechanism of errors strongly depends on the usage model

of SSDs. Program-disturb, inter-cell coupling, and data-reten-

tion errors are the main types of reliability failure. Program-dis-

turb error is the unintended increase in

due to the high

word-line voltage [7]. Inter-cell coupling also increases ,

according to the neighbor cell's

[8], [9]. Data-retention

error is the decrease of over time, due to leakage of stored

electrons. These error rates are strongly related to both write/

erase cycle and data-retention time.

Fig. 1 illustrates the proposed SSD with the proposed reli-

ability improvement techniques: -out-of-8 level cell

and universal asymmetric coding (UAC) [6]. In archive appli-

cations, supremely low cost and long retention can be achieved

by

with TLC NAND flash. In enterprise applications, the

bit-error rate (BER) of MLC NAND flash memory is improved

by UAC. The appropriate coding methods for

to

maximize cost effectiveness and minimize the bit-error rate

(BER) can be either instructed by the user (host) or auto-

matically chosen inside the controller circuit. Selecting the

code by user is easier because the user has more information

about the application. On the other hand, when the controller

circuit automatically selects the code, the dynamic analysis

of the application is required inside the controller, which

is another research topic. Thus, more software or hardware

resource is required if the user or the circuit selects the code,

respectively. Therefore, the code instruction method should be

selected by considering the hardware/software resources. Both

and UAC should always accompany ECC to realize the

uncorrectable BER below

. ECC encoder and decoder

are placed closer to the NAND flash memories than

and

UAC. This is because during read, unless the ECC first corrects

bit-errors,

and UAC will increase the bit-errors by the

decoding.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. technology

is proposed for low-cost archival storage in Section II. Mea-

1549-8328 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:15:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Fig. 2. (a) Measured and projected BER vs. data-retention time of 1X-3Xnm MLC and 2Xnm TLC NAND flash memories. (b) Estimated BER when the data-retention time is 1, 10, 100, and 1k years.

NAND flash adopts 60 bit correction per 1KByte Bose-Chaud-

huri-Hocquenghem (BCH) ECC [10]. The acceptable BER of

Fig. 1. Architecture of the proposed SSD controller.

this ECC is only 0.25%, which is calculated by finding the

maximum raw BER

that achieves the uncorrectable BER

surements of the NAND flash memory, the optimum number

lower than

from (1) in [7].

of cell levels, and the temperature/generation characteristics are also discussed. UAC is proposed in Section III for cloud/enter-

(1)

prise/security camera applications. The coding strategy is analyzed based on the measured results. Section IV discusses the circuit additions and modifications due to the proposed techniques. Section V concludes this paper.

II. -OUT-OF-8 LEVEL CELL

TECHNOLOGY

where , , and are the code length, user data size, and the number of correctable bit errors by an ECC, respectively. represents that there will be one ECC decoding failure in bits read. Even with sophisticated ECC such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [11], [12], etc., the correctable

A. Measurements of NAND Flash Memory

BER is 1 to 5% [13]–[15], which limits the most cost-effective (highest capacity per chip or $) TLC NAND flash's retention

This paper presents many measurement results of NAND time to 10 years or less. That is, TLC NAND flash memory is

flash memory. If the figure is based on the measured result, desired for archival applications because of the low bit-cost, but

“Measurement” is labeled inside the figures. The experimental not suitable in terms of reliability. Even though MLC NAND

setups are discussed below. In Section II

, all of the flash memories show better reliability, the bit-cost is about

measured BERs are taken after writing pseudo-random data in 1.5-times higher than TLC NAND flash; the capacity of MLC

a fresh block

. If the measurements are declared to is 2/3 if a chip contains same number of memory cells.

be done at , the chips are put into the temperature chamber Fig. 3 shows the measured BER of each memory state in

at . The pseudo-random data programming and the read are the 2Xnm TLC NAND flash memory at 85 . After 1-month

executed in the room temperature (RT). In Section III (UAC), data retention, it is found that the higher

states exhibits

all of the cells in a block are stressed equally for the noted times higher BER, possibly because the stronger electric fields accel-

at RT. After that, pseudo-random or the asymmetric data are erate stress-induced leakage current (SILC) [7]. The BER of the

written and read out also at RT. Note that “2Xnm” represents P7 state is higher than that of the P1 state by more than 8-times

that the NAND flash technology is in between 20 to 30 nm.

when the data-retention time is around 1 year. When the data-re-

Fig. 2(a) shows measured (points) and projected (dashed tention time is short, the BER has almost inverse trend: memory

lines) BER of 2Xnm TLC and 3X to 1Xnm MLC NAND flash states in lower exhibits higher BER. This is possibly due to

memories during data retention at 85 . TLC technology the cell-to-cell interference during programming. The larger the

improves bit-cost but sacrifices read margin, as illustrated by difference of the threshold voltage between the target and neigh-

around 10-times higher BER of TLC than that of MLC. In this boring cells is, the larger the increase in is [8]. The cells

paper, the bit-cost is defined as (Chip cost)/(Chip capacity). in the lower

are likely to have larger

difference be-

The chip cost is a function of the manufacturing/testing costs, tween the neighboring cells, which will result in the larger

etc., which is roughly proportional to the chip area. More- shift and higher BER. Note that the other origins can be also

over, in scaling of the memory cells from 3Xnm to 2Xnm to considered such as program-disturb or the read-reference

1Xnm, BER increases over 10 times. During data retention, settings. BER dependence on the memory states is reported to

BER's linear behavior in a log-log scale can be expressed as vary from the manufacturers [7] and therefore testing is required

[dashed lines in Fig. 2(a)], where p is the projected if the other types of chips are used.

BER and t is the data-retention time. Coefficient for and are fitted for each cell type. The reason why the BER can be B. n-out-of-8 Level Cell (nLC) Technology

fitted by

is kept future work, because detailed

As discussed in the previous subsection, the BER of TLC

measurements and analysis of each memory cell over time is NAND flash memory is too high to be used as a long-term

required. For the archive application with only one-time write, storage. Therefore, the proposed

[6] effectively reduces

the estimated BER from

after 1, 10, 100, and 1k years BER with low bit-cost by utilizing the biased error intensity de-

are shown in Fig. 2(b). The conventional SSD with 25 nm TLC picted in Fig. 3. The concept of the proposed

is shown in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:15:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: HIGHLY RELIABLE CODING METHODS FOR EMERGING APPLICATIONS

773

Fig. 3. Measured BER of all eight memory states in 2Xnm TLC NAND.

Fig. 5. Selection of k and j of 7LC. (a) 14 bits at most can be stored in five 7LC

cells. (b) When

, 7 levels are most efficiently used.

Fig. 4. Concept of the proposed -out-of-8 level cell

.

Fig. 4. Based on Fig. 3's observations, eliminates memory

states and also expands the read margin of the memory state

with high BER by virtually adjusting the read-reference volt-

ages

. As a result, the overall BER is reduced. As for

7-level cell (7LC;

), the memory state with the second

highest BER (P6) is eliminated. Then, between P6 and P7

is eliminated. As a result, the most unreliable memory

state (P7) has the largest memory margin. Thus, eliminating

only one memory state has significant impact on reducing the

BER. The other

(6-4LC) are similarly constructed.

Algorithm 1 explains how the data from the host is stored

in -level cells. First, the SSD controller selects the number of

cell levels

that minimize the bit-cost with given data-

retention time in selector. The

conversion is processed

in each bits of the data from the host (Line 1). Based

on the selected , -base coder translates the -bit data

from the host to -digits with base (Line 2). After

that, -digit numbers are re-translated to binary (3 bits per

one digit)

to re-allocate the data to

memory states

(Line 4). Then, is written to the NAND flash memory in TLC

allocator. For example in 7LC, each memory state is represented

as 0 to 6 (base-7). Next, 14 bit binary data from the host is

converted to a base-7 expression, and then stored to 5 memory

cells with their corresponding memory state.

Algorithm 1:

Conversion

) which can achieve the highest effective cell level

within

is selected.

is the parameter to

limit the maximum hardware complexity which is determined

by the hardware resource/performance. Algorithm 2 shows the

optimization process of . Suppose -bit data is stored into

cells. In each , since all of the data patterns should be

sufficiently allocated to the memory cells, the number of pos-

sible data patterns of -bit data should be smaller than the

number of acceptable data patterns in j

cells. Thus,

(1)

Algorithm 2

Optimization

Input:

Output: ,

1: for

to

2:

3:

4: end for

5:

6:

do that maximize

To fully utilize the memory space of , should be as

large as possible (Line 2). Fig. 5(a) shows the maximum

that satisfies (2)

versus the number of 7LC

cells calculated as Line 2. When

is determined for

each , then the effective cell level, can also be calculated

(Line 3) [Fig. 5(b)]. is defined as follows:

Input: , ,

(3)

Output: Write to the NAND flash memory

1: for each bits

do // : Vector with do bits

Thus,

2:

digits

(4)

3: for

to do

4:

//‘P1,” ‘P2,” etc.

Note that and should be as small as possible to simplify

5: end for 6: 7: end for

the encode/decode circuit. Therefore, is the minimum

that maximize

within

(Line 5). is

the corresponding bit width

(Line 6). Thus, for 7LC,

(14, 5) are selected as

which realize 6.96 effective cell

level. Previously, Bits/Cell Optimization (BCO) was proposed

To effectively store data as , the best combination of in [14] which reuses TLC NAND flash memory as MLC and

(binary data width) and (number of memory cells) ( and then single-level cell (SLC): 3 bit to 2 bit to 1 bits/cell storage,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:15:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

774

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Fig. 6. BER after 1-1k years data retention with conventional 8LC and proposed 7-4LC techniques.

respectively. In the proposed , levels rather than bits are re-

duced. Thus, the higher capacity can be realized by

(e.g.,

7LC rather than MLC-mode in BCO).

Fig. 7. (a) Acceptable data-retention time vs. effective bits/cell with ideal ECC that can achieve Shannon limit. (b) Assumed data allocation.

C. Evaluation

Fig. 6 shows the calculated BER after 1-1k years with con-

ventional 8LC (TLC) and proposed 7-4LCs. To evaluate the

BER of , the corresponding memory-state data is elimi-

nated from the TLC measurement results, then the coefficient

for and are fitted. The BER is significantly decreased by

. For example, the proposed 7LC improves BER by 79%

when the data-retention time is 1 k years. Moreover, assuming

that an ECC that can correct up to 1% BER is applied, 7LC,

6LC, and 5LC can be used for 10, 100, 1k-year data-retention,

respectively, while the conventional TLC can only be used for

less than 10 years.

Fig. 7(a) summarizes the cost of 8-4LC with ideal ECC that

can correct errors up to the theoretical limit (Shannon limit),

which is based on the numerical analysis with the projected

BERs. [Note: Figs. 8 and 9 are analyzed similarly.] Effective

bits/cell is calculated from the number of cell levels and the

parity overhead of ECC. The bit-cost is in inverse proportion to

the effective bits/cell because the chip cost is constant in

and the chip capacity is proportional to the effective bits/cell.

Although stronger ECC would increase the data-retention time,

parity overhead would also increase which would decrease the

effective bits/cell. Fig. 7(b) shows the assumption of the ideal

ECC with code rate of . The ECC is assumed to be encoded

by the systematic encoding with user data and parity. The user

data is the output of the TLC allocator and the parity is gen-

erated from the user data by the ECC encoder. Thus, the user

data can be allocated as

and the parity as 8LC. The BER

of

and 8LC

is described as,

Fig. 8. Acceptable data-retention time vs. effective bits/cell with BCH ECC.

Fig. 9. Acceptable data-retention time vs. effective bits/cell with ideal ECC (a)

when the write/erase cycle is 100 and (b) when the write/erase cycle is 500. (c)

Optimum

versus write/erase cycle with ideal ECC.

(5) Here

is the binary entropy function,

and

(9)

Thus the average BER in an ECC codeword

(6) The acceptable data-retention time with an ideal ECC is defined as the maximum data-retention time which satisfies the

following relation with given .

is,

(10)

(7)
On the other hand, a code rate of an ideal ECC that can realize a certain BER after ECC decoding from a raw BER of is expressed as follows [16], [17].
(8)

From the ECC code rate and the number of bits/cell, the effec-

tive bits/cell

can be defined as,

(11)

is the number of bits/cell without ECC. For ex-

ample, in 7LC, 14-bit

data is stored in five

7LC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:15:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: HIGHLY RELIABLE CODING METHODS FOR EMERGING APPLICATIONS

775

Fig. 10. BER after 1–100k years data retention at room temperature (RT).

Fig. 11. Dependence of the slope on the data-retention temperature.

cells. Thus,

. Moreover, if the code rate of the ECC

is 90%, then

. Fig. 7(a) indicates the cost optimum

( which achieves the highest effective bits/cell with given data

retention time) for different data-retention time requirements.

For the archival application, 7 and 6LC are the best for 20 and

100-year data-retention times, respectively.

Fig. 8 shows the dependence of the acceptable data-reten- Fig. 12. Temperature dependence of the data-retention BER. tion time on the effective bits/cell with BCH ECC. The ac-

ceptable BER of BCH ECC is calculated from (1) that realizes

. The user data size is 1 KByte and the number

of correctable bits is strengthened up to 300 bit. BCH ECC is

widely used in SSDs [4], [10] and thus the results in Fig. 8 re-

flect the acceptable data-retention time achievable with the cur-

rent SSDs. Since the BCH ECC is not effective as the ideal ECC,

the acceptable data-retention time is much shorter than that with

the ideal ECC. If the LDPC codes or other ECCs are fully opti-

mized for NAND flash channel, the error correction efficiency

becomes close to ideal [10], [13]. Similar to the cost analysis

with ideal ECC [Fig. 7(a)], the cost-optimum number of cell

levels changes from 8 to 6 with BCH ECC (Fig. 8).

Fig. 9 expands the write/erase cycle of the analysis with ideal

ECC to 500. Figs. 9 (a), (b) show the acceptable data-retention

time versus the effective bits/cell when the write/erase cycle is

100 [Fig. 9(a)] and 500 [Fig. 9(b)]. Fig. 9(c) summarizes the op-

timum number of cell levels when the write/erase cycle is 1 to

500. As the write/erase cycle increases, the period where 8LC is

optimum is shortened due to the reliability degradation. Instead,

becomes more effective. When the write/erase cycle be-

comes 500, 7LC cannot realize minimum cost and thus 6LC is

the optimum if the required data-retention time is over 1.3 years.

Fig. 10 shows the projected BER after 1–100 k years data

retention at RT. Based on the data-retention measurement of the

pseudo-random pattern at RT, the future BERs are estimated.

The BER is well below 0.1% with 7-4LC, enabling almost

eternal data-retention with the current standard ECC.

Each result in this paper is taken by measuring one NAND

flash block. Therefore, the variation is not considered and kept

as future work. For mass production, the variation should be

carefully analyzed by measuring many chips from different dies,

generations, and vendors. On the other hand, when

is de-

signed, the number of cell levels should be chosen with margin

to assure the reliability considering variations, temperature, or

voltage fluctuations. Therefore, using

instead of

suggested in Fig. 9, or applying stronger ECC than required are

some of the ways to handle the variation.

among 3X to 1Xnm MLC and 2Xnm TLC NAND flash memo-

ries. Although only a single generation (2Xnm) of TLC NAND

flash memory is measured, the analyses in this subsection gives

a deeper insight into the scaling effect from the MLC results.

As discussed in Section II-A, the BER during data retention

can be expressed as

. Therefore, represents the slope

in the log-log plot. Fig. 11 depicts the measured dependence of

(the slope) on the data-retention temperature with various types

of NAND flash memories. of the MLC NAND flash memories

are almost independent to the data retention temperature. How-

ever, BER drastically increases when the data-retention temper-

ature is high [1]. [1] discusses the BER at different tempera-

ture with the cycled condition

. On the other

hand, this paper presents measured data-retention BER when the

write/erase cycle is 1 (5000 in [1]) as shown in Fig. 12. Analysis

of is also new in this paper compared with [1]. The data-reten-

tion temperatures are RT, 60, 85, and 110 . As can be seen, the

BER starts to increase constantly with similar slope after 0.01

years. The difference of the BER among temperatures mainly

comes from the period until 0.01 years. Further investigation in

the future work is needed to explain why the BER ratios among

different temperatures are determined in the early period of data

retention, and why the slope after 0.01 years is independent to

the temperature. This requires physical analysis of the NAND

flash memory and bit-by-bit measurement. Moreover, the

thermal behavior of 2Xnm TLC NAND flash memory which

is quite different from the MLC NAND flash memories should

also be investigated.

It can also be observed from Fig. 12 that becomes smaller

(better for data retention) during scaling. This may be attributed

to the better cell construction by the advanced process. How-

ever, the NAND flash memories with smaller cells exhibit the

larger BER during the early stage of the data retention.

Fig. 13 analyzes the temperature acceleration effect of 2Xnm

NAND flash memory, which is calculated from the projected

BERs. For example, 1-year data-retention at 85 corresponds

to around 100-year data retention at RT, resulting in 100-times

D. Discussion About Temperature/Generation Dependence of Long-Term Data Retention

acceleration. Since the slope of the 2Xnm TLC is larger in the higher temperature, the acceleration effect increases along with the data-retention time. Note that in MLC, the temperature ac-

This subsection discusses the effect of the high-temperature celeration effect is not much based on the slope but on the initial

data retention and also compares the long-term data retention data-retention effect.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:15:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

776

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Fig. 13. Temperature acceleration effect of the data-retention.

Fig. 14. Measured BER dependence of four memory states (a) on write/erase cycle and (b) on DR time.

Fig. 15. Measured detailed BER of each memory state during (a) write/erase cycling and (b) data-retention at room-temperature.

III. UNIVERSAL ASYMMETRIC CODING (UAC)

A. Backgrounds of Universal Asymmetric Coding (UAC)

For enterprise applications, MLC NAND flash memory is

chosen instead of TLC, because of the high endurance require-

ment. Depending on the write/erase cycle and data-retention

time, it is observed that the memory state with the largest BER

changes. Fig. 14(a) shows the measured dependence of the BER

of four memory states on the write/erase cycle. When the write/

erase cycle is 10 k, the “E” state error is the largest. However, when the write/erase cycle is 20 k, then “P1” state error becomes the largest. Similarly, during 9-day data retention, the most vul-

Fig. 16. Measured memory states that have the highest BER with different data-retention time and write/erase cycle.

nerable memory state changes from “E” to “P2” state as shown and data-retention time requirements [6]. The data-retention

in Fig. 14(b). To analyze the change of the memory state that time requirement differs up to a few months [5] depending on

has the highest error rate, Fig. 15 shows the measured bit-er- how the SSD is used. The concept of the UAC is shown in

rors with their

higher and lower than . As shown in Fig. 17. Based on the required write/erase cycle and data-re-

Fig. 15(a), both higher and lower

BERs increase during tention time, the asymmetric coding (AC) [21] increases either

write/erase cycling, possibly due to the excessively damaged “1”s or “0”s to realize the optimum memory-state distribution.

tunneling oxide which immediately causes electron and hole When the bit-errors in the NAND flash memory has asym-

trap/detrap. Since both the higher and lower BERs signif- metry, e.g., the number of “1” to “0” error is larger than that

icantly increase in “P1” state, the total BER in “P1” state is the of “0” to “1” error, AC is effective to improve BER [21]. AC

largest when the write/erase cycle is 20 k. On the other hand, can increase the population of “1”s or “0”s by bit-flipping the

during data retention [Fig. 15(b)], in addition to the increase in data. As a result, the memory-state distribution is adjusted as

the lower BER with electron detrap/ejection, the increase depicted in Fig. 18. In multi-page cell architecture for MLC

of the higher BER especially in “P2” state is observed. The NAND flash, two logical pages are assigned to one word-line:

increase in the threshold voltage during the data retention would upper and lower pages [22]. By increasing either the population

be caused by the hole detrapping [18], [19] or the charge migra- of “1”s or “0”s in the upper and lower pages, four possible

tion from above the source/drain diffusions to the floating gate memory-state distributions can be realized (Fig. 18). When

[19]. Moreover, holes are trapped closer to the channel as the an AC can increase either the probability of “1”s or “0”s to

write/erase cycle increases [20]. Thus, BER in “P2” state be- , then the memory-state distribution (in descending order) is

comes the largest after 9-day data-retention. Fig. 16 summarizes

. In a conventional work for

the measurements of the memory states which have the highest ReRAM, the coding was changed during write/erase cycles

BER with various write/erase cycles and data-retention times, [14]. In contrast, this work generalizes the coding method

showing that the error characteristic of the NAND flash is dif- seamlessly for not only write/erase cycle but also data-retention

ferent among write/erase stress and time conditions.

time. Based on the write/erase cycle and data-retention time

B. Universal Asymmetric Coding (UAC)

requirements, the optimal coding (Original data or Code-1 to 4 of Fig. 18) is selected. Fig. 19 shows the measured BER

Based on the MLC NAND flash measurements, universal comparison among the original and asymmetric patterns. The

asymmetric coding (UAC) is proposed aiming to apply the op- code length is 5 bits which contains 4-bit user data and 1-bit flag

timum code and minimize BER for different write/erase cycle and the population of “1” or “0” can be increased to 69% [21].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:15:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: HIGHLY RELIABLE CODING METHODS FOR EMERGING APPLICATIONS

777

Fig. 20. (a) Selection of the asymmetric code by UAC. (b) BER improvement by UAC, compared with the random pattern.

Fig. 17. Concept of universal asymmetric coding (UAC). Fig. 18. Possible memory-state distributions with asymmetric coding.

because of the reduced BER by UAC. For example, simplified BCH ECC with smaller number of correctable bits can improve the SSD performance [23] if the increased I/O latency due to the UAC flag is smaller than the ECC latency. Moreover, due to the requirements of increased sensing trials [10], LDPC ECC has performance issue. Therefore, UAC+BCH may achieve the higher performance instead of using LDPC ECC. If the BER is too high to be corrected by LDPC, adding UAC may make it correctable. Considering that UAC has a considerable storage overhead by the flag, the user should choose the ECC method and whether to use UAC from the viewpoint of performance (latency related to ECC) and cost (UAC flag overhead).

C. Analysis of the Optimum Codes

The optimum asymmetric code cannot be intuitively selected

to reduce the memory state with the highest BER shown in

Fig. 16, because the AC changes the BER of each memory state.

Fig. 21 shows the measured higher/lower

BERs in each

Fig. 19. Measured BER with original and asymmetric patterns. (a) BER versus write/erase cycle. (b) BER versus data-retention time.

memory state with Code-1 to 4. When the write/erase cycle is 5 k and the data-retention time is 0 days (immediately after programming), the optimum code is Code-2 [Fig. 20(a)] while “E”

By shifting from Code-2 to Code-3 during write/erase cycling, state has the highest BER (Fig. 16). As can be seen from Fig. 21,

the BER improvement is 31% and 25% when the write/erase both the higher/lower BERs are the largest in Code-4. The

cycle is 10 k and 20 k, respectively, compared with the original large higher bit-errors would be due to the cell-to-cell in-

pattern [Fig. 19(a)]. Compared with the fixed AC with Code-2 terference [8], [9]. The higher the of a memory cell is, the

and Code-3, first, the BER of Code-2 is smaller by 18% when larger the positive shift of the neighboring cells is. Since

the write/erase cycle is 10 k. Then, when the write/erase cycle Code-4 has the largest amount of “P3” state, the cell-to-cell cou-

is 20 k, the BER of Code-3 becomes 30% smaller. With the pling is the largest and the higher BER becomes also the

conventional fixed coding (Code-2), the BER can become even largest. On the other hand, negative program-disturb phe-

larger than the random pattern. During data retention as shown nomena are reported [24], [25]. The negative program-dis-

in Fig. 19(b), the optimum AC can reduce the BER by 31 and turb would increase the BER with lower . The BER of each

21% when the data-retention time is 0 and 9 days, respectively, memory state is the smallest when Code-2 is applied. In the

compared with the random pattern. Moreover, the BER with write/erase cycle and data-retention time condition of Fig. 21,

Code-1 is 21% smaller than Code-2 in day 9. Thus applying Code-2 may have the best balance of the memory-state dis-

appropriate AC to each write/erase cycle and data-retention tribution to suppress both the

increase and decrease ef-

time requirement is essential to keep the BER low.

fects, resulting in the minimum overall BER. However, when

Fig. 20(a) summarizes the codes for UAC, which are selected the write/erase cycle or the data-retention time changes, the bal-

based on the measured results. All the data patterns, original ance of the complicated/various effects changes and thus the op-

(random) and Code-1 to 4 are measured with various write/erase timum code also changes. Note that the physical origins of the

cycles for around 30-day data retention. By comparing the BER

shift should be further examined to fully understand the

among data patterns, the best codes which minimize the BER complicated BER behavior.

in each write/erase cycle and data-retention time are selected. Changing the memory-state distribution not only adjusts the

Depending on the application, the optimum coding is selected, population of each state but also changes its BER, which makes

based on the required write/erase cycle and data-retention time. it difficult to simply choose the optimum coding. Therefore,

The measured BER improvement with UAC compared with the empirical study would be required to figure out the optimum

original random pattern is shown in Fig. 20(b). The measured coding strategy for each generation or vender of the NAND

BER reduction is 52% at maximum.

flash memory. Considering that the UAC is proposed for short

Proposed UAC is an additional technique to ECC. The most data-retention time applications such as for enterprise systems,

important feature of UAC is that the ECC can be made simpler the test time up to around 1 month is acceptable for production.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:15:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

778

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Fig. 22. (a) BER improvement by Code-2, compared with the original random pattern. (b) BER improvement by UAC, compared with Code-2.

Fig. 21. Higher/lower BERs with four codes when the write/erase cycle is 5 k and the data-retention time is 0 (immediately after programming).

D. Comparison With the Fixed Asymmetric Coding (AC)
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the UAC, Fig. 22(a) compares the measured results of fixed AC using Code-2 and the original random pattern. The maximum BER improvement is 52%, which is identical to the UAC due to the same use of Code-2. However, as suggested in Fig. 19, when the same code is used irrespective of the required write/erase cycle and data-retention time, the BER is aggravated in some conditions. In the worst case, the BER is worsened by 37%, compared with the original pattern without AC.
Next, Fig. 22(b) compares the measurements of UAC and fixed Code-2. The BER improvement is below 5% in half of the region. However, UAC improves the BER by 39% at maximum, when Code-3 is the optimum choice.

Fig. 23. Selection of the asymmetric code by universal asymmetric coding (UAC) when the code length is 17 bit.

E. UAC With 17 Bit Codeword

In the above experiments of UAC, the code length of the AC

is 5 bits, which has 25% flag overhead (4-bit user data 1-bit flag). When the code length is 5 bits, the sufficiently large asymmetry of “1” and “0” can be realized (69%) to fully exploit the

Fig. 24. (a) BER improvement by 17-bit UAC, compared with the random pattern. (b) BER improvement by 17-bit UAC, compared with Code-2.

AC [21]. However, if the application requires lower cost, in-

creasing the code length can reduce the storage (flag) overhead.

In this subsection, UAC with the code length of 17 bits (16-bit

user data 1-bit flag) is measured. The flag overhead is 6.3%

and the population of “1” or “0” can be increased to 60% [21].

Fig. 23 shows the code selection based on the measured re-

sults when the code length is 17 bits. Codes are selected in

the same way as UAC with the code length of 5 bits. Com-

pared with UAC with 5-bit asymmetric code [Fig. 20(a)], the

region where Code-2 is selected expands and Code-1 is not re-

quired. Fig. 24(a) depicts the measured BER improvement with

17-bit UAC, compared with the random pattern. The maximum

BER improvement is 40%. Fig. 24(b) shows the measured BER

improvement of UAC over Code-2. The BER improvement is

0% in many write/erase cycles and data-retention times because Fig. 25. Hardware architecture of the 7LC (a) encoder and (b) decoder.

Code-2 is mostly selected in UAC. However, 11% improvement

does exist where the original pattern is applied. Again, to de- can be implemented in one controller or if the required data-re-

sign UAC and determine the optimum code, experimental data tention time is determined, implementing one of the

can

should be taken for the required code length because the code be enough. In 7-base coder, the input data is divided by 7 for

selection changes with different code length.

five times and the remainders represent the 7-base values. In

IV. HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE

the TLC allocator, the 7-base values are allocated to the memory states with the simple logic. In the 7LC decoder [Fig. 25(b)], the

Fig. 25 depicts the hardware architecture of 7LC encoder memory-state values are re-allocated to 7-base values and then,

[Fig. 25(a)] and decoder [Fig. 25(b)]. The rest of

can be multiplied with

to convert the 7-base data

realized in the same way. All of the

codecs

to binary.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:15:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: HIGHLY RELIABLE CODING METHODS FOR EMERGING APPLICATIONS

779

TABLE I SUMMARY OF THIS WORK

NAND flash memory, 79% BER improvement is obtained,

which enables its adoption in low-cost, long retention archive

storage applications. For enterprise applications with higher

endurance requirements, UAC changes the asymmetric coding

method in different write/erase cycle and data-retention time

to reduce the BER. UAC on MLC NAND flash demonstrates

BER enhancement of 52%. The area, power, and performance

penalties of the

and UAC circuits are small.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

On the other hand, as depicted in [21], the circuit to realize

The authors appreciate T.O. Iwasaki for her support.

AC is extremely simple. In UAC, bypassing and code-selection

schemes are additionally required to generate all the possible

codes (original and Code1–4), which is also realized by simple

logic.

Therefore, both 7LC and UAC, especially UAC, can be re-

alized with simple logic. On the other hand, 840 registers are

required to construct an encoder of BCH ECC which corrects

60 bits per 1 KByte [26]. Note that the gate count of the BCH

ECC encoder is around half of that of the decoder [4]. Moreover,

to support the block-unit-write for TLC NAND flash which is

preferred [27] due to the complicated writing procedure [28],

MByte-class buffer would be implemented in the SSD.

also requires buffer to temporarily store the data before en-

coding/decoding to re-arrange the data. Those buffers can be

shared. Therefore, the additional circuit area and power of

and UAC are small.

In 7LC, both encoding and decoding computation times are

5 clock cycles per 14 bit. If the controller operates at 200 MHz,

the throughput of the 7LC codec is

. Since the archival applications usually do not re-

quire high performance, implementing a single codec will be

enough. If the application requires higher performance, for ex-

ample 6 Gbps for SSDs with SATA III interface, parallelizing

11 codecs can enable the required performance. On the other

hand, since UAC aims at enterprise applications with high per-

formance, parallelizing is necessary. Since the UAC computa-

tion is completed in 1 clock cycle, the throughput of a single

UAC codec is,

. Therefore, 8-parallel

codecs are required to comply with the SSD performance with

SATA III interface. Note that the circuit area and power of 8-par-

allel UAC codecs are also small enough.

V. CONCLUSION

-out-of-8 level cell

technology and universal asym-

metric coding (UAC) are proposed for archive and enterprise

applications, respectively. Although SSD's adoption is ex-

panding to those applications, different reliability enhancement

techniques are required because of the different error patterns.

In archive, Digital Rosetta Stone, and Cold Flash applications,

data should be preserved for an extremely long time but the

write/erase cycle of the NAND flash can be small. On the other

hand, in enterprise, security camera, and cloud applications,

the write/erase cycle is large but the data-retention time is

short (below a few months). With the proposed techniques, the

reliability of the NAND flash-based SSD can be improved to

enable the two application extremes. Table I summarizes this

work.

reduces the number of cell levels to decrease the

BER with low bit-cost. The number of cell levels is determined

by the required data-retention time. By applying

to TLC

REFERENCES
[1] S. Tanakamaru, M. Doi, and K. Takeuchi, “Error-prediction analyses in 1X, 2X and 3Xnm NAND flash memories for system-level reliability improvement of solid-state drives (SSDs),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp., Apr. 2013, pp. 3B.3.1–3B.3.6.
[2] J. Taylor, “Flash at Facebook: The current state and future potential,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit, Aug. 2013.
[3] Y. Yuan, N. Miura, S. Imai, H. Ochi, and T. Kuroda, “Digital Rosetta Stone: A sealed permanent memory with inductive-coupling power and data link,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. VLSI Circuits, Jun. 2009, pp. 26–27.
[4] Y. Lee, H. Yoo, I. Yoo, and I.-C. Park, “6.4 Gb/s multi-threaded BCH encoder and decoder for multi-channel SSD controllers,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2012, pp. 426–427.
[5] I. Min, “Enterprise NAND flash memory with 1x-nm technology,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit, Aug. 2014.
[6] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Kitamura, S. Yamazaki, T. Tokutomi, and K. Takeuchi, “Application-aware solid-state drives (SSDs) with adaptive coding,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. VLSI Circuits, Jun. 2014, pp. 103–104.
[7] N. Mielke et al., “Bit error rate in NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp., Apr. 2008, pp. 9–19.
[8] J.-D. Lee, S.-H. Hur, and J.-D. Choi, “Effects of floating-gate Interference on NAND flash memory cell operation,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 264–266, May 2002.
[9] M. Park, K. Kim, J.-H. Park, and J.-H. Choi, “Direct field effect of neighboring cell transistor on cell-to-cell interference of NAND flash cell arrays,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 174–177, Feb. 2009.
[10] R. Motwani, Z. Kwok, and S. Nelson, “Low density parity check (LDPC) codes and the need for stronger ECC,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit, Aug. 2011.
[11] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[12] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[13] S. Bates, “Using rate-adaptive LDPC codes to maximize the capacity of SSDs,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit, Aug. 2013.
[14] S. Tanakamaru, H. Yamazawa, T. Tokutomi, S. Y. Ning, and K. Takeuchi, “Hybrid storage of ReRAM/TLC NAND flash with RAID-5/6 for cloud data centers,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2014, pp. 336–337.
[15] H. Weingarten, “Advanced management for 3bpc NAND flash devices,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit, Aug. 2011.
[16] D. J. C. MacKay, “The noisy-channel coding theorem,” in Information Theory, Inference, Learning Algorithms. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003, pp. 162–175.
[17] D. J. C. MacKay, “The source coding theorem,” in Information Theory, Inference, Learning Algorithms. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003, pp. 67–89.
[18] C. Miccoli et al., “Resolving discrete emission events: A new perspective for detrapping investigation in NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp., Apr. 2013, pp. 3B.1.1–3B.1.6.
[19] N. Mielke et al., “Flash EEPROM threshold instabilities due to charge trapping during program/erase cycling,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 335–344, Sep. 2004.
[20] R. Shirota et al., “New accurate method to analyze both floating gate charge and tunnel oxide trapped charge profile in NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop, May 2014, pp. 55–58.
[21] S. Tanakamaru, C. Hung, and K. Takeuchi, “Highly reliable and low power SSD using asymmetric coding and stripe bitline-pattern elimination programming,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 85–96, Jan. 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:15:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

780

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

[22] K. Takeuchi, T. Tanaka, and T. Tanzawa, “A multipage cell architecture for high-speed programming multilevel NAND flash memories,” IEEE
J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1228–1238, Aug. 1998. [23] S. Tanakamaru, S. Hosaka, K. Johguchi, and K. Takeuchi, “Perfor-
mance and reliability of NAND flash/SCM hybrid SSD during write/
erase cycling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop, May 2014, pp. 154–157. [24] S. Aritome, S. Seo, H.-S. Kim, S.-K. Park, S.-K. Lee, and S. Hong, “Novel negative shift phenomenon of program-inhibit cell in 2X–3X-nm self-aligned STI NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 2950–2955, Nov. 2012. [25] Y.-S. Kim et al., “New scaling limitation of the floating gate cell in NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp., May 2010, pp. 599–603. [26] R. Micheloni, A. Marelli, and R. Ravasio, “Cyclic codes for non volatile storage,” in Error Correction Codes for Non-Volatile Memories. New York: Springer, 2008, pp. 167–198. [27] S. Hachiya, K. Johguchi, K. Miyaji, and K. Takeuchi, “TLC/MLC NAND flash mix-and-match design with exchangeable storage array,” in Extended Abstracts 2013 Int. Conf. Solid State Devices Mater., Sep.
2013, pp. 894–895. [28] S.-H. Shin et al., “A new 3-bit programming algorithm using SLC-
to-TLC Migration for 8 MB/s high performance TLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. VLSI Circuits, Jun. 2012, pp. 132–133.

Senju Yamazaki (S'14) received the B.E. degree in electrical engineering and information systems in 2014 from Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan, where he is currently working toward the M.S. degree.
He has been engaged in research on low-power and high-speed phase change memory and reliability of NAND memory.
Tsukasa Tokutomi received the B.E. degree from Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan, in 2014, where he is currently working toward the M.S. degree.
He has been engaged in research on the reliability of NAND flash memory.

Shuhei Tanakamaru (S'09–M'14) received the B.E. degree in electronic engineering and the M.E. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and information systems in 2009, 2011 and 2014 from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, respectively.
He is currently a Visiting Researcher with the Research and Development Initiative, Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan. He has been engaged in a research on the low power DRAM, SRAM, and highly reliable solid-state storage system.
Yuta Kitamura received the B.E. degree from the Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan, in 2014.
At Chuo University, he had been engaged in SSDs that can achieve extremely long data-retention. He is currently working at ICT Company, Ishikawa, Japan.

Ken Takeuchi (M'01) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in applied physics and the Ph.D. degree in electric engineering from the University of Tokyo, Japan, in 1991, 1993 and 2006, respectively. In 2003, he also received the M.B.A. degree from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. He is currently a Professor at the Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Communication Engineering, Faculty of Science and Engineering of Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan. He is now working on the database storage system for big-data application, VLSI circuit design, signal processing, and devices such as the emerging non-volatile memories, 3D-integrated SSDs, low-power 3D-LSI circuits, and ultra low-voltage SRAMs. Since he joined Toshiba in 1993, he had been leading Toshiba's NAND flash memory circuit design for fourteen years. He was an Associate Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Graduate School of Engineering of the University of Tokyo from 2007 till 2012. In 2012, he joined Chuo University. He designed six world's highest density NAND flash memory products such as 0.7 m 16 Mbit, 0.4 m 64 Mbit, 0.25 m 256 Mbit, 0.16 m 1 Gbit, 0.13 m 2 Gbit, and 56 nm 8 Gbit NAND flash memories. He holds 220 patents worldwide including 120 U.S. patents. Especially with his invention, “multipage cell architecture,” presented at the Symposium on VLSI Circuits in 1997, he successfully commercialized world's first multi-level cell NAND flash memory in 2001. He has authored numerous technical papers, one of which won the Takuo Sugano Award for Outstanding Paper at ISSCC 2007. He has served on the program committee member of International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), Symposium on VLSI Circuits, Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference (A-SSCC), International Memory Workshop (IMW), and Non-Volatile Memory Technology Symposium (NVMTS). He served as a tutorial speaker at ISSCC 2008, SSD forum organizer at ISSCC 2009, 3D-LSI forum organizer at ISSCC 2010, Ultra-low voltage LSI forum organizer at ISSCC 2011, and Robust VLSI System forum organizer at ISSCC 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:15:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

