Implementing High Data Rate, Low Density Parity Check
(LDPC) Decoders for Large Codes using FPGAs
John C. Porcello Senior Member IEEE,
President Blueprint Signal Processing, Inc. info@BlueprintSignalProcessing.com

Abstract— Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes offer remarkable error correction performance and therefore increase the design space for communication systems. When implementation complexity and latency are not system limitations, LDPC codes can offer near Shannon Limit performance by using large code lengths and a high number of iterations in the decoding process. Furthermore, there is a need for increasing data rates for LDPC decoding near the Shannon Limit. This paper considers High Data Rate FPGA implementation issues of LDPC Codes for large LDPC codes. The focus of this paper is on high data rate FPGA architectures based on the Sum-Product Algorithm that support decoding large LDPC codes in FPGAs. The paper begins with an overall discussion of issues surrounding decoding large LDPC codes in FPGAs, followed by a discussion of LDPC code processing complexity. Performance charts and design data are provided to support an implementation approach for high data rate, large LDPC codes and quantify required hardware resources. A discussion of trade space for LDPC code implementation based on FPGA resources is also provided. Finally, an example design is provided to illustrate the concepts discussed in the paper and provide insight into the challenging task of implementing high data rate, LDPC decoders for large codes in FPGAs.

SPA algorithm and implementation.
LDPC Decoders described in this paper are designed for both high data rate and large LDPC codes. This type of LDPC decoder applies to communications architectures with design requirements for both high data rate and substantial Bit Error Rate (BER) performance provided by large LDPC codes. For the purpose of this paper high data rate represents data rates above 1 Mbps and LDPC codes above 8K elements in the parity check matrix. Such applications are needed, for high data rate communication systems with low power and/or low bandwidth. In such applications, if substantial real-time signal processing resources are available then decoder size, decoder complexity and signal processing resources can be used to provide a solution space. This type of solution represents a design tradeoff by using real-time signal processing resources to meet performance requirements of high data rate and very low BER in a low power and/or low bandwidth communications system.
The real-time signal processing requirements are implemented using Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs). Scalable FPGA design data is provided in the following sections to support estimation of performance including required FPGA resources and throughput.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. OVERVIEW AND SCOPE ....................................................1 2. SUM PRODUCT ALGORITHM LDPC DECODERS .............1 3. HIGH DATA RATE SPA LDPC DECODER IN FPGAS......2 4. EXAMPLE LDPC DECODER DESIGN ...............................5 5. CONCLUSIONS ..................................................................7 REFERENCES ........................................................................7 BIOGRAPHY ..........................................................................7
1. OVERVIEW AND SCOPE
A previous paper [1] described design and implementation of Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes decoders using FPGAs. That paper described soft decision decoding using the Sum Product Algorithm (SPA) [2][3]. The references in section 6 cover LDPC coding and decoding, and discuss various choices for LDPC decoders including SPA implemented using Log Likelihood Ratio (LLR), the MinSum Algorithm, variants, and other algorithms. Similar to [1], the discussion in this paper is constrained to a basic

2. SUM PRODUCT ALGORITHM LDPC DECODERS
Soft decision LDPC Decoding based on the SPA was presented in reference [1]. Soft decision LDPC Decoding based on the SPA is presented in this section to provide a basis for the next section dealing with a scalable FPGA implementation of a high data rate decoder for large codes. The general notation and convention follows [2][4].
Given a parity check matrix H, a column vector x consists of bits and rows of H consists of the checks. The SPA has four simple steps operating on matrix H. The first step consists of initialization. The second step is a horizontal multiplication of non-zero row elements excluding the current element called the horizontal step and is denoted as a product of a sequence. The third step is a vertical multiplication of nonzero column elements called the vertical step and is also denoted as a product of a sequence. Finally, the fourth step is a decoding check to stop or continue the iterative decoding loop. The elements represent the check nodes and

978-1-4799-5380-6/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE

1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:12:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

bit nodes and imply storage within the FPGA(s) or external memory. Since the zero valued elements do not contribute to the decision values, when needed the Parity Check Matrix H as well as other matrices are stored with a row index value, column index value, and a numerical value at the matrix element. For the purpose in this paper all row weights and column weights are constant (a regular LDPC code). Therefore, the specific number of non-zero elements that
must be stored N Mem , to represent a given matrix is simply:

N Mem = wRow ⋅ N Row = wCol ⋅ N Col

(1)

where wRow is the row weight, N Row is the number of rows, wCol is the column weight, N Col is the number of columns.

3. HIGH DATA RATE SPA LDPC DECODER IN FPGAS
The design equations for high data rate, large LDPC decoders are very straightforward. The required maximum data rate and the code rate for the LDPC code establish the required decoding rate for the system throughput. The decoding rate determines the number of blocks which must be decoded per second. For LDPC decoding, the maximum number of iterations to either successfully decode the block or declare a decoding failure is used to set the limit on the decoding time on a per block basis.
Required decoding rate for the system is a function of the maximum data rate and the LDPC code rate. Given a
maximum data rate for a system of RDATA and an LDPC code that has a code rate RCODE _ RATE , the LDPC decoder
throughput RDECODER _ RATE is simply:

R = R R DECODER _ RATE

DATA CODE _ RATE

(2)

Equation 2, along with the LDPC code size and the number of iterations to decode or declare a decoding failure will determine the required decoding performance for the system. The required number of decoded blocks per second
RBLK _ RATE can be expressed as:

R = LRDPC BLK _ RATE

DECODER _ RATE BLK _ SIZE

(3)

where LDPCBLK _ SIZE is the selected LDPC block size.
Finally, the maximum number of iterations that the decoder will iterate before successfully decoding or declaring a
decoding failure, N MAX _ ITERATIONS , will set the required
amount of FPGA resources required for implementation. The real-time requirement for time per iteration (of the
previously described SPA decoding steps), t ITERATION , can
be expressed as:

1

t = R × N ITERATION

BLK _ RATE

MAX _ ITERATIONS

(4)

It is important to note that the value of t ITERATION represents
a single iteration cycle for the SPA decoder. Each of the decoder steps do not necessarily require an equal time slice
of t ITERATION to execute a specific step.

In order to provide design insight into high data rate LDPC decoders, Figure 1 provides a high data rate LDPC Iterative Decoder Design Nomograph. The design nomograph in Figure 1 covers LDPC code sizes from 8K to 64K and data rates above 1 Mbps. The procedure to use Figure 1 consists of selecting the Code Rate and Data Rate and reading the intersection of a line from these two points to the Decoder Rate axis. Next, the Decoder Rate and the LDPC Block Size set the LDPC Block Rate, read from the intersection of these axes. Finally, the LDPC Block Rate and the Maximum Number of Iterations to converge or declare a decoding failure set the Single Iteration Time. The Single Iteration Time axis in Figure 1 represents the real-time requirement
for the time per iteration, t ITERATION , defined in Equation 4.
The design nomograph in Figure 1 can be used for singlecarrier or multi-carrier systems such as OFDM.

At this point, the real-time throughput requirements have been defined for FPGA implementation. It should be noted here that LDPC decoder latency needs to be quantified. Maximum LDPC decoder latency requires consideration prior to implementation. Assuming the initialization step in
the SPA algorithm requires an execution time of tINIT and
the codeword estimate step requires an execution time
of tCHK then the maximum LDPC decoder latency tLATENCY
is expressed as follows:

( ) tLATENCY

= t + N INIT

MAX _ ITERATIONS

tH

+ tV

+ tCHK

(5)

where tH and tV represent the time to execute a horizontal
step and vertical step, respectively. Equation 5 also assumes

978-1-4799-5380-6/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
2
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:12:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-4799-5380-6/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
3
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:12:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

that the codeword estimate is executed in parallel with the next iteration and completes execution prior to the next iteration.
From an FPGA implementation perspective, the nature of LDPC decoding is iterative, based on a loop structure. FPGA implementation provides tremendous flexibility to implement the loop structure as a single closed loop (using minimum FPGA resources), a (single) completely unrolled loop structure (using maximum FPGA resources for a single thread) or a hybrid combination of these two structures to trade throughput for FPGA resource requirements. Additional increases in throughput above a (single) completely unrolled loop structure by a factor of N can be achieved using parallelism of N dedicated decoders. Such architectures include N parallel, independent hybrid loop structures, or N parallel, completely unrolled (maximum FPGA resources for N threads). The demand for high data rate and the use of large LDPC codes results in design choices for the latter types of these structures for FPGA implementation with the typical limitations to the design selection being available FPGA resources, cost, design complexity and schedule. For an SPA implementation in an FPGA, parallelism can be applied within the horizontal step, vertical step and codeword estimate step to further increase throughput. For the purpose in this paper, the real-time
requirement, t ITERATION , defined in equation 4 or
determined via the Single Iteration Time axis in Figure 1, along with the maximum FPGA clock rate determines the number of clock cycles available for execution. Therefore
t ITERATION and the FPGA clock rate for the design
determine the FPGA architecture for an iterative structure as well as an associated amount of FPGA resources for implementation.
Figure 1 provides design insight to illustrate the fact that for high data rate, large code LDPC decoders, the resulting
Single Iteration Time, t ITERATION , drives an FPGA
implementation using a completely unrolled loop structure. A very important point here is that an unrolled loop structure used for LDPC decoding results in significant dedicated FPGA resources. Furthermore, the required FPGA resources for high data rate, large code LDPC decoders increases by a factor directly proportional to the maximum number of iterations to converge or declare a decoding
failure, N MAX _ ITERATIONS , (refer to the Maximum Number
of Iterations axis in Figure 1).
From a practical implementation perspective, Figure 1 contains operating ranges from a small single FPGA system, through a single board multi-FPGA system, to a very large multi-board, multi-FPGA systems. Such a range is consistent with complex telecommunications systems. To put it simply,

a complete system level picture consistent with several orders of magnitude of data rates from 1 Mbps to 10Gbps would include several orders of magnitude of FPGA resources, cost and complexity. As system size and complexity increase, so does the amount of FPGA resources required for FPGA-to-FPGA and board-to-board communications overhead, but can be minimized with efficient use of Multi-Gigabit Transceivers (MGTs) and efficient COTS architectures such as OpenVPX (VITA 65).
An unrolled loop structure used for LDPC decoding may have the capability to time multiplex input at the block level therefore support a multichannel architecture, if the same LDPC code is used on each channel, or the LDPC decoder is LDPC code configurable in real-time. This can be a significant benefit to offset the substantial cost of such a system. This contrasts lower data rate decoders that decode smaller LDPC codes and have real-time requirements that allow FPGA implementation based on a single closed loop structure, but must complete all iterations to converge (or fail) before a new block (with the same LDPC code) can be processed.
Finally, with regard to power consumption a fully unrolled loop structure used for LDPC decoding has a minimum FPGA clock speed defined by the Single Iteration Time,
t ITERATION . For example, a Single Iteration Time of 0.1
microseconds (100 nSec) corresponds to a minimum clock speed of 10 MHz. This reflects the common trade in FPGA design and may represent a solution space to consider when power consumption is an important design requirement.
One method to determine total FPGA resource requirements for a fully unrolled loop structure used for LDPC decoding is to scale up a single iteration of an LDPC decoder design. FPGA resource requirements for each step in the decoder can be scaled as needed to provide a total estimate of resources. For an unrolled SPA LDPC decoder, the horizontal step and vertical step are scaled while the initialization step is instantiated once at the beginning and the decoding check (codeword estimate/loop control) is instantiated once at the end of the unrolled loop structure. A simple MUX structure may be used to send an intermediate stage output to the single decoding check at the end of the unrolled loop structure.
Given an unrolled SPA LDPC decoder implemented in this manner, the total FPGA resources are estimated based on the FPGA resources for one instance of the initialization FPGA resources, one instance of the decoding check FPGA
resources, N MAX _ ITERATIONS instances of the horizontal
step FPGA resources and N MAX _ ITERATIONS instances of the
vertical step FPGA resources. The FPGA resources required

978-1-4799-5380-6/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
4

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:12:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

for required for FPGA-to-FPGA and board-to-board communications overhead may be substantial, but will not be included in this estimate since it is ultimately architecture specific. FPGA resources for communication overhead should be added to the total FPGA resource estimate based on the selected FPGA type as well as the selected FPGA board architecture. Also note that this discussion does not include the use of off-chip memory external to the FPGA.

For the horizontal step and vertical steps in an unrolled SPA LDPC decoder, the FPGA resources required for implementation can be calculated on an FPGA resource type basis (DSP48 Slices, Block RAM, Logic) with the required number of FPGAs for system implementation based on the highest number of FPGAs found to implement a given
resource type, M F , for all resources. The number of
FPGAs, M F , required to implement a given resource type
can be expressed as:

MF

= ceil RIN

+

N × R MAX _ ITERATIONS

HV

K × K %UTIL

CHIP _ MAX

+ RDC

 (6)

where M F is the number of FPGAs required for implementation, RIN is the amount of a specific resource
type (DSP48 Slices, Block RAM, Logic) required for
implementing the initialization step, RHV is the amount of a
specific resource type (DSP48 Slices, Block RAM, Logic) required for implementing a single horizontal and a single
vertical step, RDC is the amount of a specific resource type
(DSP48 Slices, Block RAM, Logic) required for
implementing the decoder check, KCHIP _ MAX is the
maximum available resources for the selected FPGA and
K%UTIL is a utilization ratio greater than 0 and less than 1for
the design value of percent utilization for the given resource type. The ceil function is simply a function call to round up to the next largest integer value.
For example, if an initialization step requires 30 DSP48
Slices or RIN = 30, a single iteration of a horizontal and vertical step requires 60 DSP48 Slices or RHV = 60, N MAX _ ITERATIONS = 100, a decoder check step requires 40
DSP48 Slices or RDC = 30, and a Xilinx Viretx-7 XC7V485T is the selected FPGA Chip or KCHIP _ MAX =
2800 with a design value of 90% percent utilization or
K%UTIL = 0.90 for this resource type, then M F = ceil(
(30+60*100+40)/(2800*0.90)) = ceil(2.4) = 3. Likewise, a

similar calculation is done for Block RAM and Logic
resources. This yields a value of M F for each resource type. The maximum value of M F found represents the
required number of FPGAs to implement the unrolled SPA LDPC decoder.
4. EXAMPLE LDPC DECODER DESIGN
An example design is presented in this section to illustrate the concepts described in this paper. The example design is based on the single LDPC decoder design presented in [1].
A communications system has a maximum throughput requirement of 100 Mbps. The selected code is a Rate ½, LDPC Code with a code size of 64K. Figure 2 provides design insight using the nomograph to illustrate the impact of the required performance metrics of such a system. The design value for data rate and code rate yield a 200 Mbps Decoder Rate (depicted in the red circle in Figure 2). Using 64K for the LDPC Block Size in Figure 2 yields an LDPC Block Rate of just over 3000 Blocks/sec (3052 Blocks/sec, depicted in the blue circle). From simulation, a design value
of N MAX _ ITERATIONS = 30 is selected which yields a Single
Iteration Time, t ITERATION , approx. equal to 11 uSecs
(10.92 uSecs, depicted in the green circle in Figure 2). The LDPC SPA decoder is targeted for implementation using Xilinx Virtex-7 485T (XC7V485T) FPGAs, with a design value for an FPGA clock rate of the implementation equal to
400 MHz. The 10.92 uSecs for t ITERATION , along with a 400
MHz clock rate yields a hybrid combination FPGA architecture selection that consists of a dedicated initialization step, several dedicated stages of a rolled up loop structure to perform more than one iteration in the 10.92 uSec real-time requirement, followed by a dedicated
decoder check stage. As the value of t ITERATION decrease for
any given design, the implementation is forced to a fully unrolled SPA LDPC decoder which requires more FPGA resources. The same general design methodology is used similar to [1]. LDPC SPA type decoders are memory intensive and efficient changes to memory organization reduce cost and complexity. Equation 6 is used to estimate the FPGA resources for Logic, DSP48 Slices and Block
RAM based on the XC7V485T and K%UTIL = 0.925. Block
RAM is the dominant resource with DSP48 Slices slightly lower. Two architecture differences are implemented compared with [1]. First, a reduction in required memory is accomplished via a change in storage precision and SPA operation in the horizontal and vertical stages. Second, additional parallelism is required for the selected hybrid architecture to meet the 10.92 uSec real-time requirement.

978-1-4799-5380-6/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
5
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:12:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-4799-5380-6/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
6
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:12:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The result is five (5) horizontal and vertical stages per XC7V485T with another XC7V485T to implement the initialization logic and decoder check. The end design requires seven (7) Xilinx Virtex-7 485T (XC7V485T) FPGAs to implement this design. This approach yields a first order solution for FPGA implementation. Additional optimizations can be performed at the specific decoder step. The design example illustrates the importance optimizing the horizontal and vertical stages of the SPA LDPC Decoder since the number of iterations to converge has a large impact on required resources.
5. CONCLUSIONS
The increasing demand for bandwidth and the demand for superior error correction create a need for LDPC decoding at high data rates using large LDPC codes. This paper provided design and FPGA implementation data for such systems. The basis for LDPC decoding in this paper was the Sum Product Algorithm and the FPGA implementation of the SPA architecture discussed in [1]. It was shown that system level requirements for throughput, code rate and LDPC code size drive the real-time requirements for FPGA implementation. This metric was defined in this paper as the
Single Iteration Time t ITERATION . A design nomograph was
provided in Figure 1 to give insight into the various performance trades for high data rate, large LDPC code
decoder design. It was shown that the value of t ITERATION
for maximum data rate along with the value of the maximum FPGA clock speed determine the FPGA implementation architecture type (rolled up loop, hybrid loop, etc.). Furthermore, the selected FPGA implementation
architecture combined with the N MAX _ ITERATIONS required
to converge or declare a decoding failure for a specific LDPC code determines the total amount of FPGA resources required for implementation. An example design was provided in Section 4 to illustrate these concepts.
This paper has presented a scalable design approach to high data rate, large LDPC code decoder design and implementation in FPGAs. Equations and design data were provided in this paper to estimate required FPGA resources to implement high data rate, large LDPC code decoder design. The design data and equations provided in this paper can be used as a basis to implement LDPC decoders that can deliver high throughput, superior error correction capability and provide near Shannon limit performance.

REFERENCES
[1] Porcello, J., Designing and Implementing Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Decoders using FPGAs, 2014 Aerospace Conference, March 2014. [2] MacKay, D. J., and R. M. Neal, "Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes," Electron. Letter, Vol. 32, No. 18, 1996, pp. 1645-1646. [3] MacKay, D. J., "Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices," IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, Vol. 45, No.2, March 1999, pp. 399-431. [4] Moon, T. K., Error Control Coding-Mathematical Methods and Algorithms, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2005. [5] Richardson, T., Urbanke, R., Modern Control Theory, Cambridge University Press, New York, 2008. [6] Johnson, S., Iterative Error Correction: Turbo, LowDensity Parity-Check Code and Repeat-Accumulate Codes, Cambridge University Press, 2009. [7] Ryan, W. and Lin, S., Channel Codes: Classical and Modern, Cambridge University Press, New York, 2009. [8] Lin, S., and D. J. Costello, Error Control CodingFundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed., Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2004. [9] Gallager, R. G., Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1963. [10] Gallager, R. G., "Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," IRE Trans. Info. Theory, Vol. IT-8, January 1962, pp. 2128. [11] Sklar, B., Digital Communications Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2001. [12] Proakis, J. G., Salehi, M., Digital Communications, 5th Edition, McGraw Hill, Inc. New York, 2007. [13] Jiang, Y., A Practical Guide to Error-Control Coding Using MATLAB, Artech House, Norwood, MA, 2010.
BIOGRAPHY
John Porcello designs, develops and implements Digital Signal Processing (DSP) Algorithms in FPGAs for a wide range of applications including communications and radar. John is the President of Blueprint Signal Processing, Inc., (www.BlueprintSignalProcessing.com) a company that produces FPGA IP Cores for signal processing and mathematics. John is also a Senior Member of the IEEE (porcello@ieee.org).

978-1-4799-5380-6/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
7
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:12:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

