IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

327

Concatenated BCH and LDPC Coding Scheme With Iterative Decoding Algorithm for Flash Memory
Shin-Lin Shieh

Abstract—As adopting a very powerful error-correcting code gradually becomes a strategic demand for the endurance of nowadays flash memory, LDPC codes are recently proposed due to their outstanding error correcting capability. However, the error floor phenomenon of LDPC codes might not meet the extreme low error rate requirement of flash memory applications. Thus, concatenation of BCH and LDPC codes that strikes a balance between superb error correcting capability and low error floor becomes an alternative system structure. In this work, a modification of such concatenated coding system in Chen et al. [IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 980–983, May 2013] is proposed. Compared with the previous concatenated coding system via simulations, our design improves the error correcting capability in the waterfall region while keeps low error floor.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check code, BCH code, concatenated code, flash memory, error floor.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, demand on endurance of flash memory grows considerably due to new manufacture requirement [1], [2], thereby new technology to ensure data reliability of flash memory becomes a state-of-the-art research subject. Specifically, the implementation of single-level cell flash memory uses conventionally Bose-Chaydhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) codes to protect the integrity of data, but the same technique might not meet the error protection requirement of advanced multiplelevel cell flash memory. Thus, researchers begin to resort to more powerful error correcting codes such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [3], [4] to enhance the error correction capability of next generation flash memory.
LDPC codes have outstanding error correcting capability in the waterfall region. However, their error floor phenomenon [5] limits the usage of LDPC codes for flash memory applications that often require extremely low error rates. At this background, the concatenated coding system that combines BCH and LDPC codes was proposed as an alternative solution [6]. By identifying and excluding the dominant trapping sets, the error floor of the concatenated coding system improves and makes possible for its usage for flash memory. Yet, further investigation may be necessary to compensate the resultant performance degradation in the waterfall region caused by, e.g., the rate loss due to code concatenation.
In this work, we modify the outer iteration procedure between BCH and LDPC decoding in [6] and propose a new BCH code selection methodology. It is then shown by simulations that by selecting unequal length BCH codes, our new design
Manuscript received January 5, 2015; accepted January 11, 2015. Date of publication January 13, 2015; date of current version March 6, 2015. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was H. Saeedi.
The author is with the Department of Communication Engineering, National Taipei University, Taipei, 10478, Taiwan (e-mail: slshieh@mail.ntpu.edu.tw).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2015.2391260

Fig. 1. Concatenated coding system with β BCH and one LDPC encoders.
has better error correcting performance in the waterfall region, while retaining the low error floor as in [6].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the previous concatenated coding system and the iterative decoding algorithm associated with it. The proposed BCH code selection methodology is then presented in Section III. Simulation results are illustrated in Section IV. Section V concludes this work.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section, the concatenated coding system and the iterative decoding algorithm proposed in [6] are briefed. As shown in Fig. 1, the concatenated coding system partitions the information bits into β groups of equal size, i.e., K1 = K2 = · · · = Kβ, where Kj denotes the size of the jth group. Each group is encoded by its respective BCH encoder and β BCH codewords of equal length, i.e., N1 = N2 = · · · = Nβ, are generated, where Nj is the length of the jth BCH codeword. Then, the β BCH codewords are aggregated to form an LDPC input of length KLDPC = N1 + N2 + · · · + Nβ, which is subsequently fed into an LDPC encoder to output an LDPC codeword of length NLDPC.
The selection of BCH codes in [6] focuses on the elimination of dominant trapping set [5] of the adopted LDPC code. By choosing a BCH error correcting capability t no less than the number of variable nodes in the dominant trapping set, the error floor of the concatenated coding system can be considerably improved.
The iterative decoding of concatenated coding system in [6] starts with the decoding of β BCH codes and ends immediately if all β BCH decodings output valid codewords. In case any of the β BCH decoders fails to produce valid codewords, the LDPC decoding proceeds after the bit reliabilities explained below in Eq. (1) are refined. The output of the LDPC decoder are then sent back for the next round of BCH decoding.
In [6], the authors term the iteration between the BCH and LDPC decoding as the outer iteration in contrast to the inner iteration inside the LDPC decoder. As expected, the decoding of the concatenated coding system is successful when all β BCH code blocks are successfully decoded to valid codewords. On the other hand, decoding failure is declared when the predefined maximal number of outer iterations is achieved before the previous situation can be fulfilled [6].

1089-7798 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/imwiwtewd.itoee: eY.oonrgs/epiuUbnliivc.atDioonwsn_lsotaadneddarodns/Jpuunbeli2ca4t,i2o0n2s6/raigt h1t7s:/1in1d:4e3x.UhtTmCl ffroormmIEoEreEinXfpolromrea.tiRone.strictions apply.

328

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

The most famous LDPC decoding algorithm is the min-sum
algorithm (MSA) [4]. Denote by yi the ith noise-contaminated reliability of the LDPC codeword at the receiver end. Let vi and M(i) be the ith symbol node and the set of check nodes
connecting to vi, respectively. Similarly, let c j and N( j) be the jth check node and the set of symbol nodes connecting to c j, respectively. We use Ri to denote the reliability of the ith readout bit from flash memory, Li, j the extrinsic information passing from symbol node vi to check node c j, and Ei, j the extrinsic information passing from check node c j to symbol node vi. For better understanding, the modified MSA suitable for concate-
nated decoding in [6] and our work is described below.

Step 1. Initialization: For all i and j, initialize Ei, j = 0. For all i, assign the value of Ri as

Ri =Δ

2(1 − 2dˆi)/σ2, 2yi/σ2,

if i ∈ S if i ∈ S

(1)

where dˆ = [dˆ1, dˆ2, dˆ3, . . .] is the hard output from the previous BCH decoding, σ2 stands for the noise variance, and S denotes the set of all bits with successful
BCH decoding.
Step 2. Bit to Check Message Update: For all i, and for j ∈ M(i) for the given i, assign

Li, j =

Ri, Σ j ∈M(i), j = jEi, j + Ri,

if i ∈ S if i ∈ S

Step 3. Check to Bit Message Update: For all i, and for i ∈ N( j) for the given j, assign

Ei, j = αsi, j min |Li, j|
i ∈N( j),i =i

where α is a normalization scale, and

∏ si, j =

sgn(Li, j)

i ∈N( j),i =i

and sgn(·) is the sign function. Step 4. Hard Decision: Assign Di according to

Di =

Ri, ∑ j∈M(i) Ei, j + Ri,

if i ∈ S if i ∈ S

and determine the hard decision

Fig. 2. Undetected error rates of BCH codes for various n and t.
if Bi = β and Bi > Bi−1, where initially we set B0 = −∞. Notably, the former condition checks if all BCH code blocks are successfully decoded, while the latter condition examines whether there are possibly new reliability bits that could benefit the LDPC decoding in the next round.

III. MODIFIED BCH CODE SELECTION FOR CONCATENATED CODING SYSTEM

The reliability saturation to ∞ as a result of successful BCH decoding is made based on the assumption that all successful BCH decoded blocks are trustworthy. As such, the BCH codes to be selected should provide adequately low undetected error rate (UER) and therefore undetect errors that could jeopardize the data integrity of the concatenated coding system becomes a rare event. Along this observation, we proceed to analyze the UER under the assumption that the UER can be well approximated using binomial-like weight distribution. Specifically, the UER, Pud, of a length-nt-error-correcting BCH code transmitted over a binary symmetric channel (BSC) with crossover probability ε can be approximated by [7]:

∑ ∑ Pud(n,t, ε)

t
2−t· log2 n

n

n

n εh(1 − ε)n−h.

s=0 s h=t+1 h

(2)

zˆi =

1, 0,

if Di ≤ 0 if Di > 0

If HzˆT = 0, where H is the parity-check matrix of the LDPC code, stop the algorithm and output zˆ as the decoded result; else, go to Step 1 unless the number of iterations reaches the maximal allowable value.

We then plot (2) in Fig. 2 for three BCH codeword lengths (n = 2000, 4000, 8000) and three error correcting capabilities (t = 10, 14, 18) when ε ranges from 10−2 to 10−3. For flash memory, the required error rate is usually as low as 10−12[2]. Thus, different from the code selection scheme proposed in [6], where the reduction of error floor is the main concern, we choose an adequately large t = 18 such that the effect of UER

In this work, instead of setting a maximal number of outer to the entire concatenated coding system can be neglected.

iterations allowable [6], we continue the outer iterations when- We next propose a novel BCH code selection scheme, which

ever more BCH decoding blocks can possibly be decoded results in βunequal length BCH code blocks as contrast to the

successfully in comparison with that from the previous outer equal length BCH code blocks adopted in [6]. The proposed

iteration. Specifically, the first outer iteration starts from β BCH BCH code selection is a function of both BCH block error rate

decoding attempts and the number of successful BCH decoding (BLER) and the residual bit error rate of the LDPC decoding.

blocks is recorded as B1, where Bi stands for the number of successful BCH decoding blocks after the ith outer iteration.
Afterwards, the bit reliabilities of those Bi successful BCH code blocks are set to ∞, which represents the fully trust of those bits so that later LDPC decoding never changes the hard decision
of those bits. The LDPC decoding is performed subsequently

By following (2), the BLER PB for length-nt-error-

correcting BCH code can be approximated as PB(n,t, ε) ≈ 1 −

∑ts=0

n s

εs(1 − ε)n−s, which obviously increases as n large. The

maximal allowable code length nmax for a given target BLER

Pt then satisfies nmax = max{n : PB(n,t, ε) ≤ Pt}. Exemplified

nmax for t = 18 and Pt = 0.1, 0.05, 0.025 can be found in Fig. 3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:11:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHIEH: BCH AND LDPC CODING SCHEME WITH ITERATIVE DECODING ALGORITHM FOR FLASH MEMORY

329

Fig. 3. Maximal allowable codeword length of BCH code for t = 18 with target BLER 0.1, 0.05 and 0.025.

Fig. 5. BLER performance of BCH, LDPC and concatenated coding systems with column weight 3 LDPC codes. The overall code rate for all curves, except for BCH t = 208 and BCH t = 187 curves, are around 0.9 with the codeword length about 18480.

Fig. 4. BER, BLER and residual BER for (18480, 17472) LDPC code under AWGN whose signal-to-noise ratio corresponds to a BSC with crossover probability 0.01.
By selecting the BCH codeword length smaller than nmax, the BLER is guaranteed to be lower than the target BLER Pt.
Now we turn to the examination of LDPC decoding performance with reliability saturation in (1) in Fig. 4. The LDPC codeword length adopted is 18480. We randomly saturated from 0 up to 5000 reliability bits and fed them into the LDPC decoder. The resultant BER and BLER, as well as the residual BER of the unsuccessful LDPC decoding, defined as the BER calculated only for those unsuccessful LDPC decoding trials, are illustrated. The residual BER of unsuccessful LDPC decoding in Fig. 4 can serve as a crossover probability of the BCH decoding in the next outer iteration. For completeness, the median, the 70 and the 90 percentile of the residual BER are all shown. It can then be observed that all of BER, BLER and residual BER decrease as the number of saturation bits increases.
With the help of Figs. 3 and 4, we are ready to present our BCH code selection based on, for example, “Target BLER=0.05” curve in Fig. 3 and 90%-tile curve in Fig. 4. In the first outer iteration, the worse situation is that all β BCH decoding attempts fail so that B1 = 0. As observed from Fig. 4, the 90%-tile residual BER corresponding to no saturation reliability bits is 6 × 10−3. This 90%-tile residual BER then points

Fig. 6. BLER performance of BCH, LDPC and concatenated coding systems with column weight 4 LDPC codes except that one dash line shows the performance of column weight 6 LDPC for comparison.
to the BCH codeword length of N1 = 2000 in Fig. 3, which guarantees that the probability of no successful BCH decoding in the second outer iteration (i.e., B2 = 0) is smaller than 0.05. Next, we presume that N1 bits from BCH code decoding are optimistically saturated before the LDPC decoding in the second outer iteration. Thus the 90%-tile residual BER reduces to 5 × 10−3 as indicated from Fig. 4. This implies that the second BCH codeword length should be chosen as N2 = 2400 from Fig. 3. We proceed to assume that N1 + N2 = 4400 bits are trustworthy after the BCH decoding in the third outer iteration, which makes the 90%-tile residual BER after the LDPC decoding decreases to 2 × 10−3. By repeating this process, another two BCH codeword lengths are identified as N3 = 5800 and N4 = 7272.
We end this section by two notes. First, the BCH codeword lengths can be increased or decreased simultaneously by adjusting either the target BLER (cf. Fig. 3) or the percentile number of the residual BER (cf. Fig. 4) so that N1 ≤ N2 ≤ · · · ≤ Nβ is satisfied. Secondly, although unequal lengths are used as contrast to [6], it is possible to have one BCH hardware implementation for all β BCH codes by choosing one mother BCH code and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:11:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

330

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

TABLE I AVERAGE NUMBERS AND PROBABILITIES OF THE NUMBER OF DECODING ROUNDS FOR DIFFERENT RAW BERS

performing shortening [4] for all BCH codes. Therefore, the decoding hardware and complexity are similar for both equal length and unequal length concatenated coding systems.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
To verify the performance of our concatenated coding system, simulations are performed and recorded in Figs. 5 and 6. All LDPC codes to be compared with in this simulation are constructed based on the minimum-weight codewords of an Reed-Solomon code with two information symbols [8]. The column weights are 3 and 4, respectively, in Figs. 5 and 6.
The concatenated coding system in Fig. 5 is formed with rate-0.95 BCH codes and rate-0.95 LDPC code such that the overall code rate is around 0.9. Both equal-length BCH codes with Ni = 4368 for i = 1, 2, 3, 4 and unequal-length BCH codes with [N1, N2, N3, N4] = [2000, 2400, 5800, 7272] are examined. We then have the following observations. First, we observe from Fig. 5 that the rate-0.9 LDPC code has an early error floor around BLER = 10−5, while the single rate-0.9 BCH code (t = 123) suffers from a huge performance degradation in the waterfall region. However, the two concatenated coding systems respectively with equal-length and unequal-length BCH codes show no error floors in Fig. 5. When the two concatenated coding systems are compared with each other, Fig. 5 indicates that our design alleviates considerably the performance degradation due to concatenation rate-loss in the waterfall region. In particular, the concatenated coding system with equal-length BCH codes has similar performance to t = 187 BCH code, while our unequal-length modification enhances the concatenated coding system to equivalently t = 208 BCH code.
The decoding complexity measured by the number of decoding rounds for different raw BERs for the proposed concatenated coding system is also recorded in Table I. It can be observed from this table that when the raw BER is lower than 10−3 as often happening at the initial use of a flash memory, the BCH decoding is sufficient to correct all errors. As the number of raw error increases, more BCH and LDPC decodings are required; however, the average numbers of BCH and LDPC decoding for raw BER less than 10−2 only increase mildly. This substantiates the practicality of the concatenated coding system for flash memory application.
Next, higher column weight 4 LDPC codes are examined in Fig. 6. It is suggested in [9] that column-weight-4 LDPC may not meet the extreme error floor requirement of the flash

applications so that error floor improvement techniques such as column weight increasing or concatenated coding should be applied. We examine the concatenated coding systems formed by a rate-0.926 LDPC code concatenated with rate-0.973 BCH codes and similar observation as in Fig. 5 can be concluded. Also shown for comparison in Fig. 5 is the performance of the column-weight-6 LDPC with extreme low error floor [9]. Comparing the performance in the waterfall region as well as considering the large LDPC decoding complexity increase as the column weight increases from 4 to 6, we conclude that our design remains a promising solution for the flash application.
V. CONCLUSION
In this work, concatenation of BCH and LDPC codes is shown to potentially provide both good error correcting capability in the waterfall region and low error rate in the floor region. Along this research direction, a new BCH code selection scheme is proposed. Unlike the equal-length BCH code selection scheme, our proposal selects unequal-length BCH codes for the concatenation coding system. Simulations indicate our new design exhibits better error correcting capability in the waterfall region while maintains low error floor.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Yaakobi et al., “Error characterization and coding schemes for flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE GC Wkshps, Dec. 2010, pp. 1856–1860.
[2] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Error patterns in MLC NAND flash memory: Measurement, characterization, analysis,” in Proc. Des., Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib., Mar. 2012, pp. 521–526.
[3] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density pairty-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[4] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[5] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[6] P. H. Chen, J. J. Weng, C. H. Wang, and P. N. Chen, “BCH code selection and iterative decoding for BCH and LDPC concatenated coding system,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 980–983, May 2013.
[7] M. G. Kim and J. H. Lee, “Undetected error probabilities of binary primitive BCH codes for both error correction and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 575–580, May 1996.
[8] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of low-density parity-check codes constructed based on reed-solmon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[9] J. Li, K. Liu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Decoding of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with section-wise cyclic structure,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 9–14, 2014, pp. 1–10.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:11:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

