IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

323

On Characterization and Efficient Exhaustive Search of Elementary Trapping Sets of Variable-Regular LDPC Codes
Yoones Hashemi, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Recently, Karimi and Banihashemi demonstrated that a large majority of the elementary trapping set (ETS) structures of variable-regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are layered supersets (LSS) of short cycles. The LSS property corresponds to a simple search algorithm that can find all ETSs with LSS structure starting from short cycles in a guaranteed fashion. In this letter, we complement this characterization by demonstrating that the remaining structures of ETSs, that are not LSS of short cycles, are all LSS of a small number of other graphical structures within the Tanner graph of the code, and thus can also be found efficiently. This together with the results of Karimi and Banihashemi provides a simple search algorithm that can find all the (a, b) ETSs of any variable-regular LDPC code for any size a and any number of unsatisfied check nodes b in a guaranteed fashion.
Index Terms—Characterization of elementary trapping sets, elementary trapping sets, absorbing sets, error floor, exhaustive search of trapping sets, left-regular LDPC codes, variableregular LDPC codes, layered superset (LSS) property, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, short cycles, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
I T is well-known that the error floor of low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes is caused by iterative decoders getting trapped in certain graphical structures of the code’s Tanner graph, commonly referred to as trapping sets. In particular, the most problematic structures are known to be the elementary trapping sets (ETS) whose induced subgraphs contain only degree-1 and degree-2 check nodes. The characterization of ETSs and efficient search algorithms to find them are thus of great interest. Recently, Karimi and Banihashemi [1] studied the graphical structure of ETSs for variable-regular LDPC codes, and demonstrated that a vast majority of the nonisomorphic structures of ETSs are layered supersets (LSS) of
short cycles, i.e., each structure S corresponds to a sequence
of ETS structures that starts from a short cycle and grows one
variable node at a time to reach S . In particular, for variable-
regular Tanner graphs with variable degrees dv = 3, 4, 5, and 6, and girths g = 6 and 8, tables are provided in [1] that show the LSS properties of different non-isomorphic structures for different (a, b) classes of ETSs, for a, b < 10, where a is the size of the ETS and b is the number of odd-degree (unsatisfied) check nodes in the subgraph induced by the trapping set. Probably, the most significant consequence of this characterization is that it corresponds to an efficient search algorithm that starts from the

short cycles of the graph and can find all the ETSs with the LSS property in a guaranteed fashion. The shortcoming, however, is that some of the (a, b) ETS structures (within the range a, b < 10) do not lend themselves to the above characterization, i.e., they are not LSSs of any of their cycle subsets. These structures are labeled as “NA” in [1]. For example, for variableregular LDPC codes with dv = 4 and g = 6, there are a total of 178 non-isomorphic NA structures within the range a, b < 10. This implies that these structures cannot be found efficiently by using the LSS-based search algorithm of [1] if one initiates the search by a set of cycles in the graph (no matter how large the maximum length of the cycles in the set is).
In this letter, we complement the results of [1]: by careful examination of NA structures, we demonstrate that they are all LSSs of some basic graphical structures which are only slightly more complex than cycles. We call these basic structures prime with respect to the LSS property, or “LSS-prime” in brief, implying that they are not layered supersets of smaller ETSs. (By this definition, we include cycles that are not LSS of any of their subsets in the set of LSS-prime structures.) We show that for variable degrees dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, girths g = 6, 8, and (a, b) classes with a, b < 10, the non-cycle LSS-prime structures are all composed of two short cycles, and they all fit into one of the following two categories: (i) The two cycles share either a variable node or a number of variable and check nodes (and their connecting edges), (ii) the two cycles are connected by a chain (of interleaving check and variable nodes).1 For example, for the case of dv = 4 and g = 6, all the 178 NA structures appear to be LSSs of only 7 non-cycle LSS-prime structures. An important consequence of this discovery is that, by including the non-cycle LSS-prime structures of a Tanner graph in the initial set (along with short cycles), the simple LSS-based search algorithm can find all the (a, b) ETSs (with a, b < 10) of the graph in a guaranteed fashion.2 This provides significant complexity improvement over the existing exhaustive search techniques. Such techniques are mainly limited to structured codes, see, e.g., [2], or to short codes and small values of a and b, see, e.g., [3].
II. LSS-PRIME ETS STRUCTURES
Since cycles play an important role in the discussions of this letter, we start by formally defining a cycle of length n as a sequence of nodes and edges v1, e1, v2, e2, . . . , en, vn+1, in which

Manuscript received October 18, 2014; revised December 23, 2014; accepted January 7, 2015. Date of publication January 12, 2015; date of current version March 6, 2015. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was E. Paolini.
The authors are with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: yooneshashemitoroghi@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2015.2390648

1The constraints imposed on dv, g as well as on a and b values are to follow those of [1]. Our results can be extended to larger values for these parameters. Covering larger values of a and b, however, requires a larger number of more complex non-cycle LSS-prime structures.
2The guaranteed property or exhaustiveness of the search is a direct consequence of the fact that all non-isomorphic structures for every (a, b) class of ETSs are examined for their LSS properties, as described above.

1089-7798 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/imwiwtewd.itoee: eY.oonrgs/epiuUbnliivc.atDioonwsn_lsotaadneddarodns/Jpuunbeli2ca4t,i2o0n2s6/raigt h1t7s:/0in9d:5e3x.UhtTmCl ffroormmIEoEreEinXfpolromrea.tiRone.strictions apply.

324
TABLE I MULTIPLICITY OF NON-ISOMORPHIC STRUCTURES FOR DIFFERENT (a, b) ETS AND EAS CLASSES OF VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 3,
4, 5 AND g = 6, WHICH ARE REPORTED AS “NA” IN [1]

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MARCH 2015
TABLE II LSS PROPERTIES OF NA STRUCTURES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR
GRAPHS WITH dv = 3 AND g = 6

the edge ei connects the nodes vi and vi+1, for i = 1, . . . , n, and all the edges and nodes are distinct except v1 and vn+1 that are identical. In a Tanner graph, all cycles have even length. The

length of the shortest cycle is called the girth, and is denoted

by g. Similar to [1], we use an alternate graph representation

of ETSs, called a normal graph, which is obtained from the

induced subgraph of the ETS by removing all the check nodes

of degree one and their incident edges from the subgraph and

by replacing all the degree-2 check nodes and their two incident

edges by a single edge. In the rest of the letter, following [1],

we focus on ETSs in which each variable node is connected to

at least two degree-2 check nodes, and consider both ETSs and

ETSs that are also absorbing sets. The latter sets are defined

as ETSs in which each variable node is connected to a larger

number of degree-2 check nodes than it is to degree-1 check

nodes. We use the abbreviation “EAS” for these sets.

We note that if an ETS S of size a is an LSS of one of its elementary trapping subsets S of size a , then S can be efficiently found in a Tanner graph starting from S using a −

a successive applications of the following LSS-based search

algorithm: add to the input ETS Sin any variable node that has
at least two connections to the set of degree-1 check nodes in
Sin and no connection to degree-2 check nodes in Sin.
For variable-regular graphs with dv = 3,4,5, and g = 6, the multiplicity of non-isomorphic structures of (a, b) ETSs and

Fig. 1. Normal graphs of all possible non-isomorphic structures of the class of (8, 6) ETSs within variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 8.

EASs which are reported as “NA” in [1] are listed in Table I.

(Note that for dv = 3, ETSs are the same as EASs.) There is no NA structure for variable-regular graphs with dv = 6 and g = 6 or with dv = 4,5,6 and g = 8 in the range of a, b < 10. For variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 8, based on

Fig. 2. Normal graph of the only structure of the class of (9, 5) ETSs within variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 8.

Table II of [1], there are only 2, 1 and 3 non-isomorphic NA Example 2: Fig. 2 shows the only NA structure of (9, 5) ETS

structures for (8, 6), (9, 5) and (9, 7), ETS classes, respectively. class for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 8. It is easy These structures are clearly a subset of NA structures for graphs to see that this structure is an LSS of the (8, 6) ETS structure

with dv = 3 and g = 6.

shown in Fig. 1(f). The structure of Fig. 2 is thus not LSS-prime.

Example 1: In Fig. 1, we have shown the normal graph It can however be found efficiently in a Tanner graph by a one-

representation of all the possible non-isomorphic structures of level expansion of the LSS-prime structure of Fig. 1(f) using

the (8, 6) ETS class for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and the LSS-based search algorithm. g = 8. One can see that the two structures in Fig. 1(a), (b) are We carefully examine the graphical structure of all the ETS

LSSs of a cycle of length g+6 = 14. The structures in Fig. 1(c), structures that are not LSSs of any cycles and are thus identified

(d) are cycles of length g + 8 = 16, and thus by definition, are by “NA” in [1]. (The total number of NA structures for dv = 3, LSSs of a cycle of length 16. In fact, Fig. 1(c) and (d) are exam- 4, 5, 6, g = 6, 8, and a, b < 10 is 51 + 178 + 23 = 252.) Our

ples of LSS-prime structures that are cycles. Structures in goal is to investigate the LSS properties of these structures. In

Fig. 1(e) and (f), however, are neither LSSs of a cycle nor LSS- particular, we are interested in stripping down each structure

prime cycles. They are both examples of non-cycle LSS-prime to its non-cycle LSS-prime elementary subset. We start by NA

structures.

structures of variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:09:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: SEARCH OF ELEMENTARY TRAPPING SETS OF VARIABLE-REGULAR LDPC CODES

325

TABLE III LSS PROPERTIES OF NA STRUCTURES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR
GRAPHS WITH dv = 3 AND g = 8

Fig. 3. Normal graphs of all the non-isomorphic LSS-prime ETS structures of size 6, 7, and 8 within variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6.

Fig. 5. Normal graphs of 3 non-isomorphic LSS-prime ETS structures within variable-regular graphs with dv = 4 and g = 6.

TABLE IV LSS PROPERTIES OF NA STRUCTURES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR
GRAPHS WITH dv = 4 AND g = 6

Fig. 4. Normal graphs of all the non-isomorphic LSS-prime ETS structures of size 9 within variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6.

first column of Table I shows that there are 51 such structures.

The normal graphs for LSS-prime elementary trapping subsets

of these 51 structures are shown in Figs. 3 and 4. Fig. 3 contains

the subsets of size 6, 7, and 8. Size-9 subsets are presented in Fig. 4. We use the notation pak for a non-cycle LSS-prime
structure S , where a is the number of variable nodes in S ,
and k is a non-negative integer index that distinguishes among
different non-isomorphic structures with the same a value. For
example, the two LSS-prime structures with 7 variable nodes in Fig. 3 are denoted by p71 and p72.
It can be seen that all the 19 structures in Figs. 3 and 4
are composed of two cycles, each with maximum length 14.

LSSs of p71, two are LSSs of p27 and one is an LSS of p81. (In fact, the last structure is p81, itself.)
Examining the 178 NA structures of variable-regular graphs
with dv = 4 and g = 6 (second column of Table I), we find out
that they are all LSSs of only 7 non-cycle LSS-prime structures.
Four of these structures have normal graphs already included in the structures of Fig. 3(a)–(d): {p61, p71, p27, p81}. (One should however, note that the fact that the variable degree in this case is

Starting from all the ETSs with these 19 structures in a Tanner 4 rather than 3 means that the same normal graph represents a

graph, the LSS-based search algorithm will find all the ETSs
with the 51 NA structures for variable-regular graphs with
dv = 3 and g = 6 listed in Table I. For variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 8, there are
five non-cycle LSS-prime structures, whose normal graphs are also included in Figs. 3 and 4:{p58, p86, p49, p99, p190}. In Tables II and III, we have listed the LSS-prime elementary subsets of NA

different ETS structure compared to the case of dv = 3.) The normal graphs of the other three structures are presented in
Fig. 5. In Table IV, we have listed the LSS-prime elementary
subsets of NA structures of both ETSs and EASs for variableregular graphs with dv = 4 and g = 6.
For variable-regular graphs with dv = 5 and g = 6, the 23 NA structures listed in Table I appear to be LSSs of only two

structures for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3, and g = 6, LSS-prime structures. These structures have the same normal and g = 8, respectively. For example, the entry corresponding graph as p16 and p51 in Figs. 3(a) and 5(a), respectively. The LSS to a = 8 and b = 4 in Table II indicates that there are a total of structure of the 23 NA structures in relation to these two LSS-

5 NA structures in the class of (8, 4) ETSs, from which, two are prime structures is presented in Table V. There is only one EAS

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:09:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

326
TABLE V LSS PROPERTIES OF NA STRUCTURES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR
GRAPHS WITH dv = 5 AND g = 6

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MARCH 2015
TABLE VII COMPARISON OF THE TANNER CODE’S ETS RESULTS
BY THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM, [2], AND [3]

TABLE VI ELEMENTARY TRAPPING SETS OF THE (155, 64) TANNER CODE

In [2], Zhang and Schlegel reported the multiplicity of ETSs of the Tanner code for some of the (a, b) classes with a ≤ 8.

These results are listed in Table VII for comparison. As can

be seen, the results of [2] match ours except for the class of

(8, 6) ETSs. Examining the discrepancy in multiplicities for

this class, we think that the ETSs with structures in Fig. 1(a)

and (f) may not have been accounted for in [2]. The number of

such ETSs is 22 320 and 10 230, respectively. We also notice

that the results of [2] are obtained in about an hour using a

2.4 GHz CPU [2]. In comparison, our results are obtained on

a desktop computer with a similar CPU in about 35 minutes

structure in Table V for the class of (9, 9) trapping sets. The result of Table V implies that starting from p15, four successive applications of the LSS-based search algorithm will find this
NA structure.

(it took the LSS-based search algorithm only 4 minutes to find
the results reported in [2]). The 35 minutes includes the time
to enumerate all the inputs to the LSS-based search algorithm (cycles of length 8 to 18 and ETSs with structures p85 and p86). To enumerate cycles, an exhaustive brute-force search is used

[4]. Note that the time reported here can be further reduced if

III. NUMERICAL RESULTS

Based on the results of this work, we have applied the LSS-

based search algorithm to find all the (a, b) ETSs (including NA

structures) of a variety of random and structured LDPC codes

for a wide range of a and b values efficiently and in a guaranteed fashion.3 In the following, we only provide our results for the

widely studied (155, 64) Tanner code [5]. This code has dv = 3
and g = 8. Starting from the cycles of length 8 to 18 and LSS-prime structures p85 and p86, we obtain the ETSs listed in Table VI. Our results and those of [1] guarantee that all the

ETSs within the classes listed in Table VI have been found.

The ETSs that are LSSs of cycles of length are shown by LSS

in Table LSSs of

VI, while the the non-cycle

LnSoSta-tpiorinmLeSsStrpukacitsuruesepdka

for those that are . The symbol “−”

in the table means it is not possible to have such an ETS class

for a variable-regular LDPC graph with dv = 3 and g = 8.

3Based on the complexity discussions in [1] and [4], it can be seen that the complexity of the proposed search algorithm, including the task of finding the input structures to the LSS-based search algorithm, increases effectively linearly with the block length. This implies that block lengths of a few thousand can be easily handled on a regular desktop computer.

one takes advantage of the quasi-cyclic structure of the code. Using an exhaustive search technique, Kyung and Wang [3]
enumerated the fully absorbing sets of the Tanner code. Their results are also listed in Table VII for comparison. As can be seen, the reported results in [3] match our results for ETSs that are also fully absorbing sets. It is worth mentioning that the exhaustive search of [3] took more than 5 hours to generate the fully absorbing sets of this code on a desktop computer with an Intel Core2 2.4 GHz CPU with 2 GB memory [3].
REFERENCES
[1] M. Karimi and A. Banihashemi, “On characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5188–5203, Sep. 2014.
[2] S. Zhang and C. Schlegel, “Controlling the error floor in LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 3566–3575, Sep. 2013.
[3] G. B. Kyung and C.-C. Wang, “Finding the exhaustive list of small fully absorbing sets and designing the corresponding low error-floor decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1487–1498, Jun. 2012.
[4] M. Karimi and A. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
[5] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Commun. Theory Appl., Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001, pp. 365–370.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:09:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

