2022 International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing (IWCMC) | 978-1-6654-6749-0/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IWCMC55113.2022.9824284

Check-ratio-aided Layer-based Rescaling ANMSA and Its Application for 5G-NR LDPC Codes
Ziqi Zhou1, Kewu Peng2 and Zhitong He3 Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Electronic Engineering Department,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 2Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China Email: 1zhouzq19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, 2pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn, 3hezt20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract—As a kind of iterative decoding algorithms based on belief propagation (BP), sum-product algorithm (SPA) is capacity-approaching but scale-variant. Currently, however, excellent performance and great stability are still incompatible for min-sum algorithm (MSA) and its improvements. To remedy above problems, we firstly introduce the concept of rescaling, and disclose the causes of the performance loss of MSA. Then introduce the asymptotic optimal decoding algorithm, as well as the suboptimal one. Finally, a more practicable algorithm is proposed, called check-ratio-aided layer-based rescaling adaptive normalized MSA (CL-RANMSA). Compared with the first two algorithms, CL-RANMSA is both capacity-approaching and characteristically robust. In particular, the practicably optimal factors for base graph 2 in 5G new radio low-density parity check (5G-NR LDPC) codes are provided. Simulations are also carried out whose results depict its scale-invariance and excellent performance.
Index Terms—5G new radio, low-density parity check codes, belief propagation, multi-edge-type density evolution, practically asymptotic optimal factor, rescaling adaptive normalization minsum algorithm
I. INTRODUCTION
The 3rd generation partnership project (3GPP) adopted low density parity check (LDPC) code as a candidate channel coding scheme in 5th generation new radio (5G-NR) usage scenarios. LDPC once seemed to be a prohibitive coding method for the past half century [1], but it has been playing a role in the emerging information and communication technologies (ICTs) [2]. In turn, it also claims an effective decoding algorithm.
Sum-product algorithm (SPA), an iterative decoding algorithm based on belief propagation (BP) [1], could achieve a capacity-approaching performance. But when adopted in practice, it would be prohibitive due to its high complexity and scale-variance. There are two main simplifications based on BP, min-sum algorithm (MSA) and adjusted min-sum algorithm (AdjMSA) [3], [4]. However, AdjMSA still remains scale-variant due to the inherent tanh operations, while MSA is scale-invariant, complexity-reduced but performance degraded.
To remedy the performance degradation, normalized minsum algorithm and adaptive normalized min-sum algorithm were proposed subsequently [5]–[7]. The core purpose of normalization is to tune the output value of MSA so that it could be similar to the counterpart of SPA. In other words, those algorithms endeavor to combine the operation of MSA with

the approximate output value of SPA. They could be excellent in terms of performance when employed in traditional LDPC codes, but fail to ensure the performance and robustness at the same time if multi-edge-type (MET) LDPC codes get involved, such as 5G-NR LDPC.
In MSA, the replacement of the tanh operations by minimalization can cause changes in the output values of row operation [5]. And as a result, if we calculate the likelihood ratio (LLR) based on the horizontal output, it will be unequal to the output value. In other words, the output won t be real likelihood ratio any more. Due to the deviation, the belief can t be propagated correctly in the following iteration, and the MSA should hardly be regarded as a kind of BP.
For this reason, the concept of rescaling is proposed. Its ultimate aim is to turn the MSA into approximate BP by correcting the output values. And the degradation caused by the deviation of LLR should be eliminated in response.
In addition to the improvements of decoding algorithm, this paper also focuses on the analysis tools on decoding algorithm. Different from the previous work based on Monte Carlo simulations, we prefer multi-edge-type density evolution (MET-DE) due to its capability of asymptotic analysis [8], [18].
Considering the advantages of MET-DE and the rescaling, we explain the performance gap between MSA and SPA in another way, and provide three different decoding algorithms. Specifically speaking, the contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows.
Firstly, we trace the decoding process of MSA by means of MET-DE, and disclose the causes of the performance loss from the rescaling point of view. Meanwhile, the drawbacks of conventional normalization are explained as well.
Subsequently, the so-called asymptotic optimal decoding algorithm is proposed, which could thoroughly correct the probability distribution of the output in MSA. It could achieve similar performance of SPA without the attendance of SPA. But it is also prohibitive for the hardware implementation.
Thirdly, an asymptotic suboptimal algorithm is provided [16]. Different from the optimal one adopting an extremely large number of factors, this algorithm only assigns a series of factors to an edge. But they both require high complexity for implementation, and simulation results turn out that they are still sensitive to the estimation of received SNR.

978-1-6654-6749-0/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE

1222

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Finally, the check-ratio-aided layer-based rescaling adaptive normalized MSA (CL-RANMSA) is proposed, which is much more practicable. It also achieves an excellent performance, and copes with the sensitivity to SNR estimation at the same time. Besides, this algorithm could be adjusted according to its usage scenarios flexibly, such as its number of edge types and size of factors look-up table.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The section II introduces the system model of channel transmission and iterative decoding, and describes our primary analysis tool. In section III, the concept of rescaling is explained, while both the asymptotic optimal algorithm and the suboptimal are presented. Furthermore, the practically asymptotic optimal decoding algorithm is proposed in Section IV, which is also called check-ratio aided layer-based rescaling ANMSA. In Section V, simulation results are provided and the performance and the robustness of the proposed algorithm are presented. Finally, the conclusions are drawn in Section V.

II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PRIMARY ANALYSIS TOOL
A. The Model of Channel Transmission
As a typical belief propagation algorithm for LDPC codes, SPA uses the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) instead of probabilities during its iterative decoding process. In practice, the signal from the sender could be calculated and associated LLR could be obtained at receiving side.
For the illustrative purposes, this paper discusses the details of signal transmission over additional white gaussian noise channel. The received signal over AWGN channel could be modeled as y = x+n, where x denotes the sending signal and n denotes the Gaussian noise with zero mean and variance of σ. Then the a-priori log-likelihood ratio (LLR) deriving from i-th received signal could be calculated as follows [8].

LLRrsv(yj )

=

2yi σ2

.

(1)

For this reason, it is necessary for SPA to evaluate the variance value accurately, that is the power of AWGN. Any SNR estimation error will result in the discrepancy of estimated LLR, which would be propagated and accumulated during the following iterative process. The errors would be amplified finally, with the performance degradation introduced inevitably. In other words, the performance of SPA is sensitive to the estimation of received SNR.
Ideally, the coefficient should be constant, but the practical, in most cases, is much more complex [3]. The variance is usually time-varying, and different variance values would be required for different channel conditions. Hence, SPA also places a very high value on accuracy of SNR estimation and noise robustness, in addition to heavy computing power.

B. Review of Iterative Decoding
Since SPA is inherently sensitive and prohibitive, MSA, a scale-invariant alternative was proposed with the replacement

of tanh operation by minimization [9]. However, a lowcomplexity and robust improvement usually means performance degradation. And the same can be said for MSA.
To retrieve the performance loss, a conventional method is to tune the output of horizontal processing in MSA, which is called normalization, so that the normalized value could be roughly equivalent to the corresponding output of SPA. Its following improvements are engaging in more precise correction of the output value in MSA, including ANMSA, Enhanced ANMSA etc [7], [12]–[15]. Such improved methods could achieve excellent performance when applied to the single-edge-type (SET) LDPC, but fail to keep the virtue of both capacity-approaching capability and great stability in MET LDPC.
All above improvements are based on the same assumption that the optimal template for MSA is SPA [7], [12]–[15]. However, the results do not support the hypothesis if we track the propagation of belief step-by-step. Needless to say, the initialized a-priori information from received signal is a definite form of LLR at the beginning of iterative decoding. But the output of subsequent iterations does not conform to LLR because of the minimization. And furthermore, MSA could not be regarded as a kind of classic BP algorithm.
Achieving the probability density function of output is a necessary condition for verifying whether the output is LLR. It is trivial that the output in the form of LLR could not derive from non-BP decoding algorithm, but the real LLR could be obtained if the output s PDF is available. Monte Carlo simulation could provide the specific output value of MSA or SPA, which is just a subset of the statistical sample space. The corresponding PDF could not be identified accurately in this way. Instead, density evolution is going to make a splash in this respect.
C. Primary Analysis Tool
Traditional method for decoding performance analysis is Monte Carlo simulation. To obtain better normalized factors, conventional training in NMSA and its improvements are also based on this way [5]–[7]. Due to its inherent limitation of trade-off between accuracy and sample size, it is impossible for it to pursue the goal of further optimization.
Fortunately, a fantastic tool, namely multi-edge-type density evolution (MET-DE) [18], is a promising solution. By means of MET-DE, the decoding of LDPC could be traced and the belief propagated at each iterative could be visualized directly.
For performance analysis, MET-DE works on the basis of probability density functions directly, breaking through the barrier of sample size. Much more accurate decoding threshold of the specific algorithm could be available by this means than Monte Carlo.
For factor train in NMSA or its improvements, on the other hand, Monte Carlo limits the number of edges type. Fine-grained factors for each edge would require much more training samples than it could provide. Therefore, the replacement of Monte Carlo by MET-DE avoids the compromise

1223
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

between the edge type number and sample size, with excellent performance guaranteed.

III. RESCALING AND ASYMPTOTIC OPTIMAL DECODING
ALGORITHM
This paper focuses ultimately on the application of practically asymptotic optimal factors and corresponding algorithm. Before the practical factors, this section explains the concept of rescaling, and then introduces the asymptotic optimal algorithm, as well as the suboptimal one.

A. A New Concept: Rescaling

Although the improvements of MSA with normalized factors could outperform the conventional algorithm apparently, excellent performance and great stability are still incompatible for them when applied in MET LDPC. Imitating the normalization operation, we want to introduce a similar operation as an efficacious remedy.
Compared with SPA, the performance loss of MSA is comprised of two parts. One is inherent degradation from the replacement of the tanh operations by minimalization, and the other derives from the error propagation due to the nonBP values in BP iterative process. It is the latter that the improvements of normalization keep focusing on.
In the case of MSA, the decoding process should have been a BP process based on the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) operation. But in fact, the horizontal output is not genuine LLR any more. Specifically, the changes of the horizontal output values affect their probability distribution. Then if we calculate the LLR based on the changed probability, it will be unequal to the output value. It indicates the output won t be real likelihood ratio any more. In a word, the belief can t be propagated correctly in the following iteration, and the original MSA should hardly be regarded as a kind of BP.
Since the output of horizontal processing in MSA does not conform to LLR, and accordingly, its PDF deviates from that of real LLR, we proposed rescaling as a solution. With the horizontal output values changing into real LLR, the final goal of rescaling is to amend their probability distribution so that the decoding process could conform to BP again.
Assuming that i-th output of horizontal operation li = ζ for a given iteration, then p0 and p1 should be

p0(li = ζ) = Pr(li = ζ|xi = 0)

(2)

and

p1(li = ζ) = Pr(li = ζ|xi = 1).

(3)

Note that li is i-th horizontal output for a given iteration, and it is equal to LLRrsv(yj) at the first iteration.
In MSA, li = ζ is not equal to the real LLR ξ, that is

log( p0(li) ) = ξ = ζ,

(4)

p1(li)

which should have been for BP. By means of MET-DE, we could get the PDF of all the
specific horizontal outputs, recorded as PDForg.

For the discrete random variables, define the set Φ(ξ) that

Φ(ξ) =

li

|

ξ

=

L(li)

=

log(

p0(li) p1(li)

)

,

(5)

then the amended probability PDFrvs could be obtained as

P0(ξ) = Pr(li = ξ|xi = 0)

=

Pr(li = ζ|xi = 0),

(6)

ζ∈Φ(ξ)

P1(ξ) = Pr(li = ξ|xi = 1)

=

Pr(li = ζ|xi = 1).

(7)

ζ∈Φ(ξ)

Here we call the probability mass function of discrete random variables also PDF consistently for convenience.
For the continuous cases, we follow the definition of Φ(ξ) as function (5). The amended PDFrvs should be

PDF0(ξ) = PDF(li = ξ|xi = 0)

=

PDF(ζ |xi

=

0) ,

(8)

L (ζ)

ζ∈Φ(ξ)

PDF1(ξ) = PDF(li = ξ|xi = 1)

=

PDF(ζ |xi

=

1) ,

(9)

L (ζ)

ζ∈Φ(ξ)

where L(l) is defined as function (5) and L (l) is the derivative of L(l) with respect to l.
The gap between two PDFs, PDFrvs and PDForg, could narrow if we rectify the incorrect probability distribution by adjusting the output values. For this reason, the word rescaling could distinguish this operation from normalization and scaling.
Conventional normalization tries to make output values get close to those of SPA, which also conform to genuine LLR. So sometimes it works well. But traditional training for new factors often refers to other steps, such as curve fitting. The new factors will be a kind of non-ideal rescaling factors, facing the unpredictable performance loss.
Compared with normalization, rescaling does not look for references to SPA. The output of MSA and its PDF will be all it needs. To be specific, rescaling will also tune the origin output value, and correspondingly, it will make modified output PDF as close to that of the real LLR as possible. After that, the next phase is to explain how to apply it for the specific codes.

B. The Asymptotic Optimal Decoding Algorithm
According to above subsection, the performance of improved MSA could be much closer to the capacity via ideal rescaling. The best method is to correct each output pseudoLLR of each edge according to the probability distribution of corresponding genuine LLRs. After all the output values have been corrected, the original outputs are converted into the real

1224
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LLRs, and the belief could continue to be propagated properly until the next horizontal decoding.
The process of this algorithm is similar to MSA except for one more step after each horizontal decoding. For MSA, the horizontal output will be propagated to the vertical decoding immediately. But in this algorithm, we employ function (6) and (7) to finish the additional rescaling. For the continuous cases, function (8) and (9) are involved.
This process could be regarded as an ideal rescaling, but such a goal will be hardly possible to reach. Although it could achieve excellent performance near to SPA, such an asymptotic optimal decoding algorithm refers to an extremely large number of rescaling operations. And the rescaling factors require real-time calculation, which are hardly obtained in advance and stored in a small look-up table. Besides, excellent though its performance is, we find it just as sensitive as SPA. What we expected is a more practicable algorithm.
C. The Asymptotic Suboptimal Decoding Algorithm
In our previous work, we introduced the Kullback-Leibler divergence to characterize the deviation between the original output PDF and the corresponding PDF of real LLR [10]. Based on above method, we proposed a criterion, that is the least Kullback-Leibler divergence [16], to determine the suboptimal factors α.

α = arg mαin{DKL(P (α × l)||P (l))},

(10)

where for two probability density functions P (x) and Q(x), as well as their sample space χ, the Kullback-Leibler divergence DKL(P ||Q) is

P (x)

DKL(P ||Q) =

P (x) log

.

Q(x)

(11)

x∈χ

Due to MET-DE, the output PDF of each edge for specific iteration could be obtained directly, and the PDF of associated real LLR could be calculated in turn. When combined with above criterion, this proposed algorithm, called DE-aided ANMSA [16], could also approximately turn the non-BP process into approximate BP decoding process. Consequently, there will be a consistent one-to-one match between each edge and its own look-up table of factors.
Compared with the asymptotic one, it has limited number of look-up tables, at the expense of only subtle performance loss. But it shares similar stability with SPA and the asymptotic optimal algorithm. There is still much work to be done for a more practicable algorithm.

IV. PRACTICALLY ASYMPTOTIC OPTIMAL DECODING
ALGORITHM
Above two proposed algorithms have been able to provide near capacity performance, but they are still sensitive to the estimation of received SNR. In addition, they have too much rescaling factors. This section proposes a practically asymptotic optimal algorithm as a solution, not only for the drawbacks of above two algorithms, but also for great adaptability to

various usage scenarios. It is called check-ratio-aided layerbased rescaling ANMSA (CL-RANMSA).

algorithm 1 For obtaining practically asymptotic optimal

factors

Input: the bit width N for factor index; the number K of

edge types; the searching space size M for a factor; these

three values depending on the application scenario; Output: a K × 2N factors look-up table for K edge types;

1: define the searching space M (k, n) for a given factor;

2:

let n-th factor αn =

1 2M

,

n

=

1,

...,

2N

as the initial case;

3: obtain decoding threshold SNRth of the initial case by

MET-DE and take it as the reference SNRref;

4: set the value interval of two neighboring factor subjects

to

1 M

;

5: for each k ∈ [1, K], n ∈ [1, 2N ] do

6: repeat

7:

let

subject

factor

αn =

i 2M

at

i-th

iteration;

8:

obtain current decoding threshold SNRcur by MET-

DE;

9:

if SNRcur < SNRref then

10:

αn = αn;

11:

SNRref = SNRcur;

12:

else

13:

continue;

14:

end if

15: until all the elements of M (k, n) are finished.

16: end for 17: return all the final factors αn, n = 1, ..., 2N for each type.

Compared with the first two algorithms, the primary trick is the different rescaling factors adopted, that is to say the practically asymptotic optimal factors. The major improvements can be summarized as follows.
1) The purpose of rescaling factors is to adjust the probability of horizontal operation output finally by correcting their values. Similar to the theoretically asymptotic optimal factors taken by DE-aided ANMSA, rescaling factors do not take corresponding output of SPA as an example, which contributes to further robustness.
2) In the proposed algorithm, the edge-classification method is incorporated in the way of obtaining factors [11]. For each edge in the base graph of MET-LDPC codes, it should be considered as a unique one. For example, everyone has its own check-node degree and variable degree respectively. And their channel types are different with variable-node puncturing employed. All the characteristics of edges, mentioned above or not, could be our potential classification criterion. Users could flexibly choose some or all of them depending on themselves, considering the tradeoff between performance and implementation complexity. Due to the factor-obtaining method, which will be discussed in the following part, the edge-classification manage to avoid the unpredictable performance loss of nonideal rescaling effectively.
3) The key is the factor-obtaining method employed in our proposed algorithm. Unlike the Monte Carlo training, it takes

1225
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

advantage of DE, breaking the limitation of simulation sample size. And for our proposed algorithm, the number of edge-type is more adjustable than that of theoretically asymptotic optimal factors. It could be determined during factor-obtaining phase. By means of DE, the asymptotic optimal factors for each predetermine type will be selected according to their practical performance.
Actually, considering a lot of non-linear operations in iterative decoding procedure, many criterions to obtain factors directly in training period will be ineffective. The most effective one should be the final decoding performance. Therefore, the obtaining method could be described as algorithm 1.
With respect to the searching space M for a given edge type, further deliberation is necessary. Assuming that the bit width for check ratio is N , each type has 2N factors. Since each factor lies between 0 and 1, this interval is divided evenly into M subintervals for their precision, and the midpoint of a subinterval will be regarded as a candidate value. In that case, there are originally 2NM combinations for each type. But in fact, each factor is uncorrelated to others, which means the searching space decreases to M ∗ 2N , much more feasible than the original searching space.
Compared with above two algorithms, this algorithm could determine the size of factors according to its usage scenarios, which is much more flexible. And simulation results show that it is as robust as MSA,

Assuming that the 5 bits were preassigned for check ratio, then each type has 25 = 32 factors respectively. For convenience, the interval of two adjacent potential factors was set to 0.03125, which means there are 32 candidate values for a factor. In this case, the searching space should be 32 ∗ 32 = 1024. In this paper, the edges are classified into 2 types depending on their check node degrees. The edges whose check node degrees are greater than 6 are classified into one type and others belongs to the other type. Two sets of factors are visualized in Fig. 1.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS
Simulations have been carried out to validate the performance of the proposed practically asymptotic optimal decoding algorithm. In this section, all the simulation are based on 5G-NR LDPC codes. The base graph 2 (BG2) is employed for illustration, as well as BPSK modulation and AWGN channel are assumed.

(a) Over AWGN channel

Fig. 1: practically asymptotic optimal factors for two types over BIAWGN (with k = 10 and b = 384), and dh means check node degree of the edges.

(b) Over Rayleigh channel Fig. 2: Asymptotic decoding threshold for 5 algorithms including SPA, original MSA (MSAorg), the asymptotic optimal (MSAopt), the asymptotic suboptimal (MSAsubopt) and the practical one (MSAprac) with BERth = 10−9(BI-AWGN, k = 10, b = 384, code rate = 1/5).
The decoding thresholds of SPA, MSA and other three

1226
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

aforementioned algorithms are analyzed by MET-DE. Those over AWGN and Rayleigh channel are demonstrated in Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b respectively. In Fig. 2a, it is significant that the proposed algorithm shares similar stability with MSA. But it is superior to MSA in terms of decoding threshold. The gap between the proposed and the asymptotic optimal one is only 0.098dB, while it merely requests 0.244dB more than SPA. Fig. 2b shows the similar results, except wider gaps for the proposed and others. Fig. 2 validates the excellent performance and robustness of our proposed algorithm.
Fig. 3: Error performance for 6 code rates of BG2 in 5G-NR LDPC codes with SPA, AdjSPA, the asymptotic optimal (MSAopt) and the practical one (MSAprac) over BI-AWGN channel.
The Monte Carlo simulations support above conclusions. In addition to rate-1/5, which is designated as the original operating point for obtaining factors, those factors also achieve near-capacity performance for other rates. Fig. 3 depicts the BLER performance of the rate-1/5, rate-1/4, rate-1/3, rate1/2, rate-2/3 and rate-5/6 5G-NR LDPC codes. As shown in this figure, the results demonstrates that factors designed for rate-1/5 is a good option for 5G-NR LDPC codes with ratecompatibility and length-scalability.
VI. CONCLUSION In this paper, we employ MET-DE as the main method of asymptotic analysis on the decoding performance of 5G-NR LDPC codes. After tracking the decoding process of MSA, we explain the concept of rescaling firstly, and then introduce the asymptotic optimal decoding algorithm. Thirdly, we introduce an asymptotic suboptimal on the basis of our previous work, and finally propose the check-ratio aided layer-based rescaling ANMSA with the practically asymptotic optimal factors applied. The proposed algorithm shares similar decoding threshold with DE-aided ANMSA, which is asymptotic optimal in theory. But it is much more robust than others, just like MSA. Furthermore, the simulation results support above conclusions effectively.

All in all, the practically asymptotic optimal factors easy
availability and performance predictability make them superior
to their predecessors, and the proposed algorithm could expect
broad application in wireless communication scenarios for its
great stability and excellent performance.
ACKNOWLEDGE
This work was supported by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China (No. 2021YFA0716602)
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, MIT Press, Cambridge, USA, 1963.
[2] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Multi-edge type LDPC codes, in Proc. Workshop Honoring Prof. Bob McEliece 60th Birthday California Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, USA, 2002, pp. 24C25.
[3] R1-1610140, ”LDPC decoding with adjusted min-sum”, Qualcomm, Incorporated, RAN1 #86bis, Lisbon, Portugal, 10thC14th October 2016
[4] D. E. Hocevar, ”A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Workshop onSignal Processing Systems, 2004. SIPS 2004., Austin, TX, 2004, pp. 107-112.
[5] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, ”Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406-414, March 2002.
[6] L. Fan, C. Pan, K. Peng and J. Huang, ”Adaptive normalized min-sum algorithm for LDPC decoding,” 2013 9th International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), Sardinia, 2013, pp. 1081-1084.
[7] Y. Liu, K. Peng, C. Pan and L. Fan, ”Genie-aided adaptive normalized min-sum algorithm for LDPC decoding,” 2015 International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), Dubrovnik, 2015, pp. 221-225.
[8] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge University Press, March 2008.
[9] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic and H. Imai, ”Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673-680, May 1999.
[10] Solomon Kullback, Information Theory and Statistics, Dover Publications Inc., Mineola, New York, 1968.
[11] Y. Zhang, K. Peng, Z. Chen and J. Song, ”Construction of RateCompatible Raptor-Like Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Code With Edge Classification for IDMA Based Random Access,” in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 30818-30830, 2019.
[12] Ming Jiang, Chunming Zhao, Li Zhang and Enyang Xu, ”Adaptive offset min-sum algorithm for low-density parity check codes,” in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 483-485, June 2006.
[13] P. Poocharoen and M. E. Magana, ”Different perspective and approach to implement adaptive normalised belief propagation-based decoding for low-density parity check codes,” in IET Communications, vol. 6, no. 15, pp. 2314-2325, 16 October 2012.
[14] N. E. Maammar, S. Bri and J. Foshi, ”Layered Offset Min-Sum Decoding for Low Density Parity Check Codes,” 2018 International Symposium on Advanced Electrical and Communication Technologies (ISAECT), Rabat, Morocco, 2018.
[15] X. Wu, Y. Song, M. Jiang and C. Zhao, ”Adaptive-Normalized/Offset Min-Sum Algorithm,” in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 667-669, July 2010.
[16] Z. Zhou, K. Peng, J. Song and Z. He, ”DE-aided ANMSA with edge classification and its application for 5G-NR LDPC codes,” 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB), 2021.
[17] T. Cheng, K. Peng, F. Yang, J. Song and Z. Yang, ”A Near-Capacity MIMO Coded Modulation Scheme for Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting,” in IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 367-375, Sept. 2015.
[18] S. Chen, K. Peng, J. Song and Y. Zhang, ”Performance Analysis of Practical QC-LDPC Codes: From DVB-S2 to ATSC 3.0,” in IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 172-178, March 2019.

1227
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

