IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 68, NO. 2, JUNE 2022

305

Sliding Window Decoding for QC-SC-LDPC Codes Under the Constraint of Implementation Complexity
Zhitong He , Student Member, IEEE, Kewu Peng , Senior Member, IEEE, Jian Song , Fellow, IEEE, and Yushu Zhang

Abstract—Sliding window decoding has been employed as the decoding scheme of quasi-cyclic spatially-coupled low-density parity-check (QC-SC-LDPC) codes, with the decoding latency and complexity independent of the coupling length but proportional to the window size. The window size was empirically chosen at least three times the constraint length in previous works, which results in the preference of QC-SC-LDPC codes with small constraint length, to reduce the decoding latency and complexity in practical systems. However, the code design freedom and the decoder throughput are limited for these QC-SC-LDPC codes. In this paper, the optimal window size under the constraint of practical decoding complexity is analyzed employing multi-edge-type density evolution (MET-DE). It can be verified from the MET-DE analytical result that the optimal window size could achieve less than twice the constraint length for several edge spreading patterns, which largely loose this restriction in practical code design. Furthermore, it could be observed that besides the constraint length, the specific structure of the edge spreading pattern could affect the optimal window size as well, and thus the MET-DE analytical method for the optimal window size could effectively guide the design of QC-SC-LDPC codes in practical systems. Then an improved sliding window decoding scheme is proposed, including the optimal choice of window size and a parity-check based early termination scheme. Finally, the performance and robustness of the proposed sliding window decoding scheme for QC-SC-LDPC codes are demonstrated via simulation, with the decoding complexity at most twice as that of the conventional LDPC coded schemes.
Index Terms—Sliding window decoding, spatially coupled low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, density evolution, broadcasting.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, spatially-coupled low-density parity-check (SC-LDPC) codes, as a new class of LDPC block codes, have captured worldwide attentions for their universally
Manuscript received August 26, 2021; revised November 16, 2021; accepted January 7, 2022. Date of publication January 25, 2022; date of current version June 7, 2022. This work was supported by the funding of Peng Cheng Laboratory under Contract PCL2021A10, in part by the Tsinghua University (Department of Electronic Engineering)—Yunnan Mobile Digital TV Company, Ltd. Joint Research Center for DTMB and 5G Broadcasting Integration. (Corresponding author: Kewu Peng.)
Zhitong He, Kewu Peng, and Jian Song are with the DTV Technology Research and Development Center, Department of Electronic Engineering, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with the Department of Interactive Media, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: hezt20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn; jsong@ tsinghua.edu.cn).
Yushu Zhang is with the Aerospace Information Research Institute and the Key Laboratory of Technology in Geo-Spatial Information Processing and Application System, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: zhangys@aircas.ac.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2022.3143367

capacity-approaching performance over different channels under belief propagation (BP) decoding, compared to conventional LDPC codes. An SC-LDPC code can be constructed by coupling Tanner graphs of L disjoint LDPC codes. Since spatial coupling is equivalent to introducing memory into the (w+1) neighboring uncoupled codes, SC-LDPC could be viewed as a type of LDPC convolutional codes [1], with slight structured irregularity that both ends are terminated. The structured irregularity directly results in the threshold saturation phenomenon [2], i.e., the BP decoding threshold of the SC-LDPC code converges towards the maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding threshold of the underlying LDPC block code. Moreover, SC-LDPC ensembles have been proven to be universally capacity achieving over binary memory-less symmetric (BMS) channels [3]. Similar universality of SC-LDPC codes has been verified over bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) channels [4] and Gaussian multiple access channels (GMAC) [5] via density evolution (DE) analysis. Hence it’s believed that the spatially-coupled structure could lead to universality over general channels, which has been preliminarily revealed in [6].
Conventional LDPC codes have been successfully employed in modern digital terrestrial television broadcasting (DTTB) standards, such as DVB-S2/T2/NGH [7]–[9], ATSC 3.0 [10] and DTMB/DTMB-A [11], [12]. Nevertheless, the forward error control (FEC) coding and transmission schemes are required to perform well under various scenarios, including various coded modulation schemes, receiver types and channel conditions, to support emerging applications and increasing terminals in future DTTB systems. Conventional LDPC coded transmission schemes are no longer suitable for they are usually optimized towards particular scenario, and performance degradation or even decoding failure occurs when the target scenario is not satisfied. On the contrary, the universality makes SC-LDPC coded transmission schemes promising to simply and efficiently achieve good performance under different scenarios in future DTTB systems. A quasicyclic (QC-) SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme for future DTTB systems is proposed in the previous work [13], having better performance and robustness under different constellation orders and channel conditions, compared to conventional LDPC coded transmission schemes.
In future DTTB systems, the requirements of low latency and high throughput are also of great importance to support real-time transmission. The decoding complexity and latency make great contributions to the latency and throughput of the total system. The decoding complexity of SC-LDPC codes

1557-9611 c 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

306

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 68, NO. 2, JUNE 2022

under conventional full BP decoding increases linearly with bidirectional window shifting and adaptive iteration. Soft BER

the coupling length L, which could be a huge value to achieve estimation is employed to deactivate unnecessary variable node

universally capacity-approaching performance. In [13], the updates [25], [26] and dynamically shift the windows [27]

decoding complexity of QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission to further reduce the decoding complexity. A comprehensive

scheme with conventional full BP decoding is 5 times as discussion of the configurations for sliding window decoding

much as the conventional LDPC coded transmission scheme. and a parity-check based early termination method to further

Hence the conventional full BP decoding could be unbearable reduce the decoding complexity is presented in [22].

in practical implementation of DTTB systems.

This paper focuses on the analysis and improvement of

To overcome this issue of SC-LDPC codes, sliding window sliding window decoding, for the practical implementation of

decoding, as a particular decoding scheme of SC-LDPC codes QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission schemes in future DTTB

which takes advantage of the inherent spatially-coupled struc- systems. The total code length nSC is limited in practical ture, has been initially proposed in [14] and further analyzed systems, which results in limited coupling length L, smoothing

in [15]. Specifically, the sliding window decoder continuously parameter w and uncoupled code length nunc. The decoding performs decoding within the windows distributed along the complexity I is also limited, and the optimal choice of the

spatially-coupled chain. Since the decoding process of SC- window size W under practical decoding complexity is stud-

LDPC codes is wave-like, i.e., the reliable information is first ied. Moreover, the configuration of sliding window decoding is

obtained at the border of SC-LDPC codes and then propagates assumed to be simple. For instance, the bidirectional window

along the spatially-coupled chain, sliding window decoding shifting and partial variable node deactivation are not allowed,

could avoid many unnecessary decoding operations compared for they will largely increase the description and implementa-

to conventional full BP decoding, and the decoding complexity tion complexity of practical systems. Moreover, the universal

and latency of sliding window decoding are therefore indepen- property should be maintained with sliding window decoding.

dent of the huge coupling length L. Moreover, the performance Considering the above constraints, the contribution of this

loss introduced by sliding window decoding could be neg- paper can be summarized as follows.

ligible if judicious implementation is provided. Therefore, 1) An asymptotic analysis method of sliding window decod-

QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission schemes with sliding win- ing based on QC block-wise multi-edge-type density evolution

dow decoding could be a good candidate for future DTTB (QC-MET-DE) [28] is proposed in this paper. It can be verified

systems.

from QC-MET-DE analytical results that there exists a win-

The window size W is an important parameter for slid- dow size Wopt at which the decoding performance is optimal ing window decoding. The performance of sliding window under constraints of practical complexity I, as shown similarly

decoding has been demonstrated to be monotonically improv- by the PEXIT-based analytical method in [23]. The optimal

ing with W [14], as the decoding iteration number tends to window size Wopt could achieve less than twice the constraint infinity. Since the complexity and latency of sliding window length for several edge spreading patterns, and thus the con-

decoding are proportional to W, the window size W is empir- straint length could be chosen in a wider range, which are

ically chosen as 3 to 5 times the constraint length of the beneficial to maintain the universality and improve the code

code in previous works [15]–[18], which could save the com- performance. Moreover, it could be observed that the specific

plexity and latency with minimal performance degradation. structure of the edge spreading pattern could affect the optimal

In this sense, the constraint length of QC-SC-LDPC codes window size as well, and thus the MET-DE analytical method

should be set small, to fulfill the requirement of complex- for the optimal window size could effectively guide the design

ity and latency in practical systems. Nevertheless, the code of QC-SC-LDPC codes in practical systems.

design freedom of QC-SC-LDPC codes with small constraint 2) An improved sliding window decoding scheme is proposed

length is limited, and code structure more complex than quasi- in this paper. The choice of window size W is under the

cyclic structure with one-step lifting should be employed to guidance of QC-MET-DE analysis and slightly adjusted through

achieve capacity-approaching performance [19]–[21], which simulation under constraints of limited code length nSC. A new would largely reduce the decoder throughput. Moreover, the early termination scheme based on parity check is proposed,

universality of QC-SC-LDPC codes with small constraint which is simple to implement. The decoding complexity could

length might be destructed [3]. The previous works [22], [23] be efficiently reduced while the decoding performance could

have found that the window size W could be chosen as approx- be maintained using the proposed early termination scheme.

imately 2 to 3 times the constraint length, which could achieve 3) The performance and robustness of QC-SC-LDPC coded

the optimal performance under equal and constrained com- transmission scheme with proposed sliding window decoding

plexity. Though the results of these works could loosen the under practical complexity is further demonstrated via sim-

restriction of constraint length in practical code design, they ulation. The cases of different coded modulation modes and

have only been validated on several QC-SC-LDPC codes, channel conditions are mainly considered in this paper. The

and thus the choice of the window size W under practical decoding complexity of the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmis-

constraints should be more carefully studied.

sion scheme with proposed sliding window decoding could

Recent researches on improving sliding window decod- achieve at most twice the decoding complexity of conventional

ing mainly focus on the mitigation the performance loss LDPC coded transmission scheme, with comparable decoding

caused by error propagation, or the further reduction of performance and notably better robustness.

decoding complexity by early termination. In [24], the The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II

error propagation phenomenon is mitigated by introducing reviews the structure of QC-SC-LDPC codes for broadcasting

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: SLIDING WINDOW DECODING FOR QC-SC-LDPC CODES UNDER CONSTRAINT OF IMPLEMENTATION COMPLEXITY

307

and the system model of the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission

scheme in the previous work [13]. Section III introduces the

layered sliding window decoding algorithm of QC-SC-LDPC

codes, including more detailed discussion of the window def-

inition and the decoding complexity definition. Section IV

presents the QC-MET-DE analysis method and analytical

results of sliding window decoding. In Section V, the improved

sliding window decoding scheme is shown. The performance

and robustness of QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme Fig. 1. System model of the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme. with proposed sliding window decoding under practical com-

plexity is demonstrated in Section VI. Finally, the conclusions

are drawn in Section VII.
II. CODE STRUCTURE AND SYSTEM MODEL
A. QC-SC-LDPC Codes
A binary LDPC code can be defined by a sparse binary parity-check matrix H or the equivalent bipartite Tanner graph. The m rows, n columns and non-zero entries of H correspond to the m check nodes, n variable nodes and edges of the Tanner graph, respectively. For protograph-based LDPC codes, the m × n parity-check matrix H could be constructed from a smaller M × N base matrix B via lifting, where the zeros are replaced by Z × Z zero matrices and the non-zeros in B are replaced by permutation matrices or the summation of permutation matrices with size Z × Z. As a consequence, m = MZ, n = NZ, and Z is called the lifting size. QC-LDPC codes can be viewed as a special subclass of protograph-based codes, which substitute permutation matrices with simpler circulant permutation matrices in the lifting process, for the convenience of description and practical implementation.

The rate of the uncoupled code is called true rate, Rtrue = (Nunc − Munc)/Nunc, and the rate of the final QC-SCLDPC code is called design rate, Rdesign = (LNunc − (L + w)Munc)/LNunc = Rtrue − wMunc/LNunc, which suffers a rate loss wMunc/LNunc due to the terminated coupled chain.
The QC-SC-LDPC code structure is carefully designed

in [13] and inherited in this paper, whose characteristics can

be summarized as follows.

1) The base matrix and the edge spreading pattern of each

uncoupled code is assumed to be identical, which results in

the following final base matrix of the QC-SC-LDPC codes.

⎡

⎤

B0

BSC = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣BB...w1

B0 B1 ... Bw

... ... ... ...

B0 B1 ...

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

, (2)

An SC-LDPC code can be constructed by coupling L disjoint LDPC block codes. Specifically, the L disjoint LDPC

Bw (L+w)Munc×LNunc

block codes could be coupled via unwrapping [16] or edge spreading [17]. Edge spreading, i.e., the variable nodes of each

where the edge spreading pattern of each uncoupled code is Bpattern = [B0T , B1T , . . . , BwT ]T . Parallel edges are not

uncoupled code are reconnected to the check nodes of their allowed in the final base matrix BSC, i.e., the non-zeros in BSC

own and the adjacent w uncoupled codes, is more flexible for can only be substituted by circulant permutation matrices, but

universally capacity-approaching code construction and thus not their summations. The lifting of each spreading pattern

employed in this paper. The parameter L is called coupling Bpattern is assumed to be identical as well. Moreover, the base

length and w is called smoothing parameter. The constraint matrix of each uncoupled code Bunc is designed very compact,

length is defined as nconst = (w + 1)nunc, where nunc is the such as Munc = 1, Nunc = 3. Combining with above character-

uncoupled code length.

istics, the code description and the hardware implementation

For QC-SC-LDPC codes, the base graphs of uncoupled codes of sliding window decoding can be notably simplified.

are also spatially-coupled [16], [17]. Consider a series of uncou- 2) The edge spreading pattern is carefully designed to main-

pled base graphs B1unc, B2unc, . . ., BLunc with size Munc × Nunc. After edge spreading, the uncoupled base graph Blunc is extended to the edge spreading pattern Blpattern = [B0l T , B1l T , . . . , Bwl T ]T , where (·)T denotes transposition. The final base matrix of the

QC-SC-LDPC code can be described as follows

⎡ B10

⎤

BSC = ⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢BB...1w11

B20 B...12 B2w

... ... ... ...

BL0 B...1L

⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

. (1)

tain the universality under constraints of limited L, w, nunc and I. Two-step lifting is employed to introduce extra design freedom such that the QC-SC-LDPC codes with excellent decoding performance and lower error floor can be constructed. Moreover, simple row-removal of the last few rows or layers [29] is adopted to mitigate the rate loss, while the check node degrees remain not less than 3 to maintain the linear minimum distance growth property.
B. QC-SC-LDPC Coded Transmission Scheme
Based on the QC-SC-LDPC code structure mentioned above, a QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme proposed for broadcasting [13] is shown in Fig. 1. At the transmitter side, the information bits are first encoded by the

BwL (L+w)Munc×LNunc

QC-SC-LDPC encoder. Then the coded bits are interleaved

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

308

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 68, NO. 2, JUNE 2022

by the pseudo-random intra-uncoupled-code interleaver, which independently interleaves the nunc coded bits associated with each uncoupled codes. Finally the interleaved bits are consecutively mapped to constellation symbols x.
The memoryless equivalent baseband model can be described as

y = gx + v,

(3)

where x, y are the normalized transmitted symbol and the received symbol, respectively. g is the complex channel gain and v is the noise which subjects to complex Gaussian distribution CN (0, 1/ρ), where ρ denotes the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at the receiver.
At the receiver side, the demapper converts received symbols y into the output extrinsic information of interleaved bits, according to the channel state information and a priori information. Then the output extrinsic information of interleaved bits is de-interleaved and sent to the sliding window decoder as a priori information. For independent demapping systems, the output is obtained from a posteriori information from the sliding window decoder. For iterative demapping systems, the output extrinsic information of coded bits is interleaved again and then sent to the demapper as a priori information, which is illustrated via the dashed line in Fig. 1.
Owing to the intra-uncoupled-code interleaver, only the coded bits within the same uncoupled code are interleaved, which preserves the spatially-coupled structure and thus maintains the universality of QC-SC-LDPC codes in practical systems. Moreover, the intra-uncoupled-code interleaver is beneficial to sliding window decoding, since the demapper only needs to deal with the symbols in the current window, which largely improves the throughput at the receiver side. Thanks to the universality under constraints of limited L, w, nunc and I, the interleaver or the bit-mapping in the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme do not need to be individually optimized towards different scenarios to achieve capacity-approaching performance, which could notably simplify the design, description and implementation, and improve the robustness with unknown channel state information and diversified receivers.
III. LAYERED SLIDING WINDOW DECODING
In this section, the basic settings of the proposed layered sliding window decoding scheme for QC-SC-LDPC codes are introduced. The rest of this section is organized as follows. In Section III-A, the layered scheduling employed in the proposed sliding window decoding scheme is reviewed and the definition of layers for QC-SC-LDPC codes is presented. In Section III-B, the details of the window definition are discussed, including the variable nodes centered (VN-centered) windows or check nodes centered (CN-centered) windows, and the definition of windows at both ends of QC-SC-LDPC codes. In Section III-C, the definition of decoding complexity is introduced, which is the basis of the discussion in the following sections.

Fig. 2. The VN-centered window and the CN-centered window of the QCSC-LDPC code with smoothing parameter w = 2.
A. Layered Scheduling
Layered scheduling [30] is employed in the sliding window decoding scheme instead of conventional flooding scheduling, which results in a near 50% reduction of the decoding complexity. For BP decoding under flooding scheduling, the variable nodes are updated after the check node processing of all the rows is finished. For BP decoding under layered scheduling, the variable nodes are immediately updated after the check node processing of a row or layer is finished, and then the check node processing of the next row or layer starts. Obviously, the message exchange speed of BP decoding under layered scheduling is much higher than BP decoding under flooding scheduling, which leads to large decoding complexity reduction.
Based on the QC-SC-LDPC code structure mentioned in Section II, the mSC = MSCZ rows of the final parity-check matrix HSC can be naturally divided into MSC = (L + w)Munc layers, where the t-th layer represents the Z consecutive rows numbered from (t − 1)Z + 1 to tZ in the final parity-check matrix, corresponding to the t-th row (or check node) in the final base matrix BSC. Without the parallel edges in BSC, the rows within a layer do not share variable nodes with each other. Hence the layered scheduling with respect to layers is equivalent to the layered scheduling with respect to rows. Moreover, the check node processing and variable node update of the Z rows within a layer can be done in parallel, which is beneficial to improving the throughput of hardware implementation.
B. Window Definition
Sliding window decoding is generally a particular decoding algorithm designed for codes with the spatially-coupled structure. Thanks to the local relations of the spatially-coupled structure, the sliding window decoder could deal with a subset of the code at one iteration, which is commonly called a window. At the most simple case considered in this paper, after the decoding within the current window is finished, the sliding window decoder slides to the next window, and repeats the process till the decoding ends.
As for QC-SC-LDPC codes, the window can be classified into the VN-centered type [25]–[27] and the CN-centered type [22]. The VN-centered windows include a set of variable nodes and all the related check nodes, while the CN-centered windows include a set of check nodes and all the related variable nodes, as is shown in Fig. 2. The VN-centered windows

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: SLIDING WINDOW DECODING FOR QC-SC-LDPC CODES UNDER CONSTRAINT OF IMPLEMENTATION COMPLEXITY

309

Fig. 3. The size W = 3 windows of the QC-SC-LDPC code with coupling length L = 9 and smoothing parameter w = 2. k denotes the window index.
face the problem that some variable nodes inside the window might share check nodes with variable nodes outside the window, while the variable nodes outside the window cannot be updated and the message passing efficiency inside the window is thus influenced. Moreover, the non-updated variable nodes could bring extra complexity to the decoder under layered scheduling. Hence the CN-centered windows are employed in this paper.
Based on Section III-A and for the simplicity of hardware implementation, the CN-centered windows include check nodes from WMunc consecutive layers corresponding to W uncoupled codes, where W denotes the window size and is assumed the same for all the windows. After the decoding within the current window is finished, the window slides a fixed step of Munc layers which exactly corresponds to an uncoupled code. Hence the k-th window consists of the layers numbered from (k − 1)Munc + 1 to (k + W − 1)Munc.
Considering the termination of QC-SC-LDPC codes at both ends, the definition of the windows could be extended. Assuming the QC-SC-LDPC codes are not terminated at both ends, the window index k could vary from −∞ to +∞. And only when 2 − W ≤ k ≤ L + w, the windows are valid in the terminated QC-SC-LDPC codes, and thus the k-th window consists of the layers numbered from max {(k − 1)Munc + 1, 1} to min {(k + W − 1)Munc, MSC}. The sliding window decoder successively processes from the (2 − W)-th window to the (L + w)-th window, as is shown in Fig. 3.

where Window(k) denotes the set of layer indexes which
the k-th window consists of. The evaluated total decoding complexity I¯1 can be derived as

I¯1 =

MSC t=1

It

.

MSC

(5)

The evaluated total decoding complexity I¯1 could be fairly compared with the complexity of conventional full BP decoding. Consider the simplest case that the iteration number within each window achieves the maximum pre-set iteration number Imax, which is called fixed sliding window decoding. From (4), we can derive that the iteration number within each layer is the same number WImax, which has exactly the total decoding complexity equal to the case that WImax iterations of conventional full BP decoding are performed.
Since the complexity of check node processing and variable node updating is approximately proportional to the row weight within the layer, i.e., the number of edges in any row within the layer, the total decoding complexity can be evaluated by the mean value of iteration number with respect to each edge. Specifically, assume dt denotes the row weight of the t-th layer, the more precisely evaluated decoding complexity I¯2 can be derived as

I¯2 =

MSC t=1

dt It

MSC t=1

dt

.

(6)

Nevertheless, the difference between I¯1 and I¯2 is negligi-
ble, for the structured irregularity only exists in both ends of QC-SC-LDPC codes. Hence I¯1 is mainly employed in the
following sections for the convenience of computation.

IV. ANALYSIS OF SLIDING WINDOW DECODING
In this section, how the window size W affects the asymptotic performance of the sliding window decoding under constraints of practical complexity is studied. The relevance between the optimal window size Wopt and the constraint length of QC-SC-LDPC codes is revealed. The rest of this section is organized as follows. In Section IV-A, the QC-MET-DE analysis method of the layered sliding window decoding introduced in Section III is proposed. In Section IV-B, the analysis results of the optimized window size are represented.

C. Decoding Complexity
Under layered scheduling, all the layers within the current window are processed successively by the sliding window decoder once during an iteration. Therefore, the total decoding complexity can be represented by the iteration number within each layer. Since the structured irregularity of QC-SC-LDPC codes is slight, the complexity of processing each layer is similar. Hence the total decoding complexity can be evaluated as the mean of iteration number within each layer. Specifically, assume the iteration number within the k-th window is Ik, the iteration number within the t-th It layer can be derived as

It =

Ik,

(4)

{k|t∈Window(k)}

A. QC-MET-DE Analysis
For protograph-based LDPC codes or QC-LDPC codes, QC-MET-DE has been presented in [28] to predict the average asymptotic performance of the LDPC ensemble generated from the given base matrix, which is initially proposed in [31] and called protograph DE as well. Compared to conventional single-edge-type (SET-) DE [32] and MET-DE [33], QC-METDE classifies the edges which are generated from the same non-zero element of the base matrix into the same edge type, and the edges which are generated from different non-zero elements of the base matrix into different edge types. The probability density functions (PDFs) of different edge types are not merged during the evolution. The cyclic symmetry property of the protograph-based structure or the QC structure

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

310

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 68, NO. 2, JUNE 2022

guarantees the validity of the edge type classification mentioned above. QC-MET-DE is more accurate than conventional SET-DE or MET-DE, since more constraints are introduced to precisely represent the QC-LDPC structure.
According to Section III, the layered sliding window decoding of QC-SC-LDPC codes could be treated as special scheduling of the processing order for all the layers. Hence the QC-MET-DE analysis of layered sliding window decoding is similar to the QC-MET-DE analysis of conventional full BP decoding under layered scheduling. Furthermore, only the PDF evolution of processing a layer need to be illustrated.
Specifically, the PDF evolution of processing the i-th layer is shown in this paper. Assume PDFj(ch) and PDFj(e) denote the PDF of the a priori and a posteriori log-likelihood-ratio (LLR) at variable node j (in the base graph, similarly hereafter), respectively; PDFi(,vj) and PDFi(,cj) represent the latest PDF of LLR sent from variable node j to check node i and from check node i to variable node j, respectively; and M(j) and N (i) denote the adjacent check node indexes of variable node j and adjacent variable node indexes of check node i, respectively. The PDF evolution of processing the i-th layer can be separated into the following steps.
1) Variable Node Processing: For all j ∈ N (i),

PDFi(,vj) ← PDF(jch) +

PDFi(c,)j .

(7)

i ∈M(j)\i

2) Check Node Processing: For all j ∈ N (i),

PDFi(,cj) ←

PDFi(,vj).

(8)

j ∈N (i)\j

In (7) and (8), “+” and “ ” together denote commutative PDF convolution operations which correspond to the summation of LLRs, and “ ” denotes new commutative PDF convolution operations proposed in [32], which correspond to the LLR operation in the check node processing. ← denotes assignment, i.e., the right-side value would permanently substitute the old value of the left-side variable. The PDFs of the a posteriori LLR PDFj(e) can be derived as

PDFj(e) ← PDF(jch) +

PDFi(c,)j .

(9)

i ∈M(j)

During the QC-MET-DE procedure of the layered sliding window decoding, PDFi(,cj) and PDFi(,vj) are initialized as

PDFi(,cj) ← 0, PDFi(,vj) ← 0,

(10)

where 0 denotes the delta function. Then the PDF evolution indicated by (7)-(8) is carried on successively according to the processing order for all the layers from the sliding window decoder. The PDFs of the a posteriori LLR are computed as (9) and the mean bit error rate can be derived as

1 NSC BER =
NSC j=1

0
PDFj(e)(x)dx,
−∞

(11)

where NSC denotes the number of columns in the base matrix BSC. It is noteworthy that only given the channel symmetry, the equations (7)-(10) are valid under all-zero codeword
assumption.

Though numerical implementation of QC-MET-DE is practical for compact base matrix BSC, the operations between PDFs are still complicated. For binary-input (BI-) AWGN channels, reciprocal channel approximation (RCA) [34] is an 1-D approximation of QC-MET-DE with high precision. Extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) aided by QC-MET-DE is commonly employed as a precise 1-D approximation as well, while several instances for analyzing the sliding window decoding is shown in [23], [35]. Nevertheless, RCA/EXIT analysis has its limitation compared to QC-MET-DE analysis, since the 1-D approximation would result in information loss.
B. Window Size Optimization
The asymptotic performance of fixed layered sliding window decoding with different window size W under constraints of practical complexity I¯1 is analyzed employing QC-MET-DE described in Section IV-A. The (J, 2J)-regular protographbased SC-LDPC ensembles described in [17] with J = 3 ∼ 7 are analyzed first. The uncoupled base matrices Bunc of these ensembles have size 1 × 2, and the smoothing parameter can be computed as w = J − 1. The coupling length is chosen as L = 100, and the last w = w − 2 rows are removed for the final base matrices BSC to obtain the same size and rate loss. Hence the true rate is Rtrue = 1/2 and the design rate is Rdesign = 49/100. The accumulate-repeat-jaggedaccumulate (ARJA) protograph-based SC-LDPC ensemble described in [17] is also included in the analysis. The uncoupled rate-1/2 ARJA base matrix of the ensemble has size 3 × 5 with one column punctured, and the smoothing parameter is w = 1. The coupling length is chosen as L = 50 to obtain the same size of the final base matrix BSC excluding the puncture columns, and the design rate of the ensemble is Rdesign = 49/100 as well. The total decoding complexity is set as I¯1 = 30 and the window size W is transversed from w + 1 to 20. The SNR thresholds are derived at BER = 10−10 under both BI-AWGN channel and BI-Rayleigh fading channel (with i.i.d. Rayleigh fading factors, similarly hereafter). For some window size W, the iteration number within each window might not be an integer. In this case, the iteration number within each window could be treated as the expectation of independent random integer variables for the convenience of analysis. Specifically, the non-integer iteration number within each window I0 + p (I0 ∈ N) means that the iteration number within each window is independently chosen as I0 with probability 1 − p and I0 + 1 with probability p. The resulting PDFs after the QC-MET-DE procedure within any window is finished could be computed by the mixture of PDFs after I0 iterations within the window with probability 1 − p and the PDFs after I0 + 1 iterations within the window with probability p.
From Fig. 4, all the (J, 2J)-regular code cases with J = 3 ∼ 7 and the ARJA code case have the optimal window size Wopt < 20, which is defined as the window size W with the minimum SNR threshold gap. The SNR threshold gaps are monotonically decreasing when W < Wopt, and monotonically increasing when W > Wopt. The SNR threshold gaps are robust to the slight change of W near Wopt, which allows

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: SLIDING WINDOW DECODING FOR QC-SC-LDPC CODES UNDER CONSTRAINT OF IMPLEMENTATION COMPLEXITY

311

Fig. 4. The window size W vs. the SNR threshold gap to Shannon limit of (a) BI-AWGN channel and (b) BI-Rayleigh fading channel. The optimal window sizes Wopt are shown as hollow points.
the flexible adjustment of the window size W according to the various requirements in practical systems. Furthermore, it could be observed that the (J, 2J) regular code cases with J = 4 ∼ 7 have similar Wopt = 9 ∼ 11, and the ARJA code case with small smoothing parameter w = 1 also has relatively large Wopt = 8 or 10. Since the constraint length could be expressed as nconst = (w + 1)nunc, which corresponds to the code length of (w + 1) uncoupled codes, it can be inferred that the relevance between the optimal window size Wopt and the constraint length is not obvious and Wopt could achieve less than twice the constraint length (Note that the window size W is compared with the constraint length in this paper at the meaning of the number of uncoupled codes included, i.e., W is compared with w + 1.) for several edge spreading patterns. Hence the practical QC-SC-LDPC code design might not be limited to QC-SC-LDPC codes with small constraint length, which are beneficial to maintaining the universality and improving the code performance. Moreover, the optimal window sizes Wopt are similar over both BI-AWGN channel and BI-Rayleigh fading channel, which indicates that Wopt could be universal due to the spatial-coupled structure as well.
Qualitatively, the existence of the optimal window size under constraints of equal decoding complexity can be briefly explained as follows. The local constraints of different layers are weak with small window size W, which limits the benefit out of spatial-coupling and leads to the non-effectiveness of message passing within the window. Meanwhile, the effect of spatial-coupling is ensured with large window size W, but the iteration number within the window is reduced, which results in message passing inefficiency within the window as well. Thus there should be an optimal window size that balances the strength of local constraints and the iteration number within the window.
To further explore the relation between the optimal window size Wopt and the smoothing parameter w, all possible Bpattern with the size 1 × 2 uncoupled base matrices Bunc and smoothing parameter w varied from 2 to 8 are enumerated. The parameters L and w are set the same as the previous

example, and the edge spreading patterns which lead to the
variable-node or check-node degrees less than 2 for BSC after row-removal are excluded for maintaining the linear minimum
distance property. The total decoding complexity is set as I¯1 = 30 and the window size W is transversed from w + 1 to 30, which means that the optimal window size Wopt ≥ 30 could not be detected. The SNR thresholds are derived at BER = 10−10 under BI-AWGN channel.
As shown in Fig. 5, 94% of the edge spreading patterns have valid optimal window size Wopt < 30, and the relevance of the optimal window size Wopt and the smoothing parameter w has been demonstrated quite weak. Moreover, the specific
structure of the edge spreading patterns Bpattern is highly relevant to the optimal window size W. Intuitively, it could be
observed that the edge spreading patterns Bpattern with smaller SNR threshold gaps have lower optimal window size Wopt. A possible explanation is that the spatial-coupling is strong for
these edge spreading patterns, such that small W is enough for
message passing and large iteration number within the window
is more beneficial. Generally, many features of Bpattern could affect Wopt, which need to be further studied. Furthermore, the optimal window sizes Wopt might conversely influence the edge spreading patterns design in practical systems.

V. IMPROVED SLIDING WINDOW DECODING

In this Section, the improvement of layered sliding win-

dow decoding under limited total code length nSC is proposed, including the choice of window size W in Section V-A and

the new early termination scheme in Section V-B. The QC-SC-

LDPC code designed in [13] is employed in following sections

to validate the performance of proposed layered sliding win-

dow decoding schemes, whose true rate is Rtrue = 2/3 and

edge spreading pattern is

⎡

⎤

111

Bpattern = ⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢11111

1 1 0 0 0

00101⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥.

(12)

100

The coupling length is chosen L = 40 and the last w = w−2
rows of the base matrix BSC are removed. The lifting size is chosen Z = 768, which results in the total code length nSC = 92160 and the constraint length nconst = 16128.

A. Choice of Window Size
The QC-MET-DE analysis of the optimal window size Wopt in Section IV could effectively guide the determination of the window size W in practical systems. Nevertheless, the optimal window size Wopt might be changed under finite total code length nSC according to the scaling law. Moreover, the performance comparison for different window sizes W under constraints of practical complexity is hard, since the noninteger iteration number within each window is impractical for implementation. Thus the robustness of the performance near Wopt is employed, and the window size W could be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 68, NO. 2, JUNE 2022

Fig. 5. Optimal window sizes Wopt vs. SNR threshold gaps to Shannon limit of BI-AWGN channel at Wopt with decoding complexity I¯1 = 30 under layered sliding window decoding. The smoothing parameter w = 3 ∼ 8 cases are shown respectively. The optimal window sizes Wopt corresponding to the minimum SNR threshold gap of each smoothing parameter w is shown via colored dashed line.

the final base matrix BSC are shown in Fig. 6(a), where the SNR thresholds under BI-AWGN channel are observed at BER = 10−10. Under limited code length nSC = 92160, the simulation results of the SNR thresholds under BI-AWGN channel at BER = 10−5 are shown in Fig. 6(b). Obviously,
the SNR thresholds under BI-AWGN channel for window size W = 15 ∼ 17 under I¯1 = 30 ∼ 60 are similar in both cases. Hence it could be inferred that the optimal window size Wopt is approximately near 16. The window size is finally chosen as W = 16 in the following sections, which is equivalent to
exactly twice the constraint length. The decoding complexity
and latency are largely reduced compared to the empirically
chosen window size.

B. Early Termination Schemes

For fixed layered sliding window decoding, the iteration

number within each window achieves the pre-set maximum

iteration number Imax. Nevertheless, there exist windows in

which the decoding process could converge fast, such that

extra cost of decoding complexity would be spent when all

the Imax iterations are performed within these windows. Hence

early termination (ET) schemes have been proposed to reduce

the complexity and latency of sliding window decoding.

Under ET schemes, the window sliding is controlled by

ET conditions, which are generally to decide when to stop the

Fig. 6. SNR thresholds under BI-AWGN channel vs. total decoding complexity I¯1 for window size W = 12 ∼ 17. a) QC-MET-DE analytical results. b) Simulation results.

iteration within the current window, when the iteration number is less than Imax but the degradation of decoding efficiency within the window is notable. The ET strategies in previous

works could mainly be separated into two distinct approaches:

chosen flexibly according to the requirements of practical systems.
We consider the QC-SC-LDPC code described in this section. The performance of fixed layered sliding window

the parity check (PC-) based approach [22] and the LLR-based approach [24]–[26]. Under LLR-based approach, the soft-BER estimate of each variable node j in the final parity-check matrix HSC is derived as

decoding for window size W = 12 ∼ 17 is shown in Fig. 6. Specifically, the QC-MET-DE analytical results of

1

BERj = 1 + e|Lj| ,

(13)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: SLIDING WINDOW DECODING FOR QC-SC-LDPC CODES UNDER CONSTRAINT OF IMPLEMENTATION COMPLEXITY

313

where Lj denotes the LLR of the variable node j. The ET conditions are normally to decide whether the mean estimate BER of the given spatial positions within the current window is below the pre-set threshold δ. By contrast, the ET conditions under PC-based approach are generally to decide whether the assigned parity-check equations within the current window are satisfied. The PC-based approach needs only the hard-decision and logical operations, while the LLR-based approach requires exponential computing operations which are more complex. Hence the PC-based approach is better than the LLR-based approach by means of reducing the extra complexity.
Nevertheless, the PC-based approach does not utilize the LLR amplitude information, and might face the problem that the satisfaction of parity-check equations is unpredictable and unstable, since some variable nodes have output LLRs around zero and the signs of these LLRs could change frequently. Hence the PC-based approach might result in more undetected bit errors than the LLR-based approach. To solve this inherent problem of the PC-based approach and maintain its low extra complexity, the PC-based approach is modified such that the given parity-check equations within the current window should be consecutively satisfied for several iterations, while the signs of the output LLRs corresponding to these parity-check equations should remain unchanged. Hence the unpredictable and unstable satisfaction of paritycheck equations caused by near-zero LLRs could be avoided, and the probability of undetected bit errors would be largely reduced.
Moreover, ET schemes proposed in previous works majorly consider the complexity reduction in high-SNR cases. In lowSNR cases, normally all the Imax iterations within the window should be performed to make decoding process converged. Hence the complexity reduction is little for these ET schemes in low-SNR cases. Nevertheless, the decoding failures would happen frequently in low-SNR cases, and the total decoding process could be stopped earlier when the error propagation might lead to high probability of decoding failure in the following windows. Therefore, another type of ET conditions could be employed to further reduce the decoding complexity and latency in low-SNR cases. To distinguish these two types of ET conditions, conventional ET conditions are called as Type-1 ET conditions, while the ET conditions to stop the total decoding process are called as Type-2 ET conditions. In this paper, the Type-2 ET conditions are also PC-based, where the ratio of non-satisfied parity-check equations related to the current window is the criterion to stop the total decoding process.
For the QC-SC-LDPC code described in this section, the specific ET conditions are set as follows. For Type-1 ET conditions, all the parity-check equations of the first two layers within the window should be consecutively satisfied for not less than 3 iterations, and all the parity-check equations of the third layer within the window should be consecutively satisfied for not less than 2 iterations. Meanwhile, the signs of the output LLRs corresponding to these parity-check equations should remain unchanged. For Type-2 ET conditions, the rate of not-satisfied parity-check equations of the first three layers should all exceed the threshold value p = 0.0625. The

Fig. 7. (a) BER simulations of fixed layered sliding window decoding and layered sliding window decoding with different ET schemes. (b) The ratio of the total decoding complexity of layered sliding window decoding with different ET schemes to the total decoding complexity of fixed layered sliding window decoding.
parameters above for Type-1 and Type-2 ET conditions are chosen empirically, according to the practical requirement of the allowed SNR loss and the reduced complexity. In the case of different channel conditions or different underlying codes, these parameters could be empirically set initially and adjusted gradually and adaptively. BER simulations are carried out to explore the effect of Type-1 ET conditions and Type-2 ET conditions on the decoding complexity and decoding performance. With the window size W = 16 and the max iteration number within each window Imax = 2, the simulations are conducted over BI-AWGN channel.
From Fig. 7(a), the Type-1 ET conditions would lead to SNR loss no more than 0.025dB, while the SNR loss caused by Type-2 ET conditions is negligible. From Fig. 7(b), it can be observed that Type-1 ET conditions would lead to notable decoding complexity reduction at high-SNR region, while Type-2 ET conditions would lead to notable decoding complexity reduction at low-SNR region. Combining Type-1 and Type-2 ET conditions, the total decoding complexity would reduce to not more than 72% for all SNR values, with SNR loss no more than 0.025 dB. Therefore, the effectiveness of the proposed ET conditions is demonstrated.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, preliminary simulation results are presented to demonstrate the performance and robustness of QC-SCLDPC coded transmission scheme with proposed layered sliding window decoding under constraints of practical complexity. For simplicity, fixed layered sliding window decoding with W = 16 and Imax = 3 is employed in the proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 68, NO. 2, JUNE 2022

Fig. 8. BER (solid curves) and FER (dashed curves) simulations with QPSK Fig. 9. BER (solid curves) and FER (dashed curves) simulations with 256-

over AWGN and Rayleigh fading channel.

NUC over AWGN and Rayleigh fading channel.

scheme. The simulation results of the rate-2/3 ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes of length 16200 and 64800 under layered decoding with decoding complexity I = 24, referred to as scheme A and B, respectively, are also provided as benchmarks. The complexity of fixed layered sliding window decoding is set twice as that of scheme A/B, based on our preliminary observations that similar performance gap from when the complexity is not constrained, i.e., I → ∞, could be obtained by the proposed scheme and scheme A/B in that case. A possible explanation is that only one direction of the two decoding waves are reserved for sliding window decoding, which influence its inherent message passing efficiency. The improvement of sliding window decoding by reserving both the two directions of decoding waves could be further studied.
To verify whether proposed layered sliding window decoding could maintain the robustness of QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme, the simulation are conducted over different coded modulation modes and channel conditions. Specifically, the non-uniform constellations (NUCs) of modulation order 256, 1024 and 4096 from ATSC 3.0 for rate-2/3 LDPC codes, as well as QPSK, are chosen for simulations. Two channel models, i.e., AWGN channel and Rayleigh fading channel, are considered. Independent mapping is employed at the receiver, and MAP algorithm is employed for symbol-by symbol demapping. In scheme A/B, the corresponding bitinterleavers from ATSC 3.0, which are specially designed for each pair of modulation order and code rate, are also adopted, while the same simple bit-interleaver is employed for QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme.
The BER and frame error rate (FER) curves of three schemes for QPSK and 256-NUC are depicted in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9, respectively, and the curves for 1024-NUC and 4096NUC are shown in Fig. 9. The corresponding theoretical SNR thresholds are also provided. Then the SNR thresholds of the three schemes for different cases are obtained at FER = 10−3 and BER = 10−5, and the gaps to corresponding theoretical thresholds are summarized in Table I.
Since the finite-length performance and computational complexity of QC-SC-LDPC codes are mainly determined by the constraint length, the QC-SC-LDPC codes with constraint length nconst are usually compared with the conventional LDPC block codes with code length equal to nconst [16], [17], [36], [37]. Actually, the QC-SC-LDPC code

TABLE I GAPS OF SNR THRESHOLDS AT BER = 10−5 AND FER = 10−3 TO
CORRESPONDING THEORETICAL THRESHOLDS SNRtheo
for simulation has nconst = 16128, which is close to the code length of ATSC 3.0 LDPC code of length 16200 in scheme A. At FER = 10−3, the threshold gaps of scheme A are 0.1 ∼ 0.2 dB larger than those of the proposed scheme for all the cases. Furthermore, the threshold gaps of the proposed scheme are just 0.02 ∼ 0.11 dB larger than those of scheme B for all the cases at FER = 10−3. The threshold gaps at BER = 10−5 of the proposed scheme slightly degrade, since error propagation of sliding window decoding is more severe, which would lead to burst-like error patterns. Nevertheless, these burst-like error patterns could be detected early by proposed Type-2 ET conditions and decoding could be stopped promptly, which would not lead to extra bit errors. Besides, enabling bidirectional window shifting as in [24] could also efficiently avoid these burst-like error patterns.
From these simulation results, it can be concluded that the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme with proposed layered sliding window decoding can achieve comparable thresholds to scheme B and notably better thresholds than scheme A under different coded modulation modes and channel conditions, though the same simple bit-interleaver is employed instead of those optimized case by case. Moreover, compared to conventional full BP decoding, the complexity of proposed layered sliding window decoding reduces to twice as that of scheme A and scheme B, which is acceptable in practical systems. Actually, it can be inferred from the simulation results that the proposed scheme would still achieve comparable thresholds to scheme A with similar decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: SLIDING WINDOW DECODING FOR QC-SC-LDPC CODES UNDER CONSTRAINT OF IMPLEMENTATION COMPLEXITY

315

Fig. 10. BER (solid curves) and FER (dashed curves) simulations with 1024-NUC and 4096-NUC over AWGN and Rayleigh fading channel.
complexity. Employing proposed ET conditions, the decoding complexity could be further reduced. Hence the performance and robustness of the proposed scheme are demonstrated.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper focuses on the analysis and improvement of sliding window decoding, for the practical implementation of QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission schemes in future DTTB systems. A QC-MET-DE analysis method of sliding window decoding is proposed. Based on the QC-MET-DE analysis, the relevance between the optimal window size and the constraint length under constraints of practical complexity is analyzed. From the analysis results, the optimal window size could achieve less than twice the constraint length, which are beneficial to the QC-SC-LDPC code design in practical systems. Then an improved sliding window decoding method including the optimal choice of window size and a new early termination scheme is proposed, which could further reduce the decoding complexity while maintain the decoding performance. Finally, simulations are carried out to demonstrate the performance and robustness of the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme with proposed layered sliding window decoding. Simulation results show that the proposed scheme could achieve comparable performance and better robustness, with the decoding complexity at most twice of conventional LDPC coded transmission schemes. Hence QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme with proposed layered sliding window decoding could be a competitive candidate in future DTTB systems.
In the future, we will study how to extend the proposed scheme to different scenarios not limited to DTTB. The universally capacity-approaching performance of QC-SC-LDPC codes could guarantee the better adaptability and simplicity of the proposed scheme under these different scenarios, compared to conventional LDPC coded transmission schemes. To validate this, we will extend QC-MET-DE analysis of the proposed scheme to generalized channel models, and then sufficient simulations under practical constraints will be conducted. For special scenarios such as optical communications, quantized BP decoding for QC-SC-LDPC codes will be further analyzed to meet the requirement of high throughput under these scenarios.

REFERENCES
[1] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[2] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.
[3] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec. 2013.
[4] A. Yedla, M. El-Khamy, J. Lee, and I. Kang, “Performance of spatiallycoupled LDPC codes and threshold saturation over BICM channels,” 2013, arXiv:1303.0296.
[5] A. Yedla, P. S. Nguyen, H. D. Pfister, and K. R. Narayanan, “Universal codes for the Gaussian MAC via spatial coupling,” in Proc. 49th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput. (Allerton), 2011, pp. 1801–1808.
[6] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Wave-like solutions of general 1-D spatially coupled systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 4117–4157, Aug. 2015.
[7] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broad-Band Satellite Applications, ETSI Standard EN 302 307, Mar. 2013.
[8] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame Structure Channel Coding and Modulation for a Second Generation Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting System (DVB-T2), ETSI Standard EN 302 755, Apr. 2012.
[9] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Next Generation Broadcasting System to Handheld, Physical Layer Specification (DVB-NGH), ETSI Standard EN 303 105, Jun. 2013.
[10] K.-J. Kim et al., “Low-density parity-check codes for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 189–196, Mar. 2016.
[11] Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting System, Chinese National Standard GB 20600–2006, Aug. 2006.
[12] “Error-correction, data framing, modulation and emission methods for digital terrestrial television broadcasting,” Int. Telecommun. Union, Geneva, Switzerland, ITU Recommendation BT. 1306-7, Jun. 2015.
[13] Y. Zhang, K. Peng, J. Song, and Y. Wu, “Quasi-cyclic spatially coupled LDPC code for broadcasting,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 187–194, Mar. 2020.
[14] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[15] A. R. Iyengar, P. H. Siegel, R. L. Urbanke, and J. K. Wolf, “Windowed decoding of spatially coupled codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 2277–2292, Apr. 2013.
[16] D. J. Costello, L. Dolecek, T. E. Fuja, J. Kliewer, D. G. M. Mitchell, and R. Smarandache, “Spatially coupled sparse codes on graphs: Theory and practice,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 168–176, Jul. 2014.
[17] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[18] M. Stinner and P. M. Olmos, “On the waterfall performance of finitelength SC-LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 345–361, Feb. 2016.
[19] L. Schmalen, D. Suikat, V. Aref, and D. Roesener, “On the design of capacity-approaching unit-memory spatially coupled LDPC codes for optical communications,” in Proc. 42nd Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun. (ECOC), Dusseldorf, Germany, 2016, pp. 1–3.
[20] M. Battaglioni, A. Tasdighi, G. Cancellieri, F. Chiaraluce, and M. Baldi, “Design and analysis of time-invariant SC-LDPC convolutional codes with small constraint length,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 918–931, Mar. 2018.
[21] S. Naseri and A. H. Banihashemi, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes with small constraint length and low error floor,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 254–258, Feb. 2020.
[22] J. Frenzel, S. H. Müller-Weinfurtner, J. Huber, and R. R. Müller, “Comparison of windowed-decoder configurations for spatially coupled LDPC codes under equal-complexity constraints,” 2020, arXiv:2004.12973.
[23] M. Battaglioni, M. Baldi, and E. Paolini, “Complexity-constrained spatially coupled LDPC codes based on protographs,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst. (ISWCS), Bologna, Italy, 2017, pp. 49–53.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

316

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 68, NO. 2, JUNE 2022

[24] K. Klaiber, S. Cammerer, L. Schmalen, and S. T. Brink, “Avoiding burstlike error patterns in windowed decoding of spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Hong Kong, 2018, pp. 1–5.
[25] N. Ul Hassan, A. E. Pusane, M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, and D. J. Costello, “Reduced complexity window decoding schedules for coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2012, pp. 20–24.
[26] N. Ul Hassan, A. E. Pusane, M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, and D. J. Costello, “Non-uniform window decoding schedules for spatially coupled LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 501–510, Feb. 2017.
[27] S. Khittiwitchayakul, W. Phakphisut, and P. Supnithi, “Reduced complexity window decoding of spatially coupled LDPC codes for magnetic recording systems,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 1–5, Nov. 2018.
[28] S. Chen, K. Peng, J. Song, and Y. Zhang, “Performance analysis of practical QC-LDPC codes: From DVB-S2 to ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 172–178, Mar. 2019.
[29] K. Tazoe, K. Kasai, and K. Sakaniwa, “Efficient termination of spatiallycoupled codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2012, pp. 30–34.
[30] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS), Austin, TX, USA, 2004, pp. 107–112.
[31] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, USA, IPN Progress Rep. 42-154, Aug. 2003.
[32] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[33] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Multi-Edge Type LDPC Codes, ISIT Talk, Piscataway, NJ, USA, Jun. 2002.
[34] S.-Y. Chung, “On the construction of some capacity-approaching coding schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, Sep. 2000.
[35] S. Khittiwitchayakul, W. Phakphisut, and P. Supnithi, “EXIT chart analysis of serial window decoding of SC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. 34th Int. Techn. Conf. Circuits/Syst. Comput. Commun. (ITC-CSCC), JeJu, South Korea, 2019, pp. 1–4.
[36] K. Huang, D. G. M. Mitchell, L. Wei, X. Ma, and D. J. Costello, “Performance comparison of LDPC block and spatially coupled codes over GF(q),” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 592–604, Mar. 2015.
[37] B. Amiri, A. Reisizadehmobarakeh, H. Esfahanizadeh, J. Kliewer, and L. Dolecek, “Optimized design of finite-length separable circulant-based spatially-coupled codes: An absorbing set-based analysis,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 4029–4043, Oct. 2016.

Kewu Peng (Senior Member, IEEE) was born in Hefei, China. He received the B.E. degree in electronics engineering from the Hefei University of Technology in 1993, the M.E. degree in electronics engineering from Tsinghua University in 1996, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, in 2003. He was a Researcher and a Lecturer with the Department of Electronics Engineering, Tsinghua University from August 1996 to August 1999. Since January 2005, he has been with the Digital Television Research Center, Tsinghua University, as a Research Staff, an Assistant Researcher in 2006, and an Associate Professor in 2009. His recent contributions focus on SC-LDPC codes and NOMA. He has published more than 90 journals and conference papers. He holds more than 80 China patents. His main research interests include mobile/wireless communications, digital terrestrial/television broadcasting, and embedded image/video transmission.
Jian Song (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Tsinghua University in 1990 and 1995, respectively. As a Postdoctoral Researcher, he was with The Chinese University of Hong Kong and the University of Waterloo, Canada, in 1996 and 1997, respectively. Then, he worked for industry in USA for seven years. He joined the Faculty Team, Tsinghua University as a Professor in 2005, where he is currently the Director of DTV Technology Research and Development Center. He has published over 300 peer-reviewed journals and conference papers. He has coauthored several books and book chapters in the aforementioned areas. He holds two U.S. and over 80 Chinese patents. His research interests include digital television terrestrial broadcasting, wireless communication, power line communication, and visible light communications. He was a recipient of the IEEE Scott Helt Memorial Award in 2015. He is a Fellow of IET, CIC, and CIE.

Zhitong He (Student Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. degree in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2020, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree. His research area is wireless/mobile communication networks, and his current research interests include channel coding and coded modulation.

Yushu Zhang received the B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University in 2015 and 2020, respectively. Since 2020, she has been an Assistant Researcher with the Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her current research interests include signal processing, source localization, channel coding, coded modulation, and nonorthogonal multiple access.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:21:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

