Discrete Polar Decoder using Information Bottleneck Method

Akira Yamada Graduate School of Science and Technology
Keio University Yokohama, Japan 223-8522 yamada@ohtsuki.ics.keio.ac.jp

Tomoaki Ohtsuki Department of Information and Computer Science
Keio University Yokohama, Japan 223-8522
ohtsuki@ics.keio.ac.jp

Abstract—Polar codes are attracting much attention and being used for control channels of the 5th generation of mobile communication system (5G). As a feature, it is easier to implement encoder and decoder than Turbo codes and LDPC (Low Density Parity Check) codes. One of the decoding methods of polar codes is BP (Belief Propagation) decoding, which can decode in parallel, so that decoding can be performed at high speed. However, due to hardware limitation, calculations on the decoder get very complicated. This issue can be solved by using the information bottleneck method. This method compresses an observation variable to a quantized one while attempting to preserve the mutual information shared with a relevant random variable. In the conventional research, the information bottleneck method is applied to the BP decoding of the LDPC codes. In this paper, the information bottleneck method is used for the BP decoding of polar codes. The BP decoding of polar codes is distinct from that of LDPC codes. It has several types of the messages, and each time a message is updated, the decoding becomes more complex. By using the information bottleneck method, the decoder can compress the channel outputs and the messages of BP into unsigned integers while preventing degradation of the error correcting performance. Thus, we can reduce the complexity of calculation in the decoding process and easily implement the decoder. This paper also investigates the minimum bit width for quantization with negligible degradation and the suboptimal Eb/N0 for designing the lookup tables. These lookup tables are used for updating the messages. The simulation results show that the error correcting capability of the discrete polar decoders of the proposed method is negligibly degraded compared to the BP decoding without compression.
Index Terms—Polar Codes, BP Decoding, Information Bottleneck Method
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the spread of smart phones and tablets has increased the traffic rapidly, which made it necessary to have higher speed, larger capacity, and more reliable communications. Thus, the 5th generation of mobile communication system (5G) is attracting a great deal of attention. The 5G requires low latency and high speed communications. Moreover, multiple access, low cost and low power consumption are also required [1]. In wireless communications, channel coding takes an important role for these requirements. In these days, Turbo codes [2] and Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes [3] are used as main channel coding scheme, and one of the
Identify applicable funding agency here. If none, delete this.

further noted coding scheme is polar codes. Polar codes are proposed by Arikan in 2009, and can achieve the symmetric capacity in binary input discrete memoryless channels [4]. The error correcting capability of polar codes is better than that of LDPC and that of Turbo codes [5], additionally, encoders and decoders of polar codes are easy to implement [1]. Polar codes have mainly two decoding methods: one method is Successive Cancellation (SC) decoding [4] and the other is Belief Propagation (BP) decoding [6]. The SC decoder successively estimates the transmitted bits. Successive Cancellation List (SCL) [7] which is the modified version of SC has better error correcting capability close to that of the Maximum Likelihood (ML) decoder. The problems with this decoder is its low throughput, and if errors occur in the early stage of the decoding process, errors are propagated to the later decoding process. On the other hand, the BP decoding algorithm can achieve better error correcting performance in low SNR (Signal to Noise Ratio) and can be implemented in parallel, which makes it possible to decode at high speed. The drawbacks of the BP decoding algorithm are the difficulty in hardware implementation and the complexity in calculation.
Quantization is one of the means to solve these complexities. As one of the effective quantization methods, we use the information bottleneck method [8], that is a generic clustering framework in the machine learning fields. This is used for several researches in the wireless communications [9] [10]. The conventional research [11] applies this method to the LDPC codes for the quantization of the messages in check nodes and variable nodes.
The BP decoding of polar codes has four types of messages, which leads to a complexity in the decoding process. For this reason, in this paper, the information bottleneck method is used for the decoding of polar codes. Quantization by information bottleneck method makes the decoding process discretized, then the decoder can be called the discrete polar decoder. This paper proposes a discrete polar decoder using only unsigned integers in the BP decoding. The contribution of an approach is to reduce the complexities of hardware and calculation. This paper compares the BER (Bit Error Rate) performance of BP decoder, discrete polar decoder, and BP decoder whose only channel outputs are quantized into unsigned integers. The simulation results show that the discrete polar decoder

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Un9iv7.8D-1o-w7n2l8o1a-d5e0d89o-n5J/2u0n/e$2341,.20002©6 2a0t 2101:I0E5E:0E6 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

can achieve almost same BER as the BP decoding without quantization.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, a brief overview of polar codes is presented and their encoder and decoder are introduced. In Section III, the conventional research about discrete LDPC decoder including the information bottleneck method is presented. In Section IV, the proposed method is described in detail, in particular the difference between discrete LDPC decoder and discrete polar decoder. Section V shows the simulation results of several decoders, and Section VI concludes the paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, coding and decoding of the polar code are presented. In particular, this paper focuses only on BP decoding algorithm.

Fig. 1. The computational block of polar code. n = log2 N and the node stores the left and right messages. i and j denote the row and column number of the node, respectively.

A. Coding

Polar codes are based on channel polarization, which consists of three steps: channel copy, channel combine, and channel split. Channel polarization transforms N independent copies of a channel into polarized channels. The capacity of K polarized channels is close to 1; on the other hand, that of N − K polarized channels is close to 0, where N is a block length and K is the number of information bits. The generator matrix G can be written as follows

G = BN F⊗n.

(1)

Here, BN is a permutation matrix, F =

1 1

0 1

,n =

log2 N , F⊗n = F ⊗ F⊗(n−1), and ⊗ expresses the operation of exclusive or. The relation of the code sequence x1N and the information sequence u1N is expressed as:

x1N = uN1 G.

(2)

Besides, N − K bits are set to 0, denoted as frozen bits, and K bits are called information bits in general. To choose the best K out of N channels, we have to estimate the channel capacities, however, accurate estimation is not easy. Several methods estimating channel capacities are proposed. A method based on simulations is proposed in [4]. The most popular method, however, in the one using Bhattacharyya [4] parameters. The transition probability matrices (TPMs) of channels can be used to estimate the channel qualities [13]. The Gaussian Approximation (GA) is the methods estimating the log likelihood ratio (LLR) at intermediate stages as Gaussian variables [14]. The method using the information bottleneck method also exists [15]. In this paper, we use GA due to its simplicity. Thus, (N, K) polar codes are configured.

B. BP decoding algorithm
BP decoding is based on stochastic process that calculates marginal probability by conveying messages representing reliability of each bit. In this paper, LLR is treated as a message denoting the reliability to calculate the a posteriori probability of the transmitted bit. BP decoding uses a factor

Fig. 2. The factor graph of N = 8 polar code.

graph consisting of computational blocks as in Figs. 1, 2. This

factor graph has N/2 × log2 N computational blocks. (i, j) denotes the number of nodes holding LLR messages, and in

each block, the following calculation is carried out.

⎧

⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪

Li(,tj+1) = f (Li(+t)1,j , L(i+t)1,j+2n−i + Ri(,tj)+2n−i ) L(i,tj++12)n−i = Li(+t)1,j+2n−i + f (L(i+t)1,j , Ri(,tj))

⎪⎪⎪⎩⎪

Ri(+t+11,j) = f (Ri(,tj), Li(+t)1,j+2n−i + Ri(+t)1,j+2n−i ) Ri(+t+11,j)+2n−i = Ri(,tj)+2n−i + f (Ri(,tj), Li(+t)1,j )

(3)

where t is an iteration number, and

f (x, y)

log 1 + xy x+y

(4)

≈ sgn(x)sgn(y) min(|x|, |y|).

(5)

L expresses the messages propagated from right to left and it is called the left message. Similarly R is called the right message. In the decoding process, at first, LLRs are calculated from channel outputs and the left messages are generated by the following equation in the computational blocks.

P (y|x = 0)

Ln+1,j = ln P (y|x = 1)

(6)

This left messages are passed from right to left in the factor graph, then the right messages are calculated after the (1, j)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:05:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3. The relationship between different variables in the information bottleneck method [8].

Fig. 4. The quantization of channel outputs.

left messages are generated. The initialization of the right

message is

R1,j

=

ln

P (u P (u

= =

0) 1)

=

∞.

(7)

The values of the other messages are set to 0 at the beginning of the decoding processes. The left messages are passed from right to left and the right messages are passed from left to right. This process is one iteration. BP decoding repeats this process several times while using the information of frozen bits and channel outputs, thereby marginal probabilities of each bit can be obtained. The factor graph has N/2 × log2 N computational blocks, and the calculation in real numbers is done in this block. This leads to high computational and hardware complexities.

III. CONVENTIONAL RESEARCH ON QUANTIZATION USING
THE INFORMATION BOTTLENECK METHOD
The method that simplifies the computational and hardware complexities by applying the information bottleneck method to LDPC decoding process is proposed in [11]. This section presents a brief overview of the information bottleneck method and the discrete LDPC decoders.

A. Information Bottleneck Method

The information bottleneck method is an unsupervised clus-

tering framework in the machine learning field [8]. The infor-

mation bottleneck method uses three variables, an observed

variable Y , a relevant variable X, and a compression variable

T . The relationship between these variables is summarized in

Fig. 3, where I(X; Y ) =

x∈X

y∈Y

p(x,

y)

log

p(x,y) p(x)p(y)

.

We need to find a suitable conditional distribution p(t|y) that

maximizes I(T ; X) and minimizes I(T ; Y ). The Lagrange

method can be used to solve this problem and using the trade-

off parameter β, the Lagrangian is as follows [8]:

L{p(t|y)} = I(T ; Y ) − βI(T ; X).

(8)

In both the conventional and proposed methods, we consider β → ∞, which means maximizing I(T ; X) and preserving

the relevant information. It is important to decide the value of mapping p(t|y) that maximizes I(T ; X) in the information bottleneck method. How to decide p(t|y) is shown in [11].

B. Discrete LDPC decoder

Since the information bottleneck method can set the compression variable T arbitrarily, the conventional research uses the set of unsigned integers, which enables design of the discrete LDPC decoders treating decoding processes with discrete values thoroughly. The observed variable Y and the relevant variable X are the set of received values and transmitted bits, respectively.
1) Quantizer Design: The conventional research [11] proposes the design of the quantizer that has the optimum quantize boundaries in terms of mutual information. The channel output quantization is needed to design the lookup tables, and mandatory for the discrete LDPC decoders. At first, channel outputs are discretized as shown in Fig. 4, for example channel outputs in the range [−M, +M ] are discretized into |Y| = 20 unsigned integers. y is a received value and x is a transmitted bit. Next, in the case of an AWGN channel, the joint probability density function (pdf) p(x, y) is denoted as follows:

p(x, y) = √1 exp 2 2πσ

−

|y

− s(x)|2 2σn2

.

(9)

Here, σn2 is a noise variance and if x = 1, s(x) = +1; otherwise s(x) = −1. This p(x, y) is regarded as an input

of the quantizer. Since the details of the quantizer are shown

in [11], this paper describes it briefly. The quantizer repeats

drawing and merging the discretized channel outputs in accor-

dance with the Lagrangian, which defines the boundaries of

the quantization. Thus, the quantizer can obtain the mapping

function p(t|y). This p(t|y) has quantization regions that

preserve the information of the transmitted bits for the output

cardinality T , because it considers the Lagrangian letting

β → ∞. This quantizer is important for the discrete decoder

and is used in the proposed method. Furthermore, the output

of this quantizer enables to calculate LLR:

LLR

=

log

Pr(x Pr(x

= =

0|t) 1|t)

.

(10)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:05:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 6. The relationship of each message in the computational block of polar BP decoding.

Fig. 5. The check node operation.

This information will be used for check node operations later.
2) Lookup table of the check node operation: The conventional method aims to replace the check node and variable node operations with lookup tables, because these operations are complicated. Though only check node operations are shown, variable node operations are almost the same as those. The check node operations are illustrated in Fig. 5. dc represents the number of nodes connecting to a check node and the purpose of the decoding is to estimate the bit b. To generate a message for a certain target node, the check node processes dc − 1 messages and propagate tc which is informative for the target bit xc. Generating tc needs to create lookup tables describing the relationship between input messages yc = [y0c, y1c, ..., ydcc−2]T and tc. However, the input messages can take so many possible combinations, which increases the entries of a lookup table and makes it difficult to implement it. Because of this problem, new definitions of the variables are introduced [11]:

y0c = [y0c, y1c]T

(11)

ymc = [tm c −1, ymc +1]T , m ≥ 1.

(12)

Since the check node carries out the operations successively,
the number of entries can be reduced. The joint pdf is needed to generate tc.

p(xc0, y0c) =

p(b0c , y0c)p(b1c , y1c) and

(b0c , bc1 ) : x0c = bc0 ⊕b1c

(13)

p(xcm, ymc ) =

p(bm c +1, ymc +1)p(xm c −1, tm c −1)

(xcm−1 , bm+1 c ) :

xm c = xm c −1 ⊕bm c +1

(14)

for m ≥ 1. Since this calculation obtains the input of the

quantizer, the quantization using the information bottleneck

method can be applied in the design of lookup tables. This

quantizer also provides LLRs from eq. (10), thus y are ordered

by the LLRs and grouped by the same LLRs. Unsigned

integers are allocated to each group as outputs of the lookup

table, and these can be regarded as channel outputs. Then,

unsigned integers are regarded as compression outputs maximizing I(T ; X) and also can be used as quantizer inputs. Consequently, the check node operations can be replaced with lookup tables. Similarly, variable node operations can be replaced, however, this paper omits that.
As a result, using unsigned integers in whole decoding processes makes it possible to implement the discrete LDPC decoders. This conventional research achieves better error correcting performance than min-sum LDPC decoder [16].

IV. PROPOSED METHOD
The drawbacks of the polar BP decoding are the computational and hardware complexities. Therefore, in this paper we attempt to reduce these complexities by applying the idea of the conventional method to the BP decoding of the polar codes. In this section, only the differences between the conventional method and the proposed one will be described.
Compared with the BP decoding of the LDPC codes, joint probability distribution needed to create the lookup table becomes complex. The BP decoding of the LDPC codes processes two messages successively in the check nodes and variable ones for the target node. Each node carries out the same operation, respectively. However, the BP decoding of the polar codes processes three messages for the generation of one message. Furthermore, it has four types of messages and each operation is distinct. For this reason, the polar BP decoding becomes complex. The computational blocks of polar codes are shown in Fig. 6 again to assign the variables to the messages needed for the calculation. The BP decoding of polar codes uses three messages to generate one left-or-right message, and three variables are assigned to each messasge as shown in Fig. 6, where y = [y1, y2, y3] and b = 0 or 1. For example, p(x, t) about the upper left message (the red arrow in Fig. 6) needs the following calculation.

p(b, y) =

p(b1, y1)p(b2, y2)p(b3, y3).

(b1, b2, b3) : b = b1 ⊕ b2 , b2 = b3

(15)

For the other messages, the relationship among b1, b2, b3 changes.
Next, the initialization also changes from that of LDPC code. The initialization of the BP decoding is denoted as eqs. (6), (7) in section II, however the decoding processes are done

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:05:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

with all unsigned integers in the proposed method by using the information bottleneck method. Therefore, the initialization of the right messages becomes

R1,j = 0 (if frozen bit).

(16)

Channel outputs are quantized into |T | unsigned integers by using the quantizer of the conventional method, and the other messages are initialized randomly to |T |/2−1, |T |/2 in order not to be biased.

A. Decoder design
Because the design of the lookup tables is computationally expensive, it is preferable to design lookup tables offline. Channel outputs change for each Eb/N0, so it is optimum to design the lookup tables for each value of Eb/N0. However, this is also computationally expensive, then we use only one particular Eb/N0 for the sake of simplicity. In this case, discrete polar decoder uses mismatched (we refer to this Eb/N0 as a design Eb/N0) Eb/N0 to the actual condition. Accordingly, it is important how we choose the design Eb/N0 that achieves good error correcting performance for other possible Eb/N0.
When the lookup table is designed, we get the joint pdf p(x, t) and it is possible to calculate mutual information I(T ; X). This mutual information denotes the reliability of each bit, therefore pursuing the mutual information growth enables to obtain a suitable Eb/N0 for designing lookup tables. The simulation shown in Fig. 7 with |T | = 16 shows that I(T ; X) gets close to 1 in each iteration and when Eb/N0 = 2.5 dB, I(T ; X) reaches near 1. In fact, the design Eb/N0 = 3.0 dB shows a larger I(T ; X), however, it becomes constant in a small iteration (iteration number = 10). This feature degrades the decoding performance due to the gap between the designed and actual mutual information. We use the iteration number 50 in the simulations, therefore the ideal result is that the mutual information becomes constant at 50 iterations. This is because we want to terminate the iteration in high reliability and an extra iteration is unfavorable. Though a smaller design Eb/N0 matches this situation, its mutual information cannot reach near 1, which also degrades the BER performance. Considering these facts, we use Eb/N0 = 2.5 dB to design the lookup tables and the quantization of channel outputs.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, the performance of the channel output quantizer and discrete polar decoders are shown. Besides, we compare the complexity of the proposed method with that of the BP decoder.

Fig. 7. Pursuing the mutual information I(T ; X) with |T | = 16 over the decoding iterations for Eb/N0 = 2.0, 2.5, 3.0 dB.

TABLE I SIMULATION PARAMETERS.

block length code rate modulation channel
code construction |T |
iteration number

256 1/2 BPSK AWGN GA (Gaussian Approximation) 4, 8, 16 50

the BER performance of the BP decoder without quantization and that of the BP decoder with quantization |T | = 4, 8, 16. The larger the |T | becomes, the better BER performance the decoder achieves, and when |T | = 16, the quantization loss is negligible compared with the BP decoding without the quantization. Therefore, we use a channel quantizer with |T | = 16 in the discrete polar decoder.
Next, the BER of the proposed discrete polar decoder is shown in Fig. 9. The difference between the blue line and the red line denotes the loss for implementation of the lookup tables. In low Eb/N0, the proposed discrete polar decoder achieves almost the same BER performance as the BP decoding. In high Eb/N0, the quantization in both channel outputs and updating messages degrades the bit error rate of the proposed method, because the discrete polar decoder uses only |T | unsigned integers.
In this paper we use a design Eb/N0 = 2.5 dB; however, the investigation of the design Eb/N0 is suboptimal. Thus, there may be a better design Eb/N0 and the discrete polar decoder designed with optimum Eb/N0 may be able to achieve better error rate performance.

A. BER performance
The simulation parameters are listed in Table I. To investigate the performance of the quantizer, we compare the BER performance of the BP decoding without quantization and the BP decoder with q = log2 |T | bit quantization of channel outputs. The bit error rates are shown in Fig. 8. Fig. 8 shows

B. complexity
Based on the eqs. (3) and (5), we calculate the computational complexity of the BP decoding. Eq. (5) has two operations of ‘∗‘ and no operation ‘+‘, and each equation in eq. (3) has no ‘∗‘ and one ‘+‘. As a result, each computational block of BP decoding has 12 ‘∗‘ and 4 ‘+‘. Furthermore,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:05:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

complexity also can be reduced by using the discrete polar decoder.

Fig. 8. The BER performance of the decoders with different quantization bits. The iteration number of all decoders is 50.

VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes the discrete polar decoder. The discrete polar decoder is a decoder using the information bottleneck method, which is a generic clustering methods in the machine learning fields and can compress a certain value into quantized values with small loss. The idea is that the updating of the messages is replaced by the lookup table which is designed using the information bottleneck method. The quantization using this method preserves the information about the transmitted bits. As a result, the proposed discrete polar decoder shows almost the same BER performance as that of the BP decoding without the quantization. In addition, since the discrete polar decoder only uses unsigned integers in message propagation, it can reduce the computational and hardware complexities.

Fig. 9. The BER performances of the proposed method and the BP decoding with and without the quantization of the channel outputs. The iteration number of all decoders is 50.

the BP factor graph has N/2 × log N computational blocks. Finally, we show the computational complexity of the BP decoding in the following table.

TABLE II THE COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY OF THE BP DECODING WHEN A
BLOCK LENGTH IS N .

‘∗‘

‘+‘

Number of operations N/2 × log N × 12 N/2 × log N × 4

Specifically, in this paper, we use the block length N = 256, and the number of ‘∗‘ and ‘+‘ become 8192 and 4096, respectively. Because of these calculations, we show that the BP decoding has high computational complexity. However, in the proposed method, we can decode only by referring to the lookup table, which results in the reduction of the computational complexity. In addition, in the proposed method, we use only 4 bits in the decoding process thoroughly. The hardware

REFERENCES
[1] W. K. Abdulwahab and A. A. Kadhim, “Comparative Study of Channel Coding Schemes for 5G,” ICOASE, pp. 239-243, October. 2018.
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Int. Conf. Commun. ICC’93, pp. 1064-1070, May. 1993.
[3] R. G. Gallager, “Low Density Parity-Check Codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, Vol. 8, pp. 21-28, January. 1962.
[4] E. Arikan, “Channel Polarization:A Method for Constructing CapacityAhieving Codes for Symmetric Binary-Input Memoryless Channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Vol. 55, No. 7, pp. 3051-3073, July. 2009.
[5] H. Man, L. Jianping and L. Yansong, “A comparative study of polar code decoding algorithms,” IEEE 3rd ITOEC, pp. 1221-1225, October. 2017.
[6] E. Arikan, “Polar Code:A pipelined implementation,” in 4th ISBC, pp. 11-14, July. 2010.
[7] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Vol. 61, No. 5, pp. 2213 ᜳ?226, July. 2015.
[8] N. Tishby, F. C. Pereira and W. Bialek, “The information Bottleneck method,” in Proc. 37th Allerton Conf. Commun.Comput, pp. 368-377, September. 1999.
[9] G. Zeitler, R. Koetter, G. Bauch, and J. Widmer, “On quantizer design for soft values in the multiple-access relay channel,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, Dresden, Germany, pp. 1-5, June. 2009.
[10] L. Wang, T. Takahashi, S. Ibi and S. Sampei, “A Study on Replica Generation Using LUT Based on Information Bottleneck for MF-GaBP in Massive MIMO Detection,” 2019 IEEE 90th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2019-Fall), Honolulu, USA, Sept. 2019.
[11] J. Lewandowsky and G. Bauch, “Information-Optimum LDPC Decoders Based on the Information Bottleneck Method,” IEEE Access, Vol. 6, pp. 4054-4071, January. 2018.
[12] E. Arikan, “A performance comparison of polar codes and Reed-Muller codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, Vol. 12, No. 6, pp. 447-449, June. 2008.
[13] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “How to Construct Polar Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 59, No. 10, pp. 6562-6582, July. 2013.
[14] P. Trifonov, “Efficient Design and Decoding of Polar Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 60, No. 11, pp. 3221-3227, August. 2012.
[15] M. Stark, A. Shah and G. Bauch, “Polar Code Construction using the Information Bottleneck Methods,” WCNCN, pp. 7-12 , April. 2018.
[16] J. K.-S. Lee and J. Thorpe, “Memory-efficient decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Adelaide, SA, Australia, pp. 459-463, September. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:05:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

