2020 9th MEDITERRANEAN CONFERENCE ON EMBEDDED COMPUTING

(MECO), 8-11 JUNE 2020, BUDVA, MONTENEGRO

Irregular QC-LDPC Codes Generation Based on EMD Maximization Criterion for Protograph

Aleksei Kharin, Aleksei Dryakhlov, Evgeny Mirokhin, Konstantin Zavertkin, Aleksei Ovinnikov and Evgeny Likhobabin
Department of Telecommunications and Radio Foundations Ryazan State Radio Engineering University Ryazan, Russia 390005
Email: kharin.a.v, drahlov.a.a, mirohin.e.i, zavertkin.k.n, ovinnikov.a.a, likhobabin.e.a@tor.rsreu.ru

Abstract—In this paper a new method for irregular QC-LDPC codes generation with desired EMD characteristics is provided. The method allows to control the minimal EMD value for cycles of length of 4, 6, 8 and 10. Better implementations in terms of EMD values and error correction performance of WiFi codes of length 648 were obtained with the proposed method.
Index Terms—LDPC, quasi-cyclic, extrinsic message degree (EMD)
I. INTRODUCTION It is well-known that low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with soft iterative belief propagation (BP) decoding achieve performances close to the Shannon limit [1]. As binary LDPC codes with proper construction are much easier for encoding and decoding they have become a good choice for most modern communication standards [2]. In this paper we focus on irregular subclass of quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC block codes, which are more suitable for hardware implementation. QCLDPC codes used in practical communication applications are usually constructed of circulant permutation matrices (CPM) most often with single-weight circulant. Currently, most of the LDPC code designs that are remarkable in terms of implementation complexity can be interpreted as long codes derived from short codes by lifting procedure. The procedure applies copy-and-permutation operations to the protograph [3] (base graph), which is a relatively small bipartite graph from which a larger one can be obtained. Intense research activities concerning the protograph-based LDPC codes include particularly design of protographs, analysis of the lifting process and development of methods for effective lifting procedure. Density evolution (DE) [4] and protograph EXIT (PEXIT) [5] techniques are known to facilitate protograph design. This optimization methods enable to design compact protographs, for which the derived QC-LDPC codes are asymptotically close to the capacity for BEC and BIAWGN channels [6]. In practice the number of nodes in protograph is limited, which affects the degree of possible optimization. To obtain the paritycheck matrix of a QC-LDPC code from the base matrix, it
This work was supported by Russian Science Foundation under Grant 1779-20302

is necessary to perform the lifting procedure. Bit error rate performance of codes obtained in such a way mostly depends on the structure of the base matrix, more precisely on its column degree distribution. In turn, the protograph extension algorithm may approach noise immunity with a sufficient level of optimization.
A computationally efficient method for constructing QCLDPC code from base graph having a large girth (g), which is the length of the shortest cycle in the Tanner graph, is by using the modified Progressive-Edge-Growth (PEG) algorithm [7]. Such a simple technique does not allow to sufficiently influence on the error floor effect for irregular constructions. Since not all short cycles are equally harmful, selective treatment of more harmful cycles allows us to do cycle conditioning effectively. There are two different approaches that are most commonly found in the literature, which increase the noise immunity in the error floor region. In the first category researches try to analyse different error-prone structures, such as pseudocodewords [8], [9], trapping sets [10] and absorbing sets [11] in the plane of their influence on rare errors events at the output of an iterative decoder. This approach is accurate, but not universal, because of high variability in possible subgraphs leading to error floor for different code degree distribution, decoding method, quantization and other practical aspects.
The another approach is based on the idea that by avoiding short cycles from the Tanner graph with low external connectivity, cycles with low Extrinsic Message Degree (EMD) [12] performance of an QC-LDPC code with iterative BP decoding may be increased. This method is more general, than the first one, that’s why it is used in the present work.
In this paper we provide a new method for irregular QCLDPC codes generation with desired EMD characteristics. The key difference between the proposed approach and its predecessors lies in the procedure of the lifting process, which uses the method of routes decomposition into composite cycles. Thus, our algorithm allows to build irregular QC-LDPC codes of high girth and EMD for short length cycles (up to 10 inclusive) without a posteriori tests, contrary to the solutions proposed in the literature [13], [14].
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section

978-1-7281-6949-1/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:01:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2020 9th MEDITERRANEAN CONFERENCE ON EMBEDDED COMPUTING

(MECO), 8-11 JUNE 2020, BUDVA, MONTENEGRO

II contains several common definitions and notations used in this paper. In Section III, the proposed algorithm is presented. Finally, we report about BER performance comparison that demonstrates the effectiveness of our algorithm with known LDPC codes from 802.11n and later specifications.

II. DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS

Let G{V, C} denote a bipartite (Tanner) graph of an (n, k)

QC-LDPC code of rate R = k/n, which consists of the set of

n variable nodes V = {v0, v1, ..., vn−1} and the set of m =

n − k check nodes C = {c0, c1, ..., cm−1}. An QC-LDPC code

is characterized dc(i)m j−b1, where

by the degree assignment dv(i) is the degree of the

sets i-th

dv(i)ni−b 1 and variable node

and dc(j) is the degree of the j-th check node of the protograph

Gb{Vb, Cb}, nb = n/z, mb = (n − k)/z, z is called the lifting

factor. For an QC-LDPC code, the variable and check degree

profile, i.e., λ(x), ρ(x), which influences the performance of

the code, can be depicted as

dv− max

dc− max

λ(x) =

λixi−1, ρ(x) =

ρixi−1, (1)

i=dv− min

i=dc− min

where dv−min, dv−max, dc−min, dc−max are the minimum and maximum, variable and check node degree respectively. The parity-check matrix H of a irregular QC-LDPC code can be obtained from the base matrix Hb as H = P Hb , where P is the single-weight cyclic-permutation matrix size of z × z.
The standard [2] specifies QC-LDPC with special structure of Hb matrix, which is divided into two parts: Hb = [Hb1 Hb2]. For all code rates for specification [2] dc−max = dc−min + 1, dv−min = 2, λ2 = (mb − 1)/nb, dv−max ≤ mb, dc−max ≤ nb. All these restrictions are taken into account when developing the code construction algorithm in Section III.
The necessary and sufficient condition [15] for the existence of a cycle of length 2 · l in Hb is

l−1

(pik,jk − pik+1,jk ) = 0 mod z,

(2)

k=0

where il = 0, ik = ik+1, jk = jk+1, 2 ≤ l ≤ g/2 − 1.

We can see that the larger z is, the more degrees of freedom

we get to satisfy the set of equations (2). However, maximizing

of EMD metric, which can be calculated by γ = where dv−i is the degree of the i-th variable node

oif(dthve−

i − 2), cycle,

is not a trivial problem. One of the proposed solutions to obtain

QC-LDPC with optimized girth and EMD sizes is to rely on

the PEG-ACE algorithm for quasi-cyclic codes [12]. We offer

an extended modification of this method.

A. Search flow
The construction algorithm is based on a PEG-like approach. After a constant part of a matrix is set, we start to add new columns. We choose a new column so that a matrix formed by it and by previously constructed part would satisfy the desired properties. Then we switch to the next column. We continue the process until a full matrix will be generated. If at some step we were not able to find a column implementation that would satisfy the desired properties, then we go back to the previous column. We find another implementation of the column and again switch forward to see if it is now possible to construct the matrix. In this manner we move forward-backward across the matrix’s variable part in search of shift values combination that will form a matrix with the desired parameters.
Inside each column we use a very similar approach. We do not try to form a full column at once. Instead we select a shift value for every non-zero element of the column separately. This is possible because the lists of cycles and routes are sorted by its association with the exact element. A cycle or a route is associated with an element if it is defined by the element itself, previous elements of the columns and elements from previous column. So we can vary a shift value for the element to find the one that will eliminate all unwanted cycles among those associated with the element.
To find a column we start with the second element. The first element of every column has a zero shift value as it does not affect matrix properties in terms of cycles presence. We find a shift value for the second element that satisfy the desired properties with all the cycles and routes associated with element and then switch to the next element. We search for the shift value for this element and move to the next. We continue this process until we find shift values for all elements in the column. In case there are no shift values for the element that allow to satisfy the properties, we switch back to the previous element of the column. So we switch among column’s elements until we either form a column that satisfies the desired properties and go to the next column or we run out of possible shift values for the second element of the column and go back to the previous one.
So during the search we can switch forward and backward from the second element of the first variable column to the last element of the last column. The search is considered finished in two cases. The first, if we are able to find a shift value for the very last element of the matrix. This means a matrix with the desired properties was successfully found. The second, we have tested all possible shift values for the second element of the first variable column. This means a matrix with the desired properties was not found.

III. CONSTRUCTION ALGORITHM To construct an irregular matrix we need to define nonzero elements positions and shift values for the elements in a variable part of the matrix. We achieve this with the following procedures.

B. Elements placement For irregular matrices non-zero elements placement in the
matrix is described with columns and rows weights. Weight defines number of non-zero elements in one column or row. For our algorithm we define columns weight distribution and target

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:01:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2020 9th MEDITERRANEAN CONFERENCE ON EMBEDDED COMPUTING

(MECO), 8-11 JUNE 2020, BUDVA, MONTENEGRO

Fig. 1. Possible graph configurations where cycles and routes of length 8 may exist.
Fig. 2. Possible graph configurations where cycles and routes of length 10 may exist.
a uniform distribution for rows weights. To achieve a uniform distribution for every new column we apply an algorithm. It defines possible and forbidden position for non-zero elements for the current column trying to balance row weights. Still a number of available positions may be bigger than a number of elements to be placed in the column. In this case positions for the elements are chosen in random way.
As there can be several variants of elements placement inside one column, it provides another degree of freedom in search of matrix with the desired properties. Yet a possibility to alter elements positions is not implemented in a single search launch. With single launch we chose elements positions once for each column. And in case we will return to the column, we can only change shift values but elements position will stay the same. To try another elements distribution we start a separate search.

C. Cycles and routes analysis Cycles in a lifted matrix are defined by cycles and routes in
the base matrix. Cycles of lengths 4 and 6 are defined only by cycles in a base matrix and are easy to track. While cycles of lengths 8 and 10 are defined either by cycles in base matrix or by routes. There are 5 different route configurations that lead to a cycle of length 8. And there 9 different route configurations that lead to a cycle of length 10. Every route configuration defines a sub-graph in a protograph. These sub-graphs for every possible route and cycles of lengths 8 and 10 are presented in Figures 1 and 2, where variable and check nodes are presented with circles and squares respectively.
For every new column we perform a cycle search procedure. We get a list of cycles with length from 4 to 10, that are connected to the column. For every cycle we construct an equation based on (2). This equation will always include two elements from the current column and the rest from already constructed part of the matrix. This allows us to predict possible shift values for the current column based on analysis of base equations. But this values will only consider cycles of length 8 and 10. To take routes of this lengths into consideration we use additional mechanism.
We describe every route as an intersection of two short cycles. Any route of length 8 is considered as a pair of 4 cycles. And any route of length 10 is considered as a pair of 4 and 6 cycles. So we search and identify routes based on cycles pairs analysis. Furthermore, the condition that shows if a route will be transformed into a cycle in a lifted matrix is expressed through short cycles’ base equations. Also, EMD for a cycle in the lifted matrix can be calculated from EMD of short cycles. Depending on the exact route type the condition may include from 2 to 5 base equations. This makes it difficult to use prediction mechanism for routes, so we utilize guessand-try option here. With every shift value that was considered possible through cycles analysis we check routes conditions to see if they are also satisfied.
With prediction mechanism based on cycles analysis and conditions check mechanism for routes we are able to track all possible cycles and their EMD in a lifted matrix with a base matrix analysis.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS With the proposed algorithm we perform a search for alternative implementations of WiFi codes of length 648. New codes have the same weights distribution but non-zero elements positions may be different compared to standard. We aim to maximize EMD for cycles of every length. As a search may take a lot of time, we limit it to one hour. So we start with maximizing EMD for the shortest cycles until we either eliminate them totally or are not able to find a matrix with the desired parameters within the time limit. Then we do the same for longer cycles. In this manner we try to maximize EMD for cycles of lengths 6, 8 and 10 while the desired girth is set to 6. Achieved maximum EMD compared to the same for standard codes are presented in Table I.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:01:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2020 9th MEDITERRANEAN CONFERENCE ON EMBEDDED COMPUTING

(MECO), 8-11 JUNE 2020, BUDVA, MONTENEGRO

TABLE I MINIMAL EMD VALUES

Code rate

R=1/2

R=2/3

R=3/4

R=5/6

Cycle Length 4 6 8 10 4 6 8 10 4 6 8 10 4 6 8 10

WiFi

- 11 11 10 - 3 2 2 3 3 1 2 - 2 1 3

This work - 20 12 11 - 9 4 4 - 6 3 3 - 2 4* 1

*Except cycles in constant part of the matrix.

Fig. 3. Performance comparison of N648 codes constructed by the proposed method in this work (TW) with standard WiFi codes.
It can be seen that, in most cases we were able to eliminate cycles with low EMD. The lower the code rate the better results in terms of EMD we were able to get. It’s also necessary to mention that in the code of rate R = 5/6 there are a cycles of length 8 with EMD of 1 that can not be eliminated because it is located in the constant part of the matrix. We excluded these cycles from analysis and focused on cycles that can be eliminated. Despite achieving good results in terms of minimal EMD the total number of cycles in our implementations stays almost the same compared to the standard ones.
To test the error correction performance of our codes we perform Monte Carlo simulation to obtain bit error rate dependencies. We use BP decoding algorithm with Look Up Table approximation for box-plus operator. Maximum number of iterations is limited to 50. Resulted curves are presented in Figure 3.
It can be seen that, except for the code of R = 1/2, our codes provide some advantage over standard WiFi codes in the area of relatively high SNR, where effect of error floor starts to appear.

V. CONCLUSION In this work a new method for QC-LDPC codes generation with EMD control was proposed. This method allows to construct codes with certain EMD properties for cycles of different lengths. The method can be used to maximize EMD for cycles of different length, that in general leads to better error correction performance of constructed codes. In future work we plan to analyse the efficiency of the method in construction of codes of different types and lengths.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[2] IEEE-802.11n Wireless LAN Medium Access Control and Physical Layer Specifications: Enhancements for Higher Throughput P802.11n/D3.07, Mar. 2008.
[3] J. Thorpe, Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes Constructed from Protographs, August 2003.
[4] S. Jayasooriya, M. Shirvanimoghaddam, L. Ong, G. Lechner, S. J. Johnson, ”A new density evolution approximation for LDPC and multiedge type LDPC codes”, IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 4044-4056, Oct. 2016.
[5] G. Liva, M. Chiani, ”Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analvsis”, Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, pp. 3250-3254, Nov. 2007.
[6] A. K. Pradhan, A. Thangaraj, and A. Subramanian, ”Construction of nearcapacity protograph LDPC code sequences with block-error thresholds,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 27-37, Jan. 2016.
[7] M. Diouf, D. Declercq, M. Fossorier, S. Ouya and B. Vasic, ”Improved PEG construction of large girth QC-LDPC codes,” 2016 9th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC), Brest, 2016, pp. 146-150.
[8] C. A. Kelley, ”Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs”, IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory, vol. 53, pp. 4013-4038, November 2007.
[9] M. Chertkov, M.G. Stepanov, ”An efficient pseudocodeword search algorithm for linear programming decoding of LDPC codes”, IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory, vol. 54, pp. 1514-1520, April 2008.
[10] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Ann. Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr. Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[11] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, B. Nikolic, ”Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes”, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181-201, Jan. 2010.
[12] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, 2004.
[13] Zongwang Li and B.Y.K.Y. Kumar. ”A class of good quasi-cyclic lowdensity parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph”. In Asilomar Conf Signals, Systems and Computers, Record of the Thirty· Eighth, vol. 2, pp.l990-1994, Nov. 2004.
[14] S. Khazraie, R. Asvadi, and A.H. Banihashemi. ”A PEG construction of finite-length LDPC codes with low error floor”. IEEE Commun. Letters, vol.l6, no.8, pp. 1288- 1291, Aug. 2012.
[15] M. P. C. Fossorier. Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:01:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

