Multi-Label Neural Decoders for Block Codes
Cheuk Ting Leung∗, Rajshekhar V Bhat† and Mehul Motani‡ ∗‡National University of Singapore, Singapore
†Indian Institute of Technology, Dharwad, India, Email: ∗cheukting.leung@u.nus.edu, †rajshekhar.bhat@iitdh.ac.in, ‡motani@nus.edu.sg

Abstract—The problem of decoding an (n, k, d) errorcorrecting block code, where a k-bit message word is mapped to an n-bit codeword, can be cast as a singlelabel classification problem. While it has been observed that the performance of such single-label neural decoders closely approaches that of the corresponding maximum likelihood decoder (MLD), the number of output nodes increases exponentially with k, making it prohibitive to implement for large k. To address this issue, we explore classification based multi-label neural decoders, in which the number of output nodes increases linearly with k. We consider well-known linear and non-linear block codes, as well as concatenated block codes, which have applications in emerging wireless networks. Our study finds that (i) although the number of output nodes linearly increases with k in a multi-label decoder, it requires more hidden layers and nodes in each hidden layer than the corresponding single-label decoder to achieve its best performance, and (ii) although one can design a multi-label decoder with bit error rate matching that of the MLD, it leaves more blocks in error leading to a reduced performance in terms of block error rate. We also note that the performance of the proposed decoder for concatenated codes is at least as good as that of a natural decoding algorithm in which the inner code is first decoded using the MLD and then the outer code is decoded with a polynomial-time decoding algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
Many applications supported by the emerging fifth generation (5G) technology, such as autonomous driving, remote surgery, augmented reality, haptic communication, and disaster management, require ultra-reliable lowlatency communications (URLLC) [1]. This necessitates the use of short to medium length error-correcting block codes (i.e., codes with dimension 10 ≤ k ≤ 1000 [2]), with decoders having low decoding latency, i.e., the amount of time the decoder takes to detect the transmitted message from the time it receives the noisy codeword. For this purpose, our previous work [3] and many other works have considered the problem of designing lowlatency decoders [2], [4].
In [3], we cast the above problem as a supervised, multi-class, single-label classification problem and designed low-latency neural decoders with a minimum number of hidden layers and nodes that approached the performance of the maximum-likelihood soft-decision (ML-SD) decoders for short block-length linear and nonlinear block codes. For an (n, k, d) block code, while the performance of such single-label neural decoders closely approaches that of the corresponding ML-SD decoders, the number of output nodes increases exponentially with
This research is supported by the National University of Singapore and the U.S. Army Research Laboratory under Contract FA520919CA006 (WBS R-263-000-D88-597).

k. Hence, it becomes prohibitive to design and deploy a single-label neural decoder for a code with medium k, which may be required for some 5G applications [5], [6].
In this work, our goal is to design neural decoders, whose performance is close to that of the ML-SD decoder, but whose node complexity (i.e., number of nodes in the output layer) does not explode and increases nearly linearly with the code parameters. For this purpose, we cast the problem of decoding a codeword as a multilabel, multi-class classification problem and we ask the following question: Q1: What is the minimum number of hidden layers and nodes in each layer required for a multi-label neural decoder to achieve the performance of the ML-SD decoder for a given code?
We design experiments to obtain answers for the above question (Q1) for block codes (no concatenation) and concatenated block codes constructed by wrapping a high-rate short-length outer block code around an inner block code. The reason for considering concatenated block codes is that there is a growing interest in them in the design and implementation of emerging wireless networks. For instance, 5G wireless cellular network standards include the use of polar codes in concatenation with cyclic redundancy check codes [7]–[11] for communicating downlink control information, as the concatenation improves the error correction ability of polar codes at finite blocklengths.
A. Literature Survey
In recent years, the application of the deep learning framework for decoding linear block codes has gained tremendous interest, although the idea has been present for decades [12]–[18]. Furthermore, there has been existing works in designing decoders for LDPC and polar codes [10], [19]–[21]. The authors in [22] build an end-to-end neural decoder, called as DeepTurbo and other researchers in [23] present a recurrent-neural-network (RNN) based decoder for Turbo codes, which utilizes channel feedback and evaluates the decoding performance under practical constraints. Compared to the state-of-the-art decoders for polar codes, it is shown in [10] that a neural cyclic redundancy check (CRC) code concatenated with polar codes achieves the error-correcting performance of neural CRC-Polar belief propagation decoder at 0.5 dB smaller than the conventional belief propagation decoder for polar codes.
To the best of our knowledge, none of the existing works studies the multi-label neural decoder for decoding block codes or concatenated codes, where a decision is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. D97o8w-n1l-o7a2d8e1d-5o0n89J-u5n/2e02/$43,210.0206 ©at21012:004IE:1E3EUTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1: A block diagram of a communication system consisting of a transmitter, a channel and a multi-label based neural decoder.

made on each bit of a received codeword independent of others. The closest idea appears in [24], where the Sigmoid activation function is used to optimize the loglikelihood ratio of each bit of a received codeword. Moreover, authors in [25] point out that using the Sigmoid activation at the nodes of the output layer can potentially help in avoiding an exponential increase in the number of nodes in the output layer with k, however, it does not be explored further. Comparatively, the authors in [26], [27] use error-correcting codes for improving the performance of multi-class classification problem.
B. Contributions
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to study the multi-label classification based neural decoder for decoding block codes. The main contributions of the paper are as follows:
1) We construct a multi-label classification based neural network model to decode (n, k, d) error-correcting block codes and a method to train the neural decoder for specific codes. In terms of node complexity, the number of nodes in the output layer of the proposed multi-label neural decoder grows linearly with k.
2) We study of the performance of the proposed multilabel neural decoder for decoding non-concatenated block codes over a noisy channel and make the following observations:
a) In the multi-label classification, the entire noisy codeword is not accounted for making an inference, rather, a decision is made based on each received bit independent of other bits. Hence, the decoded noisy codeword may not be a valid codeword or it may be erroneously decoded to be a valid codeword. Due to this, although the biterror-rate of a multi-label decoder matches that of the ML-SD decoder, the block-error-rate will be slightly higher than that of the ML-SD decoder.
b) Moreover, the multi-label neural decoder requires more hidden layers and nodes in each hidden layer than the corresponding single-label neural decoder, explored in [3], for approaching the performance of the ML-SD decoder. This leads to a slightly greater-than-linear increase in the overall size of the neural decoder.
3) We study the performance of the multi-label classification based neural network model for decoding concatenated block codes over a noisy channel. From this study, we learn the following:

a) The designed multi-label neural decoder achieves lower BLER and BER values in a wide range of Eb/N0, compared to a natural decoding algorithm, our benchmark algorithm, in which the inner code is decoded first with the maximum likelihood decoder and then the outer code is decoded by a unique polynomial-time decoding algorithm.
b) The observation in point 2b) for non-concatenated block codes holds for concatenated block codes as well.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The system model is presented in Section II. We present multi-label based neural decoders and the corresponding performance results for block codes in Section III and concatenated codes in Section IV. We make concluding remarks in Section V.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

We consider the communication system shown in

Fig. 1, with a transmitter, an additive white Gaussian

noise (AWGN) channel and a receiver. The transmitter

first encodes a message vector mi ∈ {0, 1}k with k bits to a codeword ci ∈ {0, 1}n with n bits for i = 1, . . . , M , where, M 2k. Then, the transmitter modulates codeword ci to obtain si ∈ {−1, +1}n by mapping bits
0 and 1 in ci to symbols −1 and +1, respectively,
and transmits si over an AWGN channel. We assume
that {s1, . . . , sM } are chosen with uniform probability,
i.e., with probability 1/M , for transmission. The receiver

receives a real-valued noisy vector y = si + w, where w is the random noise vector in which each entry is a zero-

mean Gaussian random variable with variance N0/2. The goal of the receiver is to detect the transmitted message

from the observed vector y, i.e., to decode y, such that

the probability of error (precisely defined later) is as low

as possible.

We denote the average energy per message bit by Eb.

Since a message mi with k bits is mapped to the codeword

ci with n bits, the average energy per coded bit, Ec =

rEb,

where

r

=

k n

is

the

code

rate.

A. The Codes Studied
We first consider (n, k, d) error-correcting linear block codes, where n, k, and d are the block-length, the dimension, and the minimum Hamming distance, respectively, of the code. In this paper, we study and design multi-label neural decoders for the (7,4,3) Hamming code, the (8,4,4) extended Hamming code and a (10,5,4) parity check code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:04:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2: A block diagram of a concatenated coding architecture.

In these codes, the codeword ci corresponding to a message mi is obtained by ci = miG for i = 1, . . . , M , where G is a k × n generator matrix. Moreover, a (10,5,4,5) constant weight code is also included, which is an example of non-linear block codes. Here, a constant weight code can be represented as CWC-(n, k, d, w), where n is the block-length, k is the dimension of the code, d is the minimum Hamming distance and w is the Hamming weight of a codeword.
We then explore concatenated block codes in which a message is first encoded using an outer encoder, whose output is then coded using an inner encoder, as described below. Define B = {0, 1}k. An outer encoder takes a message m = (x(1), . . . , x(k)) ∈ Bk as input and outputs (y(1), . . . , y(N )) ∈ BN . Then, an inner encoder takes (y(1), . . . , y(N )) as input and outputs c = (c(1), . . . , c(n)) ∈ {0, 1}n. We illustrate the above process in a block diagram in Fig. 2. The rate of the outer code is k/N and the rate of the inner code is N/n. Hence, the overall code rate is k/n. In this work, we consider two concatenated codes: (i) a concatenated block code with a (10, 5, 4) parity check code as the inner code and a (5, 4, 2) parity check code as the outer code, and (ii) a concatenated block code with a (20, 10, 6) parity check code as the inner code, and a (10, 5, 4) parity check code as the outer code.
The generator matrices and/or the codebooks for all the codes studied in this paper are available in [28].
B. Proposed Multi-Label Neural Decoder We begin by describing a neural network and notations
used for representing its important parameters, as illustrated in Fig. 3. A neural network is a series of mappings from an input vector a0 ∈ RN0 to an output vector aL+1 ∈ RNL+1 through L + 1 steps:
al = σ(Wlal−1 + bl), for l = 1, . . . , L + 1, (1)
Fig. 3: The general structure of a neural decoder with an input layer (layer 0), L hidden layers (layers 1, . . . , L) and an output layer (layer L + 1). The number of nodes in the input layer, N0 = n. The number of nodes in layer l is denoted by Nlh for l = 1, . . . , L, where the superscript h stands for the word “hidden”. The number of nodes in the output layer is NL+1.

where Wl ∈ RNl×Nl−1 , bl ∈ RNl and σ(·) : RNl → RNl is an activation function. The layer 0 is the input layer,
and layers, 1, . . . , L are the hidden layers and the layer L + 1 is the output layer. To highlight the fact that layers 1, . . . , L are hidden layers, in the rest of the paper, we denote the number of nodes in layer l ∈ {1, . . . , L} by Nlh.
1) Multi-label Neural Decoder for Block Codes and
Concatenated Codes: In this neural decoder for block codes, we map a received vector y ∈ Rn to a k-bit message, and thus we set N0 = n and NL+1 = k. The number of hidden layers, L and the number of nodes in each hidden layer, N1h, . . . , NLh are the design parameters. We use the ReLU function, σ(x) = max(0, x) as the activation function for hidden layers l = 1, . . . , L and the activation function for output layer, i.e., the layer (L + 1),
is the Sigmoid function where the output at node i is given by (σ(xi)) = 1/(1 + exp(−xi)). We summarize this in Table I.

TABLE I: The activation functions adopted in the multi-label neural decoder.

Layer
Input Layer (Layer 0) Hidden Layers (Layers l = 1, . . . , L)
Output Layer (Layer L + 1)

Activation
ReLU Sigmoid

Number of nodes
N0 = n Nlh
NL+1 = k

The neural decoder for concatenated codes is similar
to that for the block codes. we map a received vector y ∈ Rn to a k-bit message, and thus we set N0 = n and NL+1 = k. The underlying concatenated structure is learnt by the neural decoders.

C. Training, Inference and Performance Metrics

The multi-label neural decoder is trained using the
information bits {0, 1}k as the labeled data, i.e., each transmitted codeword y(j) is mapped to k output nodes,

and the neural network learns to compute the probability

for each node having a value 1.

K

loss

E(aL(j+) 1, x(j)),

(2)

j=1

where a(Lj+) 1 is the output of the neural decoder when

the input vector is y(j) and the function, E(a, x)

M i=1

ai

log(xi)

+

(1

−

ai)

log(1

−

xi),

which

is

referred

to as the binary cross-entropy loss function.

a) Training: In this process, we minimize the loss

function for a given training data set. Training a neu-

ral network model requires extensive example data set {(yt(rja)in, x(tjra)in), j = 1, . . . , Ktrain}. The jth training example is obtained as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:04:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) (7,4,3) Hamming code (b) (8,4,4) extended Hamming code

(a) (7,4,3) Hamming code (b) (8,4,4) extended Hamming code

(c) CWC (10,5,4,5)

(d) (10,5,4) parity check code

Fig. 4: BER v/s Eb/N0 for (a) (7,4,3) the Hamming code, (b) the (8,4,4) extended
Hamming code and (c) the (10,5,4,5) Constant Weight Code, (d) the (10,5,4) parity check code, for various values of the number of nodes Nlh. We set SNRT = 0 dB.

1) We uniformly generate a message s(j) ∈ {s1, . . . , sM }. Note that s(j) ∈ {0, 1}k and each bit in s(j) has fair probability to equal to 0 or

1.

2) For linear block codes, we generate the corresponding codeword, c(j) ∈ {0, 1}n using a generator matrix, G ∈ {0, 1}k×n as follows: c(j) = s(j)T G, where s(j)T is the transpose of s(j). For non-linear

block codes, we select the corresponding codeword

from a pre-defined codebook.

3) We then modulate the codeword, c(j), by mapping

bit 0 to −1 and bit 1 to +1. 4) To each of the n coded and modulated bits of c(j), we

add a random Gaussian distributed noise with zero mean and variance N0/2 to obtain yt(rja)in.

In the rest of the paper, we denote the training SNR by

SNRT .

b) Inference: We denote the data set for inference (testing) by {(yt(ejs)t, x(tjes)t), j = 1, . . . , Ktest}. We generate the above data set in a similar manner as the training

data set. However, to test the generalization ability of

the trained model, the inference data set is generated at

different SNRs. In the paper, we denote the testing SNR

by Eb/N0.

c) Performance Metrics: A decoder makes an error

when a codeword ci is transmitted and the decoder outputs

cˆ = ci. The block error rate (BLER) is defined as

BLER = lim

1

K
I(cˆ = c(j)),

(3)

K→∞ K j=1

where I(cˆ = c) = 1 when cˆ = c and 0, otherwise.

Similarly, the bit error rate (BER) is defined as

BER = lim 1 K K→∞ kK

k
I(cˆ(i) = c(j)(i)),

(4)

j=1 i=1

(c) CWC (10,5,4,5)

(d) (10,5,4) parity check code

Fig. 5: BLER v/s Eb/N0 for (a) (7,4,3) the Hamming code, (b) the (8,4,4) extended Hamming code and (c) the (10,5,4,5) Constant Weight Code, (d) the (10,5,4) parity check code, for various values of the number of nodes Nlh. We set SNRT = 0 dB.
where c(j)(i) and cˆ(i) are the ith bits of the transmitted codeword c(j), and the predicted codeword, cˆ, respectively.
We now describe the maximum-likelihood soft-decision
(ML-SD) decoder, which we use as the benchmark for the
proposed multi-label neural decoder.

D. Maximum-Likelihood Soft-Decision (ML-SD) Decoder
Given received vector, y, the decoder outputs one of the codewords, cˆ ∈ {c1, . . . , cM } as its guess of the transmitted codeword. The decoder makes an error if cˆ = ci when ci is transmitted. When messages are transmitted with equal probability, the ML-SD decoder, which outputs cˆ = ci if P (y|ck) is the maximum value for k = i, where P (y|ck) is the conditional probability of receiving y when ck is transmitted, is an optimal decoder. Here, the term “soft-decision” indicates that the realvalued received vector y is directly used for decoding.

III. MULTI-LABEL NEURAL DECODERS FOR BLOCK CODES
The single-label neural decoder [3] maps the realvalued noisy codeword to an estimated message ˆi ∈ {1, . . . , 2k} with the highest likelihood probability. Instead, in the multi-label neural decoder, a real-valued noisy codeword is mapped to k bits directly, i.e., NL+1 for multi-label neural decoder is only k. We work with the feed-forward neural network structure, and the hyperparameters used in the decoder for different codes remain unchanged. After training the neural decoder model, we test the trained model at different testing SNRs, i.e., for varying Eb/N0 values. We then compare the BER and BLER of various block codes with the ML-SD decoder and uncoded transmission in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:04:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) BER v/s N

(b) BLER v/s N

Fig. 6: BLER and BER v/s number of nodes N in the hidden layer 1 and 2, where N1h = N2h = N in the neural decoder for the Hamming (7,4,3) code. We set SNRT = 0 dB and Eb/N0 = 0 dB.

Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 show the BER and BLER results of the multi-label neural decoder for (7,4,3) Hamming code, (8,4,4) extended Hamming code, CWC (10,5,4,5), and (10,5,4) parity check code. In the prior work [3], it has been verified that training at 0 dB gives a good generalization ability, that is, when trained at 0 dB, both the BLER and BER have the lowest values over a wide range of testing Eb/N0. Fig. 4 shows that the BER values of the multi-label neural decoders for studied codes closely approach those of the optimal ML-SD decoder for the block codes. However, as can be seen in Fig. 5, the values of BLER have a gap from the optimal ML-SD’s BLER values for all the codes. We infer that the reason is we have changed the number of nodes in the output layer, L + 1, from 2k to k. After modifying the output layer, each node in the output layer is optimized individually, i.e., the binary entropy loss is minimized at each output node, which leads to the optimization of BER instead of the BLER. Therefore, while in terms of BER, the multilabel neural decoder can closely achieve the optimal value, its BLER is higher than the optimal value.
Additionally, although the number of nodes in the output layer is less, the number of nodes in hidden layers required to achieve or closely approach the performance of ML-SD decoder increases in comparison to the singlelabel neural decoder considered in [3]. In the singlelabel neural decoder [3], the number of hidden nodes that are sufficient to achieve the performance of MLSD decoder are n. To be more specific, the sufficient number of hidden nodes is 7 for (7,4,3) Hamming code, 8 for (8,4,4) Hamming code, 10 for CWC (10,5,4,5) and (10,5,4) parity check code. On the other hand, in the multi-label neural decoder, the number of hidden nodes increases to a total of 28 for Hamming (7,4,3) code, 72 for Hamming (8,4,4) code, 100 for CWC (10,5,4,5) code and (10,5,4) parity check code. It is worthwhile mentioning that a neural decoder with a single hidden layer tends to perform worse compared to a deeper neural network with the same amount of nodes.
In the experiment represented by Fig. 6, we fix Eb/N0 to be 0 dB and test the decoding performance under varying the number of hidden nodes with a single or double hidden layers. As shown in the figure, the multilabel neural decoder with two hidden layers, each of them having at least 28 nodes, matches the BER of the MLSD decoder. It is also shown that the multi-label neural decoder with a single hidden layer does not match the

(a) BLER v/s Eb/N0

(b) BER v/s Eb/N0

Fig. 7: The variation of the BER and BLER with Eb/N0 for the multi-label neural decoder. The studied concatenated code is constructed from parity check
(5,4,2) code as the outer code and parity check (10,5,4) as the inner code.

(a) BLER v/s Eb/N0

(b) BER v/s Eb/N0

Fig. 8: The variation of the BER and BLER with Eb/N0 for the multi-label neural decoder. The studied concatenated code is constructed from parity check
(10,5,4) code as the outer code and parity check (20,10,6) as the inner code.

BER of the ML-SD decoder despite the increase in N1h. In essence, the above multi-label neural decoder optimizes BER rather than the BLER.
In the next section, we consider decoding concatenated codes with multi-label neural decoders and study the corresponding performance. Concatenated codes are of interest because of their potential application in nextgeneration wireless communication systems.

IV. MULTI-LABEL NEURAL DECODERS FOR CONCATENATED CODES
In this section, we consider designing multi-label decoders for concatenated block codes (see Section II-A) and present performance results in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8.
For benchmarking, we consider a natural decoding algorithm for concatenated codes [29] which first uses the maximum likelihood decoder to decode the inner code, then decodes the outer code by a unique polynomial-time decoding algorithm for reducing the decoding complexity. In this work, our interest in the natural decoding algorithm is only for benchmarking and hence its decoding complexity is not a concern. Therefore, we decode the outer code too by the maximum-likelihood decoder. The natural decoding algorithm does not utilize the soft information from the inner encoder. Hence, it is a sub-optimal decoding scheme. In our study, we also include BER and BLER results of uncoded transmission for reference.
In Fig. 7, we consider a concatenated code generated by wrapping a (10,5,4) parity check code, which we have already discussed in the previous section, with a (5,4,2) parity check code as the outer code. From the figure, we see that the BER values of the multi-label neural decoder match those of a natural decoding algorithm at high

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:04:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Eb/N0, and are slightly smaller than those of a natural decoding algorithm at low Eb/N0. The BLER values of a multi-label neural decoder are significantly smaller than those of the bench-mark natural decoding algorithm. Similar to the performance of multi-label neural decoder for non-concatenated block codes, a single-hidden-layer neural decoder does not achieve the same performance as a double-hidden-layer neural decoder, even though the single-hidden-layer neural decoder has more nodes in general.
In Fig. 8, we consider a (10,5,4) parity check code as the inner code and a (20,10,6) code as the outer code. The trends in the results, in this case, are similar to those in Fig. 7. The BER and BLER values of the multi-label neural decoder for this concatenated code are significantly smaller than those of a natural decoding algorithm. In this case, the single-hidden-layer neural decoder performs worse than the double-hidden-layer neural decoder.
V. CONCLUSION
It has been shown in earlier works that although the performance of a single-label neural decoder closely approaches that of the corresponding maximum likelihood decoder, the number of output nodes increases exponentially with the dimension k, making it prohibitive to decode codes with large k. Hence, with an goal of reducing the decoding complexity, we investigated the performance of multi-label neural decoders for (i) linear block codes, such as the (7, 4, 3) Hamming code, the (8, 4, 4) extended Hamming code and a (10, 5, 4) parity check code, (ii) non-linear block codes, such as the (10, 5, 4, 5) constant weight code, and (iii) concatenated block codes, generated by concatenating (a) a (10, 5, 4) parity check code as the inner code and a (5, 4, 2) parity check code as the outer code, and (b) a (20, 10, 6) parity check code as the inner code, and a (10, 5, 4) parity check code as the outer code. From our study, we found that while the BER results in the above cases closely approached those of the maximum likelihood decoder, the BLER results of the multi-label neural decoders did not closely match those of the maximum likelihood decoder. Moreover, it requires more hidden layers and nodes in each hidden layer than the corresponding single-label neural decoder, for achieving its best performance. Hence, there is a greater-than-linear increase in the overall size of the multilabel neural decoder.
REFERENCES
[1] G. J. Sutton et al., “Enabling technologies for ultra-reliable and low latency communications: From PHY and MAC layer perspectives,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2488–2524, 2019.
[2] G. Liva, L. Gaudio, T. Ninacs, and T. Jerkovits, “Code design for short blocks: A survey,” arXiv:1610.00873 [cs.IT], 2016.
[3] C. T. Leung, R. V. Bhat, and M. Motani, “Low-Latency neural decoders for linear and non-linear block codes,” in IEEE GLOBECOM - Cognitive Radio & AI-Enabled Network Symp., Dec. 2019.

[4] M. C. Cos¸kun et al., “Efficient error-correcting codes in the short blocklength regime,” Physical Commun., vol. 34, pp. 66–79, 2019.
[5] D. Hui et al., “Channel coding in 5G new radio: A tutorial overview and performance comparison with 4G lte,” IEEE Veh. Tech. Mag., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 60–69, Dec 2018.
[6] C. A. Coleman et al., “DAWNBench: An end-to-end deep learning benchmark and competition,” in NIPS ML Systems Workshop, 2017.
[7] C. Pillet, V. Bioglio, and C. Condo, “On List Decoding of 5G-NR Polar Codes,” 2019. [Online]. Available: arXiv:1907.00784
[8] P. Chen et al., “Hash-Polar Codes With Application to 5G,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 12 441–12 455, 2019.
[9] V. Bioglio, C. Condo, and I. Land, “Design of Polar Codes in 5G New Radio,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.04389
[10] N. Doan et al., “Neural Belief Propagation Decoding of CRC-Polar Concatenated Codes,” in IEEE ICC, May 2019, pp. 1–6.
[11] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2213–2226, 2015.
[12] A. Esposito et al., “A neural network for error correcting decoding of binary linear codes,” Neural Netw., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 195–202, Jan. 1994.
[13] M. M. Htay, S. S. Iyengar, and S.-Q. Zheng, “Correcting errors in linear codes with neural network,” in IEEE Southeastern Symp. on Sys. Th., 1995, pp. 386–391.
[14] L. G. Tallini and P. Cull, “Neural nets for decoding error-correcting codes,” in IEEE Tech. Appl. Conf. & Workshops, Oct. 1995.
[15] H. Abdelbaki et al., “Random neural network decoder for error correcting codes,” in Int. Joint Conf. on Neural Networks, vol. 5, Jul. 1999, pp. 3241–3245 vol.5.
[16] J.-L. Wu, Y.-H. Tseng, and Y.-M. Huang, “Neural network decoders for linear block codes,” Int. J. of Comp. Eng. Science, vol. 3, pp. 235–256, 09 2002.
[17] A. S. Hadi, “Linear block code decoder using neural network,” in IEEE Int. Joint Conf. on Neural Networks, Jun. 2008, pp. 1111– 1114.
[18] E. Nachmani et al., “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, Feb. 2018.
[19] X. Wu, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Decoding optimization for 5G LDPC codes by machine learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 50 179–50 186, 2018.
[20] E. Nachmani et al., “Near maximum likelihood decoding with deep learning,” arXiv:1801.02726 [cs.IT], 2018.
[21] S. Cammerer et al., “Scaling deep learning-based decoding of polar codes via partitioning,” IEEE GLOBECOM, Dec. 2017.
[22] Y. Jiang et al., “Deepturbo: Deep turbo decoder,” in IEEE SPAWC, July 2019, pp. 1–5.
[23] H. Kim et al., “Deepcode: Feedback Codes via Deep Learning,” in International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, ser. NIPS’18. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2018, p. 9458–9468.
[24] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, D. Burshtein, and Y. Be’ery, “RNN decoding of linear block codes,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.07560
[25] T. O’Shea and J. Hoydis, “An introduction to deep learning for the physical layer,” IEEE Trans. on Cognitive Commun. & Netw., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 563–575, Dec. 2017.
[26] Y. Zhang and J. Schneider, “Multi-label output codes using canonical correlation analysis,” in Int. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence and Stat., 2011, pp. 873–882.
[27] C. Ferng and H. Lin, “Multilabel classification using errorcorrecting codes of hard or soft bits,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 1888–1900, Nov. 2013.
[28] C. Leung, https://github.com/ctleungac/Multi-Label-NeuralDecoder, 2020.
[29] V. Guruswami, A. Rudra, and M. Sudan, “Essential coding theory,” Draft available at http://www. cse. buffalo. edu/ atri/courses/coding-theory/book, 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:04:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

