IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

2265

Searching for Voltage Graph-Based LDPC Tailbiting Codes With Large Girth
Irina E. Bocharova, Florian Hug, Student Member, IEEE, Rolf Johannesson, Life Fellow, IEEE, Boris D. Kudryashov, and Roman V. Satyukov

Abstract—The relation between parity-check matrices of quasicyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and biadjacency matrices of bipartite graphs supports searching for powerful LDPC block codes. Using the principle of tailbiting, compact representations of bipartite graphs based on convolutional codes can be found. Bounds on the girth and the minimum distance of LDPC block codes constructed in such a way are discussed. Algorithms for searching iteratively for LDPC block codes with large girth and for determining their minimum distance are presented. Constructions based on all-one matrices, Steiner Triple Systems, and QC block codes are introduced. Finally, new QC regular LDPC block codes with girth up to 24 are given.
Index Terms—Biadjacency matrix, convolutional code, girth, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, minimum distance, tailbiting, Tanner graph.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, invented by Gallager [1] in the early 1960s, constitute a hot research topic since they are a main competitor to turbo codes [2]–[5]. Recently, a connection between LDPC codes and codes based on graphs was shown (see, for example, [6]–[10]), which opens new perspectives in searching for powerful LDPC codes. Moreover, coding theory methods can be applied in describing and searching for graphs better than previously known. For example, in [11], [12] compact representations based on convolutional LDPC codes for famous bipartite graphs such as Heawood’s, Tutte’s, and Balaban’s graphs [13] are presented.
Typically, LDPC codes have a minimum distance which is less than that of the best known linear codes, but due to their structure they are suitable for low-complexity iterative decoding, like for example the belief propagation algorithm. An important parameter determining the efficiency of iterative decoding algorithms for LDPC codes is the girth, which determines the number of independent iterations [1] and is a parameter of the underlying graph. The minimum distance seems not to play an important role within iterative decoding
Manuscript received February 23, 2011; accepted September 23, 2011. Date of publication November 18, 2011; date of current version March 13, 2012.
I. E. Bocharova and B. D. Kudryashov are with the Department of Information Systems, St. Petersburg University of Information Technologies, Mechanics and Optics, St. Petersburg, Russia (e-mail: irina@eit.lth.se; boris@eit. lth.se).
F. Hug and R. Johannesson are with the Department of Electrical and Information Technology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden (e-mail: florian@eit.lth.se; rolf@eit.lth.se).
R. V. Satyukov is with Google Switzerland, Zürich, Switzerland (e-mail: satyukov@gmail.com).
Communicated by A. Ashikhmin, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2011.2176717

algorithms, since the error-correcting capabilities of such a

suboptimal procedure are often less than those guaranteed by

the minimum distance. In fact, it was shown in [14] that the

performance of LDPC codes in the high signal-to-noise (SNR)

region is predominantly dictated by the structure of the smallest

absorbing sets. However, as the size of these absorbing sets is

upper-bounded by the minimum distance, LDPC codes with

large minimum distance are of particular interest.

LDPC codes can be characterized by having either random/

pseudorandom or nonrandom structures, where nonrandom

codes can be subdivided into regular or irregular [7], [8],

[11], [15]–[28], while random/pseudorandom codes are always

irregular [29], [30]. A

-regular (nonrandom) LDPC code

is determined by a parity-check matrix with exactly ones in

each column and exactly ones in each row.

The class of quasi-cyclic (QC)

-regular LDPC codes

is a subclass of regular LDPC codes with low encoding com-

plexity. Such codes are most suitable for algebraic design and

are commonly constructed based on combinatorial approaches

using either finite geometries [15] or Steiner Triple Systems

[16], [17], having girth

. Amongst other algebraic con-

structions leading to QC LDPC codes with larger girth we would

like to mention [19], where a class of QC LDPC codes of rate

with girth up to 12 based on subgroups of the mul-

tiplicative group of the finite field was obtained. The same

method was used for convolutional codes in [21].

Although QC LDPC codes are not asymptotically optimal

they can outperform random or pseudorandom LDPC codes

(from asymptotically optimal ensembles) for short or moderate

block lengths [18]. This motivates searching for good short QC

LDPC codes.

The problem of finding QC LDPC codes with large girth and

large minimum distance for a wide range of code rates was con-

sidered in several papers, for example, [7], [8], [18], [21], [23],

[24]. Codes with girth at most 12 are constructed in [18], [19],

[21], [23], while [8] gives examples of rather short codes with

girth 14. Codes with girth up to 18 with

are presented in

[24] and it is shown that QC LDPC codes with girth and

block length between 34 000 and 92 000 outperform random

codes of the same block length and rate.

Most of the papers devoted to constructing nonrandom LDPC

codes with large girth combine some algebraic techniques and

computer search. Commonly these procedures start by choosing

a proper base matrix (also called weight or degree matrix) or

the corresponding base graph (also called seed graph [20] or

protograph [31]). References [18], [20] are focused on all-one

base matrices, while in [7], [24] base matrices are constructed

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2266

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

from Steiner Triple Systems and integer lattices. In both cases,

a system of inequalities with integer coefficients describing all

cycles of a given length is obtained and suitable labels or de-

grees are derived. For example, if we replace all nonzero en-

tries in the base matrix by permutation matrices [27], [31], circu-

lant matrices [8], [18], [19], [24], [26], or sums of circulant ma-

trices [25], we obtain the corresponding QC LDPC block codes.

On the other hand, if we replace all nonzero entries in the base

matrix by either monomials or binomials, we obtain the corre-

sponding (parent) LDPC convolutional codes [21], [25], [28].

Notice that both constructing the inequalities and the label-

ings require significant computational efforts. Some methods di-

rected towards reducing the computational complexity of these

steps can be found in [23] and [26].

Parameters of the so far shortest QC LDPC block codes with

and girth 6, 8, and 10 found via computer search are

presented in [26], improving previous results from [18].

As aforementioned, it is important that the constructed QC

LDPC block codes have large minimum distance for achieving

a suitable upper bound on their error-correcting performance

at high SNR. It is proved in [2] that the minimum distance of

QC LDPC codes whose base parity-check matrices are

all-one matrices is upper-bounded by

. However, con-

sidering base matrices with zeros leads to QC LDPC codes with

larger minimum distance. For example, in [25] it is shown that

replacing all nonzero entries in the base matrix by sums of circu-

lants and all zero entries by all-zero matrices, increases the min-

imum distance of the resulting code while preserving its regu-

larity. For LDPC convolutional codes this approach implies that

a parity-check matrix contains binomials instead of monomials.

The corresponding upper bound on the minimum distance of

such LDPC codes is presented in [25]. A particular case of this

upper bound, valid only for codes with zeros and monomials is

derived in [11].

In this paper, we focus on LDPC block codes constructed

from tailbitten convolutional codes with monomial parity-check

matrices. Notations for generator and parity-check matrices

of convolutional codes and their tailbiting block codes are

introduced in Section II. Section III focuses on bipartite graphs,

biadjacency matrices, and their relation to parity-check ma-

trices of LDPC block codes. Our constructions of base and

voltage matrices, used when searching for LDPC block codes

with large girth, are introduced in Section IV. Bounds on the

girth and the minimum distance for QC

-regular LDPC

block codes are discussed in Section V. New search algorithms

for QC LDPC block codes constructed from all-one matrices,

Steiner Triple Systems, and QC regular matrices are presented

in Section VI. Moreover, depending on the desired girth,

algorithms of different complexity for constructing the set of

inequalities and searching for suitable labelings are described.

A new algorithm for computing the minimum distance of QC

-regular LDPC codes is described in Section VII and

used to compute the minimum distance of our newly found

codes. Moreover, we determined the hitherto unknown min-

imum distance for some of the shortest known LDPC codes

given in [24]. In Section VIII, we present new examples of

-regular QC LDPC codes in the form of tailbiting LDPC

codes with girth between 10 and 24. This representation is compact and it is possible to apply low-complexity encoding, searching, and decoding procedures well developed for convolutional and tailbiting block codes [32], [33]. In particular, the presented codes with girth 10 and 12 are shorter than the ones in [26] and [8], [22], respectively. Moreover, our codes with girth 14 to 18 are shorter than those in [24]. Section IX concludes the paper with some final remarks.

II. GENERATOR AND PARITY-CHECK MATRICES

Consider a rate

binary convolutional code with

the semi-infinite generator matrix

... ...

(1) ...

of memory where ,

, are

matrices. Its semi-infinite syndrome former

binary

... ...

(2) ...

of memory , where in general

;,

,

are

binary matrices, and denotes transpose. Clearly

and satisfy

(3)

and

(4)

where

(5)

is the code sequence and is the information sequence.

Next we tailbite the semi-infinite generator matrix (1) to

length -tuples, where

. Then we obtain

the

generator matrix of the quasi-cyclic (QC) block

code as

... ...

...

...

...

(6)
. . . . . . ... ...

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: VOLTAGE GRAPH-BASED LDPC TAILBITING CODES

2267

Every cyclic shift of a codeword of by places modulo

Tailbiting (11) to length

, we obtain the tailbitten 6 8

is a codeword. The corresponding tailbiting parity-check matrix parity-check matrix of a QC LDPC block code

is the

matrix

...

...

... . . .

. . . ... (7)

... ...

... ... . . . . . .

It is easily shown that

and

satisfy

(8)

given that (3) is fulfilled. We use the terminology tailbiting

block code when we emphasize that the code is constructed from

a convolutional code and quasi-cyclic when we emphasize this

property.

The parity-check matrix for the convolutional code can also

be written as the

polynomial matrix

(12)

In particular, every cyclic shift of a codeword by

places

modulo

is a codeword.

Due to the restriction to monomial entries in

,

is

-regular, that is, it has exactly and ones in each

column and row, respectively. Moreover, to fulfill the low den-

sity criterion, has to be much larger than and , and thus

the matrix

is sparse.

Note that the first columns of

are repeated throughout

the whole matrix in a cyclicly shifted manner. By reordering the

columns as

,

, etc. and the rows as

,

, etc. we obtain a parity-check matrix

of an equivalent

-regular LDPC block code constructed

from circulant matrices

(9)

(13)

or, equivalently, as

...

...

...

(10)

In the sequel, we mostly consider parity-check matrices with

only monomial entries

of degree , where

are nonnegative integers. Clearly, such a parity-check ma-

trix

can be represented by its degree matrix

,

, and

. Note that starting from

Section VIII we will relax the restriction to only monomial en-

tries and also include zero entries.

Example 1: Consider the rate with parity-check matrix

convolutional code

where are the entries of the degree matrix and de-

notes an

circulant matrix, that is, an identity matrix with

its rows shifted cyclically to the left by positions. Note, that

the

-regular LDPC block code determined by is not

quasi-cyclic, although equivalent to the QC block code deter-

mined by .

Example 1 (Cont’d.): We return to (12) in Example 1 and

reorder the columns as 1, 5, 2, 6, 3, 7, 4, 8 and the rows as 1, 4,

2, 5, 3, 6. Then we obtain the equivalent rate

(3,

4)-regular LDPC block code with parity-check matrix

(14)

(11)

whose degree matrix is

III. GRAPHS AND BIADJACENCY MATRICES

A graph is determined by a set of vertices

and a

set of edges

, where each edge connects exactly two

vertices. The degree of a vertex denotes the number of edges

that are connected to it. If all vertices have the same degree ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2268

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

IV. BASE MATRICES, VOLTAGES, AND THEIR GRAPHS

A binary matrix is called base matrix for a tailbiting LDPC

block code if its parent convolutional code with parity-check

matrix

has only monomial or zero entries and satisfies

(15)

Fig. 1. Tanner graph with 8 symbol nodes

straint nodes

.

and 6 con-

the degree of the graph is , or, in other words, the graph is

-regular.

Consider the set of vertices of a graph partitioned into

disjoint subsets ,

. Such a graph is said to

be -partite, if no edge connects two vertices from the same set

,

.

A path of length in a graph is an alternating sequence

of

vertices ,

, and edges ,

, with

. If the first and the final vertex

coincide, that is, if

, we obtain a cycle. A cycle is

called simple if all its vertices and edges are distinct, except for

the first vertex and final vertex which coincide. The length of

the shortest simple cycle is denoted the girth of the graph. Con-

sider the block code, whose parity-check matrix is the incidence

matrix of a bipartite graph. In [34], which is an extended ver-

sion of [35], it was proven that the girth of this graph is equal

to the minimum distance of such a block code. Moreover, the

girth determines the number of independent iterations in belief

propagation decoding [1].

Every parity-check matrix of a rate

LDPC block

code can be interpreted as the biadjacency matrix [36] of a bi-

partite graph, the so-called Tanner graph [37], having two dis-

joint subsets and containing and

vertices, respec-

tively. The vertices in are called symbol nodes, while the

vertices in are called constraint nodes. If the underlying

LDPC block code is

-regular, the symbol and constraint

nodes have degree and , respectively. The incidence matrix

of such a Tanner graph coincides with the parity-check matrix

of a

linear block code.

Consider the Tanner graph with the biadjacency matrix ,

corresponding to a QC

-regular LDPC code, obtained

from the parity-check matrix of a tailbiting LDPC block code.

Clearly, by letting the tailbiting length tend to infinity, we

obtain a convolutional parity-check matrix

(10) of the

parent convolutional code . In terms of Tanner graph repre-

sentations, this procedure corresponds to unwrapping the under-

lying graph and extending it in the time domain towards infinity.

Hereinafter, we will call the girth of this infinite Tanner graph

the free girth and denote it .

that is, all nonzero entries in

are replaced by

.

Different tailbiting LDPC block codes can have the same base

matrix .

The base graph follows as the bipartite graph, whose bi-

adjacency matrix is given by the base matrix . Denote the girth

of such a base graph . The terminology “base graph” origi-

nates from graph theory and is used, for example, in [38]. It dif-

fers from the terminology used in [8], [31], where protograph

or seed graph are used.

Consider the additive group

, where

. From

the base graph

we obtain the voltage graph

[39], [40]

by assigning a voltage value

to the edge connecting the vertices and ,

satisfying the property

. Although

the graph is not directed, the voltage of the edge depends on

the direction in which the edge is passed. Finally, define the

voltage of the path to be the sum of the voltages of its edges.

Let

be a lifted graph obtained from a voltage

graph , where

and

. Two ver-

tices

and

are connected in the lifted graph by an

edge if and only if and are connected in the voltage graph

with the voltage value of the corresponding edge given by

. It is easy to see that cycles in the lifted graph

correspond to cycles in the voltage graph with zero voltage.

Consequently, the girth of a voltage graph follows as the

length of its shortest cycle with voltage zero, which is equal to

the free girth

[8], [18], [23]. A voltage assignment cor-

responds directly to selecting the degrees of the parity-check

monomials in

.

In the following we start from a base graph and use a

voltage assignment based on the monomial degrees of the

degree matrix to determine the corresponding voltage graph

. The edge voltage from the constraint node to the symbol

node is denoted by and from the symbol node to

the constraint node by ,

and

, where

(16)

When searching for LDPC convolutional codes with given free girth , we use integer edge voltages, that is, we deal with an infinite additive group. However, when searching for QC LDPC block codes with given girth , obtained by tailbiting a parent convolutional code to length , we use a group of modulo residues, that is, (16) is replaced by

Example 1 (Cont’d.): Interpreting (14) as a biadjacency ma-

(17)

trix, we obtain the corresponding Tanner graph as illustrated

in Fig. 1 with 8 symbol nodes and 6 constraint nodes, having The definitions of path and cycle in a voltage graph coincide

girth

. Its incidence matrix has size 14 24.

with those in a regular graph, except for the additional restriction

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: VOLTAGE GRAPH-BASED LDPC TAILBITING CODES

2269

from the parity-check matrix code , satisfies

of the parent convolutional

(18)

Fig. 2. Bipartite graph with 4 symbol nodes

and 3 con-

straint nodes

. Since the edges are labeled according to (16),

this corresponds to a voltage graph.

that two neighboring edges may not connect the same nodes in

reversed order. The voltage of a path or cycle within a voltage

graph, follows as the sum of all edge voltages involved.

Example 1 (Cont’d.): The bipartite graph whose biadjacency

matrix is given by the base matrix of the rate

(3,

4)-regular LDPC convolutional code is illustrated in Fig. 2.

As the edges are labeled according to (16), Fig. 2 corresponds

to a voltage graph with girth

(for example,

). The edge from, for example, constraint node

to symbol node is labeled according to

Since the parent convolutional code satisfies (18) without re-

duction modulo

and reducing modulo

does

not increase the weight of a polynomial, the first statement fol-

lows directly.

For the second statement we consider the voltage graph

representation of the parent convolutional code with girth

together with the Tanner graph representation of

the QC LDPC block code with girth . Similar to the re-

lations between the free distance

and the minimum dis-

tance , there exists a relation between each cycle within

the voltage graph of the parent convolutional code and the

Tanner graph of the corresponding block code obtained by

tailbiting to length . The edge voltages for every cycle in

have to sum up to zero. Similarly, every cycle in corresponds

to a cycle in such that its edge voltages have to sum up to

zero modulo . From the same argument as before it follows

directly that

and, hence, the parity-check polynomial

.

The free girth of the infinite Tanner graph, corresponding to the

parent convolutional code , is determined by the convolutional

parity-check matrix

and is equal to the girth of the voltage

graph; hence we can conclude that

.

If we neglect all edge labels, we would obtain the corre-

sponding base graph.

In [12], a lower bound on the girth of a voltage graph

was found via the girth of the corresponding base graph for

ordinary graphs. It is straightforward to generalize this bound:

Consider a base graph of a QC

-regular LDPC

convolutional code with girth and let denote the th gener-

alized minimum Hamming distance of the linear

block code determined by the parity-check matrix

which corresponds to the incidence matrix of the Tanner graph.

V. BOUNDS ON THE GIRTH AND THE MINIMUM DISTANCE

OF

QC LDPC BLOCK CODES

In other words, corresponds to the number of nontrivial (not identically zero) positions of an -dimensional linear subcode.

There are a number of approaches which can be applied to

construct and search for QC

-regular LDPC block

and convolutional codes [12] or the bipartite graphs constructed

Theorem 2: There exist a tailbiting length and a voltage assignment, such that the girth of the Tanner graph for the corresponding TB block code of length satisfies

by their incidence matrices. Since every LDPC convolutional code can be represented by a bipartite Tanner graph using the bi-

(19)

adjacency matrix, these techniques can be also applied to

-regular QC LDPC codes. Moreover, bounds on the girth

and the minimum distance of

-regular QC LDPC

codes [12] can be generalized to an arbitrary .

where is the second generalized minimum Hamming distance, that is, the minimum support of a subcode of having dimension two. We have equality in (19), if the underlying base graph consists of two connected cycles, having at least one

Theorem 1: The minimum distance

and the girth of

an

QC LDPC block code obtained from a rate

convolutional code with free distance and free

girth by tailbiting to length are upper-bounded by

common vertex. Proof: According to Theorem 1, any cycle in the Tanner
graph of a QC LDPC block code corresponds to a cycle of the same length in the voltage graph. As the labels of the voltage Tanner graph can be freely chosen, it is enough to prove that

there is no zero cycle shorter than

, that is, no

such cycle whose voltage is zero regardless of the labeling of

the base graph. In particular, such a cycle is also known as an

inevitable cycle [7] or balanced cycle [8]. The number of times

Proof: The first statement follows directly from the fact each edge in such a cycle of the voltage graph is passed in dif-

that any codeword

of the tailbiting block code , obtained ferent directions has to be even. This cycle cannot be simple,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

since in a simple cycle each edge is passed in one direction only.

Hence, the cycle passes through the vertices of a subgraph which

contains at least two different cycles, corresponding to two dif-

ferent nonzero codewords. The minimum distance of the code

determined by the parity-check matrix which is the incident ma-

trix to the base graph is equal to girth (see [12]). According

to the Griesmer bound, the smallest length of a linear code with

two nonzero codewords of minimum distance is

,

and, hence, the first lower bound of inequality (19) follows.

Consider the second lower bound. The definition of the

second generalized minimum Hamming distance implies that

the smallest subgraph with two cycles has to have at least

edges. Thus, the second of the two lower bounds gives the pre-

cise value of the girth of a subgraph containing two connected

cycles, having at least one common vertex. Otherwise, is a

lower bound.

The bounds are tighter than the bound [7], [38] but not tight if the shortest non-simple cycle consists of two simple cycles connected by a path.
Finally, we want to recall an upper bound on the achievable girth and minimum distance. We start by reformulating the theorem on the achievable girth by Fossorier [18] and thereby generalize it to include base matrices with zero elements.

Theorem 3: Consider the parity-check matrix

of a rate

convolutional code with base matrix . Denote the

corresponding base graph and let be the 2 3 submatrix

(20)

If the base matrix , after possibly reordering its rows and columns, contains the submatrix , then the girth of the corresponding voltage graph is upper-bounded by

VI. SEARCHING FOR QC LDPC BLOCK CODES WITH LARGE GIRTH

When searching for QC LDPC block codes with large girth,

we start from a base graph of a rate

-regular

LDPC convolutional code. Using the following algorithm, we

determine a suitable voltage assignment based on the group of

nonnegative integers, such that the girth of this voltage graph is

greater than or equal to a given girth . Afterwards we replace all

edge labels by their corresponding modulo residuals, where

we try to minimize while preserving the girth . Using the

concept of biadjacency matrices we obtain the corresponding

degree matrix and hence the parity-check matrix of a con-

volutional code whose bipartite graph has girth

. Tail-

biting to lengths , yields the rate

QC LDPC

block code whose parity-check matrix is equal to the biadja-

cency matrix of a bipartite graph with girth .

The algorithm for determining a suitable voltage assignment

for a base graph consists of the following two main steps:

1) Construct a list containing all inequalities describing cy-

cles of length smaller than within the base graph.

2) Search for such a voltage assignment of the base graph that

all inequalities are satisfied.

The efficiency of the second step, searching for a suitable

voltage assignment, depends on the chosen representation

for the list of inequalities determined during the first step.

In general, when searching for all cycles of length roughly

different paths have to be considered. However, by

using a similar idea as in [33] when searching for a path within

a trellis, we create a tree of maximum depth and search

only for identical nodes within the tree and thereby reduce the

complexity to roughly

.

(21) A. Creating a Tree Structure

regardless of the voltage assignment.

Proof: The subgraph determined by the 2 3 submatrix

contains 3 symbol nodes, 2 constraint nodes, and 6 edges.

Moreover, there exist 3 shortest cycles of length 4. Thus, the

base graph has girth

and its second generalized

Hamming distance is

. Applying Theorem 2, we obtain

the precise value of the achievable girth as

, which

Utilizing the base graph of a rate

-regular

LDPC convolutional code, with symbol and

constraint

nodes, we construct a separate subtree starting with each of the

symbol nodes.

Before describing the algorithm, we have to introduce some

notations. A node in the tree will be denoted by and has a

unique parent node . The underlying base graph is bipartite,

completes the proof.

that is, every node in the tree with

is only connected

Let

be the parity-check matrix of a rate

-regular LDPC convolutional code with free dis-

tance . By tailbiting to length we obtain a QC LDPC

block code of block length and minimum distance . As

proven in [2] for parity-check matrices without zero elements

and reformulated in [11] for parity-check matrices with zero

elements, the corresponding minimum distance

can be

upper-bounded by

to nodes

with ,

,

, where and

are the sets of symbol and constraint nodes, respectively.

In other words, a symbol node is only connected to constraint

nodes and vice versa. Moreover, every node is characterized

by its depth and its number , where

follows

directly from

or

depending on whether its depth

is even or odd. In particular, every node satisfies

where

.

Having introduced those basic notations, we can grow sep-

(22) arate subtrees, with the root node

initialized with

and depth

of the th subtree being . Extend every node

For parity-check matrices with only nonzero monomials, the

at depth

with

by connecting it

inequality simplifies to

.

with the nodes

at depth

according to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: VOLTAGE GRAPH-BASED LDPC TAILBITING CODES

2271

Fig. 3. A bipartite voltage graph with 4 symbol nodes

and

3 constraint nodes

with its edges labeled according to (16).

underlying base graph, except which is already connected to

at depth

.

Finally we label the edges according to (16) and obtain the

voltage for node in the th subtree as the sum of the edge

voltages along the path

.

Clearly, all subtrees together contain all paths of a given

length in the voltage graph. Moreover, taking into account that

the girth of bipartite graphs is always even, we can conclude

that in order to check all possible cycles of length at most

in the voltage graph, it is sufficient to grow the corresponding

subtrees up to depth

. Next we construct voltage

inequalities for all node pairs

in the same subtree with

the same number

and depth

but

different parent nodes

.

The corresponding voltage inequality for the node pair

follows directly as the difference between the voltages for the

paths from

to and , respectively, that is,

.

If there exists a cycle

, then at depth there exists

at least one pair of nodes

, whose corresponding voltage

inequality is not satisfied, that is, is equal to zero. If there is no

cycle shorter than in the voltage graph, then there are no such

pairs, and all voltage inequalities are satisfied.

Fig. 4. A tree representation with maximum depth two, starting with symbol node .

symbol nodes , and as root nodes, we obtain in total

node pairs, which all correspond to a voltage

inequality.

For example, the voltage inequality obtained by checking all

node pairs

with

, that is,

, at depth

in the subtree starting with symbol node , are

Note that amongst all 36 voltage inequalities, there are only 18 unique ones:

Example 2: Consider the rate

(3, 4)-regular LDPC

convolutional code given by (11). The corresponding base

graph, with four symbol nodes

, , 2, 3, 4, and three

constraint nodes

,

, 2, 3, is illustrated in Fig. 3. In

the following, we shall search for a set of edge labels, that is,

monomial degrees in , such that the corresponding voltage

graph has at least a given girth . Thus, we label the branches

by the general edge voltages according to (16) and obtain a

bipartite voltage graph.

In order to find a suitable labeling for the edge voltages from

the th constraint node to the th symbol node , that is, ,

, 2, 3,

, 2, 3, 4, whose underlying voltage graph has B. Searching for a Suitable Voltage Assignment

at least girth

, we have to grow 4 subtrees up to length Using the subtrees ,

, with maximum depth

, with their root nodes being initialized by ,

, we have found all cycles of length smaller than or equal

, 2, 3, 4.

to

as well as their corresponding voltage inequalities.

The subtree with root node is illustrated in Fig. 4. Clearly, Note that the same cycle might be found several times within

at depth

there are no identical nodes, while at depth the subtrees. Moreover, two different cycles can correspond to

there are

pairs of identical nodes the same voltage inequality.

with different parents. Taking into account We continue by creating a reduced list of node pairs

that a similar subtree is constructed using the remaining three

of all subtrees ,

, containing all

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2272

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

unique voltage inequalities. Thereby, we remove all duplicate

cycles, as well as different cycles corresponding to the same

voltage inequality. Using the reduced list we can reduce the

subtrees ,

, in a similar way by removing

all nodes, not participating in any of the cycles in , and

denote the reduced subtree by

. In other words, we

remove all nodes in ,

, which only participate

in already known cycles or new cycles with already known

voltage inequalities.

In the following we present two different approaches for

finding suitable edge labels (edge voltages), which we shall

denote as Algorithm A and Algorithm B.

In Algorithm A, we label the edges of the reduced subtrees

,

, with a set of randomly chosen voltages.

For every node pair

in the list , we calculate the

voltage of the corresponding cycle as the difference of the

path voltages

and

. If none of these

cycle voltages is equal to zero, the girth of the underlying

base graph with such a voltage assignment is greater than or

equal to .

In Algorithm B, we discard the list and only focus on the

reduced subtrees

. After labeling their edges with a set of

randomly chosen voltages, we sort the nodes of each subtree

according to their path voltage

. If there exists no

pair of nodes

with the same path voltage, number

, and depth

, but different parent nodes

, the girth of the underlying base graph with such a voltage

assignment is greater than or equal to .

A formal description of those two algorithms is given

below.

TABLE I COMPLEXITY OF A SEARCH FOR SUITABLE VOLTAGE ASSIGNMENT FOR QC
-REGULAR LDPC BLOCK CODES WITH GIRTH

Complexity:

Denote the sum of all nodes in the reduced tree

,

, and the number of unique inequalities in the list

by and , respectively, that is

and

where denotes the number of entries in the set .

Algorithm A requires summations for computing the

path voltages and comparisons for finding cycles, leading

to the complexity estimate

. Algorithm B requires

the same number of summations for computing the path

voltages, roughly

operations for sorting the set,

and comparisons, leading to a total complexity estimate of

.

In Table I the values of and are given when searching

for suitable voltage assignment for

-regular rate

QC LDPC convolutional codes with

, arbitrary

, and girth constructed from all-one base matrices.

In this case, up to

, Algorithm A is preferable, while

when searching for voltage assignment with girth

, Al-

gorithm B should be used.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: VOLTAGE GRAPH-BASED LDPC TAILBITING CODES

2273

In the general case we have to consider all node pairs, and

,

exceeds

, since at

as is roughly we conclude that Algorithm B performs most one 1 in each block can be canceled by each branch. In

asymptotically better (when

).

particular, such a reordering of the parity-check matrix

VII. MINIMUM DISTANCE OF QC LDPC CODES

corresponds directly to the parity-check matrix (13) of the

equivalent

-regular LDPC block code constructed from

Usually the girth of the Tanner graph of a QC LDPC block circulant matrices and is consequently only feasible for such code is considered to be the most important parameter that affects LDPC block codes.

the performance of belief propagation decoding, as it determines

the number of independent iterations [1]. Therefore, most re-

search is focused on finding QC LDPC block codes with large

girth, while their corresponding minimum distance is mostly

unknown. In [14] it was shown, that the performance of belief

propagation decoding algorithms at high SNRs depends on the

structure and the size of the smallest absorbing sets, which, how-

ever, can be upper-bounded by the minimum distance. This is the

rationale for computing the minimum distance of the shortest

known QC LDPC block codes as well as our search for QC

LDPC codes with both large girth and large minimum distance.

Our method of calculating the minimum distance is based on

the well-known fact that the minimum distance of a linear block

code with parity-check matrix is equal to the minimum

number of columns of which sum up to zero. While the pro-

posed method is not limited to the presented code construction,

it exploits the sparsity of the parity-check matrix and is as such

infeasible for general block codes.

Consider the

parity-check matrix of the

-regular rate

tailbiting block code with

block-length (7). Starting with each of the first columns

of

as a root, we will construct separate trees, where each

VIII. SEARCH RESULTS

node is characterized by its depth and partial syndrome

state column vector .

Initialize the partial syndrome state of the root

of the

th tree with column of the corresponding parity-check matrix,

that is,

,

. Then grow each tree in

such a way, that every branch between any two nodes and

is labeled by a column vector ,

, such that

, where every branch label on the path

does not occur more than once.

Consider now a certain node with nonzero state

, where

,

is an

column vector. If we assume that the th position of

the column vector is nonzero, then there are at most

columns which can cancel this nonzero position and have not

been considered previously. Therefore, every node has at most

children nodes per nonzero position.

When presenting our search results for QC

-reg-

ular LDPC block codes with different girth we will distinguish

two cases.

We started by searching for QC

-regular LDPC

block codes using an all-one base matrix , applied the al-

gorithms as described above, and obtained QC

-regular

LDPC block codes with girth

, 8, 10, and 12 as given in

Tables II–V. These codes correspond to parity-check matrices

of convolutional codes with only monomial entries as

given, for example, in (10).

However, according to Theorem 3 the achievable girth of a

QC

-regular LDPC code constructed in such a way is lim-

ited by

. Thus, in order to find QC

-regular

LDPC block codes with girth

as presented in Tables VI

and VII, we allow zero entries in our base matrix . This is a

straightforward generalization of the restriction to only mono-

Such a tree would grow until all possible linear combinations mial entries in the parity-check matrix

of the underlying

have been found. Therefore, we assume that the minimum dis- convolutional code.

tance is restricted by

, that is, the maximum depth of

the tree is . Consequently, a node at depth will not be Case I: Monomial Entries

extended, if the number of nonzero positions in its partial syn-

drome state column vector exceeds

, since

at most ones can be canceled by each branch.

In Tables II–V, parity-check matrices of short known QC

-regular LDPC block codes with girth

, 8, 10, and

12 together with those of large minimum distance are presented.

By initially reordering the columns of the parity-check matrix When searching for such codes, we applied the following restric-

in such a way that each of the nonoverlapping blocks tions to reduce the number of possible voltage assignments:

of rows contains not more than a single one per column, • As the girth of a voltage graph is defined as the shortest cycle

we can strengthen the stopping criterion as follows: A node

with voltage zero, and the sign of the voltage depends on the

at depth will not be extended, if the number of nonzero

direction of the edge, we can add the same arbitrary offset to

positions in each of its partial syndrome state column vectors

the voltage of all edges being connected to the same node.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2274

TABLE II DEGREE MATRICES FOR QC
LDPC CODES WITH GIRTH

-REGULAR

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

TABLE III DEGREE MATRICES FOR QC
LDPC CODES WITH GIRTH

-REGULAR

Thus, without loss of generality, we set the voltage of all

edges connected to one specific symbol node as well as all

edsges connected to one specific constraint node to voltage

zero. (For consistency with codes constructed from Steiner

Triple System, that will be introduced later, we choose the

first symbol node and the last constraint node. This cor-

responds directly to a degree matrix with zeros in its first

column and last row.) From a graph theoretical point of view,

this procedure is equivalent to creating a spanning tree of

the base graph and assigning the edge voltage zero to

all edges within . In particular, the spanning tree above

is created such that all edges connected to the first symbol

node as well as to the last constraint node are included.

For example, the degree matrix of the

QC

LDPC block code with girth

from Table III follows

directly as

• The maximum degree is less than the tailbiting length

for which there exists a QC

-regular LDPC

block code with given girth .

• QC

-regular LDPC block codes were

found by exhaustive search over the previously defined set

of restricted edge voltages.

• QC

-regular LDPC block codes with

were obtained by adding one additionally, ran-

domly chosen column to the best degree matrices of codes

with

having the same girth . The maximum

degree in this additional column is limited by twice the

maximum degree of the previous code.

Using these restrictions, the obtained QC

-regular

LDPC block codes with girth

, 8, 10, and 12 are presented

in Tables II–V.

The first column denotes the number of nonzero elements

per row, which corresponds to the number of columns in

and . As all entries in the first column and the last row

• Furthermore, to reduce the number of only permuted de- of the degree matrix are zero, they are omitted in the

gree matrices, we assume that

submatrix .

• The first row is sorted in ascending order.

Consider now the parity-check matrix

of the rate

• When sorting the first and the second row in ascending

convolutional code with only monomial entries cor-

order, the second row is lexicographically less than the responding to the degree matrix . By tailbiting the semi-in-

first row.

finite parity-check matrix to length (given in the fourth

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: VOLTAGE GRAPH-BASED LDPC TAILBITING CODES

TABLE IV DEGREE MATRICES FOR QC
LDPC CODES WITH GIRTH

-REGULAR

2275

TABLE V DEGREE MATRICES FOR QC
LDPC CODES WITH GIRTH

-REGULAR

column), we obtain the parity-check matrix

of an

block code with minimum distance , where

and Case 2: Monomial or Zero Entries

follow from the second and third column, respectively.

Note that due to linear dependent rows in

the rate of

might be larger than

.

The codes presented in Tables II and III coincide with the

QC LDPC block codes found by the “hill-climbing” algorithm

[26], but we determined their minimum distance with our

algorithm described in Section VII. Tables IV and V contain

new QC

-regular LDPC block codes, which, to the

best of our knowledge, are shorter than the previously known

In order to find QC

-regular LDPC block codes

with girth

, we have to allow zero entries in our base ma-

trix ; that is, relax the restriction from only monomial entries

in

to include also zero entries. According to Theorem 2,

a code with girth exists if the corresponding base graph has

girth satisfying (19). Additionally, as we are searching for

codes with short block length, we consider the shortest possible

base matrices .

codes obtained from an all-one base matrix [8], [19], [22], [26]. In particular, these codes are significantly shorter than

Case 2-I: Steiner Triple Systems

those presented in [24], which are obtained from base matrices When searching for QC

-regular LDPC block

with zeros. However, due to the zeros in their base matrix, the codes with girth

, 16, and 18, we started with a (short-

minimum distance of the LDPC block codes in [24] can exceed ened) base graph constructed by using Steiner triple systems of

. For example, we determined the minimum distance order , that is,

[16], [17], [31].

of the (444, 111) QC (3, 4)-regular LDPC block code with girth For all , where

is equal to 1 or 3, there exists a

in [24] to be

, while the corresponding code Steiner triple system of order . Then we construct a

-reg-

in Table V, that is, the (292, 75) QC (3, 4)-regular LDPC block ular,

base matrix with entries ,

code, has only minimum distance

, but shorter block and

, in such a way that the positions of the

length. Using the BEAST [33], we calculated the free distance nonzero entries in each column correspond to a Steiner triple

of the corresponding parent convolutional code for the code system of order

. Denote such a

base matrix

in [24] to be

. Therefore, using our approach and a

.

larger tailbiting length it would be possible to construct corre- Using the obtained

-regular

base matrix ,

sponding QC (3, 4)-regular LDPC block codes with minimum we search for a set of edge labels, such that the corresponding

distance up to 46.

voltage graph has at least girth .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2276

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

In general, it is possible, without loss of generality, to label a

certain subset of edges of the voltage graph simultaneously with

zero voltage and thereby decreasing the number of possible la-

belings. The following algorithm constructs a

base

matrix based on

and reorders the matrix to max-

imize the number of zero entries in its lower left corner. Using

such a base matrix, it is always possible to label the last nonzero

entry in each column with degree zero. Moreover, in each of the

remaining rows at the top of the base matrix, we can label at

least one nonzero entry with degree zero. (Hereinafter we will

always choose at least the first element in the remaining rows to

be labeled with zero voltage).

By removing the last row and last columns of the

-regular

base matrix constructed using

, we obtain a shortened

-regular base matrix , which we denote

. By

deleting additional columns and rows, it is possible to obtain

codes with intermediate rates, which are, however, irregular.

Example 3: In the following we shall construct the

base matrices of dimension

, dimension

, and dimension

. Using

Algorithm STS, we obtain the following Steiner Triple Systems

of order 9 (STS(9)), 13 (STS(13)), and 25 (STS(25)).

Each number

occurs times within the set

of Steiner triples. Note that the chosen Steiner triples are not

uniquely determined.

The corresponding base matrices of dimension

, dimension

, and dimension

are sparse matrices with nonzero elements

only in column and row , where the th Steiner Triple

contains the value . The

(3, 4)-regular base matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: VOLTAGE GRAPH-BASED LDPC TAILBITING CODES
TABLE VI DEGREE MATRICES FOR QC LDPC CODES WITH GIRTH

TO 18

2277

constructed from STS(9) denoted by example, by

is given, for

(23)

Entries that correspond to edges in the base graph that can

be, according to Algorithm STS, labeled with zero voltage are

marked in bold.

By removing the last row and the last

columns,

the corresponding shortened 8 8 (3, 3)-regular base matrix

follows directly as

This corresponds to removing the four Steiner Triples of

STS(9) containing the number of the last row. Shortening the

9 12 base matrix

constructed from STS(9) to obtain a

shortened 8 8 base matrix

is unpractical as its code

rate is

. However, by shortening the 13 25

base matrix

in the same way we obtain a 12 20 base

matrix

with the feasible code rate

.

In Table VI, the obtained QC

-regular LDPC

block codes with girth

, 16, and 18 constructed from

Steiner Triple Systems are presented. While the number of

nonzero elements in each column is fixed to

, the number

of nonzero elements in each row is specified in the first

column. The second column corresponds to the obtained girth

, while in the third and forth columns we give the dimensions

of the block code

after tailbiting to length . The fifth

column specifies the used Steiner Triple System

.

Finally, in the last column , we give the degrees of the

corresponding degree matrix in a compact way. As we have

constructed the base matrices in such a way that the last nonzero

entry in each column and the first entry in all other rows of

the base matrix is labeled with a zero voltage, these entries are

omitted. An entry of in column and row corresponds to

the voltage degree of the

th nonzero entry in the th row

of the corresponding base matrix.

(24)

Case 2-II:

-Regular LDPC Block Codes

When searching for QC

-regular LDPC block

codes with girth

, 22, and 24, we started with previously

obtained QC

-regular LDPC block codes of smaller

block size and smaller girth, and (re-)applied our algorithms.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

PROPERTIES OF QC

TABLE VII -REGULAR LDPC CODES WITH GIRTH

The obtained results for QC

-regular LDPC

block codes with girth

, 22, and 24 are presented in

Table VII. They are all but one based on previously obtained

-regular LDPC block codes with girth

(cf.

Table III), as specified in the last column in Table VII. As

before, the first column denotes the number on nonzero

elements in each column; then we give the obtained girth

and the dimensions of the block code

after tailbiting to

length . The corresponding degree matrices are too large and

are omitted in Table VII, but are available at [41].

These codes are (probably) not practical due to their huge

block length. However, the table illustrates that by interpreting

QC

-regular LDPC block codes as base matrices and

re-applying our algorithms we can find QC

-regular

LDPC block codes of “any” girth .

IX. CONCLUSION
Using the relation between the parity-check matrix of QC LDPC block codes and the biadjacency matrix of bipartite graphs, new search techniques have been presented. Starting from a base graph, a set of edge voltages is used to construct the corresponding voltage graph with a given girth.
By representing bipartite graphs in different ways, lower and upper bounds on the girth as well as on the minimum distance of the corresponding tailbiting block code have been discussed.
New algorithms for searching iteratively for bipartite graphs with large girth and for determining the minimum distance of the corresponding QC LDPC block code have been presented. Depending on the given girth, the search algorithms are either based on all-one matrices, Steiner Triple Systems, or QC block codes. Amongst others, new QC regular LDPC block codes with girth between 10 and 24 have been presented. In particular, the previously unknown minimum distance, for some known codes with girth 6 and 8, has been determined.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and M. C. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications,” in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1999, pp. 113–130.
[3] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 db of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.

[4] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. S. Zigangirov,

“Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.

[5] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold satura-

tion via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform

so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp.

803–834, Feb. 2011.

[6] G. Schmidt, V. V. Zyablov, and M. Bossert, “On expander codes based

on hypergraphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT’03), Yoko-

hama, Japan, Jun.–Jul. 29–4, 2003, pp. 88–88.

[7] S. Kim, J.-S. No, H. Chung, and D.-J. Shin, “Quasi-cyclic low-density

parity-check codes with girth larger than 12,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,

vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 2885–2891, Aug. 2007.

[8] M. E. O’Sullivan, “Algebraic construction of sparse matrices with

large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 718–727,

Feb. 2006.

[9] A. Barg and G. Zémor, “Distance properties of expander codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 78–90, Jan. 2006.

[10] I. E. Bocharova, R. Johannesson, B. D. Kudryashov, and V. V. Zyablov,

“Woven graph codes: Asymptotic performances and examples,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 121–129, Jan. 2010.

[11] I. E. Bocharova, B. D. Kudryashov, R. V. Satyukov, and S. Stiglmayr,

“Short quasi-cyclic LDPC codes from convolutional codes,” in Proc.

IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT’09), Seoul, South Korea, Jun.–Jul.

28–3, 2009, pp. 551–555.

[12] I. E. Bocharova, B. D. Kudryashov, and R. V. Satyukov, “Graph-based

convolutional and block LDPC codes,” Probl. Inf. Transmiss., vol. 45,

no. 4, pp. 357–377, 2009.

[13] J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty, Graph Theory with Applications.

New York: North Holland, 1976.

[14] L. Dolecek, P. Lee, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikolic, and M. Wain-

wright, “Predicting error floors of structured LDPC codes: Determin-

istic bounds and estimates,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no.

6, pp. 239–246, Aug. 2009.

[15] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check

codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.

[16] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Regular low-density parity-check

codes from combinatorial designs,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Work-

shop (ITW’01), Cairns, Australia, Sep. 2–7, 2001, pp. 90–92.

[17] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Construction of low-density

parity-check codes from Kirkman triple systems,” in Proc. IEEE

Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM’01), San Antonio, TX, Nov.

25–29, 2001, vol. 2, pp. 970–974.

[18] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from

circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no.

8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.

[19] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured

LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISTA, Ambleside, England, 2001.

[20] R. M. Tanner, “On graph constructions for LDPC codes by quasi-cyclic

extension,” in Information, Coding and Mathematics, M. Blaum, P. G.

Farrell, and H. C. A. van Tilborg, Eds. Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 2002,

pp. 209–219.

[21] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello

Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant ma-

trices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec.

2004.

[22] G. Zhang and X. Wang, Girth-12 Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes With Con-

secutive Lengths arXiv: 1001.3916v1.

[23] O. Milenkovic, N. Kashyap, and D. Leyba, “Shortened array codes of

large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3707–3722,

Aug. 2006.

[24] M. Esmaeili and M. Gholami, “Structured quasi-cyclic LDPC codes

with girth 18 and column-weight

,” Int. J. Electron. Commun.

(AEU), vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 202–217, Mar. 2010.

[25] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “On regular quasi-cyclic LDPC

codes from binomials,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT’04),

Chicago, IL, Jun.–Jul. 27–2, 2004, pp. 274–274.

[26] Y. Wang, J. S. Yedidia, and S. C. Draper, “Construction of high-girth

QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Rel. Topics,

Lausanne, Switzerland, Sep. 1–5, 2008, pp. 180–185.

[27] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc.

2th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Rel. Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 4–7,

2000, pp. 543–546.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: VOLTAGE GRAPH-BASED LDPC TAILBITING CODES

2279

[28] I. E. Bocharova, F. Hug, R. Johannesson, B. D. Kudryashov, and R. V. Satyukov, “New low-density parity-check codes with large girth based on hypergraphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT’10), Austin, TX, Jun. 18, 2010, pp. 819–823.
[29] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[30] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[31] J. Thorpe, K. Andrews, and S. Dolinar, “Methodologies for designing LDPC codes using protographs and circulants,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT’04), Chicago, IL, Jun.–Jul. 27–2, 2004, pp. 238–238.
[32] R. Johannesson and K. Sh. Zigangirov, Fundamentals of Convolutional Coding. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, 1999.
[33] I. E. Bocharova, M. Handlery, R. Johannesson, and B. D. Kudryashov, “A BEAST for prowling in trees,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1295–1302, Jun. 2004.
[34] X.-Y. Hu and M. P. C. Fossorier, On the Computation of the Minimum Distance of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/MINDIST/ main.pdf
[35] X.-Y. Hu, M. P. C. Fossorier, and E. Eleftheriou, “On the computation of the minimum distance of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC’04), Paris, France, Jun. 20–24, 2004, vol. 2, pp. 767–771.
[36] A. S. Asratian, T. M. J. Denley, and R. Haggkvist, Bipartite Graphs and Their Applications. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1998.
[37] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[38] C. A. Kelley and J. L. Walker, “LDPC codes from voltage graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT’08), Toronto, Canada, Jul. 6–11, 2008.
[39] J. L. Gross, “Voltage graphs,” Discr. Math., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 239–246, 1974.
[40] G. Exoo and R. Jajcay, “Dynamic cage survey,” Electron. J. Combinator., vol. 15, Sep. 2008.
[41] Degree Matrices for QC LDPC Codes [Online]. Available: http://www. eit.lth.se/goto/QC_LDPC_Codes
Irina E. Bocharova was born in Leningrad, U.S.S.R., on July 31, 1955. She received the Diploma in electrical engineering in 1978 from the Leningrad Electro-Technical Institute and the Ph.D. degree in technical sciences in 1986 from the Leningrad Institute of Aerospace Instrumentation.
During 1986–2007, she was a Senior Researcher, an Assistant Professor, and then Associate Professor at the Leningrad Institute of Aerospace Instrumentation (now State University of Aerospace Instrumentation, St. Petersburg, Russia). Since 2007, she has been an Associate Professor at the State University of Information Technologies, Mechanics and Optics. Her research interests include convolutional codes, communication systems, source coding and its applications to speech, audio, and image coding. She has published more than 50 papers in journals and proceedings of international conferences, and seven U.S. patents in speech, audio, and video coding. She has authored the textbook Compression for Multimedia (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2010).
Professor Bocharova was awarded the Lise Meitner Visiting Chair in engineering at Lund University, Lund, Sweden (January–June 2005 and 2011).

Rolf Johannesson (M’72–F’98– LF’12) was born in Hässleholm, Sweden, on July 3, 1946. He received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in 1970 and 1975, respectively, both from Lund University, Lund, Sweden, and the degree of Professor, honoris causa, from the Institute for Problems of Information Transmission, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, in 2000.
Since 1976, he has been a faculty member with Lund University where he has the Chair of Information Theory. From 1976 to 2003, he was Department Head and during 1988–1993, Dean of the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences. During 1990–1995, he served as a member of the Swedish Research Council for Engineering Sciences. His scientific interests include information theory, error-correcting codes, and cryptography. In addition to papers in the area of convolutional codes and cryptography, he has authored two textbooks on switching theory and digital design (both in Swedish) and one on information theory (in both Swedish and German) and coauthored Fundamentals of Convolutional Coding (New York: IEEE, 1999), and Understanding Information Transmission (Hoboken, NJ: IEEE /Wiley-Interscience, 2005).
Professor Johannesson has been an Associate Editor for the International Journal of Electronics and Communications. During 1983–1995, he co-chaired seven Russian-Swedish Workshops, which were the chief interactions between Russian and Western scientists in information theory and coding during the final years of the Cold War. He became an elected member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences in 2006.
Boris D. Kudryashov was born in Leningrad, U.S.S.R., on July 9, 1952. He received the Diploma in Electrical Engineering in 1974 and the Ph.D. degree in technical sciences degree in 1978, both from the Leningrad Institute of Aerospace Instrumentation, and the Doctor of Science degree in 2005 from Institute of Problems of Information Transmission, Moscow.
In 1978, he became an Assistant Professor and then Associate Professor and Professor with the Leningrad Institute of Aerospace Instrumentation (now the State University on Aerospace Instrumentation, St. Petersburg, Russia). Since November 2007, he has been a Professor with the State University on Information Technologies, Mechanics and Optics, St. Petersburg, Russia. His research interests include coding theory, information theory and applications to speech, audio, and image coding. He has authored a textbook on information theory (in Russian) and has more than 70 papers published in journals and proceedings of international conferences, 15 U.S. patents, and published patent applications in image, speech, and audio coding.
Professor Kudryashov served as a member of Organizing Committee of ACCT International Workshops.
Roman V. Satyukov received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in applied mathematics and informatics from the Saint-Petersburg State University of Information Technologies, Mechanics and Optics, Russia, in 2007 and 2009, respectively.
From March 2009 to December 2009 he was with the Special Technical Center, Saint-Petersburg, Russia, as a software engineer. From February 2010 to May 2011 he was with the Saint-Petersburg State University of Information Technologies, Mechanics and Optics, Russia, teaching number theory. From January 2010 to March 2011 he was with the DevExperts, Saint-Petersburg, Russia, as a Java software engineer. Since June 2011 he has been with Google Switzerland, Zürich, Switzerland as a software engineer. His interests has been focused on information theory, number theory, and cryptography.

Florian Hug (S’08) was born in Memmingen, Germany, on May 21, 1983. He received the Dipl.-Ing. degree from the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, in 2008.
Since then, he has been with the Department of Electrical and Information Technology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, where he is working toward the Ph.D. degree in information theory. His research interests covers the field of information and coding theory. Currently, he is focusing on codes over graphs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:44:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

