IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

2321

Fixed Initialization Decoding of LDPC Codes Over a Binary Symmetric Channel
Manabu Hagiwara, Member, IEEE, Marc P. C. Fossorier, Fellow, IEEE, and Hideki Imai, Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We introduce in this paper the concept of a correctable error set and a fixed initialization decoding, by noticing that the sum-product decoder with a given iteration number only depends on the initialized probability of error, for a BSC. Although this value has been conventionally selected as the BSC crossover probability, we show that other selections can provide better performance or faster convergence. We also prove that for any fixed initialization (i.e., any given correctable error set), the word-error-rate can be represented as a polynomial of the BSC crossover probability. This suggests that the word-error-rate can be analytically derived from the knowledge of the correctable error set.
Index Terms—Error-analysis, error-correcting codes, iterative decoding, LDPC codes, quantum LDPC codes, sum-product decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L DPC CODES are known as a class of capacity approaching codes in the sense of Shannon’s limit, when decoded with sum-product decoding [1]. Computer experiments have shown LDPC codes can achieve good error-correcting performance. On the other hand, there are no formulas for an accurate error-rate evaluation of sum-product decoding of a given LDPC code. LDPC codes have been chosen for standardization of communication products, for example, DVBs [2], and wireless communication [3]. For practical use, extremely small error-rate is expected. The smaller the error-rate required, the higher computational cost of computer experiments. The ideal goal of our research is to give a formula for an accurate error-rate of a given LDPC code. Therefore obtaining the formula is meaningful not only for theoretical interests, but also for the development of consumer equipment.
One research trend on LDPC codes is the theoretical analysis of code space and its related structures, e.g., “minimum
Manuscript received December 06, 2010; revised June 28, 2011; accepted November 05, 2011. Date of publication January 24, 2012; date of current version March 13, 2012. This work was supported by KAKENHI 22760286. The paper was presented in part at the 2010 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) and in part at the 32nd Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications (SITA 2009, in Japanese).
M. Hagiwara is with the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba City, 305-8568, Japan, and also with the Center for Research and Development Initiative, Chuo University, Tokyo, 112-8551, Japan (e-mail: hagiwara.hagiwara@aist.go.jp).
M.P.C. Fossorier is with the ETIS, ENSEA/UCP/CNRS UMR-80516, CergyPontoise, 95014, France.
H. Imai is with the AIST and Department of Electrical, Electronic and Communication Engineering, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo, 112-8551, Japan.
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2011.2177440

distance” [4]–[6], “weight distribution” [7]–[9], “stopping set” [10], “trapping sets,” “near codewords” [11], “pseudocodewords” [12], [13], and so on. These approaches provide not only bounds or approximate values of error-rates, but also guidelines for the construction of good LDPC codes.
In this paper, we generalize sum-product decoding by introducing an additional parameter “initialization.” In the process, we introduce the concept of correctable error set. While many of the previously mentioned approaches tend to identify errors that are caused by the suboptimality of iterative decoding, we attempt to characterize errors that are guaranteed to be corrected by iterative decoding.
The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we briefly review sum-product decoding. In Section III, we introduce the concept of a correctable error set for the BSC by fixing parameters of the sum-product decoding. A few examples of correctable error sets are given. In Section IV, we analyze theoretically the word-error-rate of sum-product decoding from a point of view of multi variable functions. In Section V, we establish a relation between the correctable error set and a set of syndromes. This relation allows us to reduce the computational complexity of determining the correctable error set. Section VI presents another result that reduces computational complexity. It uses the symmetry of the parity-check matrix. In Section VII, we introduce two applications of our results: One gives a relation among the “initialization,” the “iteration,” and the “word-error-rate.” The other is computational complexity reduction for computer experiments for quantum LDPC codes. In Section VIII, we conclude the paper and propose directions for future research.

II. SUM-PRODUCT DECODING

Consider the following general communication scenario: a

sender chooses a codeword of a binary linear error-correcting

code associated with an LDPC matrix and sends to a re-

ceiver over a noisy channel. If the noisy channel is a binary

symmetric channel (BSC) with crossover probability , each

bit of the codeword flips with the probability and the re-

ceiver obtains a bit sequence . The receiver inputs the param-

eters , , and the received word to a sum-product de-

coder

, where is a parameter called the maximum

iteration number. The communication succeeds if the output is

, and fails otherwise. The word error-rate is the failure proba-

bility of the communication scenario. In this paper, we analyze

the word error-rate of LDPC codes with sum-product decoding

over a BSC.

In this section we review the definition of the sum-product

decoding algorithm. We take as input a bit-sequence , which

is referred to as a syndrome in the following definition. If we

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE

2322

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

assume

, the algorithm becomes a standard sum-product

decoding.

Let

be a binary matrix of size

. Define

The set

(resp.

) is called the column (resp. row)

index set of the th row (resp. th column). The sum-product

decoding algorithm is performed as follows.

• Input: a binary matrix , a bit sequence

, the crossover probability

of a BSC, an integer , and a bit sequence

.

• Output:

.

• Step 1 (initialize): Let

,

,

, and

be matrices of size

. For

all

,

with

, set

and set

.

• Step 2 (row process): For each

,

and

, compute

and

where is a constant such that

.

• Step 5 (parity-check): If one is , go to Step 6. If

, output

and stop the

algorithm.

• Step 6 (count the iteration number): If

, increment

and go to Step 2. If

, output

and

stop the algorithm.

Remark II.1: In general, an input may be different from the channel crossover probability for various reasons. For example, might be a quantized value of or the accuracy of could not be determined.

Remark II.2: In Step 4, we assume that the temporary bit is

if

. This assumption is required to properly define

the correctable error set, which is one of the motivations of this

paper (see Section III).

Remark II.3: Another popular definition for sum-product re-

places Steps 2 and 3 with

• Step 2’ (row process): For each

,

and

, compute

where th row of , and

, is the

where

,

th row of , is the XOR operation, and

is the

and and

for ,

.

is a constant such that

.

• Step 3 (column process): For each

,

and

, compute

for ,

.

is a constant such that

.

• Step 3’ (column process): For each

,

, 1, compute

where

is a constant such that

• Step 4 (temporary word): For

compute

and

where

is a constant such that

.

and

. , 1,

These replacements define an equivalent algorithm, i.e., the two algorithm always produce the same output.

III. CORRECTABLE ERROR SET

Assuming

, we denote the output of the sum-product

decoding as

. Then for a linear code the

following statements are equivalent:

•

,

•

,

where is any codeword defined by . It suggests that we can

define the correctable error set for an LDPC code under fixed

HAGIWARA et al.: FIXED INITIALIZATION DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER A BINARY SYMMETRIC CHANNEL

2323

TABLE I

WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF THE CORRECTABLE ERROR SET FOR AN ARRAY

TYPE (3, 11) LDPC CODE,

, INITIALIZATION

Fig. 1. Cardinality of correctable error sets for

and

.

initialization and maximal iteration number

as the set

of error patterns corrected by

. Let the correctable error

set be denoted by

. Note that if we change or ,

the correctable set

changes. Significantly,

is

independent of the crossover probability of the channel.

Example III.1: Let the parity-check matrix be the 10 20 matrix

We can obtain the correctable error set

by exhaus-

tive search for fixed and .

Case

and

:

, where 0 is

the all-zero vector.

Case

and

:

.

Case

and

:

.

Case

and

:

, where is the th unit vector, and

Case

and

:

.

Case

and

:

.

The cardinality of

for

is plotted

in Fig. 1 as a function of . For this case, we observe that

the best values of represented in Fig. 1 are in the set

.

Example III.2: Table I shows the weight distribution of the

correctable error set for an array type (3,11) LDPC code, known

as an FSA code [6] of type (3, 11), which is a quasi-cyclic LDPC

code with base model matrix

,

and circulant size 11, obtained with

,

and initialization

. This code is of length 121

. We observe that for this value of ,

achieves

bounded distance decoding since, for this code, its minimum

distance is 6. Furthermore, 87% of weight 3 error patterns are

also correctable.

From Table I, we observe that the error of weight 121 is cor-

rectable for the array type (3, 11) LDPC code. In fact, this phe-

nomena occurs under

and

if each

row-weight of the parity-check matrix is odd. The reason is

the following: In Step 2 of

,

is obtained from

. Under the assumption “the row-weight is odd,”

the value

for the all-1 error is the same as the value for

the all-0 error. Therefore, the all-1 error is correctable, “without

iteration.”

IV. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS ON

In Section III, it was observed that the correctable error set

was independent of the BSC crossover prob-

ability . This suggests introducing another value to

. We call the initialization of the decoder. As a

result, the word-error-rate is regarded as a function of two

variables and for fixed parameters and . Let it

be denoted by

. With this notation, the

word-error-rate of the original sum-product decoding is equal

to

. The following theorem presents proper-

ties of

:

Theorem IV.1: Let be a parity-check matrix and

the word-error-rate for an initialization

, a crossover probability , and the maximum iteration number

. Then we have the following:

1) For a fixed initialization ,

is a polynomial

in .

2) For any initialization ,

is an integer,

where is the number of columns of . Furthermore,

is a discrete function of .

2324

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

3) For some parity-check matrix ,

, the word-

error-rate of the original sum-product decoding, is not a

continuous function of .

Remark IV.1: Theorem IV.1 3) implies that there may be

no polynomial representation of the word-error-rate

as a function of for some LDPC codes. On the other hand,

by Theorem IV.1 1) for a fixed initialization , there exists a

polynomial representation of the word-error-rate

as a function of for any LDPC code. This fact motivates us to

investigate sum-product decoding with a fixed initialization.

Before the proof is given, we recall the weight enumerator

as follows: For a set

, the weight enumerator with

variables and is defined as

The word-error-rate probability is represented by

over a BSC with crossover

for some

. Since the element

is a

polynomial,

is a function of . Furthermore, each

is a continuous function.

Next, we observe the discontinuity property of in Ex-

ample III.1 with

, 16. We have

Its weight enumerator is

where

is the Hamming weight of .

Proof for Theorem IV.1:

1) As we pointed out, it is possible to define the cor-

rectable error set

by fixing , , . Let

be the weight enumerator of

.

The probability that the error-vector is contained in

is equal to

over a BSC

with crossover probability . This implies that

Then Remember that we have Denoting the weight enumerator at

by , we obtain

which is a polynomial of . 2) By the argument above, we have
On the other hand,

This implies

.

On the other hand,

never crosses another

,

in the interval (0, 0.5), since the coordinates of

are nonnegative and there exists at least

one positive coordinate. By (1), every

has the form

where is a nonnegative integer. Since

, we

where is the cardinality of the set . Therefore,

have

which is an integer.

3) Define a finite set

as

Note that . Remember that

if and only if

where

is the ring of polynomials in and over

the integers. Then any weight enumerator of a correctable error set is an element of , since

and

(1)

for any ,

,

, and there is only one

vector of Hamming weight zero so that

. Note that

the cardinality of

is . Therefore, the cardinality

of a correctable error set is at most . This implies

Therefore, the word-error-rate is discontinuous in the interval .

Remark IV.2: From the proof of 2), we have

. Therefore, we can easily read the word-

error-rate

from the graph of the cardinalities of

the correctable error set (see Fig. 1).

HAGIWARA et al.: FIXED INITIALIZATION DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER A BINARY SYMMETRIC CHANNEL

2325

Remark IV.3: The key point of the proof for 3) is not only the different ’s but also the finiteness of the cardinality of the set
. In fact, if the cardinality is infinite, it is possible for to be continuous. For example, define

Since is

holds on the previous iteration, the last term

Since

, the term above is equal to

as a set of constant functions. Although the function

for all

,

is continuous. The finiteness of in the proof 3) is due to the finiteness of
the set of error vectors. This is one of the reasons we assume the communication channel is a BSC.

By the definition of

, it is equal to

For Step 3 (column step), since

shown above,

. holds as it is

V. SYNDROME DECODING AND CORRECTABLE ERROR SET

From Theorem IV.1 2), the word-error-rate of fixed initial-

ization decoding (FID) is closely related to the cardinality of

the correctable error set. In this section, we discuss properties

of correctable error sets.

We denote the output of the sum-product syndrome decoding

by

, which emphasizes the input ,

called a syndrome.

Theorem V.1: For any , , , , the following two statements are equivalent:
• • Theorem V.1 follows from the following proposition:

Proposition V.1: Let and be the matrices updated by

and let and be the matrices updated

by

.

For any

,

and

, the

following holds over a binary symmetric channel:

Proof for Proposition V.1: The key idea of the proof

follows from the observation of the two decoders

and

simultaneously.

For Step 1 (initialize), we remark that

For Step 4 (temporary word), since shown above,

holds as

Therefore, we obtain the proposition.

Proof of Theorem V.1: At the th iteration of the decoding,

we have

for

, parity-check is not satisfied at the

th iteration and at the th iteration we have

for all

.

for

, parity-check is not satisfied at the th

iteration and at the th iteration we have

for all

by Proposition V.1.

at the th iteration, we have

.

Corollary V.2: For , , and ,

For

, we prove recursively that the proposition

holds at the

th iteration assuming it holds at the th iter-

ation.

For Step 2 (row process), since the channel is a binary sym-

metric channel,

We call a syndrome

a decodable syndrome if

there exists

such that

. Let us denote the set of the decodable syndromes by

.

Thanks to Corollary V.2, we can determine the correctable

error set if its co-dimension

is small. For example, for

the code of Example III.2,

and

, so that it

is impossible to perform an exhaustive search to determine the

correctable error set. However, the co-dimension of the parity-

2326

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

The equivalence of 1. and 3. is obtained by the following equality:

Fig. 2. Comparison of theoretical values and computer experimental results of

WER with

and

.

check matrix is

. Therefore it is possible to obtain

Table I, by Corollary V.2.

Table I allows us to obtain a theoretical formula of

with

for a FSA code of type (3, 11).

Fig. 2 compares the theoretical values and the computer exper-

imental results of the word-error-rate over a BSC. Assuming

an AWGN channel with one-bit quantized output, the SNR

values 4.0, 5.0, 6.0, 7.0, and 8.0 dB correspond to crossover

probabilities 0.026615, 0.015044, 0.007475, 0.003162, and

0.001093, respectively. Note that numerical calculations are

performed in floating point in the computer experiments, while

our analysis for the sum-product decoding is theoretical. We ob-

serve that the theoretical and experimental values match well, as

expected. Since we have a theoretical formula as a polynomial

in , it is possible to calculate word-error-rates at high SNR

values. For example,

.

VI. GRAPH AUTOMORPHISM AND CORRECTABLE ERROR SET

Let be an

low-density parity-check matrix and let

be an

permutation matrix on the index set

. The permutation acts naturally on the columns

of . Let denote the permuted matrix of by , and let

denote the permuted vector of a column vector by . Sim-

ilarly, denotes an

permutation matrix on the index set

, which acts on the rows of . Let denote the permuted

matrix of by , and let denote the permuted vector of a

row vector by .

The following is a natural observation:

Proposition VI.1: Let

and an positive integer.

For any sequence

, the following are equivalent:

1.

,

2.

,

3.

,

for any permutation for the row index set of and any per-

mutation for the column index set of .

Proof: The equivalence of 1. and 2. is obtained directly

from the definition of the sum-product decoding, since any row

permutation for a parity-check matrix does not change the tem-

porary word in Step 4.

The equality follows from the definition of the sum-product decoding.

In the last section, we discussed the relation between syndrome decoding and the correctable error set. The following is a similar statement to Proposition VI.1.

Proposition VI.2: Let

and a positive integer.

For any sequence

, the following are equivalent:

•

,

•

,

for any permutation of columns of .

Proof: The proof is a similar to that of Proposition VI.1.

The parity-check matrix of an LDPC code can be char-

acterized by a bipartite graph

with vertex sets

and

. This bipar-

tite graph is called the Tanner graph of . Therefore, it is nat-

ural that an automorphism of an LDPC code is a graph auto-

morphism of its Tanner graph, although an automorphism of a

linear code is defined as an index permutation which stabilizes

the code space. We define the automorphism

of an LDPC

code with parity-check matrix as a pair of index permutations

on and which satisfies

If we define the product of automorphisms

and

by

the automorphisms constitute a finite group

. Note that

we regard and as permutation matrices of size

and

respectively, since they act on as index permutations.

Since an automorphism stabilizes the Tanner graph, we obtain

the following result:

Proposition VI.3: Let be a parity-check matrix. Let

(resp.

) be a correctable error set (resp. a

decodable syndrome set) with initialization and maximal

iteration number .

1. For any error vector and any automorphism

,

2. For any syndrome and any automorphism ,

Proof: 1.) By the definition of a correctable error set,

HAGIWARA et al.: FIXED INITIALIZATION DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER A BINARY SYMMETRIC CHANNEL

2327

By Proposition VI.1,

TABLE II

MACKAY (504, 252) CODE: WORD-ERROR-RATE BY SUM-PRODUCT DECODING

AND FID

, 0.10, WITH

, 20, AND 30, CROSS-OVER

PROBABILITY

, 0.03, 0.04, AND 0.05

Since

is a automorphism of ,

By applying Proposition VI.1 again,

2.) Let

and

Now we have

and

. By 1.),

implies

. Therefore,

. If

is an automorphism on ,

(i.e.,

,) then

is an automorphism

too, (i.e.,

). Note that

, since is a

permutation matrix.

Therefore,

TABLE III

DSC (273, 191) CODE: WORD-ERROR-RATE BY SUM-PRODUCT DECODING

AND FIXED INITIALIZATION DECODING

, 0.07, 0.01, WITH MAXIMAL

ITERATION

AND 100, CROSS-OVER PROBABILITIES

,

0.04, AND 0.07

Thus

.

Proposition VI.3 generalizes the main theorem of [16] that “an error vector obtained by a quasi-cyclic permutation of a correctable error is also a correctable error.” Matsunaga et.al. pointed out in [16] that this result reduces the computational costs of computer experiments for calculating bit error-rates. We point out this idea is applicable to reduce the computational costs for determining the correctable error set. In group theory,

is called an orbit of

. The orbits

give a partition

of . Therefore the computational cost for determining a cor-

rectable error is reduced to the number of orbits.

Example VI.4: Let be a parity-check matrix of size

such that columns consist of all of weight two vectors in

, where

. Then the set of check node

permutations for its Tanner graph is the symmetric group

of degree , in other words, acts on . The orbits consist

of

, where

.

Therefore we can determine the correctable error set by

computer experiments.

In general, the number of orbits can be determined from the

following theorem.

Theorem VI.5 (Burnside’s Lemma) [17]: Let be a finite group and a set such that acts on . Then the number of the orbits of by is

As a direct corollary of Theorem VI.5, we can count how

many syndromes are sufficient to determine the correctable error

set for an FSA code of type

. This number is

which represents roughly a reduction by a factor with respect

to the typical number of syndromes

. For example, for

, this number is 17, 748,

. It is significantly

smaller than the number of syndromes of an FSA code of type

(3, 11), i.e., .

VII. APPLICATIONS

A. Communications Channels

We performed experiments of our decoding method, with

FID for MacKay code of length 504 and of rate 0.5 [14] (See

Table II). FID with

and

always outper-

forms the original sum-product decoding for crossover proba-

bilities 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, and 0.05. In the case

the

difference between FID with

and SPDec is larger than

the one with

.

Table III summarizes another experimental result for the dif-

ferent set cycle (DSC) code (273, 191) [15].

FID with

always outperforms the original sum-

product decoding at the crossover probability

. At the

crossover probability 0.04, the original sum-product decoding

shows the best performance among other FIDs and it is almost

the same as FID with

. Similarly to the MacKay code

2328

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

Fig. 3. Relation between word-error-rate and iteration number for initialization (273,191).

and 0.07 and crossover probability

for the DSC code

case, the difference between FID with

and SPDec

for

is larger than the one with

at the

crossover probability

.

Fig. 3 depicts the word-error-rate as a function of the maximal

iteration number for the DSC code (273, 191) for FID with

at the crossover probability

. This figure

indicates that both initializations 0.01 and 0.07 lead to the same

WER for a very large number of iterations. On the other hand,

a suitable initialization

converges to the final word-

error-rate much faster than the

case.

B. Quantum LDPC Codes

We introduce an application to evaluate the word-error-rate

for quantum LDPC codes. It is known that the experiment for

quantum CSS codes is implementable on a classical computer

[18]. A quantum LDPC code of type CSS is a pair of LDPC

codes associated with parity-check matrices and such

that

. A quantum codeword of the CSS code is char-

acterized by a complex linear combination of quantum states

defined by

, where is the dual code associ-

ated with and is a codeword defined by .

The experiment is composed of the following processes:

1 Set a quantum Pauli channel

.

2 Randomly, generate a pair of error vectors , related to

the Pauli channel.

3 Calculate syndromes , by

,

.

4 Input syndromes and to a sum-product syndrome

decoder and obtain outputs , .

5 Decoding succeeds if

and

. Decoding fails otherwise, where is a code space

generated by .

From Theorem V.1, we can omit the 3rd step. We can also

replace the 4th step with “Input error vector and to a sum-

product decoder and obtain outputs . Finally we can replace

the 5th step with “Decoding succeeds if

and

. Decoding fails otherwise.”

Hence, we reduce the computational complexity of the exper-

iment. Note that we can also replace the sum-product decoder

with our FID. It becomes applicable to a security evaluation of

quantum cryptography, known as a BB84 protocol [19].

VIII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduced the concept of a correctable error

set and a fixed initialization decoding, by noticing that the sum

product decoder with a given iteration number only depends

on the initialized probability of error, for a BSC. Although this

value has been conventionally selected as the BSC crossover

probability, we showed that other selections can provide better

performance or faster convergence. We also proved that for any

fixed initialization (i.e., any given correctable error set), the

word-error-rate can be represented as a polynomial of the BSC

crossover probability. This suggests that the word-error-rate can

be analytically derived from the (total or partial) knowledge of

the correctable error set.

For further research, the following topics seem meaningful

from the points of view of theory and practice:

• While these results have been derived for the BSC, the

same concepts can be extended to any discrete input—dis-

crete output channel model, in particular quantized ver-

sions of the AWGN channel.

• Construct a LDPC code such that its length is practically

large but its correctable error set can be identified. One

approach is to construct a bipartite graph with high sym-

metry. For example, consider a parity-check matrix such

that the columns consist of all column vectors of Ham-

ming weight 2. Then its length is

, where

is the column size of , e.g., the length is 4950 for

HAGIWARA et al.: FIXED INITIALIZATION DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER A BINARY SYMMETRIC CHANNEL

2329

. Actually the computational complexity to determine the correctable error set is , thanks to the symmetry of . Unfortunately, the LDPC code associated with does not show good error-correcting performance. However, this example implies that it is not impossible to determine correctable error sets for large length codes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the anonymous reviewers, and Mr. W. DeMeo and Mr. J. Kong for their valuable comments and suggestions to improve the quality of the paper.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications (DVB-S2), ETSI EN 302 307, V1.2.1, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB), 2009.
[3] Draft Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications and information exchange between systems--Local and metropolitan area networks--Specific requirements-- Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications: Amendment 4: Enhancements for Higher Throughput, IEEE Draft Std.11n/D3.00, .
[4] R. M. Tanner, “Minimum-distance bounds by graph analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 808–821, Dec. 2003.
[5] K. Yang and T. Helleseth, “On the minimum distance of array codes as LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 3268–3271, Dec. 2003.
[6] K. Sugiyama and Y. Kaji, “On the minimum weight of simple fulllength array LDPC codes,” IEICE Trans. Fundum., vol. E91-A, pp. 1502–1508, Jun. 2008.
[7] X.-Y. Hu, M. Fossorier, and E. Eleftheriou, “On the computation of the minimum distance of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Paris, France, Jun. 2004.
[8] D. Declercq and M. Fossorier, “Improved impulse method to evaluate the low weight profile of sparse binary linear codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008.
[9] M. Hirotomo, M. Mohri, and M. Morii, “A probabilistic computation method for the weight distribution of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 2166–2170.
[10] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[11] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, Oct. 2003.
[12] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[13] G. D. Forney Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models (Minneapolis, MN, 1999), B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001, vol. 123, pp. 101–112.
[14] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[15] R. Lucas, M. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of one-step majority logic deductible codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 921–937, Jun. 2000.
[16] Y. Matsunaga, M. Hagiwara, K. Kobara, and H. Imai, “A study on a key establishment scheme with QC LDPC codes and UH-protocols,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Its Appl. (ISITA), Auckland, New Zealand, Dec. 2008.

[17] J. J. Rotman, An Introduction to the Theory of Groups. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1995.
[18] D. MacKay, G. Mitchison, and P. McFadden, “Sparse graph codes for quantum error-correction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2315–2330, Oct. 2004.
[19] M. Hagiwara and H. Imai, “Quantum quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 806–810.
Manabu Hagiwara received the B.E. degree in mathematics from Chiba University in 1997, and the M.E. and Ph.D. degrees in mathematical science from the University of Tokyo in 1999 and 2002, respectively. From 2002 to 2005 he was a postdoctoral fellow at IIS, the University of Tokyo. He also was a researcher at Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences (RIMS), Kyoto University, 2002. Currently, he is a scientist of Research Center for Information Security, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), is a visiting associate professor of Center for Research and Development Initiative, Chuo University, and is a research scholar at Department of Mathematics, University of Hawaii. His current research interests include industrial mathmetics, coding theory, and algebraic combinatorics.
Marc P. C. Fossorier received the B.E. degree from the National Institute of Applied Sciences (I.N.S.A.) Lyon, France in 1987, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in 1991 and 1994, all in electrical engineering. His research interests include decoding techniques for linear codes, communication algorithms and statistics. Dr. Fossorier was a recipient of a 1998 NSF Career Development award and became IEEE Fellow in 2006. He served as Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Information Theory from 2003 to 2006, as Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Communications from 1996 to 2003, as Editor for the IEEE Communications Letters from 1999 to 2007, and as Treasurer of the IEEE Information Theory Society from 1999 to 2003. From 2002 to 2007, he was an elected member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Society which he served as Second and First Vice-President. He was Program Co-Chairman for the 2007 International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), the 2000 International Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications (ISITA) and Editor for the Proceedings of the 2006, 2003 and 1999 Symposium on Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error Correcting Codes (AAECC).
Hideki Imai (LF’ 86) received the B.E., M.E., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 1966, 1968, and 1971, respectively. From 1971 to 1992, he was on the faculty of Yokohama National University. From 1992 to 2006, he was a Professor in the Institute of Industrial Science, University of Tokyo. In 2006, he was appointed to Emeritus Professor of the University of Tokyo and Professor at Chuo University. Concurrently, he serves as the Director of Research Center for Information Security, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology as well as a Director of The Institute of Science and Engineering, Chuo University. Dr. Imai received the Best Book Awards from IEICE in 1976 and 1991, the Best Paper Awards in 1992, 2003, 2004, and 2008, the Yonezawa Memorial Paper Award in 1992, the Achievement Award in 1995, the Inose Award in 2003, and the Distinguished Achievement and Contributions Award in 2004. He also received the Golden Jubilee Paper Award from the IEEE Information Theory Society in 1998, the Wilkes Award from the British Computer Society in 2007, and the Official Commendations from the Minster of Internal Affairs and Communications in 2002, from the Minister of Economy, Trade, and Industry in 2002, and from the Chief Cabinet Secretary in 2009. He was awarded an Honorary Doctor degree from Soonchunhyang University in 1999 and Docteur Honoris Causa by Toulon University in 2002. He is also the recipient of the Ericsson Telecommunications Award 2005, the Okawa Prize 2008, and 61st NHK Broadcasting Culture Award. He is a member of the Science Council of Japan, a Fellow of IEICE and IACR in 1992, 2001, and 2007, respectively, an IEEE Life Fellow, and an IEICE Fellow, Honorary Member. He served as the President of the Society of Information Theory and its Applications in 1997, of the IEICE Engineering Sciences Society in 1998, and of the IEEE Information Theory Society in 2004. He is currently the Chair of Cryptography Techniques Research and Evaluation Committee of Japan (CRYPTREC) and of the IEEE Japan Council.

