IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

817

A 2.37-Gb/s 284.8 mW Rate-Compatible (491,3,6) LDPC-CC Decoder
Chih-Lung Chen, Yu-Hsiang Lin, Hsie-Chia Chang, and Chen-Yi Lee, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a (491,3,6) time-varying low-den-

sity parity check convolutional code (LDPC-CC) decoder chip.

This work combines the algorithm level, node level, and bit level

optimizations to achieve over 2 Gb/s throughput with acceptable

hardware cost and power. The algorithm level optimization is the

on-demand variable node activation scheduling with concealing

channel values, which can not only achieve twice faster decoding

convergence speed than log-belief propagation (log-BP) algorithm,

but also reduce the 17% message storage capacity. The node level

optimization duplicates the check node units and variable node

units and unfolds the message storage first-in–first-outs (FIFOs)

so that the throughput becomes twelve multiplying with clock

frequency. In the meantime, the bit level optimization is employed

to retime the critical path such that the higher clock frequency

can be achieved and message storage size is slightly reduced.

Furthermore, a novel hybrid-partitioned FIFO is proposed to

provide sufficient memory bandwidth to processing units and

alleviate power consumption. With these schemes, a test chip of

proposed LDPC-CC decoder has been fabricated in 90 nm CMOS

technology with core area of

. Maximum

throughput 2.37 Gb/s is measured under 1.2 V supply with energy

efficiency of 0.024 nJ/bit/proc. Depending on the operation mode,

power can be scaled down to 90.2 mW while maintaining 1.58 Gb/s

at 0.8 V supply.

Index Terms—Decoding scheduling, error correction, high
throughput, low-density parity check convolutional code (LDPC-CC).

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK (LDPC) codes can be classified into two categories, one is LDPC block codes (LDPC-BCs) and the other is LDPC convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs). LDPC-BCs were first introduced by Gallager in early 1960s [1], but were disregarded for unfeasible architectures and VLSI technologies. MacKay and Neal rediscovered LDPC-BCs in 1997 [2] and proposed the belief-propagation (BP) decoding algorithm which successfully provided near Shannon bound error-correcting performance [3]. Simplified

Manuscript received September 08, 2011; revised November 26, 2011; accepted December 20, 2011. Date of publication February 24, 2012; date of current version March 28, 2012. This paper was approved by Guest Editor Makoto Nagata. This work was supported by the National Science Council and Ministry of Economic Affairs of Taiwan, under Grants NSC 100-2220-E-009-062 and NSC 100-2221-E-009-044-MY3.
The authors are with the Department of Electronics Engineering and the Institute of Electronics, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan (e-mail: lung@si2lab.org; hcchang@mail.nctu.edu.tw; cylee@si2lab.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2012.2185193

decoding algorithms such as min-sum (MS) algorithm and

normalized min-sum (NMS) algorithm reduced the decoder

complexity with acceptable performance loss [4]. Further

scheduling algorithms named as shuffled decoding and lay-

ered decoding successfully drove the overall throughput to

multi-Gb/s [5], [6]. Therefore LDPC-BCs are widely adopted

in many communication systems, such as IEEE802.11n,

IEEE802.15.3c, IEEE 802.16e, and DVB-S2 [7]–[10].

Near the rediscovery of LDPC-BCs, LDPC-CCs were

proposed in 1999 [11]. LDPC-CCs have the characteristics

of convolutional code not found in LDPC-BCs. Continuous

encoding supports any length of input data stream, which is

especially suitable for streaming video and packet-switching

network. The puncture scheme applied in LDPC-CCs provides

flexible code-rates by abandoning certain positions of encoded

bits according to the puncture table. Simple encoder circuitry

composed by registers, multiplexers, and a few XOR gates has

lower hardware cost and power consumption, and can be used

in distributed sensor network. Furthermore, the correlation be-

tween codeword symbols of LDPC-CCs is limited to a specific

interval (constraint length

, is the memory size of

encoder). This locality property lowers the overall routing com-

plexity of the decoder. Although possessing many advantages,

LDPC-CCs were rarely chosen by standards. The main reason

lies in its bottlenecks of the long decoding latency, high power

consumption, and low-to-moderate decoding throughput.

The throughput of LDPC-CC decoders reported in litera-

tures were only several hundred Mb/s, which were difficult

to compete with over Gb/s LDPC-BC decoder. Cause of

lower throughput can be explained by the decoder structure.

LDPC-CC decoder consists of serially concatenated processors,

and each processor decoding a sliding window on the bipartite

graph can be taken as one iteration in LDPC-BCs. Increasing

processor number can enhance error-correcting capability but

cannot increase throughput. Therefore many works put efforts

on realizing the parallel message passing: analysis of paral-

lelization concepts in [12], single-instruction–multiple-data

(SIMD) architecture in [13], and joint code-decoder design in

[14]. Recently, a high throughput LDPC-CC decoder design

was proposed by adding regularity during code construction

[15]. However, achieving high throughput is still challenging

for some time-varying LDPC-CCs without regularity.

The high power consumption is another crucial issue for

LDPC-CC decoder. The nature of LDPC-CC is similar to

convolutional code that the received messages are continuous

stream. Therefore the decoder consists of many message

streams which behave like first-in–first-out (FIFO). Current

literatures can be classified to two FIFO implementation

0018-9200/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

818

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

Fig. 1. (14, 3, 6) time-invariant LDPC-CC example. (a) Encoder. (b) sliding window decoding. (c) pipeline decoder.

styles, register-based [16], [17] and memory-based [18]–[22]. can achieve error-correcting performance compatible to 10 iter-

Register-based FIFO supports unlimited message bandwidth ations of conventional algorithm. After optimization, the node

but introduces enormous power consumption. Contrarily parallelism equals to 12 and 50% of FIFO are split to three

memory-based FIFO reduces power consumption but suffers two-port memories. The measurement results show that the de-

severe memory conflict. The limited bandwidth of memory coder can achieve 2.37 Gb/s throughput with maximum oper-

will highly degrade the overall throughput especially with high ating frequency 198 MHz and power consumption 284 mW

parallelism.

under 1.2 V supply voltage.

In order to reduce decoding latency, increase throughput, The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The iterative

and reduce hardware costs and power consumption, this decoding algorithm of LDPC-CC as well as its scheduling al-

paper proposes three levels of optimization (algorithm level, gorithm is reviewed in Section II. The improved decoding al-

node level, bit level) and hybrid partitioned FIFO. The idea gorithm and three implementation techniques are proposed and

of algorithm-level optimization is inspired by the layered analyzed in Section III. Moreover, Section IV reports the imple-

decoding of LDPC-BCs decoder which can accelerate the mentation results of (491,3,6) LDPC-CC code, including bit-

convergence speed of decoding [6]. In reference to the same error rate (BER) performance and measurement results of the

error rate, layered decoding is able to reduce about half of the 90-nm chip. Finally, the conclusions are given in Section V.

iteration number. Later similar idea was found to apply to the LDPC-CCs which was named as on-demand variable-node

II. BACKGROUND

activation scheduling (abbreviated as OVA scheduling in this An LDPC convolutional code (LDPC-CC) is a convolutional

paper) [23], [24]. We further modified the OVA scheduling by code with a sparse and semi-infinite parity-check matrix . A

hiding the original channel values into the streams of message parity-check matrix in the scalar form can be written as

passing, which not only maintain the original double convergence rate (i.e. only half processing units and decoding latency

...

...

are required to reach the same error-correcting performance)

but also reduce overall size of FIFOs. The node-level optimization employs register folding technique with node duplication,

...

...

...

(1)

which increases the throughput of each processor to the product

of node parallelism and the operating frequency

.

Bit-level optimization will further perform retiming to variable

...

...

nodes, shorten the longest delay path, thereby, increase the where are submatrices of size

with code-rate

operating frequency. In addition, after register folding each

. For a

-regular LDPC-CC, there

FIFO has to provide the -fold bandwidth in time-invariant are exactly ones in each row and ones in each column

LDPC-CC. As for time-varying case, each FIFO has to be of . The constraint length is defined as

.

duplicated to -fold, causing huge hardware costs and power Normally the submatrices are periodic in time, which means

consumption. The proposed hybrid partitioned FIFO splits

for any and , and this kind of code is called

out continuous section of each FIFO, and the sections with time-varying LDPC-CC with period . If =1, it is time-in-

similar length are combined to one memory bank, reducing variant since each column of is the down-shifted version of

hardware costs and power consumption. The remaining parts previous column.

are still implemented by registers in order to provide sufficient Assume the codeword vector of an LDPC-CC is denoted as

bandwidth for high node parallel decoder.

, where

,

Finally, the proposed three levels of optimization and hy- then it will satisfy the parity-check equation, i.e.,

.

brid partitioned FIFO circuit is implemented in 90 nm process Without loss of generality, in this article the code-rate is as-

chip. The code specification is (

,

,

) sumed to 1/2 and the encoding scheme is assumed to system-

LDPC-CC, where and are the degree of variable node and atic. Accordingly, the codeword symbol and the submatrix of

check node. The proposed decoder consisting of 5 processors

at each time instance are

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: A 2.37-Gb/s 284.8 mW RATE-COMPATIBLE (491,3,6) LDPC-CC DECODER

819

Fig. 2. Illustration of notations. (a) Illustration of indexes , , , and . (b) illustration of CNU input set.

, where

and

are the information bit and for the -th address in a FIFO or -th VN. The last index is

parity bit respectively. Therefore, the parity check equation is used to distinguish the information part

and the parity

rearranged to

part

. By means of index definition, the resulted message

storage scheme is shown in Fig. 2(a). The

are -th VN

(2) to CN message send out from -th VN node at -th iteration,

where is either 0 for information part or 1 for parity part. On

A rate 1/2, (14, 3, 6) time-invariant LDPC-CC is given as an example. The encoder is shown in Fig. 1(a) and check equation is described by

the other hand,

is the CN to VN messages.

Through the definition of indexes, the message-passing de-

coding algorithm can be described as follows. Initially, all the

shift registers in the pipeline decoder are filled with infinite be-

(3) cause the dummy zeros are the initial values in the encoder. As

the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of received channel values

A. Message-Passing Algorithm for LDPC-CC
Based on the relationship of parity-check equation, the bipartite graph is depicted in Fig. 1(b). The upper row and lower row are codeword symbols representing variable nodes (VN). Each nonzero element of is mapped to one edge in the graph. The parity-check equations are transformed to check nodes (CN). Because the stream characteristics of LDPC-CC, the decoding

and

are received, they are shifted into the inputs of the

rows of shift registers. The contents of shift registers

are simultaneously shifted one time instance toward output. The

next step is to operate the check node computations, and then up-

date the variable nodes which are in the end of sliding window.

Here we use the NMS algorithm, where the check node opera-

tion is calculate as

can be carried out by sliding window decoding. Each window

performs one CN operation and two VN operations. From (2),

the correlation with largest distance in CN operation is +1. Here we assume that CN and VN operations are completed in

(4)

the individual cycle, then the sliding window size is +2. One sliding window executing the message passing from CN to VN and VN to CN represents one iteration. The entire decoder consists processors, where each processor implements one sliding window. The structure of pipelined decoder is illustrated in Fig. 1(c).
The decoding algorithm for LDPC-CC is the message-passing algorithm performed on the graph. The message storage scheme is in view of VNs. Since every VN has one re-

where

mod . The scaling factor will influence the

performance, therefore it needs to be chosen by simulations.

defines the check-node input set at the -th phase, in which each

element

is the VN to CN message location in FIFOs

and

. Fig. 2(b) depicts the check-node input set of a

time-invariant LDPC-CC with CN degree

, where the

values of to depend on the code definition.

After check node updates, variable node is computed by

ceived channel value and messages on the connecting edges,

there are totally

messages (information plus parity) in

(5)

each time instance. Combine the messages in all time instance

within one sliding window to message streams, where each The decoding procedure successively repeats the shifting step

message stream acts like first-in first-out (FIFO). Therefore in and appropriate node updates. As long as the initial decoding

every processor there are

FIFOs storing streams of delay has elapsed total

time units, the pipeline

channel values and messages. The decoding of LDPC-CC is decoder outputs a decoded data.

developed according to this message storage scheme. Let’s start According to the message-passing algorithm for LDPC-CC,

from the definition of index , , , and . The index indicates the conventional processor architecture is illustrated in Fig. 3.

-th processor among processors. The index means -th There are only one check node unit (CNU) and two variable

FIFO or -th message send out from a VN. If equals to zero, node units (VNUs) in a processor, where CNU and VNU com-

that is the FIFO storing channel values. The index stands pute (4) and (5), respectively. Each square indicates a CN to VN

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

820

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

Fig. 3. Conventional processor architecture.

TABLE I PUNCTURING TABLE

0: punctured; 1: transmitted

message, a VN to CN message, or a channel value. This archi-

tecture is based on the flooding scheduling in which the vari-

able node operation in (5) is computed only after all input CN

to VN messages are ready. The overall size for message storage

is equal to

bits, where is the

bit-width of input channel values. If better error-correcting per-

formance is required, larger bit-width , code memory , and

iteration number are necessary. As a result, the hardware cost

and power consumption for message storage are much larger

than combinational circuits of CNUs and VNUs.

B. LDPC Convolutional Codes for Mobile WiMAX

In this work, we adopt the specification proposed for the IEEE 802.16m standards by Panasonic [25], a rate compatible (491,3,6) LDPC convolutional codes with time period of 3. In order to meet the requirements of next generation mobile communications, IEEE 802.16m is developed to provide higher data rates and lower latency than 802.16e standards. The equations in (6), which are constructed based on the parity check polynomials, define the time-varying convolutional encoder.

Fig. 4. BER performance under different code-rates with 50 iterations and flooding scheduling.
C. On-Demand Variable Node Activation (OVA) Scheduling

Studies have shown that the message-passing scheduling af-

fects the rate of decoding convergence and computational com-

plexity. If we observe the standard flooding scheduling, the vari-

able node units are activated only once before the values leave

the processor. Most messages are shifted while few messages

are updated in a processor. Thus, this scheduling is inefficient

without utilizing the recently updated information. To increase

(6) the convergence speed, sequential scheduling are introduced in decoding LDPC block codes. Recently, an on-demand variable

and

represent the information polynomial and node activation scheduling is proposed in [23], [24] to accel-

parity polynomial respectively. Due to the time period is only 3, erate the decoding convergence speed for LDPC-CC. The main

the complexity of hardware implementation is greatly reduced. idea is to change the variable node activation location from the

Besides, this LDPC-CC could support 5 five code rates through output of the processor to the position right before each check

puncturing. The puncturing patterns are shown in Table I. Fig. 4 node input. This on-demand variable node activation scheduling

is the bit-error-rate (BER) performance of the (491,3,6) time- is very similar to the layered decoding in LDPC block codes that

varying LDPC-CC under AWGN channel. Both the log-BP al- check nodes could access the most recent messages. We use the

gorithm and the NMS algorithm are shown in the figure.

same example given in (3) to demonstrate the processor archi-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: A 2.37-Gb/s 284.8 mW RATE-COMPATIBLE (491,3,6) LDPC-CC DECODER

821

Fig. 5. Processor architecture of on-demand variable node activation scheduling.

and make it difficult to use memory-based decoder architecture. Hence we will present a hybrid-partitioned FIFO to support large bandwidth requirement of folding technique and also minimize the power consumptions.

A. Proposed Decoding Algorithm Description

The message storage of proposed decoding algorithm is

still based on FIFOs. Detail operations of OVA scheduling are

shown in Fig. 7(a). Let’s observe the first and second VN to

CN messages

and

(7) (8)

Since the first row

stores channel values, the value of

Fig. 6. BER performance of on-demand variable node activation scheduling.

is the value of

shifted by

time in-

stances. Furthermore, the fourth row

stores the third VN

tecture of OVA scheduling. Although this example is a time-invariant code, the on-demand scheduling can be applied directly to the case of time-varying codes.
It can be seen from Fig. 5, a VNU can be disassembled into sub-VNUs (SVNUs) and distributed within a processor. Before each check node unit is activated, the SVNU calculates single VN-to-CN message instead of calculating VN-to-CN messages in parallel. The major difference from the flooding scheduling is the order of updating procedures, and it is worthy to note that the computational complexity of both scheduling is the same. Fig. 6 shows the floating point BER performance of two scheduling for (491,3,6) LDPC-CC. The performance of OVA with 25 iterations is almost identical to the performance that uses flooding scheduling with 50 iterations. This indicates the OVA scheduling converges twice faster than the standard scheduling due to make use of the most recent information.

to CN message which is unchanged before position . There-

fore

is also equal to the value of

shifted by

time instances. In this case, there are two common terms

between (7) and (8). We can obtain

from

by

subtracting the obsolete CN to VN message

and then

adding the immediate CN to VN message

. The mod-

ified operation is shown in Fig. 7(b). The computation of mod-

ified equation does not need the channel values; consequently

the FIFO storing channel values is removed. In fact, the channel

values are concealed inside the updated VN to CN messages.

Thus the proposed algorithm is named as OVA scheduling with

concealing channel values (OVA-CC).

Fig. 8 demonstrates the algorithm-level optimization to ac-

celerate the decoding convergence speed by using the proposed

OVA-CC technique. The variable activation location is the

same as the original OVA scheduling. The subtraction of the

obsolete CN to VN message

is done by pre-SVNU

III. PROPOSED LDPC-CC DECODER ARCHITECTURE

and the addition of the immediate CN to VN message

As explained in the previous section, the OVA scheduling is done by post-SVNU. Comparing with the original OVA

could reduce iteration number by half, but the cost is still large scheduling, the combinational logic is similar since the gate

for the code with long constraint length. In order to solve this count of 3-input adder is near the sum of 2-input adder and

problem, we propose a modified decoding algorithm which not 2-input substractor. However in the proposed scheduling, the

only avoids the increasing FIFOs but also further reduces the channel values (

and

) are concealed in VN-to-CN

storage of channel values. In the meantime, folding technique messages and the storage space of channel values can be re-

suitable for proposed scheduling is also presented to increase moved from processors to save memories. In order to conceal

throughput; however, it will divide the FIFOs into more pieces the channel values inside VN-to-CN messages, the bit-width

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

822

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

Fig. 7. Modify equations to conceal channel values. (a) Equations of OVA scheduling. (b) Equations of OVA scheduling with concealing channel values.

Fig. 8. Processor architecture of on-demand variable node activation scheduling with concealing channel values.

of VN-to-CN messages need to be adjusted to

. There-

fore the overall FIFO capacity of proposed design is roughly

. The memory saving

percentage is

.

Fig. 9 shows the fixed point simulation of the (491,3,6)

LDPC-CC with five iterations using NMS algorithm with

scaling factor 0.875. Comparing to log-BP algorithm with ten

processors, the proposed algorithm with five processors can

achieve similar or even better performance in all code-rates.

Therefore, only half number of processors is required under the

same performance, leading to half decoding latency reduction

as well.

B. Folding Technique

In the original pipeline decoder architecture, a number of pro-

cessors are concatenated together to decode on different regions over the Tanner graph simultaneously, thus the decoding is parallel in the iteration dimension. Assume the decoder can operate

Fig. 9. BER performance of log-BP algorithm (floating-point) and our proposed scheduling in NMS algorithm with scaling factor 0.875 (fixed-point) under AWGN channel.

at MHz clock frequency, since the decoder can decode only

one information bit in one cycle, the information throughput

will be limited to Mb/s. In order to provide a solution with For instance, Fig. 10 illustrates the architecture of the folding

lower complexity, we propose the folding technique for node factor

. For simplicity, only the messages of first codeword

level parallelization to design a high throughput LDPC-CC de- symbol are drawn in the figure. In order to handle the compu-

coder. The idea of folding technique is to look ahead the bits tation within time instances, the first step is to add

which participate in the decoding operations. Each FIFO line in pipeline registers before each input as shown in Fig. 10(a). Then

the conventional processor is folded to FIFO lines, where each shift register of length

is folded to 3 rows of shift

is defined as the folding factor or the parallelization factor. In registers of length 6, as shown in Fig. 10(b). Also, each check

other words, each FIFO line is segmented by factor to support node unit and each variable node unit are duplicated to units.

required bandwidth. With this modified FIFO structure, suffi- The last step is to reconnect the shifter registers such that the op-

cient input data could be provided for operation units.

erations within

time instances are computed in one cycle,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: A 2.37-Gb/s 284.8 mW RATE-COMPATIBLE (491,3,6) LDPC-CC DECODER

823

Fig. 10. Node level optimization: folding technique. ( is 3 in this example). (a) Add (c) duplicate CNUs/SVNUs and reconnect shift registers.

pipeline registers before each input. (b) fold each row into rows.

as shown in Fig. 10(c). Namely, the decoding latency is reduced As a result, the polynomials in (9), (10), (11) are used to depict

from 16 cycles to 6 cycles for a unit processor.

the input/output locations of CNU1, CNU2, and CNU3, respec-

Notice that input/output connections of duplicated CNUs tively. For example, the polynomial

become complicated after folding. This can be observed in describes

,

, and

,

Fig. 10(a) that original input/output (a,b,c) of CNU are regu- as shown in Fig. 10(c). Due to the data-dependency, each poly-

larly located at the first row, second row, and third row. After nomial with the form of

is

folding the input/output

of CNU1 are irregularly constrained by

and

,

,

. Conse-

located at first row, fifth row, and eighth row. The connections quently, the maximum folding factor of any LDPC-CC occurs

will become very complicated when time-varying LDPC-CC when

or

is found in any folded polynomials.

is adopted with a large folding factor. In order to solve this Using this approach to (491,3,6) LDPC-CC defined in (6) and

problem, we describe the folding architecture by parity-check letting

, we can search the possible folding factors. To

polynomials. Take the time-invariant LDPC-CC in (3) as an ex- simplify the searching procedure, the folding factors are usu-

ample, the parity-check polynomials with

time instances ally the multiples of period for time-varying LDPC-CC. Gener-

are described by

ally the LDPC-CC with larger constraint length and careful code

constructions would allow higher folding factor. After applying

folding technique to the time-varying (491,3,6) LDPC-CC with

period of 3, the possible folding factors are 3, 6, 9, and 12.

The decoder throughput will become

Mb/s. Table II

lists a comparison of storage requirements and decoding latency

for a unit processor under different folding factors for (491,3,6)

Let

, these equations can be rewritten as

LDPC-CC. The folding technique primarily duplicates the combinational logic while the sequential circuits are only slightly

increased. In other words, the increased percentages of storage

(9)

bits for

and

are only 1% and 4.7%, respectively,

which is a slight overhead. Furthermore, one basic flip-flop cell

occupies about 5.3 times area of minimum NAND2 and the

(10) area of CNU and VNU are 690 and 194 times area of minimum NAND2 by synthesized in 90 nm process. Thus, the complexity

of one CNU and one VNU are roughly equal to 130-bit and

(11) 37-bit registers. The duplication overhead of CNU and VNU

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

824

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

Fig. 11. Retime sub-VNUs to reduce both critical path and bit-width. (a) Retiming of sub-VNUs. (b) Processor architecture with retimed sub-VNUs. (c) Detail circuits of retimed operation units.

TABLE II HARDWARE COST AND DECODING LATENCY UNDER
DIFFERENT FOLD FACTORS (SINGLE PROCESSOR)

channel value and two CN-to-VN messages needs

-bits.

Since the operations of pre-SVNU and post-SVNU are inde-

pendent, they can be retimed such that the messages between

them only need

-bits. The procedure of retiming is shown

in Fig. 11(a). As long as the computation of sub-VNU is com-

pleted before CNU accesses the message, the result is identical

to the original operation. In order to achieve a maximum saving

in hardware cost, the computation of post-SVNU is moved to

the position just before CNU accesses the messages.

Fig. 11(b) depicts the bit-level optimized processor architec-

ture. The critical path of the conventional processor is domi-

nated by the CNU due to large sorters. On the other hand, the

critical path of original OVA-CC is CNU plus post-SVNU. With

for

and

are 1.4% and 7.7%, which are still minor

as comparing to the overall cost of a processor. It is evident

that our approach with 12.4% hardware overhead can increase

12 times throughput, indicating the decoding latency is reduced

from 493 cycles to 43 cycles for a single processor. Therefore

we choose folding factor 12 for implementation.

the retiming technique for sub-VNUs, the critical path from CNU to post-SVNU could be diminished by one adder delay. Moreover, the conventional CNU architecture includes conversion from sign-to-magnitude (SM) to two’s complement (TC), clipping, sorter, sign operation, output selection, and conversion from TC to SM. To balance the delay time between CNU and SVNU, the conversions of SM to TC and TC to SM could be

C. Retiming of Sub-VNUs

moved to pre-SVNU and post-SVNU, as shown in Fig. 11(c). As a consequence, the retiming of sub-VNUs could make the

From previous mentioned decoding scheduling, the channel critical path smaller than conventional while reducing memory

values are concealed in the CN-to-VN messages. To avoid trun- requirements. This technique is especially useful to large con-

cation error, the bit-width of each message should be adjusted. straint length LDPC-CCs for the long distance between two

In the situation of -bit channel values, the summation of one check node inputs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: A 2.37-Gb/s 284.8 mW RATE-COMPATIBLE (491,3,6) LDPC-CC DECODER

825

TABLE III COMPARISON OF THE STORAGE REQUIREMENTS WITH DIFFERENT TECHNIQUES (SINGLE PROCESSOR)

Fig. 12. Illustration of hybrid-partitioned FIFO. (a) Finding longest continuous sectors in each FIFO. (b) Processor architecture after merging sectors into memories.

Table III lists the storage requirements of three techniques. Assume the quantization of LLRs is 6 bits, the required numbers of 6-bit, 7-bit and 8-bit messages for (491,3,6) LDPC-CC with folding factor 12 are compared. When the OVA schedule with concealing channel values is adopted, the storage requirements is reduced by around 17%. With retimed sub-VNUs, the required number of 8-bit registers is minimized, and a 20% storage reduction is achieved.
D. Hybrid-Partitioned FIFO

still stored in registers. This procedure continues merging sectors until the memory depth is less than a predefined parameter . In the example of Fig. 12(a), the longest lengths of continuous sectors within the information part of the processor are 5, 4, and 4. Hence the depth of the merged memory bank is 4. The value of parameter is highly dependent to available memory sizes and target CMOS technology. Assume the additional area overhead of using memory in back-end process is , the value of can be computed by

For irregular time-varying LDPC-CC with large folding

factor, neither register-based FIFO with high power consump-

.

tion nor memory-based FIFO with serious memory conflict is For the LDPC-CC with larger constraint length, the lengths

suitable. In order to make trade-off between bandwidth and of continuous sectors within a processor will be longer. Large

power, the hybrid-partitioned FIFO structure is presented to amounts of data are saved in the memory banks instead of

support large bandwidth requirement and also minimize the registers, leading to a significant saving in power consumption.

power consumption. The first step is calculating the length Furthermore, if large folding factor is employed, the number of

of the longest continuous sectors of every folded row. As continuous sectors in a processor will increase, and the lengths

shown in Fig. 12(a), the operation in these sectors is simply of continuous sectors will be shortened. These segmented

shifting and power hungry. Then the sectors are merged into and shortened sectors can still be merged into several unified

one memory bank together, where the depth of the memory memory banks. The memory bank is implemented as a circular

bank is the minimum value of the sector lengths. If the original buffer whose positions for read and write operations are tracked

sector is larger than the memory depth, the excess parts are by address pointers. Two-port memories are used in this work

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

826
TABLE IV COMPARISON OF CLOCK TREE LOADING

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

Fig. 13. Chip micrograph.

such that read and write operations can be performed in the same clock cycle. The shifting operations in the FIFOs are reduced to achieve a low-power implementation.
In this work, about 50% of messages in each processor are partitioned into three two-port memories. The parameters of these two-port memories are 20 words 144 bits, 32 words 76 bits, and 36 words 144 bits, respectively. The total memory size used in each processor is
(12)
The power reduction can be observed in the decreased clock tree loading. During the physical design stage, sink is the number of leaf cells connected in the clock tree. The less number the sink is, the less power the clock tree consumes. Table IV lists the clock tree loadings under different FIFO structure. The processor based on hybrid-partitioned FIFO structure occupying area similar to the other two cases can greatly reduce the numbers of clock buffers and sinks. Moreover, merging more continuous sectors into memory banks will eliminate more buffers and sinks. As shown in Table IV the hybrid-partitioned FIFO using 3 memory banks reduces 54% clock buffers as compared to register-based FIFO.
IV. CHIP IMPLEMENTATION
Based on our proposed OVA scheduling with concealed channel values, folding architecture, retimed SVNU, and hybrid-partitioned FIFOs, a test chip of the (491,3,6) LDPC-CC decoder is fabricated in 90 nm 1P9M CMOS process. The chip micrograph is shown in Fig. 13. In this section, we describe the measurement environment, summarize the key characteristics, and compare our ASIC implementation results to other state-of-the-art designs.
A. Measurement Environment and Results
As shown in Fig. 14, the random number generators (RNGs), encoder, additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) engine, puncture/de-puncture module, and proposed LDPC-CC decoder are implemented in the test chip. The RNG can provide sufficient test patterns for real-time on-chip decoding. Since the decoding latency and decoder throughput are 43 5 cycles and 12-bit per cycle, two identical RNGs are used to avoid a large buffering FIFO (2580-bits) of information sequence. AWGN engine is built up according to the Box-Muller algorithm [26]. Furthermore, the puncture/de-puncture module allows the LDPC-CC

decoder to support 5 different code-rates from 1/2 to 5/6. The

LLR values of punctured bits are set to zeros and then sent to

LDPC-CC decoder with five processors. To determine the re-

quired bit-width of LLR values, the performance curves of dif-

ferent bit-width choices are simulated under AWGN channel

with BPSK modulation. In Fig. 15, the notation of bit-width

(6,2) means total 6-bit quantization with 2-bit decimal. Simu-

lation results indicate that both the bit-width (7,3) and (6,2) can

achieve less than 0.1 dB implementation loss. Considering the

hardware cost, this work implements 6-bit input quantization.

In order to handle chip failures when unexpected errors oc-

curred in any module or any processor, we designed bypass cir-

cuits to allow individual testing of each module and each pro-

cessor. The control signals of all multiplexers can also be con-

figured for following testing modes: BER testing, functional

testing, uncoded testing, and variable processors testing. When

the control signals of all multiplexers in Fig. 14 are set to ones,

the test chip is running at BER testing mode to measure the

BER and power under different SNRs. The functional testing

mode can verify the correctness of decoder circuit by feeding

test vectors from external inputs. Since the input/output pins of

the decoder chip are limited, the LLR values from external in-

puts are serially inputted and stored in the buffer after punc-

ture/de-puncture module. Other configurations of control sig-

nals can examine performance of uncoded (bypass and turn off

encoder/decoder) and decoding by LDPC-CC decoder with one

to five processors. The chip core area including testing circuits

is

. The buffer, AWGN engine, and pro-

posed LDPC-CC decoder occupy 5%, 8%, and 83% area, re-

spectively. Therefore the overhead of testing modules is 17%,

which is roughly equal to area of one processor.

With the aid of testing circuits, the BER, throughput, and

power consumption can be properly measured. Fig. 16(a) shows

the measurement results of BER testing and uncoded testing

modes. The measured BER curves of five code-rates are iden-

tical to Fig. 9. To get net power consumption of proposed de-

coder, we firstly measure the power of uncoded testing mode,

which is 66.7 mW and independent of the SNRs. Then sub-

tracting the uncoded power from total power is the net power

consumption of proposed decoder. Our proposed decoder con-

sumes 238 to 285 mW at 198 MHz under 1.2 V supply, while

the highest power occurs at code-rate 1/2 and the power of other

punctured code-rates are similar. Note that the throughput and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: A 2.37-Gb/s 284.8 mW RATE-COMPATIBLE (491,3,6) LDPC-CC DECODER

827

Fig. 14. Testing circuits of proposed decoder.

TABLE V CHIP SUMMARY

Fig. 15. BER performance of code-rate 1/2 under different bit-widths.

power do not vary a lot in high SNR region because early-ter-

mination is not applied.

The measurement result of the test chip at an SNR 2.5 dB

under different supply voltages is shown in Fig. 16(b). The in-

formation throughput linearly increases as the supply voltage

increases. The result shows that the decoder draws 284 mW

under 1.2 V supply voltage while running at 198 MHz. Since

the folding factor equals 12, the information throughput of the

proposed decoder achieves

. When

supply voltage is scaled down to 0.8 V, the power is reduced to

90.2 mW with a better energy efficiency of 0.0114 nJ/bit/proc.

The Shmoo plot is shown in Fig. 16(c). We choose the SNR 2.5

dB which can achieve a BER of to simulate the valid range

of operating frequency and supply voltage. Table V summarizes

key features of the proposed (491,3,6) time-varying LDPC-CC

test chip.

measured at

without early-termination under 1.2 V

supply voltage for code-rate 1/2

of overall complexity for LDPC-CC decoder is linear to code memory . The implementation scaling factors are defined as follows:
Technology Scaling Factor design technology
Voltage Scaling Factor

B. Comparison With Other LDPC-CC Decoders

design supply voltage Code Size Scaling Factor

A comparison with four state-of-the-art LDPC-CC decoder

design

designs is given in Table VI. Since these designs have different implementation parameters including code memory size , CMOS technology, supply voltage, input quantization, and processor number, it is necessary to apply performance normal-

Bitwidth Scaling Factor design bit width
Processor Scaling Factor

ization for a fair comparison. Here we assume the growth rate

design processor number

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

828

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

Fig. 16. Measurement Results. (a) Measured BER and power consumption under different SNR conditions. (b) Measured throughput and power consumption under different supply voltages. (c) The Shmoo plot.

where the normalization targets to 90 nm, 1 V supply, , 6-bit LLR input, and single processor. Accordingly, the
performance scaling factor of each design can be computed by

Area Scaling Factor Frequency Scaling Factor
Latency Scaling Factor Power Scaling Factor

The values after normalization are listed with parentheses in

Table VI. The results of LDPC-CC decoder in [15] are not nor-

malized because code memory size is near 491 and other imple-

mentation parameters are the same to normalization targets. In our design, we directly use measurement results at 1 V instead of normalized values.

Fig. 17. Comparison of normalized energy efficiency and hardware efficiency among LDPC-CC decoders.

As a result, the performance of throughput, latency, power,

and hardware cost can be fairly compared in this table. Although is less than half of the other four decoders. In other words, the

the operating frequency of proposed decoder is slowest among proposed decoder architecture successfully raises throughput

five decoders, high throughput can still be achieved by high with 50% reduced complexity. As for the normalized power

parallelism. The normalized throughput of proposed decoder is consumption, our single processor only consumes 32.7 mW,

similar to the decoder in [15], but the required area of our design which is only 9%, 4%, and 16% of three decoders in [17], [20],

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: A 2.37-Gb/s 284.8 mW RATE-COMPATIBLE (491,3,6) LDPC-CC DECODER

829

TABLE VI COMPARISON WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART OF LDPC-CC DECODERS

( ): normalized to

, 90-nm technology, 1 V supply, 6-bit quantization, and single processor.

: measured at 1 V supply voltage and normalized to single processor.

: Throughput/Area

TABLE VII COMPARISON WITH OTHER FEC DECODERS

this unit is nJ/bit/iter in LDPC-BC [27], [28] and Turbo code [29], [30]

measured at

without early-termination under 1.2 V supply voltage for code-rate 1/2

measured at

without early-termination for code-rate 1/2

measured without early-termination under 1.2 V supply voltage for code-rate 5/6

evaluated by required SNR to reach

for code-rate 1/2

[22], respectively. The low power characteristic is mainly ben- pared in both Table VI and Fig. 17. The proposed decoder can efited by reduction of message storage, relaxation of clock tree provide more than twice higher throughput per area with much buffer/loading, and realization of register-memory-mixed de- less energy than the other four designs. By sacrificing some sign style. The energy efficiency and hardware efficiency de- throughput, the decoder operated at lower supply voltages can fined as energy per bit per processor and throughput per area accomplish better energy efficiency if there is low power deare two effective parameters to evaluate different decoders. To mand in handheld devices. emphasize the advantages over other LDPC-CC decoders, the The above-mentioned comparison is based on normalization normalized energy efficiency and hardware efficiency are com- to single processor. If the BER performance is taken into
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

830

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

consideration, the proposed decoder with OVA-CC scheduling converges twice faster than the other four decoders with flooding scheduling. Therefore, this work provides higher throughput, less area, better energy efficiency, higher hardware efficiency, and better error-correcting performance with previously reported LDPC-CC decoders.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank UMC for fabrication of the test chip, Chip Implementation Center for providing the CAD tools and measurement equipment, and ATU program—eNES.

C. Comparison With LDPC-BC and Turbo Decoders

REFERENCES

The comparison among different FEC decoders is especially

difficult since the implementation style and design parameters

are distinct from each other. In order to give a rough concept, the

performance of two LDPC-BC decoders, two Turbo decoders,

and our work are listed in Table VII. Both LDPC-CC and Turbo

code can support multiple code-rates easily by puncturing. On

the other hand, LDPC-BC can support multiple code-rates only

when the parity-check matrix has certain structures. To evaluate

the performance, the normalization model used in previous sec-

tion is applied with the justification of removing the effect of

scaling factors and . The normalized areas of [27]–[30] be-

come 2.68, 1.45, 2.05, and 4.03 , whereas the throughputs

of [27]–[30] are normalized to 2.58, 1.05, 0.56, and 0.11 Gb/s,

respectively. Their corresponding energy efficiency are scaled

to 0.097, 0.015, 0.146, and 1.368 nJ/bit/iter. The required SNR

to reach

for code-rate 1/2 is also listed to com-

pare the error-correcting capability.

Compared with the LDPC-BC decoder [27], this work has

16% smaller area, superior error-correcting performance, and

better energy efficiency with 8% slower throughput. Compared

with the LDPC-BC decoder [28], this work has 125% higher

throughput and superior error-correcting performance with 54%

larger area and 54% larger energy efficiency. Therefore, the pro-

posed LDPC-CC decoder can provide better error-correcting

capability than LDPC-BC decoders in [27], [28] and can effi-

ciently trade decoder area for throughput/power, and vice versa.

Compared with the turbo decoder [29], this work achieves four

times faster throughput and 85% lower energy efficiency with

9% hardware cost. Compared with the turbo decoder [30], this

work performs better in aspects of area, throughput, and en-

ergy efficiency. Error-correcting performance is not listed for

turbo decoder because the code-rates in [29], [30] is 1/3. In con-

clusion, our proposed LDPC-CC decoder outperforms state-of-

the-art designs and has the potential to be one candidate for

next-generation communication systems.

V. CONCLUSION
We have presented a LDPC-CC decoder design that targets high-throughput, low-cost and low-power. The test chip of (491, 3, 6) time-varying LDPC-CC supporting five code-rates is implemented in 90 nm CMOS technology. The decoder containing 5 processors occupies 2.24 and provides twice faster decoding convergence speed. Maximum throughput 2.37 Gb/s is measured under 1.2 V supply with 0.024 nJ/bit/proc energy efficiency. The power can be scaled down to 90.2 mW with lowered throughput 1.58 Gb/s at 0.8 V supply. The proposed design methodologies would make LDPC convolutional codes more competitive to the other error-control codes.

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Feb. 1999.
[4] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[5] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. 36th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst., Comput. 2002, Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 2002, vol. 1, pp. 8–15.
[6] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[7] IEEE 802.11 Wireless LANs WWiSE Proposal: High Throughput Extension to the 802.11 Standard, IEEE Std. 11-04-0886-00-000n.
[8] Part 15.3: Wireless Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications for High Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPANs), IEEE Std. P802.15.3c-DF8, 2009.
[9] Part 16: air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems, IEEE Std. P802.16e-2005, Oct. 2005.
[10] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications ETSI Std. EN 302 307, Rev. 1.1.2, 2006.
[11] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Jun. 1999.
[12] E. Matus, M. Tavares, M. Bimberg, and G. Fettweis, “Towards a GBit/s programmable decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), New Orleans, LA, May 2007, pp. 1657–1660.
[13] M. Bimberg, M. Tavares, E. Matus, and G. Fettweis, “A highthroughput programmable decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Appl.-Specific Syst., Arch., Process. (ASAP), Montreal, QC, Canada, Jul. 2007, pp. 239–246.
[14] Z. Chen, S. Bates, and W. Krzymien, “High throughput parallel decoder design for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Circuits Syst. Commun. (ICCSC), Shanghai, China, May 2008, pp. 35–39.
[15] Z. Chen, T. Brandon, D. Elliott, S. Bates, W. Krzymien, and B. Cockburn, “Jointly designed architecture-aware LDPC convolutional codes and high-throughput parallel encoders/decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 836–849, Apr. 2010.
[16] R. Swamy, S. Bates, and T. Brandon, “Architectures for ASIC implementations of low-density parity-check convolutional encoders and decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Kobe, Japan, May 2005, vol. 5, pp. 4513–4516.
[17] R. Swamy, S. Bates, T. Brandon, B. Cockburn, D. Elliott, J. Koob, and Z. Chen, “Design and test of a 175-Mb/s, rate-1/2 (128,3,6) low-density parity-check convolutional code encoder and decoder,” IEEE J. SolidState Circuits, vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2245–2256, Oct. 2007.
[18] S. Bates and G. Block, “A memory-based architecture for fpga implementations of low-density parity-check convolutional decoders,” in IEEE Intern. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Kobe, Japan, May 2005, vol. 1, p. 336.
[19] S. Bates, Z. Chen, L. Gunthorpe, A. Pusane, K. Zigangirov, and D. Costello, “A low-cost serial decoder architecture for low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. p. 1967–1976, Aug. 2008.
[20] M. Tavares, E. Matus, S. Kunze, and G. Fettweis, “A dual-core programmable decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Seattle, WA, May 2008, pp. 532–535.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: A 2.37-Gb/s 284.8 mW RATE-COMPATIBLE (491,3,6) LDPC-CC DECODER

831

[21] M. Tavares, E. Matus, and G. Fettweis, “On the structured parallelism of decoders for LDPC convolutional codes - an algebraic description,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Taipei, Taiwan, May 2009, pp. 2453–2456.
[22] T. Brandon, J. Koob, L. van den Berg, Z. Chen, A. Alimohammad, R. Swamy, J. Klaus, S. Bates, V. Gaudet, B. Cockburn, and D. Elliott, “A compact 1.1-Gb/s encoder and a memory-based 600-Mb/s decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 1017–1029, May 2009.
[23] A. Pusane, M. Lentmaier, K. Zigangirov, and D. Costello, “Reduced complexity decoding strategies for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inform. Theory (ISIT), Chicago, IL, 2004, p. 490.
[24] A. Pusane, A. Feltstrom, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. Zigangirov, and D. Costello, “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008.
[25] Amendment Text Proposal on Rate Compatible LDPC-Convolutional Codes, IEEE Std. C802.16m-09/0339, 2009.
[26] B. Alimohammad, S. Fard, and C. Schlege, “A compact and accurate Gaussian variate generator,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 517–527, May 2008.
[27] S.-Y. Hung, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, S.-J. Jou, and C.-Y. Lee, “A 5.7Gbps row-based layered scheduling LDPC decoder for IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” in Proc. IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ASSCC), Beijing, China, Nov. 2010, pp. 1–4.
[28] B. Xiang, D. Bao, S. Huang, and X. Zeng, “An 847-955Mb/s 342397mw dual-path fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder for WiMAX system in 0.13 CMOS,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1416–1432, June 2011.
[29] C. Studer, C. Benkeser, S. Belfanti, and Q. Huang, “A 390Mb/s 3.57 3GPP-LTE turbo decoder ASIC in 0.13μm CMOS,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. erence Dig. Tech. Papers (ISSCC), San Francisco, CA, 2010. [30] M. May, T. Ilnseher, N. Wehn, and W. Raab, “A 150Mbit/s 3GPP LTE turbo code decoder,” in Proc. Design, Autom., Test Eur. Conf. Exhibition (DATE), Dresden, Germany, Mar. 2010, pp. 1420–1425.
Chih-Lung Chen received the B.E. and M.Sc. degrees in electronics engineering from the National Chiao-Tung University (NCTU), Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2004 and 2006, respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electronics engineering at NCTU.
His general research interests include very large-scale integration (VLSI) implementation of error control codes and wireless communication systems.

Yu-Hsiang Lin received the B.E. and M.Sc. degrees in electronics engineering from the National ChiaoTung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. in 2009 and 2011, respectively.
His research interests include error control coding and very large-scale integration (VLSI) architectures.
Hsie-Chia Chang received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electronics engineering from the National Chiao-Tung University (NCTU), Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 1995, 1997, and 2002, respectively.
From 2002 to 2003, he was with OSP/DE1 in MediaTek Corp., working in the area of decoding architectures for Combo single chip. In 2003, he joined the faculty of the Electronics Engineering Department, NCTU, where he is currently a Professor. His research interests include algorithms and VLSI architectures in signal processing, especially for error control codes and crypto-systems. Recently, he also commits himself to design high code-rate ECC schemes for flash memory and multi-Gb/s chip implementations for wireless communications.
Chen-Yi Lee (M’01) received the B.Sc. degree from National Chiao-Tung University (NCTU), Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 1982, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Katholieke University Leuven (KUL), Leuven, Belgium, in 1986 and 1990, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
From 1986 to 1990, he was with IMEC/VSDM, working in the area of architecture synthesis for DSP. In February 1991, he joined the faculty of the Electronics Engineering Department, NCTU, Hsinchu, Taiwan, where he is currently a Professor and Dean of Research and Development Office. His research interests mainly include VLSI algorithms and architectures for high-throughput DSP applications. He is also active in various aspects of high-speed networking, system-on-chip design technology, very low power designs, and multimedia signal processing. In these areas, he has published more than 180 papers and holds decades of patents. He served as the Director of Chip Implementation Center (CIC), an organization for IC design promotion in Taiwan (2000/8 2003/12), and the microelectronics program coordinator of Engineering Division under National Science Council of Taiwan (2003/1 2005/12). He was the former IEEE CAS Taipei Chapter Chair.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

