IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

2303

Windowed Decoding of Protograph-Based LDPC Convolutional Codes Over Erasure Channels
Aravind R. Iyengar, Student Member, IEEE, Marco Papaleo, Member, IEEE, Paul H. Siegel, Fellow, IEEE, Jack Keil Wolf, Life Fellow, IEEE, Alessandro Vanelli-Coralli, and Giovanni E. Corazza, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We consider a windowed decoding scheme for LDPC convolutional codes that is based on the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm. We discuss the advantages of this decoding scheme and identify certain characteristics of LDPC convolutional code ensembles that exhibit good performance with the windowed decoder. We will consider the performance of these ensembles and codes over erasure channels with and without memory. We show that the structure of LDPC convolutional code ensembles is suitable to obtain performance close to the theoretical limits over the memoryless erasure channel, both for the BP decoder and windowed decoding. However, the same structure imposes limitations on the performance over erasure channels with memory.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, convolutional codes, decoding thresholds, erasure channels, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check codes, stopping sets, windowed decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, although introduced in the early 1960’s [4], were established as state-of-the-art codes only in the late 1990’s with the application of statistical inference techniques [5] to graphical models representing these codes [6], [7]. The promising results from LDPC block codes encouraged the development of convolutional codes defined by sparse parity-check matrices.
LDPC convolutional codes (LDPC-CC) were first introduced in [8]. Ensembles of LDPC-CC have several attractive characteristics, such as thresholds approaching capacity with belief-propagation (BP) decoding [9], and BP thresholds close to
Manuscript received October 21, 2010; revised October 25, 2011; accepted October 27, 2011. Date of publication November 23, 2011; date of current version March 13, 2012. The work of A. R. Iyengar is supported by the National Science Foundation under the Grant CCF-0829865. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 2010 IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Cairo, Egypt [1]; the 2010 IEEE International Communications Conference [2]; and at the 2010 International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing [3].
A. R. Iyengar and P. H. Siegel are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA (e-mail: aravind@ucsd.edu; psiegel@ucsd.edu).
M. Papaleo is with Qualcomm Inc., San Diego, CA USA (e-mail: mpapaleo@qualcomm.com).
J. K. Wolf, deceased, was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA.
A. Vanelli-Coralli and G. E. Corazza are with the University of Bologna, DEIS-ARCES, 2-40136 Bologna, Italy (e-mail: avanelli@arces.unibo.it; gecorazza@arces.unibo.it).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2011.2177439

the maximum a posteriori (MAP) thresholds of random ensembles with the same degree distribution [10]. Whereas irregular LDPC block codes have also been shown to have BP thresholds close to capacity [11], the advantage with convolutional counterparts is that good performance is achieved by relatively simple regular ensembles. Also, the construction of finite-length codes from LDPC-CC ensembles can be readily optimized to ensure desirable properties, e.g., large girths and fewer cycles, using well-known techniques of LDPC code design. Most of these attractive features of LDPC-CC are pronounced when the blocklengths are large. However, BP decoding for these long codes might be computationally impractical. By implementing a windowed decoder, one can get around this problem.
In this paper, a windowed decoding scheme brought to the attention of the authors by Liva [12] is considered. This scheme exploits the convolutional structure of the parity-check matrix of the LDPC-CC to decode nonterminated codes, while maintaining many of the key advantages of iterative decoding schemes like the BP decoder, especially the low complexity and superior performance. Note that although similar decoding schemes were proposed in [13] and [14], the aim in these papers was not to reduce the decoding latency or complexity. When used to decode terminated (block) LDPC-CC, the windowed decoder provides a simple, yet efficient way to trade off decoding performance for reduced latency. Moreover, the proposed scheme provides the flexibility to set and change the decoding latency on the fly. This proves to be an extremely useful feature when the scheme is used to decode codes over upper layers of the internet protocol.
Our contributions in this paper are to study the requirements of LDPC-CC ensembles for good performance over erasure channels with windowed decoding (WD). We are interested in identifying characteristics of ensembles that present a good performance-latency trade-off. Further we seek to find such ensembles that are able to withstand not just random erasures but also long bursts of erasures. We reiterate that we will be interested in designing ensembles that have the aforementioned properties, rather than designing codes themselves. Although the channels considered here are erasure channels, we note that the WD scheme can be used when the transmission happens over any channel.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces LDPC-CC and the notation and terminology that will be used throughout the paper. In Section III we describe the decoding algorithms that will be considered. Along with a brief description of the belief-propagation algorithm, we will introduce

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2304

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

the windowed decoding scheme that is based on BP. Possible variants of the scheme will also be discussed. Section IV deals with the performance of LDPC-CC on the binary erasure channel. Starting with a short recapitulation of known results for BP decoding, we will discuss the asymptotic analysis of the WD scheme in detail. Finite-length analysis will include performance evaluation using simulations that reinforce the observations made in the analysis. For erasure channels with memory, we analyse LDPC-CC ensembles both in the asymptotic setting and for finite lengths in Section V. We also include simulations illustrating the good performance of codes derived from the designed protographs over the Gilbert-Elliott channel. Finally, we summarize our findings in Section VI.

II. LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES
In the following, we will define LDPC-CC, give a construction starting from protographs, and discuss various ways of specifying ensembles of these codes.

A. Definition

A rate

binary, time-varying LDPC-CC is defined

as the set of semi-infinite binary row vectors , satisfying

, where

is the parity-check matrix

Terminated LDPC-CC have a finite parity-check matrix

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

where we say that the convolutional code has been terminated

after instants. Such a code is said to be

regular if

has exactly ’s in every column and ’s in every row ex-

cluding the first and the last

rows, i.e., ignoring the

terminated portion of the code. It follows that for a given , the

parity-check matrix can be made sparse by increasing or or

both, leading to different code constructions [16]. In this paper,

we will consider LDPC-CC characterized by large and small

. As in [9], we will focus on regular LDPC-CC which can be

constructed from a protograph.

B. Protograph-Based LDPC-CC

A protograph [17] is a relatively small bipartite graph from

which a larger graph can be obtained by a copy-and-permute

...

...

procedure—the protograph is copied times, and then the edges of the individual replicas are permuted among the

...

...

...

replicas to obtain a single, large bipartite graph referred to as

...

(1)

the derived graph. We will refer to as the expansion factor. is also referred to as the lifting factor in the literature [11].

...

...

...

...

Suppose the protograph possesses variable nodes (VNs) and

check nodes (CNs), with degrees

, and

, respectively. Then the derived graph will

...

consist of

VNs and

CNs. The nodes

of the protograph are labeled so that if the VN is connected

and

is the semi-infinite all-zero row vector. The elements

,

in (1) are binary matrices of size

that satisfy [15]

•

, for

and

,

;

•

such that

;

•

has full rank

.

The parameter is called the memory of the code and

is referred to as the constraint length. The first two

conditions above guarantee that the code has memory and

the third condition ensures that the parity-check matrix is full-

rank. In order to get sparse graph codes, the Hamming weight

of each column of

must be very low, i.e.,

.

Based on the matrices

, LDPC-CC can be classified as

follows [8]. An LDPC-CC is said to be periodic if

and for some

. When

, the LDPC-CC is said to be time-invariant, in which

to the CN in the protograph, then in a replica can only

connect to one of the replicated ’s.

Protographs can be represented by means of an

biadjacency matrix , called the base matrix of the protograph

where the entry represents the number of edges between

CN and VN (a nonnegative integer, since parallel edges

are permitted). The degrees of the VNs (CNs respectively) of

the protograph are then equal to the sum of the corresponding

column (row, respectively) of . A

regular protograph-

based code is then one with a base matrix where all VNs have

degree and all CNs, excluding those in the terminated portion

of the code, have degree .

In terms of the base matrix, the copy-and-permute opera-

tion is equivalent to replacing each entry in the base ma-

trix with the sum of distinct size- permutation matrices.

This replacement is done ensuring that the degrees are main-

case the time dependence can be dropped from the notation, tained, e.g., a 2 in the matrix is replaced by a matrix

i.e.,

. If neither of these

where

and

are two permutation ma-

conditions holds, it is said to be time-variant.

trices of size chosen to ensure that each row and column of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2305

has two ones. The resulting matrix after the above trans-

formation for each element of , which is the biadjacency ma-

trix of the derived graph, corresponds to the parity-check matrix

of the code. The derived graph therefore is nothing but the

Tanner graph corresponding to the parity-check matrix of the

code.

For different values of the expansion factor , different

blocklengths of the derived Tanner graph can be achieved,

keeping the original graph structure imposed by the protograph.

We can hence think of protographs as defining code ensembles

that are themselves subsets of random LDPC code ensembles.

We will henceforth refer to a protograph and the ensemble

it represents interchangeably. This means that the density

evolution analysis for the ensemble of codes represented by

the protograph can be performed within the protograph. Fur-

thermore, the structure imposed by a protograph on the derived

graph can be exploited to design fast decoders and efficient

encoders. Protographs give the code designer a refined control

on the derived graph edge connections, facilitating good code

design.

Analogous to LDPC block codes, LDPC-CC can also be de-

rived by a protograph expansion. As for block codes, the parity-

check matrices of these convolutional codes are composed of

blocks of size- square matrices. We now give two construc-

tions of

regular LDPC-CC ensembles.

1) Classical Construction: We briefly describe the con-

struction introduced in [18]. For convenience, we will refer to

this construction as the classical construction of

regular

LDPC-CC ensembles. Let be the greatest common divisor

(gcd) of and . Then there exist positive integers and

such that

,

, and

. Assuming

we terminate the convolutional code after instants, we obtain

a block code, described by the base matrix

where

is the rate of the nonterminated code. Note

that

and the LDPC-CC has a regular degree distri-

bution [9] when

. We will assume that the parameters

satisfy

and

so that the rates and

of the nonterminated and terminated codes, respectively, are in

the proper range.

The classical construction was proposed in [18] and it pro-

duces protographs for some

regular LDPC-CC ensem-

bles. However, not all

regular LDPC-CC can be con-

structed, e.g., becomes zero if and are relatively prime

and consequently the resulting code has no memory. In [9], the

authors addressed this problem by proposing a construction rule

based on edge spreading. We denote an ensemble of

reg-

ular LDPC-CC constructed as described here as

with

the subscript for “classical” construction.

2) Modified Construction: We propose a modified construc-

tion that is similar to the classical construction except that we do

not require that

, i.e., the memory of the LDPC-CC

is independent of its degree distribution. We further disregard

the requirement that the matrices are identical and have only

ones, i.e., parallel edges in the protograph are allowed. How-

ever, the sizes of the submatrices

will still

be

. We will denote a

regular LDPC-CC ensemble

constructed in this manner as

, with subscript for

“modified” construction. Note that the rate of the

en-

semble is still given by (2). Further, the independence of the

code memory and the degree distribution allows us to construct

LDPC-CC even when and are co-primes. This is illustrated

in the following example.

Example 1: Let

and

. Clearly, a classical con-

struction of this ensemble is not possible. However, with the

modified construction, we can set

and define the en-

semble

given by

...

...

... . . .

...

. . . ...

with design rate

for a termination length .

Note that these submatrices are by no means the only possible

ones. Another set of submatrices satisfying the constraints is

where

is the memory of the LDPC-CC and

are

submatrices that are all identical and have

all entries equal to 1. Note that an LDPC-CC constructed from

the protograph with base matrix

could be time-varying

or not depending on the expansion of the protograph into the

The above example brings out the similarity between the proposed modified construction and the technique of edge spreading employed in [9], wherein the edges of the protograph defined by the matrix

parity-check matrix.

The protograph of the terminated code has

VNs

and

CNs. The rate of the LDPC-CC is

therefore

are “spread” between the matrices and (or between

and ) to obtain a

regular LDPC-CC ensemble with

(2)

memory

. The advantage of the modified construction

is thus clear—it gives us more degrees of freedom to design

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2306

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

the protographs in comparison with the classical construction.

In particular, the ensemble specified by the classical construc-

tion is contained in the set of ensembles allowed by the mod-

ified construction, meaning that the best performing

ensemble (with memory the same as that of the

en-

semble) is at least as good as the

ensemble. Note that in

[9], there was no indication as to how edges are to be spread be-

tween matrices. With windowed decoding, we will shortly show

that different protographs (edge spreadings) have different per-

formances. We will also identify certain design criteria for effi-

cient modified constructions that suit windowed decoding.

C. Polynomial Representation of LDPC-CC Ensembles

We have thus far specified LDPC-CC ensembles by giving

the parameter and the matrices

. An alter-

native specification of terminated protograph-based LDPC-CC

ensembles using polynomials is useful in establishing certain

properties of

regular ensembles and is described below.

Instead of specifying

matrices of size

,

we can specify the columns of the

matrix

...

using a polynomial of degree no more than for each column. The polynomial of the column
(3)

is defined so that the coefficient of , , is the

entry

of for all

and

. Therefore,

an equivalent way of specifying the LDPC-CC ensemble is by

giving and the set of polynomials

.

With this notation, the column of

is specified by the

polynomial

where

for unique

and

. We can hence use “the column index”

and “the column polynomial” interchangeably. Further, to de-

fine

regular ensembles, we will need the constraints

We will refer to these polynomials as the modulo polyno-

mials. Let us denote the set of polynomials defining an

LDPC-CC ensemble as

, where

, and the modulo polynomials as

,

. Later in the

paper, we will say “the summation of polynomials

and

” to mean the collection of the and the columns of

. The following example illustrates the notation.

Example 2: For

regular codes, we have

and

, the component base matrices

are

1 2 matrices. With the first column of the protograph , we

associate a polynomial of degree at most . Similarly, with the second column we as-

sociate a polynomial

,

also of degree at most . Then, the

column of

can be associated with the polynomial

, and the

column with the polynomial

. As noted earlier, we

will use the polynomial of a column and its index interchange-

ably, e.g., when we say “choosing the polynomial

,” we

mean that we choose the

column of . Similarly,

by “summations of polynomials

and

,” we mean

the collection of the corresponding columns of . In order

to define

regular ensembles, we will further have the

constraint

. In this case, since

,

is the same as the previous constraint,

because

.

We define the minimum degree of a polynomial

as the

least exponent of with a positive coefficient and denote it as

. Clearly,

.

Let us define a partial ordering of polynomials with nonnega-

tive integer coefficients as follows. We write

if

,

and

the coefficients of

are no larger than the corresponding

ones of . The ordering satisfies the following proper-

ties over polynomials with nonnegative integer coefficients: if

and

, then

We define the boundary polynomial

of a polynomial

and

to be

where

and

. Note that when , we define

.

We have for any polynomial ,

.

III. DECODING ALGORITHMS

where

is the polynomial of degree no larger than

obtained from

by collecting the coefficients of terms with

degrees where

for some

, i.e.,

:

LDPC-CC are characterized by a very large constraint length . Since the Viterbi decoder has a complexity
that scales exponentially in the constraint length, it is impractical for this kind of code. However, the sparsity of the parity-

check matrix can be exploited and an iterative message passing

algorithm can be adopted for decoding. We consider two spe-

(4) cific iterative decoders here—a conventional belief-propagation decoder [6], [19] and a variant called a windowed decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2307

Fig. 1. Illustration of windowed decoding (WD) with window of size

for a

LDPC-CC with

and

at the fourth decoding instant.

This window configuration consists of

rows of the parity-check matrix and all the

columns involved in these

equations: this comprises the red (vertically hatched) and the blue (hatched) edges shown within the matrix. Note that the symbols shown in green (backhatched)

above the parity-check matrix have all been processed. The targeted symbols are shown in blue (hatched) above the parity-check matrix and the symbols that are

yet to be decoded are shown in gray above the parity-check matrix.

A. Belief-Propagation (BP)

corresponding to these rows. We will henceforth refer to the size

For terminated LDPC-CC, decoding can be performed as in

the case of an LDPC block code, meaning that each frame car-

rying a codeword obtained through the termination can be de-

coded with the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [19].

Note that since the BP decoder can start decoding only after

the entire codeword is received, the total decoding latency

is given by

, where is the time taken to

receive the entire codeword and is the time needed to de-

code the codeword. In many practical applications this latency is

large and undesirable. Moreover, for nonterminated LDPC-CC,

a BP decoder cannot be employed.

of the window only in terms of the protograph with the corre-

sponding size in the parity-check matrix implied. The window

size ranges between

and

because each

VN in the protograph is involved in at most

check

equations; and, although there are a total of

CNs in , the decoder can perform BP when all the VN sym-

bols are received, i.e., when

. Apart from the

window size, the decoder also has a (typically small) target era-

sure probability

as a parameter.1 The aim of the WD is to

reduce the erasure probability of every symbol in the codeword

to a value no larger than .

At the first decoding instant, the decoder performs belief-

B. Windowed Decoding (WD)

The convolutional structure of the code imposes a constraint

on the VNs connected to the same parity-check equations—two

VNs of the protograph that are at least

columns

apart cannot be involved in the same parity-check equation.

This characteristic can be exploited in order to perform con-

tinuous decoding of the received stream through a “window”

that slides along the bit sequence. Moreover, this structure al-

lows for the possiblity of parallelizing the iterations of the mes-

sage passing decoder through several processors working in dif-

ferent regions of the Tanner graph. A pipeline decoder based

on this idea was proposed in [8]. In this paper we consider a

windowed decoder to decode terminated codes with reduced la-

tency. Note that whereas a similar sliding window decoder was

used to bound the performance of BP decoding in [14], we are

interested in evaluating the performance of the windowed de-

coder from a perspective of reducing the decoding complexity

and latency. Consider a terminated

regular parity-check

matrix built from a base matrix . The windowed decoder

works on subprotographs of the code and the window size

propagation over the edges within the window with the aim of

decoding all of the first symbols in the window, called the

targeted symbols. The window slides down rows and right

columns in after at least a fraction

of the targeted

symbols are recovered (or, in general, after a maximum number

of belief-propagation iterations have been performed), and con-

tinues decoding at the new position at the next decoding time

instant. We refer to the set of edges included in the window at

any particular decoding time instant as the window configura-

tion. In the terminated portion of the code, the window config-

uration will have fewer edges than other configurations within

the code. Since the WD aims to recover only the targeted sym-

bols within each window configuration, the entire codeword is

recovered in decoding time instants. Fig. 1 shows a schematic

representation of the WD for

.

The decoding latency of the targeted symbols with WD is

therefore given by

, where is the

time taken to receive all the symbols required to decode the

targeted symbols, and

is the time taken to decode the

targeted symbols. The parameters and are related as

is defined as the number of sets of CNs of the protograph

considered within each window. In the parity-check matrix ,

the window thus consists of

rows

1We will see shortly that setting

of and all columns that are involved in the check equations use of the WD scheme.

is not necessarily the most efficient

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2308

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

since at most

symbols are to be received to process

the targeted symbols. The relation between and

is given by

since the complexity of BP decoding scales linearly in block-

length and the WD uses BP decoding over

symbols in

each window configuration. We assume that the number of iter-

ations of message passing performed is fixed to be the same for

the BP decoder and the WD. Thus, in latency-limited scenarios,

we can use the WD to obtain a latency reduction of

probability. We will therefore concentrate on the erasure rate thresholds [11] of the code ensembles as a performance metric in our search for good LDPC-CC ensembles.
1) BP: The asymptotic analysis of LDPC block codes with the BP decoder over the BEC has been well studied [20]–[23]. For LDPC-CC based on protographs, the BP decoding thresholds can be numerically estimated using the Protograph-EXIT (P-EXIT) analysis [24]. This method is similar to the standard EXIT analysis in that it tracks the mutual information between the message on an edge and the bit value corresponding to the VN on which the edge is incident, while maintaining the graph structure dictated by the protograph.2
The processing at a CN of degree results in an updating of the mutual information on the edge as

The smallest latency supported by the code-decoder system is

therefore at most a fraction

that of the BP

decoder. As pointed out earlier, the only choice for nontermi-

nated codes is to use some sort of a windowed decoder. For

the sequence of ensembles indexed by , with the choice of

the proposed WD with a fixed finite window size , the de-

coding latency vanishes as

. We will typically be inter-

ested in small values of where large gains in decoding la-

tencies are achievable. Since the decoding latency increases as

increases, the trade-off between decoding performance and

latency can be studied by analyzing the performance of the WD

for the entire range of window sizes.

Latency Flexibility: Although reduced latency is an impor-

tant characteristic of WD, what is perhaps more useful practi-

cally is the flexibility to alter the latency with suitable changes in

the code performance. The latency can be controlled by varying

the parameter as required. If a large latency can be handled,

can be kept large ensuring good code performance and if a

small latency is required, can be made small while paying a

price with the code performance. (We will see shortly that the

performance of WD is monotonic in the window size.)

One possible variant of WD is a decoding scheme which

starts with the smallest possible window size and the size is in-

creased whenever targeted symbols cannot be decoded, i.e., the

target erasure probability cannot be met within the fixed max-

imum number of iterations. Other schemes where the window

size is either increased or decreased based on the performance

of the last few window configurations are also possible.

IV. MEMORYLESS ERASURE CHANNELS
In this section, we confine our attention to the performance of the LDPC-CC when the transmission occurs over a memoryless erasure channel, i.e., a binary erasure channel (BEC) parameterized by the channel erasure rate .

(5) and the corresponding update at a VN of degree gives

where

(6) is the mutual information obtained from

the channel. Note that the edge multiplicities are included in the

above check and variable node computations. The a posteriori

mutual information at a VN is found using

where the second equality follows from (6). The decoder is said to be successful when the a posteriori mutual information at all the VNs of the protograph converges to 1 as the number of iterations of message passing goes to infinity. The BP threshold
of the ensemble described by the protograph with base matrix is defined as the supremum of all erasure rates for which the decoder is successful.

Example 3: The protograph

has a BP

threshold of

. Note that all the CNs in the proto-

graph are of degree 6 while all the VNs are of degree 3. This

BP threshold is expected because corresponds to the

regular LDPC block code ensemble. The following protograph

has a BP threshold

for

. Note that,

as before, all VNs are of degree 3 and all the CNs except the

ones in the terminated portion of the code are of degree 6.

... ...

A. Asymptotic Analysis

We consider the performance of the LDPC-CC in terms of the average performance of the codes belonging to ensembles defined by protographs in the limit of infinite blocklengths and

... ... ... ... ... ... . . .

in the limit of infinite iterations of the decoder. As in the case of LDPC block codes, the ensemble average performance is a good estimate of the performance of a code in the ensemble with high

2We will use the phrase “mutual information on an edge” to mean the mutual information between the message on the edge and the bit corresponding to the adjacent VN.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2309

This is the

ensemble constructed in [18]. In terms of the

notation introduced, this is given as

;

or equivalently as

.

The above example illustrates the strength of protographs—they allow us to choose structures within an ensemble defined by a pair of degree distributions that may perform better than the ensemble average. In fact, the BP performance of regular LDPC-CC ensembles has been related to the maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoder performance of the corresponding unstructured ensemble [10].
2) WD: We now analyze the performance of the WD described in Section III-B in the limit of infinite blocklengths and the limit of infinite iterations of belief-propagation within each window.

Fig. 2. Illustration of the threshold of the

window configuration

. The targeted symbols of the previous window configurations

are known with probability

. The targeted symbols within the window are

highlighted with a solid blue bar on top of the window. The symbols within the

blue (hatched) region in the window are initially known with probability .

The task of the decoder is to perform BP within this window until the erasure

probability of the targeted symbols is smaller than . The window is then slid

to the next configuration.

Remark: In the limit of infinite blocklength, each term in the

base protograph is replaced by a permutation matrix of in-

finite size to obtain the parity-check matrix, and therefore the

latency of any window size is infinite, apparently defeating the

purpose of WD. Our interest in the asymptotic performance,

however, is justified as it allows us to establish lower bounds on

the probability of failure of the windowed decoder to recover

the symbols of the finite-length code. In practice, it is to be ex-

pected that the gap between the performance of a finite-length

code with WD and the asymptotic ensemble performance of the

ensemble to which the code belongs increases as the window

size reduces due to the reduction in the blocklength of the sub-

code defined by the window.

The asymptotic analysis for WD is very similar to that of the

BP decoder owing to the fact that the part of the code within a

window is itself a protograph-based code. However, the main

distinction in this case is the definition of decoding success.

In the case of BP decoding, the decoding is considered a suc-

cess only when, for any symbol in the codeword, the proba-

bility of failing to recover the symbol goes to 0 (or equiva-

lently, the a posteriori mutual information goes to 1) as the

number of rounds of message-passing goes to infinity. On the

other hand, the decoding within a window is successful as long

as the probability of failing to recover the targeted symbols be-

comes smaller than a predecided small value . The decoder

performance therefore depends on two parameters: the window

size and the target erasure probability .

We define the threshold

of the window con-

figuration to be the supremum of the channel erasure rates for

which the WD succeeds in retrieving the targeted symbols of

the window with a probability at least

, given that

each of the targeted symbols corresponding to the first

window configurations is known with probability

. Fig. 2

illustrates the threshold

of the window config-

uration. The windowed threshold

is then defined as

the supremum of channel erasure rates for which the windowed

decoder can decode each symbol in the codeword with proba-

bility at least

.

We assume that between decoding time instants, no infor-

mation apart from the targeted symbols is carried forward, i.e.,

when a particular window configuration has been decoded, all

the present processing information apart from the decoded tar-

geted symbols themselves is discarded. With this assumption,

it is clear that the windowed threshold of a protograph-based LDPC-CC ensemble is given by the minimum of the thresholds of its window configurations. For the classical and modified constructions of LDPC-CC described in Section II-B, all window configurations are similar except the ones at the terminated portion of the code. Since the window configurations at the terminated portions can only perform better, the windowed threshold is determined by the threshold of a window configuration not in the terminated portion of the code. Note that the performance of WD when the information from processing the previous window configurations is made use of in successive window configurations, e.g., when symbols other than the targeted symbols that were decoded previously are also retained, can only be better than what we obtain here.
We now state a monotonicity property of the WD the proof of which is relegated to Appendix I.

Proposition 1 (Monotonicity of WD Performance in ): For

any

ensemble ,

It follows immediately from the definition of the windowed threshold that

Furthermore, from the continuity of the density evolution equa-

tions (6) and (5), we have that when we set

, we decode

not only the targeted symbols within the window but all the re-

maining symbols also. Since the symbols in the right end of the

window are the “worst protected” ones within the window (in

the sense that these are the symbols for which the least number

of constraints are used to decode), we expect the windowed

thresholds

to be dictated mostly by the be-

havior of the submatrix under BP. In the following, when the

base matrix of the protograph corresponding to an ensemble

is unambiguous, we will write

and

interchangeably.

We next turn to giving some properties of LDPC-CC ensem-

bles with good performance under WD. We start with an ex-

ample that illustrates the stark change in performance a small

difference in the structure of the protograph can produce.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2310

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

Example 4: Consider WD with the ensemble

in Ex-

ample 3 with a window of size

. The corresponding pro-

tograph defining the first window configuration is

and we have

. This is seen

readily by observing that there are VNs of degree 1 that are

connected to the same CNs. In fact, from this reasoning, we see

that

.

As an alternative, we consider the modified construction of

Section II-B2 to obtain the

ensemble given by

. This ensemble has a BP threshold

for

which is quite close to that

of the ensemble

,

. WD with a

window of size 3 for this ensemble has the first window config-

uration

Fig. 3. Windowed threshold as a function of the window size for the ensembles

with

. The rates of the ensembles and

are 0.49 whereas that of is 0.495. The corresponding Shannon limits are

therefore 0.51 for and , and 0.505 for . The thresholds for the two values

of almost coincide for the ensembles and .

which has a threshold

, i.e., we

can theoretically get close to 68.3% of the BP threshold with

of the latency of the BP decoder. Note that this im-

provement in threshold has been obtained while also increasing

the rate of the ensemble, since

for the ensemble in

comparison with

for

.

consequence of a smaller is that can be decoded with a

window of size

. Further note that whereas

and satisfy Design Rule 1, does not. For a window of size

3, the subprotographs for ensembles and are as shown in

Example 4, and that for ensemble is as shown below

The above example illustrates the tremendous advantage ob-

tained by using

ensembles for WD even under the

severe requirement of

. The following is a good rule of

thumb for constructing LDPC-CC ensembles that have good

performance with WD.

Design Rule 1: For

ensembles, set

for

all

where

.

The above design rule says that for

ensembles, it is

better to avoid degree-1 VNs within a window. Note that none of

the

ensembles satisfy this design rule. We now illus-

trate the performance of LDPC-CC ensembles with WD when

we allow

.

In Fig. 3, we show the windowed thresholds plotted against

the window size for the three ensembles

and by fixing

for

.

A few observations are in order. The monotonicity of

in as proven in Proposition 1 is evident. The

windowed thresholds

for and are fairly close

to the maximum windowed threshold even when

.

The windowed thresholds for ensembles and are robust to

changes in , i.e., the thresholds are almost the same (the points

overlap in the figure) for

and

. Further,

Example 5: We compare three LDPC-CC ensembles. The

first is the classical LDPC-CC ensemble

. The

second and the third are LDPC-CC ensembles constructed as

the windowed thresholds

are fairly close to the BP

thresholds

for

. We will see next

that this last observation is not always true.

described in Section II-B2. The ensemble is defined by the polynomials

Effect of Termination: The better BP performance of the

ensemble in comparison with that of the

-reg-

ular block code ensemble (cf. Example 3) is because of the

termination of the parity-check matrix of

codes. More

and is defined by

precisely, the low-degree CNs at the terminated portion of the protograph are more robust to erasures and their erasure-cor-

recting power is cascaded through the rest of the protograph

to give a better threshold for the convolutional ensemble in

We first observe that all three ensembles have the same asymp- comparison with that for the corresponding unstructured en-

totic degree distribution, i.e., all are

regular LDPC-CC semble [16]. From the definition of the WD, we can see that the

ensembles when

. While and have a memory subprotograph within a window does not have the lower-de-

, has a memory

. Therefore, for a fixed , gree checks if previous targeted symbols are not decoded.

while and have the same rate, has a higher rate. Another Therefore, we would expect a deterioration in the performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2311

TABLE I

,

,

,

TABLE III

WINDOWED THRESHOLDS

,

TABLE II

,

,

,

than the one at the end of the code. That is, use polynomials such that each of the sums

is kept as small as possible.

Targeted Symbols: We have thus far considered only the first

VNs in the subprotograph contained within the window to be

the targeted symbols. However, as an alternative way to trade off

performance for reduced latency, it is possible to consider other

VNs also as targeted symbols. In this case, the window would

be shifted beyond all the targeted symbols after processing each

Furthermore, the Design Rule 1 increases the degrees of the CNs in the terminated portion. Therefore, the effect of different termination on the WD performance is of interest.

window configuration. For a window of size , let us denote by

the windowed threshold when the targeted symbols

are the first VNs,

. Hence,

. By definition,

.

Example 6: Tables I and II illustrate the WD thresholds for ensembles that satisfy Design Rule 1 except when . These ensembles are defined by the polynomials

Example 7: Consider the

with

defined by

ensemble denoted with

ensemble denoted ; and the
defined by

. Also consider ensembles and given by

Note that

. The ensembles are terminated so that

the rate is

. The worst threshold with WD (corre-

sponding to the least window size

) is denoted

. The largest threshold with WD is denoted

and

and

respectively. Both and are

ensembles, but with

memory

and 2 respectively. Table III gives the win-

dowed thresholds

with targeted symbols

for a window of size 4 for

.

the BP threshold as . The increase in the gap between

One might expect the windowed threshold

and with increasing illustrates the loss due to edge mul- to be higher for an ensemble for which

is

tiplicities (“weaker” termination). This is because the termina- higher. This is not quite right:

tions at the beginning and at the end of the code are different,

whereas

i.e., the CN degrees in the terminated portion at the beginning of

. This can again be explained as the

the code are

which increases with ; whereas those effect of stronger termination in in comparison with . This

at the end of the code are 2, a constant. Thus, much of the code is also evident in the larger thresholds for the

ensemble

performance is determined by the “stronger” (smaller check-de-

with same memory as , but stronger termination. Also,

gree) termination, the one at the end of the code for

. keeping the same termination and increasing the memory

This is also seen by the fact that the gap between

and improves the performance, as is exemplified by the larger

decreases as increases, meaning that the termination thresholds of in comparison with those of .

at the beginning of the code is weak and increasing the window

size helps little. Note that the

ensemble in Table II is

in fact the

classical ensemble, and that

is larger

than the corresponding BP threshold. This is possible since WD

only demands that the erasure probability of the targeted sym-

bols is reduced to . In contrast, BP demands that the erasure

The windowed thresholds

quantify the unequal

erasure protection of different VNs in the subprotograph within

the window. Furthermore, it is clear that for good performance,

it is advantageous to keep fewer targeted symbols within a

window.

probability of all the symbols is reduced to 0. From the above discussion, we can infer the following as an-
other design rule.

B. Finite-Length Performance Evaluation
The finite-length performance of LDPC codes under iterative message-passing decoding over the BEC is dependent on the

Design Rule 2: For

ensembles, keep the termina- number and the size of stopping sets present in the parity-check

tion at the beginning of the code strong, preferably stronger matrix of the code [23], [25]. Thus, the performance of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

Fig. 4. SER performance for BP and Windowed Decoding over BEC.

Fig. 5. CER performance for BP and Windowed Decoding over BEC. Also shown is the (Singleton) lower bound as SB.

codes varies based on the parity-check matrix used to repre-

sent the code and, consequently, the performance of iterative decoding can be made to approach that of ML decoding by adding redundant rows to the parity-check matrix (see, e.g., [26]). However, since we are exploiting the structure of the parity-check matrix of the convolutional code, we will not be interested in changing the parity-check matrix by adding redundant rows as this destroys the convolutional structure. The ensemble stopping set size distribution for some protograph-based LDPC codes was evaluated in [27] where it was shown that a minimum stopping set size that grows linearly in blocklength is

of the two codes. It was also observed that for small values

( ), the performance of codes constructed through circulant

permutation matrices was better than those constructed through

random permutation matrices. This difference in performance

diminished for larger values.

We include in Fig. 5, for comparison, a lower bound on the

CER . The Singleton bound, , represents the perfor-

mance achievable by an idealized

binary MDS code. This

bound for the BEC can be expressed as

important for the good performance of codes with short block-

lengths. This analysis is similar to the analysis of the minimum

distance growth rate of LDPC-CC ensembles—see [28] and ref-

erences therein. It is worthwhile to note that although the minimum stopping set size grows linearly for protograph codes expanded using random permutation matrices, the same is not true for codes expanded using circulant permutation matrices [29]. In the following we will evaluate the finite-length performance

Note that by the idealized

binary MDS code, we mean

a binary linear code that achieves the Singleton bound

with equality. This code does not exist for all values

of and .

of codes constructed from

ensembles with BP and

WD through Monte Carlo simulations. WD was considered with

V. ERASURE CHANNELS WITH MEMORY

only the first

symbols as the targeted symbols.

In Figs. 4 and 5, the symbol error rate (SER) and the code-

word error rate (CER) performance are depicted for codes

and

, where the ensembles and were defined

in Example 5. The codes used were those constructed by Liva

[12] by expanding the protographs using circulant matrices (and

sums of circulant matrices) and techniques of progressive edge

growth (PEG) [30] and approximate cycle extrinsic message

degree (ACE) [31] to avoid small cycles in the Tanner graphs

of the codes. The girth of both the codes and was 12.

The parameters used for the construction were

and

so that the blocklength

and

We now consider the performance of LDPC-CC ensembles

and codes over erasure channels with memory. We consider the

familiar two-state Gilbert-Elliott channel (GEC) [32], [33] as a

model of an erasure channel with memory. In this model, the

channel is either in a “good” state , where we assume the

erasure probability is 0, or in an “erasure” state , in which

the erasure probability is 1. The state process of the channel

is a first-order Markov process with the transition probabilities

and

. With these parameters,

we can easily deduce [34] that the average erasure rate and the

average burst length are given by

. The BP thresholds for ensembles and with

were 0.4883 and 0.4882 respectively. As is clear from

Figs. 4 and 5, code outperforms code for small window

sizes (

), confirming the effectiveness of the proposed We will consider the GEC to be parameterized by the pair

design rules for windowed decoding. For larger window sizes

. Note that there is a one-to-one correspondence between

(

), there is no marked difference in the performance the two pairs

and

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2313

Discussion: The channel capacity of a correlated binary

erasure channel with an average erasure rate of is given as

, which is the same as that of the memoryless channel,

provided the channel is ergodic. Therefore, one can obtain

good performance on a correlated erasure channel through the

use of a capacity-achieving code for the memoryless channel

with an interleaver to randomize the erasures [27], [35]. This is

equivalent to permuting the columns of the parity-check matrix

of the original code. We are not interested in this approach

since such permutations destroy the convolutional structure of

the code and as a result, we are unable to use the WD for such

a scheme.

Construction of LDPC block codes for bursty erasure

channels has been well studied. The performance metric of a

code over a bursty erasure channel is related to the maximum

resolvable erasure burst length (MBL) denoted

[35],

which, as the name suggests, is the maximal length of a single

solid erasure burst that can be decoded by a BP decoder.

Methods of optimizing codes for such channels therefore focus

on permuting columns of parity-check matrices to maximize

, e.g., [36]–[41]. Instead of permuting columns of the

parity-check matrix, in order to maintain the convolutional

structure of the code, we will consider designing

ensembles that maximize

.

is a stopping set. This is clear from the highlighted columns below

... ... ... ... ... ... . . .

... ... ... ... ... ... . . .

Therefore,

and

. Since no single

column forms a protograph stopping set,

and

, implying

.

For ensemble , the highlighted columns of in the fol-

lowing matrix form a protograph stopping set, i.e.,

is a stopping set.

A. Asymptotic Analysis

1) BP: As noted earlier, the performance of LDPC-CC ensembles depends on stopping sets. The structure of protographs imposes constraints on the code that limit the stopping set sizes

... ... ... ... ... ... . . .

and locations, as will be shown shortly.

Let us define a protograph stopping set to be a subset

of

the VNs of the protograph whose neighboring CNs are con-

nected at least twice to

. These are also denoted as

,

in terms of the set of polynomials defining the protograph. We

Thus,

and

. As no single

column of

is a protograph stopping set and no three con-

secutive columns of

contain a protograph stopping set, it

is clear that

and

, so that

define the size of the stopping set as the cardinality of

, de-

noted

. We call the least number of consecutive columns

of that contain the stopping set

the span of the stop- In these cases, it so happened that the stopping set with the min-

ping set, denoted

. Let us denote the size of the smallest imal size and the stopping set with the minimal span were the

protograph stopping set of the protograph by

, and the same.

minimum number of consecutive columns of the protograph

that contain a protograph stopping set by

. When the

protograph under consideration is clear from the context, we

will drop it from the notation and use and . The min-

imum span of a stopping set is of interest because we can give

simple bounds for

based on

. Note that the stop-

ping set of minimal size and the stopping set of minimal span

are not necessarily the same set of VNs. However, we always

have

Our aim in the following will be to obtain bounds for the

maximal

over

ensembles with memory ,

which we denote

, and design protographs that

achieve minimal spans close to this optimal value.

The analysis of the minimal span of stopping sets for un-

structured LDPC ensembles was performed in [42]. However,

the structure of the protograph-based LDPC-CC allows us to

obtain

much more easily for some

ensembles.

We start by observing that if one of the VNs in the protograph

is connected multiple times to all its neighboring CNs, then it

forms a protograph stopping set by itself. In order to obtain a

The following example clarifies the notation.
Example 8: Let us denote the base matrix corresponding to the protograph of the ensembles of Example 5 as
. For ensembles and , the first two

larger minimum span of stopping sets, it is desirable to avoid this case, and we include this as one of our design criteria.

Design Rule 3: For a

ensemble, choose the poly-

nomials

such that for every

, there exists

columns of

form a protograph stopping set, i.e.,

such that

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

Using the polynomial representation of LDPC-CC ensembles is helpful in this case since we can easily track stopping sets as those subsets that have polynomials whose coefficients are all larger than 1. From this fact, we can prove the following.

Proposition 2 (

for

Protographs): For

protographs of memory defined by polynomials

and

,

can be upper bounded as

where

and

.

We give the proof in Appendix II. We see from the above

that

and a necessary condition for

achieving this span is the first of four possible cases listed above,

which we include as another design criterion.

Design Rule 4: For set

ensembles with memory ,

Corollary 3 (Optimal

Protographs): For

protographs with memory

and

,

.

The proof is given in Appendix III. Note that ensemble

in Example 5 achieves

, as was observed in Ex-

ample 8. It also satisfies Design Rules 1, 3 and 4. We bring to

the reader’s attention here that constructions other than the one

given in the proof of the above corollary that achieve

are also possible. These constructions allow us to design

ensembles for a wide range of required . We

quickly see that a drawback of the convolutional structure is

that if is increased to obtain a larger , the code rate

decreases linearly for a fixed .

We give without proof the following upper bound for

for

ensembles, as it follows from Proposition 2.

Proposition 4 (

for

Protographs):

For

protographs defined by polynomials

, we have

the notation ,
and

,

,

,

.

Discussion: By looking at the stopping sets confined within

columns corresponding to two polynomials only, we can use

Proposition 2 to upper bound the span of these stopping sets.

The minimal such span over all possible choices of the two

columns therefore gives an upper bound on the minimal span of

the

protograph. Since

from

(7); we have

, which is similar to the

result in Proposition 2. This bound is, however, loose in general.

For terminated codes, we can give an upper bound for

that is tighter in some cases.

Corollary 5 (

for

Protographs): For

protographs terminated after instants,

.

Proof: From the Singleton bound for the protograph, we

have

. Since we need

for a

positive code rate in (2),

.

Note that for

protographs, this is tighter than the

bound

, which, in the worst

case, is a factor

times larger. However, since we are

interested mainly in ensembles for which

, this bound

might be looser than the one in Proposition 4 for

ensembles.

Example 9: Consider the memory the polynomials

ensemble with defined by

. It can be shown by an argument similar

to the one used to prove Corollary 3 that for the protograph of

this ensemble,

. This is exactly the bound in

Proposition 4 since

Thus, in this case

where

is the upper bound given in (7) at the

bottom of the page for the minimal span

of

stopping sets

confined within subsets of the form

, where we have used

which is roughly only a fraction of the (loose) upper bound for

suggested in the discussion of Proposition 4.

The constructed

protographs are thus optimal in the

sense of maximizing the minimal span of stopping sets, i.e.,

(7)
.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2315

They also satisfy Design Rules 1 and 3 for

. Although

Proposition 4 gave a tight bound for in this case, it is loose

in general.

TABLE IV

We can show that the

protographs have minimal

spans at least as large as the corresponding spans of

protographs.

Proposition 6:

where

.

Proof: The equality is trivial when

. When

, one way of constructing the

ensembles

with memory is to let each set of modulo polynomials

themselves define

ensembles with memory . The

result then follows by noting that a stopping set for the polyno-

mials has to be a stopping set for every set of polynomials ,

.

The construction proposed above often allows us to strictly

increase the minimal span of the

ensemble in com-

parison with the

ensemble, as illustrated by the fol-

lowing example.

Example 10: Consider the construction of a

en-

semble with memory 3. Let us call it . The different parame-

ters in this case are

,

,

,

,

, and

. Since

with

, we have for

protographs,

from Example 9 and

we will define the modulo polynomials to be the optimal con-

struction that achieves this minimal span, i.e.,

. Then, by defining

,

we can show that

and hence

since in this case the first

columns are completely

contained in the window. Further, we have

This is true because a stopping set for window size involving

targeted symbols is not necessarily a stopping set for window

size

, whereas a stopping set for window size

is

definitely a stopping set for window size .

Remark: When the first symbols within a window are the targeted symbols, we have for

where

denotes the minimal span of stopping sets

of the subprotograph within the window of size involving

at least one of the targeted symbols, and

. Consequently, we have

The definition of

can be extended to accommodate

, as in the case of windowed thresholds.

In particular, we have

, where

the last inequality is from the Singleton bound.

Example 11: Consider the ensemble defined in Example 5.

With a window of size

, we have

with the corresponding stopping set

high-

Note that the protograph defined by has no degree-1 VNs as- lighted below

sociated with the component matrix . In fact, the constructed

ensemble has

, fairly

close to the Shannon limit of

, even with the smallest

possible window size. Table IV lists the windowed thresholds of

this ensemble with different numbers of targeted symbols within

the smallest window for

.

and with a window size

, we have

, and the corresponding stopping sets

2) WD: The asymptotic analysis for WD is essentially the

and

are as follows

same as that for BP. We will consider WD with only the first

symbols within each window as the targeted symbols. We

are now interested in the subprotograph stopping sets, denoted

, that include one or more of the targeted symbols

within a window. Let us denote the minimal span of such stop-

ping sets as

. Since stopping sets of the protograph

of the LDPC-CC are also stopping sets of the subprotograph

within a window, and since such stopping sets can be chosen

to include some targeted symbols within the window, we have

when

. In fact,

Note that for window size 3, whereas the minimal span of a stopping set involving VN is 2, that of a stopping set in-

volving is 4. However, for window size 4, the stopping set

involving with minimal span, denoted , and that involving

, , each have a span of 4, although their cardinalities are 2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2316

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

and 3 respectively. We have in this case, .

. Notice that Example 12: For the

ensemble with memory in Example 9, we have

B. Finite-Length Analysis

1) BP: We now show the relation between the parameters

and

. We shall assume in the following that

, i.e., every column of the protograph has at least one

of the entries equal to 1. We will consider the expansion of the

protographs by a factor to obtain codes.

Proposition 7: For any

regular LDPC-CC,

.

Proof: Clearly, the set of the

columns of the parity-

check matrix corresponding to the consecutive columns of

from Propositions 7 and 9. Thus, we can construct codes with

MBL proportional to .

2) WD: The MBL for WD

can be bounded as

in the case of BP based on

. Assuming that the

window size is

, the targeted symbols are the first

symbols within the window, and the polynomials defining

the ensemble are chosen to satisfy Design Rule 3, we have

. Propositions 7 and 9 in this case imply that

that contain the protograph stopping set with minimal span

must contain a stopping set of the parity-check matrix. There-

fore, if all symbols corresponding to these columns are erased, C. Numerical Results

they cannot be retrieved.

The MBL for codes and (the same codes used in

Corollary 8: A terminated

LDPC-CC with Section IV-B) was computed using an exhaustive search al-

can never achieve the MBL gorithm, by feeding the decoder with a solid burst of erasures

of an MDS code.

and testing all the possible locations of the burst. The MBL

Proof: From the Singleton bound, we have

for the codes we considered was 1023 and 1751 for codes

, assuming that the parity-check matrix is

and , respectively. Note that for code , the MBL

full-rank. From Proposition 7 we have,

, i.e., code achieves the upper

bound from Proposition 7. More importantly, the maximum

possible

was achievable while maintaining good perfor-

mance over the BEC with the BP decoder. However, the MBL

for code ,

, is much smaller

where the second equality follows from the discussion in Ex-

ample 9. Since we require

for a

nonnegative code rate in (2),

than the corresponding bound from Proposition 7. In this case,

although other code constructions with

up to 2045 were

possible, a trade-off between the BEC performance and MBL

was observed, i.e., the code that achieved

was

found to be much worse over the BEC than both codes and

considered here. Such a trade-off has also been observed by

others, e.g., [40]. This could be because the codes that achieve

large

are often those that have a very regular structure in

which shows that the MBL of an MDS code can never be their parity-check matrices. Nevertheless, our code design does

achieved.

give a large increase in MBL (

) when compared with the

Remark: Although the idealized binary

MDS code

does not exist, there are codes that achieve MDS performance

when used over a channel that introduces a single burst of

erasures in a codeword. For example, the

code with a

parity-check matrix

has an MBL of

.

Despite the discouraging result from Corollary 8, we can

guarantee an MBL that linearly increases with as follows.

corresponding codes constructed from ensembles, without

any decrease in code rate (same ). The MBL achieved as a

fraction of the maximum possible MBL

was

roughly 9.1% and 15.5% for codes and , respectively.

In Figs. 6–8, we show the CER performance obtained for

codes and over GEC channels with

, 50 and 100

respectively, and

. As can be seen from the fig-

ures, for

, code always outperforms code , while

Proposition 9: For any

regular LDPC-CC,

for

there is no such gain when

. However, for

.

and for BP decoding, code slightly outperforms .

Proof: From the definition of , it is clear that if one of Note that the code outperforms for small when the

the two extreme columns is completely known, all other symbols average burst length

for large window sizes and for

can be recovered, for otherwise the remaining columns within BP decoding. This can be explained because in this regime, the

the span of the stopping set will have to contain another proto- probability of a burst is small but the average burst length is

graph stopping set, violating the minimality of the stopping set large. Therefore, when a burst occurs, it is likely to resemble

span (The two extreme columns are pivots of the stopping a single burst in a codeword, and in this case we know that

set [41].) The largest solid burst that is guaranteed to have at the code is stronger than . Also note the significant gap

least one of the extreme columns completely known is of length between the BP decoder performance and the Singleton bound,

. Therefore,

.

suggesting that unlike some moderate length LDPC block codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2317

Fig. 9. Subprotographs of window sizes and

. The edges connected

to targeted symbols from previous window configurations are shown in darker

shade of gray.

Fig. 6. CER Performance on GEC with Fig. 7. CER Performance on GEC with

with Singleton bound (SB). with Singleton bound (SB).

VI. CONCLUSIONS
We studied the performance of a windowed decoding scheme for LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels. We showed that this scheme, when used to decode terminated LDPC-CC, provides an efficient way to trade off decoding performance for reduced latency. Through asymptotic performance analysis, several design rules were suggested to avoid bad structures within protographs and, in turn, to ensure good thresholds. For erasure channels with memory, the asymptotic performance analysis led to design rules for protographs that ensure large stopping set spans. Examples of LDPC-CC ensembles that satisfy design rules for the BEC as well as erasure channels with memory were provided. Finite-length codes belonging to the constructed ensembles were simulated and the validity of the design rules as markers of good performance was verified. The windowed decoding scheme can be used to decode LDPC-CC over other channels that introduce errors and erasures, although in this case error propagation due to wrong decoding within a window will have to be carefully dealt with.
For erasure channels, while close-to-optimal performance (in the sense of approaching capacity) was achievable for the BEC, we showed that the structure of LDPC-CC imposed constraints that bounded the performance over erasure channels with memory strictly away from the optimal performance (in the sense of approaching MDS performance). Nevertheless, the simple structure and good performance of these codes, as well as the latency flexibility and low complexity of the decoding algorithm, are attractive characteristics for practical systems.

APPENDIX I PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1

Consider the window configuration for window sizes

and

shown in Fig. 9. We are interested in a window con-

figuration that is not at the terminated portion of the code. Call

the Tanner graphs of these windows

and

respectively, where

and

are the sets of VNs and CNs respectively and

are the

sets of edges. Clearly,

, and

.

Any VN in that is connected to some variable in

has

Fig. 8. CER Performance on GEC with

with Singleton bound (SB). to be connected via some CN in

. The edges between

these CNs and VNs in are shown hatched in Fig. 9. Consider

the computation trees for the a posteriori message at a targeted

with ML decoding [38], LDPC-CC are far from achieving MDS symbol in and that for the same symbol in . Call them

performance with BP or windowed decoding.

and respectively. Then we have

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2318

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

We now state two lemmas which will be made use of subsequently. The proofs of these lemmas are straightforward and have been omitted.
Lemma 10 (Monotonicity of ): The CN operation in (5) is monotonic in its arguments, i.e.,

We claim that this is a protograph stopping set. To see this,

consider the columns corresponding to the above subset with

and

as the column polynomials defining .

We have

where the two-argument function

.

Lemma 11 (Monotonicity of ): The VN operation in (6) is monotonic in its arguments, i.e.,

where

.

The operational significance of the above lemmas is the fol-

lowing: if we can upper (lower) bound the mutual information

on some incoming edge of a CN or a VN, and use the bound to compute the outgoing mutual information from that node, we

get an upper (lower) bound on the actual outgoing mutual in-

formation. Thus, by bounding the mutual information on some

edges of a computation tree and repetitively applying Lemmas 10 and 11, one can obtain bounds for the a posteriori mutual

information at the root of the tree.

We start by augmenting , creating another computation

tree that has the same structure as . In particular, includes the additional edges corresponding to the hatched region.

In and , we denote the set of these edges by

and

respectively. In , we assign zero mutual information

to each edge in

.

Now, let , and be the a posteriori mutual infor-

mation at the roots of the trees , and respectively.

Then it is clear that

, since the messages on edges in

are effectively erasures and zero out the contributions

from the checks in

.

On the other hand, if we denote by

the mutual infor-

mation associated with an edge

, and by

the mutual information associated with the corresponding edge

in , we know that

so that

.

Hence, we have from Lemmas 10 and 11 that

.

Since

, it follows that

, as desired.

when

. Similarly, it can be verified that

has all coefficients equal to 2 in all other cases also. Clearly,

and thus can only differ from in having

larger coefficients. Therefore,

also has all coefficients

greater than 1. This shows that the chosen subset of columns

form a protograph stopping set. Based on the parameters

, we can count the number of columns included in

the span of this stopping set and therefore give upper bounds

on

as claimed

.

APPENDIX III PROOF OF COROLLARY 3

Consider the protograph of the ensemble given by

and

. Let the polyno-

mial

represent an arbitrary

subset (chosen from the

nonempty subsets) of the

first

columns of , for any choice of polynomials

and

with coefficients in

and maximal de-

grees

and

respectively, i.e.,

APPENDIX II PROOF OF PROPOSITION 2

From the definitions made in the statement of Proposition 2,

we have

. We assume

in order to satisfy Design Rule 3. Since the code has memory

, we have

and

. Consider the subset of columns of corresponding to the

polynomial

where

where

and not all s are zeros. When

, let

. Clearly,

is a monic polynomial

of degree

. When

and

, let

. Then, is a monic polynomial of degree

. Since in both these cases is a monic polynomial,

there is at least one coefficient equaling 1. Thus,

. Finally, notice that

and

.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2319

with all coefficients strictly larger than 1. Note that

corre-

sponds to the first column of the protograph and

to

the

column. Thus, we have

. Since we have

from Proposition 2, we conclude that

.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are very grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their comments and suggestions for improving the presentation of the paper. The authors would also like to thank Gianluigi Liva, who suggested the trade-off of decoding performance for reduced latency through the use of a windowed decoder, and Rüdiger Urbanke for pointing out an error in an earlier version of the paper.

REFERENCES
[1] M. Papaleo, A. R. Iyengar, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, and G. Corazza, “Windowed erasure decoding of LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Cairo, Egypt, Jan. 2010, pp. 78–82.
[2] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, G. Liva, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, and G. E. Corazza, “Protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes for correlated erasure channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Cape Town, South Africa, May 2010, pp. 1–6.
[3] G. E. Corazza, A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, A. VanelliCoralli, and J. K. Wolf, “Latency constrained protograph-based LDPCCC,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Brest, France, Sep. 2010, pp. 6–10.
[4] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[5] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[6] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D., Linkoping University, Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[7] D. MacKay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[8] A. J. Felstrom and K. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[9] M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, “Approaching capacity with asymptotically regular LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl., San Diego, CA, 2009.
[10] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” CoRR, vol. abs/1001.1826, 2010.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[12] G. Liva, private communication, 2008. [13] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, “Ter-
minated LDPC convolutional codes with thresholds close to capacity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Sep. 4–9, 2005, pp. 1372–1376. [14] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010. [15] A. Pusane, A. J. Feltstrom, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008. [16] A. Sridharan, “Design and analysis of LDPC convolutional codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, 2005. [17] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” JPL INP, Tech. Rep., 2003. [18] A. Sridharan, D. V. Truhachev, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Distance bounds for an ensemble of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 4537–4555, Dec. 2007. [19] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001. [20] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.

[21] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[22] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[23] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[24] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, Washington, DC, Nov. 27–30, 2007, pp. 3250–3254.
[25] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[26] J. Han and P. H. Siegel, “Improved upper bounds on stopping redundancy,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 90–104, Jan. 2007.
[27] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and C. Jones, “Protograph LDPC codes over burst erasure channels,” JPL INP, Tech. Rep., 2006.
[28] M. Lentmaier, D. G. M. Mitchell, G. P. Fettweis, and D. J. Costello, “Asymptotically regular LDPC codes with linear distance growth and thresholds close to capacity,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. 2010, San Diego, CA.
[29] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “On distance properties of quasi-cyclic protograph-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Austin, TX, Jun. 13–18, 2010, pp. 809–813.
[30] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[31] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, and R. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[32] E. Gilbert, “Capacity of a burst-noise channel,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 39, pp. 1253–1265, Sep. 1960.
[33] E. Elliott, “Estimates of error rates for codes on burst-noise channels,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 42, pp. 1977–1997, Sep. 1963.
[34] L. Wilhelmsson and L. B. Milstein, “On the effect of imperfect interleaving for the Gilbert-Elliott channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 681–688, May 1999.
[35] M. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Design of LDPC codes for two-state fading channel models,” in Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Wireless Pers. Multimedia Commun., Oct. 2002, vol. 3, pp. 986–990.
[36] S. J. Johnson and T. Pollock, “LDPC codes for the classic bursty channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Aug. 2004, pp. 184–189.
[37] E. Paolini and M. Chiani, “Improved low-density parity-check codes for burst erasure channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 2006, pp. 1183–1188.
[38] G. Liva, B. Matuz, Z. Katona, E. Paolini, and M. Chiani, “On construction of moderate-length LDPC codes over correlated erasure channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Dresden, Germany, Jun. 2009, pp. 1–5.
[39] G. Sridharan, A. Kumarasubramanian, A. Thangaraj, and S. Bhashyam, “Optimizing burst erasure correction of LDPC codes by interleaving,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2008, pp. 1143–1147.
[40] S. J. Johnson, “Burst erasure correcting LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 641–652, Mar. 2009.
[41] E. Paolini and M. Chiani, “Construction of near-optimum burst erasure correcting low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1320–1328, May 2009.
[42] T. Wadayama, “Ensemble analysis on minimum span of stopping sets,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. 2006, San Diego, CA.
Aravind R. Iyengar (S’09) was born in Mysore, India, in 1985. He received his B.Tech degree in Electrical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, in 2007, and his M.S. degree in Electrical Engineering from the University of California in San Diego, La Jolla, in 2009. He is presently a doctoral student in the Electrical and Computer Engineering department at UCSD and is affiliated with the Center for Magnetic Recording Research. In 2006, he was a visiting student intern at the École Nationale Supérieure de l’Electronique et de ses Applications (ENSEA), Cergy, France. He was a visiting doctoral student at the Communication Theory Laboratory at the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland in 2010. His research interests are in the areas of information and coding theory, and in wireless communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012

Marco Papaleo (S’07–M’10) was born in Soverato, Italy, in 1981. He received his B.S. and M.Sc. degrees (summa cum laude) in Telecommunication Engineering from University of Bologna, Italy, in 2003 and in 2006, respectively. In 2010, he received his PhD in Information Technology from the Advanced Research Center on Electronic Systems for Information and Communication Technologies “Ercole De Castro” (ARCES) at the University of Bologna. In 2006 he was a visiting affiliate student at the University College of London (UCL). In summer 2008 he was a visiting Ph.D. student at the Institute of Communications and Navigation of the German Aerospace Center (DLR), in Munich, Germany, where he was involved in the design and analysis of LDPC convolutional codes. In 2009 he was a visiting graduate student at Center for Magnetic Recording Research of the University of California, San Diego (UCSD). In January 2011, he joined the Corporate Research and Development department at Qualcomm Inc., San Diego, CA, where is currently involved in the design of multimode mobile station modems. His research activities are mainly focused on the next generation wireless telecommunication systems, both the terrestrial and the satellite networks. In particular, his interests include design and performance evaluation of error control coding (with emphasis on packet level coding).

Dr. Wolf was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 1993. He was the recipient of the 1990 E. H. Armstrong Achievement Award of the IEEE Communications Society and was co-recipient with D. Slepian of the 1975 IEEE Information Theory Group Paper Award for the paper “Noiseless coding for correlated information sources.” He shared the 1993 IEEE Communications Society Leonard G. Abraham Prize Paper Award with B. Marcus and P. H. Siegel for the paper “Finite-state modulation codes for data storage.” He served on the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Group from 1970 to 1976 and from 1980 to 1986. Dr. Wolf was President of the IEEE Information Theory Group in 1974. He was International Chairman of Committee C of URSI from 1980 to 1983. He was the recipient of the 1998 IEEE Koji Kobayashi Computers and Communications Award, “for fundamental contributions to multiuser communications and applications of coding theory to magnetic data storage devices.” In May 2000, he received a UCSD Distinguished Teaching Award. In 2004 Professor Wolf received the IEEE Richard W. Hamming Medal for “fundamental contributions to the theory and practice of information transmission and storage.” In 2005 he was elected by the American Academy of Arts and Sciences as a Fellow, and in 2010 was elected as a member of the National Academy of Sciences. He was co-recipient with I.M. Jacobs of the 2011 Marconi Society Fellowship and Prize. Prof. Wolf passed away on May 12, 2011.

Paul H. Siegel (M’82–SM’90–F’97) received the S.B. and Ph.D. degrees in mathematics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, in 1975 and 1979, respectively.
He held a Chaim Weizmann Postdoctoral Fellowship at the Courant Institute, New York University. He was with the IBM Research Division in San Jose, CA, from 1980 to 1995. He joined the faculty at the University of California, San Diego in July 1995, where he is currently Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering in the Jacobs School of Engineering. He is affiliated with the Center for Magnetic Recording Research where he holds an endowed chair and served as Director from 2000 to 2011. His primary research interests lie in the areas of information theory and communications, particularly coding and modulation techniques, with applications to digital data storage and transmission.
Prof. Siegel was a member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Society from 1991 to 1996 and was re-elected for a 3-year term in 2009. He served as Co-Guest Editor of the May 1991 Special Issue on “Coding for Storage Devices” of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY. He served the same Transactions as Associate Editor for Coding Techniques from 1992 to 1995, and as Editor-in-Chief from July 2001 to July 2004. He was also Co-Guest Editor of the May/September 2001 two-part issue on “The Turbo Principle: From Theory to Practice” of the IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS.
Prof. Siegel was co-recipient, with R. Karabed, of the 1992 IEEE Information Theory Society Paper Award and shared the 1993 IEEE Communications Society Leonard G. Abraham Prize Paper Award with B. H. Marcus and J. K. Wolf. With J. B. Soriaga and H. D. Pfister, he received the 2007 Best Paper Award in Signal Processing and Coding for Data Storage from the Data Storage Technical Committee of the IEEE Communications Society. He holds several patents in the area of coding and detection, and was named a Master Inventor at IBM Research in 1994. He is an IEEE Fellow and a member of the National Academy of Engineering.
Jack Keil Wolf (S’54–M’60–F’73–LF’97) received the B.S.E.E. degree from the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, in 1956, and the M.S.E., M.A., and Ph.D. degrees from Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, in 1957, 1958, and 1960, respectively. He was the Stephen O. Rice Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering and a member of the Center for Magnetic Recording Research at the University of California-San Diego, La Jolla. He was a member of the Electrical Engineering Department at New York University from 1963 to 1965, and the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn from 1965 to 1973. He was Chairman of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Massachusetts, Boston, from 1973 to 1975, and he was Professor there from 1973 to 1984. From 1984 to 2011, he was a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering and a member of the Center for Magnetic Recording Research at the University of California-San Diego. He also held a part-time appointment at Qualcomm, Inc., San Diego. From 1971 to 1972, he was an NSF Senior Postdoctoral Fellow, and from 1979 to 1980, he held a Guggenheim Fellowship. His most recent research interest was in signal processing for storage systems.

Alessandro Vanelli-Coralli received the Dr. Ing. Degree (cum laude) in Electronics Engineering and the Ph.D. in Electronics and Computer Science from the University of Bologna (Italy) in 1991 and 1996, respectively. In 1996, he joined the Department of Electronics, Computer Science and Systems (DEIS) at the University of Bologna, where he is currently an Assistant Professor. Since 2001, he has also been a Research Associate of the Advanced Research Center for Electronic Systems (ARCES) of the University of Bologna. During 2003 and 2005, he was a Visiting Scientist at Qualcomm Inc. (San Diego, CA), working in the Corporate R&D Department on Mobile Communication Systems. Dr. Vanelli-Coralli participates in national and international research projects on satellite mobile communication systems. He is the Co-Leader of the R&D group of the Integral SatCom Initiative (ISI) technology platform, and Scientific Responsible for several European Space Agency and European Commission funded projects. His research interests are in the area of wireless communication systems, digital transmission techniques, and digital signal processing. Dr. Vanelli-Coralli has been appointed member of the Editorial Board of the Wiley InterScience Journal on Satellite Communications and Networks and has been guest co-Editor for several special issues in of international scientific journals. Dr. Vanelli-Coralli has served in the organization committees of scientific conferences and has been general Co-Chairman of the 5th IEEE ASMS Conference and 11th IEEE SPSC Workshop and Technical Chairman of the IEEE ASMS 2008 Conference and Technical Vice-Chairman of the IEEE ISSSTA 2008 Conference. Dr. Vanelli-Coralli coauthored more than 130 papers and scientific conference contributions and he is co-recipient of several Best Paper Awards. He is an IEEE Senior Member.
Giovanni E. Corazza (M’91–SM’09) is a Full Professor at the University of Bologna, Head of the Department of Electronics, Computer Science and Systems (DEIS), and leader for Wireless Communications inside the Advanced Research Centre for Electronic Systems (ARCES). He is the founder of the Marconi Institute for Creativity (2011). He was Chairman of the School for Telecommunications in the years 2000–2003, Chairman of the Advanced Satellite Mobile Systems Task Force (ASMS-TF), Founder and Chairman of the Integral Satcom Initiative (ISI), a European Technology Platform devote to Satellite Communications. Since 1997, he is Editor for Communication Theory and Spread Spectrum for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS. He is author of more than 200 papers, and received the Marconi International Fellowship Young Scientist Award in 1995, the IEEE 2009 Satellite Communications Distinguished Service Award, the 2002 IEEE VTS Best System Paper Award, the Best Paper Award at IEEE ISSSTA’98, at IEEE ICT2001, and at ISWCS 2005. He has been the General Chairman of the IEEE ISSSTA 2008, ASMS 2004, ASMS 2006, ASMS 2008, ASMS 2010 Conferences. His research interests are in wireless and satellite communications, creative thinking, estimation and synchronization, spread spectrum and multicarrier transmission, upper layer coding, navigation, and positioning.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:45:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

