2280
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012
On the Construction of Structured LDPC Codes Free
of Small Trapping Sets
Dung Viet Nguyen, Student Member, IEEE, Shashi Kiran Chilappagari, Member, IEEE,
Michael W. Marcellin, Fellow, IEEE, and Bane Vasic´, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—We present a method to construct low-density parity-
check (LDPC) codes with low error floors on the binary symmetric
channel. Codes are constructed so that their Tanner graphs are free
of certain small trapping sets. These trapping sets are selected from
the trapping set ontology for the Gallager A/B decoder. They are
selected based on their relative harmfulness for a given decoding al-
gorithm. We evaluate the relative harmfulness of different trapping
sets for the sum–product algorithm by using the topological rela-
tions among them and by analyzing the decoding failures on one
trapping set in the presence or absence of other trapping sets. We
apply this method to construct structured LDPC codes. To facili-
tate the discussion, we give a new description of structured LDPC
codes whose parity-check matrices are arrays of permutation ma-
trices. This description uses Latin squares to define a set of permu-
tation matrices that have disjoint support and to derive a simple
necessary and sufficient condition for the Tanner graph of a code
to be free of four cycles.
Index Terms—Error floor, Latin squares, structured low-density
parity-check codes, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
B
Y now, it is well established that the error-floor phenom-
enon, an abrupt degradation in the error rate performance
of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in the high signal-to-
noise-ratio (SNR) region, is due to the presence of certain struc-
tures in the Tanner graph that lead to decoder failures [1]. For
iterative decoding, these structures are known as trapping sets
(see [2] for a list of references).
To construct LDPC codes with provably low error floors, it is
essential to understand the failure mechanism of the decoders
in the high SNR region as well as to fully characterize trap-
ping sets. These prerequisites are met for decoders on the binary
Manuscript received August 24, 2010; revised September 21, 2011; accepted
September 27, 2011. Date of current version March 13, 2012. This work was
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-0963726,
Grant CCF-0830245, and in part by the Advanced Storage Technology Con-
sortium, International Disk Drive Equipment and Materials Association. The
material in this paper was presented in part at the 2010 IEEE Information
Theory Workshop, Dublin, Ireland, at the 47th Annual Allerton Conference
on Communications, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Sep. 2009, and
at the 48th Annual Allerton Conference on Communications, Control, and
Computing, Monticello, IL, Sep. 2010.
D. V. Nguyen, M. W. Marcellin, and B. Vasic´ are with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ
85721 USA (e-mail: nguyendv@ece.arizona.edu; marcellin@ece.arizona.edu;
vasic@ece.arizona.edu).
S. K. Chilappagari was with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA. He is now
with Marvell Semiconductors, Inc., Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA (e-mail:
shashickiran@gmail.com).
Communicated by P. O. Vontobel, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2011.2173733
erasure channel (BEC), in which case trapping sets are known
under the notion of stopping sets [3]. For the BEC, the definition
of stopping sets is fully combinatorial and the code construction
strategy is simply to maximize the size of the smallest stopping
set as well as to minimize the number of the smallest stopping
sets. Such a level of understanding has not been gained for other
channels of interest.
On other channels, such as the binary symmetric channel
(BSC) or the additive white Gaussian noise channel (AWGNC),
knowledge of trapping sets is far from complete due to the
complex nature of iterative decoding algorithms, such as the
sum–product algorithm (SPA). As a result, code performance
is typically improved by increasing the girth of the Tanner
graph [4]–[8]. The basis for these approaches is mostly based
on two facts. First, a linear increase in the girth results in
an exponential increase of the lower bound on the minimum
distance if the code has column weight
[9]. Second,
trapping sets containing shortest cycles in the Tanner graph
are eliminated when the girth is increased. In addition, several
recent results can be used to justify the construction of a code
with large girth: the error correction capability under the bit
flipping algorithms was shown to grow exponentially with
the girth for codes with column weight
[10]; and the
lower bound on the minimum BSC pseudocodeword weight
for linear programming decoding was also shown to increase
exponentially with the girth [11]. Notably, this lower bound
on the minimum BSC pseudocodeword weight of an LDPC
code whose Tanner graph has girth greater than 4 was proven
to be tight if and only if the minimum pseudocodeword is a
real multiple of a codeword [12]. It is worth noting here that
the lower bound on the minimum stopping set size also grows
exponentially with the girth for codes with column weight
[13].
For a given column weight
, increasing the girth of a Tanner
graph requires either increasing the number of variable nodes,
thus requiring a longer code, or decreasing the row weight
and increasing the number of check nodes, which lowers the
code rate. In most cases, at a desirable length and code rate, the
girth cannot be made large enough for the Tanner graph to be
free of the most harmful trapping sets that mainly contribute to
decoding failures in the error-floor region. These trapping sets
dictate the size of the smallest error patterns uncorrectable by
the decoder and hence also dictate the slope of the frame error
rate (FER) curve [2]. To preserve the rate while lowering the
error floor, a code must be optimized not by simply increasing
the girth but rather by more surgically avoiding the most harmful
trapping sets.
0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
NGUYEN et al.: ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FREE OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS
2281
In this paper, LDPC codes are constructed so that they are free
of small harmful trapping sets. We focus our attention on regular
column-weight-three codes as these codes allow low decoding
complexity but exhibit high error floor if they are not designed
properly. A key element in the construction of a code free of
trapping sets is the choice of forbidden subgraphs in the Tanner
graph, since this choice greatly affects the error performance
as well as the code rate. This choice is well determined if the
Gallager A/B algorithm is used on the BSC since the necessary
and sufficient conditions for a code to guarantee the correction
of a given number of errors are known [14], [15]. However, for
the SPA on the BSC and on the AWGNC, the choice of for-
bidden subgraphs is not clear since the conditions on a Tanner
graph for the code to achieve a given guaranteed error correc-
tion capability have not been characterized. In a series of pa-
pers [16]–[18], we used the notion of instantons to predict the
error floors as well as to study the phenomenon from a statis-
tical mechanics perspective. In [19], we showed how the family
of instanton based techniques can be used to estimate and re-
duce error floors for different decoders operating on a variety of
channels. Unfortunately, the instanton search is computationally
prohibitive for the construction of moderate length codes, and
in this paper, we propose another, simpler, method.
In the absence of a complete understanding of trapping sets
for the SPA, the choice of forbidden subgraphs may be derived
based on the understanding of trapping sets for simpler decoding
algorithms as well as on the intuition gained from experimental
results. This is the approach we take in this paper. A basis for
removing harmful trapping sets for the SPA is the observation
made in [19] that the decoding failures for various decoding
algorithms and channels are closely related and that subgraphs
responsible for these failures share some common underlying
topological structures. These structures are either trapping sets
for iterative decoding algorithms on the BSC or larger subgraphs
containing these trapping sets.
The method consists of three main steps. First, we develop a
database of trapping sets for the Gallager A/B algorithm on the
BSC. This database, which is called the trapping set ontology
(TSO),1 contains subgraphs that are responsible for failures of
the Gallager A/B decoder and also specifies the topological re-
lations among them. Second, based on the TSO, we determine
the relative harmfulness of different subgraphs for the SPA on
the BSC by analyzing failures of the decoder on one subgraph
in the presence or absence of other topologically related sub-
graphs. This analysis is performed repeatedly on a number of
“test” Tanner graphs, which are intentionally constructed to ei-
ther contain or be free of specific subgraphs. The relative harm-
fulness of a subgraph is evaluated based on its effect on the
guaranteed correction capability of a code. Finally, a code is
constructed so that its Tanner graph is free of the most harmful
subgraphs.
We remark that our construction attempts to optimize a code
for the SPA on the BSC. Due to much higher complexity, sim-
ilar analysis on the AWGNC is difficult. However, experimental
results show that codes constructed for the BSC also perform
1This database of trapping sets was partially presented in [20] and is available
online at [21].
very well on the AWGNC. It should be noted that in [22], exten-
sive computer simulation and hardware emulation suggest that
absorbing sets mainly contribute to error floors of codes under
the SPA on the AWGNC. Since absorbing sets are combinato-
rially similar to trapping sets for the Gallager A/B decoder, our
newly constructed codes are also free of some (and probably the
most harmful) absorbing sets and hence understandably possess
good error performance on the AWGNC. Although absorbing
sets were defined in the context of research that dealt with the
AWGNC, the failure mechanism of the SPA due to these objects
is not understood well enough to suggest an explicit strategy to
construct good codes. As a result, optimizing codes for the BSC
in order to obtain good performance on the AWGNC remains a
reasonable approach.
As the title of this paper indicates, we focus on constructing
structured LDPC codes. This is motivated by the fact that these
codes are attractive for a number of applications. For example,
encoding of quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes can be efficiently
implemented using shift registers with linear complexity [23],
while decoding can be parallelized by exploiting the block struc-
ture of the parity-check matrices [24], [25]. Furthermore, as we
show in this paper, symmetry and structure in a Tanner graph
can greatly accelerate the trapping set search and enumeration
as well as code construction.
To facilitate the discussion on removing trapping sets in struc-
tured codes, we give a new description of structured LDPC
codes whose parity-check matrices are arrays of permutation
matrices. In this description, Latin squares are used to define a
set of permutation matrices that have disjoint support and to de-
rive a simple necessary and sufficient condition for the Tanner
graph of a code to be free of four cycles. As this description
is concise and simple, it facilitates our discussion on the con-
struction of codes free of small trapping sets. Besides, the class
of codes to be described is general as it includes many existing
structured LDPC codes. The new description also results in cer-
tain advantages. For example, the class of codes to be described
contains array LDPC codes [26] but also includes higher rate
codes than shortened array LDPC codes [4], [27], when the
Tanner graphs are required to satisfy certain constraints.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents our TSO for the Gallager A/B decoder. The analytical
construction of a code free of trapping sets is difficult, and
hence, we resort to an efficient search of the Tanner graph
for certain subgraphs. We briefly discuss these search tech-
niques in Section III, with more details given in Appendix A.
In Section IV, we describe structured LDPC codes whose
parity-check matrices are arrays of permutation matrices
obtained from Latin squares. In Section V, we describe, in
general, the construction of a code free of certain trapping
sets. We present the construction of codes for the Gallager A/B
algorithm in Section VI and the construction of codes for the
SPA on the BSC in Section VII. In Section VIII, we discuss the
performance of a constructed code on the AWGNC and then
conclude the paper.
Before proceeding to Section II, we provide some back-
ground related to LDPC codes. Let
denote an
LDPC
code over the binary field
.
is defined by the null space
of
, an
parity-check matrix of
.
is the biadja-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2282
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012
cency matrix of
, a Tanner graph representation of
.
is a
bipartite graph with two sets of nodes:
variable (bit) nodes
and
check nodes
.
A vector
is a codeword if and only if
, where
is the transpose of
. The support of
,
denoted as
, is defined as the set of all variable nodes
(bits)
such that
. A
-left-regular LDPC code
has a Tanner graph
in which all variable nodes have degree
. Similarly, a
-right-regular LDPC code has a Tanner graph
in which all check nodes have degree
. A
-regular
LDPC code is
-left-regular and
-right-regular. Such a code
has rate
[28]. The degree of a variable node
(check node, respectively) is also referred to as the left degree
(right degree, respectively) or the column weight (row weight,
respectively). The length of the shortest cycle in the Tanner
graph
is called the girth
of
.
II. TSO
In this section, we describe our trapping set database known
as the TSO. The “ontology” indicates that the database is
augmented by the topological relations among the trapping
sets. We start with a brief discussion of trapping sets and related
objects.
A. Trapping Sets
Denote by
the transmitted codeword. Consider an iterative
decoder and let
be the decision vector
after the th iteration. A variable node
is said to be eventually
correct if there exists a positive integer
such that for all with
,
.
Definition 1 [1]: A trapping set for an iterative decoding al-
gorithm is a nonempty set of variable nodes in a Tanner graph
that are not eventually correct. A set of variable nodes
is
called an
trapping set if it contains
variable nodes and
the subgraph induced by these variable nodes has
odd-degree
check nodes.
On the BSC, when decoding with the Gallager A/B algorithm,
or the bit flipping (serial or parallel) algorithms, trapping sets
are partially characterized under the notion of fixed sets. By par-
tially, we mean that these combinatorial objects form a subclass
of trapping sets, but not all trapping sets are fixed sets. Fixed sets
have been studied extensively in a series of papers [2], [10], [14],
[29]. They have been proven to be the cause of the error floor in
the decoding of LDPC codes under the Gallager A/B algorithm
and the bit flipping algorithms. For the sake of completeness,
we give the definition of a fixed set as well as the necessary and
sufficient conditions for a set of variable nodes to form a fixed
set.
Assume the transmission of the all-zero codeword2 over the
BSC. With this assumption, a variable node is correct if it is 0
and corrupt if it is 1. Let
be the channel
output vector and let
denote the set of variable nodes that
are not eventually correct.
2The all-zero-codeword assumption can be applied if the channel is output
symmetric and the decoding algorithm satisfies certain symmetry conditions
(see [30, Def. 1 and Lemma 1]). The Gallager A/B algorithm, the bit flipping
algorithms and the SPA all satisfy these symmetry conditions.
Definition 2: For transmission over the BSC,
is a fixed
point of the decoding algorithm if and only if there exists a pos-
itive integer
such that
for all
.
If
and
is a fixed point, then
is called a fixed set. A fixed set is an elementary fixed set if all
check nodes in its induced subgraph have degree one or two.
Otherwise, it is a nonelementary fixed set.
Remark: The classification of fixed sets as elementary and
nonelementary fixed sets is identical to the classification of
trapping sets as elementary and nonelementary trapping sets
in [31].
Theorem 1 [10]: Let
be an LDPC code with
-left-regular
Tanner graph
. Let
be a set consisting of variable nodes
with induced subgraph . Let the check nodes in
be partitioned
into two disjoint subsets;
consisting of check nodes with odd
degree and
consisting of check nodes with even degree. Then,
is a fixed set for the bit flipping algorithms (serial or parallel)
iff: 1) every variable node in
has at least
neighbors in
, and 2) no collection of
check nodes of
share a
neighbor outside .
Note that Theorem 1 only states the conditions for the bit
flipping algorithms. However, it is not difficult to show that these
conditions also apply for the Gallager A/B algorithm. A similar
characterization of fixed sets for the Gallager A/B algorithm is
also given in [32].
The harmfulness of a fixed set is determined by its critical
number. A fixed set is more harmful if it has a smaller critical
number. The critical number of a fixed set is defined as
follows.
Definition 3 [29]: The critical number of a fixed set is the
minimal number of variable nodes that have to be initially in
error for the decoder to end up in the fixed set.
Determining the smallest critical number of fixed sets present
in a code or in general determining the weight of the smallest
uncorrectable error patterns is a key step for estimating the FER
performance of the code in the error-floor region. The problem
of estimating the error floor of LDPC codes under hard-decision
decoding on the BSC was considered in [29], [32], [33].
Although it has been rigorously proven only that fixed sets
are trapping sets for the Gallager A/B algorithm and the bit
flipping algorithms on the BSC, it has been widely recognized
in the literature that the subgraphs of these combinatorial ob-
jects greatly contribute to the error floor for various iterative
decoding algorithms and channels. The instanton analysis per-
formed in [19] suggests that the decoding failures for various
decoding algorithms and channels are closely related and sub-
graphs responsible for these failures share some common un-
derlying topological structures. These structures are either trap-
ping sets for iterative decoding algorithms on the BSC, of which
fixed sets form a subset, or larger subgraphs containing these
trapping sets. In [34], the notion of absorbing sets was defined.
In odd-column-weight codes, these are sets of variable nodes
which satisfy condition 1 of Theorem 1. These authors also de-
fined fully absorbing sets, which are combinatorially identical
to fixed sets (in odd-column-weight codes). By hardware emu-
lation, they found that absorbing sets are the main cause of error
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
NGUYEN et al.: ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FREE OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS
2283
floors for the SPA on the AWGNC. Various trapping sets identi-
fied by simulation (for example, those in [35] and [36]) are also
fixed sets.
From these observations, it is expected that an LDPC code
will have good performance in the error-floor region if the cor-
responding Tanner graph does not contain subgraphs induced
by fixed sets. However, it is impossible to construct an LDPC
code whose Tanner graph is free of all fixed sets when the length
of the code is finite. It is also well known that imposing con-
straints on a Tanner graph reduces the rate of a code. Clearly,
only subgraphs of some fixed sets can be avoided in the code
construction. These need to be chosen carefully in order to ob-
tain the best possible error-floor performance while maximizing
the code rate.
Before one can attempt to determine the fixed sets that shall
be forbidden in the Tanner graph of a code, there are two im-
portant issues that need to be addressed. First, a complete list
of nonisomorphic fixed sets (up to a proper size) for a given
set of code parameters (e.g., column weight and row weight)
is needed. This is because the notion of an
fixed set (trap-
ping set) is not sufficient. Given a pair of positive integers
,
there are possibly many fixed sets which induce nonisomorphic
subgraphs containing
variable nodes and
odd-degree check
nodes. Second, the topological relations among subgraphs in-
duced by fixed sets need to be explored. The importance of these
relations is threefold. First, the subgraph induced by a fixed set
may be contained in the subgraph induced by another fixed set.
In such a case, the absence of one subgraph yields to the absence
of the other. Second, these relations help reduce the complexity
of the search for subgraphs in a Tanner graph. Finally, these re-
lations reduce the complexity of the analysis to determine the
harmfulness of subgraphs.
In Section II-B, we present our database of fixed sets for
regular column-weight-three LDPC codes with the special em-
phasis on their topological relationships. For the sake of sim-
plicity, and because the term “trapping set” is widely used in the
literature, we drop the term fixed sets and refer to these objects
by the general term trapping sets. Therefore, in the remainder
of this paper, a trapping set should not be understood as a set
of noneventually correct variable nodes. Instead, it should be
understood as a set of variable nodes in a given code with a
specified induced subgraph or as a specific subgraph indepen-
dent of a code (a precise description is given in Section II-B).
In this context, we use the term erroneous set to refer to a set
of noneventually correct variable nodes. We also remark that in
this paper, if a code is said to be free of some trapping sets, then
these trapping sets should be understood as trapping sets of the
Gallager A/B algorithms.
B. TSO of Column-Weight-Three Codes for the Gallager A/B
Algorithm on the BSC
In the remainder of this paper, we use the following definition
of a trapping set.
Definition 4: Trapping sets are fixed sets of the Gallager A/B
algorithm, i.e., trapping sets are sets of variable nodes whose
induced subgraphs satisfy conditions 1 and 2 of Theorem 1.
Fig. 1. Graphical representation of the (5; 3)f2g trapping set: (a) Tanner graph
representation. (b) Line–point representation.
This slight abuse of terminology is motivated by the desire to
use the terminology that is common in the literature.
1) Graphical Representation: The induced subgraph of a
trapping set (or any set of variable nodes) is a bipartite graph.
In the Tanner graph (bipartite graph) representation of a trap-
ping set, we use “
” to represent variable nodes, “
” to rep-
resent odd-degree check nodes, and “
” to represent even-de-
gree check nodes. There exists an alternate graphical represen-
tation of trapping sets which allows their topological relations
to be established more conveniently. This graphical represen-
tation is based on the incidence structure of lines and points.
In combinatorial mathematics, an incidence structure is a triple
where
is a set of “points”,
is a set of
“lines,” and
is the incidence relation. The ele-
ments of
are called flags. If
, we say that point
“lies on” line . In this line–point representation of trapping
sets, variable nodes correspond to lines and check nodes corre-
spond to points. A point, represented as a circle, is shaded black
if it has an odd number of lines passing through it; otherwise,
it is shaded white. An
trapping set is thus an incidence
structure with
lines and
black-shaded points. The girth of
the line–point representation equals the girth of the associated
Tanner graph representation. To differentiate among
trap-
ping sets that have nonisomorphic induced subgraphs when nec-
essary, we index
trapping sets in an arbitrary order and as-
sign the notation
to the
trapping set with index .
Depending on the context, a trapping set can be understood
as a set of variable nodes in a given code with a specified in-
duced subgraph or it can be understood as a specific subgraph
independent of a code. To differentiate between these two cases,
we use the letter
to denote a set of variable nodes in a code
and use the letter
to denote a type of trapping set which cor-
responds to a specific subgraph. If the induced subgraph of a set
of variable nodes
in the Tanner graph of a code
is isomor-
phic to the subgraph of
then we say that
is a
trapping set
or that
is a trapping set of type
.
is said to contain type
trapping set(s).
Example 1: The
trapping set
is a union of a six-
cycle and an eight-cycle, sharing two variable nodes. The Tanner
graph representation of
is shown in Fig. 1(a). The set of
odd-degree check nodes is
. These check nodes are
represented by black-shaded squares. In the line–point represen-
tation of
which is shown in Fig. 1(b),
,
, and
are repre-
sented by black-shaded points. These points are the only points
that lie on a single line. The five variable nodes
are represented by black-shaded circles in Fig. 1(a). They corre-
spond to the five lines in Fig. 1(b). As an example, the column-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2284
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012
weight-three MacKay random code of length 4095 from [37]
has 19 617 sets of variable nodes whose induced subgraphs are
isomorphic to the subgraph of
. These sets of variable nodes
are
trapping sets.
Remark: To avoid confusion between the graphical rep-
resentations of trapping sets, we note that the Tanner graph
representation of a trapping set always contains
or
. The
line–point representation never contains
or
. We also
note that circles represent variable nodes in a Tanner graph
representation but they represent check nodes in a line–point
representation. In the remainder of this paper, we only use the
line–point representation.
2) Topological Relation: The following definition gives the
topological relations among trapping sets.
Definition 5: A trapping set
is a successor of a trapping
set
if there exists a proper subset of variable nodes of
that induce a subgraph isomorphic to the induced subgraph of
. If
is a successor of
then
is a predecessor of
.
Furthermore,
is a direct successor of
if it does not have a
predecessor
which is a successor of
.
Remark: A trapping set
can have multiple, incomparable
predecessors.
If
is a successor of
, then the topological relation be-
tween
and
is solely dictated by the topological properties
of their subgraphs. In the Tanner graph of a code
, the pres-
ence of a trapping set
does not indicate the presence of a
trapping set
. If
is indeed a subset of a trapping set
in
the Tanner graph of
, then we say that
generates
; oth-
erwise, we say that
does not generate
.
3) Family Tree of Trapping Sets: The following proposition
follows from Theorem 1.
Proposition 1: Every trapping set
contains at least a cycle.
Proof: Assume that
is a trapping set that does not contain
a cycle, i.e., the induced subgraph of
is a tree. Take any vari-
able node as the root of the tree then the variable nodes which are
neighboring to the leaf nodes with largest depth have only one
adjacent check node with degree greater than 1. Therefore, these
variable nodes have at least as many odd-degree check nodes as
even-degree check nodes. This indicates that
is not a trapping
set, which is a contradiction. Consequently, all trapping sets can
be obtained by adjoining variable nodes to cycles.
Remark: Any cycle is a trapping set for regular column-
weight-three codes.
We now explain how larger trapping sets can be obtained by
adjoining variable nodes to smaller trapping sets. We begin with
the simplest example: the evolution of
trapping sets from
the
trapping set.
Example 2: The line–point representation of a
trap-
ping set may be obtained by adding one additional line to the
line–point representation of the
trapping set. The new line
must pass through exactly three points to conform with the given
variable node degree. The process of adding a new line can be
considered as the merging of at least one point on the new line
with certain points in the line–point representation of the
Fig. 2. (5; b) trapping sets can be obtained by adding a line to the (4; 4) trap-
ping set: (a) (5; 3)f1g trapping set, (b) (5; 3)f2g trapping set, and (c) (5; 1)
trapping set; or by adding a line to the (4; 2) trapping set: (d) (5; 1) trapping
set.
trapping set. We use
to denote the points on the line that are
to be merged with points in the line–point representation of the
predecessor trapping set. If a black-shaded point is merged with
a
point, then they become a single white-shaded point. Sim-
ilarly, if a white-shaded point is merged with a
point, then
the result is a single black-shaded point. Before merging points,
one must decide on: 1) the number of the
points on the new
line; and 2) which points on the line–point representation of the
predecessor trapping set are to be merged with the
points.
Because the merging must ensure that every line passes
through at least two white-shaded points, there must be at least
two
points on the line to be merged, i.e., there can be two or
three
points. It is easy to see that if the girth is at least six,
then white points cannot be selected. Consequently, if there are
two
points, then there are two distinct ways to select two
black-shaded points. The merging, which is demonstrated in
Fig. 2(a) and (b), results in two different
trapping sets.
On the other hand, if there are three
points, then there is
only one distinct way to select three black-shaded points. The
merging, which is demonstrated in Fig. 2(c), results in the
trapping set. We remark that the line–point representation of
the
trapping set may also be obtained by adding a line
to the line–point representation of the
trapping set, as
demonstrated in Fig. 2(d). Note that the
trapping set is
neither a successor nor a predecessor of the
trapping set.
The evolution of a trapping set from one of its predecessors
in a regular-column-weight three code can now be described
in a more general setting. Since every trapping set is a direct
successor of some trapping set, it is sufficient to only consider
the evolution of direct successors from their predecessors. Con-
sider an
trapping set
. Since
has
variable nodes, its
line–point representation contains
lines. Each line has three
points lying on it, with at most one point shaded black. There are
black-shaded points, each with an odd number of lines passing
through it. An
trapping set
may be obtained
by adding
lines. These
new lines (and the points on them)
form an incidence structure and since
is a direct successor of
, this incidence structure is connected.3 A successor trapping
set
is obtained by pairwisely merging the
points with cer-
tain points of
. The evolution of elementary trapping sets from
their predecessors is further simplified by the following lemma.
Lemma 1: Let
be an elementary trapping set. Then, any
elementary direct successor of
can be obtained by pairwisely
merging the
points of one of those incidence structures listed
in Fig. 3 with certain black-shaded points of
.
Proof: See Appendix B.
3Each incidence structure corresponds to a bipartite graph. An incidence
structure is connected if the corresponding bipartite graph is connected.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
NGUYEN et al.: ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FREE OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS
2285
Fig. 3. Possible incidence structures formed by u new lines for elementary
trapping sets.
Fig. 4. (5; 3)f1g trapping set and its successors of size less than or equal to 8 in
girth-8 LDPC codes. (a) (5; 3)f2g. (b) (6; 2)f1g. (c) (7; 1)f1g. (d) (8; 2)f1g.
(e) (7; 3)f1g. (f) (8; 2)f2g. (g) (8; 4)f1g.
4) Examples: For the following examples, let us consider
regular column-weight-three LDPC codes of girth
and
elementary trapping sets.
Example 3: With the evolution of the
trapping set
from the
trapping set presented previously, we show the
family tree of
trapping sets originating from the
trapping set with
and
in Fig. 4. The derivation of
this family tree is explained as follows.
1) Since
and
, only the structures shown in
Fig. 3(b)–(d) can be chosen to merge with the
trapping set. Each of these structures have two
points.
Due to symmetry, there is only one way of choosing two
black-shaded points in the line–point representation of the
trapping set. Merging the line–point representa-
tion of the
trapping set with the structures shown
in Fig. 3(b)–(d) results in the
trapping set, the
trapping set, and the
trapping set, re-
spectively.
2) Similarly, only the structures shown in Fig. 3(b) and (c) can
be chosen to merge with the
trapping set to result
in the
trapping set and the
trapping set,
respectively.
3) Finally, only the structure shown in Fig. 3(b) can be
chosen to merge with the
trapping set. There
are two distinct ways to select two black-shaded points in
the line–point representation of the
trapping set.
Fig. 5. (4; 4) trapping set and its direct successors of size less than or equal
to 8 in girth-8 LDPC codes (excluding the (5; 3)f1g and (6; 4)f1g trapping
sets shown in Figs. 1(b) and 6(a), respectively). (a) (4; 4). (b) (6; 4)f2g. (c)
(7; 5)f1g. (d) (7; 5)f2g. (e) (8; 6)f1g. (f) (8; 6)f2g. (g) (8; 6)f3g.
Fig. 6. (6; 4)f1gtrapping set and its successors of size less than or equal to 8 in
girth-8 LDPC codes. (a) (6; 4)f1g. (b) (7; 3)f2g. (c) (8; 2)f3g. (d) (7; 3)f3g.
(e) (8; 2)f4g. (f) (8; 2)f5g. (g) (8; 4)f2g. (h) (8; 4)f3g. (i) (8; 4)f4g.
Fig. 7. Obtaining a larger trapping set by adding lines to a smaller one.
However, one of them leads to a girth violation. The other
results in the
trapping set.
Example 4: By selecting two black-shaded nodes in Fig. 5(a)
and merging them with two
nodes in Fig. 3(c), a
trapping set can be obtained. Two distinct ways to select
black-shaded nodes result in two different trapping sets: the
trapping set shown in Fig. 6(a) and the
trapping set shown in Fig. 5(b). The merging is demonstrated
in Fig. 7(a) and (b). The family tree of
trapping sets
originating from the
trapping set with
and
is illustrated in Fig. 6.
Example 5: In the same manner, other direct successors of
the
trapping set can be generated. Those
trapping
sets with
and
are shown in Fig. 5. For a more
complete list of trapping sets from the TSO, interested readers
are referred to [21].
Remarks: A trapping set may originate from different pre-
decessors. For example, the
trapping set is not only a
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2286
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012
Fig. 8. All (a; 0) trapping sets where a

10 in girth-8 LDPC codes.
(a) (6; 0)f1g. (b) (8; 0)f1g. (c) (8; 0)f2g. (d) (10;0)f1g. (e) (10;0)f2g.
(f) (10; 0)f3g. (g) (10; 0)f4g. (h) (10;0)f5g. (i) (10;0)f6g.
direct successor of the
trapping set, but also a direct suc-
cessor of the
trapping set. The evolution of the
trapping set from the
trapping set is demonstrated in
Fig. 7(c).
5)
Codewords:
Let
be a codeword of
and let
. Then,
is an
trapping set where
. Conversely,
contains codewords of Hamming
weight
if the Tanner graph of
contains
trapping sets.
Consequently,
has
as its minimum distance if and only
if 1) the Tanner graph of
contains no
trapping set where
and 2) the Tanner graph of
contains at least one
trapping set. For regular column-weight-three codes,
an
trapping set is a direct successor of an
trapping set. Therefore, the line–point representation of an
trapping set may be obtained by pairwisely merging
three black-shaded nodes in the line–point representation of
an
trapping set with three
nodes in Fig. 3(a). In
other words, from a list of all possible
trapping sets,
all possible
trapping sets can be derived. The line–point
representations of all possible
trapping sets where
of girth-8 codes are shown in Fig. 8. It can be proven easily that
all of these trapping sets are elementary.
III. SEARCHING FOR SUBGRAPHS IN A TANNER GRAPH
In this section, we briefly describe the main idea behind
our techniques of searching for elementary trapping sets from
the TSO in the Tanner graph of a regular column-weight-three
LDPC code. An efficient search of the Tanner graph for trap-
ping sets relies on the topological relations among trapping sets
defined in the TSO and/or carefully analyzing their induced
subgraphs. Trapping sets are searched for in a way similar to
how they have evolved in the TSO. Recall that by Proposition
1, the induced subgraph of every trapping set contains at least a
cycle. Therefore, the search for trapping sets begins with enu-
merating cycles. Also recall that a cycle with
variable nodes
is an
trapping set. After the cycles have been enumerated,
they will be used in the search for larger trapping sets. A larger
trapping set can be found in a Tanner graph by expanding a
smaller trapping set. More precisely, given a trapping set
of
type
in the Tanner graph of a code
, our techniques search
for a set of variable nodes such that the union of this set with
forms a trapping set
of type
, where
is a successor
of
. Our techniques are sufficient to efficiently search for a
large number of trapping sets in the TSO, especially for those
to be avoided in the code constructions that we will present
in subsequent sections. They can be easily expanded to search
for other trapping sets as well. Notably, the complexity of the
search for trapping sets in the Tanner graph of a structured code
can be greatly reduced by utilizing the structural property of
its parity-check matrix. Details on the implementation of these
techniques are given in Appendix A. An implementation of our
search algorithms can be downloaded from [20].
Let us mention other methods of searching for trapping sets
in the Tanner graph of a code. It is well known that this problem
is NP hard [38], [39]. Previous work on this problem includes
exhaustive [40], [41] and nonexhaustive approaches [42], [43].
The main drawback of existing exhaustive approaches is their
high complexity. Consequently, constraints must be imposed on
trapping sets and on the Tanner graph in which trapping sets
are searched for. For example, the method in [40] or [41] can
only search for
trapping sets with
,
in
a Tanner graph with less than 1000 variable nodes. The com-
plexity is much lower for nonexhaustive approaches. However,
these approaches cannot guarantee that all trapping sets are enu-
merated, and hence are not suitable for the purpose of this paper.
In [32], an algorithm was proposed for enumerating the smallest
weight error patterns uncorrectable by a hard-decision decoder
on the BSC instead of enumerating trapping sets. This approach
is also not suitable for the purpose of this paper. We remark that
our approach of searching for larger trapping sets by expanding
smaller ones is also the approach used in a recent work [44].
IV. STRUCTURED LDPC CODES WITH PERMUTATION
MATRICES OBTAINED FROM LATIN SQUARES
In this section, we give a description of structured LDPC
codes whose parity-check matrices are arrays of permutation
matrices obtained from Latin squares. The class of codes
described in this section is suitable to show our general method
of constructing structured LDPC codes free of small trapping
sets.
A. Permutation Matrices From Latin Squares
A permutation matrix is a square binary matrix that has ex-
actly one entry 1 in each row and each column and 0’s else-
where. Our codes make use of permutation matrices that have
disjoint support. These sets of permutation matrices can be ob-
tained conveniently from Latin squares.
A Latin square of size
(or order ) is a
array in which
each cell contains a single symbol from a -set
, such that each
symbol occurs exactly once in each row and exactly once in each
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
NGUYEN et al.: ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FREE OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS
2287
column. A Latin square of size
is equivalent to the Cayley table
(or multiplication table) of a quasi-group
on
elements (see
[45, pp. 135–152] for details).
For mathematical convenience, we use elements of
to index
the rows and columns of Latin squares and permutation ma-
trices. Let
denote a Latin square defined on
the Cayley table of a quasi-group
of order
. We de-
fine
, an injective map from
to
, where
is the set of matrices of size
over
,
as follows:
such that
if
if
According to this definition, a permutation matrix corre-
sponding to the element
is obtained by replacing the
entries of
which are equal to
by 1 and all other entries of
by 0. It follows from the aforementioned definition that the
images of elements of
under
give a set of
permutation
matrices that do not have 1’s in common positions. This defi-
nition naturally associates a permutation matrix to an element
and simplifies the derivation of parity-check matrices
that satisfy the row–column (RC) constraint [46], as will be
later demonstrated in this section.
Example 6: Let
be a quasi-group of order 4 with Cayley
table
The Latin square obtained from the Cayley table of
is
The injective map
sends elements of
to four permutation
matrices:
B. LDPC Codes as Arrays of Permutation Matrices
It is now straightforward to describe an LDPC code whose
parity-check matrix is an array of permutation matrices. Let
be a
matrix over a quasi-group
, i.e.,
...
...
...
...
(1)
With some abuse of notation, let
be
an array of permutation matrices obtained by replacing elements
of
with their images under
, i.e.,
...
...
...
...
(2)
Then,
is a binary matrix of size
. The null space of
gives an LDPC code
of length
. The column weight and
row weight of
are
and
, respectively.
Remark: Different permutations of rows and columns of the
Latin square
result in different sets of permutation matrices.
These sets of permutation matrices result in different permuta-
tions of
in (2). Since permuting rows and columns of
only
leads to the relabeling of the variable nodes and check nodes of
the corresponding Tanner graph, different permutations of rows
and columns of the Latin square
result in equivalent codes.
Therefore, a code is completely specified by a quasi-group
along with a matrix over
.
C. Deriving Parity-Check Matrices That Satisfy the RC
Constraint
The Tanner graph of a code
constructed as above is free
of four cycles if and only if its parity-check matrix satisfies the
RC constraint. The RC constraint requires that any two rows
(columns) of a parity-check matrix have 1’s in at most one
common position. The following lemma gives the necessary and
sufficient conditions on
such that the matrix
(in (2)) satis-
fies the RC constraint.
Lemma 2: Let
,
,
, and
be entries of
. Then,
satisfies the RC constraint iff the equations
do not hold simultaneously for any
,
;
,
;
;
and any
,
.
Proof: We will prove that
does not satisfy the RC con-
straint iff the aforementioned equations hold simultaneously for
some entries
,
,
, and
of
with
,
and some
,
.
does not satisfy the RC constraint if and only if there exist
,
,
, and
which are entries of
with
,
such that the matrix
does not satisfy the RC constraint.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2288
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012
Fig. 9. Row and column indices of the 1 entries in the common positions.
Assume that
does not satisfy the RC constraint and let
,
,
,
be the row indices and the column indices,
respectively, of the 1 entries of
in the common positions
as demonstrated in Fig. 9. From the definition of the map
in
Section IV-A, one can see that the equations listed in Lemma 2
hold simultaneously.
Conversely, assume that the aforementioned equations hold
simultaneously for some
,
,
, and
with
,
, and some
,
,
,
. Then, the
1 entries of
include those with positions shown in Fig. 9.
Therefore,
does not satisfy the RC constraint.
For the following two corollaries of Lemma 2,
is a Galois field, where
,
and
is prime. Let
be a primitive element of
. The powers of
,
,
, give all
elements of
and
.
Corollary 1: Let
, and let
be
the multiplicative operation of
. The Tanner graph
corresponding to
contains no cycle of length four iff
for any
,
;
,
;
;
.
Remark: The LDPC codes obtained when
is a multiplica-
tive group of a finite field were proposed under a different for-
mulation in [46].
Corollary 2: Let
and let
be
the subtractive operation of
. The Tanner graph corre-
sponding to
contains no cycle of length four iff
for any
,
;
,
;
;
.
Remark: The LDPC codes obtained when
is an additive
group of a finite field include array LDPC codes [26].
D. Remarks
For simplicity, all the codes constructed in this paper are de-
rived from the additive group of a finite field, i.e., the codes for
which Corollary 2 holds. For any parity-check matrix
which
is an array of permutation matrices, we can permute the rows
and columns to obtain
such that the topmost and leftmost
permutation matrices of
are identity matrices. The matrix
is, then, the image of a matrix
under
, where entries on the
first row and first column of
are
. Therefore, in
the rest of this paper, we only consider matrices
of which
elements on the first row and on the first column are zeros. We
denote
as the submatrix of
such that
(3)
and then write
.
V. CONSTRUCTION OF CODES FREE OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS
In this section, we give a general method to construct regular
LDPC codes free of a given collection of trapping sets. More
precisely, codes are constructed so that their Tanner graphs are
free of a given collection of subgraphs from the TSO. It is impor-
tant to note that our method of constructing codes free of small
trapping sets can also be applied to construct random codes, al-
though the complexity required to search for trapping sets would
be much higher. We organize our discussion by considering
two separate problems: 1) determining a collection of forbidden
subgraphs, i.e., which subgraphs that should be avoided in the
Tanner graph; and 2) constructing a Tanner graph which is free
of a given collection of subgraphs.
A. Determining the Collection of Forbidden Subgraphs
Let us give a general rationale for deciding which trapping
sets should be forbidden in the Tanner graph of a code. As pre-
viously mentioned, these trapping sets are chosen from the TSO.
It is clear that if a predecessor trapping set is not present in
a Tanner graph, then neither are its successors. Since the size
of a predecessor trapping set is always smaller than the size of
its successors, a code should be constructed so that it contains
as few small predecessor trapping sets as possible. However,
forbidding smaller trapping sets usually imposes stricter con-
straints on the Tanner graph, resulting in a large rate penalty.
This tradeoff between the rate and the choice of forbidden trap-
ping sets is also a tradeoff between the rate and the error-floor
performance. While an explicit formulation of this tradeoff is
difficult, a good choice of forbidden trapping sets requires the
analysis of decoder failures to reveal the relative harmfulness of
trapping sets. It has been pointed out that for the BSC, the slope
of the FER curve in the error-floor region depends on the size
of the smallest error patterns uncorrectable by the decoder [2].
We, therefore, introduce the notion of the relative harmfulness
of trapping sets in a general setting as follows.
Relative Harmfulness: Assume that under a given decoding
algorithm, a code is capable of correcting any error pattern of
weight
but fails to correct some error patterns of weight
.
If the failures of the decoders on error patterns of weight
are due to the presence of
trapping sets of type
, then
is the most harmful trapping set. Let us now assume that a
code is constructed so that it does not contain
trapping sets
and is capable of correcting any error pattern of weight
.
If the presence of
trapping sets of type
leads to de-
coding failure on some error patterns of weight
, then
is
the second most harmful trapping set. The relative harmfulness
of other trapping sets is determined in this manner.
Remarks: According to the previous discussion, a smaller
trapping set might not necessarily be more harmful than a larger
one. Besides, for two trapping sets with the same number of
variable nodes but with different number of odd-degree check
nodes, the one with the smaller number of odd-degree check
nodes might not necessarily be more harmful.
Example 7: Let us consider a regular column-weight-three
LDPC code of girth 8 on the BSC and assume the Gallager A/B
decoding algorithm. Since such a code can correct any error
pattern of weight two, we want to find subgraphs whose pres-
ence leads to decoding failure on some error pattern of weight
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
NGUYEN et al.: ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FREE OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS
2289
three. Since a code cannot correct all weight-three errors if its
Tanner graph either contains
trapping sets or contains
trapping sets, the most harmful trapping sets are the
trapping set and the
trapping set.
To further explain the importance of the notion of relative
harmfulness, let us slightly detour from our discussion and re-
visit the notion of erroneous sets. These are sets of variable
nodes that are not eventually correct. It is indeed possible, in
some cases, to identify some small erroneous sets in a code by
simulation, assuming the availability of a fast software/hard-
ware emulator. Unfortunately, erroneous sets identified in this
manner generally have little significance for code construction.
This is because the dynamics of an iterative decoder (except the
Gallager A/B decoder on the BSC) is usually very complex and
the mechanism by which the decoder fails into an erroneous sets
is difficult to analyze and is not well understood. Usually, the
subgraphs induced by the sets of noneventually correct variable
nodes are not the most harmful ones. Although avoiding sub-
graphs induced by sets of noneventually correct variable nodes
might lead to a lower error floor, the code rate may be exces-
sively reduced. A better solution is to increase the slope of the
FER curve with the fewest possible constraints on the Tanner
graph. This can only be done by avoiding the most harmful trap-
ping sets.
For the Gallager A/B algorithm on the BSC, the relative harm-
fulness of a trapping set is determined by its critical number.
Hence, there have been several works in the literature in which
the critical numbers of trapping sets are determined and codes
are constructed so that the most harmful trapping sets are elim-
inated. Examples of these works include [2], [29], [47], [48].
Nevertheless, determining the relative harmfulness of trapping
sets for other algorithms in general is a difficult problem. The
original concept of harmfulness of a trapping set can be found
in early works on LDPC codes as well as importance sampling
methods to analyze error floors. MacKay and Postol [36] were
the first to discover that certain “near codewords” are to be
blamed for the high error floor in the Margulis code on the
AWGNC. Richardson [1] reproduced their results and devel-
oped a computation technique to predict the performance of a
given LDPC code in the error-floor domain. He characterized
the troublesome noise configurations leading to the error floor
using trapping sets and described a technique (of Monte Carlo
importance sampling type) to evaluate the error rate associated
with a particular class of trapping sets. Cole et al. [49] further
developed the importance sampling-based method to analyze
error floors of moderate-length LDPC codes, while we used in-
stantons to predict error floors [16]–[18].
The main idea of our method is to determine the relative
harmfulness of trapping sets from the TSO for the SPA on the
BSC. It relies on the topological relationship among these trap-
ping sets and will be presented in Section VII. Before presenting
this method, we describe the construction of codes for the Gal-
lager A/B algorithm on the BSC in Section VI.
B. Construction of a Code by Progressively Building the
Tanner Graph
We now give an algorithm to progressively construct a
-regular LDPC code whose parity-check matrix is an
array of permutation matrices. Our construction algorithm is
inspired by the PEG algorithm [50] and the method in [27]. Let
be a
-regular LDPC code whose parity-check matrix
is an array of permutation matrices. The condition
that a Tanner graph is free of a given collection of subgraphs
can be understood as a set of constraints imposed on such a
Tanner graph. Assume that the Tanner graph
corresponding
to
is required to satisfy a set of constraints. Let
denote this
set of constraints.
The construction is based on a check and select-or-disregard
procedure. The Tanner graph of the code is built in
stages,
where
is the row weight of
(
is the number of columns
of
). Usually,
is not prespecified, and a code is constructed
with the goal of making the rate as high as possible. Although
for the class of codes under consideration, one can easily obtain
some good lower bounds on the rate, determining the maximum
possible rate is beyond the scope of this paper.
At each stage, a set of
new variable nodes are introduced
that are initially not connected to the check nodes of the Tanner
graph. Blocks of edges are then added to connect the new vari-
able nodes and the check nodes. Each block of edges corre-
sponds to a permutation matrix and hence corresponds to an el-
ement of
. An element of
may be chosen randomly, or it
may be chosen in a predetermined order. After a block of edges
is tentatively added, the Tanner graph is checked for condition
. If the condition
is violated, then that block of edges is re-
moved and replaced by a different block. The algorithm pro-
ceeds until no block of edges can be added without violating
condition
. Details of the construction are given in Algorithm
1. For mathematical convenience, we append a symbol
to the
quasi-group
and define
, the all-zero matrix of di-
mension
. Also, let
be a matrix of size
, where
is the column weight of the code to be constructed. All entries
of
are set to
.
Algorithm 1 Progressively Building the Tanner Graph
all-zero matrix;
while
do
while
do
if
then
else
if
satisfies
then
end if
end if
end while
end while
Delete the last column of
The complexity of the algorithm grows exponentially with
the column weight. The speed of a practical implementation of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2290
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012
the algorithm also depends strongly on how the condition
is
checked on a Tanner graph. However, for small column weights,
say 3 or 4, and small to moderate code lengths, the algorithm is
well handled by state-of-the-art computers. For example, with
the searching techniques described in Section III, the construc-
tion of a (790, 555) code which has girth 8, minimum distance at
least 12 and which does not contain either
or
trap-
ping sets takes less than 20 seconds on a 2.3 GHz computer.
Remarks:
1) It is worth mentioning that an alternative approach to the
previous construction based on a check and select-or-dis-
regard procedure is one in which a subgraph is described
by a system of linear equations. Elements of a given ma-
trix
are particular values of variables of these systems of
equations. The Tanner graph corresponding to
con-
tains the given subgraph if and only if elements of
form
a proper solution of at least one of these linear systems of
equations. For array LDPC codes, equations governing cy-
cles and several small subgraphs have been derived in [4]
and [34]. However, the problem of finding
such that its
elements do not form a proper solution of any of these sys-
tems of equations is notoriously difficult. In a recent work
[51], LDPC codes free of some absorbing sets were ana-
lytically constructed. However, that work only considers
a class of regular LDPC codes known as separable, circu-
lant-based codes and a limited number of small absorbing
sets.
2) Algorithm 1 can be alternatively described as a process
of progressively constructing an incidence structure. The
construction begins with an incidence structure consisting
of points with no lines. Blocks of parallel lines are then
added based on a check and select-or-disregard procedure,
similar as in [27] and [52].
3) One can easily come up with several variations of Algo-
rithm 1. An interesting problem is to find more sophisti-
cated algorithms which can result in codes with higher rate.
VI. LDPC CODES FOR THE GALLAGER A/B ALGORITHM ON
THE BSC
The error correction capability of regular column-weight-
three LDPC codes on the BSC decoded with the Gallager A/B
algorithm has been studied in [14], [15], and [47] and can be
summarized as follows.
1) A column-weight-three LDPC code with Tanner graph of
girth
cannot correct all
errors.
2) A column-weight-three LDPC code with Tanner graph of
girth
corrects all
errors.
3) A column-weight-three LDPC code with Tanner graph of
girth
can correct any two errors if and only if the
Tanner graph does not contain a codeword of weight four.
4) A column-weight-three LDPC code with Tanner graph of
girth
can correct any three errors if and only if a)
the Tanner graph does not contain
trapping sets,
and b) the Tanner graph does not contain
trapping
sets.
The aforementioned conditions completely determine the set
of constraints
to be imposed on the Tanner graph of a code
Fig. 10. FER performance of the Tanner code and code C under the Gallager
A/B algorithm on the BSC with maximum of 100 iterations.
to achieve a given error-floor performance. The necessary and
sufficient conditions to correct three errors were derived in [47].
These conditions require that the Tanner graph of the code has
girth
and does not contain
and
trapping set.
It is obvious that the
trapping set is indeed the
trapping set. The
trapping set should be understood as the
trapping set since it can be shown easily that the crit-
ical number of the
trapping set is 4. In the following
example, we present the construction of a code which can cor-
rect three errors.
Example 8 (Correct All Weight-Three Errors): Let us con-
sider the (155, 64) Tanner code [53]. This code is a (3, 5)-regular
LDPC code. Its Tanner graph contains
trapping sets
and hence cannot correct three errors under the Gallager A/B
algorithm on the BSC. Let
and
be a primitive element
of
. Let
be an LDPC code defined by the parity-check
matrix
where
is a (155, 64) LDPC code with girth
and min-
imum distance
. The Tanner graph of
contains no
trapping sets. Therefore,
is capable of correcting
any three-error pattern under the Gallager A/B algorithm on the
BSC. The FER performance of
under the Gallager A/B al-
gorithm for a maximum of 100 iterations is shown in Fig. 10.
The FER performance of the Tanner code is also shown for
comparison.
In a similar manner, codes that can be guaranteed to correct
more errors can be constructed.
We end this section with a discussion on the harmfulness of
two trapping sets, say
and
, which have the same critical
number
. To compare the harmfulness of
and
, we use the
notion of an inducing set of a trapping set defined as follows.
Definition 6: An inducing set of size
of a trapping set
is a set of
variable nodes such that if these variable nodes are
initially in error then the Gallager A/B decoder will fail on a
trapping set
of type
.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
NGUYEN et al.: ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FREE OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS
2291
With this definition, the harmfulness of
and
having
common critical number
is compared as follows:
is more
harmful than
if the number of inducing sets of size
of
is
larger than the number of inducing sets of size
of
(see [20]
for a more detailed discussion). This concept is demonstrated
by the following example.
Example 9: The
,
, and
trapping sets
all have critical number
. The number of inducing sets of
size 4 of the
and
trapping sets is 1, while for
the
trapping set, it is 2. Consequently, the
trapping set is more harmful than the
trapping set and the
trapping set. We now construct a code which can cor-
rect three errors and which is also free of the
trapping
set.
Let
and
be a primitive element of
. Let
be
an LDPC code defined by the parity-check matrix
where
is a (265, 108) LDPC code with girth
and minimum
distance
. The Tanner graph of
is free of
and
trapping sets. The FER performance of
under the Gal-
lager A/B algorithm for a maximum of 100 iterations is shown
in Fig. 10. For comparison, we also show the FER performance
of a code which is labeled in the plot as “IES 2-lifting.” It is a
(310, 126) LDPC code which is constructed from two copies of
the Tanner code by the internal edge swapping (IES) algorithm
[48]. It can be seen that although the length of
is about 15%
shorter than the length of the IES 2-lifting code, the slope of the
FER curves of both codes is 4 and
has a slightly better perfor-
mance in the error-floor region. This indicates that the number
of weight-four error patterns that the IES 2-lifting code fails to
correct is larger than the number of weight-four error patterns
that
fails to correct.
VII. LDPC CODES FOR THE SPA ON THE BSC
In this section, we present the construction of regular
column-weight-three codes for the SPA on the BSC. The main
element of the construction is the determination of the set of
most harmful trapping sets. Following the discussion of the
notion of relative harmfulness in Section V-A, we approach this
problem as follows.
Let us consider an LDPC code
and assume that
can cor-
rect any error pattern of weight
under the SPA on the BSC. We
are interested in determining the trapping sets whose presence
leads to decoding failure on error patterns of weight
. To
simplify this problem, we only focus on initial error patterns of
weight
that surely lead to decoding failures of the Gallager
A/B algorithms on the BSC. The basis for this simplification is
as follows. Since it is well known that the SPA algorithm has
a superior performance in both the waterfall and the error-floor
regions compared to that of the Gallager A/B algorithm, we sur-
mise that an error pattern correctable by the Gallager A/B algo-
rithm is correctable with high probability by the SPA algorithm,
although this fact remains unproven. The initial error patterns of
weight
that are surely uncorrectable by the Gallager A/B
algorithm can be easily derived from the TSO.
Assume the transmission of the all-zero codeword and let
be the received vector input to the decoder. Also, assume that
, a trapping set of type
from the TSO with
variable nodes. In other words, all the
initially corrupt
variable nodes belong to the trapping set
. This error pattern
results in a decoding failure of the Gallager A/B algorithm and
hence is an initial error pattern of interest. As the decoder oper-
ates by passing messages along the edges of the Tanner graph,
the decoding outcome depends heavily on the immediate neigh-
borhood of the subgraph induced by variable nodes in
. In
many cases, a decoding failure of the SPA will only occur if
generates a trapping set
of type
, where
is a successor
of
. In such cases, the presence of
in a code makes it in-
capable of correcting any error pattern of size
, and hence,
is a harmful trapping set.
To evaluate the harmfulness of the
trapping set, all ini-
tial error patterns that consist of variable nodes of a
trapping
set must be considered. Let
be the set of all trapping sets
of type
. Partition
into two disjoint sets
and
such that a trapping set
in
generates at least one
trap-
ping set while a trapping set
in
does not generate any
trapping set. For each trapping set
, perform decoding
on the input vector
where
, at a cross-over
probability
of the channel. Let
be the set of trapping sets
such that decoding is successful upon error pattern
.
Define
and
to be the rate of successful decoding for
trapping sets in
and
at the cross-over probability
of
the channel as follows:
(4)
(5)
The harmfulness of
trapping sets of
is evaluated by com-
paring
and
for a wide range of . The larger the dif-
ference
, the more harmful
trapping sets are.
The harmfulness of
trapping sets is also compared with the
harmfulness of other successor trapping sets of
, which is de-
termined in the same fashion.
We note that this characterization of relative harmfulness, al-
though heuristic, plays a critical role in the construction of good
high-rate codes as no explicit quantification of harmfulness of
trapping sets is known. This characterization of harmfulness
also helps a code designer to determine more or less the exact
subgraphs that are responsible for a certain type of decoding
failure. It is, therefore, superior to searching for trapping sets
by simulation.
We continue our discussion with three case studies in which
we evaluate 1) the relative harmfulness of the
and
trapping sets, 2) the relative harmfulness of the
trapping set, and 3) the relative harmfulness of the
,
,
and
trapping sets. For a better illustration of the rela-
tionship among these trapping sets, a hierarchy of trapping sets
of interest originating from the
trapping set is shown in
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2292
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012
Fig. 11. Hierarchy of trapping sets of interest originating from the (4; 4) trap-
ping set for regular column-weight-three codes of girth 8.
Fig. 11. For the first case, we present a detailed analysis. For
the other two cases, we only give the results of the analysis. The
analysis to be presented is a step toward the guaranteed correc-
tion of four, five, and six errors under the SPA on the BSC. For
simplicity, we assume that codes have girth
in all exam-
ples, although the method of construction can be applied to girth
6 codes which would likely result in higher rate codes.
A. Harmfulness of the
and
Trapping Sets
Since we consider codes with girth
, let us mention an
existing code of such girth. Consider the (530, 373) integer lat-
tice code (or shortened array code [4]) given in [27]. This code
has minimum distance
and, hence, is unable to correct
all weight-four error patterns. Clearly, the first step toward the
guaranteed correction of four errors is to eliminate the
,
, and
trapping sets, which are the low-weight
codewords. We, therefore, construct a code with minimum dis-
tance
. Let
and let
be a primitive element
of
and let
specify that the Tanner graph of a code has
girth
and contains no
,
and
trapping sets. Using the method of construction described in
Section V-B, we obtain a regular column-weight-three code
with parity-check matrix
where
is a (530, 373) code. Similar to the aforementioned integer
lattice code,
has column weight 3, row weight 10 and rate
.
The Tanner graph of
contains 17 066
trapping sets.
We partition the collection of
trapping sets into nine dis-
joint sets
based on whether a
trapping
TABLE I
DISJOINT SETS OF (4; 4) TRAPPING SETS IN THE LDPC CODE C . A
INDICATES THAT THE (4; 4) TRAPPING SETS IN
GENERATE AT LEAST
ONE CORRESPONDING TRAPPING SET
set generates
,
,
or
trapping sets.
Note that, for simplicity, we do not differentiate among different
and
trapping sets in this analysis, although a more
detailed treatment may reveal some differences in the harmful-
ness of those trapping sets. The classification and sizes of dif-
ferent sets of
trapping sets are shown in Table I.
To evaluate the harmfulness of the
,
,
, and
trapping sets, we perform decoding on all
input vectors
where
, a
trapping set
of
. The result is as follows. For the trapping sets in
,
,
, and
, the decoder successfully decodes all input
vectors
at all 250 values of
that have been considered,
i.e.,
. For the
trapping sets in
,
,
,
, and
, the rate of successful
decoding is shown in the form of a histogram in Fig. 12. As an
example of how to interpret the result, consider the trapping
sets in
. It can be seen that there are about 160 values (65%
of all tested values) of
at which decoding is successful for all
input vectors
. For about 90 values (30% of all tested values)
of , decoding is successful for approximately nine out of ten
input vectors
.
The following facts can be observed.
1) The
trapping sets in
,
, and
do not gen-
erate either
or
trapping sets. The rate of
successful decoding is 100% for all tested values of .
2) The
trapping sets in
,
, and
generate at
least one
trapping set. Decoding is not always suc-
cessful, but the rate of successful decoding is more than
90% for all tested values of .
3) The
trapping sets in
generate at least one
trapping set. The rate of successful decoding
is significantly lower in general compared to
,
, and
.
4) The
trapping sets in
generate at least one
and one
trapping set. The rate of suc-
cessful decoding
is lowest in general.
5) The
trapping sets in
generate at least one
trapping set, while the ones in
do not. In
general,
.
6) The
trapping sets in
generate at least one
trapping set while the ones in
do not. In general,
.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
NGUYEN et al.: ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FREE OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS
2293
Fig. 12. Rate of successful decoding for different sets of (4; 4) trapping sets in code C .
7) The
trapping sets in
generate at least one
trapping set, while the ones in
do not.
for all tested values of .
The aforementioned observations strongly suggest that both
and
trapping sets are harmful. However, the
harmfulness of the
trapping set is much more evident
than the harmfulness of the
trapping set. Besides, it is
interesting to notice that
for all tested values of .
All
trapping sets in
generate at least one
trapping
set, one
trapping set, and one
trapping set. In
this case, the presence of
trapping sets seem to increase
the rate of successful decoding. This “positive” effect of
trapping sets can also be seen when comparing
and
.
Finally, by comparing
and
, it is suggestive that the
trapping sets have some negative effect on decoding if
the
trapping sets generate
and
trapping sets.
To further verify our prediction on the harmfulness of the
and
trapping sets, we construct another code
with the same parameters as those of
. We denote this code
by
. The Tanner graph of
has stronger constraints than the
Tanner graph of
as we impose that it has neither
nor
trapping sets. Since
trapping sets are not present,
has minimum distance of at least 12.
Let
be defined by the parity-check matrix
where
The Tanner graph of
contains 16483
trapping sets,
which can be partitioned into four disjoint sets as shown in
Table II.
We again perform decoding on all input vectors
where
, a
trapping set of
. The rate of suc-
cessful decoding for trapping sets in
and
is shown in
the form of a histogram in Fig. 13. For trapping sets in
and
, decoding is always successful.
It can be seen that the results are consistent with the previ-
ously obtained results. Decoding is always successful for the
trapping sets which generate neither
nor
TABLE II
TYPES OF (4; 4) TRAPPING SETS IN THE (530, 373) LDPC CODE C
Fig. 13. Rate of successful decoding for different sets of (4; 4) trapping sets
in code C .
trapping sets. Besides,
, in general, since the
trapping sets in
do not generate
trapping
sets. These results validate our prediction on the harmfulness of
successors of the
trapping set. We have repeated the ex-
periment for a collection of codes whose Tanner graphs do not
contain either
or
trapping sets. The consistency
of the results led us to the following conjecture.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2294
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012
Fig. 14. FER performance of codes in Example 10 under the SPA on the BSC.
Conjecture 1: A regular column-weight-three code of girth
can correct any error pattern of weight 4 consisting of
variable nodes of an eight-cycle under the SPA on the BSC if its
Tanner graph contains neither
nor
trapping sets.
We remark that this conjecture only gives a sufficient condi-
tion. A code may correct any error pattern of weight 4 even if its
Tanner graph contains
trapping sets. For example, con-
sidertheTannercodeoflength155.TheTannergraphofthiscode
doesnotcontaina
trappingset,butitcontains
trapping sets. However, decoding is always successful for all the
trapping sets at any value of . It might be possible to find a
better sufficient condition by taking into account larger trapping
sets, but such an analysis appears to be difficult.
Example 10: The FER performance of
,
, and the (530,
373) integer lattice code under the SPA with 100 iterations on
the BSC is shown in Fig. 14. For comparison, Fig. 14 also shows
the FER performance of a (530, 373) LDPC code constructed
using the PEG algorithm [50]. This PEG code has girth
and minimum distance
. Clearly,
, whose Tanner
graph is free of
trapping sets, has the best performance.
Although the Tanner graph of
contains some
trapping
sets, it still outperforms the PEG code. The integer lattice code
has the worst performance although it has girth
.
Example 11: Let
and let
be defined by the parity-
check matrix
where
Fig. 15. FER performance of codes in Example 11 under the SPA on the BSC.
is a (810, 569) code with column weight 3, row weight 10,
and rate
. The Tanner graph of
has girth
and
does not contain either
or
trapping sets. The FER
performance of
under the SPA with 100 iterations on the BSC
is shown in Fig. 15. For comparison, Fig. 15 also shows the FER
performance of a (810, 567) PEG constructed code. This code
has girth
. It can be seen that
has a lower floor than the
PEG code.
B. Harmfulness of the
Trapping Set
Assuming the guaranteed correction of four errors, we are
now interested in finding trapping sets whose presence leads to
decoding failure on some error patterns of weight five. There
are two trapping sets with five variable nodes from the TSO that
can be present in the Tanner graph of a regular column-weight-
three LDPC code with girth
: the
trapping set
and the
trapping set. The result of our analysis indicates
that
trapping sets are the most harmful and should be
forbidden in the Tanner graph of a code.
Example 12: Let
and let
be defined by the
parity-check matrix
where
is given in (6), as
shown at the bottom of the page.
is a (3165, 2554) code
with column weight 3, row weight 15, and rate
. The
Tanner graph of
has girth
and does not contain ei-
ther
or
trapping sets. The FER performance of
under the SPA with 100 iterations on the BSC is shown in
(6)
(7)
(8)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
NGUYEN et al.: ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FREE OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS
2295
Fig. 16. FER performance of codes in Example 12 under the SPA on the BSC.
Fig. 16. For comparison, Fig. 16 also shows the FER perfor-
mance of a (3150, 2520) regular QC LDPC code4 constructed
using array masking proposed in [46]. The parity-check matrix
of this code is a 10
50 array of 63
63 circulants or zero ma-
trices, which has column weight 3 and row weight 15. This code
has girth
. It can be seen that
has a lower error floor
than the code constructed using array masking.
C. Harmfulness of
,
, and
Trapping Sets
With the previous results, we now consider codes free of
and
trapping sets and aim for the guaranteed
correction of six errors. To guarantee the correction of six er-
rors, codes must have minimum distances
. In other
words, their Tanner graphs should be free of
trapping sets
. Similar to the previous discussions, we analyze error
patterns of weight six, focusing on those consisting of variable
nodes of a trapping set. There are three trapping sets of size
6 from the TSO that can be present in the Tanner graph of a
regular column-weight-three LDPC code with girth
: the
trapping set,
trapping set and the
trap-
ping set. The results of our analysis and experiments suggest that
the following trapping sets are harmful (in decreasing order of
harmfulness):
1) The
trapping set and the
trapping set.
2) The
trapping sets which are successors of the
trapping sets below.
3) The
trapping sets which are successors of the
,
, and
trapping sets (see
Fig. 11 for an illustration of the relationship among these
trapping sets).
Example 13: Let
and let
be defined by the
parity-check matrix
where
is given in (7).
is
a (2388, 1793) code with column weight 3, row weight 12, and
rate
. The Tanner graph of
has girth
and con-
tains neither
trapping sets nor
trapping sets, nor
4A QC code is a structured code whose parity-check matrix can be represented
as an array of circulants.
Fig. 17. FER performance of codes in Example 13 under the SPA on the BSC.
Fig. 18. FER performance of codes in Example 14 under the SPA on the BSC.
the
trapping sets that are generated by either
,
, or
trapping sets. The FER performance of
under the SPA with 100 iterations on the BSC is shown in
Fig. 17. For comparison, Fig. 17 also shows the FER perfor-
mance of a (3150, 2518) PEG code. This code has girth
.
It can be seen that
has a lower error floor than the PEG code.
Example 14: Let
and let
be defined by a parity-
check matrix
where
is shown in (8).
is a
(4381, 3372) code with column weight 3, row weight 13, and
rate
. The Tanner graph of
has girth
and
does contain either
or
trapping sets and neither
does it contain
trapping sets that are generated by either
,
or
trapping sets. The FER perfor-
mance of
under the SPA with 100 iterations on the BSC is
shown in Fig. 18. For comparison, Fig. 18 also shows the FER
performance of a (4381, 3370) PEG code. This code has girth
. It can be seen that
has a lower error floor than that of
the PEG code.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2296
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012
Fig. 19. FER performance of codes in Example 12 under the SPA on the
AWGNC.
VIII. DISCUSSION
Although the codes presented in this paper are optimized for
the BSC, they also have excellent performance on the AWGNC.
As a demonstration, we show the FER performance of the code
from Example 12 under the SPA on the AWGNC in Fig. 19.
Recall that the Tanner graph of
has girth
and does not
contain
and
trapping sets and that the (3150,
2520) regular QC LDPC code was constructed using array
masking as proposed in [46]. It can be seen that although
was constructed for the BSC, it outperforms the other code,
which was constructed for the AWGNC.
It can be noticed that in most of the examples in this paper, we
compare the performance of the newly constructed codes with
PEG codes. It is worth mentioning that many improved versions
of the PEG construction exist in the literature. However, many
of these works deal with irregular codes. In other works, codes
with rate
and block length
(or
)
were usually constructed and their simulated performance was
shown in comparison with that of the PEG codes or the MacKay
random codes of the same length. We remark that codes of this
rate and length obtained from our construction can be made free
of many harmful trapping sets. The following code serves as an
example.
Let
and let
be a primitive element of
. Also,
let
specify that the Tanner graph of a code has girth
and
contains no
,
,
, and
trapping sets.
Using the method of construction described in Section V-B, we
obtain a regular column-weight-three code
with parity-check
matrix
where
is a (498, 247) code with column weight 3, row weight 6, and
rate
. The Tanner graph of
contains 332
trapping sets but contains no other
trapping sets with
and
. Fig. 20 shows the FER performance of
under
Fig. 20. FER performance of a rate-0.5 code under the SPA on the AWGNC.
the SPA on the AWGNC in comparison with the performance
of the PEG code of length
[37]. It can be seen that
has a lower error floor than the PEG code.
It should also be noted that while the method of removing
trapping sets in this paper is applied to codes whose parity-check
matrices are based on permutation matrices, there are other
approaches to define a parity-check matrix of a structured
LDPC code. They include finite geometries [54], balanced
incomplete block designs [52], [55], protographs [56], Cayley
graphs [57], [58], shortened Reed Solomon codes [59], and
algebraic structures [26], [46], [53], [60], [61], to name the
most popular ones. Some codes obtained by these constructions
are equivalent (more on relationships among structured codes
can be found in [62], [63], and the recent work [64]). Most of
the aforementioned constructions only ensure that the Tanner
graphs of codes are free of four cycles. Although a neces-
sary and sufficient condition for a QC code to have a certain
girth was derived in [53] and [65], the search for a code that
satisfies this condition is computationally challenging. Some
constructions also give codes with other desirable properties.
Examples include codes constructed using Cayley graphs and
protograph-based codes. If a code is constructed using Cayley
graphs, then its Tanner graph has good local-girth distribution.
On the other hand, the local neighborhood of a variable node
in the Tanner graph of a protograph-based code is completely
determined by the template protograph. Protograph-based
codes can be made to have desirable symmetries [66] and can
be encoded very efficiently [67].
To summarize, in this paper, we propose a construction of
structured regular column-weight-three LDPC codes free of
certain small trapping sets. The construction relies on the TSO,
the method of searching for trapping sets and the evaluation
of the relative harmfulness of different trapping sets. The
feasibility of our construction is provided by the fact that the
column weight is small. Generalizing our method to construct
higher column-weight codes and irregular codes is possible but
is complicated due to the exponential increase in the number of
trapping sets as well as much higher complexity of the search
algorithms. A large database of trapping sets with complicated
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
NGUYEN et al.: ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FREE OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS
2297
topological relationships will also make it more complex to an-
alyze failures of the decoder on one subgraph in the presence or
absence of other topologically related subgraphs. Consequently,
determining the relative harmfulness of different subgraphs
might also be difficult. Nevertheless, our method might still be
applicable to construct structured regular column-weight-four
codes. Future research problems include the construction of
such codes. This problem requires the derivation of a TSO for
regular column-weight-four codes. Its feasibility also depends
greatly on whether trapping sets can be enumerated and stored.
As the search for new trapping sets after a block of columns
is added only involves one new variable node (due to the use
of the structural property of the code), its complexity might be
well handled by state-of-the-art computers.
APPENDIX A
IMPLEMENTATION OF TECHNIQUES OF SEARCHING FOR
TRAPPING SETS
In this appendix, we provide details on the techniques of
searching for trapping sets. We begin by defining some simple
subroutines that will be used in the search. Then, we discuss the
technique to enumerate cycles. We continue by presenting the
techniques to search for
trapping sets and
trapping sets that are generated by
trapping sets. Then,
we discuss how the structural properties of a code can be used
to reduce the complexity of the search. Finally, we give some
remarks.
1) Subroutines: We assume that the following simple sub-
routines are used in our search algorithms.
a)
.
Let
and
be matrices with integer elements.
is a
matrix with two columns. If
is a row of
then the
th row of
and the
th row of
share
common
entries.
b)
.
Let
be the parity-check matrix corresponding to a
Tanner graph
of an LDPC code. Let
be a matrix
with each row of
giving a set of variable nodes, i.e.,
elements in each row of
form a subset of
. Assume
that all the subgraphs induced by variable nodes in rows
of
have the same number of odd-degree check nodes.
is a matrix with the same number of rows as
. Ele-
ments of the th row of
are odd-degree check nodes
in the subgraph induced by the variable nodes in the th
row of
.
c)
.
Let
be the parity-check matrix corresponding to a
Tanner graph
. Let
be a matrix whose elements are
variable nodes in
, i.e., elements of
are members of
.
is a one-column matrix with the same number of
rows as
. The element in the th row of
is the number
of check nodes with degree
in the subgraph induced by
the variable nodes in the th row of
.
d)
.
Let
be the parity-check matrix corresponding to a
Tanner graph
. Let
be a matrix whose elements are
variable nodes in
.
is a one-column matrix with the
TABLE III
NUMBER OF CYCLES OF SEVERAL LDPC CODES AND RUN-TIME OF THE
CYCLE SEARCHING ALGORITHM ON A 2.3-GHZ COMPUTER
same number of rows as
. The element in the th row
of
is 1 if the variable nodes in the th row of
form a
trapping set and is 0 otherwise.
The aforementioned subroutines can be implemented using
simple sparse matrix operations and, hence, are of low com-
plexity.
2) Searching for Cycles of Length
: Since every trapping
set contains at least one cycle, the search for trapping sets al-
ways starts with finding cycles in the Tanner graph. All cycles
of length
that contain variable node
can be found by per-
forming the following steps.
1) Find all the paths of length
from each neighbor of
such that these paths do not contain
. The set of such
paths that originate from the th neighbor of
is denoted
by
. It can be shown that
where
2) For every pair of paths
,
, and
,
determine if they have only one common node and if they
end with the same node. If so, then a cycle of length
has
been found. This cycle is induced by the union of the sets of
variable nodes in
, in
, and
. The maximum number
of possible pairs
,
is
.
The two steps described previously are executed for every
variable node. To further simplify the search, after all the cycles
containing
are found,
can be marked so that all the paths
containing
are eliminated in Step 1 of the search at another
variable node
. The complexity of searching for cycles is pro-
portional to the maximum number of pairs
,
and, hence, is
polynomial in the degree of the variable nodes and check nodes
for a given
. However, as Step 1 and Step 2 are performed re-
peatedly for every variable nodes, the complexity increases only
linearly in the code length. Note that our search algorithm not
only counts the number of cycles but also records the variable
nodes that each cycle contains. For this reason, existing efficient
algorithms to count the number of cycles in a bipartite graph
(for example, those proposed in [68] and [69]) cannot be ap-
plied directly.
Example 15: To illustrate the search algorithm, we list the
number of cycles in some popular codes, as well as the run-times
of the algorithm on a 2.6-GHz computer in Table III.
3) Searching for
Trapping Sets Generated
by
Trapping Sets: Let
be an
trapping set,
be
an
trapping set and let
be a predecessor of
.
Further, let
be a trapping set of type
in the Tanner graph
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2298
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012
of a code
and assume that
generates a trapping set
of
type
. As discussed in Section II,
is obtained by adjoining
one variable node to
. The line–point representation of
is
obtained by merging two black-shaded nodes in the line–point
representation of
with two
nodes in Fig. 3(b). Therefore,
to search for
, it is sufficient to search for a variable node
that is connected to two odd-degree check nodes in the subgraph
induced by variable nodes in
.
Let
be a matrix such that each row of
contains variable
nodes of a
trapping set in the Tanner graph
.
is the parity-
check matrix which defines
. All
trapping sets can be found
by performing the following steps.
1) Find all odd-degree check nodes of all
trapping sets:
.
2) Form
, a one-column matrix with
rows where the el-
ement in the th row is variable node .
3) Form a matrix
whose
th row gives all check
nodes neighboring to the variable node
:
.
4) Find all pairs
such that the
th row of
and the
th row of
share 2 common entries:
.
5) If
is the th row of
, adjoin variable node
to the
th row of
to form the th row of
.
6) Determine the number of degree one check nodes in the
subgraph induced by variable nodes in each row of
and eliminate the rows of
that do not have
degree one check nodes, to obtain a matrix
. Each
row of
now contains variable nodes that induce a
trapping set in the Tanner graph of the code.
.
4) Searching for
Trapping Sets Generated by
Trapping Sets: Let
be an
trapping set,
be
an
trapping set and let
be a predecessor of
.
Further, let
be a trapping set of type
in the Tanner graph
of a code
and assume that
generates a trapping set
of
type
. Consider two variable nodes that share a check node.
As discussed in Section II,
is obtained by adjoining these
two variable nodes to
. The line–point representation of
is
obtained by merging two black-shaded nodes in the line–point
representation of
with two
nodes in Fig. 3(c). Therefore,
to search for
, it is sufficient to search for a pair of variable
nodes that share a common neighboring check node and each
node is connected to one odd-degree check node in the subgraph
induced by variable nodes in
.
The search for
trapping sets is very similar to the
search for
trapping sets described in the previous
subsection. In particular, the following modifications should be
made.
1) In Step 2,
is a two column matrix, each row contains
a pair of variable nodes that share a common neighboring
check node.
2) In Step 3, the th row of
gives all degree one check
nodes in the subgraph induced by variable nodes in the th
row of
.
3) In Step 5, variable nodes in the th row of
are adjoined
to the th row of
.
4) In Step 6,
is replaced by .
Since Step 4 does not take into account the case in which
two check nodes of a new variable node are merged with two
odd-degree check nodes of
, the subroutine IsTrappingSet
is used afterward to eliminate rows of
that do not contain
variable nodes that form a trapping set.
5) Using the Structural Property to Reduce the Complexity
of the Search Algorithms: We discuss how to use the prop-
erty of a structured LDPC code to reduce the complexity of the
search algorithms. Let
be a structured LDPC code defined in
Section IV with a Tanner graph representation
and a corre-
sponding parity-check matrix
. To facilitate the discussion,
we assume that the quasi-group
is a cyclic group. Then,
is
a QC LDPC code and
can be represented as an array of cir-
culant permutation matrices, i.e.,
takes the following form:
...
...
...
...
...
where
is a circulant permutation matrix of size
for
,
.
Let
be a function from
to
defined
as follows:
where
and
are the quotient and remainder after the
division of
by , respectively.
From properties of the parity-check matrix
, one can show
the following.
Quasi-cyclicity property: Let
be a subset of variable nodes, then the subgraph in-
duced by all the variable nodes in
is isormorphic
to the subgraph induced by all the variable nodes in
,
.
Now we can use this property to reduce the complexity of the
search algorithms. Let
be a trapping set of type
which is
present in the Tanner graph of a code
. Then, one can obtain
other type
trapping sets, namely
, by
shifting variable nodes of
using the map
. Assume that we
want to find all trapping sets of type
by expanding trapping
sets
. Instead of expanding every single
trapping set, one can choose to expand only one trapping set
in the set
to obtain
trapping sets.
The map
can then be used on the variable nodes of the ob-
tained type
trapping sets to obtain the other type
trapping
sets. This significantly reduces the complexity of the search al-
gorithms since the complexity of expanding a trapping set is
much greater than the complexity of shifting variable nodes.
6) Remarks: The aforementioned search procedures may
not differentiate among different
trapping sets. For ex-
ample, all
and
trapping sets are found if they
are searched for as trapping sets generated by the
trap-
ping sets. Similarly, all
and
trapping sets
are found as being generated by the
trapping sets. If
searching for a specific type of trapping set is required, then it is
necessary to further analyze the induced subgraph. For example,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
NGUYEN et al.: ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FREE OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS
2299
TABLE IV
NUMBER OF CYCLES AND TRAPPING SETS OF THE TANNER CODE AND
RUN-TIME OF THE SEARCHING ALGORITHMS ON A 2.3-GHZ COMPUTER
TABLE V
NUMBER OF CYCLES AND TRAPPING SETS OF THE CODE C
AND RUN-TIME OF
THE SEARCHING ALGORITHMS ON A 2.3-GHZ COMPUTER
notice that the
trapping set is a union of a six-cycle and
an eight-cycle, sharing two variable nodes while the
trapping set is a union of two eight-cycles, sharing three vari-
able nodes. Therefore, to search for all
trapping sets
from a list of
trapping sets, one would find all pairs of
trapping sets that share three variable nodes, using the
RowIntersectIndex subroutine. The union of each pair of
trapping sets is then a set of five variable nodes. Each set of vari-
able nodes forms a
trapping set if its induced subgraph
contains three degree one check nodes. Similarly, all
trapping sets can be found by noticing that they are unions of
two
trapping sets, sharing five variable nodes.
Example 16: We end this section by giving the statistics
of small trapping sets present in the popular Tanner code (see
Table IV) as well as in the code
(see Table V), which was
given in Section VII. We also give the running times of the al-
gorithms for two different cases: 1) the structural property of
the code is not utilized; and 2) the structural property of the
code is utilized. All the searches were performed on a 2.3-GHz
computer.
APPENDIX B
PROOF OF LEMMA 1
We prove that the incidence structures formed by the
new
lines must be one of those listed in Fig. 3. For
or
,
the proof is trivial and all possible incidence structures are listed
in Fig. 3(a)–(c). For
, we divide the proof into two cases.
Case 1: The incidence structure formed by the
new lines
does not contain any cycle: We first argue that no line can
pass through three white-shaded points. To see this, assume that
Fig. 21. Figures used in the proof of Lemma 1.
at least one line passes through three white-shaded points, as
demonstrated in Fig. 21(a). Then, the merging of the incidence
structure formed by the
new lines with the line–point repre-
sentation of
can be divided into two steps, as demonstrated
in Fig. 21(b) and (c). Consequently, the resulting trapping set is
not a direct successor of
.
We also argue that if a line passes through two white-shaded
points, then the third point cannot be a
point. This is because
the merging of the incidence structure listed in Fig. 21(d)
with
can be divided into two steps, as demonstrated in
Fig. 21(e) and (f). Besides, a line can pass through at most one
black-shaded point. As a result, the incidence structure formed
by the
new lines can only be the one listed in Fig. 3(e) (or in
Fig. 3(d) if
).
Case 2: The incidence structure formed by the
new
lines contains at least one cycle: We first argue that only
one of those lines that form a cycle can pass through three
white-shaded points or pass through two white-shaded points
and a
point. The other lines must pass through exactly two
white-shaded points and one black-shaded point. Otherwise,
the merging of the incidence structure formed by the
new
lines with the line–point representation of
can be divided into
two steps. For example, the merging of the incidence structure
listed in Fig. 21(g) with
can be divided into two steps, as
demonstrated in Fig. 21(h) and (i).
Second, the lines that are not part of a cycle can neither pass
through three white-shaded points nor pass through two white-
shaded points and a
point. The explanation for this is similar
to the explanation found in case 1.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2300
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012
Finally, we argue that there can be at most one cycle. To see
this, assume that there are two cycles. Since only one of the lines
that form a cycle can pass through three white-shaded points,
the incidence structure formed by the
new lines must have the
form as listed in Fig. 21(j). However, since the lines that are not
part of any cycle can neither pass through three white-shaded
points nor pass through two white-shaded points and a
point,
there cannot be any
point in the incidence structure formed
by the
new lines, which is a contradiction.
Consequently, all possible structures formed by the
new
lines are listed in Fig. 3(l).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors highly appreciate the constructive comments and
suggestions made by the anonymous reviewers and especially
by the associate editor P. Vontobel. The work of S. K. Chi-
lappagari was performed when he was with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona,
Tucson.
REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu.
Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 1–3,
2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[2] M. Ivkovic, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Trapping sets in low-
density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.
[3] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke,
“Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the bi-
nary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp.
1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[4] O. Milenkovic, N. Kashyap, and D. Leyba, “Shortened array codes of
large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3707–3722,
Aug. 2006.
[5] Y. Wang, J. S. Yedidia, and S. C. Draper, “Construction of high-girth
QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Top.,
Lausanne, Switzerland, Sep. 1–5, 2008, pp. 180–185.
[6] S. Kim, J.-S. No, H. Chung, and D.-J. Shin, “Quasi-cyclic low-density
parity-check codes with girth larger than 12,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, vol. 53, pp. 2885–2891.
[7] J. Lu, J. M. F. Moura, and U. Niesen, “Grouping-and-shifting designs
for structured LDPC codes with large girth,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun. 27–Jul. 2 2004, pp. 236–236.
[8] Y.-K. Lin, C.-L. Chen, Y.-C. Liao, and H.-C. Chang, “Structured
LDPC codes with low error floor based on PEG Tanner graphs,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Seattle, WA, May 18–21, 2008,
pp. 1846–1849.
[9] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[10] S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, B. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin,
“On trapping sets and guaranteed error correction capability of LDPC
codes and GLDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp.
1600–1611, Apr. 2010.
[11] C. A. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4013–4038, Nov. 2007.
[12] S.-T. Xia and F.-W. Fu, “Minimum pseudoweight and minimum pseu-
docodewords of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 1,
pp. 480–485, Jan. 2008.
[13] A. Orlitsky, R. Urbanke, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping sets
and the girth of Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory,
Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun. 30–Jul. 5 2002, p. 2.
[14] S. K. Chilappagari and B. Vasic, “Error-correction capability of
column-weight-three LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55,
no. 5, pp. 2055–2061, May 2009.
[15] S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, B. V. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin,
“Error correction capability of column-weight-three LDPC codes
under the Gallager A algorithm—Part II,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 2626–2639, Jun. 2010.
[16] M. G. Stepanov, V. Chernyak, M. Chertkov, and B. Vasic, “Diagnosis
of weaknesses in modern error correction codes: A physics approach,”
Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 95, no. 22, pp. 228701–228704, Nov. 2005.
[17] V. Chernyak, M. Chertkov, M. G. Stepanov, and B. Vasic, “Error cor-
rection on a tree: An instanton approach,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 93, no.
19, pp. 198702–198705, Nov. 2004.
[18] V. Chernyak, M. Chertkov, M. G. Stepanov, and B. Vasic, “Instanton
method of post-error-correction analytical evaluation,” in Proc. IEEE
Inf. Theory Workshop, San Antonio, TX, Oct. 24–29, 2004, pp.
220–224.
[19] S. K. Chilappagari, M. Chertkov, M. G. Stepanov, and B. Vasic, “In-
stanton-based techniques for analysis and reduction of error floors of
LDPC codes,” IEEE JSAC Capacity Approach. Codes, vol. 27, no. 6,
pp. 855–865, Aug. 2009.
[20] B. Vasic, S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, and S. K. Planjery, “Trap-
ping set ontology,” in Proc. 47th Allerton Conf. Commun., Control,
Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 30–Oct. 2 2009, pp. 1–7.
[21] Trapping Set Ontology [Online]. Available: http://www.ece.arizona.
edu/~vasiclab/Projects/CodingTheory/TrappingSetOntology.html
2009
[22] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic,
“Analysis of absorbing sets for array-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Commun., Glasgow, Scotland, Jun. 24–29, 2007, pp. 6261–6268.
[23] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of
quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[24] C.-H. Liu, C.-C. Lin, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee,
Y.-S. Hsu, and S.-J. Jou, “Design of a multimode QC-LDPC decoder
based on shift-routing network,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II: Exp.
Briefs, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 734–738, Sep. 2009.
[25] Z. Cui, Z. Wang, and Y. Liu, “High-throughput layered LDPC de-
coding architecture,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol.
17, no. 4, pp. 582–587, Apr. 2009.
[26] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc.
2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 4–7,
2000, pp. 543–546.
[27] B. Vasic, K. Pedagani, and M. Ivkovic, “High-rate girth-eight low-den-
sity parity-check codes on rectangular integer lattices,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1248–1252, Aug. 2004.
[28] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes.
Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1963.
[29] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasic, “Error floors
of LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Commun., Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 11–15, 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1089–1094.
[30] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density
parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[31] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of
trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[32] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Estimation of bit and frame
error rates of finite-length low-density parity-check codes on binary
symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 12, pp.
2234–2239, Dec. 2007.
[33] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error rate estimation of low-density
parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels using cycle enumer-
ation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1550–1555, Jun. 2009.
[34] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B.
Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of
array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp.
181–201, Jan. 2010.
[35] Y. Zhang and W. Ryan, “Toward low LDPC-code floors: A case study,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1566–1573, Jun. 2009.
[36] D. J. C. MacKay and M. J. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ra-
manujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes
Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003.
[37] D. J. C. MacKay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes [Online]. Avail-
able:
http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
[Online]. Available
[38] K. M. Krishnan and P. Shankar, “Computing the stopping distance of
a Tanner graph is NP-hard,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 6, pp.
2278–2280, Jun. 2007.
[39] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating
stopping and trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp.
1640–1650, Apr. 2010.
[40] C. C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Finding all error-prone
substructures in LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5,
pp. 1976–1999, May 2009.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
NGUYEN et al.: ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FREE OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS
2301
[41] G. B. Kyung and C.-C. Wang, “Exhaustive search for small fully ab-
sorbing sets and the corresponding low error-floor decoder,” in Proc.
IEEEInt.Symp.Inf.Theory,Austin,TX,Jun.13–18,2010,pp.739–743.
[42] M. Hirotomo, Y. Konishi, and M. Morii, “Approximate examination
of trapping sets of LDPC codes using the probabilistic algorithm,” in
Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Its Appl., Auckland, New Zealand, Dec.
7–10, 2008, pp. 1–6.
[43] S. Abu-Surra, D. Declercq, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Trapping
set enumerators for specific LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl.
Workshop, La Jolla, CA, Jan. 31–Feb. 5 2010, pp. 1–5.
[44] M. K. Dehkordi and A. H. Banihashemi, “An efficient algorithm for
finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp.
Turbo Codes Iterat. Inf. Process., Brest, France, Sep. 6–10, 2010, pp.
444–448.
[45] C. J. Colbourn and J. H. Dinitz, Handbook of Combinatorial
Designs, Second Edition (Discrete Mathematics and Its Applica-
tions).
London, U.K.: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press, 2006.
[46] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar,
“Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary era-
sure channels: A finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.
53, no. 7, pp. 2429–2458, Jul. 2007.
[47] S. K. Chilappagari, A. R. Krishnan, and B. Vasic, “LDPC codes which
can correct three errors under iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Inf.
Theory Workshop, Porto, Portugal, May 5–9, 2008, pp. 406–410.
[48] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering
the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.
[49] C. A. Cole, S. G. Wilson, E. K. Hall, and T. R. Giallorenzi, “Anal-
ysis and design of moderate length regular LDPC codes with low error
floors,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., Princeton, NJ, Mar.
22–24, 2006, pp. 823–828.
[50] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular
progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.
51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[51] J. Wang, L. Dolecek, and R. Wesel, “Controlling LDPC absorbing sets
via the null space of the cycle consistency matrix,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Commun., Kyoto, Japan, Jun. 5–9, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[52] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-den-
sity parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[53] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-struc-
tured LDPC codes,” presented at the presented at the 5th Int. Symp.
Commun. Theory Appl., Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 15–20, 2001.
[54] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check
codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[55] B. Ammar, B. Honary, Y. Kou, J. Xu, and S. Lin, “Construction of
low-density parity-check codes based on balanced incomplete block
designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1257–1269, Jun.
2004.
[56] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from
protographs,” IPN Progr. Rep. 42-154.
Pasadena, CA, Aug. 2003, Jet
Propulsion Lab..
[57] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles
and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982.
[58] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of regular and irregular
LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 24–29, 2001,
pp. 4–4.
[59] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of low-
density parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes
with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp.
317–319, Jul. 2003.
[60] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello
Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[61] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-shannon-limit quasi-
cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52,
no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.
[62] I. Djurdjevic, A.V.Kuznetsov,and E.M.Kurtas,“Relationshipsamong
classes of structured LDPC codes and their application to data storage,”
in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Top.; 6th Int. ITG-Conf.
Source Channel Coding, Munich, Germany, Apr. 3–7, 2006, pp. 1–6.
[63] A. Mahadevan and J. M. Morris, “On RCD SPC codes as LDPC codes
based on arrays and their equivalence to some codes constructed from
Euclidean geometries and partial BIBDs,” Commun. Signal Process.
Lab., Comput. Sci. Electr. Eng. Dept., Univ. Maryland Baltimore
County, Tech. Rep. CSPL TR: 2002-1, 2002, vol. 42–154.
[64] S. Kovalev and V. Y. Krachkovsky, “A simple method to construct
LDPC codes based on projective planes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf.
Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Jul. 31–Aug. 5 2011, pp. 742–746.
[65] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from
circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no.
8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[66] R. M. Tanner, “On quasi-cyclic repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 41st
Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep.
22–24, 1999, pp. 249–259.
[67] H. Jin, T. J. Richardson, and V. Novichkov, “Methods and Apparatus
for Encoding LDPC Codes,” US Patent #6 961 888, 2005.
[68] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “An algorithm for counting short cy-
cles in bipartite graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp.
287–292, Jan. 2006.
[69] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “A message-passing algorithm for
counting short cycles in a graph,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop,
2010, pp. 1–5.
Dung Viet Nguyen (S’07) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering
from the University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, in 2007, where he is currently pur-
suing the Ph.D. degree. His research interests include digital communications
and information theory.
Shashi Kiran Chilappagari (S’05–M’09) received the B.Tech. and M.Tech.
degrees in electrical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology,
Madras, India in 2004 and Ph.D. in electrical engineering from the University
of Arizona in 2008. He was a Research Engineer in the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering at the University of Arizona, Tucson from January
2009 to December 2009. He is currently with Marvell Semiconductor Inc,
Santa Clara, California. His research interests include error control coding and
information theory with focus on the analysis of failures of various sub-optimal
decoding algorithms for LDPC codes.
Michael W. Marcellin (S’81–M’87–SM’93–F’02) was born in Bishop, Cali-
fornia, on July 1, 1959. He graduated summa cum laude with the B.S. degree in
Electrical Engineering from San Diego State University in 1983, where he was
named the most outstanding student in the College of Engineering. He received
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Electrical Engineering from Texas A&M Univer-
sity in 1985 and 1987, respectively.
Since 1988, Dr. Marcellin has been with the University of Arizona, where he
holds the title of Regents’ Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
and of Optical Sciences. He is currently on sabbatical at Universitat Autonoma
Barcelona where he is a visiting professor and Marie Curie Fellow. His research
interests include digital communication and data storage systems, data compres-
sion, and signal processing. He has authored or coauthored more than two hun-
dred publications in these areas.
Dr. Marcellin is a major contributor to JPEG2000, the second-generation ISO
standard for image compression. Throughout the standardization process, he
chaired the JPEG2000 Verification Model Ad Hoc Group, which was respon-
sible for the software implementation and documentation of the JPEG2000 al-
gorithm. He is coauthor of the book, JPEG2000: Image compression funda-
mentals, standards and practice, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. This book
serves as a graduate level textbook on image compression fundamentals, as well
as the definitive reference on JPEG2000. Dr. Marcellin served as a consultant
to Digital Cinema Initiatives (DCI), a consortium of Hollywood studios, on the
development of the JPEG2000 profiles for digital cinema.
Professor Marcellin is a Fellow of the IEEE, and is a member of Tau Beta
Pi, Eta Kappa Nu, and Phi Kappa Phi. He is a 1992 recipient of the National
Science Foundation Young Investigator Award, and a corecipient of the 1993
IEEE Signal Processing Society Senior (Best Paper) Award. He has received
teaching awards from NTU (1990, 2001), IEEE/Eta Kappa Nu student sections
(1997), and the University of Arizona College of Engineering (2000, 2010). In
2003, he was named the San Diego State University Distinguished Engineering
Alumnus. Professor Marcellin is the recipient of the 2006 University of Ari-
zona Technology Innovation Award. From 2001 to 2006, Dr. Marcellin was the
Litton Industries John M. Leonis Professor of Engineering. He is currently the
International Foundation for Telemetering Professor of Electrical and Computer
Engineering at the University of Arizona.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2302
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2012
Bane Vasic´ (S’92–M’93–SM’02–F’10) received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Nis, Nis, Yugoslavia
(now Serbia), in 1989, 1991, and 1994, respectively.
From 1996 to 1997, he was a Visiting Scientist at the Rochester Institute of
Technology and Kodak Research, Rochester, NY, where he was involved in re-
search in optical storage channels. From 1998 to 2000, he was with Lucent Tech-
nologies, Bell Laboratories (Bell-Labs). He was involved in research in iterative
decoding and low-density parity-check codes, as well as development of codes
and detectors implemented in Bell-Labs chips. Presently, he is a Professor in
the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Arizona,
Tucson. His research interests include coding theory, information theory, com-
munication theory, and digital communications and recording.
Dr. Vasic´ is a Member of the Editorial Board for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON MAGNETICS. He served as Technical Program Chair of the IEEE Communi-
cation TheoryWorkshop in 2003 and as Co-organizer of the Center for Discrete
Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science (DIMACS)Workshops on Op-
tical/Magnetic Recording and Optical Transmission, and Theoretical Advances
in Information Recording in 2004. He was Co-organizer of the Los Alamos
Workshop on Applications of Statistical Physics to Coding Theory in 2004, the
Communication Theory Symposium within the IEEE International Conference
on Communications (ICC 2006), and IEEE Communication Theory Workshop
(CTW 2007).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:46:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
