Design and Analysis of Wave-pipelined LDPC
Decoder
M. Anbuselvi#1, S. Salivahanan#2, P.Saravanan*3
#Electronics and Communication Engg. Department, SSN College of Engineering, *Electrical and Electronics Engg. Department, SSN College of Engineering Chennai, India 1anbuselvim@ssn.edu.in 2salivahanans@ssn.edu.in 3saravananp@ssn.edu.in

Abstract— This paper presents a novel architecture for LDPC
codes using Wave pipelining technique. LDPC approaches the near Shannon limit and it was analyzed using sum-product algorithm. Wave pipelining technique overcomes the drawbacks of conventional pipelining, namely latency overhead and area overhead. The proposed architecture is designed with different stages of pipelining and the performance is compared with that of wave pipelined architecture. Synthesis report proves that the wave pipelined architecture reduces the area overhead and latency overhead. As an extension of the work, the multiplier module is analysed with floating point representation. LDPC codes find its applications in WLAN (IEEE 802.11n) and MIMO OFDM.

In this paper, we propose a LDPC decoder architecture using wave pipelining. Buffer insertion technique has been explored with the SPA based LDPC decoder architecture. There are significant reduction in terms of latency and area overhead. Comparison chart of wave pipelined architecture and various different stages of pipelined architecture have been presented. This paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses about the SPA and its mathematical support. Section III gives the overview of the concept of wave pipelining. Section IV discusses the implementation of the architecture of SPA and its internal modules namely check node and bit node. Section V gives the synthesis report of the architectures and its comparison. Finally Section V concludes the paper and highlights the future scope.

Keywords— LDPC, Decoder, Wave pipelining, Sum-product
algorithm, Check node, Bit node
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes, is a kind of forward error correction (FEC) technique that exhibits capacity of approaching near Shannon’s limit. LDPC codes with iterative decoding algorithm are easy to implement and also parallelizable in hardware as compared to turbo codes. The per-iteration complexity of LDPC is much lower than that of turbo decoder. LDPC is a class of linear block code which has a very spare parity check matrix. LDPC codes have excellent distance properties, the minimum distance between codewords increases with N when column and row weights are held fixed
Among various decoding algorithms for LDPC codes, Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) has a good decoding performance. The implementation has trade off between decoding performance and hardware complexity. Various pipelined and parallel architectures for implementation are dealt with the literature [1] [2] [3]. The advent of wave pipelining has attracted the researchers toward the area optimized and low latency architectures.

II. SUM PRODUCT ALGORITHM
The algorithm used to decode LDPC codeword is a message-passing algorithm known as the sum-product algorithm. It is similar to the MAP algorithm used for turbo coding though it appears different. Similar to the algorithms used in the turbo decoder, the message-passing algorithm determines the aposteriori probabilities for bit values based on apriori information, improving the accuracy of these calculations with each iteration. The Sum-Product algorithm or Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm is an iterative algorithm. Messages from the channel are handed to the bit nodes, which perform some operations on these messages and the messages from the check nodes, and send the results along the edges in the factor graph to the check nodes. The check nodes take these messages, also perform some operations, and send the results back to the bit nodes. After each iteration, the decoded word is checked with the parity equation. If the stopping criterion is not satisfied, the message passing between the nodes are done iteratively until a maximum number of iterations is reached. The channel values and the messages that are sent between bit nodes and check nodes are Log Likelihood Ratios (LLRs).

978-1-4244-5137-1/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

ICWCSC 2010X

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The decoding algorithm for LDPC can be thought of as a bipartite graph. There two sets of nodes performing computations in parallel, and then communicating with each other over connections described by the edges of the graph. The messages communicated between nodes consist of estimates of probabilities. The nature of the nodes in the graph and the structure of the graph’s interconnections are completely described by the number and location of ones in the parity check matrix [4] [5]. There are two types of nodes, check nodes and bit nodes. The check nodes determine the probability that a parity check is satisfied if one particular data bit is set to be a one (or zero) and the other data bits have values with a probability distribution corresponding to the known priori probabilities. The bit nodes determine the probability that a data bit has the value one (or zero), given the information from all of the other checks. Only bits and checks that are related by having a one at a specific corresponding location in the parity check matrix need to be considered in the calculations

ti = 0 and r1ij is the probability that check j is satisfied if it is

assumed that data bit ti = 1. These probabilities are computed as per the following equations.

r 0ij

=

⎡ ⎢1+ ⎣⎢

r'εro∏w[

j

/

i]⎜⎛⎝

qi0'

j

− q1i'

j

⎟⎞⎠⎦⎥⎥⎤

2

r1ij

=

⎡
⎣⎢⎢1−r'εro∏w[ j

/ i]⎝⎛⎜ qi0' j

−q1i'

j

⎟⎠⎞⎦⎥⎤⎥

2

The bit nodes generate the qij values, where qi0j is the
probability that bit ti = 0 given the values of all checks other than j, and q1ij is the probability that bit ti = 1 given the values
of all checks other than j. These probabilities are computed as per the following equations.

qi0j = αij pi0 j'εro∏w[i / j]ri0' j

q1ij = αij p1i j'εro∏w[i / j]ri1' j

Figure. 1 Tanner graph representation
The nodes represented by squares along the top row of the graph represent the check nodes, of which there is one for each row of the matrix A. Each row represents a single parity check. Similarly, the nodes represented by circles at the bottom of the graph represent the bit nodes, of which there is one for each column in A, and thus one for each transmitted bit. The location of ones and zeroes in ‘A’ determine the connection of nodes in the message-passing graph. Having a one at row j, column i simply indicates that check node j is connected to bit node i. Looking at the first row of A, one can see ones in the first, second, third, sixth, seventh and tenth columns. This is reflected in the graph as connections between check node c1 (represented by the first row) b1, b2, b3, b6, b7 and b10 (each represented by their respective columns). The number of ones in a row determines the number of ports that the corresponding check node will have, and the number of ones in a column determine the number of ports that the corresponding bit node will have. In case of regular parity check matrices, the total number of ones in each row will be
equal to all other rows, and likewise for columns.
The check nodes generate the values, where r 0ij is the
probability that check j is satisfied if it is assumed that data bit

Here pi0 and p1i represent the current estimate of the posterior probabilities for each bit. These are the extrinsic values, for all iterations after the first. For the first iteration, they are initialized to values determined by the data received from the channel. For instance, if the channel demodulator determines that the signal received is close to that expected for a one, it would assign a high p1i. It is acceptable if the channel supplies binary values for pi0 and p1i
In addition, the bit nodes also calculate the extrinsic probabilities, which are the computed posterior probabilities of bit having a given value. These extrinsic probabilities are used to determine the decoded values for each bit and are used in the bit nodes equations. The accuracy of these probabilities improves with each iteration of the algorithm.
III. WAVE PIPELINING
The concept of wave pipelining is based on the fact that the clock speed can be increased, if the idle time of the noncritical paths can be reduced. With wave pipelining,, the clock period can be reduced as long as data from a particular clock cycle does not overwrite the data from the previous clock cycle. The limiting factor of the clock period is the difference between the maximum and minimum data delays through the combinatorial block along with register timing, propagation delay and unintentional clock skew[6] [7].
The choice of an appropriate logic style is crucial in any wave-pipelined implementation, because mismatches in propagation delays at the level of basic building blocks may cause the architecture to fail. The wave-pipelined architecture

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

has some attractive properties, namely the absence of pipeline latches which leads to decrease in area and power consumption, simpler clock distribution and higher throughput, but layout is critical for delay balancing. Figure 2 shows the timing diagram of wave pipelining, where it is evident, that the clock period should be such that the output data is latched after the latest data has arrived at the outputs and before the earliest data from the next clock period arrives[8] [9]. This frames the concept of wave pipelining.

The minus sign ‘-’ in the equation represents the subtraction in the check node block diagram, the ‘Π’ in the equation represents the multiplier in the check node block diagram, the 1+ and 1- in equations represent the added and subtraction in the check node block diagram with one of the inputs as 1. The entire equation that is divided by 2 represents the shifter ‘ >>1’ in the block diagram of the check node. The output from the shifter, i.e. the check node, is given as input to the bit node. The number of input ports to the check node is determined by the number of 1’s present in the row of a regular parity check matrix

Fig. 2 Timing diagram of wave pipelining
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
LDPC decoder architecture has been designed with the sum product algorithm, initially with the fixed point representation. Figure 3 shows the basic architecture of SPA based LDPC decoder. The check node functional unit (CFU), the bit node functional unit (BFU) and their message passing scenario are depicted in the diagram.

Fig. 3 Check node functional unit (CFU)
B. Bit Node Functional Unit
The inputs of bit node are from the check nodes. Unlike the check node, right from the first iteration, the inputs are fed from the check node. These nodes generate the qij value by using the sum-product equation. Figure 5 shows the block diagram of check node with 3 ports represented by the above two equations. The ‘Π’ in the equation represents the multiplier in the bit node block diagram.

Channel

Check Node Units

Memory
Control Unit

Bit Node Units

Fig. 3 Basic architecture of LDPC decoder
A. Check Node Functional Unit
The inputs of the check are from the bit nodes except for the first iteration. For the first iteration, the inputs are fed from the channel and from the second iteration onwards, the inputs are fed from the bit node. These nodes get the input from the bit node and generate the rij value by using the sumproduct equations. Figure 4 shows the block diagram of check node with 3 ports represented by the above equations.

Fig. 4 Bit node functional unit (CFU)
After each iteration the output is checked for error. If error is present, then the output is fed back to the input of check node. Finally the outputs are passed to the normalizer circuit. The number of ports to the input of the bit node is determined by the number of 1s that is present in the column of a regular parity check matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. SYNTHESIS
The single stage and two stage pipelined architectures have been designed and its functionalities are verified using Modelsim 7.0 and the synthesis using Xilinx 9.1. The synthesis report gives the resource utilization for the three different modules. Later the architecture has been modified with the concept of wave pipelining. The concept of delay balancing for achieving a faster performance is incorporated in the design. Insertion of buffers for equalizing the delay among the blocks of an algorithm has been done. The synthesis report of the wave-pipelined LDPC decoder architecture clearly shows the area reduction. When the latency analysis is done with the respective modules, wavepipelined architecture proves to be superior. The insertion of buffers in the combinatorial blocks, the insertion of the register at the input and output block paves way for the reduction in the resource utilization of the architecture.
The comparison between the pipelining stages in terms of their logic utilization is given in the Table I. It is evident that the number of flip flops and the LUTs count gets reduced with the technique of wave pipelining. As the pipelining stages increase, the number of synchronizing elements and the logic utilization increases. With the wave-pipelined architecture, reduction in the number of synchronizing elements, logic utilization of the architecture gets reduced.

TABLE I DEVICE UTILIZATION FOR LDPC DECODER

Pipelining stages
Logic Utilization

Single stage

Two stage

Wavepipelining

Number of slice flip flops

134

140

37

The latency analysis of the module is done by measuring the number of clock cycles between the initiation of the input and the time instant at which the output is generated. Table II shows the timing analysis between the different stages of pipelining with the wave-pipelined architecture. It is proved that the wave-pipelined architecture greatly reduces the latency overhead and thereby works at the faster rate

In the decoder architecture, multiplier module consumes more computation time and hardware resources. Here the multiplier is designed with fixed point notation. The module can be remodified with higher precision using floating point representation. The multiplier module is designed with IEEE 754 standard for floating point representation of 32 bits. The module is also analysed with the different stages of pipelining and compared with the wave pipelined multiplier. The number of bits to be processed is more and hence higher level of pipelining analysis has been done effectively. Table III again proves the effect of wave-pipelined multiplier module with reduced number of flip flops, LUTs and total gate count.
.

TABLE III DEVICE UTILIZATION FOR FLOATING POINT MULTIPLIER

Pipelining stages
Logic utilization

Single stage

Two stage

Three stage

Wavepipelining

No. of slice flip flops

601

751

846

456

No. of 4 input LUTs

2,481 2,491

2,494

2,409

Total gate count 24,115 25,366 26,080

22,505

Number of 4 input luts

173

184

2

TABLE IV TIMING ANALYSIS FOR FLOATING POINT MULTIPLIER

TABLE II TIMING ANALYSIS FOR LDPC DECODER

Pipelining stages Single stage

Number of clock cycles
4

Pipelining stages Single stage

Number of clock cycles
12.5

Two stage

13.5

Two stage

5

Three stage

15.5

Wave-pipelined

3

Wave-pipelined

11.5

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Timing analysis shows that the wave-pipelined architecture is superior to the other given in the Table IV. Here also the latency analysis of the module is done by measuring the number of clock cycles between the initiation of the input and the time instant at which the output is generated

REFERENCES
[1] Sanjiv Kumar Mangal, Raghavendra B.Deshmukh, M.Badghare and R.M.Patrikar, “FPGA Implementation of Low power parallel Multiplier”,20th International Conference on VLSI Design (VLSID’07).

VI. CONCLUSION
The LDPC decoder which is of greater attraction towards the Wireless communication based applications and its

[2] Kazunori Shimizu, Tatsuyuki Ishikawa, Nozomu Togawa, Takeshi Ikenaga←and Satoshi Goto, “Partially-Parallel LDPC Decoder Based on High-Efficiency Message-Passing Algorithm”, Proc. ICCD’05, IEEE

implementation in a FPGA and optimization of its architecture, [3] Massimo Rovini, Nicola E. L’Insalata, Francesco Rossi and Luca

gains more interest in the research community. The sum product algorithm of the LDPC decoder has been realized in FPGA with the different stages of pipelining. The computation extensive multiplier module is also designed with the floating point representation. The module is analysed with

Fanucci, “ VLSI Design of a High-Throughput Multi-Rate Decoder for Structured LDPC Codes”, Proc. DSD’05,IEEE
[4] Todd. K. Moon, Error Correction Coding Mathematical Methods and Algorithms, Wiley, May 2006
[5] Bernard M. J. Leiner (2005), “LDPC codes- a brief tutorial”. Available: http://bernh.net/media/download/papers

the different stages of pipelining and compared with the wave- [6] Fabian klass, Maciji Ciesielski, Wayne P. Burleson and Wental Liu,

pipelined architecture.

“Wave –Pipelining: A Tutorial and Research Survey”,IEEE

Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI)Systems.vol.6,

With the advent of the wave pipelining technique, the optimization of the architecture in terms of speed and area can be improved. This work can be extended towards the power

No.3, September 1998.

[7] G.Lakshminarayanan and B.Venkataramani,

“Optimization

Techniques for FPGA-Based Wave-pipelined DSP Blocks”, IEEE

Transactions on Very

Large Scale Integration (VLSI)

optimization techniques, to have a better LDPC decoder.

Systems.vol.13, No.7, July 2005

[8] Donald A. Joy and Maciej J. ciesielski, “Clock Period Minimization

With Wave Pipelining”,IEEE Transaction On Computer Aided Design

of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol.12, No.14 April 1993.

[9] C. Thomas Gray, Wentai Liu, Ralph K. Cavin, “Timing constranits for Wave-Pipelined Systems”, IEEE Transactions on Computer-aided Design of Integraged Circuits and Systems, vol. 13, no. 8. August 1994

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

