Performance Analysis of 3-D Monolithic Integrated Circuits

Shashikanth BobbaŒ1, Ashutosh ChakrabortyŒ2, Olivier ThomasŒ3, Perrine BatudeŒ, Vasilis F. PavlidisŒ1, and Giovanni De MicheliŒ1
Œ1 Integrated Systems Laboratory (LSI), EPFL, Switzerland
Œ2 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Texas Austin, USA
Œ3 CEA-LETI/MINATEC, 17 rue de Martyrs, 38000 Grenoble, France

Abstract
3-D monolithic integration (3DMI), also termed as sequential integration, is a potential technology for future gigascale circuits. Since the device layers are processed in sequential order, the size of the vertical contacts is similar to traditional contacts unlike in the case of parallel 3-D integration with through silicon vias (TSVs). Given the advantage of such small contacts, 3DMI supports stacking active layers such that fine-grain integration of 3-D circuits can be implemented. This paper extends the idea of constructing the standard cells across two active layers, forming 3-D cells, to reduce the overall area and interconnect wirelength of a circuit. To demonstrate the effect of the 3DMI technology on these important parameters of circuit design, two important communication blocks are evaluated. Specifically, a lowdensity-parity-check (LDPC) decoder as a sample of interconnectdominated circuit and a data-encryption-standard (DES) block, which is good instance of a gate dominated circuit, are investigated. By employing 3-D cells in the conventional design flow chain, there is more than 10% decrease in wirelength for both circuits (in wirelength driven placement mode). However, when subjected to timing driven placement a slight reduction in delay (1.6%) is observed for an LDPC decoder, whereas for the DES block considerable delay reduction (14.22%) is achieved.
Keywords 3D, Monolithic Integration, Cell Design.
1. Introduction
3-D integration provides an effective platform for realizing future gigascale circuits by integrating multiple layers of active devices on a single 3D chip [1, 2]. 3-D fabrication technologies can be broadly classified into two groups according to preferred integration scheme: a) 3-D parallel integration (or TSV-based technology) in which each active layer, along with the respective interconnect metal layers, is fabricated separately and is subsequently stacked via TSVs [3, 4], and b) 3-D monolithic integration, in which the stacked transistors are grown sequentially on the same wafer. Developing TSV manufacturing technologies is expensive in terms of cost, yield and area. For example, the TSV pitch is usually around (5 µm -10 µm) [11] compared to 100 nm contact dimensions offered by 3DMI technology [9].
The performance of ICs in advanced technology nodes is dominated by the interconnect delay [18]. In 3-D integration, the
Contact Email: shashikanth.bobba@epfl.ch

benefits in terms of wirelength, latency, and power depend on the granularity level at which the circuit is partitioned [8]. In the case of TSV technology, due to low precision of the alignment capability of the equipment and the relatively large size of TSVs, circuit integration at transistor/gate level is not feasible. Consequently, 3DMI is a promising choice for ultrahigh density 3-D circuits. The cross-section view of a 3D monolithic die with two active layers is illustrated in Figure 1. In 3-D monolithic integration, top transistor layers are processed sequentially on the lower transistor layers. As the alignment of the top transistor-lithography-levels occurs after the bonding of the new top active layer, the alignment precision is only linked to the performance of the stepper (for H[DPSOH ı = 10 nm for 45 nm node equipment [5]). To date, 3-D contact dimensions of ~100 nm have been demonstrated [6]. Alternatively, in 3-D parallel integration (or 3D-TSV integration), two wafers are stacked after the individual processing of each wafer, thereby demanding high alignment precision (ı = 1 µm [11]).

Metal 9
Metal2 Metal 1 ( Copper)

More Active layers like in TSV
technology
N-type devices
3D contact P-type devices

Si substrate

Figure 1. Cross-section view of a 3D monolithic die with 2 active layers.
Achieving small 3-D contact pitch in monolithic integration is an important asset. However, growing high quality top FET at low temperatures to preserve the electrical characteristics of bottom FETs and metal interconnections is a challenging task. To achieve reasonable performance for the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

top transistors, a maximum value of 600°C-650°C for the overall thermal budget is needed. Recently, Batude et al., have demonstrated top and bottom transistors with similar characteristics [9]. Advancements in this technology have been demonstrated both for memory [6] and logic applications [10].
This paper extends the idea of folding standard cells across multiple active layers; thereby forming these cells in 3-D [9]. In this study, we consider two active layers wherein the pull-down network (PDN) of complimentary logic (comprising of n-type devices) is realized at the bottom active layer and pull-up network (PUN) is laid in the top active layer. Traditional ASIC design flow is considered in our experimental setup where the impact of 3DMI technology on two case studies, LDPC decoder and DES block is investigated
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the planar to 3-D transformation of a standard cell. In Section 3, we explain the experimental setup and showcase various benchmark circuits, with quantified benefits. Finally, we conclude in Section 4.
2. Planar to 3-D Transformation of a Standard Cell
In this section, we present the layout partitioning at a standard cell granularity. Standard cells implement a pre-defined logic function (for example, AND gates, OR gates and flip-flops) and have fixed height but varying widths. The structure of a typical standard cell laid in 2-D is shown in Figure 2a. The power and ground rails are located at the top and bottom of the cell. Active region height (HACT) of the cell is where the transistors are fabricated. The distance between two diffusion regions is called diffusion gap region, where we place the input pins. Since 3DMI technology offers multiple active layers adjacent to each other, the layout of the standard cell can be folded in multiple layers [9]. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 2b, p-type devices (forming the PUN) are realized on the top active layer and n-type devices

(forming the PDN) at the bottom active layer. Since the PUN is typically larger than the PDN, the active region height for a 3-D cell (HACT3D) is limited by the height of the P-diffusion (HPdiff). The active region height of a 3-D library is given by the following equation, when mapped directly from a 2-D library:

HACT3D = HACT2D - HNdiff + HIO

(1)

In the above example, it can be observed that the reduction in the height of a 3-D cell is due to the N-diffusion region. Moreover, there can be a slight increase in the space needed for input-output (I/O) pins in the 3-D layout, as the design rules should be obeyed, considering the close proximity of wide power rails. Table I shows a comparison of the standard cell height of existing 2-D (planar) standard cell libraries before and after the cell transformation. We have benchmarked across two important cell libraries at 45 nm and 65 nm technology node. A virtuoso snapshot of a D-flipflop at 65 nm technology node is depicted in Figure 3.
Table I. Normalized height of existing standard cell libraries before and after cell transformation

Cell Height
Planar (2-D) 3-D library

45 nm Nangate Library
100 % 71.43 %

45 nm commercial library
100 % 71.61 %

65 nm commercial library
100 % 69.05 %

(a)
Power Rail

Planar to 3-D transformation

(b) H| Pdiff

Power Rail

H|IO

H| Pdiff

H| Ndiff

H|IO

Ground Rail

p - diffusion n- diffusion

polysilicon IO pins

Ground Rail
p- diffusion (top active layer) over n- diffusion (bottom active layer)

Figure 2. A two-input Standard cell (a) Typical cell in 2-D (planar) configuration and (b) Cell designed in 3-D by realizing the PUN on the
top active layer and the PDN in the bottom active layer.

Figure 3. Virtuoso snap-shot of a D-flipflop built in 3-D at 65 nm technology node.
By local stacking, all the cells are spread across two active layers (3-D cell) fetching ~29% gain in the standard cell height. One of the primary advantages of this transformation is the ease in integration with the conventional design flow, as the design effort consists of developing only the 3-D cell library. Hence to realize circuits with these new 3-D cells, the existing 2-D physical design tools can be employed without any modifications.
Batude et al., [9] have demonstrated the area gain by designing the cells in 3-D. However, their study is limited only to the cell design. We infer that, place and route information

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

plays a vital role to determine the impact of 3DMI technology. In this work we employ the 3-D cell library into the conventional RTL-to-GDSII design flow to benchmark various circuits. The original contribution of our work is to study the impact of interconnect and in the process to find the promising circuits, which fetch in performance gains, for the 3DMI technology.
3. Experimental Setup and Results
In this section, we focus on the implementation details along with the experimental setup. The standard cells in the Nangate Open Cell Library [13] are mapped to the corresponding 3-D equivalent (Section 2) by changing the physical-attributes of the cells. For instance, the height of the cells is reduced by 30% without modifying any width. The size of the I/O pins is retained as in the case of a 2-D cell while the location is altered. This approximation holds true as the traditional placement tools take the LEF (Layout Exchange Format) file as an input for placing the cells. Since the driving strength of the gates is not altered similar delay characteristics are assumed as in the planar case, as the main difference arises from the intra-cell parasitic which have relatively small impact on the overall delay of the cell. Accurate library characterization is considered as part of our future work.
3.1. Benchmark Circuits
To quantify the benefit of the 3DMI technology, two important benchmarks circuits are synthesized with the Nangate 45 nm Open Cell Library [13] before and after the local-stacking transformation. A low-density-parity-check (LDPC) decoder and a data-encryption-standard (DES) block from opencores [7] have been considered for our analysis. The specifications of these blocks are listed in Table II. In LDPC decoders, interconnect plays a dominant role as half of the total wires traverse the chip from one end to the other. Furthermore, the I/O pin count is high. Alternatively, the DES block falls on the other end of the spectrum where the I/O-pins are limited and is not interconnect dominated. In order to study the effect of interconnect (after place and route) on the performance of the circuits the following tools are employed.
Synopsys Design Compiler (A-2007.12-SP4) [14] is used for mapping the RTL of the benchmarks onto target 3-D standard cell library. Cadence SOC Encounter (v8.1) [15] is used as the physical synthesis engine to generate the virtual seed placement in timing driven mode. Timing analysis is performed with Synopsys PrimeTime (D-2009.12-SP2) using the capacitance table of the NCSU design kit at 45 nm technology node [12].
3.2. Results and Discussion
The benchmark circuits used to quantize the benefit of 3-D cells in the context of 3DMI technology are reported in Table II. The Dmin of the circuit indicates the minimum possible delay achievable if no changes in the circuit netlist are allowed during placement. Note that Dmin sets the starting seed value for timing optimization. We performed optimization in two configurations: in the first mode, wirelength driven placement is performed, and in the second mode, timing driven optimization along with in-

place optimization is applied which performs various optimization tasks, such as buffer insertion, gate sizing, and cell replication.
Experimental results are summarized in Table II. In this Table the total wirelength, total power and critical path delay of different benchmarks are reported after placement is performed using the two cases mentioned above. All numbers are reported using Cadence Encounter (EDI) v8.1 (2010 release). The power numbers include all components of the power dissipation namely leakage and switching power.

Table II. Wirelength, delay, and power results of LDPC decoder and DES block when realized with 2-D (planar) and 3-D standard cells.

Circuit

Objective

Wirelength Driven

2D

3D

Timing driven + InPlace Opt.

2D

3D

LDPC
#Nets = 48K #Cells = 44K #Pins =4100 Dmin=6.904
DES
#Nets = 59K #Cells = 56K #Pins = 298 Dmin=2.532

Wirelength
Circuit delay (ns)
Power (mW) Wirelength
Circuit delay (ns)
Power (mW)

15.4E+5 8.503 1201 5.84 E+5 3.316 536.5

13.8E+5 7.312 1105 5.08 E+5 3.518 526.8

18.3E+5 2.461 1554 6.71E+5 1.132 620.2

16.0E+5 2.421 1461 5.81E+5 0.971 608.2

In wirelength driven placement mode the primary objective is to reduce the overall wirelength of the design on the die. We can observe from the above table that the LDPC decoder is an interconnect dominated circuit. In a planar case, the total wirelength of the LDPC decoder is roughly three times higher than the DES block, whereas the cell and net count of an LDPC is 20% less than that of DES. Consistent improvement in wirelength reduction is exhibited for both the benchmark circuits, fetching 13.01% wirelength reduction for the DES block and 10.39% for the LDPC decoder. The percentage improvement in performance and area are plotted in Figure 4.

Figure 4. Performance improvement in area, wirelength, and delay of LDPC decoder and DES block realized with 3-D cells when compared to the respective planar implementations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Note that when subjected to wirelength driven placement, delay should not be compared. Hence, care should be taken when analysing the data from Table II.
In the timing driven placement with in-place optimization mode, the placer has flexibility to apply any synthesis or timing optimization transforms to the netlist, improving the timing. For this set of experiments a very high time requirement is set to maximize the timing improvement. In this manner, we can test the best performance that each of the techniques can provide. Compared to the 2-D case, use of 3-D cell library can reduce the critical path delay further by 14.22% for the DES block and 1.63% for the LDPC decoder.
In summary, designs with 3-D standard cells are considerably effective in reducing the overall area. However, the reduction of the total die area comes at a cost of more expensive technology as two active layers are employed. It can be inferred from the experiments that the proposed design approach is more effective for circuits, which are not interconnect dominated. This result differs when compared to the similar study for traditional 3D technology with TSVs [16, 17]. Employing 3-D cells for interconnect dominated circuits leads to more congestion and since the same backend metal lines are used limited delay gains can be achieved. On the other hand, it turns out to be very effective for gate-delay dominated circuits as we reduce the overall wirelength thereby reducing the delay.
4. Conclusions
3DMI technology, offering 3-D contacts with sizes in the order of ~100 nm, is an effective vehicle for future gigascale circuits. In this work, we support the idea of realizing compact standard cells designed in 3-D (employing two active layers) as the building blocks for an ASIC design flow. This paper has demonstrated the impact of 3DMI on two different benchmark circuits, LDPC decoder as a case-study for interconnect dominated circuits and DES block representing a gate dominated circuit. 3DMI technology with 3-D standard cells provide significant reduction in total wirelength (>10%) and overall circuit footprint (~30%) for both the circuits. However, when timing driven placement with in-place optimization is applied the proposed approach reduces the critical path delay for the DES block by 14%. In the case of LDPC decoder due to the congestion issues the improvement in delay is considerable smaller (1.6%).
The analysis presented in the paper, explore the scope of 3DMI technology for ASIC design where the building blocks (standard cells) are designed in 3-D. However, we envisage higher performance and area gains when new design methodologies are applied. For instance, in this approach of 3-D cells, the number of neighbors remains the same like in a planar case for the placement tool. One way to incorporate the advantage of 3-D integration, is by keeping cells planar and by placing cells in two different layers during the placement phase; thereby doubling the neighboring cells. However, none of the exiting physical design tools can perform this task and new CAD tools should be developed [19]. These issues will be focus of our future work.

Acknowledgments
This work is primarily funded by the European grant: ERC2009-AdG-246810, and partly supported by the ST-IBM-LETI alliance program.
References
[1] Banerjee, K.; et al., "3-D ICs: a novel chip design for improving deep-submicrometer interconnect performance and systems-onchip integration," Proceedings of the IEEE , vol.89, no.5, pp.602633, May 2001
[2] V. Pavlidis and E. Friedman, Three-Dimensional Integrated Circuit Design. Morgan Kaufmann, 2009.
[3] Koester, S. J.; Young, A. M.; Yu, R. R.; Purushothaman, S.; Chen, K.-N.; La Tulipe, D. C.; Rana, N.; Shi, L.; Wordeman, M. R.; Sprogis, E. J.; , "Wafer-level 3D integration technology," IBM Journal of Research and Development , vol.52, no.6, pp.583-597, Nov. 2008
[4] Sillon, N.; Astier, A.; Boutry, H.; Di Cioccio, L.; Henry, D.; Leduc, P.; , "Enabling technologies for 3D integration: From packaging miniaturization to advanced stacked ICs," Electron Devices Meeting, 2008. IEDM 2008. IEEE International , vol., no., pp.1-4, 15-17 Dec. 2008
[5] www.itrs.net/Links/2009ITRS/2009Chapters_2009_Tables [6] S-M Jung; et al., "High Speed and Highly Cost effective 72M bit
density S3 SRAM Technology with Doubly Stacked Si Layers, Peripheral only CoSix layers and Tungsten Shunt W/L Scheme for Standalone and Embedded Memory," Proc. VLSI Tech.,pp.82-83, 2007 [7] www.opencores.org [8] Loh, Gabriel H.; Xie, Yuan; Black, Bryan; , "Processor Design in 3D Die-Stacking Technologies," Micro, IEEE , vol.27, no.3, pp.31-48, 2007 [9] P. Batude., et al., "GeOI and SOI 3D monolithic cell integrations for high density applications," VLSI Technology, 2009 Symposium on , vol., no., pp.166-167, 16-18 June 2009 [10] P. Batude., et al., "Advances in 3D CMOS sequential integration," Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2009 IEEE International , vol., no., pp.1-4, 7-9 Dec. 2009 [11] MIT 3D Desisgn Kits, version 3DEM. [12] NCSU FreePDK45 Design Kit. [13] “Nangate 45nm Library.” http://www.nangate.com/. [14] “Synopsys Design Compiler.” [15] “SOC Encounter tool.” [16] Puttaswamy, K.; Loh, G.H.; , "The impact of 3-dimensional integration on the design of arithmetic units," Circuits and Systems, 2006. ISCAS 2006. Proceedings. 2006 IEEE International Symposium on , vol., no., pp.4 pp., 0-0 0 [17] Puttaswamy, K.; Loh, G.H.; , "Scalability of 3D-Integrated Arithmetic Units in High-Performance Microprocessors," Design Automation Conference, 2007. DAC '07. 44th ACM/IEEE, vol., no., pp.622-625, 4-8 June 2007. [18] Havemann, R.H.; Hutchby, J.A.; , "High-performance interconnects: an integration overview," Proceedings of the IEEE , vol.89, no.5, pp.586-601, May 2001. [19] Das, S.; Chandrakasan, A.; Reif, R.;, "Design tools for 3-D integrated circuits," Design Automation Conference, 2003. Proceedings of the ASP-DAC 2003. Asia and South Pacific , vol., no., pp. 53- 56, 21-24 Jan. 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

