IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

233

Linear Time Encoding of LDPC Codes
Jin Lu, Member, IEEE, and José M. F. Moura, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a linear complexity encoding method for arbitrary LDPC codes. We start from a simple graph-based encoding method “label-and-decide.” We prove that the “label-and-decide” method is applicable to Tanner graphs with a hierarchical structure—pseudo-trees—and that the resulting encoding complexity is linear with the code block length. Next, we define a second type of Tanner graphs—the encoding stopping set. The encoding stopping set is encoded in linear complexity by a revised label-and-decide algorithm—the “label-decide-recompute.” Finally, we prove that any Tanner graph can be partitioned into encoding stopping sets and pseudo-trees. By encoding each encoding stopping set or pseudo-tree sequentially, we develop a linear complexity encoding method for general low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes where the encoding complexity is
M k M proved to be less than 4 1 1 ( 0 1), where is the number of k independent rows in the parity-check matrix and  represents the
mean row weight of the parity-check matrix.
Index Terms—Encoding stopping set, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, linear complexity encoding, pseudo-tree, Tanner graphs.

I. INTRODUCTION

L OW-density parity check (LDPC) codes [1] are excellent error correcting codes with performance close to the

Shannon capacity [2]. The key weakness of LDPC codes is their

apparently high encoding complexity. The conventional way to

encode LDPC codes is to multiply the data words by the code

generator matrix , i.e., the codewords are

. Though

the parity-check matrix for LDPC codes is sparse, the asso-

ciated generator matrix is not. The encoding complexity of

LDPC codes is

where is the block length of the LDPC

code. For moderate-to-high code block length , this quadratic

behavior is very significant and it severely affects the applica-

tion of LDPC codes. For example, LDPC codes have advantages

over turbo codes [3] in almost every aspect except that LDPC

codes have

encoding complexity, while turbo codes have

encoding complexity. It is highly desirable to reduce the

encoding complexity of LDPC codes.

Several authors have addressed the issue of speeding en-

coding of LDPC codes and, generally speaking, they follow

three different paths. The first path designs efficient encoding

methods for particular types of LDPC codes. We list a few

typical representations. Reference [4] proposes a linear com-

plexity encoding method for cycle codes—LDPC codes with

Manuscript received April 23, 2008; revised March 26, 2009. Current version published December 23, 2009.
J. Lu is with Sun Microsystems, Bloomfield, CO 80021 USA (e-mail: j.lu@sun.com).
J. M. F. Moura is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA (e-mail: moura@ece.cmu.edu).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2034823

column weight . Reference [5] presents an efficient encoder

for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. In [6], an efficient encoding

approach is proposed for Reed–Solomon-type array codes.

Reference [7] shows that there exists a linear time encoder for

turbo-structured LDPC codes. Reference [8] constructs LDPC

codes based on finite geometries and proves that this type of

structured LDPC codes can be encoded in linear time. In [9],

[11], two families of irregular LDPC codes with cyclic struc-

ture and low encoding complexity are designed. In addition, an

approximately lower triangular ensemble of LDPC codes [10]

was proposed to facilitate almost linear complexity encoding.

The above low-complexity encoders are only applicable to a

small subset of LDPC codes, and some of the LDPC codes

discussed above have performance loss when compared to

randomly constructed LDPC codes. The second path borrows

the decoder architecture and encodes LDPC codes iteratively

on their Tanner graphs [12], [13]. The iterative LDPC encoding

algorithm is easy to implement. However, there is no guarantee

that iterative encoding will successfully get the codeword. In

particular, the iterative encoding method will get trapped at

the stopping set. The third path utilizes the sparseness of the

parity-check matrix to design a low-complexity encoder. In

[14], the authors present an algorithm named “greedy search”

that reduces the coefficient of the quadratic term. This encoding

method is relatively efficient. Its computation complexity and

matrix storage need to be further reduced for most practical

applications.

In this paper, we develop an exact linear complexity encoding

method for arbitrary LDPC codes. We start from two particular

Tanner graph structures—“pseudo-tree” and “encoding stop-

ping set”—and prove that both the pseudo-tree and the encoding

stopping set LDPC codes can be encoded in linear time. Next,

we prove that any LDPC code with maximum column weight

three can be decomposed into pseudo-trees and encoding

stopping sets. Therefore, LDPC codes with maximum column

weight three can be encoded in linear time and the encoding

complexity is no more than

where denotes

the number of independent rows of the parity-check matrix

and represents the average row weight. Finally, we extend

the

complexity encoder to LDPC codes with arbitrary

row weight distributions and column weight distributions. For

arbitrary LDPC codes, we achieve

encoding complexity,

not exceeding

.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In

Section II, we introduce relevant definitions and notation.

Section III proposes a simple encoding algorithm “label-and-de-

cide” that directly encodes an LDPC code on its Tanner graph.

Section IV presents a particular type of Tanner graph with

multiple layers—“pseudo-tree” and proves that any pseudo-tree

can be encoded successfully in linear time by the label-and-de-

cide algorithm. Section V studies the complement of the

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

234

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

pseudo-tree—“encoding stopping set.” Section VI proves that the encoding stopping set can also be encoded in linear time by an encoding method named “label-decide-recompute.” Section VII demonstrates that any LDPC code with column weight at most three can be decomposed into pseudo-trees and encoding stopping sets. By encoding each pseudo-tree or encoding stopping set sequentially using the label-and-decide or the label–decide–recompute algorithms, we achieve linear complexity encoding for LDPC codes with maximum column weight three. Finally, we extend in this section this linear time encoding method to LDPC codes with arbitrary column weight distributions and row weight distributions. Section VIII concludes the paper.

Let be a standard parity-check equation. If the values of some of the bits in the left-hand side of are already known, then can be equivalently rewritten as a generalized parity-check equation. For example, if the values of the bits
are known, we move these bits from the left-hand side of (1) to its right-hand side and rewrite it as follows:

(3)

Let shown in (4)

be generalized parity-check equations, as

II. NOTATION

...

...

...

...

(4)

LDPC codes. LDPC codes can be described by their parity-

check matrix or their associated Tanner graph [15]. In the Tanner We say

are dependent on each other if the

graph, each bit becomes a bit node and each parity-check con- corresponding homogeneous equations in (5) are dependent on

straint becomes a check node. If a bit is involved in a parity- each other check constraint, there is an edge connecting the bit node and

the corresponding check node. The degree of a check node in

a Tanner graph is equivalent to the number of ’s in the corresponding row of the parity-check matrix, or, in another words, the row weight of the corresponding row. We will use the term

...

...

...

...

(5)

“degree of a check node” and “row weight” interchangeably in this paper. Similarly, the degree of a bit node in a Tanner From (4) and (5), we derive that

graph is equivalent to the column weight of the corresponding

column of the parity-check matrix, and we will interchangeably

(6)

use the term “degree of a bit node” and “column weight” in this

paper. The LDPC codes discussed in this paper may be irregular,

i.e., different columns of the parity-check matrix have different

column weights and different rows of the parity-check matrix

have different row weights. The parity-check matrix of an LDPC

code may not be of full rank. If a row in the parity-check ma-

trix can be written as the binary sums of some other rows in the

parity-check matrix, this row is said to be dependent on the other

rows. Otherwise, it is an independent row.

Arithmetic over the binary field. We represent by “ ” the

summation over the binary field, i.e., an XOR operation. For ex-

ample,

. Similarly, we have

. In addition, we have the following

in the binary field. Further, we use the symbol “ ” to repre-

sent the inverse of the value in the binary field. As an illustra-

tion,

and

.

when the generalized parity-check equations

are dependent on each other.

Connected graph. A graph is connected if there exists a path

from any vertex to any other vertices in the graph. If a graph is

not connected, we call it a disjoint graph.

Relative complement of a subgraph in a Tanner graph

. Let be a Tanner graph and be a subgraph of , i.e.,

. We use the symbol to denote the subgraph that

contains the nodes and edges in , but not in . For example,

let

be check nodes in a Tanner graph . The

subgraph

represents the remaining graph

after deleting check nodes

from . Assume

are subgraphs in a Tanner graph . The notation

represents the subgraph where nodes

and edges are in , but not in

.

Generalized parity-check equation. A conventional parity-

check equation is shown in (1). The right-hand side of the paritycheck equation is always .

III. “LABEL-AND-DECIDE” ENCODING ALGORITHM Initially, Tanner graphs [15] were developed to explain the

(1) decoding process for LDPC codes; in fact, they can be used for the encoding of LDPC codes as well [12]. To encode an LDPC

In this paper, we define the generalized parity-check equation, code using its Tanner graph, we identify information bits and

as shown in (2)

parity bits through a labeling process on the graph. After de-

termining the information bits and the parity bits, we start by

(2) assigning numerical values to the bit nodes labeled as information bits and then in a second step, calculate the missing values

On the right-hand side of (2), is a constant that can be either of the parity bits sequentially. This encoding approach is named

or .

label-and-decide. It is described in Algorithm 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: LINEAR TIME ENCODING OF LDPC CODES

235

Algorithm 1 Label-and-decide algorithm

Preprocessing (carry out only once):

Label every bit node either as information bit or parity bit on the Tanner graph.

Encoding:

;

Get the values of all the bits labeled as information bits;

while there are parity bits undetermined do

if there exists one undetermined parity bit that can be uniquely computed from the values of the information bits and the already determined parity bits then
Compute the value of .

Fig. 1. Left: A Tanner graph. Right: Labeling bit nodes on the Tanner graph shown on the left.

else

, exit the while loop.

end if

end while

if

then

Encoding is unsuccessful.

else

Output the encoded codeword.

IV. PSEUDO-TREE
A pseudo-tree is a connected Tanner graph that satisfies the following conditions (A1) through (A4).

(A1) It is composed of

tiers where is a positive in-

teger. We number these tiers from to

, starting

from the top. The

th tier

contains only bit nodes, while the th tier

contains only check nodes.

end if

Example: Fig. 1 shows on the left an LDPC code whose

Tanner graph is a tree. Initially, all its bit nodes are unlabeled.

First, we randomly pick bit nodes

and to be informa-

tion bits. According to the parity-check equation , the value

of bit depends on the values of the bits

and such

that

. Therefore, should be labeled as a

parity bit. Similarly, we label bits

as information

bits and label bits

as parity bits. We represent informa-

tion bits by solid circles and parity bits by empty circles. The

labeling result is shown on the right in Fig. 1.

By the above labeling process, we decide the systematic com-

ponent of the codeword

to be

and the parity component

to be

. The label-and-decide encoding on the

code in Fig. 1 then has the following steps:

Step 1. Get the values of the information bits

and from the encoder input.

Step 2. Compute the parity bit from the parity-check

equation

.

Step 3. Compute the parity bit from the parity-check

equation :

; compute the

parity bit from the parity-check equation :

.

In fact, any tree code (whose Tanner graph is cycle-free) can

be encoded in linear complexity by the label-and-decide algo-

rithm. We will prove this fact in Corollary 2 in Section V. Fur-

ther, the label-and-decide algorithm can be used to encode a par-

ticular type of Tanner graphs with cycles, i.e., the pseudo-tree

we propose in the next section.

(A2) Each bit node in the first tier has degree one and is connected to one and only one check node in the second tier.

(A3) For each check node in the th tier, where can

take any value from to , there is one and only one

bit node in the

th tier (immediate upper tier)

that connects to , and there are no other bit nodes

in the upper tiers that connect to . We call the

parent of and the child of .

(A4) For each bit node in the

th tier, where can

take any value from to , there is at most one check

node in the th tier (immediate lower tier) that

connects to , and there are no other check nodes in

the lower tiers that connect to .

For example, Fig. 2 shows a pseudo-tree with seven tiers. It contains many cycles. Each check node in the pseudo-tree is connected to a unique bit node in the immediate upper tier, while each bit node in the pseudo-tree may connect to multiple check nodes in the upper tiers.
An important characteristic of a pseudo-tree is that it can be encoded in linear complexity by the label-and-decide algorithm. This is proved in the following lemma.

Lemma 1: Any LDPC code whose Tanner graph is a pseudo-

tree is linear time encodable.

Proof: Let a pseudo-tree contain

tiers, bit nodes,

and check nodes. Condition (A3) guarantees that each check

node is connected to one and only one parent bit node in the

immediate upper tier. Condition (A4) guarantees that different

check nodes are connected to different parent bit nodes. There-

fore, there are parent bit nodes for the check nodes. We label

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

236

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

XOR operations. So,

XOR operations are required

to obtain all the parity bits. Let

denote the

average number of bits in the parity-check equations, then the

encoding complexity is

. For LDPC codes with

uniform row weight , the encoding complexity is

. The above analysis shows that the encoding process is ac-

complished in linear time. This completes the proof.

The linear-complexity encoding process described in the proof of Lemma 1 is summarized in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2 Linear-complexity encoding algorithm for a

pseudo-tree with

tiers.

Preprocessing:

Label the parent bit nodes in the pseudo-tree as parity bits

and the other bit nodes as information bits.

Encoding:

Get the values of all the information bits from the encoder

input.

for

to STEP-1 do

Compute the values of all the parity bits in tier

based on the values of the bits below the

th tier.

end for

Output the encoded codeword.

We look at an example. We encode the pseudo-tree in Fig. 2

as follows:

Step 1. Determine the values of all the information bits

Fig. 2. A pseudo-tree.

Step 2. Compute the parity bit

and . from the parity-check

equation

.

these parent bit nodes as parity bits and the other

bit

nodes as information bits.

The inputs of the encoder provide the values for all the in-

formation bits. The task of the encoder is to compute the values

for all the parity bits. Let be an arbitrary parity bit in the

th tier. By conditions (A3) and (A4), there is only one

check node in the lower tiers that connects to . The value

Step 3. Compute the parity bit from the parity-check

equation

; com-

pute the parity bit from the parity-check equation

.

Step 4. Compute the parity bits

and in the

first tier by the parity-check equations

and respectively:

of is uniquely determined by the parity-check equation rep-

resented by . According to condition (A3), all the bit nodes

.

involved in except for are in tiers below the

th tier. The above encoding process requires only 25 XOR operations.

Therefore, the value of depends only on the values of the bit

nodes below the

th tier. For example, as shown in Fig. 2,

parity bit is the parent bit node of the check node . From

the parity-check equation , we see that the value of is com-

puted from the values of

and , which are lo-

V. ENCODING STOPPING SET
An encoding stopping set in a Tanner graph is a connected subgraph such that:

cated below . We compute the values of the parity bits tier by

tier, starting from the

th tier (bottom tier) and then pro-

gressing upwards. Each time we compute the value of a parity

bit, we only need the values of those bits (both information bits

(B1) If a check node is in an encoding stopping set, then all the bit nodes involved in and the edges that are incident on are also in the encoding stopping set.

and parity bits) in lower tiers, which are already known. Hence,

this encoding process can proceed. The encoding process is re-

peated until the values of all the parity bits in the first tier are

known.

We evaluate the computation complexity of the above en-

coding process. Let

, denote the number

of bits involved in the th parity-check equation. The th parity-

check equation determines the value of a parity bit with

(B2) Any bit node in an encoding stopping set is connected to at least two check nodes in the encoding stopping set.
(B3) All the check nodes contained in an encoding stopping set are independent of each other, i.e., any parity-check equation cannot be represented as the binary sums of other parity-check equations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: LINEAR TIME ENCODING OF LDPC CODES

237

Fig. 3. A pseudo-encoding stopping set.

The number of check nodes in an encoding stopping set is called its size. If a connected Tanner graph satisfies conditions (B1) and (B2) but not condition (B3), we call this Tanner graph a pseudo-encoding stopping set. For example, the Tanner graph shown in Fig. 3 is not an encoding stopping set but a pseudo-encoding stopping set since it satisfies conditions (B1) and (B2) but not condition (B3). The Tanner graph shown in Fig. 4 is an encoding stopping set. Its size is . Every bit node in this encoding stopping set has degree greater than or equal to , and every check node is independent of each other. Please note that the “encoding stopping set” defined in this paper is different from the “stopping set” defined in [16]. Stopping sets are used for the finite-length analysis of LDPC codes on the binary erasure channel, while encoding stopping sets are used here to develop efficient encoding methods for LDPC codes. From the above definitions of pseudo-tree and encoding stopping set, we have the following lemma.

Lemma 2: Any pseudo-tree or union of pseudo-trees does not contain ecoding stopping sets.
Proof: See Appendix A.

We will show next that the label-and-decide algorithm cannot

successfully encode encoding stopping sets.

Fig. 4. An encoding stopping set that contains a pseudo-tree shown in Fig. 2.

Theorem 1: An encoding stopping set cannot be encoded suc-

cessfully by the label-and-decide algorithm.

Proof: Let be an encoding stopping set and suppose encoding stopping set. Hence, there exist some degree-one bit

can be encoded successfully by the label-and-decide algo- nodes in . We generate a multilayer graph and place those

rithm. Let be the last parity bit being determined during the degree-one bit nodes in the first tier of . Next, the check nodes

encoding process. Since is an encoding stopping set, is that connect to the degree-one bit nodes in the first tier of are

connected to at least two check nodes and by condition placed in the second tier of . Notice that there exist at least one

(B2). Further, by condition (B3), all the check nodes in , in- bit node in such that connects to at most one check

cluding and , are independent of each other. Hence, for node in . This statement is true. Otherwise, becomes

certain encoder inputs, and provide different values for an encoding stopping set, which contradicts the fact that does

the parity bit . This contradicts the fact that every parity bit not contain any encoding stopping set. We pick all the bit nodes

can be uniquely determined successfully by the label-and-de- in that connect to at most one check node in and place

cide algorithm. Hence, the label-and-decide algorithm cannot them in the third tier of . Correspondingly, those check nodes

encode an encoding stopping set. This completes the proof.

in

that connect to the bit nodes in the third tier of are

Conversely, if a Tanner graph does not contain any encoding stopping set, there must exist a linear complexity encoder for the corresponding code.

placed in the fourth tier of . Each time we find bit nodes in

that connect to at most one check node in , we place

those bit nodes in a new tier

of and place the check

nodes connecting to those bit nodes in the following new tier

Theorem 2: If a Tanner graph does not contain any en-

of . We continue finding such bit nodes and increasing

coding stopping set, then it can be encoded in linear time by the tiers till all the nodes in are included in . Up to now, the

label-and-decide algorithm.

multilayer structure constructed so far satisfies the conditions

Proof: We first delete all redundant check nodes (i.e., de- (A1), (A2), and (A4). Condition (A3) may fail to be satisfied.

pendent on other check nodes) from the Tanner graph . Next, For example, as shown on the top in Fig. 5, the check node

we restrict our attention to the case that is a connected graph. in tier 4 is connected to two bit nodes and in tier 3, which

We will show that can be equivalently transformed into a contradicts condition (A3). To satisfy condition (A3), we fur-

pseudo-tree if it is free of any encoding stopping set. Since ther adjust the positions of the bit nodes. If a check node in tier

does not contain any encoding stopping set, itself is not an is connected to bit nodes in the upper tiers of , we pick

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

238

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

. Since

, then the encoding complexity

of is

where is

the number of independent check nodes in . This completes

the proof.

In the proof of Theorem 2, we detailed the process of transforming a connected Tanner graph that is free of any encoding stopping sets into a pseudo-tree. We further summarize the above transformation process in Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 3 Transform a connected Tanner graph into a pseudo-tree .

Fig. 5. Top: A multilayer structure but not a pseudo-tree. (Note that C has two parents x and x and C has two parents x and x .) Bottom: The pseudo-tree
that evolves from the multilayer structure shown on the top.

one bit node in tier

from these bit nodes and leave its

position unchanged. Next, we drag the other

bit nodes

from their initial positions in tier

to the

th tier. To

illustrate, let us focus on Fig. 5 again. We drag the bit node

from tier 3 to tier 5 and drag the bit node from tier 1 to tier 3.

The newly formed graph is shown at the bottom in Fig. 5, which

follows condition (A3). By tuning the positions of the bit nodes

in this way, the resulting hierarchical graph satisfies conditions

(A1) to (A4). In this way, we transform into a pseudo-tree.

By Lemma 1, a pseudo-tree is linear time encodable. Therefore,

the encoding complexity of is

where denotes the

number of independent check nodes contained in .

We now prove the case that is a disjoint graph. Let contain

connected subgraphs:

. By the above analysis,

the complexity of encoding is

, where

denotes the number of independent check nodes contained in

Remove all the redundant check nodes from the Tanner

graph .

.

if there exist degree-one bit nodes in then

Place all the degree-one bit nodes in the first tier of .

Place all the check nodes that connect to the degree-one

bit nodes in the second tier of .

else

.

end if

while

and

do

if there exist bit nodes in that connect to at most

one check node in then

Pick all the bit nodes in that connect to at most

one check node in and place them in a new tier

of .

Pick all those check nodes in that connect to the

bit nodes in the tier

of and place them in a

new tier

of .

else

.

end if

.

end while

if

then

for

to do

while a check node in tier is connected to

bit nodes in the upper tiers of do

Pick one bit node in tier

from these bit

nodes and leave its position unchanged.

Drag the other

bit nodes from their initial

positions in tier

to the

th tier, as

shown in Fig. 5.

end while

end for

Output the generated pseudo-tree derived from the

original Tanner graph .

else

The Tanner graph can NOT be transformed into a

pseudo-tree.

end if

From Theorem 2, we easily derive the following four corollaries.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: LINEAR TIME ENCODING OF LDPC CODES

239

Fig. 6. A parity-check matrix in upper triangular form.

ping set that contains check nodes

. Let

. There exists at least one bit node in

that only connects to . This contradicts the fact that every

bit node in an encoding stopping set is connected to at least two

check nodes in the encoding stopping set. Hence, is not an

encoding stopping set. Since the Tanner graph of the LDPC code

does not contain any encoding stopping set, by Theorem 2 it is

linear time encodable. This completes the proof.

Theorems 1 and 2 show that encoding stopping sets prevent the application of the label-and-decide algorithm. However, we will show in the next section that encoding stopping sets can also be encoded in linear complexity.

Corollary 1: If a Tanner graph does not contain any encoding stopping set, then it can be represented by a pseudo-tree or a union of pseudo-trees.
Proof: The proof of Corollary 1 can be found in the proof of Theorem 2.

VI. LINEAR COMPLEXITY ENCODING APPROACH FOR ENCODING STOPPING SETS
Let be an encoding stopping set. We say is a -foldconstraint encoding stopping set if the following two conditions hold.

Corollary 2: The label-and-decide algorithm can encode any tree LDPC codes (whose Tanner graphs are cycle-free) with linear complexity.
Proof: Let be the Tanner graph of a tree LDPC code and be an arbitrary subgraph of . Since the Tanner graph
is a tree, its subgraph is either a tree or a union of trees.

(C1) There exist check nodes

in such

that

does not contain any en-

coding stopping set. We call the check nodes

key check nodes. We always specify the

key check nodes

when defining a

-fold-constraint encoding stopping set.

Therefore, the graph contains at least one bit leaf node with degree one. Since the graph contains a degree-one bit node, cannot be an encoding stopping set. Since no subgraph of is an encoding stopping set, by Theorem 2, the tree code can be encoded in linear complexity by the label-and-decide algorithm. This completes the proof.

(C2) For any ping set.

check nodes

in

contains an encoding stop-

The notation

denotes the remaining

graph after deleting check nodes

from .

Fig. 4 shows a twofold-constraint encoding stopping set with

Corollary 3: A regular LDPC code with column weight (cycle code) can be encoded in linear complexity by the labeland-decide algorithm.
Proof: We prove Corollary 3 by showing that a cycle code does not contain any encoding stopping set. Assume the cycle code contains an encoding stopping set . By the definition of cycle code and condition (B2), all the bit nodes in have uniform degree two. It follows that the binary sum of all the parity-check equations in is a vector of ’s. Then, at least one check node in is dependent on the other check nodes. This contradicts condition (B3) that all the check nodes in an encoding stopping set are independent of each other. Hence, a cycle code does not contain any encoding stopping set. By Theorem 2, a cycle code is linear time encodable by the labeland-decide algorithm. This completes the proof.

key check nodes and . After deleting the two key check

nodes and from this encoding stopping set, the Tanner

graph turns into a pseudo-tree, see Fig. 2. We will focus on one-

fold-constraint and twofold-constraint encoding stopping sets

in this paper, since we will show later that all types of LDPC

codes can be decomposed into onefold or twofold constraint

encoding stopping sets and pseudo-trees.

Let us first look at a twofold-constraint encoding stopping

set with two key check nodes and . The twofold-con-

straint encoding stopping set has size . By definition, the

subgraph

does not contain any encoding stopping

set. Therefore, we can transform the subgraph

into a pseudo-tree by Algorithm 3 and then encode in

linear complexity. Based on the above analysis, we encode the

twofold-constraint encoding stopping set in three steps.

In the first step, we encode

using the label-and-

An alternative proof can be found in [4].

Corollary 4: Let be the parity-check matrix of an LDPC

code. If can be transformed into an upper triangular matrix

by row and column permutations, then the LDPC code can

be encoded in linear time by the label-and-decide algorithm.

Proof: We label the rows of the upper triangular matrix

one by one as

, from the bottom to the top,

as shown in Fig. 6. We notice that if

, then there ex-

decide algorithm according to Theorem 2. During encoding,

bit nodes are labeled as parity bits and the remaining

bit nodes are labeled as information bits. In the above encoding

process, if we change the value of an information bit and keep

the values of all the other information bits unchanged, some

parity bits

will also change their values. We say

that the parity bits

are affected by the bit .

In the second step, we verify the two key check nodes and

based on the bit values acquired in Step 1. For convenience,

ists at least one bit that is involved in but not in . As- we first define the value of a key check node as follows. Let a

sume the Tanner graph of the code contains an encoding stop- key check node connect to bit nodes

. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

240

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

binary sum

is defined to be the value of the

check node . If the parity-check equation associated with a

key check node is satisfied, then the value of the key check

node is . Otherwise, the value of the key check node

is . If the values of the two key check nodes and are

both , the encoding results acquired in Step 1 are reliable. If at

least one of the two key check nodes and has value ,

then the encoding results acquired in Step 1 need correction. To

correct the previously obtained encoding results, we notice that

the existence of the key check nodes and indicates that

two bits and that were previously labeled as information

bits are actually parity bits, and their values are determined by

and . We call the two bits and reevaluated bits.

The reevaluated bits and satisfy the following three

conditions.

(D1) If changes its value while and other informa-

tion bits keep their values unchanged, then the value

of the key check node must also be changed. We

say that is affected by . Although may not

directly connect to

is affected by through

other check nodes and parity bits.

(D2) If changes its value while and other information bits keep their values unchanged, then the value of the key check node must also be changed. We say that is affected by .

(D3) If and both change their values while the other information bits keep their values unchanged, then the value of at least one of the two key check nodes and is changed.

Since

, and the other check nodes in are independent

of each other, there must exist bit nodes and that satisfy

conditions (D1) to (D3). An algorithm for finding reevaluated

bits and from a twofold-constraint encoding stopping set

is presented in Appendix B. We also prove the validness of the

algorithm in Appendix B. Notice that the workload to find the

two reevaluated bits is a preprocessing step that is carried out

only once. Assume in Step 1 that and are randomly as-

signed initial values and , respectively. If the parity-check

equations and are both satisfied, the initial values

and are the correct values for and . If , or , or

both, are not satisfied, we need to recompute the values of

and from the values of the key check nodes and . Let

and

where and are the

correct values of and , respectively, and let and be the values of the key check nodes and , respectively. If
is affected by alone, is affected by both and , we derive the following equations:

(7)
If is affected by both and and is affected by alone, we derive the following equations:

If is affected by alone and is affected by alone, we have the following equations:

(9)

From (7)–(9), we can get the correct values of and . Notice that, condition (D3) prevents the case that is affected by both
and and is also affected by both and .

Algorithm 4 Determine the parity bits in a twofold-constraint encoding stopping set that are affected by the reevaluated bits and . The two key check nodes of are and .

Use algorithm 3 to transform

into a

pseudo-tree . Assume the reevaluated bit is in the

th tier of and the reevaluated bit is in the

th tier of .

for

to STEP-1 do

for Each parity bit node in tier

of do

if the child (a check node) of a parity bit node is

connected to and is also connected to an even

number (including ) of parity bits that are affected

by and are located below the

th tier then

Label as a parity bit that is affected by .

else if the child of the parity bit node is not

connected to but is connected to an odd number

of parity bits that are affected by and are located

below the

th tier then

Label as a parity bit that is affected by .

else

The parity bit is not affected by .

end if

end for

end for

for

to STEP-1 do

for Each parity bit node in tier

of do

if the child (a check node) of a parity bit node is

connected to and is also connected to an even

number (including ) of parity bits that are affected

by and are located below the

th tier then

Label as a parity bit that is affected by .

els if the child of the parity bit node is not connected

to but is connected to an odd number of parity

bits that are affected by and are located below the

th tier then

Label as a parity bit that is affected by .

else

The parity bit is not affected by .

end if

end for

end for

Output the labels (whether a parity bit is affected by , by

, or by both, or by neither) of all the parity bits.

In the third step, we determine the parity bits

that are affected by the reevaluated bits and . We provide

(8) Algorithm 4 to find those parity bits

that are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: LINEAR TIME ENCODING OF LDPC CODES

241

affected by the reevaluated bits and . The output of Al-

gorithm 4 may label a parity bit as being affected by alone,

by alone, by both and , or by neither nor . Next,

we recompute those parity bits

that are affected

by and/or based on the correct values of and . This

encoding method is named label–decide–recompute and is de-

scribed in Algorithm 5.

We look at an example. Fig. 4 shows a twofold-constraint en-

coding stopping set with key check nodes and . After

deleting the two key check nodes and

becomes the

pseudo-tree shown in Fig. 2. Next, we determine the two reeval-

uated bits following Algorithm 11. We represent the two key

check nodes and as functions of the information bits as

follows:

Algorithm 5 Label-decide-recompute algorithm for a

(10)

twofold-constraint encoding stopping set with two key

(11)

check nodes and . contains check nodes.

Preprocessing (carry out only once): Use Algorithm 11 to pick two information bits and that satisfy conditions (D1) to (D3) as reevaluated bits.

From (10) and (11), we see that the value of the bit node only affects key check node and the value of the bit node
only affects key check node . The two bit nodes and satisfy conditions (D1) to (D3). Hence, we can choose the

Use Algorithm 4 to determine the parity bits

two bits and as reevaluated bits (there exist other options

that are affected by and/or .

of the reevaluated bits).

Encoding:

Fill the values of the information bits except for and ;

Assign

and

;

Encode values of the

using Algorithm 2. Compute the parity bits;

Compute the values and of the key check nodes

and , respectively;

if

AND/OR

then

Recompute the values of and from and

by (7)–(9);

for

to do

Recompute the value of the parity bit based on the

new values of and ;

end for

After determining the reevaluated bits, we use Algorithm 4

to find the parity bits that are affected by the reevaluated bits

and . We start from tier 5, the parity bit is affected by

the reevaluated bit . In tier 3, the parity bit is also affected

by . However, since the parity bit has child and is

connected to both and the parity bit that is affected by

, the parity bit is not affected by . Similarly, in tier

1, we determine that the parity bits and are affected by

while the parity bits and are not affected by . In

the same way, we label the parity bits

and as being

affected by the reevaluated bit while the parity bit is not

affected by . We notice that the parity bit is affected by

both and while the parity bit is affected by neither

nor .

After finishing the above preprocessing, we use the label–de-

end if

cide–recompute algorithm to encode as follows.

Output the encoding result.

Step 1. Assign

and

. Encode the pseudo-

Next, we analyze the computation complexity of the

tree part following the procedures in Section IV.

label–decide–recompute algorithm when encoding a Step 2. Compute the values of the key check nodes and

twofold-constraint encoding stopping set with size . Every check node except for the two key check nodes and are computed at most twice in the label–decide–recompute encoding (label-and-decide step and recompute step) while the values of the two key check nodes and need

, e.g.,

Step 3a. If

and

the codeword

and .
, stop encoding and output .

to be computed only once. In addition, we may need one

extra XOR operation to compute the two reevaluated bits

and by (7)–(9). Hence, the encoding complexity of the

label–decide–recompute algorithm is less than or equal to

, where

, are the degrees of the check nodes other than

and

are the degrees of the check nodes and

, respectively. The encoding complexity of the label–de-

Step 3b.

If

and or

, recompute the values

of and as follows:

and

,

where and are the values of the parity-check

equations and , respectively. Recompute the

parity bits

and based on the

new values of and . Output the codeword

.

cide–recompute algorithm can be further simplified to be less The label–decide–recompute algorithm can be further sim-

than

where is the number of check nodes in plified. We restudy the third step of the label–decide–recompute

the encoding stopping set and is the average number of bit method. Assume

are the parity bits whose values

nodes involved in each check node in the encoding stopping set. need to be updated. In order to get the new values of the parity

This shows that the label–decide–recompute algorithm encodes bits

, we need to recompute those parity-check

any twofold-constraint encoding stopping set in linear time. equations that involve

. In fact, instead of recom-

The preprocessing (determining reevaluated bits, and parity puting the parity-check equations involving parity bits

bits affected by the reevaluated bits) is done offline and does

, we can directly flip the values of the parity bits

not count towards encoder complexity.

since in the binary field the value of a bit is either or .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

242

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

For example, if the correct value of the reevaluated bit is different from its originally assigned value , we simply flip the values of those parity bits that are affected by . We name the above encoding method label–decide–flip and describe it in Algorithm 6. The encoding complexity of Algorithm 6 is at most
XOR operations plus two vector flipping operations. We, again, look at an example. The twofold-constraint encoding stopping set shown in Fig. 4 can be encoded by Algorithm 6 as follows.

Encoding:

Step 1. Step 2. Step 3a.

Assign

and

. Encode the pseudo-

tree part following the procedures in Section IV.

Compute the values of the parity-check equations

and , e.g.,

and

.

If

and

the codeword

, stop encoding and output .

Algorithm 6 Label–decide–flip algorithm for a twofold-constraint encoding stopping set with two key check nodes and . contains check nodes.

Preprocessing (carry out only once):

Use Algorithm 11 to pick two information bits and that satisfy conditions (D1) to (D3) as reevaluated bits.
Use Algorithm 4 to determine the parity bits that are affected by alone and group

in a vector

.

Use Algorithm 4 to determine the parity bits

that are affected by alone and group

Step 3b.

If

and or

, recompute the values

of and as the following:

and

where and are the values of the

parity-check equations and , respectively.

If

and

, flip the values of the

vectors

and to be

and

, respectively. If

and

, flip

the values of the vectors

and to be

and

, respectively. If

and

, flip the values of the vectors

and

to be

and

, respectively. Output the

codeword

.

in a vector

.

Use Algorithm 4 to determine the parity bits

that are affected by both and and group

in a vector

.

Encoding:

Fill the values of the information bits except for and ;

Assign

and

;

It is easy to revise Algorithm 5 and Algorithm 6 to encode

a onefold-constraint encoding stopping set. For example, Algo-

rithm 7 shows the label–decide–recompute algorithm for a one-

fold-constraint encoding stopping set. The encoding complexity

of Algorithm 7 is less than

where is the number

of check nodes in the encoding stopping set and is the average

number of bit nodes involved in each check node in the encoding

stopping set.

Encode

using Algorithm 2. Compute the

values of the

parity bits;

Compute the values and of the parity-check equations and , respectively;

Algorithm 7 Label-decide-recompute algorithm for a onefold-constraint encoding stopping set with key check node . contains check nodes.

if

AND/OR

then

Recompute the values of and from and by (7)–(9);

if

AND

then

Flip the vectors and .

else if

AND

then

Preprocessing (carry out only once): Use Algorithm 11 to pick an information bit the key parity-check equation . Use Algorithm 4 to determine the parity bits
that are affected by . Encoding:

that affects

Flip the vectors and .

else if

AND

then

Flip the vectors and .

end if

end if

Output the encoding result.

Preprocessing: We choose the reevaluated bits to be and

. We also determine that the parity bits and are affected

by alone and the parity bits

are affected by

alone. Further, we determine that the parity bit is affected by

both and .

Fill the values of the information bits except for .

Assign

.

Encode

using Algorithm 2, compute the values of

the

parity bits.

Verify the parity-check equation .

if the parity-check equation is not satisfied then

.

for

to do

Recompute the value of the parity bit based on

the new value of ;

end for

end if

Output the encoding result.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: LINEAR TIME ENCODING OF LDPC CODES

243

contains an encoding stopping set. Assume contains

check nodes and the th added check node is the last check

node that introduces outsider nodes to . We will show that

. Assume adds outsider nodes

to . We will prove that the

th added check node

connects to all the bit nodes not connect to all the bit nodes, then

. If

does

involves a smaller

number of outsider nodes than does and should be added ear-

lier than since we always pick the check node that involves

the smallest number of outsider nodes and add it first to . This

Fig. 7. Outsider nodes.
VII. LINEAR COMPLEXITY ENCODING FOR GENERAL LDPC CODES

contradicts the fact that is added to after . Therefore,

should connect to all the bit nodes

.

Similarly,

connect to all the bit nodes

. Since any bit node can connect to at most three check

nodes, it follows that

, which means at most two check

In this section, we propose a linear complexity encoding method for general LDPC codes. We will show that any Tanner graph can be decomposed into pseudo-trees and encoding stopping sets that are onefold-constraint or twofold-constraint. By encoding each pseudo-tree or encoding stopping set using Algorithm 2 , Algorithm 5, or Algorithm 7, we achieve linear time encoding for arbitrary LDPC codes.
To proceed, we provide the following definition. Given a

nodes are added to after . Further, we can prove that does

not contain any encoding stopping set before adding . The

corresponding proof is shown in Appendix C. Hence, the en-

coding stopping set in is either a onefold-constraint encoding

stopping set or a twofold-constraint encoding stopping set. The

last added check nodes

are key check nodes

for the constructed onefold-constraint or twofold-constraint en-

coding stopping set. Condition (E3) is satisfied.

is a pseudo-encoding stopping set. It follows that the bi-

Tanner graph and its subgraph , we call the bit nodes in nary sum of all the check nodes in is zero. So, the degree of

but not in the outsider nodes of . For example, Fig. 7 shows

a Tanner graph and its subgraph . Since in Fig. 7 the two bit

nodes and are in but not in

and are outsider

nodes of . The check node involves two outsider nodes of

every bit node in is an even number. Since the maximum bit node degree is three, the degree of each bit node in is two. Condition (E2) is satisfied.
This completes the proof.

, i.e., is connected to two outsider nodes. The check node involves zero outsider nodes of .
We start from LDPC codes with maximum column weight

We detail the method of determining a pseudo-encoding stopping set or an encoding stopping set in Algorithm 8.

by proving the following lemma.

Algorithm 8 Find a pseudo-encoding stopping set

Lemma 3: Assume the maximum bit node degree of a Tanner graph is three, then one of the following statements must be true. (E1) There are no pseudo-encoding stopping sets or en-

or an encoding stopping set (onefold-constraint or twofold-constraint) from a Tanner graph with maximum bit node degree .

coding stopping sets in .

.

(E2) There exists a pseudo-encoding stopping set in . All the bit nodes in the pseudo-encoding stopping set have uniform degree .
(E3) There exists a onefold-constraint or a twofold-constraint encoding stopping set in . The key check nodes for the encoding stopping set are specified.

.

.

while

and

do

Find a check node in that involves the smallest

number of outsider nodes of .

Add and all its associated outsider nodes to .

if does not introduce new bit nodes to then

Proof: We only need to prove either condition (E2), or condition (E3), is true if contains a pseudo-encoding stopping set, or an encoding stopping set, respectively. We prove this statement by constructing a subgraph from the Tanner graph . Initially is empty. We pick a check node from that involves the smallest number of bit nodes. Next, we add and

.

while there exists a bit node of degree one in

Delete the degree-one bit node and the check

node connecting to from .

end while

if

then

all the bit nodes involved in to . We keep adding check

does not contain any pseudo encoding stopping

nodes and all their associated bit nodes to till contains a

set or encoding stopping set.

pseudo-encoding stopping set or an encoding stopping set. Each

else

time we add a check node to , we always pick the check node

.

that involves the fewest outsider nodes of . If contains an

end if

encoding stopping set, we also add all the check nodes in

end if

that involves zero outsider nodes to . Next, we discuss two dif-

.

ferent cases.

end while

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

if

then

if all the bit nodes in are of degree then

The subgraph is a pseudo encoding stopping set.

else

The subgraph is an encoding stopping set.

end if

Output .

else

The Tanner graph does not contain pseudo-encoding

stopping sets or encoding stopping sets.

end if

Next, we present our main theorem.

Theorem 3: Let be the Tanner graph of an LDPC code.

If the maximum bit node degree of is three, then the LDPC

code can be encoded in linear time and the encoding complexity

is less than

where is the number of indepen-

dent check nodes in and is the average number of bit nodes

involved in each check node.

Proof: If the Tanner graph does not contain any encoding

stopping set, then the corresponding LDPC code can be encoded

in linear time by Theorem 2. Therefore, we only need to prove

Theorem 3 for the case that contains encoding stopping sets.

Since the maximum bit node degree of is three, by Lemma 3

there exists a pseudo-encoding stopping set or an encoding stop-

ping set in . If is a pseudo-encoding stopping set, we

simply delete a redundant check node from and becomes

a pseudo-tree. If is an encoding stopping set, it is either a one-

fold-constraint or a twofold-constraint encoding stopping set by

Lemma 3.

Next, we look at the subgraph . We first transform the

parity-check equations in

into generalized parity-check

equations by moving the bits contained in from the left-hand

side of the equation to the right-hand side of the equation. Let

a parity-check equation involves bit nodes

where the bits

are also in , then the parity-check

equation

can be rewritten as

(12)

In (12), the parameter becomes a constant after we encode

and get the values of all the bits in . Since the maximum bit

node degree of

is less than or equal to three, we, again,

find a pseudo-encoding stopping set or an encoding stopping

set from . If is an encoding stopping set, is either

a onefold-constraint or a twofold-constraint encoding stopping

set by Lemma 3. If is a pseudo-encoding stopping set and we

assume contains the following generalized parity-check

equations:

...

...

we derive that

...

...

(13)

(14)

Hence, we can replace any generalized parity-check equation in

(13) by the new parity check (14). From the above analysis, we

can delete any check node from to make a pseudo-tree

if is a pseudo-encoding stopping set. To maintain the code

structure, we also generate a new check node that represents

the parity check (14). Since the parity check (14) only involves

bits in , we add the new check node to and regenerate

encoding stopping sets or pseudo-trees in the graph

.

Generally, we can find a pseudo-encoding stopping set or an

encoding stopping set from the subgraph

. If is an encoding stopping set, is either a one-

fold-constraint or a twofold-constraint encoding stopping set by

Lemma 3. If is a pseudo-encoding stopping set, we operate

in three steps. In the first step, we sum up all the generalized

parity-check equations in to generate a new parity-check

equation . In the second step, we delete one check node from

to make a pseudo-tree. In the third step, we add the

new check node to and regenerate pseudo-tree or en-

coding stopping sets in

. Notice that the new parity-check

equation in (14) does not incur extra cost to compute vari-

ables

since these variables have already been

computed in those generalized parity-check equations in ,

as shown in (13). Practically, we can compute these variables

only once and store them. Later, we can apply the

stored values

to both (14) and (13). Hence, the

new parity-check equation only needs

additional XOR

operations to compute the summation of

. Since

the cost of encoding the pseudo-tree is

where is the average degree of the remaining

check

nodes in , the overall cost of encoding and the new

parity-check equation is

.

By continuing to find pseudo-tree or encoding stopping sets

in this way, we reach the stage where

or

does not contain pseudo-encoding

stopping sets or encoding stopping sets.

By the above analysis, we decompose the Tanner graph

into a sequence of subgraphs

where

, is either a onefold-constraint encoding stopping set, a

twofold-constraint encoding stopping set, or a pseudo-tree. If

is a onefold-constraint or a twofold-constraint encoding stop-

ping set, the key check nodes for are specified by Lemma 3.

Therefore, we apply Algorithm 7 or Algorithm 5 to encode

and the resulting encoding complexity is less than

where denotes the number of independent check nodes in

and denotes the average number of bit nodes involved in each

check node in . If is a pseudo-tree, we apply Algorithm 1

to encode and the corresponding encoding complexity is less

than

. The overall computation complexity of en-

coding is linear on the number of independent check nodes

in and is bounded by

,

where denotes the average number of bits involved in each in-

dependent check node of . This completes the proof.

We summarize the algorithm of decomposing a Tanner graph with maximum bit node degree into pseudo-trees and encoding stopping sets in Algorithm 9 and the algorithm to encode such LDPC codes in Algorithm 10.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: LINEAR TIME ENCODING OF LDPC CODES

245

Algorithm 9 Decompose a Tanner graph with maximum bit node degree 3 into onefold-constraint encoding stopping sets, twofold-constraint encoding stopping sets, and pseudo-trees.

Find a pseudo-encoding stopping set or an encoding

stopping set from using Algorithm 8.

.

if is a pseudo-encoding stopping set then

Delete a check node in . becomes a pseudo-tree.

end if

.

while there exists a pseudo-encoding stopping set or an

encoding stopping set in do

Find a pseudo-encoding stopping set or an encoding

stopping set from using Algorithm 8. Assume

contain check nodes

.

if is a pseudo-encoding stopping set then

. becomes a pseudo-tree.

Generate a new check node

.

Add to and regenerate pseudo-trees and

encoding stopping sets in

.

end if

.

end while

.

Output a sequence of subgraphs

where

, is either a pseudo-tree or an encoding stopping

set (onefold-constraint or twofold-constraint.)

Algorithm 10 Linear complexity encoding algorithm for LDPC codes with maximum bit node degree

Preprocessing (carry out only once):

Apply Algorithm 9 to decompose the Tanner graph

of the code into subgraphs

where

, is either a pseudo-tree

or a onefold-constraint encoding stopping set or a

twofold-constraint encoding stopping set with the key check

nodes being specified.

Encoding:

end for Output the encoded codeword.

Next, we extend the linear time encoding method described in Theorem 3 to LDPC codes with arbitrary column weight and row weight.

Theorem 4: Any LDPC code with arbitrary column weight

distribution and row weight distribution can be encoded in linear

time, and the corresponding encoding complexity is less than

where is the number of independent check

nodes in and is the average degree of check nodes.

Proof: We first show that an LDPC code with arbitrary

column weight distribution and row weight distribution can be

equivalently transformed into an LDPC code with maximum

column weight three. For example, Fig. 8 on the top shows a

bit node of degree . It can be split into two bit nodes and

of degree and an auxiliary check node , as shown on the

bottom in Fig. 8. The auxiliary check node is represented as

, which means is equivalent to . Originally, the bit

node connects to four check nodes

, and . After

node splitting, connects to

, and connects to

.

Hence, the Tanner graph on the top in Fig. 8 is equivalent to the

Tanner graph on the bottom in Fig. 8. Similarly, a bit node of

degree can be split into three bit nodes

and and two

auxiliary check nodes and , as shown in Fig. 9. Generally,

a bit node of degree can be equivalently transformed into

bit nodes of degree and auxiliary check nodes, as shown

in Fig. 10. Assume an LDPC code contains check nodes

and bit nodes. The check nodes have degrees

, respectively. The bit nodes have degrees

, respectively. Among the bit nodes in , there are bit

nodes whose degrees are greater than and their degrees are

. This LDPC code can be equivalently transformed

into another LDPC code with maximum column weight .

The new code has

check nodes and

bit nodes. By Theorem 3, the LDPC code

can be encoded in linear time and the encoding complexity is

less than

, where is the number of independent

check nodes in and is the average degree of independent

check nodes in . Since there are

auxiliary check

nodes in that have degree , we derive that

for

to do

Compute the constants on the right-hand side of the

generalized parity-check equations of based on the

already known bit values of

.

if is a pseudo-tree then

Encode using Algorithm 1.

else

if is a onefold-constraint encoding stopping set

then

Encode using Algorithm 7.

else

(15)

Encode using Algorithm 5.

end if

Therefore, the overall computation cost of encoding is less

end if

than

. As the LDPC code is equivalent to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

246

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

Fig. 8. Transform a bit node of degree 4 into two bit nodes of degree 3 and an auxiliary check node of degree 2.

the check node that involves the smallest number of outsider

nodes of . After adding seven check nodes, the resulting graph

is a pseudo-tree, as shown in Fig. 12. When nine check nodes

are considered, we get the twofold-constraint encoding stopping

set with key check nodes and shown in Fig. 13. The

bits

are information

bits. The two bit nodes and are chosen to be reevaluated

bits by Algorithm 11.

After finding the encoding stopping set , the remaining

Tanner graph of the code can be constructed to be a twofold-con-

straint encoding stopping set with key check nodes and

, as shown in Fig. 14. Therefore, the LDPC code can be parti-

tioned into two encoding stopping sets and that are shown

in Fig. 14. The bits

in the encoding stop-

ping set are information bits. The two bit nodes and

are chosen to be reevaluated bits of by Algorithm 11.

Encoding.

Encode :

Step 1. Fill the values of the information bits, i.e.,

. Assign

and

.

Step 2. Encode the pseudo-tree shown in Fig. 12. Compute

the parity bits

as

follows:

Fig. 9. Transform a bit node of degree 5 into three bit nodes of degree 3 and two auxiliary check nodes of degree 2.

0 Fig. 10. Transform a bit node of degree k into k 2 bit nodes of degree 3 and 0 k 3 auxiliary check nodes of degree 2.
the LDPC code , the complexity of encoding is less than . This completes the proof.

Step 3. Compute the values of the key parity-check equa-

tions and .

, and

.

Step 4. Since

and

, the correct values of

the reevaluated bits and are

and

.

Step 5. Recompute the parity bits

and

based on the new values of and . We derive

that

.

Encode :

Step 6. Fill the values of the information bits, i.e.,

. Assign

and

.

Step 7. Compute the parity bits

as follows:

Let us look at an example. The parity-check matrix of a

LDPC code with column weight is shown in Fig. 11.

Assume the values of the 13 information bits are

and . We apply the proposed linear complexity

Notice that the value of the parity bit is based

encoding method to encode this code.

on the value of the bit in .

Preprocessing. We construct an encoding stopping set from

Step 8. Compute the values of the key parity-check equa-

the LDPC code shown in Fig. 11 using Algorithm 8. We start

tions and .

from an empty graph and add check nodes and their associated

, and

bit nodes to . Each time we add a check node, we always pick

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: LINEAR TIME ENCODING OF LDPC CODES

247

Fig. 11. The parity-check matrix of a (13; 26) LDPC code.

Fig. 12. A pseudo-tree built from the LDPC code described in Fig. 11.

Step 9. Since

and

the reevaluated bits

and

.

The encoded codeword is

, the correct values of and are

Fig. 13. An encoding stopping set developed from the LDPC code described in Fig. 11.

linear time. Then, we prove that any Tanner graph can be

VIII. CONCLUSION

decomposed into pseudo-trees and encoding stopping sets. By encoding the pseudo-trees and encoding stopping sets in

This paper proposes a linear complexity encoding method for a sequential order, we achieve linear complexity encoding for

general LDPC codes by analyzing and encoding their Tanner arbitrary LDPC codes. The proposed method can be applied

graphs. We show that two particular types of Tanner graphs: to a wide range of codes; it is not limited to LDPC codes. It

pseudo-trees and encoding stopping sets can be encoded in is applicable to both regular LDPC codes and irregular LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

248

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

APPENDIX B FINDING REEVALUATED BITS AND IN A TWOFOLD-CONSTRAINT ENCODING STOPPING SET
WITH KEY CHECK NODES AND
The details are described in Algorithm 11.

Algorithm 11 Finding reevaluated bits and in a twofold-constraint encoding stopping set with key check nodes
and .

Transform the two key check equations and into

equivalent parity-check equations and that involve

only information bits. Assume involves information

bits

and involves information bits

.

.

for

to do

if is involved in but not in then

.

Choose the reevaluated bit to be

. Exit

the for loop.

Fig. 14. Two encoding stopping sets developed from the LDPC code described in Fig. 11.

end if

end for

if

then

Choose the reevaluated bit to be

.

codes. In fact, the proposed linear time encoding method is applicable to any type of block codes. It removes the problem of high encoding complexity for all long block codes that historically are commonly encoded by matrix multiplication.

else

Choose the reevaluated bit to be

.

for

to do

if is involved in but not in then

Choose the reevaluated bit to be

. exit

the for loop.

end if

APPENDIX A PROOF OF LEMMA 2
We prove Lemma 2 by contradiction. Assume a pseudo-tree

end for end if Output the two chosen reevaluated bits

and .

contains an encoding stopping set . Let be an arbitrary check node in the encoding stopping set and is located in the th tier of . According to condition (B1), all the bit nodes that connect to , which include the parent bit node of , are also in the encoding stopping set . By condition (B2), there exists another check node in that connects to the parent bit node of . By condition (A4), the check node must be in a tier above . By the above reasoning, we conclude that the encoding stopping set must contain a check node above the
th tier if contains a check node in the th tier. By repeatedly using the above conclusion, we derive that the encoding stopping set must contain a check node in tier 2. By condition (B1), the parent bit node of , which is in the first tier of
, is also in the encoding stopping set . However, by condition (A2), the parent bit node of has degree one, which violates condition (B2) that every bit node in has degree greater than or equal to two. Therefore, the assumption is wrong. Any pseudo-tree cannot contain an encoding stopping set. Similarly,

Next, we prove that Algorithm 11 can successfully find two bits and that satisfy conditions (D1) to (D3).
Proof: We discuss two different cases. Algorithm 11 chooses a bit that is involved in but not in . Since the bit is directly involved in the parity-check equations and is equivalent to , the value change of alone will affect the value of . Hence, condition (D1) is satisfied. Since Algorithm 11 also chooses another bit that is directly involved in the parity-check equation and is equivalent to , the value change of alone will affect the value of . Hence, condition (D2) is satisfied. Since the parity-check equation only involves the bit but not the bit and is equivalent to , the value changes of both and will change the value of . Hence, condition (D3) is also satisfied. Algorithm 11 chooses a bit that is involved in both and . Since the bit is directly involved in the parity-check equations and is equivalent to , the value change of

we can prove that the union of pseudo-trees cannot contain any

alone will affect the value of . Hence, condition (D1) is

encoding stopping set. This completes the proof.

satisfied. Since Algorithm 11 also chooses another bit that is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: LINEAR TIME ENCODING OF LDPC CODES

249

directly involved in the parity-check equation but not in and is equivalent to , the value change of alone will affect the value of . Hence, condition (D2) is satisfied. Since the parity-check equation only involves the bit but not the bit and is equivalent to , the value changes of both
and will change the value of . Hence, condition (D3) is also satisfied.
This completes the proof.

APPENDIX C IN THE PROOF OF LEMMA 3, THE SUBGRAPH DOES NOT CONTAIN ANY ENCODING STOPPING SET BEFORE ADDING A
CHECK NODE THAT INVOLVES ZERO OUTSIDER NODES

Proof: We prove this fact by contradiction. Assume the

subgraph contains an encoding stopping set before adding

a check node that involves zero outsider nodes. Let the encoding

stopping set contain check nodes

and the check node is being added to the subgraph later

than all the other check nodes

in . From

the construction process of , all the bit nodes that are involved

in check nodes

have already been in before

the check node is being added to . By definition, all the

bit nodes that are involved in check nodes

are not outsider nodes when is being added to . Further,

introduces at least one outsider node to . Therefore, the

outsider node is not connected to any of the check nodes in

the encoding stopping set except for . Since connects

to the check node and is in the encoding stopping set

is also in by condition (B1). However, is only

connected to the check node in , which violates condition

(B2) that every bit node in an encoding stopping set is connected

to at least two check nodes in the encoding stopping set. Hence,

the assumption is wrong. The subgraph does not contain any

encoding stopping set before adding a check node that involves

zero outsider nodes. This completes the proof.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their suggestions which significantly improved the presentation of the results in this paper and to Dr. Igal Sason for his leadership with this paper.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] G. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[4] J. Lu, J. M. F. Moura, and H. Zhang, “Efficient encoding of cycle codes: A graphical approach,” in Proc. 37th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems, and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 2003, pp. 69–73.

[5] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[6] T. Mittelholzer, “Efficient encoding and minimum distance bounds of Reed-Solomon-type array codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information theory (ISIT 2002), Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun. 2002, p. 282.
[7] J. Lu and J. M. F. Moura, “TS-LDPC codes: Turbo-structured codes with large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1080–1094, Mar. 2007.
[8] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[9] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “A family of irregular LDPC codes with low encoding complexity,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 79–81, Feb. 2003.
[10] S. Freundlich, D. Burshtein, and S. Litsyn, “Approximately lower triangular ensembles of LDPC codes with linear encoding complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1484–1494, Apr. 2007.
[11] M. Yang, W. E. Ryan, and Y. Li, “Design of efficiently encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564–570, Apr. 2004.
[12] D. Haley, A. Grant, and J. Buetefuer, “Iterative encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom 2002, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC, Nov. 2002, vol. 2, pp. 1289–1293.
[13] D. Haley and A. Grant, “High rate reversible LDPC codes,” in Proc. 5th Australian Communications Theory Workshop, Newcastle, Australia, Feb. 2004, pp. 114–117.
[14] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[15] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[16] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
Jin Lu (S’01–M’06) received the bachelor and master degrees from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, in 2004.
Then he joined Sun Microsystems, Broomfield, CO, as a researcher. His research interests focus on developing and designing structured LDPC codes with large girth, efficient LDPC encoding and decoding algorithms, hardware implementation of LDPC codes, and advanced signal detection and timing recovery schemes for high-density magnetic recording channels. He holds four issued or pending patents.
José M. F. Moura (S’71-M’75-SM’90-F’94) received the engenheiro electrotécnico degree from Instituto Superior Técnico (IST), Lisbon, Portugal, and the M.Sc., E.E., and the D.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge.
He is a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering and of BioMedical Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, and a founding Codirector of the Center for Sensed Critical Infrastructures Research (CenSCIR). During 2006–2007, he is a Visiting Professor of Electrical Engineering at MIT. He was on the faculty at IST (1975–1984) and has held visiting faculty appointments at MIT (1984–1986 and 1999–2000) and as a research scholar at the University of Southern California (USC), Los Angeles (summers of 1978–1981). His research interests include statistical and algebraic signal processing and digital communications, on which he has published extensively and he holds six patents.
Dr. Moura is the President Elect of the IEEE Signal Processing Society (SPS) and was the Editor-in-Chief for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING (1975–1999). He has been on the Editorial Board of the PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, the IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING MAGAZINE, and the ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks and on the program committee of numerous Conferences and Workshops. He is a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), and a corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences of Portugal (Section of Sciences). He was awarded the 2003 IEEE Signal Processing Society meritorious service award and in 2000 the IEEE Millennium Medal. He is affiliated with several IEEE societies, Sigma Xi, AMS, AAAS, IMS, and SIAM.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

