ISIT 2010, Austin, Texas, U.S.A., June 13 - 18, 2010
Threshold Saturation via Spatial Coupling: Why Convolutional LDPC Ensembles Perform so well
over the BEC
Shrinivas Kudekar∗, Tom Richardson† and Ru¨diger Urbanke∗ ∗School of Computer and Communication Sciences EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland Email: {shrinivas.kudekar, ruediger.urbanke}@epfl.ch † Qualcomm, USA Email: tjr@qualcomm.com

Abstract— Convolutional LDPC ensembles, introduced by Felstro¨m and Zigangirov, have excellent thresholds and these thresholds are rapidly increasing as a function of the average degree. Several variations on the basic theme have been proposed to date, all of which share the good performance characteristics of convolutional LDPC ensembles. We describe the fundamental mechanism which explains why “convolutional-like” or “spatially coupled” codes perform so well. In essence, the spatial coupling of the individual code structure has the effect of increasing the belief-propagation (BP) threshold of the new ensemble to its maximum possible value, namely the maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) threshold of the underlying ensemble. For this reason we call this phenomenon “threshold saturation”. This gives an entirely new way of approaching capacity. One significant advantage of such a construction is that one can create capacityapproaching ensembles with an error correcting radius which is increasing in the blocklength. Our proof makes use of the area theorem of the BP-EXIT curve and the connection between the MAP and BP threshold recently pointed out by Me´asson, Montanari, Richardson, and Urbanke. Although we prove the connection between the MAP and the BP threshold only for a very specific ensemble and only for the binary erasure channel, empirically the same statement holds for a wide class of ensembles and channels. More generally, we conjecture that for a large range of graphical systems a similar collapse of thresholds occurs once individual components are coupled sufficiently strongly. This might give rise to improved algorithms as well as to new techniques for analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
We consider the design of capacity-approaching codes based on the connection between the BP and MAP threshold of sparse graph codes. Recall that the BP threshold is the threshold of the “locally optimum” BP message-passing algorithm. As such it has low complexity. The MAP threshold, on the other hand, is the threshold of the “globally optimum” decoder. No decoder can do better, but the complexity of the MAP decoder is in general high. Surprisingly, for sparse graph codes there is a connection between these two thresholds which emerges in the limit of infinitely large blocklengths, see [1], [2]. We discuss a fundamental mechanism which ensures that these two thresholds coincide (or at least are very close). We call this phenomenon “threshold saturation via spatial coupling”. A prime example where this mechanism is at work are convolutional low-density parity-check (LDPC) ensembles.

These ensembles were introduced by Felstro¨m and Zigangirov

[3].

Convolutional LPDC ensembles are constructed by coupling

several standard (l, r)-regular LDPC ensembles together in a

chain. Perhaps surprisingly, due to the coupling the threshold

of the resulting ensemble is considerably improved. Indeed,

if we start with an (3, 6)-regular ensemble then on the BEC

the threshold is improved from BP(l = 3, r = 6) ≈ 0.4294

to

roughly

0.4881

(the

capacity

for

this

case

is

1 2

).

The

latter

number is indeed the MAP threshold MAP(l, r) of the under-

lying (3, 6)-regular ensemble. In a nutshell, the convolutional

structure allows one to convert the MAP threshold of the

underlying ensemble into the BP threshold of the convolutional

structure. This opens up an entirely new way of constructing

capacity-approaching ensembles. It further shows that it is

possible to construct ensembles that have large BP thresholds

and low error floors, whereas it is a folk theorem that for

standard constructions, improvements in the BP threshold go

hand in hand with increases in the error floor.

The potential of convolutional LDPC codes has long been

recognized. Our contribution lies therefore not in the intro-

duction of a new coding scheme, but in clarifying the basic

mechanism that make convolutional-like ensembles perform

so well. There is a considerable literature on convolutional-

like LDPC ensembles. Variations on the constructions as

well as some analysis can be found in Engdahl and Zigan-

girov [4], Engdahl, Lentmaier, and Zigangirov [5], Lentmaier,

Truhachev, and Zigangirov [6], Papaleo, Iyengar, Siegel, Wolf,

and Corazza [7], as well as Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridhara,

Fuja, and Costello [8]. In [9], Sridharan, Lentmaier, Costello

and Zigangirov consider density evolution (DE) for convo-

lutional LDPC ensembles and determine thresholds for the

BEC. The equivalent observations for general channels were

reported by Lentmaier, Sridharan, Zigangirov and Costello

in [10]. A protograph representation of convolutional LDPC

ensembles was introduced by Lentmaier, Fettweis, Zigangirov

and Costello [11]. In a recent paper [12], Lentmaier and

Fettweis independently formulated the equality of the BP

threshold of convolutional LDPC ensembles and the MAP

threshold of the underlying ensemble as a conjecture. They

attribute this numerical observation to G. Liva.

978-1-4244-7892-7/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

684

ISIT 2010

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2010, Austin, Texas, U.S.A., June 13 - 18, 2010

II. CONVOLUTIONAL-LIKE LDPC ENSEMBLES
The principle that underlies the good performance of convolutional-like LDPC ensembles is very broad and there are many degrees of freedom in constructing such ensembles. In the sequel we introduce two basic variants. The (l, r, L)ensemble is very close to the ensemble discussed in [11]. Experimentally it has a very good performance. We conjecture that it is capable of achieving capacity. We also introduce the ensemble (l, r, L, w). Experimentally it shows a worse tradeoff between rate, threshold, and blocklength. But it is easier to analyze and we will prove that it is capacity achieving. One can think of w as a “smoothing parameter” and we investigate the behavior of this ensemble when w tends to infinity.
A. The (l, r, L) Ensemble
The left-hand side of Figure 1 shows the protograph of a standard (3, 6)-regular ensemble. There are two variable nodes and there is one check node. Let M denote the number of variable nodes at each position. For our example, M = 100 means that we have 50 copies of the protograph so that we have 100 variable nodes at each position. Next, consider a collection of (2L+1) such protographs as shown on the righthand side of Figure 1. These protographs are non-interacting

-L

0

L

Fig. 1. Left figure shows the protograph of a standard (3, 6)-regular ensemble. The figure on the right illustrates a chain of (2L + 1) protographs of the standard (3, 6)-regular ensemble for L = 9. These protographs do not interact.

and so each component behaves just like a standard (3, 6)-

regular component. In particular, the BP threshold of each

protograph is just the standard threshold, call it BP(l = 3, r =

6). Slightly more general; start with an (l, r = kl)-regular ensemble where l is odd so that lˆ = (l − 1)/2 ∈ N.

An interesting phenomenon occurs if we couple these com-

ponents. To achieve this coupling, connect each protograph to lˆ protographs “to the left” and to lˆ protographs “to the right.”

This is shown in Figure 2 for the case (l = 3, r = 6) and L = 9. An extra lˆ check nodes are added on each side to

connect the “overhanging” edges at the boundary. There are

two main effects resulting from this coupling:

(i) Rate Reduction: Recall that the design rate of the under-

lying

standard

(l, r

=

kl)-regular

ensemble

is

1

−

l r

=

k−1 k

.

Let us determine the design rate of the corresponding (l, r =

kl, L) ensemble. By design rate we mean here the rate that

we get if we assume that every involved check node imposes

a linearly independent constraint.

The variable nodes are indexed from −L to L so that in

total there are (2L + 1)M variable nodes. The check nodes are indexed from −(L+lˆ) to (L+lˆ), so that in total there are

-L · · · -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 · · · L
Fig. 2. A coupled chain of protographs with L = 9 and (l = 3, r = 6).

(2(L+lˆ)+1)M/k check nodes. We see that, due to boundary effects, the design rate is reduced to

R(l, r

=

kl, L)

=

k

− k

1

−

2lˆ k(2L +

1) .

(ii) Threshold Increase: The threshold changes dramatically

from BP(l, r) to something close to MAP(l, r) (the MAP

threshold of the underlying standard (l, r)-regular ensemble).

This phenomenon (which we call ”threshold saturation”) is

much less intuitive and it is the aim of this paper to explain

why this happens.

So far we have considered as starting points (l, r = kl)-

regular ensembles. Let us now give a general definition of the

(l, r, L)-ensemble which works for all parameters (l, r) so

that l is odd. Rather than starting from a protograph, place

variable nodes at positions [−L, L]. At each position there

are M such position [−L

variable nodes. Place − lˆ, L + lˆ]. Connect

l r

M

check

exactly one

nodes of the

at each l edges

of each variable node at position i to a check node at position i − lˆ, . . . , i + lˆ.

The next lemma asserts that the minimum stopping set

distance of most codes is at least a fixed fraction of M . For

the proof technique we follow the lead [13], [14].

Lemma 1 (Stopping Set Distance of (l, r, L)-Ensemble): Consider the (l, r, L)-ensemble with l = 2lˆ + 1, lˆ ≥ 1, and

r ≥ l. Define

p(x) =

r xi, a(x) = (

r ixi)/(

r xi),

i

i

i

i=1

i=1

i=1

b(x)

=

−(l

−

1)h2(a(x)/r)

+

l r

log2(p(x))

−

a(x)

l r

log2(x),

ω(x) = a(x)/r, h2(x) = −x log2(x) − (1 − x) log2(1 − x).

Let xˆ denote the unique strictly positive solution of the equation b(x) = 0 and let ωˆ(l, r) = ω(xˆ). Then, for any δ > 0,

lim
M →∞

P{dss(C)/M

<

(1

−

δ)lωˆ(l, r)}

=

0,

where dss(C) denotes the minimum stopping set distance of the code C. Discussion: The quantity ωˆ(l, r) is the relative weight (normalized to the blocklength) at which the exponent of the expected stopping set distribution of the underlying standard (l, r)-regular ensemble becomes positive. It is perhaps not too surprising that the same quantity also appears in our context. The lemma asserts that the minimum stopping set

685
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2010, Austin, Texas, U.S.A., June 13 - 18, 2010

hEBP BP(3, 6) ≈ 0.4294 MAP(3, 6) ≈ 0.4881
hEBP

distance grows linearly in M . But the stated quantity does not scale with L. We leave it as an interesting open problem to determine whether the stated quantity is only a lower bound or indeed equal to the typical relative stopping set distance.

B. The (l, r, L, w) Ensemble

In order to simplify the analysis we modify the ensemble

(l, r, L) by adding a randomization of the edge connections.

For the remainder of this paper we always assume that r ≥ l,

so that the ensemble has a non-trivial design rate.

We assume that the variable nodes are at positions [−L, L],

L ∈ N. At each position there are M variable nodes, M ∈

N. Conceptually we think of the check nodes to be located

at all integer positions from [−∞, ∞]. Only some of these

positions actually interact with the variable nodes. At each

position

there

are

l r

M

check

nodes.

It

remains

to

describe

how the connections are chosen.

Rather than assuming that a variable at position i has exactly one connection to a check node at position [i − lˆ, . . . , i + lˆ],

we assume that each of the l connections of a variable node

at position i is uniformly and independently chosen from the

range [i, . . . , i + w − 1], where w is a “smoothing” parameter.

In the same way, we assume that each of the r connections of

a check node at position i is independently chosen from the

range [i − w + 1, . . . , i]. We no longer require that l is odd.

As discussed beforehand, we will always consider the limit

in which M first tends to infinity and then the number of

iterations tend to infinity. Therefore, for any fixed number of

rounds of DE the probability model is exactly the independent

model described above1.

Lemma 2 (Design Rate): The design rate of the ensemble

(l, r, L, w), with w ≤ 2L, is given by

R(l,

r, L,

w)

=

(1

−

l r

)

−

l r

w

+

1

−2 2L

+

w i=0
1

i w

r
.

There are many variations on the theme that show the same

qualitative behavior. For real applications, these variations are

vital to achieve the best trade-offs. However, the main aim of

this paper is to explain why coupled LDPC codes perform so

well rather than optimizing the ensemble. Therefore, despite

the practical importance of these variations, we focus on the

ensemble (l, r, L, w). It is the simplest to analyze.

III. MAIN STATEMENT AND INTERPRETATION
A. The (l, r, L) Ensemble
Consider the EBP EXIT curve of the (l, r, L) ensemble.2 It is shown in Figure 3 for various values of L. Note that these EBP EXIT curves show a dramatically different behavior
1We refer the reader to [15] for the exact description of the (l, r, L, w) ensemble.
2For a general introduction into EBP EXIT curves of LDPC ensembles see [16]. To compute this curve we proceed as follows. We fix a desired entropy (defined to be the average of the erasure message of a variable node in each section) value, χ. We initialize the constellation with the constant χ. We then repeatedly perform one step of DE, where in each step we fix in such a way that the entropy of the resulting constellation is equal to χ. This procedure is the equivalent of the procedure introduced in [17, Section VIII] to compute the EBP EXIT curve for general binary-input memoryless output-symmetric channels.

L=2 L=1

Fig. 3. The figure on the left depicts the EBP EXIT curves of

the ensemble (3, 6, L) for L = 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, and 128. The

BP/MAP thresholds are BP/MAP(3, 6, 1) = 0.714309/0.820987,

BP/MAP(3, 6, 2)

=

0.587842/0.668951, BP/MAP(3, 6, 4)

=

0.512034/0.574158, BP/MAP(3, 6, 8)

=

0.488757/0.527014,

BP/MAP(3, 6, 16) = 0.488151/0.505833, BP/MAP(3, 6, 32) =

0.488151/0.496366, BP/MAP(3, 6, 64)

=

0.488151/0.492001,

BP/MAP(3, 6, 128) = 0.488151/0.489924. The light/dark gray areas

mark the interior of the BP/MAP EXIT function of the underlying (3, 6)-

regular ensemble, respectively. The figure on the right shows the wiggles

in the EBP EXIT curve for the (3, 6, 32) ensemble. The circle shows a magnified portion of the curve. The horizontal magnification is 107, the

vertical one is 1.

compared to the EBP EXIT curve of the underlying ensemble. These curves appear to be “to the right” of the threshold MAP(3, 6) ≈ 0.48815. For small values of L one might be led to believe that this is true since the design rate of such an ensemble is considerably smaller than 1 − l/r. But even for large values of L, where the rate of the ensemble is close to 1 − l/r, this dramatic increase in the threshold is still true. Emperically we see that, for L increasing, the EBP EXIT curve approaches the MAP EXIT curve of the underlying (3, 6)-regular ensemble from the right. In particular, for ≈ MAP(l, r) the EBP EXIT curve drops essentially vertically until it hits zero. We will see that this is a fundamental property of this construction.
B. Discussion
A look at Figure 3 might convey the impression that the transition of the EBP EXIT function is completely flat and that the threshold of the ensemble (l, r, L) is exactly equal to the MAP threshold of the underlying (l, r)-regular ensemble when L tends to infinity.
Unfortunately, the actual behavior is more subtle. Figure 3, on the right, shows the EBP EXIT curve for L = 32 with a small section of the transition greatly magnified. As one can see from this magnification, the curve is not flat but exhibits small “wiggles” in around MAP(l, r). These wiggles do not vanish as L tends to infinity but their width remains constant. As we will see later, area considerations imply that, in the limit as L diverges to infinity, the BP threshold is slightly below MAP(l, r).
Emperically, these wiggles are very small (e.g., they are of width 10−7 for the (3, 6, L) ensemble), and further, these wiggles tend to 0 when l is increased. Unfortunately this is hard to prove. We therefore study the ensemble (l, r, L, w). The wiggles for this ensemble are in fact larger, but they can be made arbitrarily small by letting w tend to infinity.

686
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2010, Austin, Texas, U.S.A., June 13 - 18, 2010

As pointed out in the introduction, numerical experiments indicate that there is a large class of convolutional-like LDPC ensembles that all have the property that their BP threshold is “close” to the MAP threshold of the underlying ensemble. Unfortunately, no general theorem is known to date that states when this is the case. The following theorem gives a particular instance of what we believe is a general principle. The bounds stated in the theorem are loose and can likely be improved.

a fast “transition”, and has arbitrarily small values towards the boundary. Figure 4 shows a typical such example. We will see
-16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16

C. Main Statement Theorem 3 (BP Threshold of the (l, r, L, w) Ensemble):

Fig. 4. Unimodal FP of the (l = 3, r = 6, L = 16, w = 3) ensemble with small values towards the boundary, a fast transition, and essentially constant values in the middle.

Consider transmission over the BEC( ) using random

elements from the ensemble (l, r, L, w) with l ≥ 3. Let shortly that the associated channel parameter, ∗, of such a FP

BP(l, r, L, w) denote the BP threshold and let R(l, r, L, w) is necessarily very close to MAP(l, r).

denote the design rate of this ensemble. Then, in the limit as (ii) Construction of EXIT Curve: Once we have established

M tends to infinity, and for w > w(l, r),

the existence of such a special FP we construct from it a

MAP(l, r, L, w) ≤

MAP

(l,

r)

+

2L(1

−

(1

w − xMAP

)r−1

)l

,

whole FP family. The elements in this family of FPs look
essentially identical. I.e., they differ only in their “width” and their channel parameter is very close to ∗. This width

BP(l, r, L, w) ≥

MAP(l,

r)

−

w−

1 8

8lr+

4rl2 (1−4w−

1 8

(1

−

2−

1 r

)2

)r

1

−

4w-

1 8

rl.cuhnatinlgietsrecaocnhtiensuozeursoly. ,Tinhiitsiaflalymibleyin“gexepqluaainlst”o

roughly how the

2L + 1 overall

constellation collapses once the channel parameter has reached

In the limit as M , L and w (in that order) tend to infinity, a value close to MAP(l, r): starting from the two boundaries,

lim
w→∞

lim
L→∞

R(l,

r,

L,

w)

=

1

−

l r

,

lim lim BP(l, r, L, w) = lim MAP(l, r, L, w) = MAP(l, r).

w→∞ L→∞

L→∞

Discussion:

(i) The constant w(l, r) is strictly positive, and it depends only on l, r. An explicit expression can be found in

[15], from which one can see that the lower bound is positive. Above, xMAP is the stable fixed-point of DE at MAP(l, r) for the (l, r)-regular ensemble. The lower bound on BP(l, r, L, w) is the main result of the paper. It

shows that, up to a term which tends to zero when w tends

to infinity, the threshold of the chain is equal to the MAP

threshold of the underlying ensemble. The statement in

the theorem is weak. The convergence speed w.r.t. w is

most likely exponential. We prove only a convergence

speed

of

w−

1 8

.

We

pose

it

as

an

open

problem

to

improve

this estimate. (ii) The MAP threshold MAP(l, r) of the underlying ensemble

quickly approaches the Shannon limit (see [16]). We

therefore see that convolutional-like ensembles provide

a way of approaching capacity with low complexity. E.g., for a rate equal to one-half, we get MAP(3, 6) = 0.48815, MAP(4, 8) = 0.49774, MAP(5, 10) = 0.499486, MAP(6, 12) = 0.499876, MAP(7, 14) = 0.499969.

the whole constellation “moves in” like a wave until the two
wave ends meet in the middle. The EBP EXIT curve is a projection of this wave (by computing the EXIT value4 of
each member of the family). If we look at the EBP EXIT
curve, this phenomenon corresponds to the very steep vertical transition close to MAP(l, r).
When we construct the above family of FPs it is mathemat-
ically convenient to allow the channel parameter to depend
on the position. Let us describe this in more detail. We start with a special FP as depicted in Figure 4. From
this we construct a smooth family ( (α), x(α)), parameterized by α, α ∈ [0, 1], where x(1) = 1 and where x(0) = 0. The components of the vector (α) are essentially constants (for α fixed). The possible exceptions are components towards the boundary. We allow those components to take on larger (than in the middle) values. From the family ( (α), x(α)) we then derive an EBP EXIT curve. This smooth family of FPs essentially traces out (starting from α = 1) the EBPEXIT curve for (l, r)-regular ensemble till all the channel components are just greater than ∗. After this point, we show that for a “majority” portion of α, the components of (α) are essentially equal to ∗. We then measure the area enclosed by
this curve. We show that this area is close to the design rate and conclude that ∗ ≈ MAP(l, r). (iii) Operational Meaning of EXIT Curve: We finally show that

the EBP EXIT curve constructed in step (ii) has an operational

D. Proof Outline for the Lower Bound

meaning. More precisely, we show that if we pick < ∗ then

The proof of the lower bound on BP(l, r, L, w) in Theo- forward DE converges to the trivial FP.

rem 3 is long. Due to space limitations, we only provide a short outline. A detailed proof can be found in [15].

IV. DISCUSSION AND POSSIBLE EXTENSIONS

(i) Existence of Fixed-Point (FP): “The” key to the proof is to A. New Paradigm for Code Design show the existence of a unimodal FP ( ∗, x∗) which takes on The explanation of why convolutional-like LDPC ensembles an essentially constant value in the “middle” (≈ xs( ∗))3, has perform so well given in this papers gives rise to a new

3xs( ∗) is the stable FP of DE at ∗ for standard (l, r)-regular ensemble.

4EXIT value of each FP is the average of the EXIT value of each section.

687
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2010, Austin, Texas, U.S.A., June 13 - 18, 2010

paradigm in code design. In known graphical designs one encounters typically a trade-off between the threshold and the error floor behavior. E.g., for standard irregular graphs an optimization of the threshold tends to push up the number of degree-two variable nodes. The same quantity, on the other tends to favor the existence of low weight (pseudo)codewords.
For convolutional-like LDPC ensembles the important operational quantity is the MAP threshold of the underlying ensemble. As, e.g., regular LDPC ensembles show, it is simple to improve the MAP threshold and to improve the error-floor performance – just increase the minimum variablenode degree. An emperical study of the threshold saturation phenomenon for transmission over an additive white Gaussian noise channel can be found in [18].
B. Scaling Behavior
In our design there are three parameters that tend to infinity. The number of variables nodes at each position, called M , the length of the constellation L, and the length of the smoothing window w. Assume we fix w and we are content with achieving a threshold slightly below the MAP threshold. How should we scale M with respect to L so that we achieve the best performance? This question is of considerable practical importance. Recall that the total length of the code is of order L · M . We would therefore like to keep this product small. Further, the rate loss is of order 1/L (so L should be large) and M should be chosen large so as to approach the performance predicted by DE. Finally, how does the number of required iterations scale as a function of L?
Also, in the proof we assumed that we fix L and let M tend to infinity so that we can use DE techniques. We have seen that in this limit the boundary conditions of the constellation dictate the performance of the system regardless of the size of L (as long as L is fixed and M tends to infinity). Is the same behavior still true if we let L tend to infinity as a function of M ? At what scaling does the behavior change?
C. Extension to General Coupled Graphical Systems
Codes based on graphs are just one instance of graphical systems that have distinct thresholds for “local” algorithms (BP threshold) and for “optimal” algorithms (MAP threshold). To be sure, coding is somewhat special – it is conjectured that the so-called replica-symmetric solution always determines the threshold under MAP processing for codes based on graphs. Nevertheless, it is interesting to investigate to what extent the coupling of general graphical systems shows a similar behavior. Is there a general class of graphical models in which the same phenomena occurs? If so, can this phenomenon either be used to analyze systems or to devise better algorithms?
D. Why are Coupled Codes so Good?
For (uncoupled) LDPC ensembles it was shown in [2] that a suitable modified BP decoder, called the Maxwell decoder, is capable of decoding up to the MAP threshold. All the BP requires is some ”push”. For the Maxwell decoder this push is provided in the form of guesses. For the coupled case it

is the spatial arrangement which provides this push. The key
lies in the existence of the special FP as discussed in point
(i) of Section III-D. As this FP indicates, the information
can flow along the chain of coupled graphs starting from the
boundary, where everything is known, towards the inside of
the constellation. Neighbors are helping neighbors – how nice.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank N. Macris for his help in choosing
the title. The work of SK was supported by the grant from the
Swiss National Foundation no 200020-113412.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Me´asson, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Life above threshold: From list decoding to area theorem and MSE,” in Proc. of the IEEE Inform. Theory Workshop, San Antonio, TX, USA, Oct. 2004, e-print: cs.IT/0410028.
[2] C. Me´asson, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “Maxwell construction: The hidden bridge between maximum-likelihood and iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5277 – 5307, 2008.
[3] A. J. Felstro¨m and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 2181–2190, Sept. 1999.
[4] K. Engdahl and K. S. Zigangirov, “On the theory of low density convolutional codes I,” Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 295–310, 1999.
[5] K. Engdahl, M. Lentmaier, and K. S. Zigangirov, “On the theory of lowdensity convolutional codes,” in AAECC-13: Proceedings of the 13th International Symposium on Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error-Correcting Codes. London, UK: Springer-Verlag, 1999, pp. 77– 86.
[6] M. Lentmaier, D. V. Truhachev, and K. S. Zigangirov, “To the theory of low-density convolutional codes. ii,” Probl. Inf. Transm., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 288–306, 2001.
[7] M. Papaleo, A. Iyengar, P. Siegel, J. Wolf, and G. Corazza, “Windowed erasure decoding of LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. of the IEEE Inform. Theory Workshop, Cairo, Egypt, Jan. 2010, pp. 78 – 82.
[8] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridhara, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Ldpc block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966 – 2984, Dec. 2004.
[9] A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. S. Zigangirov, “Convergence analysis of a class of LDPC convolutional codes for the erasure channel,” in Proc. of the Allerton Conf. on Commun., Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2004.
[10] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. C. Jr., “Terminated LDPC convolutional codes with thresholds close to capacity,” CoRR, vol. abs/cs/0508030, 2005.
[11] M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Approaching capacity with asymptotically regular LDPC codes,” in Information Theory and Applications, San Diego, USA, Feb. 8–Feb. 13, 2009, pp. 173–177.
[12] M. Lentmaier and G. P. Fettweis, “On the thresholds of generalized LDPC convolutional codes based on protographs,” 2010, submitted to ISIT’10.
[13] R. Smarandache, A. Pusane, P. Vontobel, and J. D.J. Costello, “Pseudocodewords in LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. of the IEEE Int. Symposium on Inform. Theory, Seattle, WA, USA, July 2006, pp. 1364 – 1368.
[14] ——, “Pseudocodeword performance analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2577–2598, June 2009.
[15] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” 2010, e-print: http://arxiv.org/abs/1001.1826.
[16] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[17] C. Me´asson, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “The generalized area theorem and some of its consequences,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 4793–4821, Nov. 2009.
[18] S. Kudekar, C. Measson, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold Saturation on BMS Channels via Spatial Coupling,” Apr. 2010, e-print: http://arxiv.org/abs/1004.3742.

688
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

