IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010
1
Transactions Letters
Multiple-Bases Belief-Propagation Decoding of
High-Density Cyclic Codes
Thorsten Hehn, Student Member, IEEE, Johannes B. Huber, Fellow, IEEE, Olgica Milenkovic, Member, IEEE,
and Stefan Laendner, Student Member, IEEE
Abstract—We introduce a new method for decoding short
and moderate-length linear block codes with dense parity-
check matrix representations of cyclic form. This approach is
termed multiple-bases belief-propagation. The proposed iterative
scheme makes use of the fact that a code has many structurally
diverse parity-check matrices, capable of detecting different error
patterns. We show that this inherent code property leads to
decoding algorithms with significantly better performance when
compared to standard belief-propagation decoding. Furthermore,
we describe how to choose sets of parity-check matrices of
cyclic form amenable for multiple-bases decoding, based on
analytical studies performed for the binary erasure channel. For
several cyclic and extended cyclic codes, the multiple-bases belief-
propagation decoding performance can be shown to closely follow
that of the maximum-likelihood decoder.
Index Terms—Algebraic codes, belief propagation, multiple-
bases belief-propagation decoding, stopping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
C
LASSICAL algebraic codes of short block length have
large minimum distance and efficient soft-decision de-
coding algorithms [2], [3]. Consequently, these codes rep-
resent a good choice for low-delay applications where high
transmission reliability is required. Algebraic codes are also
frequently used as components of product codes and parts of
concatenated coding schemes. In modern storage and commu-
nication systems, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are
most often used as the inner coding scheme. For this reason it
is desirable to implement a soft-input soft-output decoder for
algebraic codes as a belief-propagation (BP) algorithm. This
is a reasonable choice as the decoder can handle both types
of codes. Since algebraic block codes have dense parity-check
matrices with a large number of short cycles [4], [5], standard
BP decoders offer poor error-correcting performance for such
codes.
Paper approved by F. Fekri, the Editor for LDPC Codes and Applications
of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received September 17,
2007; revised June 16, 2008 and May 1, 2009.
T. Hehn, J. B. Huber, and S. Laendner are with the Institute for Information
Transmission (LIT) FAU Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany (e-mail: {hehn,
huber, laendner}@lnt.de).
O. Milenkovic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA (e-mail:
milenkov@uiuc.edu).
Parts of the results were presented at the IEEE International Symposium
on Information Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, 2007. The work was supported
in part by the NSF grant CCF 0644427 awarded to Olgica Milenkovic. Note:
A full-size paper corresponding to this letter can be found online [1].
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2010.01.070468
The use of redundant parity-check matrices for iterative
decoding schemes when signaling over the binary erasure
channel (BEC) has been excessively studied. Several authors
proposed using a high number of redundant checks [6], [7], [8]
to improve the decoding performance. This type of decoding
has also drawn the attention of researchers who studied this
concept in the context of the AWGN channel. Other authors
proposed adaptive BP algorithms [9], [10], which iteratively
optimize the matrix representation during the decoding pro-
cess. Such schemes have large implementation complexity
due to the required matrix reduction after each iteration. The
random redundant decoding (RRD) [4] algorithm does not
require this type of processing and obtains very promising
results. This is accomplished by serially altering the applied
matrix representation within the decoding process. Another
closely related approach was described in [11], where a simple
simulation-based study was performed using randomly chosen
parity-check matrices of the [24, 12, 8] extended Golay code.
This approach offers poor performance when compared to the
algorithms described in this work.
The approach followed in this paper draws upon the prior
work of the authors on BEC decoding [12] and introduces a
novel decoding method that operates in parallel and iterative
fashion on a collection of parity-check matrices. Using this set
of decoder representations, the algorithm performs joint output
processing in order to estimate the transmitted codeword. This
output processing can occur at various stages of decoding and
it may have various degrees of complexity. We distinguish
between techniques where the BP algorithms run separately
and compare them to schemes where the decoders are allowed
to exchange information. We investigate processing of the
form of metric and complexity selection, averaging of prob-
abilities [13], information combining [14], as well as certain
reliability-based schemes.
As the different representations of the parity-check matrix
form bases of the dual code, we refer to the proposed
approaches as Multiple-Bases Belief-Propagation (MBBP) de-
coding. For the purpose of MBBP decoding, one needs to
identify classes of parity-check matrices that jointly offer good
decoding performance. In order to accomplish this task, we
propose using parity-check matrix design techniques originally
developed for the BEC but subsequently used for signaling
over the AWGN channel. It was observed that this approach
leads to good performance results [15]. Moreover, this method
relies on the fact that the performance of a parity-check matrix
0090-6778/10$25.00 c⃝2010 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010
for the BEC is completely characterized by combinatorial
entities termed stopping sets [16]; and, that pseudocodewords
for linear programming decoders of several classes of chan-
nels represent stopping sets for any channel in the Tanner
graph [17], [18]. Although we focus our attention on parity-
check matrix construction techniques for cyclic codes, the
described concepts can be generalized for other classes of
codes as well.
The main differences between the existing RRD algorithm
and the proposed MBBP scheme are that RRD operates in a
serial fashion in terms of periodically permuting the received
word, while MBBP works in a parallel manner. Further,
the RRD algorithm uses message scaling processing between
iterations that tends to increase the overall complexity of the
scheme. Contrary, the MBBP algorithm deploys the standard
update rules defined by message passing decoding. Finally, the
RRD algorithm uses a greedy search over the Tanner graphs to
find a representation which offers good performance. Further it
deploys random techniques to select the permutations used to
interchange the positions of the variable nodes. The MBBP
algorithm relies on specially designed parity-check matrix
families. Transformations from one element of a family to
another one and between families, respectively, are done by
means of algebraic rules.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces rel-
evant definitions and terminology, while Section III contains a
description of the bases selection process. Section IV presents
a set of different variations of MBBP decoding algorithms.
Simulation results are presented in Section V.
II. DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY
We start by introducing the terminology related to stopping
sets and the BEC. We also provide the terminology needed
for describing the MBBP decoding approach.
Definition II.1. Let 𝑨be an 𝑚×𝑛matrix, and let the columns
of 𝑨be indexed by the set of integers 𝒥= {0, . . . , 𝑛−1}.
For a set ℐ⊆𝒥, we define the restriction of 𝑨to ℐas the
𝑚× ∣ℐ∣array of elements composed of the columns of 𝑯
indexed by ℐ.
When transmitting over the BEC, stopping sets completely
determine the failure modes of iterative decoders. For com-
pleteness we define these sets below [16].
Definition II.2. For a given parity-check matrix 𝑯of an
[𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑑] binary linear code 𝒞, a stopping set 𝒮(𝑯) of size 𝜎is
a set ℐof 𝜎positions in the codeword for which the restriction
of 𝑯to ℐdoes not contain rows of Hamming weight one.
Clearly, a codeword is a stopping set and consequently the
size of the smallest stopping set of any given parity-check
matrix cannot exceed 𝑑.
In order to compare different parity-check matrix repre-
sentations with respect to their decoding performance, we
restrict our attention to a simple evaluation criteria: the number
of stopping sets of size less than or equal to 𝜎, for some
predefined value 1 ≤𝜎≤𝑑. Given a parity-check matrix 𝑯,
the number of its stopping sets of size 𝜎will henceforth be
denoted by ∣𝒮𝜎(𝑯)∣. Although stopping sets are known to
completely characterize the performance of iterative decoders
only for the BEC, they also represent a partial performance
indicator for transmission over the AWGN channel. This is
due to the intimate connection between stopping sets and
pseudocodewords [17], [19].
As we focus our attention on codes with parity-check
matrices of cyclic form, a code category that includes cyclic
codes, we also provide the following definitions.
Definition II.3. Let 𝒞be a binary, linear code and 𝒞⊥its
dual. A parity-check matrix of 𝒞is said to be of cyclic form
if it consists of 𝑛−𝑘≤𝑚≤𝑛consecutive cyclic shifts
of one chosen codeword of 𝒞⊥. The qualifier “consecutive”
implies that the (𝑖+ 1)-th row of the parity-check matrix,
1 ≤𝑖≤𝑚−1, is the cyclic right shift of the 𝑖-th row by
one position. A code 𝒞is called cyclic if any cyclic shift of a
codeword 𝒄∈𝒞is also a codeword, and it necessarily has at
least one parity-check matrix of cyclic form.
For a code with at least one parity-check matrix of cyclic
form, we introduce the notion of a partition of the set of
codewords of 𝒞⊥and the notion of a cyclic orbit generator
(cog).
Definition II.4. Let 𝒞be a binary, linear, cyclic code. Partition
the set of codewords of 𝒞⊥into disjoint orbits (subsets)
consisting of cyclic shifts of one codeword. Let one designated
codeword in the orbit be the representative of the subset. This
codeword is referred to as the cyclic orbit generator (cog).
Throughout the paper we focus our attention on cogs of
minimum Hamming weight. Little technical modifications are
required in the above definition to encompass parity-check
matrices that are of cyclic form when restricted to a proper
subset of columns, e.g. extended cyclic codes.
Let 𝒢be the set of cyclic orbit generators with Hamming
weight equal to the minimum distance of the dual code, 𝑑⊥.
A cyclic orbit generator cog ℓ∈𝒢, ℓ= 1, . . . , ∣𝒢∣, is used to
construct a parity-check matrix 𝑯ℓ, ℓ= 1, . . . , ∣𝒢∣, of size
𝑚× 𝑛, 𝑛−𝑘≤𝑚≤𝑛, such that the row-rank of the matrix
is 𝑛−𝑘1. This matrix consists of 𝑚consecutive right shifts
of cog ℓ. To avoid identical rows in 𝑯ℓ, even if 𝑚= 𝑛holds,
only cogs with a period of 𝑛, i.e. cogs with a cyclic orbit that
consists of 𝑛distinct shifts, are considered for the construction
process.
Note that a redundant parity-check matrix of cyclic form
can have at most 𝑛distinct rows. The larger the value of
𝑚, the larger the hardware implementation complexity of
the BP decoder. Nevertheless, based on extensive computer
simulations, it was observed that for decoding of algebraic
codes signaled over the AWGN channel the best decoding
performance is achieved for 𝑚= 𝑛. This finding holds for
both the bit error rate (BER) and frame error rate (FER). The
reason supporting this observation is intuitively clear. Consider
a parity-check matrix of cyclic form for which 𝑚= 𝑛−𝑘, as
shown in (1) for 𝑚= 3, 𝑛= 7. Here, the symbol 𝑥serves as
1Here, and throughout the paper, we only consider cogs that generate parity-
check matrices with row-rank 𝑛−𝑘. As a consequence, we use the word bases
to describe the underlying matrices, although the considered structures are
actually frames. Frames are over-complete systems in which every element
of a vector space can be represented in a not necessarily unique manner [20].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HEHN et al.: MULTIPLE-BASES BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODING OF HIGH-DENSITY CYCLIC CODES
3
placeholder for the bits of the generating cog of the matrix.
⎛
⎝
1
𝑥
𝑥
𝑥
1
0
0
0
1
𝑥
𝑥
𝑥
1
0
0
0
1
𝑥
𝑥
𝑥
1
⎞
⎠
(1)
As can be seen from (1), not all of the seven bits participate
in the same number of parity-check equations - the column
degrees of the parity-check matrix vary with the column.
There exist at least two bits (including the first and last)
that participate in only one parity-check, and therefore have
very low probability of being correctly decoded. Depending
on the particular choice of the cog, the set of symbols at
the beginning and at the end of the codeword is strongly
restricted with respect to the maximum number of parity-
checks it can participate in. This problem can be solved by
setting 𝑚= 𝑛: such a row-redundancy allows for achieving
equal error protection for all code symbols [21]. Computer
simulations show that for the codes considered in this work
and in [1], this effect outbalances the performance degradation
by additional cycles. Therefore, square parity-check matrices
will be used throughout the remainder of this paper.
We conclude this section by introducing the notion of a cog
family of a set of parity-check matrices.
Definition II.5. Let ℱ1, ℱ2, . . . , ℱ𝐹be a partition of the set of
indices {1, . . . , ∣𝒢∣}, so that the “stopping set performance” of
𝑯ℓis fixed within each family ℱ𝑓, for all ℓ∈ℱ𝑓, and for all
𝑓∈{1, . . . , 𝐹}. The “stopping set performance” of a parity-
check matrix, defined for both the BEC and AWGN channel,
is the number of stopping sets of size up to and including 𝑑.
We refer to the set {cog ℓ}, ℓ∈ℱ𝑓, as the 𝑓-th cog family.
III. BASES SELECTION FOR MBBP DECODING
Recall that a linear [𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑑] code 𝒞is uniquely defined by
a parity-check matrix 𝑯of rank 𝑛−𝑘or a generator matrix
𝑮of rank 𝑘. There usually exists a large number of generator
and parity-check matrices for the same code. For BP decoding
over AWGN channels, one usually seeks a sparse parity-check
matrix 𝑯.
Adding redundant rows to parity-check matrices improves
the performance of iterative decoding for the BEC, but usu-
ally has detrimental effects on BP decoders correcting data
signaled over the AWGN channel. This can be attributed to
the increase of the number of short cycles and the density of
the matrix. But, as was shown by the authors in [22], adding
judiciously chosen redundant rows may increase the minimum
weight of pseudocodewords (and trapping sets) of the given
parity-check matrix.
In order to exploit the benefits offered by redundant parity-
check matrices with respect to pseudocodeword performance,
while controlling the negative effects on the cycle lengths, the
following approach can be used. Rather than decoding a re-
ceived word in terms of only one parity-check matrix, one can
use a collection of parity-check matrices, each with small row-
redundancy, in parallel. The results of the decoders operating
on different parity-check matrices can then be appropriately
combined. This is the main idea behind MBBP decoding,
and for this purpose, we propose to develop good heuristic
techniques for identifying parity-check matrices which offer
both good individual and joint decoding performance.
For cyclic algebraic codes, we proved in a companion paper
[12] that parity-check matrices that consist of cyclic shifts of
carefully chosen cogs offer excellent stopping set properties.
In what follows, we focus on identifying families of cogs
that obtain very good decoding performance for the AWGN
channel. The iterative decoding performance of a fixed parity-
check matrix used over the AWGN channel is, to a certain
extent, strongly correlated with its BEC performance. Hence,
we use the total number of stopping sets of size up to 𝑑as
our cog family optimization criteria.
Since cogs from the same family define parity-check matri-
ces of cyclic form with identical properties for the BEC and
comparable properties for the AWGN channel, it is desirable
to identify the family with the best performance and then
exclusively use cogs from this family to build matrices for
MBBP decoding. Identifying all families along with its mem-
bers by counting stopping sets in the corresponding matrices
is computationally expensive [23]. Also, storing all cogs used
for decoding can be prohibitively costly. In order to avoid
these problems, we propose to use a cog mapping technique
that relies on the notion of the automorphism group of a code.
Definition III.1. [24, Ch. 8] The permutations which send
𝒞into itself, i.e. codewords go into (possibly different) code-
words, form the automorphism group of the code 𝒞, denoted
by Aut(𝒞). If 𝒞is a linear code and 𝒞⊥is its dual code, then
Aut(𝒞) = Aut(𝒞⊥).
It is straightforward to prove that there exists a set of
permutations 𝒫in the automorphism group of a cyclic code
which map one cog into another cog from the same family.
Fixing one cog, and then applying a subset of permutations
from 𝒫to it, represents a convenient way for generating
redundant parity-check matrices with identical densities and
comparable performance under MBBP decoding.
We provide next a partial characterization of the set 𝒫for
cyclic codes. More precisely, we describe how to find a large
set of permutations 𝒫for which ∣𝒮𝜎(𝑯𝑎)∣= ∣𝒮𝜎(𝑯𝑏)∣, for
𝜎≤𝑛, where the generating cogs of 𝑯𝑎and 𝑯𝑏satisfy
cog 𝑏= 𝜅(cog 𝑎), and where 𝜅(⋅) ∈𝒫. Here, 𝜅(cog 𝑎) is used
to denote the action of the permutation 𝜅on the vector cog 𝑎.
Note that the same framework can be used when only stopping
sets up to a size smaller than or equal to 𝑑are considered.
It is well known that the automorphism group of a
cyclic code contains two classes of permutations [24]. The
first class, referred to as 𝑃1, contains cyclic permutations
𝛼0, 𝛼1, . . . , 𝛼𝑛−1, where 𝛼: 𝑖→(𝑖+ 1) mod 𝑛,
𝑖=
0, . . . , 𝑛−1, or, equivalently, 𝛼(𝒄) = (𝑐𝑛−1, 𝑐0, 𝑐1, . . . , 𝑐𝑛−2)
holds. The second class, denoted by 𝑃2, is the class of per-
mutations 𝛽0, 𝛽1, . . . , 𝛽ℎ−1, where 𝛽: 𝑖→(2⋅𝑖) mod 𝑛, 𝑖=
0, . . . , 𝑛−1. Alternatively, this can be specified by 𝛽(𝒄) =
(𝑐0 𝑐(𝑛+1)/2 𝑐1 . . . 𝑐(𝑛−1)/2). Here, ℎdenotes the cardinality
of the cyclotomic coset of the 𝑛-th roots of unity that contains
one. Above, all subscripts are taken modulo 𝑛. For extended
cyclic codes, the described permutations are only to be applied
to the cyclic part of the codeword.
We find the following definition useful for our subsequent
derivations.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
4
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010
Definition III.2. Let 𝜅be a permutation operating on a vector
𝒗, resulting in a vector 𝒕= 𝜅(𝒗). We define the 𝜅-permutation
of an 𝑚×𝑛matrix 𝑽as a matrix obtained by permuting each
row of 𝑽according to 𝜅. In this setting, 𝑻= 𝜅(𝑽) is used
to denote 𝑻(𝜇, :) = 𝜅(𝑽(𝜇, :)), 𝜇= 1, . . . , 𝑚, where 𝑿(𝜇, :)
represents the 𝜇-th row of the matrix 𝑿.
The following straightforward results provide a partial char-
acterization of the set of permutations 𝒫of cyclic codes. All
proofs rely on the fact that 𝛼𝑗𝜃= 𝜃𝛼𝑗′, for any integer 𝑗and
some integer 𝑗′, and for 𝜃∈𝒜(𝑛), the affine group of order
𝑛.
Lemma III.3. A necessary and sufficient condition for
𝜃(𝛼𝑗(cog 𝑎)) = 𝛼𝑗′(𝜃(cog 𝑎))
for all 𝑗∈{0, . . . , 𝑛−1} and some 𝑗′ ∈{0, . . . , 𝑛−1} to
hold is that 𝜃(⋅) is an affine permutation. A permutation of
that kind is defined as
𝜃: 𝑖→𝑞⋅𝑖+ 𝜔mod 𝑛,
for some 𝑞∈{0, . . . , 𝑛−1}, 𝜔∈{0, . . . , 𝑛−1}, and 𝑖=
0, . . . , 𝑛−1, such that gcd(𝑞, 𝑛) = 1. Here, gcd(𝑞, 𝑛) denotes
the greatest common divisor of 𝑞and 𝑛.
Proof: The claim of Lemma III.3 can be rewritten as
𝜃(𝑖+ 𝑗) = 𝜃(𝑖) + 𝑗′ mod 𝑛,
with 𝑗∈{0, . . ., 𝑛−1}, 𝑗′ ∈{0, . . . , 𝑛−1}, 𝑖= 0, . . . , 𝑛−1,
and where 𝜃(𝑖) denotes the action of the permutation 𝜃on the
coordinate 𝑖.
The former equality is true if and only if 𝜃(𝑖) is a linear
function of the form 𝑞⋅𝑖+ 𝜔for which gcd(𝑞, 𝑛) = 1. Con-
sequently, there exists a one-to-one correspondence between
𝑗and 𝑗′.
The lemma asserts that cyclic permutations commute (up
to a cyclic shift) with all affine permutations in a symmetric
group.
Claim III.4. If cog 𝑏= 𝛼𝑗(cog 𝑎), for some 𝑗∈{0, . . . , 𝑛−
1}, then ∣𝒮𝜎(𝑯𝑎)∣= ∣𝒮𝜎(𝑯𝑏)∣, for all 𝜎≤𝑛.
Proof: Applying 𝛼𝑗to cog 𝑎cyclically permutes the rows
of 𝑯𝑎. This cyclic permutation preserves all stopping sets,
which proves the claimed result.
Claim III.5. If cog 𝑐= 𝛽𝑗(cog 𝑎), for some 𝑗∈{0, . . . , ℎ−
1}, then ∣𝒮𝜎(𝑯𝑎)∣= ∣𝒮𝜎(𝑯𝑐)∣, for all 𝜎≤𝑛.
Proof: It is straightforward to see that
𝑯𝑐(𝜇, :)
=
𝛼𝜇−1(𝑯𝑐(1, :))
=
𝛼𝜇−1(𝛽𝑗(𝑯𝑎(1, :)))
=
𝛽𝑗(𝛼𝜇′−1(𝑯𝑎(1, :))),
(2)
since 𝛽𝑗is an affine permutation with 𝑞= 2𝑗and 𝜔= 0. As
a result, 𝑯𝑐can be transformed into 𝑯𝑎through row- and
column-permutations.
We conclude that 𝒜(𝑛) ∩Aut(𝒞) ⊆𝒫: in other words,
applying affine transforms from the automorphism group of
the code to one chosen cog in the family produces cogs
that generate parity-check matrices with identical stopping set
distributions. Therefore, the MBBP decoder does not have to
store all redundant bases, but rather a set of permutations,
along with a low number of cog vectors that are known to have
good stopping set properties, which is a desirable property for
practical applications.
Let ˆ𝑓denote the index of the optimal or near-optimal family.
One vector cog ˆ𝑙, ˆ𝑙∈ℱˆ
𝑓, and a subset of permutations in
Aut(𝒞) suffice to generate a set of cogs from ℱˆ
𝑓. Depending
on the set of available permutations, multiple cogs may be
required to generate all cogs from the family ℱˆ
𝑓. Following,
the matrices 𝑯ℓ, ℓ∈ℱˆ
𝑓can be constructed by cyclically
shifting the corresponding cogs, cf. Section II.
IV. MBBP DECODING
We describe next in more detail the operating principles
of the MBBP decoders, and modifications thereof. The basic
components of an MBBP decoder are collections of (possi-
bly redundant) parity-check matrices, and logical units that
combine and process outputs of BP decoders operating on
the matrices of the collection. We distinguish two basic
MBBP architectures: one, which allows information exchange
between decoders (MBBP-X) and another, where the decoder
outputs are obtained without exchange of information (MBBP-
NX). The decoders in the former category have the feature
that information on the reliability of the received symbols can
be exchanged during the process of iterative BP decoding;
decoders in the latter class can only combine their results
upon termination of their individual decoding processes. Both
types of decoders can be implemented by storing a set of
parity-check matrices. However, if only matrices based on one
family of cogs are used, one needs to store only a low number
of cogs, along with a set of permutations from 𝒫.
The simplest architecture of an MBBP decoder is depicted
in Fig. 1, where the outputs of individual decoders are jointly
processed only at the end of the decoding cycle. We refer to
this technique as standard MBBP decoding.
A. MBBP-NX decoding
Standard MBBP decoding (MBBP-NX-S) and its variation
First-success MBBP decoding (MBBP-NX-FS) generate a
collection of decoded words and then perform an additional
metric selection within this set of words. The result of this pro-
cessing is passed on to the information sink, which represents
the gateway for the final codeword estimate of the decoder.
The MBBP-NX-S decoder runs multiple BP decoders in
parallel, each of them separately and on a different parity-
check matrix representation of the code. Let the parity-check
matrix representation used by the ℓ-th decoder be denoted by
𝑯ℓ, ℓ= 1, . . . , 𝑙, and its decoded vector after at most 𝑁
iterations by ˆ𝒄ℓ, ℓ= 1, . . . , 𝑙. We let 𝒱⊆{1, . . . , 𝑙} be the set
of indices ℓdescribing decoders that converged to a valid code-
word. If none of the decoders converged to a valid codeword,
we let 𝒱= {1, . . . , 𝑙}. The words estimated by the decoders,
ˆ𝒄𝑣, 𝑣∈𝒱are passed on to a least metric selector (LMS)
unit, which determines the “best” codeword estimate using
the decision rule ˆ𝒄= argmax𝑣∈𝒱Pr {𝒀= 𝒚∣𝑪= ˆ𝒄𝑣}. The
estimated information vector ˆ𝒖is obtained from ˆ𝒄in the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HEHN et al.: MULTIPLE-BASES BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODING OF HIGH-DENSITY CYCLIC CODES
5
𝒚
1∈𝒱?
2∈𝒱?
𝑙∈𝒱?
ˆ𝒄
BP-Dec.
BP-Dec.
BP-Dec.
on
on
on
ˆ𝒄1
ˆ𝒄2
ˆ𝒄𝑙
𝑯1
𝑯2
𝑯𝑙
. . .
. . .
. . .
LMS
𝑁
Fig. 1. MBBP-NX-S decoding.
standard manner. Fig. 1 depicts the operation of the MBBP-
NX-S decoder.
The MBBP-NX-FS decoder follows the standard approach
in so far that it runs multiple BP decoders separately, each
on a different parity-check matrix of the code. Denote the
number of iterations required by the ℓ-th decoder to converge
by 𝑁ℓ. As soon as the first decoder, indexed by ℓ∗, identifies
a codeword, the decoding process terminates. The estimate
obtained by the decoder indexed by ℓ∗is passed on to the
information sink. If two or more decoders converge to a
codeword after the same number of iterations, one of the
outputs is randomly chosen from 𝒄𝑣, where 𝑣∈𝒱and where
𝒱is defined as for the MBBP-NX-S decoder. This approach
requires only 𝑁ℓ∗= minℓ𝑁ℓiterations to converge, and has
therefore a lower time-complexity when compared to MBBP-
NX-S. This effect shows in particular in the low signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) regime, cf. [1].
B. MBBP-X decoding
In this section we present MBBP approaches which allow
for periodic exchange of information between decoders during
iterative BP decoding. To this end, each decoder performs in-
dependently a given number of iterations, 𝑁p, and afterwards
exchanges information with other decoders only at iterations
indexed by 𝜄⋅𝑁p, where 𝜄∈ℕ. The intrinsic information of a
given variable node depends only on the channel output and is
therefore equal for all decoders. For this reason, the decoders
exchange only extrinsic information about the variable nodes.
To emphasize that the messages exchanged between de-
coders represent extrinsic information, they are denoted by
Pr(e)(⋅). As part of their cooperation scheme, the decoders
agree on the (extrinsic) probability values for each variable
node. Afterwards, each decoder replaces its own informa-
tion about a given variable node with the jointly derived
estimate of the decoders, then calculates the a-posteriori
information, and resumes decoding. The jointly derived es-
timate can be found by probabilistic averaging (probability-
averaging MBBP, MBBP-X-PA), by selecting the most reliable
output from all decoders (highest-reliability MBBP-X, MBBP-
X-HR), and by information combining [14] (information-
combining MBBP-X, MBBP-X-IC). The latter approach is the
optimal decision method on the value of a random variable
when multiple independent noisy observations are given. We
point out that the combined observations, which originate from
different BP decoders, are not independent. Nevertheless, we
propose this type of algorithm.
For the purpose of computing the cooperative extrinsic
probability, only a subset of active decoders 𝒜𝜈, 𝜈
=
0, . . . , 𝑛−1, is used. This subset is selected in terms of a
soft-metric majority vote ¯𝑣𝜈which is calculated for a variable
node 𝜈according to
¯𝑣𝜈=
𝑙
∑
ℓ=1
log
(
Pr(e)(𝑐ℓ,𝜈= 0 ∣𝑯ℓ, 𝒚)
Pr(e)(𝑐ℓ,𝜈= 1 ∣𝑯ℓ, 𝒚)
)
, 𝜈= 0, . . . , 𝑛−1.
The subset of decoders used in the described processing step
is different for each variable node and defined as
𝒜𝜈
=
(3)
{
ℓ∣sgn(¯𝑣𝜈) = sgn
(
log
(
Pr(e)(𝑐ℓ,𝜈= 0 ∣𝑯ℓ, 𝒚)
Pr(e)(𝑐ℓ,𝜈= 1 ∣𝑯ℓ, 𝒚)
))}
,
where 𝜈= 0, . . . , 𝑛−1 holds, and sgn(⋅) denotes the sign
function.
If averaging is used, the updated probabilities are calculated
by
Pr(e)(𝑐𝜈= 0) =
1
∣𝒜𝜈∣
∑
ℓ′∈𝒜𝜈
Pr(e)(𝑐ℓ′,𝜈= 0 ∣𝑯ℓ′, 𝒚),
where 𝜈= 0, . . . , 𝑛−1.
In the case of MBBP-X-HR, we calculate Pr(e)(𝑐𝜈= 0) =
Pr(e)(𝑐ℓ∗,𝜈= 0 ∣𝑯ℓ∗, 𝒚), with
ℓ∗= argmaxℓ′∈𝒜𝜈∣Pr(e)(𝑐ℓ′,𝜈= 0 ∣𝑯ℓ′, 𝒚) −0.5∣,
𝜈= 0, . . . , 𝑛−1.
In the case of information-combining MBBP-X, the pro-
cessing rule follows Equation (4).
Independent of the MBBP-X approach, we calculate the
updated counter-probabilities by Pr(e)(𝑐𝜈
=
1) =
1 −
Pr(e)(𝑐𝜈= 0), 𝜈= 0, . . . , 𝑛−1. We point out that the
performance of these approaches strongly depends on the
specific implementation of the proposed steps. An algorithmic
summary of all decoding algorithms can be found in [1].
V. RESULTS
As stated before, parity-check matrices that offer good
performance when used for decoding signals transmitted over
the BEC may also be good candidates for BP decoding over
the AWGN channel [25]. The same characteristic of parity-
check matrices was observed through extensive computer
simulations for the variants of MBBP decoders, used over the
AWGN channel. These results are presented in this section.
Additionally, we provide a comparison of the error rates
of MBBP decoders with those of a full search algorithm
(maximum-likelihood, ML, decoding). Furthermore, we com-
pare our results to the Gallager bound (random coding bound)
[26] and standard BP decoding. Due to space limitations, we
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
6
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010
Pr(e)(𝑐𝜈= 0) =
∏
ℓ′∈𝒜𝜈
Pr(e)(𝑐ℓ′,𝜈= 0 ∣𝑯ℓ′, 𝒚)
∏
ℓ′∈𝒜𝜈
Pr(e)(𝑐ℓ′,𝜈= 0 ∣𝑯ℓ′, 𝒚) +
∏
ℓ′∈𝒜𝜈
Pr(e)(𝑐ℓ′,𝜈= 1 ∣𝑯ℓ′, 𝒚)
, 𝜈= 0, . . . , 𝑛−1.
(4)
illustrate our findings only on the [24, 12, 8] extended Golay
code2.
The maximum number of iterations is set to 𝑁= 100 for
all codes and decoding approaches considered. Furthermore,
𝑁p = 10 is set whenever MBBP-X approaches are simulated.
We use 𝑙to denote the number of parallel BP decoders in the
MBBP architecture.
A. The [24, 12, 8] Extended Golay Code
For the purpose of MBBP decoding of the extended Golay
code, we use the result of Sections II and III, and identify
three different cog families denoted by ℱ1, ℱ2, and ℱ3. For
this code, one can generate cogs of a family by repeated
application of permutations of type 𝑃2. Let us describe the
process of constructing the parity-check matrices for the
extended Golay code in more detail.
The [24, 12, 8] extended Golay code is self dual and contains
759 codewords of minimum weight 8. This set of codewords
can be partitioned into 33 cyclic orbits. Again, these cyclic
orbits can be partitioned into three families of equal size. In
other words, each family ℱ𝑓, 𝑓= 1, 2, 3, contains 11 cogs.
Since the code is an extended cyclic code, we construct
the parity-check matrices from each cog in terms of 23 shifts
performed on positions 0 to 22 while keeping the last position
fixed. For the 24-th row of the parity-check matrix, we use the
all-one codeword: this codeword preserves the stopping set
distribution of the 23 × 24 matrix, and is the only reasonable
parity check of the [24, 12, 8] extended Golay code invariant
under all affine permutations. As a performance criterion for
the cog families, we use the number of stopping sets up to size
𝑑= 8 in the parity-check matrices 𝑯ℓ, ℓ∈{ℱ1, ℱ2, ℱ3}.
We consider one representative cog for each family, termed
cog ℱ𝑓, 𝑓= 1, 2, 3. These cogs read
cog ℱ1
=
110101001100100000001000,
cog ℱ2
=
111000001001100000100001,
cog ℱ3
=
110100110000000101001000.
The number of stopping sets in 𝑯ℓ, ℓ∈{ℱ1, ℱ2, ℱ3}, is sum-
marized in Table I. Note that the matrices of the considered
families differ significantly from the near-optimal and highly
redundant matrices used for decoding over the BEC, given in
[6] and [7]. Due to the high redundancy, these matrices are not
amenable for decoding over the AWGN channel, where short
cycles may significantly degrade the performance of iterative
decoders.
If matrices from the same family are used for signaling over
the BEC, they provide the same performance under iterative
decoding. Interestingly, the simulation results presented below
2Note that results for the [31, 16, 7] BCH code, the [47, 24, 11] QR code,
and the [127, 64, 21] BCH code are available in [1].
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
 
 
BER →
10 log10(𝐸b/𝑁0) →
𝑯ℓ, ℓ∈ℱ1
𝑯ℓ, ℓ∈ℱ2
𝑯ℓ, ℓ∈ℱ3
BP
MBBP-NX-S, 𝑙= 11
MBBP-NX-FS, 𝑙= 11
ML decoding
Gallager bound
(a) MBBP-NX approaches
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
 
 
BER →
10 log10(𝐸b/𝑁0) →
ℓ∈ℱ1
ℓ∈ℱ2
ℓ∈ℱ3
BP
MBBP-X-PA, 𝑙= 11
MBBP-X-HR, 𝑙= 11
MBBP-X-IC, 𝑙= 11
ML decoding
Gallager bound
(b) MBBP-X approaches
Fig. 2. Performance comparison for the [24, 12, 8] extended Golay code using
𝑯ℓ, ℓ∈ℱ1, ℱ2, ℱ3.
show that the same is true for decoders used over the AWGN
channel. Fig. 2 shows the BER performance of MBBP-NX-S
decoding and MBBP-NX-FS decoding as well as MBBP-X-
PA, MBBP-X-HR, and MBBP-X-IC of the extended Golay
code. For all decoder types and all three families, 𝑙= 11
parallel BP decoders are used. FER performance results show
similar characteristics, but these results are not plotted due to
space limitations.
It can be observed for all approaches that MBBP decoders
using matrices 𝑯ℓ, ℓ∈ℱ1, have the best performance,
followed by matrices 𝑯ℓ, ℓ∈ℱ3. This finding is supported
by the stopping set distribution of Table I, showing that the
first family contains matrices that do not have stopping sets of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HEHN et al.: MULTIPLE-BASES BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODING OF HIGH-DENSITY CYCLIC CODES
7
TABLE I
NUMBER OF STOPPING SETS FOR THE [24, 12, 8] EXTENDED GOLAY CODE, 𝑯ℓ, cog ℓ∈ℱ𝑓, 𝑓= 1, . . . , 3.
∣𝒮𝜎(𝑯ℓ)∣, ℓ∈ℱ1
∣𝒮𝜎(𝑯ℓ)∣, ℓ∈ℱ2
∣𝒮𝜎(𝑯ℓ)∣, ℓ∈ℱ3
𝜎≤5
0
0
0
𝜎= 6
0
437
46
𝜎= 7
1357
10143
1495
𝜎= 8
25783
73209
20631
size up to six and a low number of stopping sets of size seven.
Matrices from the other two families have stopping sets of size
six and exceed the number of stopping sets of size seven of
the first family. The performance of MBBP decoders using
parity-check matrices 𝑯ℓ, ℓ∈ℱ2, is significantly worse than
that of the two other classes - matrices in this family have
437 stopping sets of size six and over 10, 000 stopping sets
of size seven.
The performance obtained by means of the MBBP-NX-S
with 𝑙= 11 is approximately 0.75 dB better than standard
BP and performs close to the ML decoding bound. When
performing a direct comparison of MBBP-NX-S and MBBP-
NX-FS decoders, cf. Fig. 2, one can observe that MBBP-NX-
FS follows the performance of MBBP-NX-S very closely. This
is a remarkable result, as the MBBP-NX-FS decoder requires
a significantly lower number of iterations on the average.
It is worth pointing out that the MBBP-X-PA and MBBP-
X-HR algorithms achieve similar results when the cog family
is fixed. Also, if the cogs are chosen from ℱ1 or ℱ3, these
MBBP-X approaches outperform standard BP decoding, but
do not attain the performance of MBBP-NX decoders. If the
decoders operate on parity-check matrices constructed from
cogs in ℱ2, very poor performance results and error floors are
observed in most of the cases. MBBP-X-IC decoders perform
very poorly, regardless of the family considered. A probable
cause for this phenomena is the strong correlation of the
data, which makes information combining techniques highly
suboptimal.
Let us now assess the results in a more general way. In
Fig. 2 we observe that the results for both standard BP and
MBBP outperform the Gallager bound. In further simulations
we observed for codes of longer length that BP decoding
does not outperform this bound while MBBP decoding does.
This is exemplary shown in [1] using a [47, 24, 11] QR
code. For codes of significantly longer lengths, performance
improvements exist when using MBBP decoding instead of BP
decoding, but do not suffice to underrun the Gallager bound.
Similar observations were made for Chase Type-2 decoding
[21]. While MBBP-NX-S outperforms Chase Type-2 decoders
for codes of short length [27], we show in [1] that Chase Type-
2 is superior to MBBP decoding for the [127, 64, 21] BCH
code. This is strongly related to the number of test patterns in
the Chase decoding setup, which grows exponentially with the
minimum distance. In the discussed example, it reads 2⌊𝑑/2⌋=
1024 and is hence significantly higher than the diversity order
in any reasonable MBBP-NX-S setup.
It is also of interest to relate the presented results to the
performance obtained by a BP decoder operating on the union
of the parity checks from the matrices used in the MBBP
setup. We have shown in [27] that the performance of such
an approach is even worse than the performance of a standard
BP algorithm which operates on any of these matrices.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We introduced a class of decoding algorithms that operate
in parallel on a judiciously chosen family of parity-check
matrices. We considered two variants of this class of tech-
niques: one, in which the decoders are not allowed to exchange
information during individual runs of the BP algorithm, and
another, in which periodic information exchange is allowed.
Algorithms in the first class were shown to offer significant
performance improvements when compared to the standard BP
technique. The approaches in the second class often compare
favorably to standard BP, but do not match the performance
of algorithms that do not make use of periodic information
exchange. Possible reasons for this behavior include the fact
that “cycles” are created during the process of information
exchange. These cycles “in-between” the graphs of the repre-
sentations negatively affect the performance of each decoder.
The presented approaches were shown to work for classical
high-density codes and are applicable to cyclic and extended
cyclic codes. It is possible to generalize the introduced meth-
ods to codes like the progressive edge-growth (PEG) [28]
family. For this class of codes, significant gains in performance
can be obtained. Results in this direction were presented in
[29].
REFERENCES
[1] T. Hehn, J. Huber, O. Milenkovic, and S. Laendner (2009, May),
“Multiple-bases belief-propagation decoding of high-density cyclic
codes.” [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0905.0079
[2] M. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block codes
based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 41, pp. 1379-
1396, Sept. 1995.
[3] R. Lucas, M. Bossert, and M. Breitbach, “On iterative soft-decision
decoding of linear binary block codes and product codes,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 276-296, Feb. 1998.
[4] T. Halford and K. Chugg, “Random redundant soft-in soft-out decoding
of linear block codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Symp. Inf. Theory
(ISIT), Seattle, WA, USA, July 2006, pp. 2230-2234.
[5] T. Halford, A. Grant, and K. Chugg, “Which codes have 4-cycle-free
Tanner graphs?” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 4219-4223,
Sept. 2006.
[6] M. Schwartz and A. Vardy, “On the stopping distance and stopping
redundancy of codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 922-
932, Mar. 2006.
[7] J. Han and P. Siegel, “Improved upper bounds on stopping redundancy,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 90-104, Jan. 2007.
[8] H. Hollmann and L. Tolhuizen, “On parity-check collections for iterative
erasure decoding that correct all correctable erasure patterns of a given
size,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 823-828, Feb. 2007.
[9] A. Kothiyal, O. Y. Takeshita, W. Jin, and M. Fossorier, “Iterative
reliability-based decoding of linear block codes with adaptive belief
propagation,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1067-1069, Dec.
2005.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010
[10] J. Jiang and K. Narayanan, “Iterative soft-input soft-output decoding of
Reed-Solomon codes by adapting the parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3746-3756, Aug. 2006.
[11] K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “LDPC decoding using multiple
representations,” in Proc. IEEE International Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT),
Lausanne, Switzerland, June 2002, p. 456.
[12] T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, S. Laendner, and J. Huber, “Permutation
decoding and the stopping redundancy hierarchy of cyclic and extended
cyclic codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5308-5331,
Dec. 2008.
[13] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial anal-
ysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. International
Conf. Wireless Netw., Commun., Mobile Computing (WirelessComm),
Maui, HI, June 2005, pp. 630-635.
[14] I. Land and J. Huber, “Information combining,” Foundations Trends
Commun. Inf. Theory, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 227-330, Nov. 2006.
[15] L. Zeng, L. Lan, Y. Y. Tai, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction
of LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels based on
finite fields,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Rotorua, New
Zealand, Aug. 2005, pp. 273-276.
[16] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-
length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure
channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570-1579, June
2002.
[17] J.
Feldman,
“Decoding
error-correcting
codes
via
linear
programming,”
Ph.D.
dissertation,
Massachusetts
Institute
of
Technology,
Cambridge,
MA,
USA,
2003.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.columbia.edu/∼jf2189/pubs.html
[18] C. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4013-4038, Nov. 2007.
[19] R. Koetter and P. Vontobel, “Graph covers and iterative decoding of
finite-length codes,” in Proc. 3rd International Symp. Turbo Codes
Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2003, pp. 75-82.
[20] J. Kovacevic and A. Chebira, “Life beyond bases: the advent of frames
(part I),” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 86-104, July
2007.
[21] S. Lin and D. Costello, Error Control Coding, 2nd ed. Pearson Educa-
tion, Inc., 2004.
[22] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. Huber, “When does one
redundant parity-check equation matter?” in Proc. 49th Annual IEEE
Global Telecommun. Conf. (GlobeCom), San Francisco, USA, Nov.
2006.
[23] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating
stopping and trapping sets in LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory
Workshop (ITW), Lake Tahoe, CA, USA, Sept. 2007, pp. 248-253.
[24] F. MacWilliams and N. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland Publishing Company,
1977.
[25] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-
approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001.
[26] R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication. John
Wiley and Sons, 1968.
[27] T. Hehn, J. Huber, S. Laendner, and O. Milenkovic, “Multiple-bases
belief-propagation decoding for short block-codes,” in Proc. IEEE
International Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, June 2007, pp.
311-315.
[28] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular
progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 51, pp. 386-398, Jan. 2005.
[29] T. Hehn, J. Huber, P. He, and S. Laendner, “Multiple-bases belief-
propagation with leaking for decoding of moderate-length block codes,”
in Proc. International ITG Conf. Source Channel Coding (SCC), Ulm,
Germany, Jan. 2008.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
