1
A Message-Passing Algorithm for Counting Short Cycles in a Graph
Mehdi Karimi and Amir H. Banihashemi Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada

Abstract—This paper presents a distributed message-passing algorithm for counting short cycles in a graph. For bipartite graphs, which are of particular interest in coding, the algorithm is capable of counting cycles of length g, g + 2, . . . , 2g − 2, where g is the girth of the graph. For a general (non-bipartite) graph, cycles of length g, g +1, . . . , 2g −1 can be counted. The algorithm is based on performing integer additions and subtractions in the nodes of the graph and passing extrinsic messages to adjacent nodes. The complexity of the proposed algorithm grows as O(g|E|2), where |E| is the number of edges in the graph. For sparse graphs, the proposed algorithm significantly outperforms the existing algorithms in terms of computational complexity and memory requirements.
I. INTRODUCTION
G RAPHICAL models are widely used in different branches of science and engineering to represent systems and facilitate the description of inference algorithms. The structure of the graphs consequently plays an important role in the dynamics of the system and the performance of the corresponding algorithms. One important example, which has many applications in areas such as artificial intelligence, signal processing and digital communications, is the factor graph representation of systems and the sum-product algorithm [6]. Factor graphs are bipartite graphs and the sum-product algorithm is a generic message-passing algorithm which operates in a factor graph. One notable application of factor graphs and message-passing algorithms is in channel coding, where widely popular schemes such as turbo codes and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes can be considered as specific instances. In particular, an specific instance of a factor graph is a Tanner graph [8], which is used to represent an LDPC code. In fact, LDPC codes, which are famous for their capacityapproaching performance on many communication channels, owe their popularity to the good performance of the iterative message-passing algorithms that can decode these codes with relatively low complexity. The low complexity is a consequence of the sparsity of the Tanner graph.
In practical error correction schemes, finite-length codes have to be used. For such codes, the performance of the message-passing algorithms is closely related to the structure of the graph, in general, and its cycles, in particular. In [7], the girth distribution of the Tanner graph was related to the performance of an LDPC code. Numerous publications since have used the cycle structure of the Tanner graph as an important measure of performance of LDPC codes, with the general belief that for good performance short cycles should be avoided in the Tanner graph of the code. In [5], the authors devised a code construction, known as progressive edge growth

(PEG), to maximize the local girth of the graph in a greedy fashion. Halford and Chugg [4] showed that in addition to the girth, the number and statistics of short cycles are also important performance metrics of the code. In [9], error rates of finite-length LDPC codes were accurately and efficiently estimated by enumerating and testing the subsets of short cycles as error patterns. The close relationship between the performance of graph-based coding schemes and the cycle structure of the graph, especially the number of short cycles, motivates the search for efficient algorithms that can count cycles of different length in the graph. In the context of coding, the graph is often bipartite. This includes the Tanner graph of LDPC codes.
Counting the number of cycles in a general graph is known to be a hard problem [3]. Alon et al. [1] presented methods for counting short cycles in a general graph. The complexity of their algorithm however is prohibitively high for longer cycles, say beyond 7. Fan and Xiao [2] presented a method for counting cycles of length 2k, 2 ≤ k ≤ 5 in the Tanner graph of LDPC codes. The complexity of their method is O(mkn) where m and n are the number of the check nodes and variable nodes in the graph, respectively. Their method quickly becomes prohibitively complex even for counting cycles as short as 6, particularly in graphs with large m. Halford and Chugg [4] presented a method for counting short cycles of length g, g + 2 and g + 4 in bipartite graphs with girth g. The complexity of their method is O(gn3), where n is the size of the larger set between the two node partitions. To best of our knowledge, this is the lowest complexity for counting short cycles in a bipartite graph.
In this paper, we present an algorithm that counts the cycles of length g, g + 2, . . . , 2g − 2 in a bipartite graph. The algorithm is based on message-passing on the edges of the graph, where the messages are computed at the nodes with integer additions and subtractions. The algorithm can also be applied to general (non-bipartite) graphs to count cycles of length g, g + 1, . . . , 2g − 1. The complexity of the proposed algorithm is O(g|E|2), where |E| is the number of edges in the graph. For sparse bipartite graphs, the proposed algorithm can significantly outperform the algorithm of [4] in terms of both computational complexity and memory requirements. As an example, for a regular graph with node degrees 3 and 6 corresponding to an (8000,4000) LDPC code, the proposed algorithm is more than 30 times faster than the method of [4] and requires less memory by a factor of about 600. Conceptually also, the proposed algorithm is much simpler than the algorithm of [4], in which tedious matrix equations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

are involved in the counting process. Noteworthy is also the fact that for graphs with g ≥ 6, the proposed algorithm is capable of counting short cycles of lengths up to at least the same value as the algorithm of [4] does.
In rest of the paper, we use bipartite graphs for the sake of simplicity and for the reason that the graphs involved in most coding applications are bipartite. We also have three lemmas in the paper whose proofs are not provided due to the limitation of space.
II. DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS
An undirected Graph G = (V, E) is defined as a set of nodes V and a set of edges E, where E is some subset of the pairs {{u, v} : u, v ∈ V, u = v}. In this definition and without loss of generality in the context of this paper, we exclude loops using the condition u = v. Parallel edges are also indistinguishable by this definition and are excluded for simplicity. A walk of length k in G is a sequence of nodes v1, v2, . . . , vk+1 in V such that {vi, vi+1} ∈ E for all i ∈ {1, . . . , k}. Equivalently, a walk of length k can be described by the corresponding sequence of k edges. A walk is a path if the edges are distinct. A walk is called closed if the two end nodes are identical, i.e., if v1 = vk+1 in the previous description. A cycle of length k is a closed walk such that v1 through vk are distinct. In a graph G, cycles of length k, also referred to as k-cycles, are denoted by Ck. We use Nk for |Ck|. To each undirected edge, we associate two directed edges, depending on which end node is selected as the starting point. The direction of edges is of consequence in message-passing algorithms.
A graph G(V, E) is called bipartite if the set V can be partitioned into two disjoint subsets U and W (V = U ∪ W and U ∩ W = Ø) such that every edge in E connects a node from U to a node from W . We denote |U | by n and |W | by m. Tanner graphs of LDPC codes are bipartite graphs, in which U and W are referred to as variable nodes and check nodes, respectively. Parameters n and m in this case are the code block length and the number of parity check equations, respectively.
The girth g of a graph is the length of a shortest cycle in the graph. For bipartite graphs, all cycles have even lengths and g is an even number. The number of edges connected to a node v is called the degree of v, and is denoted by dv. We call a bipartite graph G = (U ∪ V, E) regular if all the nodes in U have the same degree du and all the nodes in W have the same degree dw. Otherwise, the graph is called irregular. For a regular graph, we have ndu = mdw = |E|.
III. MAIN IDEAS
A. Message Passing
A message-passing algorithm operates in a graph by computing messages at the nodes and passing them along the edges to the adjacent nodes. A well-known example is the sumproduct algorithm operating in a factor graph [6]. Message passing algorithms often have the property that a message sent along an edge e is not a function of the message previously received along e. We refer to this property as extrinsic messagepassing. Extrinsic message-passing, for example, is known to

be an important property of good iterative decoders [6]. The algorithm proposed in this paper also has this property.
For bipartite graphs G(U ∪W, E), a natural message-passing schedule is for every node in U to send messages to adjacent nodes in W followed by every node in W to send messages to adjacent nodes in U . This is referred to as parallel schedule and is used often in iterative decoding algorithms. In this case, a complete cycle of message-passing from U to W and then from W to U is called one iteration. We assign discrete time t to message-passing, starting from time index zero followed by positive integer values. Corresponding to a time index t ≥ 0, we associate an iteration number = t/2 + 1 ≥ 1. The time indices t = 2 − 2 and t = 2 − 1 correspond to the first and the second halves of the iteration . We also refer to messages passed at t = 0 as initial messages, and use the notation m(u→) w for a message passed from node u to node w at iteration .
In the general context of iterative decoding, all nodes in the same partition (U or W ) perform the same type of operation to generate their messages. The types of operation however are usually different for the two partitions and depend on the nature of the algorithm and the domain in which the messages are presented. In the algorithm proposed here, however, all the nodes perform the same type of operation. The messages are all monomials and the operation is multiplication. In this work, a monomial is the product of integer powers of variables. For example, a message m = X1iX2jX3k is a monomial with variables X1, X2 and X3. We say m contains i copies of X1, j copies of X2 and k copies of X3. If the variables are ordered, we may use a simpler representation of m as a vector: m = (i, j, k). Using the vector representation of messages, the multiplication of monomials is reduced to the addition of the corresponding vectors.
B. Algorithm Development
To describe the basic idea of the algorithm, we start by examining message-passing on a single cycle.
Lemma 1: Suppose that C is a cycle of length 2k in a bipartite graph G = (V, E), and v ∈ V is in C. Denote the two adjacent edges of v in C by e1 and e2. Assume that the algorithm is initiated by every node passing 1 along every edge in E, with the exception of node v and edges e1 and e2. For e1 and e2 the initial messages sent by v are monomials X1 and X2, respectively. The algorithm then proceeds for t ≥ 1, by each node u ∈ V, u = v passing extrinsic messages using multiplication every time that any of its incoming messages changes. Node v always passes 1 for t ≥ 1. Then, at iteration k, node v will receive one copy of X2 and one copy of X1 along e1 and e2, respectively, where both copies have traveled through all the edges of C.
It is easy to see that if the node v in Lemma 1 is in aNNt22vvikk;;teee11r,,aeet22ioccnyocpkli,eesnsooodffeleXvng1wthailll2okrnegwcehei1vicehaNnadl2vlk;eien21c,,el2uredcseoppeeci1etisavneodlfye,X2w,2 thahenerdne each pair of copies have traveled through all the edges of one of the cycles, respectively. Assuming there are no additional copies of X2 received by v along e1 and no additional copies of X1 received by v along e2 at iteration k, the monomials

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. Three problematic structures for which the incoming extrinsic messages do not represent cycles.

received at iteration k by

X and X . N2vk;e1,e2
2

N2vk;e1 ,e2 1

v along e1 and Here, we note

e2 are respectively that in addition to

copies of X2 which are received by node v along e1 at iteration

k, v may also receive copies of X1 along e1 at iteration k.

These correspond to closed walks of length 2k which start

and end at edge e1, and are not cycles. To eliminate these structures in the counting process of N2vk;e1,e2 , one should only consider the power of received variables along e1 and

e2 excluding the initial message. To describe this, we use the notation mI(k,E) ,(v;e1) to denote the incoming message to node v along e1 at iteration k, excluding the variable of the initial

mme(Iks,Es)a,(gve;ep1)as=sedXb2Ny2vvk;e1a,leo2n, ganed1.

In the above scenario, we

mI(k,E) ,(v;e2)

=

X . N2vk;e1,e2
1

have This

results in

N2vk;e1,e2 = {ex(m(Ik,E) ,(v;e1)) + ex(m(Ik,E) ,(v;e2))}/2,

(1)

where ex(·) is the exponent of the monomial, defined as the sum of the powers of all its variables.
There is also a possibility that node v receives additional copies of X2 along e1 and additional copies of X1 along e2 at iteration k. These additional copies travel through non-cycle closed walks of length 2k which start and end at e1 and e2, respectively. Examples of such structures are given in Fig. 1, where the message X is initiated at node v1. In Fig. 1(a), 2k is in fact the sum of the lengths of the two cycles C1 and C2, while in Fig. 1(b), it is the sum of the lengths of the two cycles plus twice the length of the path between vi and vj. In Fig. 1(c), message X travels from v1 to vi first, and then from vi to vj through vk. It then travels back from vj to vi through vl followed by a trip from vi to vj through vk for the second time. The journey finally ends when X is passed back from vj to v1. In this case, the total length of the walk is 2k.
A careful inspection of the problematic structures, as described above, reveals that they all include at least two cycles. This implies that the shortest length of such structures is 2g, where g is the girth of the graph. We thus have the following:
Lemma 2: Consider a bipartite graph G = (V, E) with girth g. Select a node v ∈ V with two adjacent edges e1 and e2. Assume that the algorithm is initiated at t = 0 by every node passing 1 along every edge in E, with the exception of node v and edges e1 and e2. For e1 and e2, the initial messages sent by v are monomials X1 and X2, respectively. The algorithm then proceeds for t ≥ 1, by each node u ∈ V, u = v passing extrinsic messages using multiplication every time that any of

its incoming messages changes. Node v always passes 1 for

t ≥ 1. Then, at iteration k, k < g/2, node v will only receive

1 along all its edges including e1 and e2. At iteration k, g/2 ≤

k ≤ g − 1, node v

X X N2vk;e1,e2 j

1

2

along

will receive monomials e1 and e2, respectively,

X X i N2vk;e1,e2
12
where i and j

and are

non-negative integers. In this case, Equation (1) is valid.

Let us now focus on the problem of counting all the cycles

which pass through a certain node v in a bipartite graph G =

(U ∪W, E). Without loss of generality, we assume v ∈ U . One

approach to count all the cycles containing v is to use Lemma

2 and count the cycles involving different adjacent edges, two

at a time, and then add up the results for any cycle length. The

following lemma however suggests a more efficient approach.

Lemma 3: Consider a bipartite graph G = (U ∪W, E) with

girth g, and a node v ∈ U . Initiate the algorithm by passing

1 on all the edges connected to nodes u ∈ U, u = v, while

passing dv different monomials, say X1, X2, . . . , Xdv , along

all the edges connected to v : e1, . . . , edv . For k ≤ g − 1, we

then have

dv

N2vk = ( ex(mI(k,E) ,(v;ej)))/2 ,

(2)

j=1

where N2vk is the number of 2k-cycles containing v. In Lemma 3, at iteration k, k < g/2, node v will only
receive 1 along all its edges, indicating there are no cycles of length g − 2 or smaller containing v.

IV. PROPOSED ALGORITHM

A. Pseudo Code

To count the short cycles of a certain length 2k in the whole

graph G = (U ∪ W, E), one can apply the proposed algorithm

described in the previous section to every node in one of the

node partitions, U or W , and then add up the results for each

cycle length. In this case, for each cycle length, the result

should be divided by k as every cycle is counted k times:

N2k = ( N2uk)/k = (

N2wk )/k

,

g 2

≤

k

≤

g

−

1

.

(3)

u∈U

w∈W

To simplify the algorithm and to avoid the k-fold counting
repetition, we can deactivate a node as soon as its cycles
are counted. This would be equivalent to removing that node
and all its adjacent edges from the graph. Moreover, the
algorithm can be further simplified by only activating nodes
that have at least one non-one incoming message. Based on
these simplifications, the proposed algorithm has the following
pseudo code: Proposed Algorithm
for k = 1 : g − 1 do counter(k) = 0
end for for i = 1 : n do
Initialization l=1 for wj ∈ N (ui) do
m(u0i)→wj = Xl l = l+1 end for for i = i + 1 : n do for wj ∈ N (ui ) do

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

m(u0i) →wj = 1 end for end for

for k = 1 : g − 1 do

Message Passing from W

for j = 1 : m do

for ui ∈ N (wj) do

m(w2jk→−1u)i =

m uh∈N (wj ), h≥i, h=i

(2k−2) uh →wj

end for

end for

Counting Cycles local-counter(k) =

wj ∈N (ui) ex(mE(2,k(−wj1→ ) ui))

Message Passing from U

for i = i + 1 : n do

for wj ∈ N (ui ) do

m(u2ik→ ) wj =

m(2k−1)
wh∈N (ui ), h=j wh→ui

end for

end for

end for

for k = 1 : g − 1 do counter(k) = counter(k) + local-counter(k)/2
end for end for
In the above pseudo code, the algorithm is initiated from U . Similarly, it can be initiated from W . Nodes in U are indexed by i = 1, . . . , n, and notation mE,(wj→ui) is used to denote the incoming message from node wj to node ui excluding the initial variable passed from ui to wj. Notation N (u) is used for the nodes adjacent to u (neighbors of u).
Here we have implicitly assumed that the girth g of the graph is known. In the following subsection, we discuss a modification of the algorithm that can compute g and Ng.

B. Parallel Implementation
The algorithm presented in the previous subsection is based on sequentially going through the nodes in one of the two partitions in the graph. To speed up the counting process and at the expense of larger memory usage, one can run a parallel version of the algorithm in which all the nodes in one partition are initialized simultaneously. This is explained in Fig. 2(a) for a bipartite graph with |U | = |W | = 4.
It is noteworthy that in the parallel implementation, none of the nodes in the initiating partition will receive a copy of its initial messages before iteration g/2. At iteration g/2, the nodes which are contained in the shortest cycles will receive copies of their initial messages and all such copies are received along the edges so that they differ from the initial messages of those edges. This means that all the received copies represent true g-cycles. One thus does not need to distinguish among the initial messages of a node. The initialization in this case is explained in Fig. 2(b) for the graph under consideration. In this case, if the first iteration in which at least one of the nodes receives a non-one message is iteration k, then g = 2k, and the number of g-cycles is equal to the total number of received non-one messages by all the nodes divided by 2k.

Fig. 2. Initial message-passing in parallel implementations: a) counting short cycles of length 2k, g/2 ≤ k ≤ g − 1, b) calculating g and Ng.
V. COMPLEXITY OF THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM
A. Computational Complexity
In the following, we arbitrarily assume that the algorithm is initiated from the node set U . We consider a sequential implementation, where the nodes in U are processed one at a time. We also consider the vector representation of messages and first derive the complexity for a regular graph. We then generalize the results to irregular graphs. For a regular graph G = (U ∪ W, E), starting from a node u ∈ U , there are du initial messages, each represented by a unit vector of length du. All the subsequent messages are also vectors of length du. To calculate the messages at an active node w ∈ W , we first add all the incoming vectors to w, and then subtract from this, the incoming message along each adjacent edge to obtain the outgoing message along that edge. This requires (2dw − 1)du integer additions and subtractions. Similarly, for each active node u ∈ U , we need (2du − 1)du integer additions and subtractions to obtain the outgoing messages. Considering that in even and odd time instances, the number of active nodes are upper bounded by n and m, respectively, the number of operations per iteration is upper bounded by O(nd2u + mdudw) = O(|E|du). Considering that, the algorithm needs to perform g − 1 iterations, the complexity of the algorithm for each node u ∈ U is O(g|E|du). The total complexity is thus O(g|E|ndu) = O(g|E|2). It is easy to see that the same complexity order also applies to irregular bipartite graphs.
In the above discussions, it is implicitly assumed that the girth of the graph is known a priori. Since the computational complexity of finding the girth is at most O(n2), e.g., based on the algorithm of [7],1 the extra complexity for computing the girth is negligible compared to the rest of the computations, and does not change the overall complexity order.
B. Memory Requirements
For each edge of the bipartite graph, we need two memory locations to store the message vectors in both directions. For a regular graph, since each vector has du elements, the total number of memory locations, each storing an integer number, is 2du|E| or O(du|E|). For an irregular graph, the storage
1It is easy to see that if we use the algorithm proposed in Section IV.B to compute g, the complexity is O(gn2du), which is in general larger than that of [7]. The algorithm of [7] however only finds g, while the proposed algorithm also computes Ng.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I NUMBER OF SHORT CYCLES IN THE TANNER GRAPHS OF FOUR
RATE-1/2 LDPC CODES

Code A Code B Code C Code D

N6

11538

0

N8 408657

2

N10 13110235 11238

N12

-

91101

N14

-

748343

179 1218 9989
-

161 1260 10051
-

TABLE III CPU TIME AND MEMORY USAGE FOR THE ALGORITHM OF [4]

Code A Code B Code C Code D

CPU Time (S)
10.3 16.6 4965
-

Max Memory (MB)
1.5 1.5 7839 -

Max Swap (MB)
35 35 14195 -

TABLE II CPU TIME AND MEMORY USAGE FOR THE PROPOSED
ALGORITHM

Code A Code B Code C Code D

CPU Time (S)
5.3 3 155 1127

Max Memory (MB)
0.36 0.36 13 13

Max Swap (MB)
3.3 2.8 157 157

complexity is O(dmax|E|), where dmax is the maximum node degree in U or W , depending on which side initiates the algorithm.
C. Comparison with the Algorithm of [4]
While the algorithm of [4] is limited to bipartite graphs, the proposed algorithm is capable of counting short cycles in a general (non-bipartite) graph. For bipartite graphs, the algorithm of [4] counts cycles of length g, g+2, g+4, while the proposed algorithm counts cycles of length g, g+2, . . . , 2g−2. The coverage of the proposed algorithm is thus at least as much as the algorithm of [4] for graphs with g ≥ 6. It should be noted that the Tanner graphs of almost all good LDPC codes have g ≥ 6.
The computational complexity of the algorithm of [4] is O(gn3), where n = max(|U |, |W |). The complexity of the proposed algorithm is O(g|E|2). One can thus see that for sparse graphs with |E| increasing at a rate lower than n3/2, the complexity order of the proposed algorithm is less than that of the algorithm in [4]. Moreover the computations in the algorithm presented here are simple integer additions and subtractions, while in [4] the operations are mainly highprecision multiplications.
In terms of memory requirements, the algorithm of [4] requires at most 11(n2 + m2) + 21nm high bit-width (64bit integer) storage locations, which is of order O(n2). The proposed algorithm on the other hand requires 2du|E| memory locations (O(dmax|E|)), which for sparse graphs can be much smaller than what is needed for the algorithm of [4]. Moreover, the maximum size of memory locations for the proposed algorithm, which is proportional to the number of cycles, is usually much less than 64 bits.
VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we present numerical results obtained by applying the proposed algorithm to Tanner graphs of LDPC codes. We consider four rate-1/2 codes from [10]. Codes

A and B are MacKay’s codes P EGirReg504x1008 and P EGReg504x1008, both constructed using Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) method of [5]. For both codes, n = 1008 and m = 504. Code A is irregular while Code B is regular. Codes C and D are MacKay’s codes 8000.4000.3.483 and 10000.10000.3.631, respectively. They are both regular with du = 3 and dw = 6. For Code C, n = 8000 and m = 4000, while these parameters for Code D are 20, 000 and 10, 000, respectively. The number of short cycles in the Tanner graphs of these codes is listed in Table I. Codes A, C and D have girth 6 and the proposed algorithm, similar to the algorithm of [4]2, can compute N6, N8 and N10. Code B however has girth 8, and while the algorithm of [4] can only compute N8, N10 and N12, the proposed algorithm can also compute N14.
Tables II and III show the running time and memory requirements of the proposed algorithm and the algorithm of [4], respectively. Both algorithms were run on the same machine with a 2.2-GHz CPU and 8 GB of RAM. As can be seen, the proposed algorithm is consistently faster than the algorithm of [4] and requires significantly less memory for larger graphs. In fact, for Code D, the algorithm of [4] ran out of memory and was not able to find the results.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Alon, R. Yuster and U. Zwick, ”Finding and counting given length cycles,” Algorithmica, vol. 17 no. 3, pp. 209-223, 1997.
[2] J. Fan and Y. Xiao, ”A method of counting the number of cycles in LDPC codes,” 8th International Conference on Signal Processing, ICSP 2006, vol. 3, pp. 2183-2186, 2006.
[3] J. Flum and M. Grohe, ”The parameterized complexity of counting problems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Foundations of Computer Science, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 538-547, Nov. 2002.
[4] T.R. Halford and K.M. Chugg, ”An algorithm for counting short cycles in bipartite graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 287-292, Jan. 2006.
[5] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, ”Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386-398, Jan. 2005.
[6] F. R. Kschischang , B. J. Frey and H.-A. Loeliger ”Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498-519, Feb. 2001.
[7] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, ”A heuristic search for good lowdensity parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Communications, vol. 1, Helsinki, Finland, pp. 41-44, Jun. 2001.
[8] R. M. Tanner, ”A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533-547, 1981
[9] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, ”Error Rate Estimation of LowDensity Parity-Check Codes on Binary Symmetric Channels Using Cycle Enumeration,” IEEE Trans. Comm., pp. 1550-1555, June 2009.
[10] [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/ data.html
[11] [Online]. Available: http://csi.usc.edu/chugg/tools
2To implement the algorithm of [4], we used the authors’ code in [11].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

