116

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

Flexible LDPC Decoder Design for Multigigabit-per-Second Applications
Chuan Zhang, Student Member, IEEE, Zhongfeng Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, Jin Sha, Li Li, and Jun Lin

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are one of the most promising error-correcting codes approaching Shannon capacity and have been adopted in many applications. However, the efficient implementation of high-throughput LDPC decoders adaptable for various channel conditions still remains challenging. In this paper, a low-complexity reconfigurable VLSI architecture for high-speed LDPC decoders is presented. Shift-LDPC codes are incorporated within the design and have shown not only comparable decoding performance to computer-generated random codes but also high hardware efficiency in high-speed applications. The single-minimum Min-Sum decoding scheme and the nonuniform quantization scheme are explored to reduce the complexity of computing core and the memory requirement. The well-known Benes network is employed to construct the configurable permutation network to support multiple shift-LDPC codes with various code parameters. The ASIC implementation results of an (8192, 7168) (4, 32)-regular shift-LDPC decoder demonstrate a maximum decoding throughput of 3.6 Gbits/s at 16 iterations, which outperforms the state-of-the-art design for high-speed flexible LDPC decoders by many times with even less hardware.
Index Terms—Error-correction codes, flexible structures, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, very large scale integration (VLSI) architecture.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, which were originally introduced by Gallager in his Ph.D. dissertation in the early 1960s [1], have been ignored for a long time for the requirement of high-complexity computation. Since their rediscovery by MacKay and Neal [2], [3], LDPC codes have become one of the most attractive topics of interest in both academia and industry. Compared with turbo codes, LDPC codes are well suited for wireless, optical, and magnetic recording systems due to their near-Shannon-limit error-correcting capacity, low error floor, reasonable implementation complexity, as well as high intrinsic degrees of parallelism. With these remarkable character-
Manuscript received August 09, 2008; revised January 04, 2009. First published March 24, 2009; current version published January 22, 2010. This work was supported in part by the National 863 Program of China under Grant 2008AA01Z135 and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 60876017. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE Asia Pacific Conference on Circuits and Systems, Macau, China, December 2008. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor G. M. Maggio.
C. Zhang, J. Sha, L. Li, and J. Lin are with the Institute of VLSI Design, the Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory of Advanced Photonic and Electronic Materials, the National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, and the Department of Physics, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China (e-mail: zhangchuan01@yahoo.com; shajin@nju.edu.cn; lili@nju.edu.cn; njuphylinjun@yahoo.com).
Z. Wang is with Broadcom Corporation, Irvine, CA 92617 USA (e-mail: zfwang@broadcom.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2009.2018915

istics, LDPC codes have been recently adopted in several industrial standards such as wireless local area networks (IEEE 802. 11n) [4], wireless metropolitan area networks (IEEE 802.16e) [5], China’s Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting standards (DTTB) [6], and Digital Video Broadcasting-SatelliteSecond Generation (DVB-S2) [7].
The locally optimal, yet the most complex, iterative decoding algorithm of LDPC codes is the “Belief Propagation” (BP), which is also known as “sum–product” (SP) [8]–[10]. Prior literature has demonstrated that LDPC codes with BP decoding provide performance very close to the Shannon limit. Taking [8] as an example, for binary-input AWGN channels, simulation results show that the designed codes using a block length of bits have a threshold that is within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit at the bit error rate (BER) of . Although BP decoding provides excellent performance, it is too complex for hardware implementation. A better tradeoff between hardware complexity and error-correction performance can be achieved with another well-known decoding algorithm called “Min-Sum” (MS) [11]–[13]. With the aid of linear postprocessing of check-node message approximation such as normalization and additive offset, the degradation caused by MS decoding can be greatly compensated [14], [15].
Although significant development on both construction and implementation of LDPC codes has occurred in the past several years, the efficient realization of high-speed LDPC decoders still remains a challenge for ever-increasing high-speed applications. Prior literature has demonstrated that quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes can be a preferred candidate when code lengths are short [16]. However, for large code lengths, a significant increase in hardware complexity turns to be quite a problem to tackle [17]. In order to deal with this problem, Sha et al. proposed a new class of implementation-oriented LDPC codes, namely, shift-LDPC codes, in [18]. It is shown that shift-LDPC codes can perform as well as randomly generated codes. Furthermore, the shift-LDPC decoder with multigigabit-per-second throughput can be implemented at very low hardware cost.
Recently, the implementation of decoders satisfying a class of LDPC codes with different code parameters (e.g., code lengths and code rates) has become a popular issue that attracts the attention of researchers, because, in certain applications such as wireless communication, the code parameters should hold great flexibility to adapt to varying channel conditions. Furthermore, flexible LDPC decoders capable of meeting various service requirements and interference conditions can also achieve as high hardware efficiency as those of specific ones. Prior literature has proposed several flexible LDPC decoder architectures, of which the most notable ones are by Mansour and Shanbhag [19], Masera et al. [20], Zhang et al. [21], and Lee and Ryu [22]. Mansour and Shanbhag, in [19], designed a programmable

1549-8328/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: FLEXIBLE LDPC DECODER DESIGN FOR MULTIGIGABIT-PER-SECOND APPLICATIONS

117

decoder chip for 2048-bit architecture-aware LDPC codes. By

employing the turbo-decoding message-passing algorithm, the

decoder could achieve a throughput of 640 Mbits/s, which is

not sufficient for modern high-speed communication systems

(e.g., 802.15). Masera et al., in [20], proposed an implemen-

tation of a flexible LDPC decoder which could be tailored to

decode both IEEE 802.11n and IEEE 802.16e LDPC codes.

The decoder implemented the low-traffic BP algorithm which

achieved a remarkable interconnection reduction between

nodes. The Benes [23] networks were used to establish non-

blocking connections among processing elements. Although

the routing complexity was low, this architecture is proved to be Fig. 1. LDPC code example. (a) TG. (b) Parity-check matrix. not suitable for high-speed applications either. Zhang et al., in

[21], presented a decoder architecture for multirate QC-LDPC

codes in broadband broadcasting systems (i.e., China’s DTTB). There are two kinds of nodes in TG, variable nodes ( - nodes)

The targeting throughput is 26 Mbits/s. Moreover, the modified and check nodes ( - nodes). In addition, check node is con-

MS algorithm (MMSA) was employed. Lee and Ryu, in [22], nected to variable node only when the element of is a

presented a flexible LDPC decoding architecture to support 1. Fig. 1 shows the parity-check matrix and its corresponding

multiple code rates and code lengths achieving high throughput. TG of an (8, 4)-regular LDPC code.

The decoder occupies an area of 16.3 mm and can run at a Shift-LDPC codes are a subclass of the LDPC codes proposed

clock frequency of 212 MHz, resulting in a 1-Gbit/s decoding by Sha et al. [18], which proves to be a satisfying approach

throughput. However, due to the inherent characteristics of the for very high throughput applications. The parity-check matrix

employed broadcasting interconnection, further improvement defining an

-regular shift-LDPC code of length

of hardware efficiency is prohibited.

can be expressed as

This paper presents a flexible LDPC decoder architecture,

which aims to have features of flexibility and high throughput

while using very low complexity hardware. The decoder implements the offset MS decoding algorithm for shift-LDPC codes

...

(1)

which own the merits of memory efficiency, high paralleliza-

tion, and low routing complexity. The Benes network is employed to realize the interconnection networks, which can be easily programmed to support multiple shift-LDPC codes with different code rates and code lengths. Moreover, nonuniform quantization schemes are explored to reduce the memory requirement. Based on the proposed design techniques, an (8192,

The leftmost submatrices are

random permutation ma-

trices, where there is exactly one entry 1 in each row and column

and 0s elsewhere. The matrix denotes a permutation ma-

trix obtained by cyclically shifting the columns of the identity

matrix to the right by a single step.

7168) (4, 32) shift-LDPC decoder with flexible code rate and code length is implemented to demonstrate the merits of the proposed techniques. It is shown that about 40% hardware reduction can be achieved compared with the state-of-the-art design for high-speed flexible LDPC decoding. With Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation (SMIC) 0.18-
m CMOS technology, a 3.6-Gbits/s decoding throughput can be obtained at 16 decoding iterations.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. A brief review of shift-LDPC codes is provided in Section II.

B. Performance for Shift-LDPC Codes
Experimental simulation results show that shift-LDPC codes can achieve as excellent performance as that of randomly generated LDPC codes of similar code lengths and code rates for the AWGN channels [18]. On the other hand, Cui and Wang have shown that any QC-LDPC codes can be converted to an extended shift-LDPC code [25], where each submatrix has at most two 1s per row (and per column) while the shift structure remains unchanged.

In Section III, an efficient decoding approach and simulation results are presented. The design of the high-speed flexible shift-LDPC decoder is presented in Section IV. The implementation results and comparisons with other references are presented in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes this paper.

C. Decoding Schedule for Shift-LDPC Codes
The message-passing schedule for decoding an -regular shift-LDPC code is shown in Fig. 2.
One check-node processing unit (CNPU) and one variablenode processing unit (VNPU) complete the message updating associated to one row and one column of matrix in one clock

II. REVIEW OF SHIFT-LDPC CODES

cycle, respectively. The messages corresponding to all rows are processed in parallel. Moreover, totally, VNPUs per-

A. Construction of Shift-LDPC Codes

form message updating in parallel. Hence, clock cycles are required to complete both the row and column message updating

LDPC codes are a set of linear block codes corresponding to in one decoding iteration. The major advantage with shift-LDPC

the

parity-check matrix , which has very low decoding is that the interconnection between two kinds of pro-

density of 1s. With the aid of the bipartite graph called Tanner cessing nodes is very simple [18], which directly leads to high

graph (TG), LDPC codes can be effectively represented [24]. clock speed and low hardware complexity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

118

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

D. Flexible Shift-LDPC Codes

In order to support the requirement for multiple code rates

and code lengths and achieve the best tradeoff among decoding

performance, hardware complexity, and throughput, fully flex-

ible shift-LDPC decoders are in pressing demand.

The flexible

-regular shift-LDPC codes have sev-

eral major characteristics.

1) The block size of submatrices can vary between one and ;

2) The row number of submatrices can vary between one and

;

3) The column number of submatrices can be any integer

number if overall memory requirement is satisfied.

III. DECODING ALGORITHMS OF FLEXIBLE SHIFT-LDPC CODES
In order to implement a flexible shift-LDPC decoder which is suitable for multiple codes with different code rates and code lengths efficiently, the hardware complexity becomes the major issue which should be taken into consideration. In particular, when the supported code lengths are large, the memory can even dominate the whole area consumption of the decoder. For the sake of high memory efficiency of flexible shift-LDPC decoders, two versions of decoding schemes—single-minimum decoding and nonuniform quantization schemes—are well explored in this paper. Based on extensive decoding-performance simulations, the comparisons between different decoding schemes are shown, and the optimal decoding algorithm is discussed.
A. Single-Minimum Scheme

The Single-Minimum MS Algorithm

Initialization:

,

;

Fig. 2. Message-passing schedule for a regular shift-LDPC code.

large-length shift-LDPC codes, the hardware consumption

caused by the computation and storage of both the minimum

magnitude and the second minimum magnitude still cannot

be neglected. To further reduce hardware complexity, several

approaches have been proposed [26]–[28], among which is the

single-minimum scheme [26]. Requiring only one minimum

magnitude, the single-minimum scheme can help achieve

significant hardware reduction with slight performance loss.

Furthermore, the decoding algorithm with this scheme can be

summarized in the aforementioned four major steps, where

defines the number of the minimum values, with the scaling

factor

and the offset factor

.

for

step 1 until or

do

B. Nonuniform Quantization Scheme

begin

When decoding shift-LDPC codes, soft messages passing in

Step. 1 if

;

either direction of edges should be stored in memories. In gen-

eral, outstanding decoding performance can be attained only

when the code length is reasonably large (e.g.,

bits).

Thus, the memory requirement is significantly high for the im-

if

plementation of shift-LDPC decoders. Since the routing com-

plexity, as well as the memory requirement, is linearly propor-

else

;

tional to the word length of soft messages, using less number of quantization bits for each soft message can be an effective

Step. 2

;

approach to further reduce the implementation complexity [29].

However, simply reducing the word length of soft messages usu-

; ally leads to significant performance degradation. In this sec-

Step. 3

;

tion, an optimized nonuniform quantization scheme is proposed with 4 bits per soft message to achieve comparable decoding

Step. 4

performance with that using 6 bits per message in the prior de-

;

sign [18].

end Output: decoded bit

Since CNPUs find only the minimum magnitudes, the 4-bit nonuniformly quantized messages can be directly used in CNPUs without conversion. However, in order to make the

variable-to-check message

more precise, both the Exp

Although the MS algorithm can achieve comparable de- (expansion) and Comp (compression) blocks are employed in

coding performance to SP algorithm, much less implemen- VNPUs to convert 4-bit nonuniformly quantized messages to

tation complexity is required [19]. In scenarios of decoding 5-bit uniformly quantized messages before computation and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: FLEXIBLE LDPC DECODER DESIGN FOR MULTIGIGABIT-PER-SECOND APPLICATIONS

119

TABLE I PROPOSED 4-BIT NONUNIFORM QUANTIZATION

Fig. 4. FER comparisons between different decoding algorithms for the (8192, 7168) (4, 32) shift-LDPC code.

can observe that the performance gap between the normal MS algorithm with 4-bit nonuniform quantization and the normal MS algorithm with (6:3) uniform quantization is quite small. Moreover, it can be found that, at a FER of , the single-minimum MS algorithm employing 4-bit nonuniform quantization, with a significant complexity reduction, is only less than 0.1 dB away from the normal MS algorithm with (6:3) uniform quantization. These observations confirm that the proposed decoding algorithms offer effective tradeoff between the performance of iterative decoding and the corresponding complexity.

IV. FLEXIBLE SHIFT-LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE

Fig. 3. BER comparisons between different decoding algorithms for the (8192, 7168) (4, 32) shift-LDPC code.

backward after computation. The detailed conversion between two different formats is shown in Table I.

C. Simulation Results and Comparisons

An (8192, 7168) (4, 32)-regular shift-LDPC code example

is considered in this paper. Fig. 3 shows the BER performance

comparisons of the discussed decoding schemes for an AWGN

channel with various

and

, where is the

maximum allowed decoding iterations. Note that the normal MS

algorithm with 4-bit nonuniform quantization can achieve a sim-

ilar decoding performance as that of the normal MS algorithm

with (6:3) uniform quantization. The BER of the single-min-

imum MS algorithm employing 4-bit nonuniform quantization

suffers only a 0.03-dB performance loss, compared with that of

the normal MS algorithm with (6:3) uniform quantization.

Fig. 4 shows the frame error rate (FER) performance ac-

cording to the algorithms shown in Fig. 3. From Fig. 4, we

Based on the proposed MMSA, this section discusses the components of a flexible shift-LDPC decoder architecture, which is suitable for decoding multiple shift-LDPC codes with different code rates as well as different code lengths. In comparison to prior architectures presented in [19]–[22], our design has the following unique characteristics.
1) High throughput. Owing to the intrinsic parallelism characteristics of shift-LDPC codes, the proposed decoder architecture can easily achieve multigigabit-per-second throughput that satisfies very high speed communication systems.
2) Low hardware complexity. Adopting the MMSA with both single-minimum decoding and nonuniform quantization scheme, the proposed architecture proves to be hardware efficient.

A. Overall Decoder Architecture

Fig. 5 shows the proposed flexible shift-LDPC decoder archi-

tecture, which is mainly composed of an array of VNPUs, an

array of

CNPUs, a CNPU local shuffle network, and a

configurable global permutation network.

Each block of the decoder specifies a particular function

being executed. The array of VNPUs and the array of

CNPUs compute the variable-to-check messages and

check-to-variable messages, respectively. The configurable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

120

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

Fig. 5. Overview of the proposed flexible shift-LDPC decoder architecture.

global permutation network between the VNPU and CNPU arrays, which is dynamically configurable, can accommodate different code rates, various code lengths, and distinct submatrix sizes. The CNPU local shuffle network helps reduce the interconnection complexity significantly.

B. CNPU Local Shuffle Network

Owing to the intrinsic structured features of shift-LDPC

codes, considerable reduction of interconnection complexity

can be easily attained by employing the CNPU local shuffle

network. According to the decoding schedule aforementioned,

VNPUs execute concurrently in one clock cycle, and totally

clock cycles are needed to complete one decoding iteration. As

shown in the following, when decoding an

-regular

shift-LDPC code, the row-process intermediate messages are

transmitted via the CNPU local shuffle network.

Scheduling with CNPU Local Shuffle Network

Iteration Start

if in clock cycle ,

pass intermediate result from else if in clock cycle ,

to
Fig. 6. Architecture of CNPU. (a) CNPU using 4-bit nonuniform quantization scheme. (b) CNPU using both single-minimum and 4-bit nonuniform quantization schemes.

pass intermediate result from

to End Iteration

4-bit nonuniform quantization scheme. In addition, the architecture of a CNPU employing both single-minimum and 4-bit

nonuniform quantization schemes is shown in Fig. 6(b).

Consequently, the established global permutation network The old, new, and sign registers store the row-process re-

between VNPUs and CNPUs can be reused in each clock sults of the last iteration, the intermediate results of the row cycle and therefore reduces the interconnection complexity. process, and the sign bits of the check-to-variable messages,

respectively. Due to the adoption of the single-minimum and

C. Architecture of CNPU

nonuniform quantization schemes, the routing complexity and memory usage of CNPU will be significantly decreased.

The CNPU executes the check-to-variable message compu- The sequence operations in each decoding iteration can be

tation and the magnitude comparison between the variable-to- scheduled as shown in Fig. 7 and explained as follows. At the be-

check and the intermediate result of the row process. To imple- ginning of every iteration (Clock Cycle 1), CNPUs are fed

ment the CNPU efficiently, both the single-minimum scheme with variable-to-check messages from VNPUs, i.e., each

and the 4-bit nonuniform quantization scheme are used in our CNPU with one message, respectively. After the check-node

design. Fig. 6(a) shows the architecture of CNPU by using the processing,

check-to-variable messages are passed to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: FLEXIBLE LDPC DECODER DESIGN FOR MULTIGIGABIT-PER-SECOND APPLICATIONS

121

Fig. 7. Decoding schedule within one iteration.

Fig. 8. Architecture of a VNPU.

VNPUs, and the variable node updating computation is finally

finished. All the aforementioned operations are done in the first

clock cycle. During the check-node process, the row-process re-

sult of the last iteration is transferred from the New Register

of

to the Old Register of

, while

the New Register of

begins to store the row-process

intermediate result of the present iteration. However, in Clock

Cycle

, the Old Register of

con-

tains the same results as the Old Register of

,

and the New Register of

is continuously updated by the

row-process intermediate result of the present iteration.

Fig. 9. (a) Architecture of the Exp block. (b) Architecture of the Comp block.
As shown in Fig. 9, the two blocks can be easily derived based on the nonuniform quantization scheme, and the corresponding equations used to perform the expansion are expressed in

D. Architecture of VNPU

Fig. 8 shows the architecture of a VNPU which adopts the

(2)

same structure as that in [30]. In order to employ the nonuniform

quantization scheme, the Exp and Comp blocks are introduced

in the VNPU.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

122

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

TABLE II ASIC IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS AND COMPARISONS

Fig. 10. Configurable global permutation network.
Similarly, the conversion formula for compression can be obtained as follows:
(3)
The overhead of this part of logic is small compared with the significant hardware reduction brought by the transformed MS algorithm. In this design, two stages of pipelining are added to the VNPU to shorten the critical path.

more crossbar switches than the Banyan network with the same

number of inputs.

As shown in Fig. 10, the configurable global permutation

network comprises two subnetworks and one configurable reg-

ister. Subnetworks 1 and 2 shuffle data of variable-to-check and

check-to-variable messages, respectively, and each subnetwork

comprises four

Benes networks. Moreover, the con-

figurable register stores the control information using 7680 con-

trol bits.

With the aid of the configurable global permutation network,

the proposed shift-LDPC decoder provides enough flexibility to

support any kind of shift-LDPC code, whose submatrices are

smaller than the input size of Benes networks.

In general, the decoding throughput of a shift-LDPC decoder

can be well estimated as follows:

Throughput

(4)

where is the clock frequency determined by the critical path, is the number of clock cycles required in one decoding itera-
tion, and is the average number of iterations to process one code word. Since the critical path of the configurable global permutation network is quite long, it is necessary to make it well pipelined to attain a higher decoding throughput. The Benes networks employed have 15 stages of crossbars, which can be easily split into three parts. Each part equally has five stages of crossbars, as shown in Fig. 11.

E. Configurable Global Permutation Network

V. ASIC IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

The configurable global permutation network implements

the flexible interconnections between the CNPUs and VNPUs.

Among the candidate structures for a flexible permutation

network are the Benes network and the Banyan network.

An

Benes network has

stages, each

of which contains

crossbar switches, and totally

crossbar switches are needed. Compared

with the

Banyan network, the

Benes network

can support any number of inputs that is smaller than , no

matter if it is a power of two or not. Thus, the Benes network

is preferable for flexible application even though it consumes

The proposed flexible decoders for the (8192, 7168) (4, 32)regular shift-LDPC code are implemented in a SMIC 0.18- m Logic 1P6M Salicide 1.8/3.3-V process. The hierarchical design flow is followed with standard EDA tools: Cadence Verilog XL is used for simulation and verification, Synopsys Design Compiler is used for synthesis, Synopsys Prime Time is used for timing analysis, and Cadence SoC Encounter is used for floor planning, place, and route. The final layout plot of the design with both the single-minimum and 4-bit nonuniform quantization schemes is shown in Fig. 12, and its operation is configurable according to three parameters: the block size of subma-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: FLEXIBLE LDPC DECODER DESIGN FOR MULTIGIGABIT-PER-SECOND APPLICATIONS

123

Fig. 11. Pipelining scheme for the configurable global permutation network.

achieves 26.7% of area reduction and 71.4% of throughput increase compared with [17]. It can also be expected that our designs can achieve higher clock speed if we really use a 65-nm CMOS process, and thus, even higher throughput can be expected. Therefore, we conclude that the proposed designs are well suited for very high speed communication systems.
To make the comparisons simple, one performance metric introduced by [20] is employed in this paper. It is named throughput-to-area ratio (TAR) and is computed as follows:
(5)

It is clear from Table II that the proposed designs are also much more efficient than any published flexible LDPC decoders according to this performance metric. Thus, they are the most competitive designs up to now and are well suited for very high speed applications.

VI. CONCLUSION

A flexible shift-LDPC decoder architecture for very high

speed communication systems has been proposed. Both the

single-minimum and nonuniform quantization schemes are

Fig. 12. Final layout of the flexible shift-LDPC decoder with both the singleminimum and 4-bit nonuniform quantization schemes.

exploited to reduce the hardware consumption while maintaining similar decoding performance. The Benes network is employed to implement the configurable interconnections

trices, the row number of submatrices, and the column number of submatrices.
Table II lists the ASIC implementation results of the decoders and comparisons with other prior references. The maximum number of iterations is set to 16 to offer a good tradeoff between decoding performance and throughput. In addition, in order to perform a fair comparison of the hardware performance, the area consumption of the proposed designs is roughly scaled to a 65-nm process.
It can be observed that the proposed design with 4-bit nonuni-

between the VNPU and CNPU arrays, which brings sufficient flexibility for multiple code rates, code lengths, as well as submatrix sizes. Two (8192, 7168) (4, 32)-regular shift-LDPC decoder design examples are implemented in a SMIC 0.18-
m Logic 1P6M Salicide 1.8/3.3-V process, which can achieve a maximum throughput of 3.6 Gbits/s at 16 iterations with die size of only 13.9 mm and 13.1 mm , respectively. By adopting more advanced technology and better optimized pipelining schemes, significantly higher clock speed and, thus, even higher throughput can be expected.

form quantization occupies 13.9- mm and saves 2.81% of silicon area compared with [19]. Moreover, the corresponding decoding throughput is more than one order of magnitude higher than [19]. Furthermore, the proposed design, which employs both the single-minimum and the 4-bit nonuniform quantization schemes, saves about 8.44% of area compared with [19] while having a small penalty in performance loss. The significant hardware reduction of the second approach is attributed to the savings of the second minimum. As summarized in Table II, although the hardware complexity of our designs is two times larger than [20], more than 185 times higher throughput can be achieved. Furthermore, compared with the latest published flexible LDPC decoder in [22], our efficient flexible decoder architecture for shift-LDPC codes results in 19.6% hardware complexity reduction due to the adoption of the single-minimum and 4-bit nonuniform quantization schemes, and it has a throughput that is about two orders of magnitude higher by incorporating the shifting structure. Compared with [17], which is also suitable for very high decoding throughput but fails to provide flexibility of decoding, the proposed designs possess advantages in both throughput and area. In the Proposed I decoder, thanks to our nonuniform quantization approach, only 78.0% of hardware resources are used, and the corresponding throughput is 71.4% higher than that of [17]. Moreover, the Proposed II decoder

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett, vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[4] IEEE Draft Standard for Information Technology—Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems—Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Specific Requirements—Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications: Amendment 4: Enhancements for Higher Throughput, IEEE Standard11n P.802, 2008.
[5] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems Amendment 2: Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands and Corrigendum 1, IEEE Standard 802.16e, 2008.
[6] Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting System, R.P. China Standard GB206002006, 2006.
[7] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for 11/12 GHz Satellite Services, European Standard EN 300 421, 2005.
[8] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr, T. J. Richardson, and R. E. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

124

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

[9] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[10] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[11] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[12] E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and A. Dholakia, “Reduced complexity decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 102–104, Jan. 2001.
[13] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Decoding low-density parity-check codes with normalized APP-based algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 1026–1030.
[14] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[15] N. Pandya and B. Honary, “Low-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 43, no. 18, pp. 990–991, Aug. 2007.
[16] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.
[17] H. Zhong, W. Xu, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Area-efficient min-sum decoder design for high-rate quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes in magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 4117–4122, Dec. 2007.
[18] J. Sha, Z. Wang, M. Gao, and L. Li, “Multi-Gb/s LDPC code design and implementation,” IEEE Trans.Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 262–268, Feb. 2009.
[19] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder ship,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[20] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 54, pp. 542–546, Jun. 2007.
[21] L. Zhang, L. Gui, Y. Xu, and W. Zhang, “Configurable multi-rate decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes based broadband broadcasting system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 226–235, Jun. 2008.
[22] J.-Y. Lee and H.-J. Ryu, “A 1-Gb/s flexible LDPC decoder supporting multiple code rates and block lengths,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 417–424, May 2008.
[23] V. E. Benes, “Optimal rearrangeable multistage connecting networks,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., no. 43, pp. 1641–1656, 1964.
[24] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[25] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, “Efficient decoder design for high-throughput LDPC decoding,” in Proc. APCCAS, Dec. 2008, pp. 1640–1643.
[26] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A bit-serial approximate min-sum LDPC decoder and FPGA implementation,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2006, pp. 149–152.
[27] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, “Efficient message passing architecture for high throughput LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2007, pp. 917–920.
[28] Y. Chen and K. K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004.
[29] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Nonuniformly quantized min-sum decoder architecture for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 18th ACM GLSVLSI, May 2008, pp. 451–456.
[30] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “Low-complexity high-speed decoder design for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans.Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 104–114, Jan. 2007.
Chuan Zhang (S’08) received the B.E. degree in microelectronics with minor in microcomputer application from Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, in 2006, where he is currently working toward the M.E. degree in VLSI design in the Institute of VLSI Design.
His current research interests include low-power high-speed VLSI design, specifically VLSI design for digital signal processing, digital communications (including error-control coding), and cryptography.
Mr. Zhang was a recipient of the Merit Student Paper Award at the IEEE Asia Pacific Conference on Circuits and Systems in 2008.

Zhongfeng Wang (M’00–SM’05) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, in 2000.
Upon finishing his graduate study, he was with Morphics Technology Incorporated for two years and then moved to National Semiconductor Corporation in 2002. From 2003 to 2007, he was an Assistant Professor with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis. He is currently a Senior Principal Scientist with Broadcom Corporation, Irvine, CA. He has published about 100 technical papers and has filed numerous U.S. patent applications. His current research interests include the area of VLSI design for digital communication systems. Dr. Wang was the recipient of the Best Student Paper Award at the IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems in 1999 and a corecipient of the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society VLSI Transactions Best Paper Award in 2007. He was an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—PART I: REGULAR PAPERS and is an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—PART II: EXPRESS BRIEFS and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS. He has also served in many technical committees for IEEE and ACM conferences.
Jin Sha received the B.S. degree in physics and the Ph.D. degree in microelectronics from Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, in 2002 and 2007, respectively.
From 2007 to 2008, he was an ASIC Design Engineer with the Corporate Research and Development Group, OmniVision Technologies, Inc., Shanghai, China. He is currently an Assistant Professor with Nanjing University. His research interests include VLSI architectures and integrated-circuit design for communications, coding theory applications, and image signal processing.
Li Li received the B.E. degree in electric engineering and automation and the Ph.D. degree in precision instrument from Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China, in 1996 and 2002, respectively.
After finishing her graduate study, she has been with the Department of Physics, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, where she is currently an Associate Professor. She has published numerous technical papers and coauthored two books. She has filed for three Chinese invention patents. Her current research interests include the area of VLSI design for digital communication systems and multiprocessor system-on-a-chip architecture design. Dr. Li was the recipient of the Excellent Faculty Award of Jiangsu Six Talent Peaks Project in 2004 and the Excellent Young Faculty Award of Nanjing University in 2006.
Jun Lin received the B.S. degree in physics from Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, in 2007, where he is currently working toward the M.S. degree in microelectronics.
His research interests include VLSI architectures and algorithm design for communication protocols, coding theory applications, and cryptology.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

