Keynote Talk 3
Squeezing the Spectral Lemon: Advances in Signal Processing and Coding to Improve Spectral Efficiency
Sebastien Roy Laval University, Canada
Abstract Over the last few years, a research program was undertaken in collaboration with InterDigital Canada under the theme "Advanced Broadband Transceivers." The aim was the development of novel signal processing techniques, exploiting the latest in communication theory and having fundamental advantages, while keeping a focus throughout on associated implementation issues, such as algorithmic complexity, power consumption, etc. This research approach, bridging theory and implementation under a pragmatic mindset, yielded rather promising results. For example, it is known that MIMO techniques are the key to augmenting effective link throughput without bandwidth expansion. However, it is still problematic in practice to incorporate multiple antennas on handsets because of cost/power/size constraints. As a solution, virtual MIMO techniques based on sphere decoding were developed which can effectively at the receiver separate more co-channel signals than there are receive antennas. Also, new powerful quasi-cyclic LDPC codes were devised which allow encoding in linear complexity. Furthermore, new joint decoding techniques were developed as well as efficient parallel hardware implementations. Together, these techniques are capable of aggregate throughputs above 10 Gbps on an FPGA. Multi-rate codec architectures were also developed and then applied in ARQ (automated repeat request) schemes, as well as relaying / network coding scenarios. We will look at how these techniques can improve spectral efficiency in current wireless systems. Approaches for further gains will also be discussed, including distributed arrays, cognitive radio, cognitive networks, interference alignment, and network coding.
Speaker's Biography Sebastien Roy (S'95-M'02) received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from Laval University, Quebec, QC, Canada, in 1991 and 1993, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 2000. He is currently Full Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Laval University, where he is pursuing research in the system-level and implementation aspects of signal processing for communications as well as space-time processing and space-time coding. From 2000 to 2002, he was a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Postdoctoral Fellow at Laval University. He has also been active in industrial consulting with companies such as InterDigital and MacDonald Dettwiller, and was involved in the organization of several international conferences. In 2007 and 2009, he was an invited professor at l'Ecole Nationale Superieure de Sciences Appliquees et de Technologie (ENSSAT), Lannion, France. He received 5 teaching awards and in 2007 received the award for excellence in technology transfer from the strategic network on Systems and Technologies for Advanced Communications (SYTAcom). Dr. Roy was also awarded the award for Post-Graduate Research Excellence from the Canadian Institute for Telecommunications Research in 2000.
x

