IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

87

Using Embedded Dynamic Random Access Memory to Reduce Energy Consumption of Magnetic Recording Read Channel
Ningde Xie1, Tong Zhang1, and Erich F. Haratsch2
ECSE Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA LSI Corporation, Allentown, PA 18109 USA
Although the performance of a magnetic recording read channel can be improved by employing advanced iterative signal detection and coding techniques, the method nevertheless tends to incur significant silicon area and energy consumption overhead. Motivated by recent significant improvement of high-density embedded dynamic random access memory (eDRAM) towards high manufacturability at low cost, we explored the potential of integrating eDRAM in read channel integrated circuits (IC) to minimize the silicon area and energy consumption cost incurred by iterative signal detection and coding. As a result of the memory-intensive nature of iterative signal detection and coding algorithms, the silicon cost can be reduced in a straightforward manner by directly replacing conventional SRAM with eDRAM. However, reducing the energy consumption may not be trivial. In this paper, we present two techniques that trade eDRAM storage capacity to reduce the energy consumption of iterative signal detection and coding datapath. We have demonstrated dDRAM’s energy saving potential by designing a representative iterative read channel at the 65 nm technology node. Simulation shows that we can eliminate over 99.99% of post-processing computation for dominant error events detection, and achieve up to a 67% reduction of decoding energy consumption.
Index Terms—Embedded dynamic random access memory (DRAM), energy consumption, low-density parity check (LDPC).

I. INTRODUCTION

I T is almost evident that future magnetic recording read channels will employ iterative signal detection and coding techniques to sustain the continuous scaling of hard disk storage density. However, those advanced iterative signal detection and coding techniques will inevitably incur significant silicon area and energy consumption overhead. Motivated by recent significant improvement of high-density embedded DRAM (eDRAM) [1]–[4], this paper attempts to explore the potential of using eDRAM instead of conventional SRAM as on-chip memory in read channel integrated circuits (IC) to reduce the silicon area and energy consumption induced by those advanced iterative signal detection and coding techniques.
As reported by IBM [3], compared with conventional SRAM, eDRAM can achieve 3 higher storage density and 0.8 lower energy consumption while maintaining a sufficiently high-speed performance for most applications. Therefore, due to the memory-intensive nature of iterative signal detection and coding, we can directly use eDRAM as a drop-in replacement of SRAM to largely reduce the silicon area overhead and modestly reduce energy consumption in a very straightforward manner. This work concerns how to further improve the energy efficiency through read channel architecture design innovations when eDRAM is being used as on-chip memory. It is intuitive that the high storage density of eDRAM could make it feasible or economic to apply certain unconventional design approaches that essentially trade memory storage capacity for energy efficiency. Following this intuition, we propose two design approaches, including 1) conditional execution of dominant error event detection and 2) iterative decoder voltage overscaling. The first approach tends
Manuscript received March 01, 2009; revised May 15, 2009 and June 15, 2009. Current version published December 23, 2009. Corresponding author: N. Xie (e-mail: xien@rpi.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2009.2026898

Fig. 1. SER with and without post processing.
to obviate a large percentage of explicit executions of dominant error event detection, while the second approach leverages the run-time variations of decoding iteration numbers to aggressively reduce the iterative decoder supply voltage. Both design approaches can effectively reduce the energy consumption but demand extra memory storage capacity.
To demonstrate the proposed design approaches, we use an iterative read channel as a test vehicle, which employs low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, soft output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) signal detection, and dominant error event detection. Targeting at 1.5 Gb/s channel throughput with the 512-byte sector format, we designed the entire iterative read channel at 65 nm CMOS technology node. We show that the first design approach (i.e., conditional execution dominant error even detection) can eliminate over 99.99% of post-processing computation for detecting dominant error events, and the second approach (i.e., LDPC decoder voltage overscaling) can achieve up to 67% reduction of LDPC decoding energy consumption.
II. BASELINE ITERATIVE READ CHANNEL
The baseline iterative read channel being considered in this work uses LDPC code and SOVA signal detection. Each sector

0018-9464/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

88

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

Fig. 2. Unrolled baseline magnetic recording read channel architecture.

enough to ensure that the buffer overflow rate is lower than the

target sector error rate (SER). We assume that the datapath is

pipelined and its controller is designed in such a way that all the

components are almost always busy (i.e., processing data). Let

denote the number of sectors that the buffer can hold, de-

note the number of channel iterations required for each sector,

Fig. 3. Recursive baseline magnetic recording read channel architecture.

and denote the sector length. The latency of processing

sectors can be approximated as

,

during which

sectors arrives and sectors leaves.

contains 512-byte user data, and the equalizer contains a 10-tap Therefore, to avoid buffer overflow, we should have

FIR filter with the target of

followed by a 3-tap

whitening filter. A rate-8/9 regular quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC

(1)

code with the column weight of 4 is being used. To further

improve the performance, a post-processor is also used to realize dominant error event detection [5]–[7]. We interleave two 64-bit single parity check codes for the purpose of dominant error event detection. In this context, the post-processor operates

Hence, let

denote the probability that channel iter-

ations are required for processing each sector, the upper bound

for buffer overflow probability can be estimated as

on the hard-decision of the SOVA detector output and, once it

detects a dominant error event, it simply sets the corresponding

(2)

soft-output magnitude to zero. Based on our simulations, using

the post-processing in the first round of channel detection/de-

coding can noticeably improve the overall system performance, while it does not help if the post-processing is further used in the succeeding detection/decoding iterations. With the maximum allowable channel detection/decoding iteration number of 4, Fig. 1 shows the simulated sector error rate (SER) results with and without post processing in the first round of channel detection/decoding, respectively. It clearly indicates at least 0.1 dB gain by using post-processor to perform the dominant error event detection.
Given a target read channel throughput and the maximum allowable channel iteration number , such iterative read channel may be implemented with two different options: 1) Unrolled architecture as illustrated in Fig. 2: All the components

which must be lower than the target SER. Due to the lack of

analytical methods, we can carry out extensive computer simu-

lations to estimate the values of . Because of the very low

target SER (e.g.,

and below) in practice, we may have to

use conservative trajectory extrapolations to approximately es-

timate

and overflow probability upper bound . More-

over, it is clear that the overflow probability upper bound also

depends on the value of . As increments from 1 to infinity,

the overflow probability upper bound will first increase and then

decrease and eventually approach to zero. In this work, we rely

on extensive numerical calculations to search for the that

leads to the maximal overflow probability upper bound.

including SOVA detector, post-processor, and LDPC decoder

are designed to achieve the throughput , and simply dupli-

cated by times along the datapath; 2) Because the number of

channel iterations in the run time varies from one sector to the

next, we can use a recursive architecture, as illustrated in Fig. 3.

We implement only one set of components that must achieve a

throughput, denoted as

, which is higher than the target

channel throughput, and insert a buffer between equalizer and

SOVA detector to prevent data loss. This work assumes a base-

line read channel with the recursive architecture because of its

obvious advantage of silicon area.

B. Baseline Read Channel ASIC Design

We assume the target channel throughput is 1.5 Gb/s,

the component throughput

is 2 Gb/s, and the maximum

allowable number of channel iterations is 4. We estimate the

buffer size as follows. Under two different SERs, we carry out

simulations and obtain the channel iteration number statistics as

listed in Table I, based on which we conservatively estimate the

buffer overflow probability under different buffer size as

shown in Fig. 4. Assuming a target SER of

, we set

in this baseline read channel.

With the target 2 Gb/s component throughput, we designed

A. Estimation of Buffer Size

the SOVA detector, post-processor, and LDPC decoder using Synopsys tools and TSMC 65 nm CMOS standard cell and

One critical issue in this baseline recursive read channel ar- SRAM libraries, where the LDPC decoder can achieve 2 Gb/s in

chitecture design is to determine the size of the buffer memory case of carrying out 24 decoding iterations. The SOVA detector

that is used to prevent data loss. The buffer should be just big uses the modified register-exchange design approach [8], and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIE et al.: USING EMBEDDED DRAM TO REDUCE ENERGY CONSUMPTION OF MAGNETIC RECORDING READ CHANNEL

89

Fig. 4. Estimated sector buffer overflow rate.
TABLE I STATISTICS OF THE CHANNEL ITERATION NUMBER UNDER TWO DIFFERENT
SERS

Fig. 5. Modified data processing flow for conditional execution of post-processing in the first round of read channel processing.
fabrication cost, leading to a subtle tradeoff between potential performance gain and cost penalty. Such a tradeoff should be carefully considered and evaluated in practice.

A. Conditional Execution of Post-Processing

As illustrated in Fig. 3, like in current design practice, the

post-processor in the first detection/decoding pass carries out

dominant error even detection for all the sectors. In this work,

we propose to modify the data processing flow as illustrated

TABLE II DATAPATH ASIC DESIGN SYNTHESIS RESULTS

in Fig. 5: Instead of blindly performing post-processing on each sector, we first carry out LDPC decoding immediately after signal detection, and the post-processing is invoked only

if the decoding fails. This is motivated by the observation that,

under the target very low sector error rate, most sectors can be

successfully decoded during the first pass even without using

post-processing, which suggests that most post-processing

during the first pass is unnecessary and simply wastes energy.

Clearly, to support such conditional execution of post-pro-

cessing, we must add a buffer that can hold two data frames

the LDPC decoder uses sum-product algorithm and its architecture follows the one presented in [9]. Readers are referred to [6] for the description of the computations involved in dominant error even detection, and sufficient computation parallelism is used to meet the 2 Gb/s throughput. In terms of finite wordlength configuration, the output of the equalizer uses 6 bits, the path metric and soft output of the SOVA detector use 9 bits and 6 bits, respectively, the FIR coefficients and dominant error event weight metric in post processor use 6 bits and 10 bits, and the internal LDPC decoding messages use 6 bits. Table II summarizes the synthesis results including the area of logic circuit and SRAM.

in case LDPC decoding fails and we need to invoke post-processing. One of the data frames is 6-bit channel output data and the other one is 1-bit detector hard decision. At 65 nm technology node, such a buffer will occupy 0.31 mm if SRAM is being use, which can be reduced to 0.1 mm when eDRAM is being used. Hence, the use of eDRAM can better justify and support this proposed conditional execution of post-processing. To demonstrate its energy saving potential, we carried out the following simulations and analysis. It is clear that, when we use the above data processing flow, the overall decoding iteration number of the LDPC decoder may increase, i.e., the LDPC decoder may consume more energy. Let and denote the average power consumption of the LDPC decoder with uncon-

III. DESIGN EXPLORATION USING EMBEDDED DRAM
This section discusses the potential of exploiting the higher storage density enabled by eDRAM to improve the above baseline read channel silicon area and energy efficiency. The above design results of the baseline read channel show that the on-chip

ditional and conditional post-processing, respectively. Let and represent the power consumption of the post processor and eDRAM respectively. If the post processor is invoked with the probability of , the average power saving can be estimated as follows:

SRAM occupies more than 68% of the total silicon area, which

(3)

clearly suggests a great area reduction potential if we simply

replace the on-chip SRAM with eDRAM. This will lead to a Based on the simulation results as shown in Fig. 1, we assume

45% saving of the total silicon area assuming eDRAM achieves the system will operate under the SNR of 8.6 dB in order to

3 higher density than its SRAM counterpart [3]. Besides such reach sufficiently low sector error rate. Following the results in

straightforward drop-in replacement to reduce silicon area, this [3] (i.e., energy consumption of eDRAM tends to be 0.8 lower

section presents two approaches that further leverage eDRAM than its SRAM counterpart) and using Synopsis tools (TSMC 65

to reduce read channel energy consumption. It should be pointed nm CMOS standard cell with 1.2 V power supply), we estimate

out that the process of eDRAM may introduce up to 10% extra the power consumption for every component as in Table III.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

90
TABLE III POWER CONSUMPTION RESULTS

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

Fig. 7. Embedded DRAM buffer stacking to enable LDPC decoder voltage scaling.

Fig. 6. Histogram of LDPC decoding iteration numbers.

Meanwhile, targeting at an SER below

, we carry out

simulation to estimate . With the estimated

,

based on (3) and the results listed in Table III, we have that 35

mW can be saved at the expense of extra 0.1 mm silicon area.

B. LDPC Decoder Voltage Scaling

finish the decoding of present sector within , which is re-

ferred to as decoding overflow. The buffer memories are used

to prevent the sector loss in presence of LDPC decoding over-

flow. Notice that, in order to ensure iterative detection and de-

coding, this LDPC decoder buffer should store both the input

and output of the SOVA detector. As we reduce the voltage

scaling factor, the LDPC decoder energy consumption will ac-

cordingly reduce, but the probability of decoding overflow will

increase, which will demand a larger amount of buffer mem-

ories to prevent buffer overflow. This work studies this design

tradeoff described below.

Given voltage scaling factor

, the buffer memories

should be sufficiently large so that the buffer overflow prob-

ability is (much) less than the target sector error rate. Let

denote the number of sectors that can be stored in the buffer

memories and represent the maximum number of decoding

iterations that the LDPC decoder can carry out within . We

assume that the decoding of all the sectors is statistically inde-

pendent and let represent the probability that iterations

are required in one LDPC decoding. Therefore, during the time

period of , the upper bound for the buffer overflow proba-

bility can be estimated as

We further develop a method that leverages the large storage

capacity provided by eDRAM to enable the well known voltage

(4)

scaling technique to reduce LDPC decoder energy consumption.

Let

denote the maximum allowable number of LDPC de-

coding iterations. Due to the on-the-fly decoding convergence

check inherent in LDPC decoding, the run-time number of de-

coding iterations may vary from one sector to the next and the

average iteration number can be much less than . For ex-

ample, we simulated sectors at 8.6 dB under the above pre-

sented read channel configuration and obtained the LDPC de-

coding iteration number histogram as shown in Fig. 6.

Let denote the target read channel sector processing rate,

and

denote the supply voltage under which the LDPC

decoder carry out

iterations within . When operating

In spite of the above simple formulation, there are no existing

accurate analytical methods that can estimate the values of

for LDPC decoding. Hence, we have to empirically estimate

through simulations. Given target buffer overflow prob-

ability and , we can accordingly determine the minimal

allowable value of . On the first order of approximation, we

have that the circuit delay is proportional to

,

where

is the velocity saturation index. Therefore, we

can estimate the allowable voltage scaling factor by solving

the following equation:

under the supply voltage

, due to the significant run-

time decoding iteration number variation as shown in the above,

(5)

the LDPC decoder may simply be idle most time during the run

time, leading to a potential for applying voltage scaling to re- After we obtain the allowable voltage scaling factor , the

duce energy consumption. Ideally, we may want to dynamically LDPC decoder energy saving percentage can be approximated

scale the supply voltage so that it is just enough for the LDPC as

, where here is the power consump-

decoder to carry out the exact number of iterations for decoding tion of the eDRAM that can hold sectors. To demonstrate the

each sector. However, since the exact number of decoding itera- LDPC decoding energy saving potential, we carried out a case

tions cannot be known until the decoding is finished, it is impos- study as follows. First, based on the LDPC decoding iteration

sible to realize such ideal voltage scaling a priori. Furthermore, number statistics simulation results shown in Fig. 6, we can es-

such fine-grain dynamic voltage scaling tends to incur non-neg- timate the buffer overflow probability according to (4), as illus-

ligible silicon and energy overhead.

trated in Fig. 8.

Leveraging the large storage capacity provided by eDRAM, Because the computer simulations could not empirically re-

we propose to insert a certain amount of buffer memories be- veal the values of for

within a reasonable amount

tween the detector and decoder, as illustrated in Fig. 7, to en- of simulation time, we conservatively estimate the values of

able a fixed voltage scaling on LDPC decoder. Under a scaled

for

on the order of based on the above simula-

supply voltage, the LDPC decoder may not always be able to tions. Accordingly, we can estimate the minimal allowable value

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIE et al.: USING EMBEDDED DRAM TO REDUCE ENERGY CONSUMPTION OF MAGNETIC RECORDING READ CHANNEL

91

Fig. 8. Buffer overflow probability P vs. buffer capacity m, where m is the
number of sectors that can be stored.

Fig. 10. Estimated total energy saving, while taking into account of the buffer
energy consumption overhead, under different values of buffer capacity m and velocity saturation index .

TABLE IV
K ESTIMATED VOLTAGE SCALING FACTOR

Fig. 9. Estimated LDPC decoder energy saving under different values of buffer
capacity m and velocity saturation index .

of under

and different value of , and we have

equals to 14

, 10

,7

,6

,

and 4

, respectively. In our ASIC design at 65 nm node

described above, the

is 1.2 V and the threshold voltage

is about 0.5 V. The value of is not readily available and we

consider three different values of , i.e., 1.2, 1.5, and 2. There-

fore, with

as in Section II.B, we can estimate the

voltage scaling factor (as listed in Table IV), LDPC decoder

energy saving (as shown in Fig. 9) and total energy saving while

taking into account of the buffer energy consumption overhead

(as shown in Fig. 10) under different values of buffer capacity

and velocity saturation index . The results clearly show a

great energy saving potential for the read channel chip design,

and similar potentials can be expected for many other commu-

nication systems where iterative coding and signal detection are

being used. Finally, we note that the energy saving curve tends

to become flat for

, which is because the buffer energy

consumption becomes more significant and offsets the energy

saving gained by LDPC decoder voltage scaling.

IV. CONCLUSION
It is evident that the emerging eDRAM may shift the signal processing integrated circuit design to a new paradigm with a

much greater design space available to explore. Particularly concerning magnetic recording read channel with advanced iterative signal processing and coding, this paper presents simple yet effective approaches that trade the memory storage capacity provided by eDRAM for energy saving. Their effectiveness has been well demonstrated using ASIC design at 65 nm CMOS technology node.
REFERENCES
[1] Iida et al., “A 322 MHz random-cycle embedded DRAM with highaccuracy sensing and tuning,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 40, pp. 2296–2304, Nov. 2005.
[2] D. Anand et al., “A 1.0 GHz multi-banked embedded DRAM in 65 nm CMOS featuring concurrent refresh and hierachical BIST,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integerated Circuits Conf., Sept. 2007, pp. 795–798.
[3] J. Barth et al., “A 500 MHz random cycle, 1.5 ns latency, SOI embedded DRAM macro featuring a three-transistor micro sense amplifier,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, pp. 86–95, Jan. 2008.
[4] S. Romanovsky et al., “A 500 MHz random-access embedded 1 Mb DRAM macro in bulk CMOS,” in Dig. Tech. Papers. IEEE Int. SolidState Circuits, Feb. 2008, p. 270.
[5] J. Caroselli et al., “Improved detection for magnetic recording systems with media noise,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 2779–2781, Sep. 1997.
[6] W. Feng, A. Vityaev, G. Burd, and N. Nazari, “On the performance of parity codes in magnetic recording systems,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 2000, pp. 1877–1881.
[7] Z. A. Keirn, V. Y. Krachkovsky, E. F. Haratsch, and H. Burger, “Use of redundant bits for magnetic recording: Single-parity codes and ReedSolomon error-correcting code,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 225–230, Jan. 2004.
[8] O. J. Joeressen and H. Meyr, “A 40-Mb/s soft-output Viterbi decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 30, pp. 812–818, Jul. 1995.
[9] H. Zhong, T. Zhang, and E. F. Haratsch, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for the magnetic recording channel: Code design and VLSI implementation,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1118–1123, Mar. 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

