IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

181

Analysis of Absorbing Sets and Fully Absorbing Sets
of Array-Based LDPC Codes
Lara Dolecek, Member, IEEE, Zhengya Zhang, Member, IEEE, Venkat Anantharam, Fellow, IEEE, Martin J. Wainwright, Member, IEEE, and Borivoje Nikolic´, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The class of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is attractive, since such codes can be decoded using practical message-passing algorithms, and their performance is known to approach the Shannon limits for suitably large block lengths. For the intermediate block lengths relevant in applications, however, many LDPC codes exhibit a so-called “error floor,” corresponding to a significant flattening in the curve that relates signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) to the bit-error rate (BER) level. Previous work has linked this behavior to combinatorial substructures within the Tanner graph associated with an LDPC code, known as (fully) absorbing sets. These fully absorbing sets correspond to a particular type of near-codewords or trapping sets that are stable under bit-flipping operations, and exert the dominant effect on the low BER behavior of structured LDPC codes. This paper provides a detailed theoretical analysis of these (fully) absorbing sets for the class of
Cp;
 array-based LDPC codes, including the characterization of = 2 3 4 all minimal (fully) absorbing sets for the array-based LDPC codes for 
 ; ; , and moreover, it provides the development of tech-
niques to enumerate them exactly. Theoretical results of this type provide a foundation for predicting and extrapolating the error floor behavior of LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Absorbing set, bit-flipping, error floor, low-density parity-check (LDPC ) codes, message passing decoding, nearcodeword, trapping set.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are a class of error-correcting codes based on sparse graphs. Their chief appeal is their excellent performance under practical decoding algorithms based on message passing, especially for
Manuscript received January 31, 2008; revised January 19, 2009. Current version published December 23, 2009. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant CCF-0635372, and by Marvell Semiconductor and Intel Corporation through the UC MICRO program. The work of L. Dolecek was also supported by the University of California Dissertation Year Fellowship. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Conference on Communications, Glasgow, Scotland, July 2007.
L. Dolecek was with the Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA. She is now with the Electrical Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA (e-mail: dolecek@ucla.edu).
Z. Zhang was with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley. He is now with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA (e-mail: zhengya@eecs.umich.edu).
V. Anantharam, B. Nikolic´, and M. J. Wainwright are with the Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA (email: ananth@eecs.berkeley.edu; bora@eecs.berkeley.edu; wainwrig@eecs.berkeley.edu).
Communicated by T. Etzion, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of Figures 1 and 2 in this paper are available online at http:// ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2034781

moderate bit-error rates (BER), say

and above [6], [26],

[28]. As a consequence, LDPC codes have been adopted into

several recent standards including Ethernet [2], digital video

broadcasting [1], [29], and broadband wireless [3].

However, it has been observed that LDPC codes often exhibit

an error floor, meaning that beyond a certain signal-to-noise

ratio (SNR), there is a significant change in slope in the plot

of BER versus SNR. For suitably designed codes, these error

floors only occur at relatively low BERs (e.g., below ), and

do not pose problems for applications requiring only moder-

ately low BER, such as low-rate wireless communications. For

other applications with low BER requirements, such as mag-

netic disk drives and optical channels, these error floors are ex-

tremely troublesome. An ongoing line of research has shown

that these error floors are closely related to the suboptimality of

practical message-passing decoders. MacKay and Postol [18]

recognized that certain classes of non-codewords, which they

referred to as near-codewords, can cause the decoder to fail; in

particular, an

near-codeword is a binary string of weight

whose syndrome has weight . From simulation of a rate

LDPC code with block length based on the Margulis con-

struction, they found that

and

near-codewords

are the main contributors to the error floor of this code when

used for the transmission over an additive white Gaussian noise

(AWGN) channel. They also postulated that the minimum dis-

tance of this code is significantly higher than the weight of

the observed near-codewords. Di et al. [5] defined a closely re-

lated concept of a stopping set, which governs the performance

limits of iterative decoding for LDPC codes over the binary era-

sure channel (BEC). Subsequent work by Orlitsky et al. [21]

has provided analytical characterization of the stopping set enu-

merator for different ensembles of LDPC codes. Although very

useful for determining the performance over a BEC, stopping

sets cannot be used directly to determine LDPC performance

for other channels, such as AWGN channels, since the nature of

errors in nonerasure channels is more subtle. For more general

channels, pioneering work by Richardson [23] introduced the

operationally defined notion of a trapping set in order to address

the error floor of LDPC codes, and developed a fast numerical

method for estimating the error probability in the low BER re-

gion. Follow-up work by Chilappagari et al. [4] used trapping

sets to study error floors of LDPC codes on a binary symmetric

channel. Other researchers have studied closely related notions

of elementary trapping sets [17], pseudocodewords for iterative

decoding [14], [15], and pseudocodewords for linear-program-

ming decoding [12].

In previous experimental work [32], we designed a hardware

emulator to explore the low BER regime of various classes of

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

182

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

Fig. 1. Hardware-based BER/FER performance of several array-based LDPC codes with bit degree four.

structured LDPC codes. On the basis of these experiments, we isolated a set of graphical substructures in the Tanner graph [27] representation of the parity check matrix, referred to as

TABLE I ERROR STATISTICS FOR THE (2809; 2600) ARRAY-BASED LDPC CODE
(CHECK DEGREE = 53, BIT DEGREE = 4)

absorbing sets, that cause various message-passing decoders to

fail by converging to these non-codeword states. Like stopping

sets, absorbing sets have a purely combinatorial definition in

terms of the parity check matrix of a given LDPC code. They

can be viewed as a special subclass of a near-codeword or a trap-

ping set, in particular one that is guaranteed to be stable under

a bit-flipping decoder. With this property, and in contrast to

previous works, absorbing sets describe the dominant decoding failures of various message passing algorithms and provide a new analytical foundation for studying error floors.

TABLE II ERROR STATISTICS FOR THE (2209; 2024) ARRAY-BASED LDPC CODE
(CHECK DEGREE = 47, BIT DEGREE = 4)

We also point out that the insights on the structure of the

absorbing sets as the dominant contributors to the LDPC code

performance in the low BER region are not only useful from

the theoretical viewpoint, but they also play an extremely im-

portant role in the systematic development of an efficient de-

coder design required by practical very-large-scale integration

(VLSI) implementations. The properties of absorbing sets are a

critical factor in the design of a high-throughput hardware em- codeword lengths,

and

ulator that operates in very low BER regions [33], [34]. In ad-

, with rates

and

, respectively. These

dition, an ongoing work has demonstrated that the absorbing codes have check degrees

and , respectively, and all

sets are also a fundamental component in an importance-sam- three have bit degrees equal to . While the performance re-

pling-based method for estimating error floor probabilities [9]; ported in Fig. 1 of these three codes is quite similar, it is impor-

in the development of explicit theoretical bounds on decoder’s tant to notice that the low BER performance of all three codes

performance [7]; and for the systematic improvement of prac- is dominated by the

(fully) absorbing sets (this object

tical decoding algorithms [25], [34].

will be precisely defined in Section II-B), as indicated in Ta-

In order to motivate the theoretical results in this paper, we bles I, II, and III which list the statistics (counts) of the error

present several experimental results obtained on our hardware events captured at several SNR points. Each row corresponds to

emulator [32]. This hardware platform is capable of reaching the number of captured decoding errors when the decoder con-

remarkable BER levels below

for structured finite-length verged to an

absorbing set, for different pairs.

LDPC codes, decoded using a sum–product algorithm. Fig. 1 While in this paper we focus on describing in detail the ab-

shows the performance of several array-based LDPC codes [11], sorbing sets for the family of high-rate array-based LDPC codes,

along with the uncoded transmission curve, for both the bit- and it is worth reiterating that the absorbing sets are a general prop-

frame- error rate (FER). The results are for three different erty of the factor graph describing the parity check matrix of an

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DOLECEK et al.: ANALYSIS OF ABSORBING SETS AND FULLY ABSORBING SETS OF ARRAY-BASED LDPC CODES

183

Fig. 2. Hardware-based BER/FER performance of the (2048; 1723) Reed–Solomon based LDPC code.

TABLE III ERROR STATISTICS FOR THE (1849; 1680) ARRAY-BASED LDPC CODE
(CHECK DEGREE = 43, BIT DEGREE = 4)

LDPC code, not just of a specific class of codes on which

we focus in depth in the remainder of the paper. As an il-

lustration, Fig. 2 shows the BER/FER versus SNR curve

of another high-performance LDPC code, the

Reed–Solomon LDPC code [6]. While this code also has a very

good performance in the moderate BER region, it also expe-

riences a significant flattening of the BER/FER versus SNR

curve at lower BER levels. For this code, the dominant errors

are the

(fully) absorbing sets. In fact, almost all errors

captured in the 5.0–5.5 dB range are

fully absorbing sets.

It is important to point out that in all of the above examples,

none of the recorded decoding errors in the low BER region

were due to the minimum distance or any other nontransmitted

codewords.

Under maximum-likelihood decoding, it is well known that

the minimum distance and the weight enumerator of a code

are key factors that determine its error-correcting performance.

Given that absorbing sets (as opposed to neighboring code-

words) are the dominant error event for iterative decoders, it

is natural to consider the analogs of minimum distance and

weight enumerator for absorbing sets. With the above moti-

vating examples in mind, we now turn to the in-depth study

of the minimal absorbing sets of high-rate array-based LDPC

codes. This class of codes is an exemplar of a structured LDPC

code with excellent performance in the moderate BER region,

but whose low BER performance is governed by the minimal

absorbing sets. For this class of structured LDPC codes, we

prove the nonexistence of various possible candidate absorbing

sets, and having thereby explicitly constructed minimal ab-

sorbing sets, we characterize their combinatorial structure and

cardinalities.

Compared to the results in [8], in this work we provide the

complete and explicit characterization of all

(fully) ab-

sorbing sets (versus pure existence and asymptotic properties),

and a detailed theoretical analysis of all candidate configura-

tions of minimal absorbing sets for column weights of interest.

Additionally, the experimental evidence provided earlier in this

section motivates the usefulness of studying absorbing sets.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We begin

in Section II with a brief overview of the class of array-based

LDPC codes [11], and then formally introduce the definition of

absorbing sets. In Section III, we provide a detailed study of the

absorbing sets for column weights

and for the stan-

dard parity check matrices of such codes, and enumerate

all such sets of smallest size. All of the theoretical results are

stated in this section, with some of the more technical proofs

deferred to the Appendix. Section IV concludes the paper.

II. BACKGROUND

We begin with background on array-based LDPC codes, and then provide a precise definition of absorbing sets.

A. Array-Based LDPC Codes

Array-based LDPC codes [11] are regular LDPC codes pa-

rameterized by a pair of integers , such that

, and

is a prime. Given a

permutation matrix of the form

... ...

... ...

(1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

184

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

Fig. 3. An example of a (4; 4) absorbing set.

we form the

parity check matrix

... ...

...

...

(2)

We use to denote the binary linear code defined by this parity check matrix (2). The rate1 of this code is [20]. Fan [11] first demonstrated that array-based LDPC codes have very good performance in the low SNR region, and they have subsequently been proposed for a number of applications, including digital subscriber lines [10] and magnetic recording [30].

B. Absorbing Sets

A convenient representation of an

parity check matrix

of a binary linear code is in terms of its factor or Tanner graph

[13], [16], [27]. In particular, let

denote a bi-

partite graph, in which the set of vertices is associated with

bits in the code (columns of ), and the set is associated with

checks of the code (rows of ). The edge set is defined by

the structure of : in particular, there exists an edge

if and only if

and

. Elements of are called “bit

nodes” and elements of are called “check nodes.”

For the array-based LDPC codes defined in Section II-A, the

factor graph associated with does not have any cycles of

length four, and thus the girth is at least six (see [11]). For any

subset of we let denote the subset of check nodes

neighboring the elements of . For any subset of , let

(resp.,

) be the set of neighboring vertices of in in the

graph with even (resp., odd) degree with respect to . With

this setup, we have the following.

Definition 1: Given an integer pair , an absorbing

set is a subset

of size , with

of size and with

the property that each element of has strictly fewer neighbors

in

than in

. We say that an

absorbing set

is an

fully absorbing set, if in addition, all bit nodes in

have strictly more neighbors in

than in

.

should also have strictly more empty squares than full squares

as neighbors.

Note that

is a fully absorbing set if and only if for

all

, where

de-

notes the symmetric difference between and ,

is

the Hamming weight of a binary string , and is a binary

string with support .

The name “absorbing set” indicates the absorbing nature of

these combinatorial objects in the sense that they act as local

minimum states for the decoding algorithm: upon entering this

configuration the decoding algorithm is “absorbed” in it. For the

special case of a bit flipping algorithm [24], the configuration

described as a fully absorbing set is stable, since each bit node

receives strictly more messages from the neighboring checks

that reinforce its value than messages that suggest the opposite

bit value. However, as illustrated in the examples in the Intro-

duction (further implementation details and additional examples

are in our concurrent work [34]), absorbing sets also control the

error floor behavior of more sophisticated message-passing de-

coders, such as the sum–product algorithm.

III. THEORETICAL RESULTS

Our goal is to describe minimal absorbing sets and minimal

fully absorbing sets of the factor graph of the parity check

matrix , for

, where the minimality refers to the

smallest possible , and where is the smallest possible for the

given .

We use the following notation throughout the paper. Recall

that

is a

matrix of ’s and ’s. It is convenient

to view

as a two-dimensional array of component

submatrices with the rows in the range

(also

referred to as row groups) and the columns in the range

(also referred to as column groups). Each column

of is uniquely described by a pair

where denotes

the column index of the submatrix this column belongs to, and

, denotes the index of this column within the

submatrix.

Our main results are summarized in Theorems 1 and 2. Let

be the factor graph associated with the parity check matrix

of the array-based LDPC code . The first result char-

acterizes the minimal (fully) absorbing sets.

Theorem 1 (Minimality):

(a) For the family, all minimal absorbing sets are min-

imal fully absorbing sets, and are of size .

(b) For the family, the minimal absorbing sets are of size

, and the minimal fully absorbing sets are of size

.

(c) For the

family, and for

, the minimal ab-

sorbing sets and the minimal fully absorbing sets are of

size .

An example of a

absorbing set is given in Fig. 3,

where dark circles represent bits in the set , dark squares

constitute the set

, white squares constitute the set

is given by solid lines, and

is given

by dashed lines. Observe that each element in has more

Our second result deals with the scaling behavior of the

number of absorbing sets. Recall the standard asymptotic

notation : we say that some positive function grows as

if there exist constants

such that

, for sufficiently large.

neighbors with even degree than odd degree. All check nodes not in the picture are denoted by empty squares. For this set to be a fully absorbing set, every bit node not in the figure

H 1Note that the parity check matrix

0 
=p increase in rate over 1

.

is not full rank, hence the slight

Theorem 2 (Scaling): Recalling that the block length

of the code corresponds to the number of columns in the

parity check matrix , we have the following.

(a) For

, the number of minimal (fully) absorbing sets

in grows as

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DOLECEK et al.: ANALYSIS OF ABSORBING SETS AND FULLY ABSORBING SETS OF ARRAY-BASED LDPC CODES

185

(b) For

, the number of minimal absorbing sets as well

as the number of minimal fully absorbing sets grows as

.

(c) For

and for all block lengths

the number of

minimal absorbing sets as well as the number of minimal

fully absorbing sets grows as

.

Although Theorem 2 states the result in terms of the

-scaling behavior, our techniques in fact provide an exact

count of the number of minimal (fully) absorbing sets. Note

that Theorem 1(a) implies that for

, the smallest (fully)

absorbing sets are codewords; in fact, for this code, these

absorbing sets are the minimum distance codewords. This

result should be contrasted with the assertions of Theorem 1(b)

and (c), for

and

, respectively, which establish

the existence of (fully) absorbing sets strictly smaller than

the minimum distance of the code. In particular, for

,

the minimum distance is six [20], [31], whereas for

and

, the minimum distance is between eight and ten

[20], [31]. Therefore, for both

and

, the minimal

absorbing sets and minimal fully absorbing sets are strictly

smaller than the minimum distance of the code.

Subsequent sections contain detailed proofs of the above

statements. In particular, the proofs of Theorems 1 and 2 are

presented in the following order.

• In Section III-A, we summarize the principal structural

properties of the parity check matrix , that are referred

to as the bit-, check-, cycle-, and pattern- consistency con-

straints, respectively. These structural properties will be re-

peatedly exploited in establishing the main results.

• Section III-B contains the proof of statements given in The-

orems 1(a) and 2(a). In particular, after having shown that

the number of bits in a minimal absorbing set has to be at

least for the code described by , Lemma 3 provides

an explicit count of

(fully) absorbing sets, thus im-

mediately implying Theorem 1(a) and Theorem 2(a).

• Section III-C contains the proof of statements given in The-

orems 1(b) and 2(b). We first show that for the code de-

scribed by , the number of bits in a minimal absorbing

set has to be at least . We then prove that

absorbing

sets exist, and that these are not fully absorbing sets. We

then show that

absorbing sets are the minimal fully

absorbing sets, thus establishing Theorem 1(b). Lemma 4

provides the explicit counts of

absorbing sets, and of

fully absorbing sets, thereby implying the statement

in Theorem 2(b).

• The lengthiest Section III-D deals with proving the state-

ments given in Theorems 1(c) and 2(c). To prove the state-

ments regarding the minimality of

(fully) absorbing

sets for the code described by , we proceed with a se-

ries of auxiliary lemmas that establish the nonexistence of

certain smaller candidate absorbing sets, which holds for

sufficiently large code parameter (specifically

will be sufficient for all auxiliary results). The sequence

of the intermediate results consists of: 1) Lemma 5 that

proves that

absorbing sets do not exist, 2) Lemma

6 that proves that

absorbing sets do not exist, and

3) Lemma 7 that proves that

absorbing sets do not

exist. Finally, Lemma 8 provides an in-depth analysis of

the

(fully) absorbing sets, where we provide the ex-

plicit enumeration and structural description of these sets.

We begin with elementary structural conditions and lemmas that play a central role throughout the paper, summarized in Section III-A.

A. Preliminaries

Let

be the factor graph associated with , so bit

nodes and check nodes in represent columns and rows in

, respectively. In the graph , bit nodes have degree

and check nodes have degree . There is a total of bit nodes

and check nodes. Each bit node in receives the unique

label

that describes the corresponding column of .

Each check node in receives a label if the corresponding

row of belongs to the row group . Multiple bit nodes can

have the same or label, but not both. Multiple check nodes

can have the same label.

We note that the structure of the parity check matrix imposes

the following conditions on the neighboring bit nodes and check

nodes.

Bit Consistency: For a bit node, all its incident check nodes,

labeled through , must have distinct labels, i.e., these

check nodes are in distinct row groups.

Check Consistency: All bit nodes, say

through

, participating in the same check node must have dis-

tinct values, i.e., they are all in distinct column groups.

Both conditions follow from the fact that the parity check ma-

trix of consists of a two-dimensional array of permu-

tation matrices of equal size.

Lemma 1: (Pattern Consistency) The permutation submatrix

has the following properties.

(a) The

entry of is if and only if

.

(b) Let and be in the same row group of . If

entry

of is nonzero, then so is entry

of

where

.

Proof: Assume that the columns and rows of are indexed

with through . Recall that has “ ” in the topmost row in

the column indexed (last column), and that each subsequent

row has “ ” in a position that is a cyclic shift to the right of

the position of “ ” in the previous row. Multiplying with

cyclically shifts the entries by one position to the left. Thus,

has “ ” in the topmost row in column

, and has

“ ” in some row in the column

, from

which the statement (a) follows. Thus, has “ ” in row in

the column indexed

and has “ ” in

row in the column indexed

. Equating

these expressions in terms of , the statement in (b) follows.

We will refer to the constraints of the type described in Lemma 1 as pattern consistency constraints.

Lemma 2: (Cycle consistency) Consider a cycle in of

length , involving bit nodes, with labels

through

and check nodes, with labels through , such that

bit nodes

and

participate in the check labeled

and

participate in the check labeled , and

so on, until check labeled in which

and

par-

ticipate. Then

(3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

186

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

whereas the pattern consistency constraints of Lemma 1(b) give

(7)

Fig. 4. (Labeled) candidate (4; 0) absorbing set.
Proof: The pattern consistency constraints of Lemma 1(b) give

There are ways of choosing , which also determines .

Since

, we must have

, so we have

ways

of choosing , which also determines . We then have ways

of choosing , which also determines . Since

, we

have

ways of choosing , which also determines . To

verify that every one of these choices satisfies all the equations

it only remains to verify that

. This holds because

Expand Hence

... into

(8)
(4) Now, for any choice of row group labels for the checks, and column labels for the bits that satisfy the bit and check consistency constraints and the pattern consistency constraints of Lemma 1(b), there is a unique way to choose the row index in the individual row groups so that the pattern consistency constraint of Lemma 1 are satisfied. This completes the proof of Lemma 3.

By rearranging the terms, relation (3) follows.

(5)

From Lemma 3 (and recalling that the block length

),

we conclude that the number of

(fully) absorbing sets for

the code described by is

, thereby establishing The-

Constraints of the type (3) will subsequently be referred to as cycle consistency constraints. Note that the cycle consistency constraints are a consequence of the pattern consistency constraints.

B. Proof of Theorems 1(a) and 2(a)

We start by proving Theorem 1(a). The code has uniform

bit degree two, and is thus a cycle code. Even though such codes

are known to be poor [22], we include the analysis for the sake

of completeness.

Let

denote the factor graph of . Let

be an

absorbing set in . Each bit node in has

degree in and is required to have strictly more neighbors

in

than in

. This implies that

is empty. The

absorbing set is of type . It is thus a fully absorbing set,

and is in fact a codeword.

Since the matrix has the top row consisting of identity

matrices, the codewords of are of even weight. Moreover,

since the bottom row of

consists of distinct component

submatrices, no two columns of sum to zero. Therefore,

and even and there are no cycles of length in this code.

We now consider

. Let

and

be the bit nodes participating in a candidate

ab-

sorbing set. These nodes must necessarily be arranged as in

Fig. 4.

The following result proves Theorem 1(a).

orem 2(a).

C. Proof of Theorems 1(b) and 2(b)

In our preceding analysis with

, note that

ab-

sorbing sets are actually codewords, so the performance of the

cycle code under iterative decoding is dominated by low weight

codewords. We now turn to the case

, which leads to more

interesting results. In particular, our proof of Theorem 1(b) es-

tablishes the existence of minimal absorbing sets and minimal

fully absorbing sets, for which the number of bit nodes is

strictly smaller than the minimum distance of the code.

Let

denote the factor graph of . Let

be an

absorbing set in . Each bit node in has

degree in and is required to have strictly more neighbors

in

than in

.

Suppose

. In the graph , an even number of edges

from terminates in . Thus, either

or

corre-

sponding to the situations in Fig. 5. In either case, there would

be a cycle of length in , which cannot hold [11], implying

that

.

Suppose

. In the graph , an even number of edges

from terminates in

. Thus, either

or

.

Suppose . This must correspond to the first form in Fig. 6,

or the second form in Fig. 6, which again involves a cycle of

length in , a contradiction [11].

Still with

, the remaining case to consider is

.

Lemma 3: There is a total of

(fully) ab-

sorbing sets in the code described by .

Proof: The bit consistency conditions are automatically

satisfied by the numbering of the row groups in Fig. 4. The check

consistency constraints give

In this case, each bit node in would then connect to exactly

one check node in

implying the unlabeled form of Fig. 7.

Note that there is a cycle of length . Suppose that these three

bit nodes are indexed as

and

, respec-

tively, where and are distinct (by the check consistency)

and

. Without loss of generality, as-

and

(6) sume that

and

share a check in the row group

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DOLECEK et al.: ANALYSIS OF ABSORBING SETS AND FULLY ABSORBING SETS OF ARRAY-BASED LDPC CODES

187

Fig. 5. Candidate (2; b) absorbing sets. (a) b = 0. (b) b = 2.

Fig. 8. Candidate (3; 3) absorbing set (solid circles), with an adjacent bit node (empty circle).

Even though a

fully absorbing set seems plausible, care

must be taken with respect to bit nodes outside a candidate fully

absorbing set, that also participate in the unsatisfied checks. As

we now show, a the existence of a sorbing set.

fully absorbing set cannot exist, though

absorbing set implies a

fully ab-

Suppose first that a

fully absorbing set were to exist.

Since

, it is then necessary that no bit node outside of the

absorbing set participates in more than one unsatisfied check

adjacent to a

absorbing set. Since

and

share a check,

. Consider the bit node labeled

Fig. 6. Candidate (3; 1) absorbing sets. (a) First candidate. (b) Second candidate.

that connects to , as in Fig. 8. Since

, it follows from

Lemma 1(b) that

. Equations (9)–(11) imply that

so that

bit node

also connects to the check labeled , as shown in Fig. 8. This

eliminates the possibility of a

fully absorbing set.

A

absorbing set (i.e., a codeword of weight ) cannot

exist since the minimum distance of the code is [31]. The

next candidate size for the smallest fully absorbing set is .

Each of the unsatisfied checks in any such configuration would

necessarily connect to only one of the bit nodes, else we would

have a cycle of length , a contradiction [11]. Given this, no satisfied check node can connect to all four bit nodes, else we

Fig. 7. (Labeled) candidate (3; 3) absorbing set.

would have a cycle of length , a contradiction [11]. Since there are ten edges from the bit nodes that go to satisfied checks we

and

share a check in the row group , and that

and

share a check in the row group , where

and are distinct by the bit consistency con-

dition. We may assume without loss of generality that

and

. Note that the bit consistency constraints

force the values of

and to be as given in Fig. 7.

In the remainder of the discussion, we first prove the exis-

tence of a

absorbing set. We then show that these

absorbing sets are not fully absorbing sets. This result will in

turn imply the existence of

fully absorbing sets, which

are thus minimal fully absorbing sets for

.

The bit consistency constraints are automatically satisfied by

our labeling of the row groups in Fig. 7. The check consistency

constraints reduce to the distinctness of

and . The pat-

tern consistency constraints of Lemma 1(b) give

(9) (10)

now see that there must be five satisfied checks in any candidate

fully absorbing set. The two bit nodes that each have all

their three edges going to satisfied check nodes must then share

exactly one satisfied check (they have to share at least one, and

cannot share more than one [11]). We have therefore concluded

that any candidate

fully absorbing set must look like (an

unlabeled version of) Fig. 8. The existence of such

fully

absorbing sets is proved in Lemma 4, which also counts the

number of such sets.

Lemma 4: The total number of

absorbing sets and

fully absorbing sets in the factor graph is

,

and

, respectively.

Proof: Referring to Fig. 7, the bit consistency and the

check consistency constraints are satisfied for the given labels

of row groups and since

and are distinct. Then and

can each be chosen in ways, and then can be chosen

in

ways. This fixes by (9), by (10), and then

by (11). There is then a unique way to choose the row indices

in the individual row groups so that the pattern consistency

(11) conditions of Lemma 1 are satisfied. Thus, the total number of

absorbing sets is

.

The existence of a solution and hence of a absorbing set is Turning to counting

fully absorbing sets, every such

given in the proof of Lemma 4 below, which counts the number set must look like an unlabeled version of Fig. 8, and so it con-

of such sets.

tains exactly two distinct

absorbing sets (corresponding,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

188

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

Lemma 5: For

, the factor graph family does not

contain any

absorbing sets.

Proof: Without loss of generality, we may let

and

, where

and dis-

tinct by the bit consistency conditions. Then, by propagating

the bit consistency conditions at each remaining vertex, and ex-

ploiting the symmetry, it suffices to consider

either

or

where

and are distinct.

For the case

, we es-

tablish the following cycle consistency conditions based on the

cycles within the graph in Fig. 9:

Fig. 9. Depiction of the candidate (4; 4) absorbing set.

and (12)

By adding and subtracting the conditions in (12), it follows that

respectively, to removing one of the bit nodes that connects

to an unsatisfied check). From Fig. 7 one can see that every

absorbing set is contained in three distinct

fully ab-

sorbing sets (for each pair of unsatisfied checks in Fig. 7 one

can find a bit node that these checks connect to, which when ap-

pended to the

absorbing set gives a

fully absorbing

set). The total number of

fully absorbing sets is therefore

.

Observe that Lemma 4 immediately implies Theorem 1(b).

D. Proof of Theorems 1(c) and 2(c)

and (13)

Since

are distinct, relation (13) implies that ’s would

have to be all the same, which contradicts the check consistency

constraint.

For the case

, again

based on the cycle structure in Fig. 9, we obtain the cycle con-

sistency conditions

In order to establish that

(fully) absorbing sets are min-

imal for

and

, we will first show that

ab-

sorbing sets for

do not exist. This section contains the

(14)

following auxiliary results on the nonexistence of certain can-

didate absorbing sets, which hold for sufficiently large code pa-

rameter (specifically

will be sufficient for all auxiliary

results). In particular:

— Lemma 5 proves that

absorbing sets do not exist;

— Lemma 6 proves that absorbing sets do not exist, and

— Lemma 7 proves that

absorbing sets do not exist.

Finally, Lemma 8 provides an in-depth analysis of the

absorbing sets.

Let denote an

absorbing set in

,

the factor graph of . If

(respectively, ) then at least

six (respectively, nine) edges from in terminate in ,

which implies the existence of a cycle of length in , which

is false [11]. Thus,

.

Suppose

and note that must be even. We cannot have

We let

and

. By the

check consistency condition, all of

and are nonzero.

Substituting

and in (14) and then expressing and

in terms of , one arrives at the condition

(15)

It can be verified that this condition cannot hold for any choice

of

, where

and are distinct

for

. There are

ways of assigning numerical

values to

. Substituting each numerical assignment

yields possible choices of prime for which the ex-

pression in (15) becomes zero

. The condition (15) holds

for

. Therefore, for

does not contain

absorbing sets.

, since this would imply the existence of a codeword of

weight , which is false [31]. If

, one can conclude that

there must be a cycle of length in the code (whether the number

of edges going into unsatisfied checks is two or four), and this is

false, [11]. Thus, we must have

and, since each bit node

We next show that absorbing sets do not exist for the parameter large enough. In particular we establish a congruential constraint involving the labels of the edges emanating from the bits in the absorbing set that cannot hold for large enough.

must have at least three edges going to satisfied checks, the im- Lemma 6: For

, the factor graph family does not

possibility of a cycle of length [11] implies that the absorbing contain any

absorbing sets.

set can be described as in Fig. 9. In this figure, each vertex rep-

Proof: Since each bit node in the absorbing set has at most

resents a distinct bit node of the candidate

absorbing set one neighboring unsatisfied check node, it follows that

.

and each edge represents a satisfied check node that connects By counting the number of edges emanating from the bit nodes

to the bit nodes in the absorbing set, that correspond to its end- in the candidate absorbing set (some of which have three sat-

points in the figure. The following lemma establishes that such isfied and one unsatisfied check, and the rest having all four

sets do not exist if the prime is large enough.

checks satisfied) and ending at satisfied checks, it follows that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DOLECEK et al.: ANALYSIS OF ABSORBING SETS AND FULLY ABSORBING SETS OF ARRAY-BASED LDPC CODES

189

that

. We let

and

, where

and distinct. By propagating possible values

of the labels for remaining edges, while maintaining bit con-

sistency conditions, it follows that

is

either

or

.

For

, and

for each edge and its endpoints in Fig. 10, we write the pattern

consistency constraints of Lemma 1(b), in terms of and

Fig. 10. Depiction of the candidate (5; 4) absorbing set.

(16a)

(16b)

(16c)

(16d)

(16e)

(16f)

and

(16g)

(16h)

the number of bit nodes with three satisfied and one unsatisfied

check nodes is even, and thus is even.2 First

by the min-

imum distance,

of the code, [31]. If

, since we

have at most five edges going to unsatisfied checks, there are

two cases: (a) either three of them go to one unsatisfied check

and one to another, or (b) one edge goes to each of the two un-

satisfied checks. In case (a), because the girth of the factor graph

is bigger than [11], none of the three bit nodes that share an

unsatisfied check can share a satisfied check. Further, no two

bit nodes can share a satisfied check for the same reason. By

counting, this eliminates case (a). In case (b), if we drop one

of the bit nodes that has an unsatisfied check we would have a

absorbing set which we have argued in Lemma 5 does not

exist for

.

Thus, for

we are left with considering the case

since at most five edges go into unsatisfied checks. This means

the candidate absorbing set contains one bit node with all checks

satisfied and four bit nodes each with three satisfied and one

unsatisfied check. The only way that such an absorbing set could

exist is if one has the configuration shown in Fig. 10, where the

vertices represent bit nodes and edges represent their satisfied

check nodes.

Since

and are all distinct elements of the set

, by the bit consistency condition, and by the sym-

metry of the candidate configuration in Fig. 10, we may assume

2There are five bit nodes in a candidate (5; b) absorbing set, some having three neighboring satisfied checks and one neighboring unsatisfied check, and
0 some having four neighboring satisfied checks and zero neighboring unsatisfied
checks. The number of former is then b and the number of latter is (5 b). The number of edges emanating from the bits in this absorbing set and ending at
0 satisfied checks is even (since these checks are satisfied). Thus, 3b + 4(5 b) 0 is even. That is, (20 b) is even and b itself is even.

A simplification of the last system leads

(17a) (17b) (17c)

We let

and

. Note that by the check consistency condition, all

of

and are nonzero.

We then obtain (18) at the bottom of the page.This last system

can be rewritten as

(19)

Therefore, the determinant of the matrix multiplying the

(nonzero) vector

in (19) is itself zero, which

simplifies to

(20)

Since

and distinct, we consider all

assignments for

, and for each we evaluate the left-hand

side expression in (20). Note that for distinct

,

this expression is at most in absolute value, and therefore the

constraint in (20) does not have a solution for

for distinct

. (Solutions exist for

and , which

can be verified by direct numerical substitution).

(from (17a)) (from (17a)) (from (17b))

(from Authorized licensed use limited aton: dYobnysesi uUbnisvt.iDtuotwinnlgoafdreodmon(J1u7nec)2,4(,21072b6)a,ta0n1:d58(:1437aU)T,CrefrsopmeIcEtEivEeXlpyl)o.re. Restrictions apply.

(18)

190

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

For

we one of the bit nodes in the second group. The same is true with

likewise establish the constraints as in (16) and (17). We the other two bit nodes in the first group, namely they too share

again let

and their remaining three (satisfied) checks with the bit nodes in

and obtain

the second group, and these satisfied checks connect to two bit

nodes in the absorbing set. Therefore, there exist two bit nodes

in the first group and two bit nodes in the second group such that

(21) any two share a distinct check. This configuration is not possible

by Lemma 5 for

.

Suppose now that there exists one unsatisfied check of de-

Since the entries in

are all nonzero, it follows

that the determinant of the matrix in (21) is zero. Simplifying

the expression for the determinant yields again the condition in

(20). Therefore, for

,

absorbing sets do not exist.

gree with respect to the bit nodes in the absorbing set. The remaining unsatisfied check then has degree with respect to the bit nodes in the absorbing set, and the neighboring bit nodes in the absorbing set of these two unsatisfied checks are different. There are two bit nodes in the absorbing set that have all checks

We can now proceed with the analysis of

absorbing

sets. Since the number of bit nodes with three satisfied and one

unsatisfied check node is even, is even. First,

is not

possible since

[31]. The following lemma addresses

the case of

.

Lemma 7: For

, the factor graph family does not

contain any

absorbing sets.

Proof: We first claim that there is no check node of degree

at least with respect to the bit nodes in the absorbing set. Let

us first suppose that there exists one such check node and that it

has an even degree with respect to the bit nodes in the absorbing

set. Since we are considering an absorbing set with six bit nodes,

such a check node would have degree either or with respect

to the bit nodes in the absorbing set. If this satisfied check is of

degree , there would exist two bit nodes in the absorbing set

which would share an additional satisfied check. This situation

would imply the existence of a cycle of length , which is im-

possible by the girth condition [11].

Suppose now that this satisfied check has degree . Each bit

node that participates in this check has at least two more neigh-

boring satisfied checks, which it then necessarily must share

with the remaining two bit nodes in the absorbing set that them-

selves do not participate in this degree- check by the girth con-

dition [11]. If there exists a bit node that participates in this de-

gree- check and has all checks satisfied, it then shares its re-

maining neighboring check with one of the bit nodes with which

it already shares a check. This situation violates the girth con-

straint [11]. If all bit nodes in the absorbing set that participate

in this degree- check have three satisfied and one unsatisfied

check, three of them would have to participate in the same un-

satisfied check to make the total number of unsatisfied checks

be two. This again violates the girth condition [11].

Therefore, all satisfied checks with respect to the bit nodes in

the absorbing set have degree . Suppose there exists a check

node that is unsatisfied with respect to the bits in the absorbing

set and that has degree bigger than . If such a check node has

degree , there would necessarily exist two bit nodes in the ab-

sorbing set that share this degree- check and another satisfied

check, which is impossible by the girth condition [11].

Suppose that there exist two degree- checks incident to the

satisfied. Partition the bit nodes in the absorbing set into three

groups: the first group contains the three bit nodes that share a

degree- unsatisfied check, the second group contains the one

bit node that has one unsatisfied check, and the third group con-

tains the two bit nodes that have all four checks satisfied. Each

of the three bit nodes in the first group has one unsatisfied and

three satisfied checks and thus it shares a satisfied check with

each of the bit nodes in the second and third group since it cannot

share a satisfied check with another bit node in the first group

by the girth condition [11]. The bit node in the second group

also has one unsatisfied and three satisfied checks, and the latter

are shared then with the bit nodes in the first group. The two

bit nodes in the third group have all four checks satisfied, the

three of which they each share with each of the bit nodes in the

first group. Since all three satisfied checks of the bit node in

the second group are used up with the checks it shares with the

bit nodes in the first group, the two bit nodes in the third group

share a satisfied check with each other. Therefore, there exist

two bit nodes in the first group and two bit nodes in the third

group such that any two share a distinct check. This configura-

tion is not possible by Lemma 5 for

.

We conclude that no check incident to the bit nodes in the

absorbing set has degree larger than , namely that all neigh-

boring satisfied (respectively, unsatisfied) checks have degree

(respectively, ). By requiring that each vertex corresponding to

a bit node in the absorbing set has either three or four outgoing

edges, and that there are no parallel edges, it follows that there

are two possible configurations, as shown in Fig. 11, that relate

bit nodes in the absorbing set (vertices) and their shared satis-

fied checks (edges).

Observe that the configuration in Fig. 11(b) contains a

absorbing set which consists of

and

. By Lemma 5, such configuration is not possible for

. The analysis of the configuration in Fig. 11(a) is con-

siderably more involved and its technical details are deferred to

Appendix I-A, in which we derive a congruency constraint that

cannot hold for prime

under all possible configuration

labelings. With that result, the proof of Lemma 7 is complete.

Having eliminated smaller candidate absorbing sets, we now prove the following result.

bit nodes in the absorbing set. First, these degree- checks do not have any neighboring bit nodes in common since we require that each bit node has at most one unsatisfied check. We can then group the bit nodes in the absorbing set into two disjoint groups, each of size , such that the bits in the same group share the same degree- check. Consider a bit node in, say, the first group. It shares its remaining three (satisfied) checks with each

Lemma 8: For all

, the factor graph family has

(fully) absorbing sets. These sets are completely charac-

terized by the solutions given in Tables IV, V, VI, and VII.

Proof: We will first show that all satisfied checks neigh-

boring bit nodes in one such absorbing set must have degree .

Note that there cannot be a degree- check with respect to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DOLECEK et al.: ANALYSIS OF ABSORBING SETS AND FULLY ABSORBING SETS OF ARRAY-BASED LDPC CODES

191

TABLE IV SEVERAL SOLUTIONS FOR A (6; 4) FULLY ABSORBING SET EXPRESSED IN TERMS OF THREE INDEPENDENT PARAMETERS, q; s; AND t.
CONFIGURATION IS SHOWN IN FIG. 12. PARAMETERS y; z; AND w DETERMINE EDGE LABELING, SEE TEXT FOR MORE DETAILS

TABLE V SEVERAL SOLUTIONS FOR A (6; 4) FULLY ABSORBING SET EXPRESSED IN TERMS OF THREE INDEPENDENT
PARAMETERS, q; s; AND t. CONFIGURATION IS SHOWN IN FIG. 12. PARAMETERS x; y; AND z DETERMINE EDGE LABELING, SEE TEXT FOR MORE DETAILS

condition [11]. Suppose that there exists a check node of de-

gree with respect to a

absorbing set. Let

be

the bit nodes in the absorbing set participating in this degree-

check node, and let and be the remaining two bit nodes in the absorbing set. By the girth condition there can be at most

one degree- check incident to the bit nodes in the absorbing

set. If at least one of

had all check nodes satisfied, it

would be necessary that such a bit node shares another distinct check node with some other bit node participating in the de-

gree- check node, which is impossible by the girth constraint

[11]. Thus, all of

are each connected to three satis-

fied and one unsatisfied check nodes, and all unsatisfied checks are distinct. Then and are each connected to four satisfied

check nodes each of degree with respect to the bit nodes in

the absorbing set. Since through have three satisfied neigh-

boring checks (one of which is a degree- check by assumption),

they each share a check with and with . Therefore, and

do not share a check. Let for

be the labels of the

four check nodes connecting and . By the bit consistency

condition at , they are all different. By the bit consistency con-

dition at each of for

, the label of their shared de-

gree- check node must be different from all for

,

which is impossible as there are only four distinct labels avail-

able. Therefore, all satisfied check nodes neighboring bit nodes

in the absorbing set have degree .

We first consider the case where there exists an unsatisfied check of degree with respect to the bit nodes in the absorbing

set (an unsatisfied check of degree larger than is not possible

by the girth condition). Consider a candidate absorbing set

in which three bit nodes, call them

connect to the same

unsatisfied check, and the remaining three bit nodes, call them

, each have a distinct unsatisfied check. Since there are

no cycles of length , each of the

shares a distinct sat-

Fig. 11. Depiction of the candidate (6; 2) absorbing sets. (a) First candidate configuration. (b) Second candidate configuration.

isfied check with each of

. Appendix I-B contains the

proof that in fact for prime , where

, such a configura-

tion is not possible.

We now continue with the analysis of the candidate configu-

rations in which each satisfied check has degree with respect bits in the absorbing set as then some of these bits would have to to the bit nodes in the absorbing set, and each unsatisfied check share another satisfied check which is not possible by the girth has degree with respect to the bits in the absorbing set.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

192

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

TABLE VI A SOLUTION FOR A (6; 4) ABSORBING SET EXPRESSED IN TERMS OF THREE INDEPENDENT PARAMETERS, q; s; AND t. CONFIGURATION IS SHOWN IN FIG. 13.
PARAMETERS x; y; AND w DETERMINE EDGE LABELING, SEE TEXT FOR MORE DETAILS

TABLE VII A SOLUTION FOR A (6; 4) ABSORBING SET EXPRESSED IN TERMS OF THREE INDEPENDENT PARAMETERS, q; s; AND t. CONFIGURATION IS SHOWN IN FIG. 13.
PARAMETERS y; z; AND w DETERMINE EDGE LABELING, SEE TEXT FOR MORE DETAILS

Fig. 12. Depiction of the first candidate (6; 4) absorbing set.

Fig. 14. Depiction of the third candidate (6; 4) absorbing set.
conditions at remaining vertices, the possible assignments for the remaining edge labels are as follows:

(22) We first observe that the assignments

and
Fig. 13. Depiction of the second candidate (6; 4) absorbing set.

By separately considering the cases when the two bit nodes are in fact symmetric (exchange and ) and it is thus

that have all neighboring checks satisfied also have a satisfied sufficient to analyze only one of them. Likewise, by ap-

check in common, and the cases when they do not, one can show pealing to symmetry and after appropriate renaming, the that there are three possible nonisomorphic configurations, as remaining six assignments also represent the same labeled

shown in Fig. 12, 13, and 14. By ensuring the bit consistency, configuration. In particular, the third and sixth assignments

it further follows that for each configuration there are eight dis- in (22) are symmetric, as are fourth and seventh, and as

tinct edge labelings (as we show below). Let us consider the are fifth and eighth assignments. Fourth assignment fol-

configuration in Fig. 12 first. The other two configurations are lows from the third by exchanging the labels and , and

analyzed subsequently.

the fifth assignment follows from the third by exchanging

(a) First candidate

configuration— Fig. 12.

the labels and . It is thus sufficient to consider only

We first determine all possible edge labelings. For con-

venience, we assign

, where or

.

and distinct by the bit consistency I. Consider the labeling

condition at

. Then, by imposing the bit consistency

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DOLECEK et al.: ANALYSIS OF ABSORBING SETS AND FULLY ABSORBING SETS OF ARRAY-BASED LDPC CODES

193

By applying the pattern consistency for each edge and its end points in Fig. 12 we obtain

We complete the analysis of this label assignment by consid-

ering

.

2. Case

:

In this case, the system in (24) reduces to

(26)

(23)
Using the cycle consistency conditions for each of five cycles that span the cycle space of the graph in Fig. 12 we also write

(24)

We will use the relationships in (24) to express through

in terms of and

, and then in turn use (23) to express

through in terms of

and

.

By symmetry of the configuration (see Fig. 12), for the cur-

rent labeling it is sufficient to consider

and

. Specif-

ically, letting

or

reduces to the

case.

We let

and

. Note that in particular by the check consistency

constraint,

.

1. Case

:

The system in (24) reduces to

Note that the last relation follows from the previous four. We

again express

and in terms of , so that by setting

and

, all of through follow as a function of

and . Then, by letting

, the remaining through

follow from and from (24). The solution set for various

numerical assignments of

is given in Table V, where

the indices are taken

.

As in the

case, the unsatisfied checks all belong in

the row group labeled . By the bit consistency condition, no

bit node can connect to more than one such check. Therefore,

this configuration is also in fact a

fully absorbing set. In

particular, the solution set in row 1 of Table V holds for all

and even.

We now consider the remaining labeled configuration of

Fig. 12.

II. Consider the labeling

.

We again let

and

. Note that in particular by the

check consistency constraint,

.

Based on the cycle consistency condition for the five cycles

in Fig. 12 we establish

(25)

(27)

Using (25) we express

and in terms of . In particular,

it can be shown that the last constraint in (25) is redundant as it

follows from the previous four.

Therefore, for

and

, all of the remaining

values of

follow for each of the

choices of

.

From (23), we have that

as well

as

and

.

We can thus express through in terms of

and . The results for all choices of

are summarized

in Table IV, where the indices are taken

.

Furthermore, under the current configuration, the bit nodes in

one such

absorbing set that have three satisfied and one

unsatisfied checks, all have unsatisfied checks in the row group

labeled . By the bit consistency condition, no bit node can con-

nect to more than one such check. Therefore, this configuration

is in fact a

fully absorbing set. In particular, the solution

set in row 1 holds for all

and a multiple of .

By expressing obtain

and in terms of , from this system we

(28) and

(29)

where

and are distinct. For all

distinct ways of assigning numerical values to

and , the system (28)–(29) produces the unique solution

provided that

. Since

by the edge

consistency condition, we conclude that this configuration is

not possible.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

194

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

We now analyze possible solutions for the next candidate

configuration, for which we show that there exist

absorbing sets which are not fully absorbing sets.

(b) Second candidate

configuration— Fig. 13.

We first determine all possible edge labelings. For conve-

nience, let

, where

and are distinct by the bit consistency condition at

. Then, by imposing the bit consistency conditions at re-

maining vertices, the assignments for the remaining edge labels

are given by the following set:

(30)

By exploiting the symmetry, one can show that after renaming the labeling

and

reduce to the same case (by exchanging and ). We are thus

left with analyzing the remaining seven cases. As before, we let

and

. Note that in particular by the check consistency

constraint,

.

Consider the labeling

. We apply the cycle consistency

conditions to five cycles spanning the cycle space of the graph

in Fig. 14 and obtain

Out of these eight possible labeled configurations by appealing

to symmetry and label renaming it is sufficient to consider only

two of these as we now show. Note that the eighth labeling is

the same as the first labeling after we exchange

and

and

, and labels with and with .

Likewise, the second labeling is the same as the seventh labeling

after we exchange

and

and

,

and labels with and with . The sixth labeling is the same

as the fourth labeling after we exchange labels with with

, and nodes

with

with

, and

with

, and take the mirror image of the resulting

configuration. The fifth labeling is the same as the third after

we exchange labels with and with and take the mirror

image of the whole configuration. The fourth (respectively, first)

labeling is the same as the second (respectively, third) after we

exchange

and

and labels and .

It is thus sufficient to consider only two different labelings,

namely

(32) By expressing and in terms of , and substituting in the bottom two constraints of (32) we obtain
(33) and
(34)

(third labeling) and

where

and are distinct. For all

distinct ways of assigning numerical values to

(seventh labeling). The analysis utilizes the same tools as the

ones developed for the previous candidate configuration, and its

technical details are deferred to Appendix I-C. The outcome of

the analysis gives the solution sets listed in Tables VI and VII,

again the entries are taken

, which are absorbing but not

fully absorbing sets, as further argued in Appendix I-C.

Finally, we consider the third and final unlabeled candidate

absorbing set, for which we show that in fact does not

yield

absorbing sets for the prime large enough.

(c) Third candidate

configuration— Fig. 14.

We first determine all possible edge labelings. As before, we

let

, where

and distinct by the bit consistency condition at

. Then, by

propagating bit consistency conditions for remaining vertices,

the assignments for the remaining edge labels are given by the

following set:

and , the system (33)–(34) produces the unique solution

provided that

. Since

by the check

consistency condition, we conclude that this configuration is

not possible.

One can likewise establish the constraints of the (32) type

for the remaining six cases, from which the two equations (as

in (33) and (34)) relating and will follow. In all five cases,

the unique solution for large enough is

. In

particular,

is sufficient for all cases considered.

Having exhaustively considered all possible configurations of

a

absorbing sets, the proof of the lemma is complete.

Using these results the proof of Theorem 1(c) now follows.

We complete our analysis of

by proving the claim in

Theorem 2: The number of

(fully) absorbing sets scales

as

, where is the codeword length.

Proof: Recall that for the configuration in Fig. 12 we identified two sets of labelings given in Tables IV and V that deter-

mine

fully absorbing sets. For each such assignment there

are three parameters that determine all of ’s and ’s, and each

parameter is chosen independently in at most ways (to en-

sure the all ’s and ’s have integer values), yielding an upper

bound which grows as

. A lower bound on the cardinality

(31) of the

fully absorbing sets is given by one solution set in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DOLECEK et al.: ANALYSIS OF ABSORBING SETS AND FULLY ABSORBING SETS OF ARRAY-BASED LDPC CODES

195

Table IV, which also grows as

. Note that the number of

solutions of absorbing sets in Tables VI and Table VII grows as

as well. 3 Since

, the result follows.

We have thus proven Theorem 2 for

.

IV. CONCLUSION
Absorbing sets are a substructure of the factor graphs defining LDPC codes that cause error floors in iterative decoding. The main contribution of this paper was to develop algebraic techniques for analyzing and enumerating minimal fully absorbing sets for the class of array-based LDPC codes. Starting with the motivating experimental results that suggest the importance of understanding relevant absorbing sets in the error-floor region, we provided an explicit description of minimal (fully) absorbing sets and showed the nonexistence of certain candidate configurations. We also enumerated minimal (fully) absorbing sets and showed how their number scales with the codeword length, thus providing a theoretical foundation for the starting experimental findings. Finally, while the focus of this work has been on a detailed study of (fully) absorbing sets for a class of structured LDPC codes, it would be worthwhile to investigate the asymptotic average distributions of absorbing sets for various LDPC ensembles. Part of future work involves suitably applying the techniques developed in [19] to study such configurations.

(35j) (35k)

We now separately consider

and

.

1. For

, the set of constraints (35a)–(35k) reduces to

from (35 a) from (35 e) from (35 h)

from (35b); (35a) and (35g); and (35h), (35a), and (35j), respectively

from (35d); (35h) and (35f); and (35e), (35h), and (35i), respectively

from (35 c), (35e), and (35a); and

(35e) and (35k), respectively.

(36)

APPENDIX I

A. Nonexistence of

Absorbing Sets

By ensuring the bit consistency, it follows that the configura-

tion in Fig. 11(a) has two distinct edge labelings. In particular,

by the bit consistency at

we may let

and

, where

and dis-

tinct. By propagating the labels while making sure that the bit

consistency constraints are satisfied we conclude that either

•

or

•

Since

and

conditions, we have that

Since

and

by the check consistency

and

.

is prime, we may let

and (37)
for some integers and which are themselves nonzero. From
, and , respectively, it follows that

where throughout

are distinct and belong to the set

.

I. Consider the labeling

and (38)

Using the pattern consistency constraint (see Lemma 1(b)) for each edge in Fig. 11 for the current labeling we obtain
(35a) (35b) (35c) (35d)

From (38), by equating the expressions for and , it follows that

and (39)

The last set of constraints implies

, which is a

contradiction.

2. For

the set of constraints (35a)–(35k) reduces to

(35e)

(35f)

(35g)

(35h)

(35i)

= 37 3For p

, Remarks 1 and 2 in Appendix I-C also show that the number

37 of additional solution sets also scales as .

(40)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

196

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

Note that consistency conditions, so that
. Since

and

by the check

and

, we may let

and (41)

for some integers

and , which are themselves nonzero.

The identities

and

,

respectively, yield the following constraints:

and (42)
Eliminating from the top two constraints in (42) implies , which combined with the
bottom constraint in (42) yields

Since 3. For

, this cannot hold for we obtain

(43) .

B. Nonexistence of Check of Degree

Absorbing Sets With an Unsatisfied

Recall that we are considering the case where there exists

an unsatisfied check of degree with respect to the bit nodes

in a candidate

absorbing set. In this absorbing set, bit

nodes

connect to the same unsatisfied check, and the

remaining three bit nodes,

, each have a distinct unsatis-

fied check. Since there are no cycles of length , each of

shares a distinct satisfied check with each of

.

Let the check incident to

and have label , where

. Using the bit consistency condition, we let

be the label of the satisfied check incident to and

be the label of the satisfied check incident to and , and

be the label of the satisfied check incident to and , where

are distinct and are different from .

By propagating the remaining edge labels while ensuring that

the bit consistency is satisfied, we obtain that the labels of the

checks connecting with

and , respectively, are

and and the labels of the checks connecting with

and

, respectively, are

and .

Let

for

be the labels of the bit nodes .

Using the pattern consistency (see Lemma 1(b)) we write one

equation for each pair of the bit nodes in the absorbing set that

share a satisfied check as follows:

(44)

As before, some algebra yields

, a contradiction.

(47)

4. For

we obtain

In addition, we may also write

(48)

since the bit nodes

and

, all participate

in the same (unsatisfied) check with label .

Since

and are distinct we now con-

(45) sider different numerical assignments of these labels. In partic-

After some algebra, we obtain the following condition:

ular, it is sufficient to consider

and

, since by the

symmetry of the configuration both

and

reduce to

the

case.

which, because .

(46) 1. Case

:

Equation (48) reduces to

, has no solution for (47) gives

which combined with

II. For the labeling

we separately consider

and

, and proceed along the lines of the

previous case. For

, respectively,

, it follows after

some algebra that

, respectively,

,

a contradiction in each case. For

, respectively,

, it

Since

(49) do not have any nontrivial factors and by

follows similarly that

, the check consistency conditions, we may let

respectively,

, neither

and

of which can hold for

.

for some nonzero integers

and .

This completes the proof of Lemma 7.

Using the identity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DOLECEK et al.: ANALYSIS OF ABSORBING SETS AND FULLY ABSORBING SETS OF ARRAY-BASED LDPC CODES

197

we obtain (using From (59), (60), and (61), it follows that , and so on)

The last expression implies
Likewise, expression (50) implies and

(50)

and

(62)

Since the constraints in (62) also only hold for

we

(51)

conclude that for prime does not exist.

this candidate configuration

C. Analysis of the Candidate (52) Fig. 13

Absorbing Sets Given in

Recall that it is sufficient to consider only two different label(53) ings, namely

Since

, expressions (51), (52), and (53)

hold only for prime

.

2. Case

:

and

In this case, (47) implies

and

.

Combined with (48), we further obtain

We let From
Substituting

, for some nonzero integers , we have

(54)
and and .

For the first case, by symmetry, it is sufficient to consider

and

as

and

reduce to the

and

case, respectively. Likewise, for the second case it is sufficient

to consider

and

, as

and

each reduce

to the

and

cases, respectively.

I. Consider

(55)
and in (54) and using the identities and
, respectively, we obtain

We start with the

analysis.

1. Case

:

From Fig. 13 and under the current edge label assignment

using the pattern consistency constraints of Lemma 1(b) we

write

(56)

and

(57)

(58)

respectively. From (55) and (56) by equating the expressions for we obtain

(59) Likewise, from (55) and (57) by equating the expressions for
we obtain
(60)

(63)

Let

and

. Using the cycle constraint for four cycles spanning

the cycle space of the configuration in Fig. 13 and under the

current edge labeling we have

and from (55) and (58) by equating the expressions for we obtain

and (61)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(64)

198

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

From the systems (63) and (64) we write

and (65)

and

, we have that

. We

have thus expressed all of through in terms of and . Now

the system (63) reduces to

Using the identity

, and (65)

we obtain (66)

There are six possible assignments for

, as permuta-

tions of the set

. In the remainder we will show that in

fact only

gives rise to absorbing sets. In all

other cases, we will reach a contradiction.

From (64) we have

(69)

Thus, with

and using (69) we can express all of

through in terms of and . This solution set for through

and through is listed in Table VI, where the entries are

taken

.

Note that the result in Table VI establishes the existence of

a

absorbing set. Even though

and

,

the check consistency constraints are not violated as

and

and

do not share an edge, and neither do

and

We also have

(67)

, see Fig. 13.

We now discuss whether this set is also a

sorbing set. Suppose there exists a bit node

fully aboutside this

and

absorbing set that is incident to some of the unsatisfied checks.

By the bit consistency constraint, both

and

each

(68) have a neighboring unsatisfied check whose label is . These

where the top expression in (68) follows from substituting top

expression in (67) into the second expression of (64) and some

algebra, and the bottom expression in (68) follows from sub-

stituting bottom expression in (67) into the fourth expression

of (64).

For

, the bottom expression in (68) gives

, which then implies

, by the top

expression in (68). Since

, and

and

share a check, must be nonzero, implying a contradiction.

two checks must be distinct by the girth condition [11]. Like-

wise, both

and

each have a neighboring unsat-

isfied check whose label is , and these are also distinct by the

girth condition. By the bit consistency condition, the bit node

can then share at most two of these checks with the

bit nodes

through

. Suppose that the bit node

shares a check labeled with

and a check la-

beled with

. From the cycles relating bit nodes

and

, we obtain

For

we ex-

press following:

in terms of using (67) and (68) and obtain the and

— for

:

— for — for

:

;

For

of present interest, we obtain

;

that further have

using the result in Table VI. Since we

:

; and

— for

:

.

In all four cases, when and are substituted in (66) it

follows that

(we get

and

,

respectively). Since is a multiple of in all four cases, if

, then

as well. Since

and

and

it follows that

. Therefore, by the existence

of this bit node

, the current

absorbing set is not a

fully absorbing set.

2. Case

:

As before, using the pattern consistency constraints we

establish

nodes

and

share a check, must be nonzero,

thus implying a contradiction.

For

we obtain

. When

and are substituted in (66), we obtain the identity

. Since

, we have that

and

since

, we have that

. Note that neither

of these two conditions on ’s violates the check consistency

constraint since the respective bit nodes do not share a check in

Fig. 13. Let

and

. Then

and

. Since

, and

and

, we have that

. Since

as well. Likewise, since

, and

(70)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DOLECEK et al.: ANALYSIS OF ABSORBING SETS AND FULLY ABSORBING SETS OF ARRAY-BASED LDPC CODES

199

Let

and

. Using the cycle constraints for four cycles

spanning the cycle space of the configuration in Fig. 13 we may

also write

With so that

, (73) yields

and (74)

From (72) we then have

and (71)

There are six possible assignments for

as permuta-

tions of the set

. Using the same technique as in the

previous case, one can show that the only possible assignment

is

, whereas a contradiction is reached in all

other cases. In particular, for this remaining assignment we ob-

tain the solution set listed in Table VII. From Fig. 13 and under

the current labeling, note that the bit nodes

and

both have an unsatisfied check whose label is , and that like-

wise the bit nodes

and

both have an unsatisfied

check whose label is . Therefore there could exist a bit node

that connects to two satisfied and two unsatisfied check nodes.

Consider a bit node

that shares a check labeled with

and a check labeled with

. By the parity check

constraint

and

(75)

From (74) and (75) it follows that

for all

numerical assignments of and , for

and consequently,

. Since

and

share an edge in Fig. 13, the

condition violates the

check consistency constraint for all but a small finite number of

values of .

Remark 1: Since Theorem 2(c) is concerned with counting

absorbing sets for

, note that for

and

the assignment

either

or

, from

the (74) and (75) we may express

and in terms of

(itself nonzero). Combined with (73), we may then express all

of

indices of bits in this absorbing set in

terms of three independent parameters:

and

.

for

, it follows that

and

. Thus, the existence of

this

bit node for a multiple of , makes the candidate

configuration be a

absorbing set but not a

fully ab-

sorbing set. We will now show that in fact the remaining labeling

is not possible for large enough.

II. Consider the labeling

2. Case

:

We now have

and

which follows from From (72) we also have

and

(76)

and

.

Applying the cycle consistency condition to the four cycles in

Fig. 13 for

and

we obtain

(72) Using the pattern consistency conditions we may also write

(77)

Combining (76) and (77) it again follows that

for all

numerical assignments of and

. This in turn implies that

violates the check consistency condition.

for , which

Remark 2: Since Theorem 2(c) is concerned with counting

absorbing sets for

, note that for

and

the assignment

either

or

, from

the (76) and (77) we may express

and in terms of

(itself nonzero). Combined with (73), we may then express all

of

indices of bits in this absorbing set in

terms of three independent parameters:

and

.

REFERENCES

Recall that it is sufficient to only consider

1. Case

:

(73)

and

.

[1] Digital Video Broadcasting Standard, DVB-S2, 2006 [Online]. Available: http://pda.etsi.org/exchangefolder/en_302307v010102p.pdf, pp. 19-21.
[2] 10 Gigabit Ethernet: IEEE Standard for Information TechnologyTelecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems-Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Specific Requirements Part 3: Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) Access Method and Physical Layer Specifications, IEEE Std. 802.3an-2006, Sep. 2006 [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.3an-2006.pdf, p. 3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

200

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

[3] Mobile Wireless MAN IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems Amendment 2: Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands and Corrigendum 1, IEEE Std. 802.16e-2005, Dec. 2005 [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.16e-2005.pdf, pp 626–630.
[4] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasic´, “Error floors of LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 2006, pp. 1089–1094.
[5] C. Di, D. Proietti, T. Richardson, E. Telatar, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[6] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[7] L. Dolecek, P. Lee, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikolic, and M. J. Wainwright, “Predicting error floors of structured LDPC codes: Deterministic bounds and estimates,” IEEE J. Selected Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 908–917, Aug. 2009.
[8] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. J. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets for array-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Glasgow, Scotland, U.K., Jun. 2007, pp. 6261–6268.
[9] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Evaluation of the low frame error rate performance of LDPC codes using importance sampling,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, Sep. 2007, pp. 202–207.
[10] E. Eleftheriou and S. Ölçer, “Low density parity check codes for digital subscriber lines,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, New York, Apr./May 2002, pp. 1752–1757.
[11] J. L. Fan, “Array-codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 543–546.
[12] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[13] G. D. Forney, “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 520–548, Feb. 2001.
[14] G. D. Forney, Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznick, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001, pp. 101–112.
[15] R. Koetter and P. Vontobel, “Graph covers and iterative decoding of finite-length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 75–82.
[16] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[17] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Conf. Wireless Communications, Honolulu, HI, Jun. 2005, pp. 630–635.
[18] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and RamanujanMargulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes in Theor. Comp. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, Oct. 2003.
[19] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[20] T. Mittelholzer, “Efficient encoding and minimum distance bounds of Reed-Solomon-type array codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jul. 2002, p. 282.
[21] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929–953, Mar. 2005.
[22] W. W. Peterson and E. J. Weldon, Error Correcting Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972.
[23] T. Richardson, “Error-floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Monticello, Ill., Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.

[24] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[25] C. Schlegel and S. Zhang, “On the dynamics of the error floor behavior in (regular) LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Taormina, Italy, 2009, to be published.
[26] Y. Y. Tai, L. Lan, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Algebraic construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for the AWGN and erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1765–1774, Oct. 2006.
[27] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1980.
[28] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[29] M. C. Valenti, S. Cheng, and R. I. Seshadri, “Turbo and LDPC codes for digital video broadcasting,” in Turbo Code Applications: A Journey From a Paper to Realization. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Springer, 2006, ch. 12.
[30] B. Vasic´ and E. Kurtas, Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording Systems. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 2005.
[31] K. Yang and T. Helleseth, “On the minimum distance of array codes as LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 3268–3271, Dec. 2003.
[32] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes via hardware simulation,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM), San Francisco, CA, Oct./Nov. 2006, pp. 1–6.
[33] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Quantization effects in low-density parity-check decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Glasgow, Scotland, U.K., Jun. 2007, pp. 6231–6237.
[34] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance: Quantization and algorithm choices,” IEEE Trans. Commun., to be published.
Lara Dolecek (S’07–M’07) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and computer sciences, as well as the M.A. degree in statistics, all from the University of California, Berkeley.
She was a Postdoctoral Researcher with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, from 2007 to 2009. In January 2010 she joined the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles, as an Assistant Professor. Her research interests span information and probability theory, graphical models, statistical algorithms, and computational methods, with applications to complex systems for data processing, communication, and storage.
Dr. Dolecek received the 2007 David J. Sakrison Memorial Prize for the most outstanding doctoral research in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences at University of California, Berkeley.
Zhengya Zhang (S’02–M’09) received the B.A.Sc. degree in computer engineering from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 2003 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of California, Berkeley, in 2005 and 2009, respectively.
In September 2009, he joined the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. His research interest is in the design of signal processing and computation systems which require a spectrum of optimizations from algorithms to architecture and implementations.
Dr. Zhang received the David J. Sakrison Memorial Prize for the most outstanding doctoral research in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences at the University of California, Berkeley, in 2009. He is also the recipient of the Analog Devices Outstanding Student Designer Award and the Vodafone U.S. Foundation Fellowship for his graduate research.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DOLECEK et al.: ANALYSIS OF ABSORBING SETS AND FULLY ABSORBING SETS OF ARRAY-BASED LDPC CODES

201

Venkat Anantharam (M’86–SM’96–F’98) received the B.Tech. degree in electronics in 1980 from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras (IIT-M) and the M.A. and C.Phil. degrees in mathematics and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering in 1983, 1984, 1982, and 1986, respectively, from the University of California, Berkeley (UCB). From 1986 to 1994, he was on the faculty of the School of Electrical Engineering at Cornell University, Ithaca, NY. Since 1994, he has been on the faculty of the Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department at UCB.
Prof. Anantharam received the Philips India Medal and the President of India Gold Medal from IIT-M in 1980, and an NSF Presidential Young Investigator award during the period 1988–1993. He is a corecipient of the 1998 Prize Paper award of the IEEE Information Theory Society (with S. Verdú) and a corecipient of the 2000 Stephen O. Rice Prize Paper award of the IEEE Communications Theory Society (with N. Mckeown and J. Walrand). He received the Distinguished Alumnus Award from IIT-M in 2008.
Martin J. Wainwright (M’03) received the Bachelor’s degree in mathematics from University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and computer science (EECS) from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge.
He is currently an Associate Professor at the University of California, Berkeley, with a joint appointment between the Department of Statistics and the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences. His research interests include statistical signal processing, coding and information theory, statistical machine learning, and high-dimensional statistics.
Prof. Wainwright has been awarded an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Fellowship, an NSF CAREER Award, the George M. Sprowls Prize for his dissertation research (EECS Department, MIT), a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada 1967 Fellowship, an IEEE Signal Processing Society Best Paper Award in 2008, and several outstanding conference paper awards.

Borivoje Nikolic´ (S’93–M’99–SM’06) received the Dipl. Ing. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, in 1992 and 1994, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of California, Davis in 1999.
He taught electronics courses at the University of Belgrade from 1992 to 1996. He spent two years with Silicon Systems, Inc., Texas Instruments Storage Products Group, San Jose, CA, working on disk-drive signal processing electronics. In 1999, he joined the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, where he is now a Professor. His research activities include digital and analog integrated circuit design and VLSI implementation of communications and signal processing algorithms. He is a coauthor of the book Digital Integrated Circuits: A Design Perspective, 2nd ed., Prentice-Hall, 2003.
Dr. Nikolic´ received the NSF CAREER award in 2003, College of Engineering Best Doctoral Dissertation Prize , and Anil K. Jain Prize for the Best Doctoral Dissertation in Electrical and Computer Engineering at University of California, Davis in 1999, as well as the City of Belgrade Award for the Best Diploma Thesis in 1992. For work with his students and colleagues he received the Best Paper Award at the ACM/IEEE International Symposium of Low-Power Electronics in 2005, and the 2004 Jack Kilby Award for the Outstanding Student Paper at the IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

