IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

105

Min-Sum Decoder Architectures With Reduced Word Length for LDPC Codes
Daesun Oh, Member, IEEE, and Keshab K. Parhi, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we propose an improvement of the normalized min-sum (MS) decoding algorithm and novel MS decoder architectures with reduced word length using nonuniform quantization schemes for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The proposed normalized MS algorithm introduces a more exact adjustment with two optimized correction factors for check-node-updating computations, while the conventional normalized MS algorithm applies only one correction factor. The proposed algorithm provides a significant performance gain without any additional computation or hardware complexity. The finite word-length analysis in implementing an LDPC decoder is a very important factor since it directly impacts the size of memory to store the intrinsic and extrinsic messages and the overall hardware area in the partially parallel LDPC decoder. The proposed nonuniform quantization scheme can reduce the finite word length while achieving similar performances compared to a conventional quantization scheme. From simulation results, it is shown that the proposed 4-bit nonuniform quantization scheme achieves an acceptable decoding performance, unlike the conventional 4-bit uniform quantization scheme. Finally, the proposed MS decoder architectures by the nonuniform quantization scheme provide significant reductions of 20% and up to 8% for the memory area and combinational logic area, respectively, compared to the conventional 5-bit ones.
Index Terms—Correction factors, finite word length, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, LDPC decoder, nonuniform quantization, normalized min-sum (MS) algorithm, offset MS algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes[1], [2] allow a high degree of parallelism and are very suitable for highdata-rate applications such as wideband wireless multimedia communications and magnetic storage systems [3], [4]. Welldesigned irregular LDPC codes demonstrate better performance than regular ones [5]. Although the hardware architecture of irregular LDPC codes is a bit complex, many practical applications such as IEEE 802.11n[6], [7] and IEEE 802.16e [8] have adopted or are considering the use of irregular LDPC codes due to their better performance. Furthermore, since the LDPC decoder for the most modern wireless-communication systems includes multiple code rates, various block lengths, and different
Manuscript received April 11, 2008; revised September 17, 2008. First published February 24, 2009; current version published January 22, 2010. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor Y. Massoud.
D. Oh is with Samsung Electronics, Suwon-City, 443-742, Korea (e-mail: daesun.oh@samsung.com).
K. K. Parhi is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail: parhi@umn. edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2009.2016171

sizes of submatrices, the flexible LDPC decoder need to decode several kinds of LDPC codes[9], [10].
Among a variety of decoding algorithms, the well-known belief propagation (BP) or sum–product algorithm achieves a good decoding performance. For the standard BP algorithm in log-likelihood ratio (LLR) domain, a lot of logarithmic and multiplicative computations are required for the check node computation. The min-sum (MS) algorithm, which is an alterative method, selects the first and second minimum messages among several passed messages from the variable nodes. The MS algorithm can significantly reduce the hardware complexity of the BP algorithm at the cost of performance degradations, where complex computations at the check nodes can be implemented with simple comparison and summation operations. Recently, the modified MS algorithms such as normalized MS or offset MS using additional correction factors have been preferred for many practical applications since they offer comparable decoding performance over the BP algorithm for regular LDPC codes[11], [12]. Moreover, for irregular LDPC codes, the improved normalized and offset MS algorithms exhibit small performance degradations[13], [14]. In[15], the self-corrected MS decoding of LDPC codes was proposed to ensure a quasi-optimal decoding performance.
Aside from their low hardware complexity, the MS algorithms have a few advantages. They do not require channel information such as the noise variance for additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels and provide less sensitive decoding performance under finite word-length implementations over the BP algorithm. In the normalized MS or offset MS algorithm, one correction factor is applied to the output values of check nodes of the original MS algorithm regardless the values of output messages in order to compensate the overestimated messages.
The finite word length of the soft information as one of the major factors affects the complexity of computation logic, routing complexity, and the decoding performance of an LDPC code. Moreover, it directly decides the size of memory, which plays a role to store the intrinsic and extrinsic messages and dominantly determines the overall implementation area in the partially parallel LDPC decoder. Several works to reduce the finite word length were introduced in[16]–[21] by using nonuniform quantization schemes for BP decoding algorithms of LDPC codes.
In this paper, we propose an improved MS algorithm and a novel nonuniform quantization scheme, which result in significant reductions of hardware area in the finite word-length implementation. The simulation results would show that our proposed 4-bit nonuniform quantization scheme achieves an acceptable

1549-8328/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

decoding performance unlike the conventional 4-bit uniform quantization schemes. In other words, the proposed scheme can give a good tradeoff between the decoding performance and the hardware complexity and save a large portion of memory at the cost of a small performance degradation.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly reviews the BP algorithm and the MS algorithms such as offset MS and normalized MS. Moreover, a novel normalized MS algorithm with two normalization factors is proposed, and its decoding performances are provided. Section III proposes a novel nonuniform quantization scheme to reduce the finite word length without significant performance degradations. In addition, the simulation results of the proposed nonuniform quantization scheme are provided. In Section IV, the offset MS and normalized MS decoder architectures for the proposed 4-bit nonuniform quantization scheme are presented. Finally, Section V concludes this paper.

B. Optimized Offset MS Algorithm
Although LDPC codes can be decoded very well with a class of BP algorithms including nonlinear computations, the modified MS decoding algorithms such as normalized or offset MS algorithms would be preferred due to its simplified hardware implementations and acceptable performances. In particular, the improved offset MS algorithm presented in [22] can be efficiently implemented with finite word length for practical applications due to its better performance. The offset MS algorithm is composed of two phases of message passing, i.e., from variable and check node units. Let denote the check-to-variable message conveyed from the check node to the variable node
, and represents the variable-to-check message conveyed from the variable node to the check node . The and represent the iteratively updated extrinsic information. The updating equation of check-to-variable message in the offset MS algorithm can be approximated as (5)

II. BP ALGORITHM AND MS ALGORITHMS

(5)

A. BP Algorithm
The LDPC codes can be efficiently decoded with BP algorithm using an iterative message-passing algorithm. The general BP algorithm is composed of two phases of message passing, i.e., from variable and check nodes. In the LLR-domain version of BP algorithm, each check node performs the following computation for its outgoing LLR message to the variable node :

(6)
where is an offset value optimized by the quantization scheme, is the sign part of , and denotes the set of variable
nodes connected to the check node . The updating equation of variable-to-check message is expressed as follows:
(7)

(1) (2)

where is the sign part of , and

denotes the set of

variable nodes excluding connected to the check node . The

updating equation of variable-to-check message is expressed as

follows:

(3)

where

denotes the scaled received data, where is the

received soft messages and is the scaling factor decided by

the quantization scheme and LDPC code, where and are

uniquely set to the optimized values according to each LDPC

code and its quantization scheme. Note that, even though

a proper analog–digital converter[23] can provide the best

dynamic range of quantized data, it does not support the best

solution in using an optimal correction factor and quantized

data in an offset MS algorithm. The estimated information bit

is determined by taking a hard decision of the for variable

node computed as follows:

(8)

where is the intrinsic information

, where is

the received soft symbols and is the estimated standard deviation of channel noise. The estimated information bit is determined by taking a hard decision of the for variable node computed as follows:

The overall offset MS algorithm consists of computing and passing all the ’s and ’s iteratively as the BP algorithm.
As examples of LDPC codes, we consider two different rates LDPC codes[6] for IEEE 802.11n applications: One is a -rate

(4) irregular LDPC code -rate irregular LDPC code

, and the other is a , where

and are the block length and the dimension of the code, respec-

The overall BP algorithm consists of computing and passing tively. Moreover, modulations by BPSK and transmissions over

all the ’s and ’s iteratively. In other words, in the first half an AWGN channel are assumed, and the maximum number of

iteration, all the check nodes receive and update their messages decoding iterations is set to 24. As presented in[22], for (1728,

’s, and then, in the next half-iteration, all the variable nodes 864) irregular LDPC code, the offset value and the scaling factor

update their messages ’s. If the estimated code words sat- are determined with

and

, respectively, op-

isfy all the parity-check equations or the maximum number of timized at

dB, resulting in the smallest bit error

iterations is reached, then the decoding algorithm stops.

rate (BER). In the case of (1728, 1296) irregular LDPC code,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OH AND PARHI: MIN-SUM DECODER ARCHITECTURES WITH REDUCED WORD LENGTH FOR LDPC CODES

107

Fig. 1. Performance of the quantized offset MS algorithm for (1728, 864) irregular LDPC codes.

Fig. 2. Performance of the quantized offset MS algorithm for (1728, 1296) irregular LDPC codes.

the best decoding performance is obtained with

and

optimized at

dB.

It is presented in [22] that a good tradeoff between hardware

complexity and decoding performance is given with the 6-bit

quantization scheme for both intrinsic and extrinsic messages,

which are uniformly quantized with 1 sign bit, 2 integer bits, and

3 fractional bits. The performance loss between the presented

scheme and floating point seems to be no more than 0.1 dB.

However, a 4-bit quantized offset MS algorithm would suffer

from serious performance degradations and unacceptable error

floors. As shown in Figs. 1 and 2, the 4-bit uniformly quan-

tized offset MS algorithms cause a large performance degrada-

tion compared to the 5- or 6-bit cases, which may not be well

suited for practical applications. Therefore, a novel nonuniform

quantization scheme with the reduced word length will be dis-

cussed in Section III.

where is a normalization factor, and is equal to (6). More-

over, as the offset MS algorithm, the scaled received data

can be used as the intrinsic information at the variable-node-up-

dating (VNU) computations instead of

. Although

the normalized MS algorithm can efficiently reduce the compu-

tation complexity and achieve good performance, it still intro-

duces the performance degradations compared to the BP algo-

rithm.

D. 2-D Normalized MS Algorithm
In [13], the 2-D normalized MS decoding algorithm was presented to improve the performance of conventional normalized MS decoding algorithm, where the normalization factors are applied to both the check-to-variable and variable-to-check messages in (10) and (11), respectively

(10)

C. Conventional Normalized MS Algorithm (11)

Although LDPC codes can be decoded very well with the

BP algorithm including nonlinear computations, the approximated decoding algorithm such as MS algorithm would be preferred due to its simplified hardware implementations. Since the output messages from check-node-updating (CNU) computations, which are selected with the first or second minimum messages, are always overestimated compared to

where and are the normalization factors for check-to-

variable and variable-to-check messages, respectively. The op-

timum normalization values of 2-D normalized MS are

and

for both (1728, 864) and (1944, 972)

irregular LDPC codes.

those obtained with the BP algorithm, the normalized MS algorithm can achieve better performance by multiplying a scaling factor that is less than one. The updating equation for the check-to-variable messages can be simplified as

E. Improved Normalized MS Algorithm
In this paper, we propose an improved normalized MS algorithm, which uses multiple normalization factors according to the output values of check nodes. Consider a set

(9) of variable-to-check messages

, where is satisfied. Then,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

Fig. 3. Performance of normalized MS algorithm with several combinations of  and  for (1728, 864) and (1944, 972) irregular LDPC codes.

the check-to-variable messages updated by the conventional

TABLE I

normalized MS algorithm can be expressed as

OPTIMAL CORRECTION FACTOR VALUES FOR NORMALIZED MS ALGORITHM

(12) ...

The normalization factor compensates performance degra-

dation caused by an approximation of algorithm. Better performance can be achieved with multiple normalization factors. It is easily observed that the two different correction factors can be applied to the minimum message and the second minimum message , respectively, without introducing any computation complexity. The updating equation with two normalization factors can be modified as

Fig. 3(a) and (b) shows the decoding performances of the nor-

malized MS algorithm according to several combinations of

and at

dB for (1728, 864) and (1944, 972) ir-

regular LDPC codes, respectively. In Fig. 3, each contour line

denotes the same BER performance, and the combination of

and

at the right–bottom area achieves better BER

performance than that at the left–top area. It can easily be ob-

served that the performance of the normalized MS algorithm (13) varies according to the combination of and , and

where

gives only a suboptimal decoding performance. The optimal and for both LDPC codes can be determined to be 0.750 and

if

st minimum message 0.875, respectively, when considering efficient hardware imple-

if

nd minimum message mentations. From extensive simulation works, the optimal com-

(14) bination set of and correction factors was searched and shown in Table I for several LDPC codes, which includes one

(15) general (3, 6) regular LDPC code [4] and one -rate irregular

LDPC code for IEEE 802.16e WiMAX[8].

In the case of

, our proposed algorithm is equivalent The decoding performances of (1728, 864) irregular LDPC

to the conventional normalized MS algorithm. In other words, code are shown in Fig. 4. The proposed normalized MS algo-

the conventional normalized MS algorithm with one correction rithm with

and

achieves better perfor-

factor is a subset of the proposed normalized algorithm with two mances compared to the conventional normalized MS algorithm

correction factors.

with

or the 2-D normalized MS algorithm with

As examples of LDPC codes, we consider two -rate

and

. In particular, the proposed

irregular LDPC codes for IEEE 802.11n applications: One algorithm obtains a performance gain of more than 0.2 dB in

is

[6], and the other is

terms of the frame error rate (FER) at high SNR rates over the

[7], where and are the block length and conventional one. Moreover, the improved algorithm does not

the dimension of the code, respectively. Moreover, modula- cause the error floor up to

, unlike the conven-

tions by BPSK and transmissions over an AWGN channel are tional one, and provides even slightly better performance than

assumed, and the maximum number of decoding iterations is the original BP algorithm. At medium or short code lengths, the

set to 30.

BP algorithm is not optimum due to negative effects caused by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OH AND PARHI: MIN-SUM DECODER ARCHITECTURES WITH REDUCED WORD LENGTH FOR LDPC CODES

109

Fig. 4. Decoding performance of (1728, 864) irregular LDPC code, where the Fig. 5. Decoding performance of (1944, 972) irregular LDPC code, where the

solid lines are for BER and the dashed lines are for FER.

solid lines are for BER and the dashed lines are for FER.

correlated messages passed during the iterative decoding, while

the 2-D or improved normalized MS algorithms seem to be able

to outperform the BP algorithm by reducing them [11]. For finite

word-length simulations with 6-bit quantization scheme, which

are uniformly quantized with 1 sign bit, 2 integer bits, and 3 frac-

tional bits, the performance gaps between the proposed scheme

and the conventional one seem to be more than 0.25 dB at high

SNR.

For the (1944, 972) irregular LDPC code shown in Fig. 5,

the proposed normalized MS algorithm with

and

obtains large performance gains over the conven-

tional normalized MS algorithm with

. Moreover,

the proposed normalized MS algorithm achieves better perfor-

mance than the 2-D normalized MS algorithm with

and

. At high SNR, the performance gains

such as BER or FER are more than 0.1 dB compared to the con-

ventional one. In addition, the proposed algorithm provides sig-

nificant performance gains even when compared to the BP al-

gorithm.

From the simulation results in Figs. 4 and 5, it is shown that

the proposed normalized MS algorithm with two different nor-

malization factors provides significant performance gains over

the conventional one without introducing any additional com-

putation complexity or hardware overhead.

formance loss can decrease the hardware size which includes

the computation logic and memory banks.

As shown in Section II, 4-bit uniformly quantized MS de-

coding algorithms suffer from serious performance degradation

and unacceptable error floors. This is because the 4-bit uniform

quantization scheme might have too narrow dynamic ranges to

cover all the messages and/or too large step size to apply the

optimal correction factor of the offset MS algorithm. Consider

a

uniform quantization scheme in which totally bits are

used, of which bits are used for its fractional part. The mes-

sage ranges and the step size that is capable of being expressed

by the

uniform quantization scheme are from

to

and , respectively. For example, the maximum

magnitude of (4:2) quantized message and its step size are 1.75

and 0.25, respectively, and the maximum magnitude of message

and the step size for (4:3) quantization are 0.875 and 0.125, re-

spectively.

Therefore, novel nonuniform quantization schemes for

the MS algorithms need to be considered, which can be im-

plemented with reduced finite word length at the cost of an

acceptable small performance loss. The proposed scheme

applies different quantization step sizes according to the mag-

nitude of messages, where it uses the larger quantization step

sizes for the larger magnitudes of both intrinsic and extrinsic

messages. In other words, if the magnitude of message is

III. FINITE WORD-LENGTH IMPLEMENTATIONS OF MS DECODING ALGORITHMS

less than

, then the message is quantized with

uniform quantization, and its quantization step size is .

However, in the case that the magnitude of message is more

A. Nonuniform Quantization Schemes

than

, the larger quantization step size is applied as

The finite word length of the soft information directly decides follows:

the size of memory, which plays a role to store the intrinsic and extrinsic messages and dominantly determines the overall im-

for

plementation area in the partially parallel LDPC decoder. There-

for

fore, the reduction of finite word length without significant per-

for

(16)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

TABLE II CONVERSION TABLE BETWEEN 6-BIT UNIFORM AND 5-BIT NONUNIFORM
QUANTIZATION SCHEMES

Fig. 6. Performance of the nonuniformly quantized offset MS algorithm for (1728, 864) irregular LDPC codes.

TABLE III CONVERSION TABLE BETWEEN 5-BIT UNIFORM AND 4-BIT NONUNIFORM
QUANTIZATION SCHEMES

For example, Tables II and III show the conversion tables between the 6-bit uniformly quantized messages and the 5-bit nonuniformly quantized messages and between the 5-bit uniformly quantized messages and the 4-bit nonuniformly quantized messages, respectively. Unless the most significant bit for sign expression is considered, the (6:3) quantization scheme represents 32 different 5-bit data, while the 5-bit nonuniform quantization scheme includes 16 different data, which can be represented with 4-bit word-length data. Similarly, for the 4-bit nonuniform quantization scheme, the magnitudes of quantized messages can be expressed with the converted 3-bit word length.
Notice that the nonuniformly quantized messages can still be used in the CNU computations of MS algorithms, which find only the first and second minimum messages among several input messages. However, the nonuniformly quantized messages need to be converted into original uniformly quantized forms for the VNU computations before the VNU units, which perform several additions, and then, the updated messages need to be converted into nonuniformly quantized forms before storing in the memories or passing to the CNU units.

B. Nonuniformly Quantized MS Decoding Performances

The decoding performances of offset and normalized MS al-

gorithms under the proposed nonuniform quantization schemes

are discussed with three kinds of irregular LDPC codes.

In Fig. 6, the performances of (1728, 864) irregular LDPC

code show that the offset MS algorithm with the 5-bit nonuni-

form quantization scheme achieves similar performances com-

pared to that with the (6:3) uniform quantization scheme. The

offset MS algorithm with even the 4-bit nonuniform quantiza-

It is observed that the total number of different messages tion scheme achieves a good performance, although it causes

quantized nonuniformly by this scheme is reduced from small performance degradations of less than 0.1 dB compared

to , which can be implemented with the

-bit word to that with the (5:3) uniform quantization scheme. Moreover,

length by inserting additional conversion circuits.

the proposed 4-bit nonuniform quantization does not cause the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OH AND PARHI: MIN-SUM DECODER ARCHITECTURES WITH REDUCED WORD LENGTH FOR LDPC CODES

111

Fig. 7. Performance of the nonuniformly quantized offset MS algorithm for Fig. 8. Performance of the nonuniformly quantized normalized MS algorithm

(1728, 1296) irregular LDPC codes.

for (1944, 972) irregular LDPC codes.

error floor up to

at high SNR, unlike the 4-bit uni-

form quantization. For the (1728, 1296) irregular LDPC code

shown in Fig. 7, the 5-bit nonuniformly quantized offset MS

algorithm achieves almost the same performances, and its per-

formance loss is negligible when compared with the (6:3) uni-

formly quantized one. In addition, the 4-bit nonuniformly quan-

tized offset MS algorithm gives a good decoding performance

close to that with the 6- or 5-bit quantization schemes.

Meanwhile, Fig. 8 shows the decoding performances of

(1944, 972) irregular LDPC code, where the improved nor-

malized MS algorithm with the 5-bit nonuniform quantization

scheme provides similar performances compared to that with

the (6:3) uniform quantization scheme. The normalized MS

algorithm with even the 4-bit nonuniform quantization scheme

achieves negligible performance degradations of less than

0.1 dB compared to that with the (5:3) uniform quantization

scheme. Moreover, the proposed 4-bit nonuniform quantization

does not introduce the error floor up to

at high

SNR.

From these simulation results, we can expect that the

proposed 4-bit nonuniform quantization scheme can be imple-

mented with an acceptable decoding performance, which can

save a large portion of memory and reduce the hardware com-

plexity significantly. In addition, note that the proposed scheme

can be similarly applied to different kinds of MS algorithms

such as the 2-D MS algorithms[13], which can result in better

decoding performances under the limited finite word-length

implementation.

IV. MS DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR NONUNIFORM QUANTIZATION SCHEME

Fig. 9. (a) EXP circuit. (b) COMP circuit.
architecture for the 4-bit word-length implementation is considered in this paper, the 5-bit nonuniform quantization scheme can be implemented similarly.
As explained in Section III, since the 5-bit word-length data should be used only in the VNU computations, we need to design the conversion circuits, such as expansion (EXP) and compression (COMP) circuits, between the VNU units and the memory blocks or the CNU units, where the EXP circuit expands the 4-bit nonuniformly quantized data to the 5-bit word-length data and the COMP circuit compresses the updated 5-bit word-length data to the 4-bit nonuniformly quantized data.
From Table III, (5:3) uniform quantization data can be generated from 4-bit nonuniformly quantized data, as described in (17), and can be implemented with a small size of combinational logic. Denote the implemented circuit as EXP

In this section, the hardware architectures of the offset MS and normalized MS algorithms with the proposed 4-bit nonuniform quantization scheme are discussed. Although the hardware
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

Fig. 10. Architecture of CNU unit for the proposed nonuniform quantization scheme.

(17)

where represents the sign bit, and

represents a 4-bit

nonuniformly quantized intrinsic or extrinsic message stored

in the memory or used in the CNU computations. In addition,

is equivalent to 5-bit expanded data for the VNU

computations, where indicates its sign bit. Similarly, one pos-

sible combinational logic equation for the COMP circuit can be

formulated as

Fig. 11. Architecture of VNU unit for the proposed nonuniform quantization scheme.

Fig. 11, the symbol

denotes the updating computation

(18) for the variable-to-check messages by (7). Moreover,

and

blocks, which would be defined and implemented in this

where

represents the 4-bit compressed data to be section, play roles to compensate the updated messages with

stored in the memory and used in the CNU computations after correction factors, where the output values are subtracted by

completing the VNU computations at each iteration. From (17) the offset value or downsized by the normalization factor .

and (18), the EXP and COMP circuits can be implemented as To increase the clock speed of the decoder, several pipelining

combinational logic circuits shown in Fig. 9, where Fig. 9(a) stages can be inserted into CNU units. The EXP circuit expands

and (b) shows the EXP and COMP circuits, respectively. These

-bit data to -bit data for the VNU computations, and

two conversion circuits include less than 30 logic gates, and the COMP circuit compresses the -bit data to

-bit data,

their hardware overheads are relatively small compared with as shown in Fig. 11.

the overall LDPC decoder architecture.

The offset reduction computations consist of two kinds of

In the proposed CNU and VNU architectures shown in steps. In the first step, the offset calculations are applied with

Figs. 10 and 11, respectively, the finite word lengths of both uniform quantization, and then in the second step, the values

input and output data are

bits, including 1 sign bit, and are converted to nonuniform quantization values. For example,

the expanded data for the VNU computations consist of the -bit an input value 0.5(01000) is decreased to 0.375(00110) by the

word length. In Fig. 10, which excludes the sign computation offset value

in the (5:3) uniform quanti-

block, the SWAP units compare the magnitudes of two input zation scheme. Therefore,

is mapped from

messages and swap the smaller one to its lower output position

using Table III. By similar way, the overall

and the other one to its upper output position. Each minimum mapping table is shown in Fig. 12(a), and the offset reduction

message finder unit finds the minimum message and the second (OFFR) circuit

or

in the CNU units can be simply

minimum one among four input messages from two messages implemented, as shown Fig. 12(b).

sets, which each message set includes two sorted messages, and For the proposed normalized MS decoder, two messages nor-

outputs the the minimum message to its lower output position malized by

and

can similarly be ob-

and the second minimum one to its upper output position. In tained from Table III and shown in Fig. 13(a). Then, the cor-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OH AND PARHI: MIN-SUM DECODER ARCHITECTURES WITH REDUCED WORD LENGTH FOR LDPC CODES

113

TABLE IV AREA AND SPEED COMPARISONS OF 6 CNU AND 3 VNU FOR OFFSET MS DECODERS

TABLE V AREA AND SPEED COMPARISONS OF 6 CNU AND 3 VNU FOR NORMALIZED MS DECODERS

Fig. 12. (a) Offset reduction table. (b) Offset reduction circuit.

= 0 750 Fig. 13. (a) Normalized reduction table (conversion table). (b) 

:

= 0 875 normalized reduction circuit. (c)  : normalized reduction circuit.

As example designs, the 6 CNU unit and 3 VNU unit for the proposed nonuniformly quantized offset and normalized MS decoders are implemented as shown in Tables IV and V, respectively, using the Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company 0.18- m standard-cell CMOS technology. For the offset MS decoder shown in Table IV, the proposed 5-bit architecture can be designed with a similar implementation area (0.0218 mm ), but it can save a memory area of 17% compared to that of the conventional 6-bit architecture (0.0210 mm ), where denotes the total number of intrinsic and extrinsic messages. Furthermore, the proposed 4-bit architecture can be implemented with the reduced hardware complexity and memory area by 3% and 20%, respectively, compared to the conventional 5-bit architecture. Moreover, it is observed that the critical path of the proposed 4-bit CNU is shorter than that of the conventional 5-bit CNU since the finite word length is reduced to 4 bits from 5 bits.
Table V shows the implementation area and speed comparison for three kinds of normalized MS decoders. The 2-D normalized MS decoders require a little longer critical path and a larger implementation area in VNU units than the conventional normalized one. The proposed 5-bit architecture and the conventional 6-bit architecture can be implemented with almost same hardware area of 0.0214 and 0.0216 mm , while the former can save a memory area of 17% compared to the latter. The proposed 4-bit normalized MS decoder can reduce the computation logic area and the memory area by 8% and 20%, respectively, compared to the conventional 5-bit one.

responding circuits

and

in the CNU units can be

V. CONCLUSION

simply implemented, as shown in Fig. 13(b) and (c) for and In this paper, we have proposed an improved normalized MS

, respectively. It is worth noting that the compensation cir- decoding algorithm and a novel MS decoder architecture using

cuits by the offset value or normalization factors can be com- nonuniform quantization schemes for LDPC codes. The pro-

bined into the EXP circuits of VNU units to reduce the hardware posed MS algorithm applies two different normalization factors

complexity and the critical path.

in the CNU computations, unlike the conventional normalized

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2010

MS algorithm, using only one normalization factor. Simulation results have shown that the proposed normalized MS algorithm provides a significant performance gain over the conventional one and even the BP algorithm without any additional computation or hardware complexity.
The finite word length of the soft information as one of the major factors affects the size of memory, the complexity of computation logic, the routing complexity, and the decoding performance of an LDPC code. In particular, it directly impacts the size of memory to store the intrinsic and extrinsic messages and the overall hardware complexity in the partially parallel LDPC decoder structure. The proposed nonuniform quantization scheme for MS decoders can reduce the finite word length while achieving similar performances compared to the conventional uniform quantization scheme. Simulation results have shown that the proposed 4-bit nonuniform quantization scheme for an offset or normalized MS decoder achieves the acceptable decoding performance, unlike the conventional 4-bit uniform quantization scheme. Finally, the proposed MS decoder architectures by the nonuniform quantization scheme lead to reductions of 20% and up to 8% for the memory area and the combinational logic area, respectively, compared to the conventional 5-bit ones.
Note that to provide a theoretical analysis of nonuniform quantization scheme in decoding LDPC codes is an interesting research topic. We will focus on obtaining a theoretical analysis as our future research works.

[12] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
[13] J. Zhang, M. Fossorier, and D. Gu, “Two-dimensional correction for min-sum decoding of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 180–182, Mar. 2006.
[14] J. Chen, R. M. Tanner, C. Jones, and Y. Li, “Improved min-sum decoding algorithms for irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Sep. 2005, pp. 449–453.
[15] V. Savin, “Self-corrected min-sum decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Jul. 2008, pp. 146–150.
[16] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. K. Parhi, “On finite precision implementation of low density parity check codes decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., May 2001, vol. 4, pp. 202–205.
[17] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Finite precision implementation of LDPC decoders,” Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng.—Commun., vol. 152, no. 6, pp. 1098–1102, Dec. 2005.
[18] F. Vacca, L. Dinoi, and G. Masera, “Design of a VLSI decoder for partially structured LDPC codes,” Int. J. Digit. Multimedia Broadcast., vol. 2008, pp. 1–12, 2008.
[19] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “Low-complexity high-speed decoder design for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 104–114, Jan. 2007.
[20] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, “Efficient message passing architecture for high throughput LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., May 2007, pp. 917–920.
[21] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Low complexity implementations of sum–product algorithm for decoding low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop SiPS Des. Implement., Oct. 2006, pp. 262–267.
[22] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Optimally quantized offset min-sum algorithm for flexible LDPC decoder,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst., Comput., Oct. 2008, pp. 1886–1891.
[23] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, J. Tousch, and J. L. Danger, “Generic description and synthesis of LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 2084–2091, Nov. 2007.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank the Editor and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments to improve the quality of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] M. Rovini, N. E. L’Insalata, F. Rossi, and L. Fanucci, “VLSI design of a high-throughput multi-rate decoder for structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. 8th Euromicro Conf. DSD, Aug. 2005, pp. 202–209.
[4] J. Lu and J. M. F. Moura, “Structured LDPC codes for high-density recording: Large girth and low error floor,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 208–213, Feb. 2006.
[5] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] IEEE P802.11 wireless LANs TGn Sync Proposal: TGnSync Proposal Technical Specification, IEEE 11-04-0889-06-000n, May 2005.
[7] IEEE P802.11 Wireless LANs WWiSE Proposal: High Throughout Extension to the 802.11 Standard, IEEE 11-04-0886-00-000n, Aug. 2004.
[8] IEEE Std 802.16e-2005 and IEEE Std 802.16-2004/Cor 1-2005 (Amendment and Corrigendum to IEEE Std 802.16-2004), IEEE Std 802.16e-2005, 2006.
[9] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 542–546, Jun. 2007.
[10] Y. Sun, M. Karkooti, and J. R. Cavallaro, “VLSI decoder architecture for high throughput, variable block-size and multi-rate LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2007, pp. 2104–2107.
[11] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.

Daesun Oh (S’05–M’09) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea, in 1995 and 1997, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, in 2008.
He has been with Samsung Electronics, SuwonCity, Korea, since 2009. From 1997 to 2002, he was a Research Engineer with Daewoo Electronics, Seoul, Korea. From 2003 to 2004, he was a Senior Electrical Engineer with TRW Automotive, Seoul. His current research interests include the algorithm/architecture/circuit for VLSI design and the computational aspects of digital signal processing. Specifically, his focus is on a VLSI architecture design for the wireless communication and broadcasting systems including low power system, finite field arithmetic, error control coding, and equalization.
Keshab K. Parhi (S’85–M’88–SM’91–F’96) received the B.Tech. degree from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India, in 1982, the M.S.E.E. degree from the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, in 1984, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1988.
He has been with the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, since 1988, where he is currently a Distinguished McKnight University Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. His research addresses VLSI architecture design and implementation of physical layer aspects of broadband communication systems. He is currently working on error control coders and cryptography architectures, high-speed transceivers, ultrawideband systems, quantum error control coders, and quantum cryptography. He has published over 350 papers,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OH AND PARHI: MIN-SUM DECODER ARCHITECTURES WITH REDUCED WORD LENGTH FOR LDPC CODES

115

has authored the text book VLSI Digital Signal Processing Systems (Wiley, 1999), and coedited the reference book Digital Signal Processing for Multimedia Systems (Marcel Dekker, 1999).
Dr. Parhi is the recipient of numerous awards, including the 2004 F. E. Terman award by the American Society of Engineering Education, the 2003 IEEE Kiyo Tomiyasu Technical Field Award, the 2001 IEEE W. R. G. Baker prize paper award, and a Golden Jubilee award from the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society in 1999. He has served on the editorial boards of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—PART I: FUNDAMENTAL THEORY AND APPLICATIONS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—PART II: ANALOG AND DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON

VLSI SYSTEMS,IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, and IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS. He currently serves on the editorial board of the IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. He was the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I (in 2004–2005 term). He served as the Technical Program Cochair of the 1995 IEEE VLSI Signal Processing workshop and the 1996 ASAP Conference and as the General Chair of the 2002 IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems. He was a distinguished Lecturer for the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society during 1996–1998. He currently serves on the Board of Governors of the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

