960

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

Low-Complexity Soft-Decoding Algorithms for Reed–Solomon Codes—Part II: Soft-Input
Soft-Output Iterative Decoding
Jason Bellorado, Aleksandar Kavc˘ic´, Marcus Marrow, and Li Ping

Abstract—In this paper, we present a practical approach to the iterative decoding of Reed-Solomon (RS) codes. The presented methodology utilizes an architecture in which the output produced by steps of belief-propagation (BP) is successively applied to a legacy decoding algorithm. Due to the suboptimal performance of BP conducted on the inherently dense RS parity-check matrix, a method is first provided for the construction of reduced-density, binary, parity-check equations. Iterative decoding is then conducted utilizing a subset of a redundant set of parity-check equations to minimize the number of connections into the least-reliable bits. Simulation results show that performance comparable to (and exceeding) the best known practical RS decoding techniques is achievable with the presented methodology. The complexity of the proposed algorithm is significantly lower than these existing procedures and permits a practical implementation in hardware.
Index Terms—Reed-Solomon (RS) codes, reduced-density parity-check matrices, belief propagation.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE introduction of Turbo Codes [1] and the rediscovery of low-density parity check (LDPC) codes [2] in the early 1990’s demonstrated the achievability of decoding performance arbitrarily close to the capacity of many practical channel models. This performance was shown to be possible using belief-propagation (BP) style decoding methodologies. In such, information is passed along the edges of the code’s graph (Tanner Graph) defined by a code’s constraint equations and iteratively updated using localized update rules. All such update procedures, however, are predicated on the basic assumption that the messages passed to a given node on distinct edges are statistically independent, an assumption that truely holds only when the underlying graph is cycle-free. Much recent work ([3]–[6]) has hence focused on the construction of graphs for finite length block codes to mimic this property, and have been
Manuscript received August 07, 2006; revised March 24, 2009. Current version published March 10, 2010. This work was supported in part by the NSF Grant ECCS07-25649. The material in this paper was presented in part at the Information Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, September 2007.
J. Bellorado and M. Marrow are with the Link-A-Media Devices, Santa Clara, CA 95051 USA.
A. Kavc˘ic´ is with the The Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA.
L. Ping is with the The Department of Electronic Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong..
Communicated by S. W. McLaughlin, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2039091

shown to perform well for codes with very sparse parity-check matrices.
The parity-check matrix of a Reed-Solomon (RS) code is significantly more dense than that of any code on which iterative decoding has been shown to perform well. Although the total number of cycles in a graph increases exponentially with the matrix density, the unavoidable presence of a large number of 4-cycles in a dense matrix is the single largest obstruction to the iterative decoding of RS codes using BP. The extension of BP decoding techniques for RS codes is, therefore, certainly nontrivial.
The first successful iterative RS decoding technique, developed by Jiang and Narayanan in 2004 [7], was the adaptive belief-propagation (ABP) algorithm. This iterative methodology is conducted using hard-decision vectors produced using the output of successive iterations of BP. To obviate the inherent difficulties of BP decoding on the dense RS parity-check matrix, Gaussian elimination (GE) is performed on the parity-check matrix before each iteration, such that the variables of lowest reliability connect into the graph only once. Although the performance of the ABP algorithm was shown (at the time of its inception) to be superior to any existing (practical) RS decoding technique, the required adaptation of the graph (i.e., the adaptive GE) renders a hardware implementation of the procedure impossible.
Variants of the ABP algorithm have been recently proposed which improve upon its performance. Most notably, the Hybrid ABP-ASD decoding procedure proposed by El-Khamy and McEliece [8], which utilizes the Kötter-Vardy (K-V) [9] algorithm at each decoding step. This decoding methodology has been shown (for short codes) to perform very close to maximum-likelihood decoding, however, the complexity incurred by utilizing K-V decoding after each BP iteration is extremely high (see [10]).
Here we present an approach for iterative RS decoding, the foundation of which is a reduced-density, binary, parity-check matrix. We, thus, first detail the construction of low-weight codewords (in the binary image of the dual code) to compose this matrix. Decoding on the graph defined by these equations ensues utilizing a redundant, fixed, set of parity-check equations, such that the subset that minimizes the number of connections into the least-reliable bits is used to decode. We further reduce the graph connections by making hard-decisions on the majority of the most-reliable bits before conducting BP. This operation achieves better performance without requiring a multitude of, computationally expensive, floating-point operations. We demonstrate performance comparable to (or better

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BELLORADO et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY SOFT-DECODING ALGORITHMS

961

than) the ABP algorithm in a manner that allows a practical implementation in hardware (i.e., with no need the computationally expensive adaptive Gaussian eliminations).
The remainder of this work is organized as follows: We first establish our utilized notation in Section II and detail the construction of reduced-density, binary, RS parity-check matrices in Section III. The proposed decoding algorithm is presented in Section IV and simulation results are provided Sections V. A brief conclusion is, then, given in Section VI.

II. BACKGROUND AND NOTATION

We denote the RS code of length and dimension over

the Galois Field of elements (which we specify by

)

as

. Since the methods presented in this work do not

significantly depend on the selection of the

spectral

zeros of the code, we hereafter consider the code with generator

polynomial specified by the first

powers of a primitive

field element

, i.e.,

. We de-

note by the traditional, Vandermonde, parity-check matrix

of

over

and its binary image [11].

The basis of our decoding procedures is a BP-style decoding

methodology known as the Min-Sum Algorithm and, thus, we

first establish notation utilized in following sections (we refer

the reader to [12] for a detailed explanation of BP decoding and

the Min-Sum Algorithm). The input to the algorithm is the vector

of a-posteriori probabilities ob-

tained from the channel output where, for (binary) variable

(1)

We specify by

the set of

variable nodes (corresponding to columns of

) and

the set of

check nodes

(corresponding to rows of ). For a given variable node

, we index the set of its neighboring check nodes by

(i.e., each check node

, may be reached from by

traversing a single graph edge). Similarly, the set of neighboring

variable nodes for check node

is indexed by the set .

In the th BP iteration, the message passed from variable node

to check node

is denoted by

. The

message that is subsequently passed back to variable node

from check node in this iteration is denoted by

.

exhaustive searches of the code become quickly intractable

with increasing code length since

.

Randomized searches, however, have revealed that low-weight

codewords may be constructed by considering the subcodes of

consisting of codewords that are nonzero only on a

subset of indices. We next develop nonrandom constructions of

such codewords, from which we form our constructed matrices.

A. Constructing Codewords for Given Support

We denote by

a

low-weight codeword in

. In this representation of ,

the superscript specifies the associated, higher-field, symbol in

, while the subscript indexes its binary representation.

For a parameter

, we define the support-set

(2)

and its complement set

. We constrain

to be zero outside the defined support set for each higher-field

symbol, i.e.

(3)

Our objective is to determine all codewords in

obeying these constraints, the set of which we denote by

. We construct

directly from

by consid-

ering linear combinations of its rows (which are code-

words in

). We index the columns of

as

and construct

the submatrix composed only of the columns corresponding to

the constrained coordinate positions, i.e.

(4)

which we denote by . Clearly, if there exists a linear combination of the rows of that produces the zero vector, then the combination of the same rows of will produce a codeword in . Thus, for each that satisfies

(5)

we obtain

as

(6)

III. CONSTRUCTING REDUCED-DENSITY BINARY PARITY-CHECK MATRICES FOR RS CODES

The entire code is generated from all vectors in the left null-space of (Algorithm 1).

Here, we outline the construction of reduced-density, binary,

RS parity-check matrices which will be the foundation of the it-

erative procedure presented in the following section. Although

this methodology is not guaranteed to produce the minimum

density parity-check matrix for a given code (not even the den-

sity of this matrix is known), it does produce matrices of suffi-

ciently low density to achieve high-level decoding performance

using the presented decoding methods.

The problem of obtaining the minimum density, binary,

parity-check matrix for

is equivalent to finding the

codewords of minimum Hamming weight that

span the binary image of the dual code

, which

we denote by

. Although possible for short codes,

B. Constructed Codeword Weights

Since the codewords in are nonzero on no more than

coordinate positions, we expect to achieve codewords of

average Hamming weight

.

For sufficiently small , however, the size of renders an

exhaustive search tractable, the result of which is codewords of

Hamming weight significantly less than

.

For larger values of

quickly becomes too large

to search exhaustively. We note, however, that since we are

using these codewords as rows of the parity-check matrix,

we need only form a low-weight basis of (not the entire

code). We have noticed (empirically) that only a small fraction

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

962

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

of

must be searched to obtain a basis consisting of the

lowest weight codewords. We, thus, may truncate the search in

Algorithm 1 without significantly impacting the results.

The weights of the produced codewords are proportional to

, however, because is a wide matrix (has more columns

than rows), it is not guaranteed to have a non-empty left null-

space. The existence (or lack thereof) of is dependent upon

the RS code being considered, as defined by its generator poly-

nomial. For the code under consideration (see Section II), we

have empirically verified that exist for all support-sets such

that

.

, while a superficial search is utilized for larger . We have found this methodology to quickly produce results. ALGORITHM 2: Low-Density Parity-Check Matrix Construction
FOR FOR all support sets

ALGORITHM 1: Construction of

INPUT:

INITIALIZATION:

CONSTRUCTION OF

Denote:

Rows of by

Index:

Columns of

by

Construct: Matrix of columns

FOR: Each of
Compute:

in the left null-space

FOR each FOR each cyclic shift of of length
IF

ELSE

IF

,&

END FOR END FOR END FOR END FOR OUTPUT:
If the left null-space of has large dimension, Algorithm 1 may be abbreviated such that contains a fraction of the codewords with support-set .

END FOR

To increase the effectiveness of our search, we also utilize the cyclic property of RS codes. Since RS codes are cyclic only in

OUTPUT:

the higher field

, and not in the binary field, we may

only utilize cyclic shifts of length

, which we de-

C. Constructing the Parity-Check Matrix

In order to represent all

parity-check constraints

that define a code, it is necessary to determine an entire basis

for

. We accomplish this by systematically searching

note by . Thus, a low-weight codeword produced by our search may be expanded into multiple codewords (of equivalent weight) by considering its cyclic -shifts. The full search procedure we employ is given as Algorithm 2.

through the subcodes of

by continually applying Al-

gorithm 1 to different support-sets . Since the average weight

of a codeword in is proportional to , we step through in-

creasing values of , from

to

(since

corresponds to the case that

, it is not con-

sidered). For each value of for which nonzero solutions to

(5) do exist, we consider all

possible choices of . The

D. Completing the Span of the Parity-Check Matrix

In the event that the codewords in , as produced by Algo-

rithm 2, span

, the parity-check matrix is constructed

using these vectors as its rows. If spans a smaller dimensional

subspace, then we also require a set of vectors to complete

this span. In [11], we provide a set of heuristic guidelines to

construct . However, because the majority of the matrix can

output of Algorithm 1 is, then, utilized to construct a set , the be constructed using Algorithm 2 (see Table I), we omit this set of lowest weight codewords that span the greatest possible discussion here.

dimension. We acknowledge the redundancy of this procedure since, if E. Constructed Matrices

support-set

, then

ever, since the dimension of

is a subcode of

. How- In Table I, we provide examples of the lowest-density, binary,

is exponentially increasing parity-check matrices constructed for the codes;

in , we only exhaustively search the subcodes for small

. We note that, for the considered

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BELLORADO et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY SOFT-DECODING ALGORITHMS

963

TABLE I LOWEST DENSITY, BINARY, PARITY-CHECK MATRICES CONSTRUCTED

We note here that it is both possible that either no solutions, or multiple solutions, exist to this set of equations. In the former case, an erasures-only decoding failure is declared and the decoder proceeds to the next decoding stage. In the latter case, the set of all solutions is searched for the solution closest (in Euclidean distance) to the hard-decision vector, which is then declared the decoded codeword.

B. Bit Slicing

generator polynomial, the parity-check matrices for

and

are of minimum possible density, as verified

by an exhaustive search (the enormous size of

renders an exhaustive search prohibitive).

IV. ITERATIVE RS DECODING
Despite the density reduction achieved by techniques of the preceding section, the resulting graph still has a significant number of short-length cycles that are severely detrimental to the performance of BP decoding. We, thus, modify the application of BP utilizing the following steps: 1) Legacy/Erasures-Only Decoding Front-End; 2) Bit Slicing; 3) Belief-Propagation/Legacy Iterations, each of which is detailed in the following text.

A. Legacy/Erasures-Only Decoding Front-End

The front-end of the decoding algorithm consists of a legacy

decoding procedure followed by a bit-level erasures-only de-

coding, which is performed only in the event of a legacy de-

coding failure. We remark that either of these portions of the

front-end may be omitted from the decoding procedure; how-

ever, there are significant advantages to utilizing this type of

architecture. In addition to the obvious performance gains, the

average complexity of the overall algorithm is also dramatically

reduced by the inclusion of the decoding front-end. This com-

plexity reduction is explained by the fact that BP is only run

in the event of a front-end decoding failure. Since the com-

plexity of BP decoding, as well as the power dissipated by its

hardware implementation, is significantly higher than that of

the front-end, a significant reduction of these, critical, factors

is achieved by its utilization.

Legacy decoding1 may be applied in a straightforward

manner, however, we give a brief explanation of bit-level era-

sures-only decoding in the following. In such, we partition the

coordinate positions into the sets

,

containing the

coordinate positions of lowest

(channel) reliability, and , containing the

coordinate

positions of highest reliability. The bits in are replaced with

their hard-decision values and the parity of their respective

checks updated appropriately. The parity-check equations can

then be solved for the vector of low reliability bits that satisfy

the check equations.

The Bit-Slicing operation, like bit-level erasures-only de-

coding, utilizes the channel soft-information to partition the

variable nodes into sets of high and low-reliability bits. If an

appropriate selection is made, the bits in the latter set (with high

probability) all have correct channel information (i.e., their

hard-decisions and transmitted values are equivalent). We, thus,

make hard-decisions on these bits (an operation historically

referred to as slicing) and remove them from the graph such

that BP may be conducted using only the low-reliability bits.

We refer to the high-reliability bits as the sliced-set and

the low-reliability bits as the active-set

.

Because the slicing process discards information about the

high-reliability bits, this procedure is, clearly, suboptimal. How-

ever, in a graph containing a large number of short-length cycles,

the independence assumption on which the BP update equations

are based is rendered invalid. The treatment of correlated mes-

sages as being independent allows low-reliability bits to sig-

nificantly affect the value of high-reliability bits. By locking

the values of the highest-reliability bits to their hard-decisions,

we disallow this from occurring which, the vast majority of the

time, is the correct course of action.

Using the channel log-likelihood ratios

defined as

(7)

we partition the set of all bits

into the sets

and

utilizing one of the

following methodologies;

• Threshold Slicing: For a given threshold , the set of sliced

coordinate positions is given by

(8)

• Fixed-Number Slicing: For a given real number

, the sliced-set is chosen as the

indices

with largest magnitude log-likelihood ratios, i.e.

(9)

Regardless of the method used to construct (see [11] for a comparison of these slicing methods), we modify the BP updates to account for slicing the variables in by computing the sliced-parity for each check , as
(10)

1In addition to traditional HDD (e.g., Berlekamp-Massey), we also consider Low-Complexity Chase (LCC) legacy decoding. See [10] or [11] for a full treatment of this algorithm.

The sign of each outgoing message of check plied by to reflect this change.

is, then, multi-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

964

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

Fig. 1. Simulation results for C (31; 25) for 60 iterations of Redundant Iterative Decoding (r = (n 0 k) 1 m) with and without error-recovery. We consider
both HDD and LCC ( = 2) legacy decoding in the top figure, and LCC ( = 1; 3) legacy decoding in the bottom figure. These results are compared to HDD, the ABP(20; 1) + HDD decoding algorithm, and a maximum-likelihood lower bound in both plots.

C. Iterative Decoding

decoding, however, we apply the output of each successive BP

iteration to a legacy decoding algorithm. We, thus, utilize the

We conduct iterative decoding using only the low-reliability BP output in a manner that gives the legacy decoding algorithm

(active) variables in . In contrast with traditional iterative the best chance of correctly decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BELLORADO et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY SOFT-DECODING ALGORITHMS

965

Fig. 2. Simulation results for C (255; 239) for 60 iterations of Redundant Iterative Decoding (r = (n 0 k) 1 m) with and without error-recovery. We consider
both HDD and LCC ( = 5) legacy decoding in the top figure, and LCC ( = 4; 6) legacy decoding in the bottom figure. These results are compared to HDD, the ABP(5; 1) + HDD decoding algorithm, Kötter-Vardy Decoding (maximum multiplicity = 100), and a maximum-likelihood lower bound in both plots.

We express the a-posteriori log-likelihood ratios

Because RS graphs contain many cycles, the extrinsic informa-

, produced by the th BP iteration as

tion is not an a-posteriori probability (as in a cycle-free graph),

but merely a metric that indicates the value of required to

satisfy its adjacent check nodes. We have found that treating

(11) the extrinsic information as an a-posteriori probability leads to

severely suboptimal results. Here we consider the use of LCC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

966

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

(see [11] and [10]) and HDD (Berlekamp-Massey) legacy de- (see [11] and [10]) of

we achieve additional gain

coding and, therefore, we next specify how the BP output is of 0.25 dB (0.30 dB), thus, displaying an achievable improve-

used to obtain an input to these procedures. Although we target ment over HDD of 2.40 dB (1.20 dB).

this discussion directly to these legacy decoding algorithms, it At an FER of (which is the lowest ABP FER existing in

is extendable to any legacy decoding method (i.e., Sudan [13], literature) our method utilizing HDD legacy decoding performs

Kötter-Vardy (K-V) [9], or the newly proposed bit-level alge- extremely close to ABP [15]. We do note, however, that the per-

braic decoder [14] etc.).

formance gap between these decoding procedures is decreasing

For the application of HDD, we require only a hard-decision with increasing

and, thus, vanishing at low FERs. We

vector, whereas LCC decoding requires, in addition, a secondary are, however, able to outperform the ABP algorithm if LCC

hard-decision vector and a set of unreliable indices . Although legacy decoding is employed.

the BP output values

, may be used directly to pro- In Fig. 2, we also provide the performance of K-V decoding

duce the hard-decision vector, better performance may be ob- [9] with maximum multiplicity of 100 for

. Despite

tained by restricting the use of the extrinsic information to vari- the extremely high complexity associated with this decoding

ables with very little channel information. We, thus, partition procedure, our decoding techniques are able to outperform this

as •
where

methodology for all values of

. Here, the performance

—set of indices of lowest channel reliability, advantage is increasing with decreasing FER. Note that (though

is a configurable parameter.

at an extremely high complexity) an additional gain of 1 dB is

•

—remaining indices in .

achievable with methods of [16].

The hard-decision vector is obtained for the coordinate positions

in

using the metrics

, whereas only the channel

VI. CONCLUSION

log-likelihood ratios

are used for the indices in

(hard-decisions are always used for the sliced variables in ).

We, finally, note that, in applying LCC [11], [10], we select the

unreliable indices in according to , thus, rendering

constant through all iterations.

We next improve the decoding performance by further al-

tering our constructed graphs. Our procedure utilizes a superset

of

parity-check equations that span the full

dimensional binary image of the dual code

(the re-

dundant checks are easily obtained in the matrix construction

process). Here, the redundant check equations are used to max-

imally reduce the number of graph connections into the active

variables . Denoting the number of active variable nodes ad-

jacent to check as

In this paper, we have presented a solution to the iterative decoding of RS codes which is based on our construction of reduced-density, binary, parity-check matrices. The given methodologies proceed in an iterative fashion in which the output BP is successively applied to a legacy decoding procedure. Although this decoding architecture is similar to the best-known (practical) RS decoding methodology, the ABP algorithm, we have shown results exceeding its decoding performance. Unlike the ABP algorithm, however, these results are achievable without the need for graph adaptation, which is both computationally expensive (due to the required Gaussian elimination) and not implementable in hardware. The performance and complexity advantages of our iterative procedure relative to the ABP algorithm hold with the application of any

legacy decoding algorithm (i.e., HDD, Sudan, Kötter-Vardy), (12) however, they are most pronounced when LCC legacy decoding

we select the

[10] is utilized. checks that minimize (12), provided

. This set of active check nodes, which we denote by , is chosen using a simple greedy approach. We proceed with BP in the aforementioned manner while passing messages only through the checks in .

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

We next present simulation results for

(Fig. 1)

and

(Fig. 2). In such, we used 60 iterations of

BP and a single redundant set of parity-check equations (i.e.,

). We provide performance results for both HDD

and LCC legacy decoding and compare our results to HDD (as

well as ABP and K-V [9] decoding for

). Since

many variants of ABP decoding exist, the results we provide

were obtained from [15].

Our decoding method achieves significant performance gains

over traditional HDD, even with the use of HDD legacy de-

coding. We achieve an FER of (resp. ) at an

of 2.15 dB (0.9 dB) lower than that required by HDD to achieve

this error-rate for

. The performance

of our iterative procedure is also increased by employing the

LCC algorithm for legacy decoding. For a practical selection

REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., Geneva, Switzerland, 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] D. MacKay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of lowdensity parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[3] R. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Commun. Theory Appl., Ambleside, England, 2001.
[4] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[5] J. Rosenthal and P. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun. Control, 2000.
[6] A. Prabhakarm and K. Narayanan, “Pseudo-random construction of low density parity check codes using linear congruential sequences,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 1389–1396, Sep. 2002.
[7] J. Jiang and K. Narayanan, “Iterative soft decoding of Reed Solomon codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 244–246, Apr. 2004.
[8] M. El-Khamy and R. McEliece, “Iterative algebraic soft-decision list decoding of Reed-Solomon Codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 24, pp. 481–490, Mar. 2006.
[9] R. Kötter and A. Vardy, “Algebraic Soft-Decision Decoding of Reed-Solomon Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 2809–2825, Nov. 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BELLORADO et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY SOFT-DECODING ALGORITHMS

967

[10] J. Bellorado and A. Kavc˘ic´, “Low complexity decoding algorithms for Reed Solomon codes: Part I—An algebraic soft-in-hard-out chase decoder,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2009, accepted for publication.
[11] J. Bellorado, “Low-complexity soft decoding algorithms for Reed-Solomon codes.,” Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard Univ., Cambridge, MA, 2006.
[12] D. MacKay, Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms 2003.
[13] M. Sudan, “Decoding of Reed Solomon codes beyond the error-correction bound,” J. Complex., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 180–193, 1997.
[14] J. Jiang and K. Narayanan, “Algebraic soft decision decoding of ReedSolomon codes using bit level soft information,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Computing, Monticello, IL, 2006.
[15] J. Jiang and K. Narayanan, “Iterative soft-input soft-output decoding of Reed-Solomon codes by adapting the parity check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, pp. 3746–3756, Aug. 2006.
[16] W. Jin and M. Fossorier, “Enhanced box and match algorithm for reliability-based soft-decision decoding of linear block codes,” in Proc. Globecom, San Francisco, CA, 2006.

Since 2007, he has been with the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, where he is presently an Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering. Prior to 2007, he was with the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering from 1998 to 2002, and as the John L. Loeb Associate Professor of Natural Sciences from 2002 to 2006. While on leave from Harvard University, he served as a Visiting Associate Professor with the City University of Hong Kong in fall 2005 and as a Visiting Scholar with the Chinese University of Hong Kong in spring 2006.
Prof. Kavc˘ic´ received the IBM Partnership Award in 1999 and the NSF CAREER Award in 2000. He is a corecipient, with X. Ma and N. Varnica, of the 2005 IEEE Best Paper Award in Signal Processing and Coding for Data Storage. He served on the Editorial Board of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY as Associate Editor for Detection and Estimation from 2001 to 2004, as Guest Editor of the IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING MAGAZINE during 2003–2004, and as Guest Editor of the IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS from 2008 to 2009. From 2005 until 2007, he was the Chair of the Data Storage Technical Committee of the IEEE Communications Society.

Jason Bellorado received the Bachelor of Science degree in electrical engineering from the University of Massachusetts, Lowell, in 2000, where he was awarded the Dean’s Medal for the highest academic standing in the James B. Francis College of Engineering. Under the advisement of Professor Aleksandar Kavc˘ic´, he received the Master of Arts and Ph.D. degrees in engineering sciences from the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences (DEAS), Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, in 2001 and 2006, respectively.
In March 2006, he joined Link-A-Media Devices (LAMD) Corporation, a semiconductor startup company, in Santa Clara, CA, which specializes in information storage. He has worked as a systems architect for both hard-disk drives and solid-state drives, and currently holds patents in advanced digital signal processing and signal detection methods, robust signal timing in low-SNR conditions, error control coding techniques, and read-channel optimization procedures which span both fields. He is currently a Senior Manager with LAMD and currently manages a team of both read-channel and validation engineers.
Aleksandar Kavc˘ic´ received the Dipl. Ing. degree in electrical engineering from Ruhr-University, Bochum, Germany, in 1993, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, in 1998.

Marcus Marrow was born in Dublin, Ireland, in 1972. He received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering from University College Dublin in 1994, and the Ph.D. degree in Communications Theory from the University of California, San Diego, under Prof. J. Wolf in June 2004.
From 1994 to 1999, he worked as a Systems Architect and ASIC Design Engineer with Parthus Technologies. He is currently Director of Systems Architecture for HDD read-channel and solid-state storage with Link-A-Media Devices, Santa Clara, CA.
Li Ping (S87-M91-SM06) received the Ph.D. degree at Glasgow University in 1990.
He lectured at Department of Electronic Engineering, Melbourne University, from 1990 to 1992, and worked as a member of research staff at Telecom Australia Research Laboratories from 1993 to 1995. He has been with the Department of Electronic Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, since January 1996, where he is now a professor of information engineering. His research interests are communications systems and coding theory.
Dr. Li Ping received a British Telecom-Royal Society Fellowship in 1986, the IEE J. J. Thomson premium in 1993 and a Croucher Foundation Award in 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

