XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE 
Current Trends on Deep Learning-aided Channel 
Coding  
Tuyet-Mai Dang, Eunyoung Cho, and Sang-Hyo Kim* 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Korea 
*Email: iamshkim@skku.edu
Abstract—Artificial intelligence (AI)-aided approaches are 
emerging in solving physical layer communication problems. In 
this paper, we focus on applications of deep learning (DL) in 
channel coding for wireless communications and provide a 
survey on related topics. We describe various decoding 
problems of short linear codes and LDPC codes assisted by deep 
neural networks. The survey will be concluded with a list of 
future research directions.  
Keywords— AI, machine learning, DL, neural belief 
propagation, channel coding, error-correcting codes, 5G, 6G 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Artificial intelligence has become viral in the modern era 
for its capabilities of processing big data by using machines 
excluding human’s interferences, which potentially shifts the 
world into a new phase of metaverse [1]. Most common 
methods used in AI are from machine learning (ML) 
algorithms in which machines are trained to solely solve 
problems and make decisions by evaluating past experiences 
[2]. The smallest yet top-notch subset of AI, deep learning 
(DL), enables computers to learn mimicking human brains via 
multi-layer networks [3]. Due to remarkable performances, AI 
broadly has its technological touch in nearly every field and 
we are particularly intrigued by the impacts of AI in 
communication system areas. 
In upper layer communication systems, decision-making 
and classification techniques in ML are widely utilized, 
popularly in routing establishment, optimization and cognitive 
radio networks [4] whereas recently, ML featured 
classification method has made a breakthrough in physical 
layers and is expected to replace standard procedures in 
solving central tasks such as reliably transmitting and 
receiving information data over noisy channels. Especially, 
DL methods are primarily used and so far have achieved state-
of-the-art results in signal processing areas [5]. Deep learning 
has gradually become an essential technique in working with 
channel coding problems [6]. The method proposed in [7] 
employs a conventional NN as a pre-processing method to 
solve the problem of detecting a frame syncword. In addition, 
one of the latest and most beneficial applications of DL 
emerged in communication systems relates to channel 
decoding. An NN is designed to generalize message passing 
methods for the decoding of sparse graphical codes. The novel 
scheme is called neural belief propagation (NBP) or weighted 
BP decoder, where the iterative process with fixed numbers of 
iterations is unfolded into a layer-wise structure comparable 
to a neural network [8]. Particularly, the authors in [9] use a 
deep learning-based optimization method to properly tune 
learnable weights assigned onto the edges of the Tanner, 
which mitigates the message dependency issue caused by 
short cycles in the Tanner graph and present promising gains 
over the conventional iterative belief propagation algorithms. 
The resulting NBP procedure with learned parameters brings 
several practical enhancements: (i) NBP decoder via the 
learning process refines the transmitted messages with 
trainable factors so that the final output is closer to the ground 
truth partition function compared to the conventional 
operations. (ii) While preserving many of BP’s properties, 
NBP outperforms the original methods with reduction in 
computational complexity for comparable results [10]. We 
have acknowledged the potentials of DL-aided decoding from 
recent studies. Specifically, the dependency between 
messages has significantly decreased with added learnable 
factors, which hence results in better performances. This 
motivates us to investigate further into deep learning-aided 
channel coding matter in response to superior demands and 
requirements about higher throughputs and lower latency 
from future wireless technologies for beyond-5G and 6G.  
In this survey, we introduce some latest research studies 
about the emerging AI-aided channel coding techniques and 
describe various applications of DL-aided channel decoding. 
The discussion is divided into two main categories: a sparse 
neural decoder which is a non-fully connected structure whose 
nodes in hidden layers represent Tanner graph’s edges in 
iterative decoding specialized for LDPC codes; and a hybrid 
BP-NN decoder, a combination of a standard BP decoder 
accompanied by a trained neural network. Lastly, we will 
propose some ideas for future research directions. 
II. A NEURAL BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODER 
Recent advances in deep learning technologies have 
accomplished impressive performances in physical layer 
communications. Particularly, iterative message-passing 
procedure can be compatibly represented by a deep neural 
network with the number of hidden layers depending on the 
number of decoding iterations. 
A. Iterative belief propagation decoder 
The belief propagation algorithm is an iterative process 
where messages are  passed between the variable nodes (VNs) 
and check nodes (CNs) in a Tanner graph, a graphical 
representation of the parity check matrix (PCM) of the codes 
[11]. Each VN is associated with a codeword bit and a CN 
indicates a parity-check equation. We use 𝑣𝑣 (𝑐𝑐) to denote a 
variable (check) node. 𝐿𝐿𝑣𝑣→𝑐𝑐
(𝑡𝑡)  and 𝐿𝐿𝑐𝑐→𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡)  are messages passed 
from 𝑣𝑣 to 𝑐𝑐 and 𝑐𝑐 to 𝑣𝑣 at iteration 𝑡𝑡, respectively. First, 
𝐿𝐿𝑣𝑣→𝑐𝑐 
(0)
= 𝐿𝐿𝑐𝑐ℎ is initialized with the LLR value calculated as 
𝐿𝐿𝑐𝑐ℎ= 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙(
𝑃𝑃(𝑦𝑦|𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖=0)
𝑃𝑃(𝑦𝑦|𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖=1)), 
 
 (1) 
1222
978-1-6654-9939-2/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
ICTC 2022
2022 13th International Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC) | 978-1-6654-9939-2/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICTC55196.2022.9952535
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:41:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
where 𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖 is the 𝑖𝑖𝑡𝑡ℎ transmitted codeword bit. Then the 
messages are updated iteratively as follows 
𝐿𝐿𝑣𝑣→𝑐𝑐
(𝑡𝑡)
= 𝐿𝐿𝑐𝑐ℎ+ ∑
𝐿𝐿𝑐𝑐′→𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡−1)
𝑐𝑐′∈𝒩𝒩(𝑣𝑣)\𝑐𝑐
, 
 
 (2)  
𝐿𝐿𝑐𝑐→𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡)
= 2 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡ℎ−1 (∏
𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡ℎ
𝐿𝐿𝑣𝑣′→𝑐𝑐
(𝑡𝑡)
2
𝑣𝑣′∈𝒩𝒩(𝑐𝑐)\𝑣𝑣
)ǡ ሺ3)  
where 𝒩𝒩(𝑣𝑣) (𝒩𝒩(𝑐𝑐)) denotes the set of neighboring check 
(variable) nodes of the VN 𝑣𝑣 (CN 𝑐𝑐). The a posteriori LLR of 
a VN 𝑣𝑣, denoted as 𝐿𝐿𝑣𝑣, is expressed as 
𝐿𝐿𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡) = 𝐿𝐿𝑐𝑐ℎ+ ∑
𝐿𝐿𝑐𝑐→𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡−1)
𝑐𝑐∈𝒩𝒩(𝑣𝑣)
. 
 
 (4)  
Finally, the bit value corresponding to the VN 𝑣𝑣 is 
determined by 
𝑏𝑏̂𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡) =
1
2 (1 −𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠(𝐿𝐿𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡))).   
         (5) 
B.  Trellis representation of the Tanner graph 
Nachmani et al. in [9] introduce a parameterized deep 
neural network decoder as a generalization of the BP 
algorithms focusing on short high density parity check 
(HDPC) codes. A trellis whose neurons in hidden layers 
representing the edges of Tanner graph is designed as a non-
fully connected neural network. The neuron connections 
among each layer are equivalent to connections between VNs 
and CNs in the PCM of the codes. Each processing element is 
computed corresponding to (2) and (3), but the variable-to-
check equation in (2) is modified by adding trainable weights 
𝑤𝑤𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡)
 
 and  𝑤𝑤𝑐𝑐′
(𝑡𝑡)
 
 
, which yield: 
𝐿𝐿𝑣𝑣→𝑐𝑐
(𝑡𝑡)
= 𝑤𝑤𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡)
 ∙𝐿𝐿𝑐𝑐ℎ+ ∑
𝑤𝑤𝑐𝑐′
(𝑡𝑡−1) ∙𝐿𝐿𝑐𝑐′→𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡−1)
𝑐𝑐′∈𝒩𝒩(𝑣𝑣)\𝑐𝑐
,Ǥ  
(6) 
The bit-decision is made by using the following soft version 
of (5): 
𝑏𝑏̂𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡) = 𝜎𝜎(𝐿𝐿𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡)).    
 
(7) 
The 
training 
is 
conducted 
with data generated 
corresponding to signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) values and a 
cross-entropy binary loss function. Simulation results 
demonstrate that the novel neural belief propagation 
framework with learned weights notably outperforms the 
conventional BP decoders for short codes. 
C. Recurrent neural network decoder 
The methods in [12] and [13] enhance the procedure in [9] 
by preserving the weights 𝑤𝑤𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡)
 
 and  𝑤𝑤𝑐𝑐′
(𝑡𝑡)
 
 
 values over 
iterations on a recurrent neural network (RNN) framework. In 
addition, normalized min-sum (NMS) decoder, a variant of 
sum-product algorithm, is used with the weight-sharing 
technique. The network architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1. 
This markedly simplifies [9] by reducing the numbers of 
trainable parameters for a comparable result. By using neural 
NMS, the check nodes are updated with a learned parameter 
𝑤𝑤 as 
𝐿𝐿𝑐𝑐→𝑣𝑣
(𝑡𝑡)
= 𝑤𝑤× ∏
𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠(𝐿𝐿𝑣𝑣→𝑐𝑐
(𝑡𝑡) ) ×
𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
𝑣𝑣′∈𝒩𝒩(𝑐𝑐)\𝑣𝑣|𝐿𝐿𝑣𝑣→𝑐𝑐
(𝑡𝑡) |
𝑣𝑣′∈𝒩𝒩(𝑐𝑐)\𝑣𝑣
Ǥ  (8)  
D. NBP in decoding 5G LDPC codes 
Following the footsteps of the novel neural belief 
propagation structures from [9], [12], [13], the authors in [14], 
[15], and [16] present a high-performance learning method to 
decode protograph LDPC codes, defined by a small base code 
[17]. Since the 5G NR systems adopted protograph LDPC 
codes, many researchers in digital communication areas have 
been intrigued to search for an appropriate method to utilize 
this special structure.   
All of these above methods use neural normalized-offset 
MS (NOMS) decoder which is trained with the same learnable 
parameters shared among the edges associated with the same 
edge in the base code (i.e., owning the same original structure 
properties). Particularly, parameter-sharing mechanism is 
applied in both [14] and [15] to reduce the number of learnable 
parameters but with a difference in graphical representation. 
The authors in [14] use a many-to-one RNN structure whereas 
a Tanner-based NN is processed in [15]. Moreover, residual 
connections are too added to the NN in order to shortcut to 
variable layer outputs and avoid gradient vanishing problems. 
The NN models in [14] and [15] are extensively trained with 
the same base code whose lengths and rates are various for 
generalizing the ability of one well-developed neural decoder 
to multiple codelengths and code rates.  
Nonetheless, while the procedures in [14] and [15] are 
implemented under parallel (flooding) decoding schedule, the 
neural NOMS framework proposed in [16] has the model 
parameters trained in the layered decoding schedule. The 
simulation results is reported to surpass the standard layered 
BP decoding.  
III. A POSTPROCESSING BP-NN DECODER 
A. An iterative BP-CNN architecture 
In [18],  a novel receiver architecture that concatenates a 
standard BP decoder with a CNN is designed to tackle poor 
decoding performances when correlation exists in channel 
noise. A common way to approach correlated channel noise 
issue is to whiten the colored noise or estimate the noise 
distribution and then use the estimated joint distribution to 
build an optimal decoder. However, optimizing the BP 
decoder with a joint noise distribution results in high 
computational complexity and insufficiency when the 
codelength is long or the correlation is strong. Instead, taking 
advantages of CNN’s remarkable attainments in image 
denoising and super-resolution, a CNN denoiser is added after 
the BP decoding process in order to resolve the correlated 
noise issues and generate a more favorable input for BP 
decoder. 
 
 
   
Fig. 1. Recurrent Neural Network Architecture with unfold N 
which corresponds to N full BP iterations used in [12], [13].  
1223
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:41:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TABLE I. SUMMARY OF PAPERS REVIEWED IN THE SURVEY 
 
More specific, after BP decoder, estimated channel noise 
is obtained by subtracting the estimated transmit symbols 
from the received symbols. CNN then decorrelates the noise 
via training, which is then subtracted from the received signal 
in order to provide a more reliable input to the next round of 
the decoding process. The procedure iteratively operates 
between BP decoder and CNN to gain desired outcomes. It 
was shown that with the aid of the CNN denoiser, the 
decoding performance is improved by approximately 3.5 dB 
at BER = 10−4 under strong correlation case and with lower 
complexity. 
B. NN-aided impulsive purturbation decoding 
The role of NN is differently exploited to serve the 
purpose of pattern recognition in [19]. The authors design an 
NN-aided perturbation search algorithm to overcome the 
finite length problems of short LDPC codes and train the NN 
to find good symbols to perturb for better decoding 
performance. The model is effectively specialized to raptor-
like (RL) LDPC codes, a special-structured codes containing 
degree-1 variable nodes. From successful impulsive 
perturbation decoding, several patterns are learned via NN 
training and weighted loss for better perturbation symbol 
selections. The result presents a significant improvement in 
terms of lower decoding complexity and less perturbation 
rounds compared to the conventional schemes. 
These works mentioned above are the most recent 
proposals 
of 
deep 
learning-based 
channel 
coding. 
Specifications and contributions of papers in this survey are 
summarized in Table I.   
IV. FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 
Numerous studies have been conducted to enhance the 
effectiveness of NNs in replacing signal processing tasks [20], 
especially the proposal of model-driven NNs in [21]  
dramatically thrives as an alternative method in solving 
communication system problems. Even though the idea has 
been around and achieved certain accomplishments, there are 
still many open rooms to be explored. In  
 
this section, we will outline some potential suggestions for 
future works.  
A. Suitable training dataset generation 
Deep 
learning 
methods 
are 
data-consumers 
and 
programmed mainly on input and output pairs. Hence, finding 
useful data is a key to a well-developed NN [22]. Unlike 
common problems in computer vision areas, in channel 
coding, data is synthetically generated grounded in SNR 
values. To obtain a robust NN model, a suitable training 
dataset under various SNR ranges should be established. 
Some preliminary works already focused on this matter. For 
example, in [23], the authors use a parameter adapter network 
(PAN) learning the relation between SNR and optimal 
weighted BP parameters to make learnable parameters SNR-
adaptive and reduce the storage of resulting weights when 
channel conditions are changed. However, it still remains 
uncertainty what the best dataset should be used to attain 
optimal training results. Therefore, it is deserved to have 
more studies on the matter with the consideration of the active 
learning method.   
B. Expansion on the NN-aided impulsive perturbation 
decoding from [19] 
The authors exploit DL techniques as a postprocessing 
method to recognize perturbation patterns that most 
potentially lead to a successful decoding performance. 
However, only one-bit perturbation is consider in the study. It 
would be beneficial to employ a direct neural network-based 
channel decoder for both decoding and pattern detection 
purposes and the prospect can be expanded to multi-bit 
perturbation.  
C.  Hardware-friendly implementation 
A perspective on hardware implementation for NBP 
decoder is worth taking into considerations since it mainly 
resembles the BP algorithms for which efficient hardware 
architecture is already available. However, in practical 
DNN model 
Codes 
Methods and Contributions 
Survey papers 
A sparse neural 
network for 
short codes and 
5G-NR LDPC 
codes 
BCH (63, 36), BCH 
(63, 45), and BCH 
(127, 106) 
• 
Designed an alternative graphical representation to BP algorithm 
• 
Assigned learnable weights to the edges of Tanner graph 
• 
Reduced message dependency caused by short cycles in Tanner graph with weighted 
BP decoder 
[9] 
BCH (63, 36) code 
• 
Shared parameters of the decoder across iterations in a recurrent neural network  
• 
Applied neural min-sum decoder with tied weights to reduce memory storage 
• 
Optimized relaxation factor to improve the convergence behavior of the NBP decoder 
[12], [13] 
(150, 30) and (800, 
600) BG2 
• 
Shared the same parameters among a bundle of edges derived from the same base code 
• 
Made more memory-efficient for the practical implementations 
[14] 
5G LDPC code 
(𝐾𝐾𝑏𝑏= 6, 𝑘𝑘=
120), code rate 1/5 
• 
Used single weight per circulant matrix in regarding to the quasi-cyclic nature of 5G 
LDPC codes to reduce the numbers of trainable parameters 
• 
Applied residual connection to the NN to resolve the vanishing gradient problem 
[15] 
(2600, 520) BG2 
LDPC codes 
• 
Used DNN implementing the layered decoding that learns the scaling factors of the 
normalized offset min-sum scheme 
• 
Upgraded the performance of NOMS in the layered decoding schedule 
[16] 
Postprocessing 
BP-NN decoder 
(576, 432) LDPC 
codes 
• 
Added denoising CNN to tackle the noise correlation in the receive signal 
• 
Improve performance of the conventional BP decoder in a correlated noisy channel 
[18] 
(104, 20) RL LDPC 
code with CRC-8 
• 
Built a neural network concatenated with a normalized min-sum decoder 
• 
Proposed deep-learning aided perturbation method which outperforms the existing 
criteria for raptor-like structure 
[19] 
1224
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:41:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
applications, NBP decoding likely causes exponential 
growing complexity which results in high hardware cost. As 
such, a hardware-friendly implementation for the NBP 
decoder is desirable. The pruning method where some of 
trainable weights are reset can be a potential approach in this 
direction but more studied is needed.      
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This work was supported by Institute of Information & 
communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) 
grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No.2021-0-
00746, Development of Tbps wireless communication 
technology). 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  H. -J. Jeon, H. -C. Youn, S. -M. Ko, and T. -H. Kim, "Blockchain and 
AI meet in the Metaverse," in Advances in the Convergence of 
Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence , 2022.  
[2]  El Naqa, I., Murphy, M.J., "What Is Machine Learning?," In: El Naqa, 
I., Li, R., Murphy, M. (eds) Machine Learning in Radiation Oncology. 
Springer, 
Cham, 
2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-18305-3_1. 
[3]  J. Patterson and A. Gibson, Deep Learning: A Practitioner's Approach, 
Sebastopol, CA, USA: O'Reilly Media, 2017.  
[4]  M. Bkassiny, Y. Li and S. K. Jayaweera, "A Survey on Machine-
Learning Techniques in Cognitive Radios," IEEE Commun. Surveys 
& Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1136-1159, Third Quarter 2013.  
[5]  H. Huang et al., "Deep Learning for Physical-Layer 5G Wireless 
Techniques: Opportunities, Challenges and Solutions," IEEE Wireless 
Commun., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 214-222, February 2020.  
[6]  A. Balatsoukas-Stimming and C. Studer, "Deep Unfolding for 
Communications Systems: A Survey and Some New Directions," in 
IEEE Int. Workshop on Sig. Proc. Sys. (SiPS), 2019.  
[7]  J. M. Song, Y. -S. Kil and S. -H. Kim, "Blind Frame Syncword 
Detection Using Deep Neural Networks with Input Linear Filtering," 
in 019 Int. Conf. on Inf. and Commun. Tech. Converg. (ICTC), 2019.  
[8]  J. R. Hershey, J. Le Roux and F. Weninger, "Deep Unfolding: Model-
Based Inspiration of Novel Deep Architectures," November 2014. 
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.2574. 
[9]  E. Nachmani, Y. Be'ery, D. Burshtein, "Learning to Decode Linear 
Codes Using Deep Learning," in 54th Annu. Allerton Conf. on 
Commun. Con., and Comput., 2016.  
[10] J. Kuck et al., "Belief Propagation Neural Networks," in 34th Conf. on 
Neural Inf. Proc. Sys. (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada, 2020.  
[11] R. M. Tanner, "A recursive approach to low complexity codes," IEEE 
Trans. Inf. Theory, Vols. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 399-431, Sep. 1981.  
[12] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, 
Y.Be'ery, "Deep Learning Methods for Improved Decoding of Linear 
Codes," IEEE Jour. of Sel. Topics in Sig. Proc., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119-
131, February 2018.  
[13] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, D. Burshtein and Y.Be'er, "RNN decoding 
of linear block codes," February 2017. [Online]. Available: 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.07560. 
[14] J. Dai et al., "Learning to Decode Protograph LDPC Codes," IEEE 
Jour. on Sel. Areas in Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1983-1999, July 
2021.  
[15] K. Andreev, A. Frolov, G. Svistunov, K. Wu and J. Liang, "Deep 
Neurnal Network Based Decoding of Short 5G LDPC Codes," 2021 
XVII Int. Symp. "Problems of Redundancy in Inf. and Con. Sys." 
(REDUNDANCY), pp. 155-160, 2021.  
[16] N. Shah and Y. Vasavada, "Neural Layered Decoding of 5G LDPC 
Codes," IEEE Commun. Letters, vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 3590-3593, 
November 2021.  
[17] J. Thorpe, "Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from 
protographs IPN Progress Rep. 42-154," JPL, Aug. 2003. 
[18] F. Liang, C. Shen and F. Wu, "An Iterative BP-CNN Architecture for 
Channel Decoding," IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 93-
99, April 2019.  
[19] H. Lee, Y. -S. Kil, M. Y. Chung, and S. -H. Kim, "Neural Network 
Aided Impulsive Perturbation Decoding for Short Raptor-Like LDPC 
Codes," IEEE Commun. Letters, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 268-272, February 
2022.  
[20] T. O'Shea and J. Hoydis, "An Introduction to Deep Learning for the 
Physical Layer," IEEE Trans. on Cog. Commun. and Net., vol. 3, no. 
4, pp. 563-575, December 2017.  
[21] H. He, S. Jin, C. -K. Wen, F. Gao, G. Y. Li and Z. Xu, "Model-Driven 
Deep Learning for Physical Layer Communications," IEEE Wireless 
Commun., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 77-83, October 2019.  
[22] Shanker, M., Hu, M. Y., & Hung, M. S., "Effect of data 
standardization on neural network training," in Omega, 1996, pp. 385-
397. 
[23] M. Lian, F. Carpi, C. Hager and H. D. Pfister, "Leanred Belief-
Propagation Decoding with Simple Scaling and SNR Adaption"," 
IEEE Int. Symp. on Inf. Theory (ISIT), pp. 161-165, 2019.  
[24] A. Buchberger, C. Häger, H. D. Pfister, L. Schmalen and A. G. i. 
Amat, "Learned Decimation for Neural Belief Propagation Decoders 
: Invited Paper," Proc. ICASSP 2021 - 2021 IEEE Int. Conf. on 
Acoustics, Speech and Sig. Proc. (ICASSP), pp. 8273-8277, June 
2021.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1225
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:41:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
