2022 International Conference on Electrical Engineering and Photonics (EExPolytech) | 978-1-6654-9030-6/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/EEXPOLYTECH56308.2022.9950957

Detecting Minimum Distance of LDPC Codes with
Improved Approximately Nearest Codeword
Method
Zhewei Tong1, Kewu Peng2, Zhitong He3 Department of Electronic Engineering, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
Tsinghua University, Beijing, P. R. China 2Peng Cheng Laboratory,
Shenzhen, China 1tzw19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, 2pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn, 3hezt20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract—Approximately nearest codeword (ANC) is a classic approach for detecting minimum distance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. With the principle of local search, ANC method is capable of detecting minimum distance of LDPC codes within acceptable time. However, the message passing (MP) decoding algorithm and scheduling scheme, as well as the local search strategy, still have much space to improve. To fill the gap, this paper proposes an improved-ANC method which employs novel noise introduction method, decoding algorithm, scheduling scheme and searching strategy, to accelerate the computation of the minimum distance of LDPC codes significantly. Finally, we run simulations on LDPC codes in WiFi5 and 5G-NR standards. The simulation results are presented and demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposal.
Keywords—low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, minimum distance, Hamming weight, approximately nearest codeword (ANC), message passing (MP) algorithm
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes were introduced by R. G. Gallager in 1962 [1]. As a group of binary linear block codes, and in its broader-sense definition error correcting codes, LDPC codes help recover the original message from the message that has been corrupted by the noisy channel [2]. With sparse parity-check matrix (PCM) and iterative decoding algorithm applied, performance of LDPC codes could closely approach Shannon limit [2].
For binary linear codes, the minimum distance determines their error correction capability [3], which is directly related to the decoding performance, especially at error floor region. Vardy proved that minimum distance (MinDist) problem is an NP-hard problem [4]. Therefore, the Approximately Nearest Codeword (ANC) method, which applies local search strategy, is introduced to lower the complexity of MinDist problem [3].
Considering the fact that the size of codeword space grows exponentially as code length increases, any attempt to implement exhaustive search to obtain minimum distance is barely possible in practice. The idea of ANC method is that local search, which only investigates a small portion of codewords with lower Hamming weight, is intuitively a more efficient way to detect minimum distance.
Despite the success of local search principle of ANC method, the efficiency still needs improvement. To this end, we propose an improved-ANC method. By simplifying the introduction of perturbing noise, employing the low-
This work was supported by the funding under the contract number of PCL2021A10.

complexity decoding algorithm and efficient scheduling scheme for original ANC decoder, and optimizing the local search strategy to expand the search range in codeword space, we achieve a more efficient and robust method of detecting minimum distance of a given LDPC code.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces background and notation we use throughout this paper. In section III, we propose improvedANC method which detects minimum distance of LDPC codes faster and more robustly. Section IV presents simulation results for LDPC codes in 5G-NR and Wi-Fi standards and section V concludes the paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES AND NOTATION
A binary , linear code is a set of codewords with length that comprises message bits and = − check bits. It can be uniquely defined by a × parity-check matrix (PCM), denoted as H. To help illustrate the message passing behavior in iterative decoding process, Tanner graph could be introduced. Each column of PCM corresponds to a variable node (VN) while each row corresponds to a check node (CN) in Tanner graph. Each non-zero element corresponds to an edge connecting a VN and a CN.
Message Passing (MP) algorithm is an iterative decoding algorithm that operates on Tanner graph, which is a bipartite graph, messages are transmitted between VNs and CNs along the edges in MP decoder [5]. LDPC codes have sparse PCMs, corresponding to sparse edges in Tanner graph. Therefore, message passing between VNs and CNs can be very effective.
Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm, as an important subclass of MP algorithm, is widely used as decoding algorithm for LDPC code. The messages transmitted in BP decoder are probabilities. In a BP decoder, each CN or VN is an operation unit (abbreviated as CNU and VNU, respectively). In each row operation, a CNU passes probability message from CN to all adjacent VNs. Similarly, a VNU passes probability message from VN to all adjacent CNs in each column operation.
Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA), also known as Log Belief Propagation (Log-BP) algorithm, is adopted in original ANC pipeline. The messages transmitted in SPA are log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of every CNs and VNs [6]. In a row operation, the i-th CNU receives LLR vector from its adjacent VNUs and processes them with:

978-1-6654-9030-6/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE

139

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:38:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=

,

∈/

⋅!⎛$ ! % ⎝∈

, % ⎞, 1 ⎠

where

) ! ) = − log -tanh 2245 2

and

represents the extrinsic message passed from the i-

th CNU to the j-th VNU in the k-th iteration.

,

represents the extrinsic messages passed from the j-th VNU to

the i-th CNU in the − 1 -th iteration. 6 / is the set of order

number of adjacent VNUs of the i-th CNU.

In a column operation, the j-th VNU receives LLR vector from its adjacent CNUs and processes them with:

= 7 8$
∈9 /

, ,3

where

represents the extrinsic message passed from

the j-th VNU to the i-th CNU in the k-th iteration. 7

represents the a priori message of the j-th bit from the channel. ; / is the set of labels of adjacent CNUs of the j-th VNU.

Without performing hard decision, the output of the SPA decoder at the end of each iteration is a LLR vector revealing reliability information. Bits with higher absolute LLR value are more reliable. In ANC decoder, the positions of bits are permuted based on reliability information obtained from SPA decoder. A matrix < is derived from the column permutation of PCM <, based on reliability rank of corresponding nodes. The least reliable bits are shifted to the left in matrix < .

Then, semi-Gaussian elimination is performed on < and
thus we obtain the rank of matrix < , denoted as >? . We select an appropriate number of nodes to perform traversal
search in ANC decoder, denoted as >@. The value of >@ is normally 6~10 for traversal search in original ANC decoder. The number of cases to full search is 2AB . Too large >@ will cause the time complexity to explode, while too small >@ will limit search range in the codeword space. These >? 8 >@ least reliable nodes are called erasures altogether. Apart from
erasures, the remaining − >? − >@ nodes will be determined by hard decision, since they are the most reliable
ones. With erasures undetermined, ANC decoder tries all the
combinations of >@ erasures corresponding to the dependent columns.

The pipeline of ANC method is shown in Fig. 1. There are 5 major steps in ANC method:

i. Add perturbing noise on all-zero codeword C and obtain noise-corrupted codeword X.

ii. Obtain the LLR vector of codeword X, then transmit the LLR vector to the input of the SPA decoder.

iii. Obtain LLR vector Y as the output of the SPA decoder at each iteration step.

iv. Transmit Y to the ANC decoder and obtain a set of codewords Z as the output.

v. Compute the Hamming weight of every codewords in the set Z and update the minimum Hamming weight.
Fig. 1. Pipeline of ANC method
As a remark, in practice, ANC approaches transform the problem of MinDist computation into minimum Hamming weight detection. The logic is that, there is a high probability that the Hamming weight of the nearest non-zero codeword will reveal information on the minimum distance [3].
III. IMPROVED APPROXIMATELY NEAREST CODEWORD METHOD
Based on the ANC method described in Section II, we propose improved approximately nearest codeword (improved-ANC) method, which accelerates and simplifies the original ANC method in the following aspects:
A. Perturbing Noise In traditional ANC method, perturbing noise is introduced
as additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) or error impulse. Either way requires operating on the vector obtained from modulation, which is of high time complexity in simulation processes.
Recognizing that, we introduce perturbing noise by simply operating on LLR vector in improved-ANC method. Assuming that the initial LLR vector for all-zero codeword is 1,1,1, ⋯ ,1 , we implement sign flipping on a single bit for every iteration. When performing sign flipping on i-th bit, the received noise-corrupted LLR vector is 1,1, ⋯ ,1,1 − D , 1, ⋯ ,1 , where D E 1 such that the LLR of i-th bit is a negative value. We control noise energy by tuning the difference of the updated and original LLR. Through the tuning process, the noise energy is strong enough to bring the decoding result away from all-zero codeword and meanwhile being minimized so that noise-corrupted vector is decoded marginally away from the all-zero codeword.
B. Decoding Algorithm Equation (1) shows how the row operation is performed.
It is worth noting that the CNU needs to compute with hyperbolic tangent function, which is of high complexity for the decoder.
Recognizing that, we propose Min-Sum decoding Algorithm (MSA) as a suboptimal iterative decoding algorithm to implement in the improved-ANC method [7]. In each row operation, instead of computing with hyperbolic tangent function, CNU in MSA decoder computes with signum function and minimal function. The updating of extrinsic messages to be transmitted from CNU to adjacent VNUs are simply:

140
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:38:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

=
∈/

, ⋅ min %

,% 4

Although with performance degradation of MSA compared with SPA, bit-error propagation is faster in MSA decoder, which makes it better for minimum Hamming weight detection. Meanwhile, MSA significantly accelerates every row operation, and further accelerates the whole decoding process.

C. Scheduling
Scheduling scheme determines how row operations and column operations are organized sequentially in a single iterative loop. Both original SPA and MSA adopt floodingscheduling. In every iteration, all VNUs operate once and then all CNUs operate once. The flooding-scheduling is easy to describe and implement, but messages received by a CNU are not able to participate in the following operations right after they are being computed. Vice versa, a VNU is not able to transmit messages to or receive messages from adjacent CNUs instantly. Clearly, flooding-scheduling is not the most efficient scheduling scheme.

Recognizing that, we implement layered-scheduling scheme in improved-ANC method. First proposed in [8], layered-scheduling splits PCM into submatrices to shuffle the operation order of CNUs and VNUs by layers. Layeredscheduling significantly improves the efficiency of message passing. Simulation results in [5] show that the average number of iterations can be reduced by 50% by using layeredscheduling, compared to original flooding-scheduling scheme.

The most widely used layered-scheduling method for QCLDPC codes is to regard each row of the base graph as a layer [8]. In this scheme, the maximum column weight in each layer is 1, which facilitates the implementing parallelization at hardware level. More complex scheduling schemes are brought forward. For instance, [9] proposed interlaced column-row scheduling scheme. In our improved-ANC method, we use layered-scheduling scheme proposed in [8]. In a single iterative loop, each CNU performs row operation once followed by every adjacent VNUs performing column operations once.

Based on what we propose in subsections B and C, there are 4 steps involved in an iterative process of MSA decoder with layered-scheduling scheme in improved-ANC method:

i. Initialization: Set a maximum number of iterations > I?J. Perform column operation once for all VNUs with:

=7 5

where the initial message 7 is LLR vector from the noise-

corrupted channel in the first iteration. For IL ≥ 2

iteration, the initial vector 7 is the output vector from the

− 1 -th iteration

. Shuffle the order of CNUs

1~m. Let N increases from 1 to .

ii. Row operation: Update the extrinsic message of the i-th CNU with equation (4).

iii. Column operations: Update the extrinsic messages of all the VNUs that are adjacent to i-th CNU with equation (3).

iv. Perform ii and iii recurrently until each CNU finishes row operation once N = . Update the received LLR as:

= 7 8$
∈9

,6

which is the output of the MSA decoder for a single iteration.

D. Non-Traversal Search Strategy
The idea of ANC decoder is to conduct local search near all-zero codeword. Based on this principle, bits with highest reliability are settled by hard decision, bits with moderate reliability are then searched exhaustively and bits with least reliability are solved by simple back substitution. However, given the fact that the codewords we search are very much likely to have small Hamming weight, generally, there is few non-zero elements among the >@ erasures with moderate reliability. Therefore, traversal search of >@ erasures corresponding to dependent columns are not efficient. This process will contain many codewords with large Hamming weight and maybe far away from all-zero codeword.
Recognizing that, we propose a non-traversal search scheme among >@ erasures in improved-ANC method. In our scheme, we only search codewords with bit error numbers no larger than >@PQQ . This method significantly reduces the number of cases to search from original 2AB to R>>@P@QQS. With lower complexity, we enlarge the number >@ to fit the code length. For longer codewords, we set larger >@ and smaller >@PQQ to expand the range to search in codeword space.
E. Post-processing
Finally, we perform post-processing according to the properties of the LDPC codes we use. For instance, widelyused LDPC codes of both 5G-NR and Wi-Fi5 standards are quasi-cyclic. For each legal codeword we collect, all quasicyclic shifted codewords are legal with the same Hamming weight. Regarding that, we mark these codes and reduce repetitive computation for up to T times, where T is the lifting factor for QC-LDPC codes.
Apart from quasi-cyclic property, there are punctured nodes in the LDPC code of 5G-NR standard [10]. When postprocessing 5G-NR LDPC code with improved-ANC method, we detect minimum Hamming weight of legal codewords we collect from improved-ANC decoder both with and without considering punctured nodes.
By performing post-processing with the consideration of characteristics of widely-used LDPC code standards, we further reduce time complexity while expand searching range to improve the searching efficiency of the improved-ANC algorithm.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
With the consideration of the QC-LDPC code in Wi-Fi5 standard used for simulation, the parameters are set as follows. The lifting factor T = 54, the size of proto-matrix U × U is 12 × 24. Therefore, the size of PCM × is 648 × 1296. Maximum number of iterations is set as > I?J = 10, since our improved-ANC method allows the decoding results to converge quickly. The number of erasures to perform nontraversal search >@ is set as 81, and >@PQQ is set as 1. The proto-matrix of this LDPC code is displayed in Fig. 2.

141
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:38:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. Each zero element will be lifted as an all-zero T × T matrix in PCM, while each non-zero element will be lifted as cyclic shift of T × T identity matrix with the offset address equal to − 1.
The LDPC code of Wi-Fi5 standard has dual diagonal structure in its proto-matrix. Without punctured nodes, we compute its minimum Hamming weight with improved-ANC method. The result is shown in Fig. 3. We demonstrate the number of codewords with the minimum Hamming weight 23, and those with Hamming weight ranging from 23 to 27.

We introduce an equivalent method to add noise directly on the input LLR vector. Instead of the SPA decoder used in original ANC method, we adopt MSA decoder and implement layered-scheduling scheme, which makes the message passing process more efficient. For local search in ANC decoder, we propose a non-traversal searching strategy which lowers the complexity and expands the searching range simultaneously. Finally, we do simulations on LDPC codes in both Wi-Fi5 and 5G-NR standards, for which we perform some postprocessing strategies based on the structural characteristics.

Fig. 3. Simulation results for LDPC code in Wi-Fi5 standard
The process of detecting the minimum distance of this LDPC code in Wi-Fi5 standard takes only several minutes with our improved-ANC method, while it might take up to hours with original ANC method.
For the LDPC code in 5G-NR standard, the parameters are set as follows. The lifting factor T = 13, the size of protomatrix U × U is 5 × 11. Maximum number of iterations is also set as > I?J = 10. The number of erasures to perform non-traversal search >@ is set as 8, and >@PQQ is set as 2. The punctured bits are the first two columns of proto-matrix. We obtain minimum Hamming weight of the LDPC code, both before and post puncture. Fig. 4 shows that the minimum Hamming weight before puncture is 6 and post puncture is 5.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose an improved-ANC method. Based on the principle of ANC method, we lower the complexity of detecting minimum distance of LDPC codes.

Fig. 4. Simulation results for LDPC code in 5G-NR standard
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, "Low-density parity-check codes," in IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, January 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices," in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399-431, March 1999.
[3] Xiao-Yu Hu, M. P. C. Fossorier and E. Eleftheriou, "On the computation of the minimum distance of low-density parity-check codes," 2004 IEEE International Conference on Communications (IEEE Cat. No.04CH37577), 2004, pp. 767-771 Vol.2.
[4] A. Vardy, "The intractability of computing the minimum distance of a code," in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1757-1766, Nov. 1997.
[5] F. Li et al., "Review on 5G NR LDPC Code: Recommendations for DTTB System," in IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 155413-155424, 2021.
[6] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey and H. . -A. Loeliger, "Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm," in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498-519, Feb 2001.
[7] Y. Cao, "An improved LDPC decoding algorithm based on min-sum algorithm," 2011 11th International Symposium on Communications & Information Technologies (ISCIT), 2011.
[8] D. E. Hocevar, "A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes," IEEE Workshop onSignal Processing Systems, 2004. SIPS 2004., 2004, pp. 107-112.
[9] S. Usman, M. M. Mansour and A. Chehab, "Interlaced Column-Row Message-Passing Schedule for Decoding LDPC Codes," 2016 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2016, pp. 1-6.
[10] S. V. S. Ranganathan, D. Divsalar and R. D. Wesel, "Quasi-Cyclic Protograph-Based Raptor-Like LDPC Codes for Short BlockLengths," in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 3758-3777, June 2019.

142
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:38:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

