2022 29th IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Circuits and Systems (ICECS) | 978-1-6654-8823-5/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICECS202256217.2022.9970908 24 × (1 − R) m−1

An Improved Codec Design Architecture for Irregular LDPC Codes Applicable to WiMAX

Divita Shri, Arijit Mondal and Shayan Srinivasa Garani Email: {divitashri, arijit, shayangs}@iisc.ac.in
Department of Electronic Systems Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru: 560012

Abstract—We propose the design architecture of the Lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) encoder and decoder based on the WiMAX standard (IEEE 802.16e). The design architectures were implemented on a Kintex-7 KC705 field-programmable gate array (FPGA) kit, for a rate 1/2 WiMAX LDPC code with a code length of 2304, containing twelve layers in the parity check matrix. A new null bypassing logic for irregular LDPC decoder is proposed. The tool reported a total power of 0.677 W for encoder with a throughput of 364 Gbps. The tool reported a total power of 1.009 W for the decoder with a throughput of 0.0785 Gbps (78.5 Mbps) for five iterations. Our architecture is also amenable for constructing non-binary LDPC codes where each bit of the non-binary code is binary coded and interleaved, useful for applications in optical transmission channels. Our architecture is also scalable for a wide range of quasi-cyclic code parameters.
Index Terms—WiMAX, Low-Density Parity-Check codes, LDPC encoders/decoders, layered min-sum (MSA) algorithm, FPGA implementation, interleaving.
I. INTRODUCTION LDPC codes are efficient error-correcting codes approaching the Shannon limit for large block lengths [1]-[3]. They possess excellent error correction capability, low decoding complexity, and are amenable to parallel hardware realization. Belief propagation algorithm or sum-product algorithm is used for decoding of LDPC codes. The min-sum algorithm (MSA) having simplified approximate check node unit operations is practically used in almost all digital circuit implementations as an alternative to the sum-product algorithm. There are two types of MSA based architectures for LDPC decoders, namely layered [4][5] and non-layered MSA [5]. The non-layered architecture processes the block rows in parallel and is thus area intensive, but offers higher throughput. On the other hand, the layered architecture processes the block rows serially; hence, has a low throughput but occupies lesser hardware resources. Layered MSA also offers faster convergence, thereby better SNR performance. LDPC codes are a part of many standards like WiMAX (Worldwide interoperability for microwave access) (IEEE 802.16e), WiFi (802.11n). LDPC codes are also widely used in data storage systems hard disks, optical disks, and solidstate devices. WiMAX standard typically works below the 10 km range and uses LDPC codes. LDPC codes adopted by the WiMAX standard supports 19 codeword sizes with 4 distinct rates. The decoders for LDPC codes are generally implemented on application specific integrated circuit (ASICs). In this paper, we implement the encoding architecture based on the algorithm proposed by Richardson and Urbanke (RU)

[6]. The decoding architecture is based on the layered MSA [4][5]. The WiMAX LDPC code (used for demonstration of the proposed encoder and decoder, Fig. 1 in [8]) has a code rate 1/2 and block length of 2304, over 12 blocks of parity check layers. Further, the WiMAX code is irregular and has blocks of null matrices, requiring appropriate control logic for building such decoders. The design of the control logic for bypassing the nulls in the irregular parity-check matrices was one of the main challenges addressed in this paper. Further, an interleaved LDPC system architecture is also proposed towards non-binary realizations. Our architecture is 3 times more efficient than the architecture proposed in [11] in terms of overall areathroughput trade-off.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II deals with the algorithms and architectures of the encoder and decoder followed by discussions on the non-binary architecture using interleaved binary LDPC codes so that the hardware can be reused. The hardware implementation results are summarized in Section III, along with comparisons with other relevant works, followed by conclusions in Section IV.
II. ENCODING AND DECODING ARCHITECTURES A. Encoder

24 × R

1

m−1

A

B

T

C

D

E

1

24

Fig. 1. WiMAX standard-based LDPC parity-check matrix [9].
The encoder for the WiMAX LDPC code is based on the two-step parity check computation approach proposed in [6] based on Gaussian elimination. The parity check matrix is divided into 6 block matrices. Fig. 1 shows the structure of WiMAX standard parity check matrix, where
• m × n is the size of the matrix, • R is the rate, • A is (m − 1) × (24 × R) matrix, • B is (m − 1) × 1 vector, • T is (m − 1) × (m − 1) matrix, • C is 1 × (24 × R) vector, • D is 1 × 1 element, • E is 1 × (m − 1) vector.
From the RU encoding algorithm [6], we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:38:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

po = D + ET−1B −1 C + ET−1A u ,

(1)

p1 = T−1 Au + Bpo ,

(2)

where po is the first part of the parity bits with one z bit vector, p1 is the second part of parity bits with m − 1 z-bit vectors, u is the original message. The final encoded message is [u po p1].

R E G I index1 S T E R

Stage 1 R

addra

E

BRAM

G

douta

I

S
information bits T

E

R

Stage 2 R
E po gen
G
I
S
p1 partial T E
R

Stage 3 p1 gen
concatenation [u po p1] encoded message

Stage 4 R
index2
E addra

G

BRAM

I

din

douta S

T

E

R

R E G I S T E R
clk

Fig. 2. Pipelined encoder architecture for WiMAX LDPC codes.

Fig. 2 shows the pipelined architecture of the encoder.
Stage 1 consists of a block random access memory (BRAM)
that is used for storing the information u. Stage 2 consists
of the blocks po_gen and p1_partial. po_gen performs the operation stated in equation (1) and p1_partial performs the operation T−1Au as stated in equation (2). Stage 3 consists
of the blocks p1_gen and concatenation blocks. p1_gen is used for performing the operation p1_partial + T−1Bpo and concatenation block performs the concatenation of u, po and p1. The encoded message (codeword) is produced at the end of Stage 3 which is then stored in the BRAM. For po_gen, D + ET−1B −1 C + ET−1A is pre-calculated on software
and then the XOR-ing is performed with the information bits u on the hardware. Similarly, for p1, T−1A and T−1B are precalculated, and then XOR-ing is performed on the hardware
with the information u and po, respectively. The novelty lies in the pipelined architecture. One can use on-the-fly encoders
as in [7], but our encoder is specific to WiMAX. B. Decoder
1) Layered MSA: Let the expanded parity-check matrix
for WiMAX LDPC code be of size mz × nz, where z is the parallelism. Let ci be the ith bit of the codeword and yi be the value received from the channel. Let k denote the iteration
number and l denote the layer number. • Let L(ci) be the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) for ith variable node.

L(ci) = log

P r(ci = 0/yi) P r(ci = 1/yi)

,

(3)

• Let L(qi(jk,l)) be the message from ith variable node to jth check node in the kth iteration and lth layer.
• Let L(rj(ki ,l)) be the message from jth check node to ith variable node in the kth iteration and lth layer.

L(rj(ki ,l))

=

γ

·

αi(′kj,l)
i′∈Vj \i

·

min
i′∈Vj \i

βi(′kj,l)

,

(4)

where αi(jk,l) = sign L(qi(jk,l)) , βi(jk,l) = |L(qi(jk,l))|, and γ is scaling factor between 0 and 1. • Let L(Q(ik,l)) be the a posteriori LLR for ith variable node in the kth iteration and lth layer.
The steps in the layered MSA can be summarized as shown
in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Layered MSA [4]
Initialize L(Qi(1,1)) = L(ci), L(rj(0i,l)) = 0, For iteration k = 1 to kmax,
For layer l = 1 to m, Update L(qi(jk,l)) = L(Q(ik,l)) − L(rj(ki −1,l)), where check node j is connected to ith variable node in layer l. Update L(rj(ki ,l)) by equation (4), Update L(Qi(k,l)) = L(qi(jk,l)) + L(rj(ki ,l)), where check node j is connected to ith variable node in layer l.
end loop,

cˆi =

1, 0,

if L(Qi(k,m)) > 0 otherwise

(5)

end loop.

if cˆiHT = 0 then break,

2) Performance Evaluation: In hardware, the LLRs need to be stored using a finite number of bits, leading to a trade-off between area and accuracy. A SNR performance degradation of 0.5 dB was observed for 5-bit quantized LDPC decoder compared the to non-quantized LDPC decoder for 5 iterations. A SNR degradation of 0.25 dB was observed for 6bit quantization for 5 iterations (refer to Fig. 3). Considering a trade-off between area and performance, we implemented the architectures using a 5-bit quantization scheme. However, it should be noted that the architectures are flexible in terms of the number of bits used for quantization. The maximum number of iterations was also fixed at 5 considering a similar trade-off between speed and performance. The architecture, however, is flexible, and a simple re-synthesis of RTL can be used to change the iteration limit.
3) Architecture: The decoding architecture in Fig. 4 is similar to the one presented in [5] with the main difference that here, MSB of ‘shift’ is also an input to the check node unit (CNU). This is done to handle the irregularity of the WiMAX standard parity-check matrix. The two sets of barrel shifters emulate the appropriate forward and reverse routing of the messages in the Tanner graph. There are z number of CNUs, C2S (2’s complement to signed magnitude converter) and S2C (signed magnitude to 2’s complement converter).
a) CNU: Fig. 5 shows the architecture of the CNU. Here, all the computations take place in signed magnitude format. The main objective of the CNU is to find the first and the second minimum (N1 and N2) from the n values it receives in n clock cycles, index of the first minimum (N1_index) and computation of the sign for the n outputs. Since WiMAX

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:38:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

Frame Error Rate (FER)

10-1

10-2

10-3

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

SNR (in dB)

Fig. 3. SNR vs. FER for layered min-sum WiMAX LDPC decoder (for matrix shown in Fig. 1 of [8]) for quantized floating point numbers for 5 iterations. 5-bit quantization has a SNR degradation of 0.5 dB over the unquantized curve, whereas 6-bit quantization has a SNR degradation of 0.25 dB over the unquantized curve.

1

All zeros

0

R select

Layer 1 Layer 2

newFrame Channel LLRs
1
0

newFrame

Rold

shift

-
+

Barrel Shifter 1

C2S 1-Z

Layer m

shift(MSB)

CNU 1-Z

S2C 1-Z

Rnew

Q memory Q

newMessage

+

SyndromeCheck

1 or 0

shift
Barrel Shifter 2

Fig. 4. Top-level of the architecture of decoder [5]. Channel LLRs and shift are the inputs. Output ‘1’ from SyndromeCheck block implies that the message is correctly decoded. C2S converts 2’s complement to signed magnitude form. S2C converts signed magnitude to 2’s complement form. newMessage, Q memory, Layer 1 to Layer m are BRAMs.

11111 0

0

Q1

DQ

1 11111

clk reset

enable

comparator A<B
comparator A≥B

clk N1 final N2 final N1 index final
= count

count

clk state
N1 partial N2 partial N1 index partial
clk

sign processing unit

0 R
1

XOR

cumulative sign

sign

controller shift(MSB)

shift registers for storing sign of shift shift registers for storing enable signal

XOR

Fig. 5. Architecture of the CNU. Q and shift are the inputs, with R being the output. It has five main parts. N1 & N2 finder finds N1, N2 and N1_index by comparing the incoming message Q to the partial states. Partial state stores the partial values of N1, N2 and N1_index and is updated at the every positive edge of the clock. final_state stores the final values of N1, N2 and N1_index after a certain number of clock cycles. Hardware for bypassing nulls (HBN) deals with the irregular nature of the WiMAX std. LDPC codes. Sign processing unit (SPU) computes the sign of the output of the CNU.

LDPC codes are irregular in nature, CNU needs to perform another task of bypassing the nulls (‘-1’) present in the paritycheck matrix (H). The signal ‘shift’ represents the shifts in the permutation tiles in the H matrix; wherever the value is ‘-1’, ‘R’ (output of CNU) should be zero at that position. This is achieved by using a series of registers. ‘shift’ signal is stored in 2’s complement format. As the shift values of H matrix varies from -1 to z − 1, the MSB of shift will be 1 only in case of ‘-1’. Whenever the MSB of ‘shift’ is 1, enable signal is made 0. These enable signals for n values are stored in shift registers. After n + 2 clock cycles, these enable signals are used for bypassing the nulls through the last MUX. In Fig. 5, we see that whenever the enable is 0, input to the first MUX is a series of ones. In signed magnitude format, magnitude of series of ones will be the largest number that can be represented by it. This was done so that ‘Q’ values where ‘shift’ is ‘-1’ are not taken into account and series of ones would not affect the minimum values. A scaling factor γ = 1 was chosen for the hardware implementation.
A counter counts from 1 to 2n + 2. In the first n clock cycles, each CNU receives n values, finds the first and second minimum and the index of the first minimum by using the comparators. In the (n + 2)nd clock cycle, the final values of N1, N2 and N1_index are updated in N1_final, N2_final, and N1_index_final respectively. The final values are not updated in (n + 1)st clock cycle because if the first minimum lies in the nth clock cycle then that will be missed out. In the next n clock cycles, n outputs are generated serially while the sign processing unit computes the sign of the n values.
b) Barrel Shifter: Barrel shifter similar to the one proposed in [5] is used. It consists of s number of stages (ceil of log2 max(shift)), where each stage produces a shift of 1, 2, 4, 8,.., 2s−1. Each stage consists of z number of 2 × 1 MUXes. ‘shift’ is represented using (s + 1)-bits. The MSB will be 1 only in case of ‘-1’. The bits of the ‘shift’ signal except the MSB are the select lines for the s stages.
c) Syndrome Check Unit: Fig. 6 shows the architecture for syndrome check unit (SCU). It is used to check whether a given message is corrected or not. In every clock cycle, z bits of z×n length message are received. These z bits are the inputs to m different 1-bit barrel shifters for providing the shifts in m layers. The XOR array calculates the z×m syndrome elements of the syndrome vector and finally all these syndrome elements are NOR-ed to produce ‘1’ or ‘0’, signifying whether the code has been corrected.
C. Non-binary Interleaving Parallel instances of the LDPC encoder and decoder can
be used for producing non-binary interleaved codes, similar to the BCH coder proposed in [10]. Fig. 7 shows the architecture for producing non-binary interleaved codes. t different encoders with different code rates receive t different information vectors (u1, u2.., ut). The respective codeword produced by the encoders are alternatively interleaved and sent in GF(2t) field. At the receiver, a de-interleaver separates the t different codewords and routes them to their respective decoders.
With interleaving, the size of the burst erasure that can be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:38:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Syndrome check

message part1 message part2

1 bit

XOR array

barrel shifter 1

1 bit

XOR array

barrel shifter 2

message partn count

1 bit barrel shifter m

XOR array

NOR

register

z inputs

⊕
z copies register
⊕
XOR array

SYN 1 SYN Z

1 or 0

Fig. 6. Architecture of the SCU. The input to this unit is z-bit vector continuously for n clock cycles. After n clock cycles, it computes either ‘1’ or ‘0’. Output ‘1’ denotes that the message is correctly decoded.
corrected increases. If one decoder can correct a burst erasure of size B, the architecture in Fig. 7 can correct a burst erasure of size tB. When GF(2t) field symbols are sent through the channel, the probability of errors occuring in the lower bits is more as compared to higher bits. Hence, the lower bits can be coded with a low rate codeword as compared to higher bits.

u1 Encoder Rate1
u2 Encoder Rate2

Interleaver

Channel

De-interleaver

Decoder Rate1

decoded codeword1

Decoder Rate2

decoded codeword2

ut Encoder Ratet

Decoder Ratet

decoded codewordt

Fig. 7. Non-binary interleaving from binary LDPC encoders and decoders.

III. RESULTS AND COMPARISONS A. Encoder
Table I shows the implementation details of the WiMAX

encoder (size of H matrix as 12 × 24 with z = 96)

such as LUTs, registers, BRAM and maximum frequency.

The throughput of the proposed encoder was calculated as

Fmax × (codeword length), where Fmax is the maximum

frequency.
TABLE I
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF ENCODER ON KINTEX-7 KC705 FPGA

BOARD

Parameter

Proposed

Slice LUTs Slice Registers
BRAM Clock (MHz) Throughput (Gbps)

5364 5765 16 158 364

B. Decoder Table II shows the implementation details of the WiMAX
decoder (size of H matrix as 12 × 24 with z = 96) such as LUTs, registers, BRAM and maximum frequency. The throughput for the decoder is calculated for one iteration. The throughput is calculated using the following equation:

Throughput = Fmax × codeword length

(6)

kmax × CPI

where, kmax is the number of iterations, CPI is number of cycles per iteration and Fmax is the maximum frequency of the decoder.

TABLE II IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF DECODER WITH COMPARISON ON
KINTEX-7 KC705 FPGA BOARD

Parameter

[11] Proposed

Slice LUTs Slice Registers
BRAM Clock (MHz) Throughput (Gbps)

188147 102877
360 192 1.408

14510 9549 106 104 0.4

If four parallel instances of the proposed decoder is instan-
tiated, the throughput will be almost same for the proposed
decoder and the decoder in [11] but still the LUTs utilized by
the proposed would be less than 1/3 of the LUTs utilized by
decoder in [11]. We have compared the proposed decoder with
the latest paper ([11]) which is also implemented on FPGA. IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, an improved, rate-adaptable WiMAX LDPC
encoder and decoder were designed and implemented on a
kintex-7 KC705 FPGA board. A new CNU architecture was
designed for the decoder to handle the irregular nature of
the WiMAX standard LDPC codes. The proposed encoder
and decoder were implemented for a codeword of rate 1/2
and length 2304 with twelve layers. Finally, a non-binary
interleaving architecture was proposed which increased the
length of burst erasures that can be corrected.
V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT D. Shri was financially supported by the Ministry of Human
Resource Development, Govt. of India for her Masters. D. Shri
acknowledges Texas Instruments for conference expenses.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, "Low-density parity-check codes," in IRE Trans. on Info. Theory, January 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices," in IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, March 1999.
[3] S. J. Johnson, "Introducing low-density parity-check codes," in Australia: University of Newcastle, 2006.
[4] D. E. Hocevar, "A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes," in IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Syst., 2004.
[5] A. Mondal, S. Thatimattala, V. K. Yalamaddi and S. S. Garani, "Efficient coding architectures for reed-solomon and low-density parity-check decoders for magnetic and other data storage systems," in IEEE Trans. on Magnetics, Feb. 2018.
[6] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, "Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes," in IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, Feb. 2001.
[7] S. S. Garani and A. Weathers, "An efficient on-the-fly encoding algorithm for binary and finite field LDPC codes," in IEEE Communications Letters, Nov. 2009.
[8] T. Heidari and A. Jannesari, "Design of high-throughput QC-LDPC decoder for WiMAX standard," in 21st Iranian Conf. on Electrical Engineering (ICEE), 2013.
[9] X. Wang, T. Ge, Y. Wang, Z. Li, N. I. Sarkar, "QC-LDPC encoder structure for IEEE 802.16e/802.11n standard" in Int. Journal of Control and Automation, 2016.
[10] A. Gunasekaran, N. C. Jose and S. S. Garani, "An optimized BCH decoder design architecture for adaptive M-ary recording channels," in IEEE 62nd Int. Midwest Symp. on Circuits and Syst. (MWSCAS), 2019.
[11] R. Goriushkin, P. Nikishkin, E. Likhobabin and V. Vityaze, "FPGA implementation of LDPC decoder architecture for wireless communication standards," in 10th Int. Conf. on Modern Circuits and Systems Technologies (MOCAST), 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:38:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

