2022 6th International Conference on Communication and Information Systems
Decoder Implementation of Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes

2022 6th International Conference on Communication and Information Systems (ICCIS) | 978-1-6654-6385-0/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICCIS56375.2022.9998153

Jian Yang College of Information and Communication Engineering Harbin Engineering University yang961203@hrbeu.edu.cn

Danfeng Zhao* College of Information and Communication Engineering Harbin Engineering University
Harbin, China zhaodanfeng@hrbeu.edu.cn

Hai Tian College of Information and Communication Engineering Harbin Engineering University
Harbin, China tianhai@hrbeu.edu.cn

Haoxiang Jia College of Information and Communication Engineering Harbin Engineering University
Harbin, China jiahaoxiang@hrbeu.edu.cn

Tongzhou Han College of Information and Communication Engineering Harbin Engineering University
Harbin, China hantongzhou@hrbeu.edu.cn

Abstract—In order to meet the requirements of high reliability and high flexibility of wireless communication, the Space-coupled Low-Density Parity-Check (SC-LDPC) codes are deeply studied. At present, the main research direction of SC-LDPC codes is to reduce the complexity of the algorithm and reduce the occupation of decoding resources. In terms of hardware implementation, there is relatively little research. Therefore, in view of the above problems, considering hardware resource occupation and coding and decoding performance, the FPGA design and implementation of the SC-LDPC code codec are carried out, and the functional correctness test is carried out on the Xilinx xc7k325tffg900-2 chip.
Index Terms—SC-LDPC codes; Low complexity; FPGA; hardware implementation;
I. INTRODUCTION
As one of the important transmission means of physical layer mobile communication technology, channel coding plays an important role in ensuring the reliability and validity of the channel. At present, the commonly used coding methods in wireless communication systems include Turbo codes and LDPC codes. In UWA channel, the performance of LDPC code has been proved to be better than that of Turbo code, and the problem of enhancing mobile communication in mobile communication channel was solved in 2016 3GPP TSG RAN WG1 meeting Enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB) scenario, LDPC code was determined Coding standard for 5G mobile channel. LDPC convolutional codes have the advantages of LDPC codes and convolutional codes, while SC-LDPC codes are derived from LDPC convolutional codes. Compared with the LDPC code, the matrix of the SC-LDPC code has a special form, and has a special chain structure feature at the head and tail of the matrix, that is, the matrix structure of the SC-LDPC code has several checks for the relationship between the head and the tail. . This makes the decoding performance of the

SC-LDPC code closer to the Shannon capacity limit than the LDPC code, and also ensures that the SC-LDPC code has good decoding performance in the waterfall region and the error equalization region [1].
In terms of the realization of code rate compatibility, due to the special matrix structure, SC-LDPC codes can be flexibly converted between code rates, which makes SC-LDPC codes more flexible in code rate applicability. In terms of decoding, a special decoding method performs block decoding on the data chain, which reduces the occupation of decoding resources. It can well solve the communication interference caused by large-span communication distance and unstable communication conditions, and ensure the reliable transmission of signals under the interference of multi-path wireless communication systems. Therefore, SC-LDPC codes have important research value and broad research prospects [2].
At present, the main research direction of rate-compatible SC-LDPC codes tends to algorithm research. In terms of FPGA design, how to find a low-complexity algorithm to implement a hardware design that consumes less decoding resources is still relatively small. Therefore, considering hardware resource occupation and codec performance, a ratecompatible SC-LDPC codec decoder based on FPGA is designed and implemented on the basis of existing research. On the premise of not increasing the complexity and affecting the throughput rate, this paper designs a decoding scheme that uses a set of codecs to achieve flexible switching between multiple code rates.
II. BASIC PRINCIPLES ILLUSTRATE
This part mainly introduces the structural form of the check matrix of SC-LDPC code and the decoding algorithm of the hardware design of the decoder.

978-1-6654-6385-0/22/$31.00
Authorized licensed

©2022 IEEE
use limited to: Yonsei

Univ.

Downloaded

on

J2un2e

24,2026

at

13:39:29

UTC

from

IEEE

Xplore.

Restrictions apply.

A. Check Matrix Structure of SC-LDPC Code
The SC-LDPC code is derived from the LDPC convolutional code, so the structure of the single frame matrix is similar to that of the LDPC code. There are two main representation methods for SC-LDPC, one is represented in matrix form, namely parity check matrix, and the other is represented in graph form, namely Tanner graph. The check matrix of SCLDPC code is shown in the following formula [3].

 H0



 H1 H0



  

...

H1 H0

  

 Hms

...

H1 . . .

  

Hsc

=

 



Hms

...

...



H0

 

(1)

     

Hms . . . ...





H1 

...

  

Hms (ms+L)m×nL

Among them, HSC is the check matrix structure of SCLDPC code, which is composed of L frames. It can be seen from Fig.1 that HBase is composed of H0, H1, · · · , Hms, so HBase is called the basis matrix of HSC , which is also referred to as A single frame called a check matrix. The submatrices H0, H1, · · · , Hms are respectively called the check relation matrix and the coupling relation matrix, which are used to store the check relation of the matrix. If the parity check matrix consists of L frames with the same HBase, it is called a time-invariant SC-LDPC code [4]. If the L frames are different, it is called a time-varying SC-LDPC code. Because the single-frame structure check relationship of time-varying SC-LDPC codes is complicated, it is necessary to store a complete check-relation matrix during research, which is inconvenient to design. The experimental relationship matrix simplifies storage and reduces storage space. This paper mainly studies time-invariant SC-LDPC codes.
Referring to the 5G standard LDPC code and the Raptorlike extended matrix structure, the check matrix can be used for systematic coding, which greatly reduces the complexity. The check matrix structure of the Raptor-like LDPC code is shown in Fig. 1 [5].

Fig. 1 shows that, submatrix A and submatrix E are matrix arrays composed of cyclic shift matrices, submatrix O is an all-zero matrix, and submatrix I is a unit matrix. The matrix A corresponds to the information bits; the matrix D corresponds to the check bits, which has a double-diagonal structure and is used for recursive coding; the kernel matrix [AD] corresponds to the high code rate part; the matrix [EI] corresponds to the extended code rate compatible redundant bits , the identity matrix I corresponds to a single parity bit with a degree of 1. Since sub-matrix D and sub-matrix I have double-diagonal and single-diagonal structures, respectively, the parity check matrix can be used for recursive encoding without generating a matrix, and the encoding process is simplified.
B. Research on Decoding Algorithm of SC-LDPC Codes
Compared with the LDPC code, the check matrix of the SC-LDPC code with the coupling structure makes the size of the matrix uncontrollable due to the relationship of the coupling chain length, and the matrix occupies a lot of space. If hardware resources are stored for the entire matrix, hardware resources will be wasted, and the decoding complexity will be high. Aiming at the above problems, combined with the timeinvariant SC-LDPC codes in this paper, a sliding-window hierarchical minimum-sum decoding algorithm is studied. As the name suggests, the sliding window is simplified according to the frame replication structure of the time-invariant SC-LDPC code, and the layering is because the element of the check matrix is replaced by the unit matrix [6]. In the replaced check matrix, each row in each layer exists. Orthogonal relationship, do not affect each other, can perform the operation of the minimum sum algorithm at the same time. The minimum sum algorithm uses the comparison of the minimum value and the second minimum value to perform a posteriori solution on the variable nodes of each row of each layer [7]. The schematic diagram of sliding window decoding is shown in the Fig.2:

Fig. 1. An example of a variable-node degree Tanner graph

Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of sliding window decoding graph
The variable nodes in the blue box in each window are decoded in a sliding manner, and the decoding result is used as input to provide probability information for the next frame decoding. It is worth noting that when the decoded

23 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

frame is the first frame, the first frame is directly decoded without inputting the prior probability information. The sliding window hierarchical min-sum decoding algorithm will be described below. Divide the sliding window matrix into L layers, each layer contains K rows, T is the number of layers where the decoding is located, and the number of iterations M = 1. When decoding the first frame, the probability information does not need to perform any operations, and the minimum sum decoding algorithm is performed. That is, after one iteration, perform modulo-square multiplication with HT , if the result is zero, end the decoding operation, T = T + 1, and proceed to the next layer of operation. If it is not the first frame, the probability information should be calculated [8]. The specific decoding algorithm process flow is shown in the Fig.3:

4)Decoding decision, calculating the posterior loglikelihood ratio

Zn(k) = Zn(0) +

Lm (kn)

(5)

m∈M (m)

If the information codeword after the judgment is multiplied by the check matrix modulo square to 0, or the operation has jumped out of the iterative process, at this time, the judgment is over, and the current judgment result is the decoding output after the decoding algorithm. Otherwise, it will return to the check node update step for the next iteration [10].Hardware implementation of decoder for the above algorithm research

III. FPGA IMPLEMENTATION
A. The overall architecture of the decoder
According to the above-mentioned hierarchical minimum sum decoding scheme, the overall structure design of the decoder is carried out. The decoder is mainly composed of three main parts: a control module, a storage module, and a calculation module. The decoder control module ensures that during the decoding process, the decoding operations between the modules are performed in an orderly manner. The calculation module mainly completes the minimum value, subminimum value comparison operation, complement code operation operation, normalization operation, addition operation and multiplication operation for the input information [11].The specific decoder structure is shown in the Fig.4

Fig. 3. Hierarchical decoding algorithm flow chart

Among them, EiT is the transpose of the matrix corresponding to the i row of the sub-matrix E. After layering,

the algorithm for operation in the layer adopts the minimum

sum algorithm.The process of the minimum sum decoding

algorithm is similar to that of the BP decoding algorithm, but

the rules in the update process of the check node have changed.

During the k iteration, the posterior probability-likelihood ratio

of the information sequence is expressed as a column vector

Znk .

Zm

k n

represents

the

probability

information

passed

to

the

variable

node

to

the

check

node.

Lm

k n

means

to

pass

probability information to the check node to the variable

node [9]. The minimum sum decoding algorithm process is

as follows:

1) Initialization

Zm,n(0) = Zn(0) m ∈ M (n)

(2)

2) Check node update

Lm,n(k) =

sgn(Z
mn

) (k−1)

×

min

|Z (k−1) |(3)
mn

n ∈N (m)/m

3)Variable node update

Zmn(k) = Zn(0) +

Lmn (k)

(4)

m ∈M (m)/m

Fig. 4. The overall structure of the decoder
After the overall structure is determined, the hardware implementation will be described. There are two main types of decoding scheduling: flooding and hierarchical. Among them, flooding decoding is suitable for a fully parallel decoding structure. However, for SC-LDPC codes with a relatively large matrix structure, the resource occupation will be very high. The characteristics of the layered type are similar to the layered minimum algorithm. Compared with the flood-type decoding structure, the operation of the information carried out on each layer can reduce the number of decoding iterations and reduce the occupation of hardware resources. The hierarchical decoding structure mainly includes a block parallel decoding structure and a row parallel decoding structure. For the determined decoding scheme, this paper adopts a row parallel decoding structure [12]. The schematic diagram of the row parallel decoding structure is shown in the Fig.5:

24 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the final 2 groups of second minimum and minimum values into the 4-input comparator again to obtain the minimum and second minimum values among the 8 input data value [15].

Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of the structure of the row parallel decoder
B. Core Computing Module Design
The most core computing module in the decoder is also the embodiment of the minimum sum algorithm. The operations performed by the minimum sum algorithm include operations such as comparison, selection, addition, and shift. Therefore, the above route is used to read data from different storage slices. Implementing the function of layering can achieve the purpose of reducing the occupancy of the check node update unit. The check node update unit will be described below. The check node performs update operations on its own information, including the operation of taking the absolute value, the operation of comparing the minimum value and the second smallest value, the normalized shift operation, and the addition operation. Perform absolute value operation on the above updated variable node information [13]. Since the input data is complement code, the information with the sign bit of 0, the information bit remains unchanged, the information with the sign bit of 1, the complement operation is performed, and the information after the operation is performed. By comparison, the minimum value and the second minimum value can be obtained, and the obtained minimum value and the second minimum value are respectively stored in the updated check node for normalization operation [14]. For the above minimum algorithm, a comparison design is made, as shown in the Fig.6: As can be seen from the above, taking a matrix with a row

IV. DECODING PERFORMANCE AND THROUGHPUT
ANALYSIS
In this section, under the Gaussian white noise channel, the modulation method is BPSK, and the maximum number of iterations is 40. Under the condition of 192bit length of information bits, code rate 1/3, and coupling chain length of 100, the three decoding methods of BP, LLR-BP and minimum sum decoding algorithm are used to compare the bit error rate and frame error rate with the standard The comparison of LDPC codes, the abscissa in the figure represents the normalized signal-to-noise ratio, represented by . The ordinate represents the bit error rate and frame error rate, expressed in BER . As can be seen from Fig.7 compared with the 5G standard LDPC code, the minimum sum decoding algorithm is somewhat different from the BP decoding algorithm, but compared with the LDPC code, the decoding performance is similar, and even slightly improved.
Fig. 7. Comparison of Decoding Algorithms and LDPC Codes

Fig. 6. Minimum operation structure diagram
weight of 8 as an example, comparing the size of the 8 input data pairwise, 4 groups of minimum values and sub-minimum values can be obtained. The 4-input comparator can achieve 2 groups of minimum and second minimum values. Input

The function simulation of the decoder designed by the above decoding algorithm is carried out, the binary information sequence is randomly generated by software, the random information bit sequence is subjected to software coding, modulation, noise addition, and quantization process, and the quantized information is decoded by the decoder. code, compare the decoding result with the encoded codeword, and verify whether the decoding function of the code rate compatible SC-LDPC code decoder is correct. The decoding result is shown in the Fig.8. The decoding input is sent in multiple frames, and the decoding results are counted to obtain the bit error rate as shown in the Fig.9: The clock frequency set in this paper is 300Mhz. When the code rate is 1/3, the clock cycle of the decoding calculation is counted. At this time, it takes 3120 clock cycles to decode the input information bit sequence, and the code rate can be obtained by calculation.

25 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 8. Decoder decoding result

V. CONCLUSIONS
In terms of decoding algorithm and compiler hardware implementation, this paper designs a hierarchical minimum sum decoding algorithm for the check matrix of the designed Raptor-like structure, which not only reduces the decoding complexity, but also reduces the resource occupation of hardware implementation. Finally, under the condition of ensuring low resource occupation, the decoder throughput rate on the Xilinx xc7k325tffg900-2 chip can reach 18.46Mbps, and the decoding performance can reach 10−4 bit error level.

Fig. 9. Decoder decoding result bit error rate curve statistics
The throughput rate of the compatible SC-LDPC code decoder is 18.46Mbps. After the above bit error rate curve reaches the expected performance,Xilinx xc7k325tff900-2 chip is used to implement the function of the decoder, and Vivado is used to design and synthesize the RTL code,as shown in the Fig.10:
Fig. 10. Decoder decoding result bit error rate curve statistics

REFERENCES
[1] GALLAGER R. Low-density parity-check codes[J]. IRE Transactions on Information Theory, 1962, 8(1): 21-28.
[2] Andrew Thangaraj. Rate Compatible LDPC Codes for Wireless Applications[J]. IETE Technical Review, 2004, 21(5): 325-333.
[3] FELSTROM A J, ZIGANGIROV K S. Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix[J]. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 1999, 45(6): 2181 - 91
[4] Kangning Sun, Linhua Ma, Yanhua Cao, Xing Hu, and Shaocheng Huang, Design of LDPC Codes Degree Sequences on Random Particle Swarm Optimization over Mixed Channel,” Journal of Communications, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 455-461, 2016.
[5] Hosung Park, ”Construction of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes Using a Class of Balanced Incomplete Block Designs with Irregular Block Sizes,” Journal of Communications, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 553-559, 2019.
[6] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, ”Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181-2191, 1999.
[7] LI Huaan, BAI Baoming, MU Xijin, et al. Algebra-Assisted Construction of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes for 5G New Radio[J]. IEEE Access. 2018, 6: 50229-50244.
[8] ZHANG Kai, HUANG Xinming, WANG Zhongfeng. High-throughput Layered Decoder Implementation for Quasi-cyclic LDPC Codes[J]. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 2009, 27(6): 985994.
[9] ALI I, KIM J H, KIM S H. Improving Windowed Decoding of SC LDPC Codes by Effective Decoding Termination, Message Reuse, and Amplification[J]. IEEE Access. 2018, 6: 9336-9346.
[10] UL HASSAN N, PUSANE A E, LENTAMIER M. Non-Uniform Window Decoding Schedules for Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes[J]. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 2017, 65(2): 501-510.
[11] Tazoe K, Kasai K, Sakaniwa K. Efficient termination of spatiallycoupled codes[C]. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, 2012: 30-34.
[12] Hassan N, Pusane A E, Lentmaier M, et al. Reduced complexity window decoding schedules for coupled LDPC codes[C]. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, 2012: 20-24.
[13] bu-Surra S, Pisek E, Taori R. Spatially-coupled low-density parity check codes: Zigzag-window decoding and code-family design considerations[C]. Information Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA), 2015: 275-281.
[14] Hassan N U, Schlter M, Fettweis G P. Fully parallel window decoder architecture for spatially-coupled LDPC codes[C]. IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2016: 1-6.
[15] Park S I, Wu Y, Kim H M, et al. Two Dimensional Code Based on Low Density Parity Check and ReedSolomon Codes for the Terrestrial Cloud Transmission System[J]. IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, 2015, 61(1):75-83.

26 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

