IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

501

On Generic Erasure Correcting Sets and Related Problems
Rudolf Ahlswede and Harout Aydinian

Abstract—Motivated by iterative decoding techniques for the binary erasure channel Hollmann and Tolhuizen introduced and studied the notion of generic erasure correcting sets for linear codes. A generic ( )–erasure correcting set generates for all codes of codimension a parity check matrix that allows iterative decoding of all correctable erasure patterns of size or less. The problem is to derive bounds on the minimum size ( ) of generic erasure correcting sets and to find constructions for such sets. In this paper, we continue the study of these sets. We derive better lower and upper bounds. Hollmann and Tolhuizen also introduced the stronger notion of ( )–sets and derived bounds for their minimum size ( ). Here also we improve these bounds. We observe that these two conceps are closely related to so called –wise intersecting codes, an area, in which ( ) has been studied primarily with respect to ratewise performance. We derive connections. Finally, we observed that hypergraph covering can be used for both problems to derive good upper bounds.
Index Terms—Generic erasure correcting set, intersecting code, iterative decoding, stopping redundancy.

I. INTRODUCTION

I TERATIVE decoding techniques, especially when applied to low-density parity-check codes, have recently attracted

a lot of attention. It is known that the performance of iterative

decoding algorithms in case of a binary erasure channel depends

on the sizes of the stopping sets associated with a collection of

parity check equations of the code [9]. Let be a parity-check

matrix of a code , defined as a matrix whose rows span the dual

code . A stopping set is a nonempty set of code coordinates

such that the submatrix formed by the corresponding columns

of does not contain a row of weight one. Given a parity-

check matrix , the size of the smallest nonempty stopping

set, denoted by , is called the stopping distance [25] of

the code with respect to . Iterative decoding techniques, given

a parity check matrix , allow to correct all erasure patterns

of size

or less. Therefore, for better performance of

iterative erasure decoding it is desired that

be as large

as possible. Since the support of any codeword (the set of its

nonzero coordinates) is a stopping set, we have

for

all choices of . It is well known that the equality can always be

achieved, by choosing sufficiently many vectors from the dual

Manuscript received July 22, 2010; revised May 11, 2011; accepted July 20, 2011. The work of H. Aydinian was supported by the DFG Project AH46/8-1. Date of current version February 08, 2012.
R. Ahlswede, deceased, was with the Department of Mathematics, University of Bielefeld, D-33501 Bielefeld, Germany.
H. Aydinian is with the Department of Mathematics, University of Bielefeld, D-33501 Bielefeld, Germany (e-mail: ayd@math.uni-bielefeld.de).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2011.2173729

code as rows in . This motivated Schwartz and Vardy [25] to introduce the notion of stopping redundancy of a code. The

stopping redundancy of , denoted by , is the minimum

number of rows in a parity-check matrix such that

.

Schwartz and Vardy [25] derived general upper and lower

bounds, as well as more specific bounds for Reed-Muller codes,

Golay codes, and MDS codes. Improvements upon general

upper bounds are presented in [11], [12]. The stopping redundancy of Reed-Muller codes was further studied by Etzion [10]. Hehn et al. [13] studied the stopping redundancy of cyclic codes.
Recall that a binary linear code is capable of correcting

those and only those erasure patterns that do not contain the support of a non-zero codeword. These patterns are called correctable for . All other erasure patterns are called uncorrectable. Note that the size of a correctable erasure pattern for a code can be greater than its minimum distance and it is upper

bounded by the codimension of the code. Hollmann and Tolhuizen [15] observed that given a linear
code , any correctable erasure pattern can be iteratively decoded provided a chosen parity check matrix contains sufficiently many rows. This motivated them [15] to introduce the

notion of generic erasure correcting sets for binary linear codes. A generic –erasure correcting set, generic –set for short, generates for all codes of codimension a parity check matrix that allows iterative decoding of all correctable erasure patterns of size or less. More formally, a subset of a bi-

nary vector space is called generic –set if for any binary

linear code of length and codimension , and any parity

check

matrix of , the set of parity check equations

enables iterative decoding of all cor-

rectable erasure patterns of size or less.

Weber and Abdel-Ghaffar [28] constructed parity check matrices for the Hamming code that enable iterative decoding of all correctable erasure patterns of size at most three. Hollmann and Tolhuizen [14], [15] gave a general construction and established upper and lower bounds for the minimum size of generic

–sets.

Throughout the paper, we use the following notation. We use

for a linear code (of length , dimension , and min-

imum Hamming distance ) over . The Hamminng weight of

a vector is denoted by

. We denote by the set of inte-

gers

. A –element subset of a given set is called for

short a –subset.

denotes the set of all

matrices

over the finite field . For integers

,

stands

for the -ary Gaussian coefficient, defined by

and

for

. It is well known

that

is the number of –dimensional subspaces in .

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:38:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

502

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

A –dimensional subspace is called for short a –subspace. A

coset of a –subspace in is called a –dimensional plane or

shortly –plane. Recall that there are

–planes in

. A –plane which is not a subspace is called a –flat.

Later on, we will omit in the notation above for the binary

case.

In this paper, we continue the study of generic erasure cor-

recting sets. Let

denote the minimum size of a generic

–set. The bounds for

presented below are due to

Hollmann and Tolhuizen. The following is the best known con-

structive bound

Theorem 1: [15] For

we have

It is clear that any upper bound for bound for the stopping distance of an
Therefore, for an has the bound

(I.1)
is an upper code, thus code , one

(I.2)

which turns to be also the best constructive bound for the stopping redunduncy.
We notice that the best known nonconstructive upper bounds for the stopping redundancy of a linear code are given in Han and Siegel [11] and in Han et al. [12].

Theorem 2: [11] For an

code with

A subset

is called -1 good if for any linearly

independent vectors

there exists a vector

such that the inner product

for

.

Furthermore, is called

-good if for any linearly

independent vectors

and for arbitrary

there exists

such that

for

.

We denote by

the minimum cardinality for which

there exists a -1 good set . The corresponding notation

for –good sets is

. Hollman and Tolhuizen observed

that these two notions are essentially the same.

Proposition 1: [14] Let

be an -1 good set, then

is an -good set. Moreover, one has

.

Later on, we consider only -1 good sets and call them

for short just –sets. As shown in [14], every –set is a

generic –set, thus

.

Theorem 4: [14]. For

the following holds

(I.6)

The upper bound is obtained again by a probabilistic argument.

The paper is organized as follows.

In Section II, we obtain some properties of generic

–erasure correcting sets and

–sets which we use

later.

In Section III, we show that the problem we study here is

closely related to so called –wise intersecting codes studied in

the literature ([6], [7]). This allows us to get more insight about

the problems mentioned above.

In Section IV, we focus on bounds for

and

.

We improve the bounds (I.5) and (I.6) in Theorems 11–15. In

particular, we show that for

, we have

(I.3) A closed form expression derived from (I.3) is as follows

Corollary 1: For an

code with

(I.4)

In Section V, we show that hypergraph covering can be used to obtain in a simple way good upper bounds for generic erasure correcting sets, –sets, and stopping redundancy of a linear code.

II. PROPERTIES OF GENERIC

–SETS

(where is always of base 2). Further improvements upon the probabilistic upper bound are given in [12].
There is a big gap between the lower and upper bounds for .

Theorem 3: [14] For

the following holds

Hollmann and Tolhuizen obtained the following characterization of generic –sets.

Proposition 2: [15] A subset

is generic –set if

and only if for every full rank matrix

there exists

such that

.

We extend this characterization as follows

Proposition 3: A subset

is a generic –set if and

(I.5) only if for every full rank matrix

the set

contains a hyperplane not passing through the

The upper bound is derived by a probabilistic approach.

origin.

Reference [14] introduced and studied a related notion of

Proof: For integers

and a set of linearly

-good set.

independent vectors

, let

be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:38:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AHLSWEDE AND AYDINIAN: ON GENERIC ERASURE CORRECTING SETS AND RELATED PROBLEMS

503

a subset satisfying the following property (P) with respect to

columns of that contain all nonzero

– tuples

:

and

zero tuples.

(P) For every full rank matrix

there exists a vector

such that

for some

.

We claim then that satisfies this property with respect to every

III. RELATION TO OTHER PROBLEMS

linearly independent set of vectors

.

To prove the claim, we have to show that given a full rank

matrix

, there exists

such that

for

some

. Let

be an invertible matrix such that

for

. Then, in view of the property (P)

of , there exists

such that

for some

and hence

.

Let now

and let be the set of unit vectors in .

Then the claim (together with Proposition 2) gives the following

analogue of Proposition 2.

In this section, we show the relationship between –sets

and –wise intersecting codes

Intersecting Codes: A linear

code over a field

is called intersecting if any two nonzero codewords have a

common nonzero coordinate. Intersecting codes where intro-

duced in [18] and have been studied by several authors [5]–[7],

[18], [23].

A more general notion of -wise intersecting linear codes was

introduced in [5]. An

code is called –wise intersecting

if for every subset of linearly independent vectors in there

Proposition 4: A set

is generic

–set if and is a coordinate where all the vectors have a nonzero element.

only if for any given set of linearly independent vectors Under the same condition we also define an –wise intersecting

and every full rank matrix

there set

.

exists

such that

for some

.

Note also that for

we have –sets and the

claim implies the following condition (shown in [14]):

is an –set if and only if for every full rank matrix

the set

contains all nonzero

vectors. This condition clearly means that meets every

–flat.

Let now be a generic –set and let

be

a matrix of rank . Let also

be such that

. Then Proposition 4

implies that the dimension

.

Thus,

contains a hyperplane not passing

through the origin.

Furthermore, suppose that for every full rank matrix

there exists an

–flat

. Note then

that for every linearly independent vectors

we

have

. This, in view of Proposition 4,

implies that is a generic –set.

Let

be a generic –set. Let us represent by an

matrix where the rows are the vectors of . Let also

be an invertible matrix. Then we get the following.

Corollary 2: (i) In every set of columns of
columns that contains each

there is a subset of –tuple.

Problem 1: Given integers

, determine

(in case

we write

), the minimum length of an

-wise intersecting

–code.

Proposition 5: The elements of a –set

with

, represented as columns of a matrix, give a gener-

ator matrix of an -wise intersecting code. Conversely, the

columns of a generator matrix of an -wise intersecting

code form a –set. As a consequence, we have

.

Proof: Let

be a –set. Let

us represent as an

matrix where the rows corre-

spond to the vectors of , and denote

. Note that

and

. Let

be linearly

independent vectors and let

. Then

are linearly independent as well. By the defi-

nition of a –set, there exists

such that

for

, that is all vectors

have a one in

the th coordinate. This clearly means that the

code with

generator matrix is an –wise intersecting code. Similarly we

have the inverse implication.

Recall (Proposition 1) that if

is a –set then

contains a solution to every (consistent) nonhomogeneous

system of independent equations, which in fact means that

meets every

–flat. Thus, the problem of construction of

(ii) hits at least

–flats.

–wise intersecting

-codes (respectively

-sets) can

(iii)

.

be viewed as a covering problem.

Proof:

(i) Note first that the rows of also define a generic

–set. Indeed, in view of Proposition 2 for every full

rank matrix

(and hence for ) the matrix

contains a row of weight one. Now

the statement follows from Proposition 3.

(ii) Proposition 3 implies that if

is a generic

–set, then hits at least

cosets of every

–subspace in . This implies the statement.

Problem 2: Determine the minimal size

of a set of

vectors in , called a transversal or a blocking set, that meets

every

–dimensional flat.

Remark 1: We note that in case

, we have a triviality

and

. Another trivial case is

. In this case, we

clearly have

.

Also, it is not hard to observe that

(see

also Remark 3 below). The first open case is

.

(iii) Without loss of generality we may assume that contains Remark 2: The notion of a

–set can be extended to ar-

unit vectors. Now the statement follows since there exist bitrary spaces in a natural way. However, notice that Propo-

sition 5 is not true for the nonbinary case. Consider an MDS

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:38:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

504

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

code . Such a code exists for all

the restriction of the code on the coordinate set , that is the

(see [22]). Observe that for

code obtained by deletion of the coordinates

.

(that is

), we have an –wise intersecting code, but

the columns of a generator matrix of do not form a –set

for

.

It is worth to mention that the problem of finding the min-

imal size of a set of nonzero vectors in that meets all

–dimensional subspaces is much easier. This problem was

solved by Bose and Burton [4].

Lemma 1: Let be an -wise intersecting

code and let

be a codeword with

and with

.

Then

(i) [7] is an

code. If

is a base

of

then the code

generated by the vectors

is an

–wise intersecting

code.

Theorem 5: [4] Let be a set of points of that meets (ii) is an

–wise intersecting

code.

every

–space of . Then

, The proof of (i) is easily derived from the definition of an

with equality if and only if consists of the points of an

–wise intersecting code. Note that both (i) and (ii) follow from

–subspace of .

Proposition 6 (the lemma was also observed in [14] in terms of

Covering Arrays: A

array with entries from an al-

–sets).

phabet of size is called a -covering array, and denoted by Lemma 1 implies simple estimates for the minimum and max-

, if the columns of each

subarray contain imum distances of intersecting codes. It shows that -wise in-

each -tuple at least once as a column. The problem is to mini- tersecting codes have strong distance properties which means

mize for which there exists a

. Covering arrays that in general construction of such optimal codes is a difficult

were first introduced by Renyi [24]. The case

was solved problem.

by Renyi [24] (for even ) and by Katona [17] and Kleitman and In view of equivalence shown in Proposition 5, the next

Spencer [19] (for arbitrary ). Covering arrays have applications results can be used for construction of infinite families of

in circuit testing, digital communication, network designs, etc.

–sets with positive rate.

Construction of optimal covering arrays has been the subject of

a lot of research (see a survey [8]).

Let be a generator matrix of an –wise intersecting

code and let

be a full rank matrix. Then in view

Theorem 6: (Cohen-Zemor) [6] There is a constructive infinite sequence of -wise intersecting binary codes with rate arbitrary close to

of Proposition 5 (and by definition of an –good set), the

(III.1)

columns of matrix contain all nonzero –tuples. This in

particular means that for every invertible matrix

the

matrix

(a generator matrix of ) together with the all

zero column is a covering array. Thus, we have the following.

The result is obtained by concatenating algebraic-geo-

metric

codes in Tsfasmann [27] satisfying

with

and with a rate arbi-

trary close to

, with –wise intersecting

Proposition 6: An

code is –wise intersecting if and

code (the punctured dual of

only if every generator matrix of (together with the all zero the 2-error-correcting BCH code).

column) is an –covering array.

Another possible approach for constructing –wise in-

Equivalently, the columns of an –covering

array tersecting codes (and hence

–sets) is to use -Biased

, considered as a matrix

, form an Codes. A binary linear code of length is called –biased if

–good set if and only if this covering array is invariant the weight of every non-zero codeword in lies in the range

under every invertible transformation of , i.e., for every

. Biased codes can be constructed

invertible matrix

the matrix is an –covering using pseudo-random graphs known as expanders (expander

array.

codes).

Let us also mention another extensively studied related no-

tion. A code of length is called –separating, if for

every disjoint pair

of subsets of with

and

the following holds: there exists a coordinate such

Theorem 7: (Alon et al.) [3] For any , there exists an explicitly specified family of constant-rate binary linear –biased codes.

that for any codeword

and any codeword Lemma 2: (Cohen-Lempel) [5] Let and denote respec-

,

.

tively the minimum and the maximum distance of a binary linear

Separating codes were studied by many authors in connec- code . Then is –wise intersecting if

.

tion with practical problems in cryptography, computer science, The next statement follows directly from Lemma 2.

and search theory. The relationship between –wise intersecting

codes and separating codes is studied in [7].

Corollary 3: An –biased linear code is –wise intersecting

if

.

A. Some Known Results About Intersecting Codes
In this subsection, we present some known results on intersecting codes which can be used for our problems.

The following nonconstructive lower bound for the rate of an

–wise intersecting

code is due to Cohen and Zemor.

Theorem 8: [6] For any given rate

Given a vector

, the set

is called the support of and is denoted by

.

Given a code of length and

, denote by

(III.2)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:38:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AHLSWEDE AND AYDINIAN: ON GENERIC ERASURE CORRECTING SETS AND RELATED PROBLEMS

505

and

there exists an –wise intersecting

code of

rate .

Using recursively the upper bound due to McEliece-Ro-

demich-Rumsey-Welch [22] together with Lemma 1 (i) one can

get upper bounds for the rate of –wise intersecting codes.

Theorem 9: (Cohen et al.) [7] The asymptotic rate of the

largest –wise intersecting code is at most , with

,

,

,

,

.

For the case

, the best known bounds on the minimal

length

of an

intersecting code are as follows:

(III.3)

where

.

The lower bound is obtained by Katona and Srivastava [18].

The upper bound is due to Komlós (see [5], [18], [23]). Note

that the upper bound in Theorem 4 for

gives

.

(together with

) implies that

.

We have now the relation

(IV.3)

with

. Using induction on

we get the required result.

Notice that the right hand side of (IV.1) is greater than the

lower bound

in (I.6)

by

. Note also that this lower bound was obtained (in [14])

using the relation

(compare

with Lemma 3, resp. with (IV.3)).

Remark 3: The bound (IV.1) is tight for

. Indeed, we

have

. On the other

hand any set of

nonzero vectors is a

–set. The

latter

–wise intersecting

code is a punctured

simplex code.

Theorem 11: For

we have

IV. IMPROVING BOUNDS FOR

AND

In this section we derive new bounds for . We first derive a lower bound for
that we have trivial cases .

Theorem 10: For

, we have

and . Recall
and

(IV.1)

Proof: To prove this bound we need the following consequence of Lemma 1.

Lemma 3: For an –wise intersecting maximum distance , we have

code with

(IV.4)

Proof: Our problem is to find a blocking set of (minimum)

size with respect to the

-dimensional flats in . Let

be a

–flat and let

. The subset with

does not contain a blocking set. Thus, for

every fixed there are

bad –sets ( –sets which

are not blocking sets) in . The number of all

–flats is

. Therefore, the number of bad sets of size is

less than

. If now

(the number of all –subsets of

)

then there exists a blocking set of size . The latter inequality

is equivalent to the following:

(IV.2)

(IV.5)

Proof: Let be a codeword of minimal weight , with the

support set , that is

, and let be a generator

matrix of . We may assume that all rows of except for the This gives the result.

first one have a zero in the first coordinate. Hence by Lemma 1(i)

the code

(defined in Lemma 1) has support size , that

is

. Furthermore, Lemma 1(ii) implies

that

, which together with the previous

Note that Theorem 11 improves the upper bound in Theorem 4. A closed form expression derived from (IV.4) is as follows.

Corollary 4: For

we have

inequality gives the result.

Recall now that for

we have

. Note

then that

. This follows from the simple observation that

(IV.6)

there is no a constant weight

code with

.

Then Lemma 3 in particular implies the inequality

Proof: We use the following known estimate for

(the latter also follows from the fact that the Gaussian coefficients which is not hard to verify:

in case

we have

). Since

is a

The left-hand

code, there is a codeword

of weight at most

in the support set of . Observe that this implies

side of (IV.5) is less than

. The latter

and hence

, implies that

, hence the result.

where is the minimum weight of . Note that

Corollary 4 in terms of the rate of an –wise intersecting code

and thus

. This in particular for

gives the following

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:38:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

506

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

Corollary 5: Given integers

–wise intersecting

code of rate

, there exists an Corollary 6: Given integers

we have

(IV.7)

(compare with Theorem 8).

Proof: Denote

the right hand side of (IV.4) and

is defined as in Theorem 8. Note then that

Proof: Note first that we have for any
have that

(IV.9)

. In case

, we

. This clearly implies

Therefore, in view of Corollary 4, we have

To apply Corollary 6, we can use any lower bound

for

. Using for example (I.6) we get

. Thus, we have

(IV.10)

For , Corollary 6 together with (IV.1) implies

Next we derive bounds for

. We start with a lower

bound. Recall that in view of Corollary 2(iii) we have

, which actually improves the

lower bound

(Theorem 3). However, we are able

to improve this bound.

Theorem 12: For integers

and

we have

Theorem 13: For integers

, we have

(IV.11)

(IV.8)

Proof: Let

be a generic –set with

and let

be a matrix where the columns are the

vectors of . Denote by

the

code generated by

. Suppose that

is the smallest number such that there

exists a subset

of linearly independent vectors which is

not –wise intersecting. Thus, is

–wise intersecting but

not –wise intersecting. Let also

where is an

–wise intersecting subset. Without loss of generality, we

assume that the rows of contain the vectors of . Denote then

by the

submatrix of obtained after removing

all vectors of .

We claim now that the code generated by is an

–wise intersecting

code (to avoid a triviality we

assume that

).

Suppose this is not the case, and let

be a set of

linearly independent vectors which are not

–wise inter-

secting. Recall that, in view of Corollary 2(i) (and Proposition

5), every subset of linearly independent vectors in contains

an

–wise intersecting subset. Thus

contains an

–wise intersecting subset

. Furthermore

contains one of subsets and . Note however, that

since is not –wise intersecting (

. Similarly,

, since (by assumption) is not

–wise inter-

secting (

). This means that set

does not contain an

–wise intersecting subset, a con-

tradiction. Therefore, given

, we have

which completes the proof.

(IV.12)

Proof: To each

–subspace

, we put into

correspondence a fixed generator matrix

of the dual

space , that is

. For example,

taking the set of all

matrices of rank in reduced row

echelon form, we get one-one correspondence between these

matrices and the set of all

–subspaces of . Now each

coset of denoted by is uniquely defined by the pair

where

and

. We say that

the cosets

are linearly independent if the vectors

are linearly independent. Let

denote the set

of all cosets of . We look for an –subset of which is a

generic –set.

In view of Proposition 4, a subset

is a generic

–set iff for each

–subspace , it contains a vector

from every collection of linearly independent cosets of .

We estimate now the number of bad sets of size . We remove

from

a set of independent cosets and denote the union

of these cosets by , thus

. Then any –subset of

is a bad set. The same holds with respect to the cosets of

every

–subspace. The number of distinct bases in is

. Therefore, the number of all bad –subsets

is less than

. If now this

number is less than

, the number of all –subsets of

, then there exists a generic –set of size . The

latter is equivalent to

(IV.13)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:38:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AHLSWEDE AND AYDINIAN: ON GENERIC ERASURE CORRECTING SETS AND RELATED PROBLEMS

507

This implies the result. A closed-form expression derived from (IV.12) is as follows.

Corollary 7: For

we have

(IV.14)

Proof: Simple calculations show that the left-hand side of

(IV.13) is less than

.

V. BOUNDS DERIVED BY A HYPERGRAPH COVERING

In this section, we show that hypergraph covering can be em-

ployed to get good upper bounds for –sets, generic erasure

correcting sets, and stopping redundancy of a linear code. Recall

that a hypergraph is a pair

where is a set of elements

called vertices and is a set of nonempty subsets of called

edges. Let

be a hypergraph with a vertex set and

an edge set . We denote by

(minimal

vertex degree) and by

(maximal vertex

degree) of . Similarly, we define the minimal edge degree

and the maximal edge degree .

Covering Lemma (Johnson [16], Lovás [21], Stein [26]): For

every hypergraph

there exists a covering of edges (by a

vertex set)

with

Lemma 4: A set of vectors

is –set if for every

–space

there exists an –space

such that

.

Proof: The proof is straightforward. Given an

–space , the fact that the direct sum

implies

that hits every coset of .

Consider a bipartite graph

with bipartition

. Define to be the set of all –subspaces, and to be

the set of all

–subspaces of . Thus

.

For

and

, we have an edge

if and only

if

. It is easy to see that given an –subspace , the

number of

–subspaces avoiding is

. Hence, the

degree of every vertex in is

.

The problem now is to find a minimal cover

of the

vertices . This clearly gives us an –set.

Every hypergraph can be represented as a bipartite graph (or

an incidence matrix) and vice versa. Given a bipartite graph

, let be the minimal degree of and let be the

maximal degree of .

The bipartite graph version of the Covering Lemma is as fol-

lows. There exists a covering

of with

Applying this to our problem, we get

(V.3)

(V.1)

This resut can be applied to our problems.

–Sets or –Wise Intersecting Codes: We apply now the

Covering Lemma. The vertex set is the set of nonzero vectors

in and the edge set is the set of all

–flats. The number

of all

–flats is

. Thus, we have a regular

uniform hypergraph with

and

.

Each

–flat has size , that is

. The number

of

–flats in containing a given vector is

.

Thus, the vertex degree is lemma there is a covering with

. In view of the

This yields the following result.

Theorem 14: There exists a –set (resp. an –wise in-

tersecting

code) consisting (resp. with a generator matrix

whose columns consist) of a union of less than

subspaces of dimension .

Generic Erasure Corecting Sets: The vertex set our hyper-

graph

is the set of nonzero vectors in . A subset

is an edge in if and only if is a union of linearly indepen-

dent cosets (defined in the proof of Theorem 13) of an

–subspace. Thus, the degree of each edge is

. Further-

more, the degree of each vertex is

.

It is clear that a minimal edge covering gives an optimal

generic erasure correcting –set, that is

. Ap-

plying now (V.2), we get

Recall that

(see Proposition 5 and

Problem 2). Thus, we have the following

Corollary 8: For integers

we have

Stopping Redundancy of a Binary Linear Code: Let be an

code and be its dual code. Let also

and

. The vertex set of our hypergraph is the set of

(V.2) all nonzero vectors of . Given a set of coordinates

with

, let be the set of all vectors in which

Note that the upper bound in Theorem 4 is approximately have weight one in . Note that

.

.

Our edge set is defined as

Next we show that there are ”good” –sets with an inter- . Let

be a minimum vertex cover of the hypergraph

esting structure: a union of –subspaces of . To this end we

. It is easy to see that if is a parity check matrix, that

need the following simple fact.

is

, then

. Note that dim

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:38:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

508

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

. Therefore, adding at most

independent vectors to

we get a parity check matrix. Thus, we have

. Observe now that a vector

of weight

covers

edges. Let

be the weight for which is maximal over all choices of

. Thus,

is a hypergraph with the minimal edge degree

and maximal vertex degree

.

Therefore, applying (V.2), we get

Corollary 9: For an

code with

, we have

Notice that although we do not always get the best known constants, however we achieve the same order of magnitude for the upper bounds. Since this simple approach gives almost the same results as those of presented before, it should be followed further by finding better covering results using for example Maximal Code Lemma (see [1, p. 238]) or ideas and methods described in [2, ch. 3].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The second author would like to thank anonymous referees for their comments.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Ahlswede, “Coloring hypergraphs: A new approach to multi-user source coding-II,” J. Combin., Inform., and Syst. Sci., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 220–260, 1980.
[2] R. Ahlswede and V. Blinovsky, Lectures on Advances in Combinatorics, Universitext. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2008.
[3] N. Alon, J. Bruck, J. Naor, M. Naor, and R. Roth, “Construction of asymptotically good low-rate error-correcting codes through pseudorandom graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 509–516, Mar. 1992.
[4] R. C. Bose and R. C. Burton, “A characterization of flat spaces in finite geometry and the uniqueness of the Hamming and the MacDonald codes,” J. Combin. Theory, vol. 1, pp. 96–104, 1966.
[5] G. D. Cohen and A. Lempel, “Linear intersecting codes,” Discrete Math., vol. 56, pp. 35–43, 1985.
[6] G. D. Cohen and G. Zemor, “Intersecting codes and independent families,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1872–1881, Nov. 1994.
[7] G. Cohen, S. Encheva, S. Litsyn, and H. G. Schaathun, “Intersecting codes and separating codes,” Discrete Appl. Math., vol. 128, no. 1, pp. 75–83, 2003.
[8] C. J. Colbourn, “Combinatorial aspects of covering arrays,” Le Matematiche (Catania), vol. 58, pp. 121–167, 2004.
[9] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[10] T. Etzion, “On the stopping redundancy of Reed-Muller codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 4867–4879, Nov. 2006.
[11] J. Han and P. H. Siegel, “Improved upper bounds on stopping redundancy,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 90–104, Jan. 2007.

[12] J. Han, P. H. Siegel, and A. Vardy, “Improved probabilistic bounds on stopping redundancy,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1749–1753, Apr. 2008.
[13] T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, S. Lendner, and J. B. Huber, “Permutation decoding and the stopping redundancy hierarchy of cyclic and extended cyclic codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5308–5331, Dec. 2008.
[14] H. D. L. Hollmann and L. M. G. M. Tolhuizen, “Generic erasure correcting sets: Bounds and constructions,” J. Combin. Theory A, vol. 113, pp. 1746–1759, 2006.
[15] H. D. L. Hollmann and L. M. G. M. Tolhuizen, “On parity-check collections for iterative erasure decoding that correct all correctable erasure patterns of a given size,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 823–828, Feb. 2007.
[16] D. S. Johnson, “Approximation algorithms for combinatorial problems,” J. Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 9, pp. 256–298, 1974.
[17] G. O. H. Katona, “Two applications (for search theory and truth functions) of Sperner type thorems,” Periodica Math. Hung, vol. 3, pp. 19–26, 1973.
GF [18] G. O. H. Katona and Srivastava, “Minimal 2-coverings of a finite affine space based on (2),” J. Statist. Plann. Infer., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. k 375–388, 1983. [19] D. K. Kleitman and J. Spencer, “Families of –independent sets,” Dis-
crete Math., vol. 6, pp. 255–262, 1973. [20] J. Komlós and A. G. Greenberg, “An asymptotically fast nonadaptive
algorithm for conflict resolution in multiple-access channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-31, no. 2, pp. 302–306, Mar. 1985. [21] L. Lovász, “On the ratio of optimal and fractional covers,” Discrete Math., vol. 13, pp. 383–390, 1975. [22] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North Holland Mathematical Library, 1977. [23] D. Miklos, “Linear binary codes with intersecting properties,” Discrete Appl. Math., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 187–196, 1984. [24] A. Rényi, Foundations of Probability. New York: Wiley, 1971. [25] M. Schwartz and A. Vardy, “On the stopping distance and the stopping redundancy of codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 922–932, Mar. 2006. [26] S. K. Stein, “Two combinatorial covering problems,” J. Combin. Theory. A, vol. 16, pp. 391–397, 1974. [27] M. A. Tsfasmann, “Algebraic-geometric codes and asymptotic problems,” Discrete Appl. Math., vol. 33, pp. 241–256, 1991. [28] J. H. Weber and K. A. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Stopping set analysis for Hamming codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISOC Information Theory Workshop on Coding and Complexity, Rotorua, New Zealand, Aug./Sep. 2005, pp. 24–24.
Rudolf Ahlswede was born in Dielmissen, Germany, in September 15, 1938. He studied mathematics, physics, and philosophy in Göttingen, and received his Dr. rer. nat. degree in mathematics from the University of Göttingen, Germany, in 1966.
In 1967, he joined the faculty of the Department of Mathematics, Ohio State University, Columbus, where he was promoted to Associate Professor in 1969 and served as Full-Professor from 1972 to 1976. Since then, he has been at the University of Bielefeld, Germany, till 2003 as Ordinarius and then as Emeritus. He has been guest of most of the leading research centers in the world.
Dr. Ahlswede’s honors and prizes include an Honorary Doctor of the Russian Academy of Sciences 2001, membership of the European Academy of Sciences 2004, and the 2006 Shannon Award.
Rudolf Ahlswede died on December 18, 2010.
Harout Aydinian received the Ph.D. degree in mathematics from the Institute for Informatics and Automation problems, Yerevan, Armenia, in 1989.
From 1979 to 1984 and from 1984 to 1986, he was a Researcher at the Institute for Informatics and Automation Problems, and the Institute for Problems of Information Transmission, Moscow, Russia, respectively. From 1987 to 1997, he was a Senior Researcher at the Institute for Informatics and Automation problems, Yerevan. Since 1997, he has been a Wiss. Mitarbeiter at the University of Bielefeld, Germany.
His research interests include coding theory, combinatorics, and networking.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:38:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

