IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

585

Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes: Influence of Proto- and Tanner-Graph Structure on Minimum Hamming Distance Upper Bounds
Roxana Smarandache, Member, IEEE, and Pascal O. Vontobel, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are an important instance of proto-graph-based LDPC codes. In this paper we present upper bounds on the minimum Hamming distance of QC LDPC codes and study how these upper bounds depend on graph structure parameters (like variable degrees, check node degrees, girth) of the Tanner graph and of the underlying proto-graph. Moreover, for several classes of proto-graphs we present explicit QC LDPC code constructions that achieve (or come close to) the respective minimum Hamming distance upper bounds. Because of the tight algebraic connection between QC codes and convolutional codes, we can state similar results for the free Hamming distance of convolutional codes. In fact, some QC code statements are established by first proving the corresponding convolutional code statements and then using a result by Tanner that says that the minimum Hamming distance of a QC code is upper bounded by the free Hamming distance of the convolutional code that is obtained by “unwrapping” the QC code.
Index Terms—Convolutional code, girth, graph cover, low-density parity-check (LDPC) matrix, proto-graph, proto-matrix, pseudo-codeword, quasi-cyclic (QC) code, Tanner graph, weight matrix.

I. INTRODUCTION

Q UASI-CYCLIC (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes represent an important class of codes within the

family of LDPC codes [1]. The first graph-based code

construction that yielded QC codes was presented by Tanner in

[2]; although that code construction was presented in the context

of repeat-accumulate codes, it was easy to generalize the under-

lying idea to LDPC codes in order to obtain QC LDPC codes

[3]–[6]. The simplicity with which QC LDPC codes can be de-

scribed makes them attractive for implementation and analysis

purposes.

A QC LDPC code of length

can be described by a

(scalar) parity-check matrix that is formed by a

Manuscript received January 23, 2009; revised July 04, 2011; accepted July 15, 2011. Date of current version February 08, 2012. The work of R. Smarandache was partially supported by the NSF by Grants DMS-0708033 and TF-0830608. The work of P. O. Vontobel was supported in part by the NSF by Grant CCF-0514801. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 2004 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
R. Smarandache is with the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA 92182 USA (e-mail: rsmarand@sciences.sdsu.edu).
P. O. Vontobel is with Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA 94304 USA (e-mail: pascal.vontobel@ieee.org).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2011.2173244

array of

circulant matrices. Clearly, by choosing these cir-

culant matrices to be low-density, the parity-check matrix will

also be low-density.

With the help of the well-known isomorphism between the

ring of circulant matrices over some field and the ring of

-polynomials modulo

(see, e.g., [7]), a QC LDPC code

can equally well be described by a polynomial parity-check ma-

trix of size

. In the remainder of the paper we will mainly

work with the polynomial parity-check matrix of a QC LDPC

code and not with the (scalar) parity-check matrix. Another rel-

evant concept in this paper will be the weight matrix associated

with a polynomial parity-check matrix; this weight matrix is a

integer matrix whose entries indicate the number of terms

of the corresponding polynomial in the polynomial parity-check

matrix.

Early papers on QC LDPC codes focused mainly on poly-

nomial parity-check matrices whose weight matrix contained

only ones. Such polynomial parity-check matrices are known as

monomial parity-check matrices because all entries are mono-

mials, i.e., polynomials with exactly one term. For this class

of QC LDPC codes it was soon established that the minimum

Hamming distance is always upper bounded by

[4], [5],

[8].

In this paper we study polynomial parity-check matrices with

more general weight matrices by allowing the entries of the

weight matrix to be 0, 1, 2, or 3 (and sometimes larger). This

is equivalent to allowing the entries of the polynomial parity-

check matrix to be the zero polynomial, to be a monomial, to be

a binomial, or to be a trinomial (and sometimes a polynomial

with more nonzero coefficients). The main theme will be to an-

alyze the minimum Hamming distance of such codes, in partic-

ular by studying upper bounds on the minimum Hamming dis-

tance and to see how these upper bounds depend on other code

parameters like the girth of the Tanner graph. We will obtain

upper bounds that are functions of the polynomial parity-check

matrix and upper bounds that are functions of the weight matrix.

The latter results are in general weaker but they give good in-

sights into the dependency of the minimum Hamming distance

on the structure of the weight matrix. For example, for

we show that there are weight matrices that are different from

the all-one weight matrix (but with the same column and row

sum) that yield minimum Hamming distance upper bounds that

are larger than the above-mentioned

bound. By con-

structing some codes that achieve this upper bound we are able

to show that the discrepancies in upper bounds are not spurious.

Being able to obtain minimum Hamming distance bounds

as a function of the weight matrix is also interesting because

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

586

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

the weight matrix is tightly connected to the concept of proto-

graphs and LDPC codes derived from them [9], [10]. Proto-

graph-based code constructions start with a proto-graph that

is described by a

incidence matrix whose entries are

non-negative integers and where a “0” entry corresponds to no

edge, a “1” entry corresponds to a single edge, a “2” entry cor-

responds to two parallel edges, etc. (Such an incidence matrix is

also known as a proto-matrix.) Once such a proto-graph is spec-

ified, a proto-graph-based LDPC code is then defined to be the

code whose Tanner graph [11] is some -fold graph cover [12],

[13] of that proto-graph.

It is clear that the construction of QC LDPC codes can then

be seen as a special case of the proto-graph-based construction:

first, the weight matrix corresponds to the proto-matrix, i.e., the

incidence matrix of the proto-graph; secondly, the -fold cover

is obtained by restricting the edge permutations to be cyclic.

A main reason for the attractiveness of QC LDPC codes

is that they can be encoded efficiently using approaches

like in [14] and decoded efficiently using belief-propaga-

tion-based decoding algorithms [15] or LP-based decoding

algorithms [16]–[19]. Although the behavior of these decoders

is mostly dominated by pseudo-codewords [20]–[27] and the

(channel-dependent) pseudo-weight of pseudo-codewords,

the minimum Hamming distance still plays an important role

because it characterizes undetectable errors and it provides an

upper bound on the minimum pseudo-weight of a Tanner graph

representing a code.

Although the main focus of this paper is on QC codes, we

can state analogous results for convolutional codes. Besides the

interest that these statements generate on their own, from a the-

orem proving point of view these results are helpful because

some of our results for QC codes are most easily proven by

first proving the corresponding results for convolutional codes.

From a technical point of view, this stems from the fact that

convolutional codes are defined by parity-check matrices over a

field (more precisely, the field

specified in Section II-A),

whereas QC codes are defined by parity-check matrices over

rings (more precisely, the ring

specified in Section II-A),

and that consequently there are more linear algebra tools avail-

able to handle convolutional codes than to handle QC codes.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.1

Section II introduces important concepts and the notation

that will be used throughout the paper. Thereafter, Section III

presents the two main results of this paper. Both results are

upper bounds on the minimum Hamming distance of a QC

code: whereas in the case of Theorem 7 the upper bound is

a function of the polynomial parity-check matrix of the QC

code, in the case of Theorem 8 the upper bound is a function

of the weight matrix of the QC code only. The following two

sections are then devoted to the study of special cases of these

results. Namely, Section IV focuses on so-called type-1 QC

LDPC codes (i.e., QC LDPC codes where the weight matrix

entries are at most 1) and Section V focuses on so-called type-2

and type-3 QC LDPC codes (i.e., QC LDPC codes where the

weight matrix entries are at most 2 and 3, respectively). We will

1This overview mentions only QC code results and omits the analogous convolutional code results.

show how we can obtain type-2 and type-3 codes from type-1 codes having the same regularity and possibly better minimum Hamming distance properties. Section VI investigates the influence of cycles on minimum Hamming distance bounds. Finally, Section VII discusses a promising construction of type-1 QC LDPC codes based on type-2 or type-3 QC LDPC codes. In fact, we suggest a sequence of constructions starting with a type-1 code that exhibits good girth and minimum Hamming distance properties, or that has good performance under message-passing iterative decoding. We construct a type-2 or type-3 code with the same regularity and higher Hamming distance upper bound, and from this we obtain a new type-1 code with possibly larger minimum Hamming distance. Section VIII concludes the paper. The Appendix contains the longer proofs and also one section (cf. Appendix I) that lists some results with respect to graph covers.

II. DEFINITIONS
This section formally introduces the objects that were discussed in Section I, along with some other definitions that will be used throughout the paper.

A. Sets, Rings, Fields, Vectors, and Matrices

We use the following sets, rings, and fields: for any positive

integer

denotes the set

is the ring

of integers; for any positive integer

is the ring of in-

tegers modulo

is the Galois field of size 2;

is the

ring of polynomials with coefficients in and indeterminate

is the ring of polynomials in

modulo

, where is a positive integer; and

is the field

of formal Laurent series over , i.e., the set

with the usual rules for addition and mul-

tiplication. We will often use the notational short-hand

for

.

By and

we will mean, respectively, a row vector

over of length and a matrix over of size

, with a

similar meaning given to

, and

. In the following we will use the convention that

indices of vector entries start at 0 (and not at 1), with a similar

convention for row and column indices of matrix entries.

For any matrix , we let

be the submatrix of that

contains only the rows of whose index appears in the set

and only the columns of whose index appears in the set . If

equals the set of all row indices of , we will omit in

the set and we will simply write . Moreover, we will use

the short-hand

for

.

As usual, the operator gives back the minimum value

of a list of values.2 In the following, we will also use a more

specialized minimum operator, namely the

operator that

gives back the minimum value of all nonzero entries in a list of

values.3

2If the list is empty then gives back .

3If the list is empty or if zero is the only value appearing in the list then

gives back . In particular, for lists containing only non-negative values, as

will be the case in the remainder of this paper, the

operator gives back the

smallest positive entry of the list if the list contains positive entries, otherwise

it gives back .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE AND VONTOBEL: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

587

B. Weights

The weight

of a polynomial

equals the number of nonzero coefficients of . Similarly, the

weight

of a polynomial

equals the

weight

of the (unique) minimal-degree polynomial

that fulfills

.

Let

be a

length- polynomial vector. Then the weight vector

of

is a length- vector with the th entry equal to

. Similarly, let

be a size-

polynomial matrix. Then the weight matrix

of

is a -matrix with the entry in

row and column equal to

.

The Hamming weight

of a vector is the number

of nonzero entries of . In the case of a polynomial vector

, the Hamming

weight

is defined to be the sum of the weights of

its polynomial entries, i.e.,

.

Analogous definitions are used for the weight of an element

of

, the weight of vectors over

, etc.

C. QC Codes

All codes in this paper will be binary linear codes. As usual,

a block code of length can be specified through a (scalar)

parity-check matrix

, i.e.,

, where denotes transposition. This code has rate at least

and its minimum Hamming distance (which equals the

minimum Hamming weight since the code is linear) will be de-

noted by

.

Let , and be positive integers. Let be a code of length

that possesses a parity-check matrix of the form

where

. It can easily be checked that

is equivalent to

giving us an alternate way to check if a (polynomial) vector is a codeword.
The following classification was first introduced in [8].

Definition 1: Let be some positive integer. We say that

a polynomial parity-check matrix

of a QC LDPC code

is of type if all the entries of the associated weight matrix

are at most . Moreover, we say that a QC LDPC

code is of type if it is defined by a polynomial parity-check

matrix of type .

Equivalently,

is of type if for each polynomial entry

in

the number of nonzero coefficients is at most . In

particular, the polynomial parity-check matrix

is of type

1 (in [8] we also called them “type I”) if

contains only

the zero polynomial and monomials. Moreover, the polynomial

parity-check matrix

is of type 2 (in [8] we also called

them “type II”) if

contains only the zero polynomial,

monomials, and binomials. If

contains only monomials

then it will be called a monomial parity-check matrix. (Obvi-

ously, a monomial parity-check matrix is a type-1 polynomial

parity-check matrix.)

D. Convolutional Codes

A convolutional code

can be described by a polynomial

parity-check matrix

; the codewords

of

are then the polynomial vectors

that

satisfy4

...

...

...

...

where the submatrices

are circulant. Such a code

is called quasi-cyclic (QC) because applying circular shifts to

length- subblocks of a codeword gives a codeword again. Be-

cause

is circulant, it can be written as the sum

, where

is the entry of

in row

and column 0, and where is the times cyclically left-shifted

identity matrix of size

.

With a parity-check matrix

of a QC code we as-

sociate the polynomial parity-check matrix

...

...

...

...

The free Hamming distance of

will be denoted by

. Moreover, a convolutional code whose (poly-

nomial) parity-check matrix is sparse will be called a con-

volutional LDPC code and we extend the classification of

polynomial parity-check matrices in Definition 1 from QC

codes to convolutional codes.

The main interest of the present paper in convolutional codes

is the fact that QC codes can be “unwrapped” to yield con-

volutional codes [28] (see also [29] and [30]). In mathemat-

ical terms, “unwrapping” means to associate with a QC code

defined by some polynomial parity-check matrix

the convolutional code

defined by the poly-

nomial parity-check matrix

, where

where

. Moreover, with any vector In other words,

is obtained by replacing all appear-

we as- ances of (and its powers) in

by (and its powers). Note

sociate the polynomial vector

4Although “formal Laurent series parity-check matrix” and “formal Laurent series vector” would be more precise, we use “polynomial parity-check matrix” and “polynomial vector” also in the context of convolutional codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

588

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

that the weight matrices of

and

are the same,

i.e.,

.5

A theorem by Tanner [28] allows one then to relate the min-

imum Hamming distance of the QC code to the free Hamming

distance of the above-defined convolutional code , namely

(1)

(See [31] for the usage of this theorem in the context of QC

LDPC and convolutional LDPC codes, along with generaliza-

tions of it to different notions of minimum pseudoweights.)

There is a simple algebraic reason why in the present paper

we are interested in the aforementioned connection between

QC codes and convolutional codes. Namely, since the entries

of

are from some field, notions like linear indepen-

dence and rank are well defined for this matrix. In particular, the

zero-ness/nonzero-ness of determinants of square submatrices

of

allow us to reach conclusions about the linear de-

pendence/independence of the rows and columns of these sub-

matrices. Such conclusions can in general not be reached for

the submatrices of

, which is a matrix with entries in some

commutative ring (in particular, a ring with zero divisors).

Fig. 1. Left: Tanner graph of a length-12 QC LDPC code. It is a triple cover of the proto-graph shown on the right. Right: Proto-graph of the Tanner graph shown on the left.

E. Graphs

With a parity-check matrix we associate a Tanner graph

[11] in the usual way: for every code bit we draw a variable

node, for every parity-check we draw a check node, and we

connect a variable node and a check node by an edge if and only

if the corresponding entry in is nonzero. Similarly, the Tanner

graph associated with a polynomial parity-check matrix

is simply the Tanner graph associated with the corresponding

(scalar) parity-check matrix .

As usual, the degree of a vertex is the number of edges in-

cident to it and an LDPC code is called

-regular if all

variable nodes have degree and all check nodes have degree

. Otherwise we will say that the code is irregular. Moreover, a

cycle of a graph will be a backtrackless, tailless, closed walk in

the graph, and the length of a cycle is defined to be equal to the

number of visited vertices (or, equivalently, the number of vis-

ited edges). The girth of a graph is then the length of the shortest

cycle of the graph.

The above-mentioned concepts are made more concrete with

the help of the following example.

Example 2: Let be a length-12 QC code that is described by the parity-check matrix

Clearly,

, and

also be written like

for this code and so can

where

, are -times cyclically left-shifted

identity matrices. The corresponding polynomial parity-

check matrix is

and the weight matrix is

The Tanner graph associated with or

is shown in

Fig. 1(left). We observe that all variable nodes have degree 3

and all check nodes have degree 4, therefore is a

-reg-

ular LDPC code. (Equivalently, all columns of have weight

3 and all rows of have weight 4.)

The proto-graph associated with a polynomial parity-check

matrix

is a graphical representation of the weight matrix

in the following way. It is a graph where for each

column of

we draw a variable node, for each row of

we draw a check node, and the number of edges between a vari-

able node and a check node equals the corresponding entry in

.

Example 3: Continuing Example 2, the proto-graph of

is shown in Fig. 1(right). Clearly, the weight matrix

5Here and in the following we assume that

is given in a form where is the incidence matrix of this latter graph. We observe that all

the exponents that appear in

are at least 0 and strictly smaller than .

variable nodes have degree 3 and all check nodes have degree

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE AND VONTOBEL: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

589

4. (Equivalently, all column sums (in ) of

and all row sums (in ) of

equal 4.)

equal 3

An important concept for this paper is that of the so-called graph covers, see the next definition.

Definition 4 (See, e.g., [12] and [13]): Let be a graph with

vertex set

and edge set

, and let

denote the set

of adjacent vertices of a vertex

. An unramified, fi-

nite cover, or, simply, a cover of a (base) graph is a graph

along with a surjective map

, which is a graph

homomorphism, i.e., which takes adjacent vertices of to adja-

cent vertices of such that, for each vertex

and each

, the neighborhood of is mapped bijectively

to . For a positive integer , an -cover of is an unrami-

fied finite cover

such that, for each vertex

of

contains exactly vertices of . An -cover of

is sometimes also called an -sheeted covering of or a cover

of of degree .6

Example 5: Continuing Examples 2 and 3, we note that the graph in Fig. 1(left) is a 3-cover of the graph in Fig. 1(right). Therefore, the code is a proto-graph-based code. It can easily be checked visually that all edge permutations that were used to define this 3-cover are cyclic permutations, confirming that the code is indeed QC.

Tanner graphs can also be defined for convolutional codes (see, e.g., [32]); in particular, [32] discusses some connections between the Tanner graph of a QC code and the Tanner graph of a convolutional code that is obtained by “unwrapping” the QC code.
We conclude this subsection by emphasizing that graph covers have been used in two different ways in the context of LDPC codes: on the one hand, they have been used for constructing LDPC codes (like in this paper), on the other hand they have been used to analyze message-passing iterative decoders (like in [23] and [24]).

F. Determinants and Permanents

The determinant of an

-matrix

commutative ring is defined to be

over some

III. MINIMUM HAMMING DISTANCE UPPER BOUNDS

This section contains the two main theoretical results of this

paper, namely Theorems 7 and 8. More precisely, given some

QC code with polynomial parity-check matrix

and min-

imum Hamming distance

, Theorem 7 presents an upper

bound on

as a function of the entries of

and The-

orem 8 presents an upper bound on

as a function of

the entries of

. The upper bound of Theorem 8 is in

general weaker than the upper bound of Theorem 7, however,

it is interesting to see that the weight matrix alone can already

give nontrivial bounds on the achievable minimum Hamming

distance. These theorems also present analogous results for the

free Hamming distance of convolutional codes.

In Sections IV and V, we will discuss the implications of

these two theorems on codes with type-1, type-2, and type-3

polynomial parity-check matrices. Moreover, in Section VI we

will show how the upper bounds in Theorems 7 and 8 can be

strengthened by taking some graph structure information (like

cycles) into account.

We start with a simple technique to construct codewords

of codes described by polynomial parity-check matrices; this

extends a codeword construction technique by MacKay and

Davey [4, Theorem 2]. (Note that the paper [4] deals with codes

that are described by scalar parity-check matrices composed

of commuting permutation submatrices, of which parity-check

matrices composed of cyclically shifted identity matrices are

a special case. However, and as we show in this paper, their

techniques can be suitably extended to codes that are described

by scalar parity-check matrices composed of any circulant ma-

trices, and therefore to codes that are described by polynomial

parity-check matrices.)

Lemma 6: Let be the QC code defined by the

polynomial parity-check matrix

.

Let be an arbitrary size-

subset of and let

be a length-

vector defined by7

where the summation is over all permutations of the set ,

and where

equals if is an even permutation and

equals if is an odd permutation.

The permanent of an

-matrix

over some

commutative ring is defined to be

Then is a codeword in .

An analogous construction yields codewords of the convolu-

tional code

defined by the polynomial parity-check matrix

.

Proof: Let

be the chosen size-

subset. In order to verify that is a codeword in , we need

to show that the syndrome

(in

)

is the all-zero vector. For any

, we can express the th

component of as follows:

where the summation is over all permutations of the set .

Clearly, for any matrix with elements from a commutative

ring of characteristic 2 it holds that

.

6It is important not to confuse the degree of a covering and the degree of a vertex.

7Because the ring

has characteristic 2, we could equally well define

if

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

590

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

where in the last step we used the fact that for commutative rings

with characteristic 2 the permanent equals the determinant. Ob-

serving that

is the co-factor expansion of the determinant

of the

-matrix

...

...

...

and noting that this latter matrix is singular (because at least two

rows are equal), we obtain the result that

and that

is indeed a codeword in , as promised.

Because

is a field, and therefore a commutative ring,

the same argument holds also for a code like

that is defined

by a parity-check matrix over

.

With the help of the codeword construction technique in

Lemma 6 we can easily obtain the bound in Theorem 7:

simply construct the list of all codewords corresponding to all

size-

subsets of , and use the fact that the minimum

Hamming distance of /the free Hamming distance of

is upper bounded by the minimum Hamming weight of all

nonzero codewords in this list.

Theorem 7: Let be the QC code defined by the polynomial

parity-check matrix

. Then the minimum

Hamming distance of is upper bounded as follows

(2)

Let

be the convolutional code defined by the polyno-

mial parity-check matrix

. Then the free

Hamming distance of

is upper bounded as follows:

Let us emphasize that it is important to have the

operator in (2), and not just the

operator. The reason is

that the upper bound is based on constructing codewords of

the code and evaluating their Hamming weight. For some

polynomial parity-check matrices some of these constructed

codewords may equal the all-zero codeword and therefore have

Hamming weight zero: clearly, such constructed codewords are

irrelevant for upper bounding the minimum Hamming distance

and therefore must be discarded. This is done with the help

of the

operator. [Similar statements can be made with

respect to (3).]

The next theorem, Theorem 8, gives a minimum/free Ham-

ming distance upper bound which is easier to compute than (2)

and (3) and which depends only on the weight matrix associ-

ated with

and

, respectively. In particular, this

bound does not depend on , the size of the circulant matrices

in the scalar parity-check matrix corresponding to

. The

bound says that the minimum/free Hamming distance is upper

bounded by the minimum nonzero sum of the permanents of all

submatrices of a chosen

submatrix of the

weight matrix, the minimum being taken over all such possible

submatrices of the weight matrix.

Theorem 8: Let be a QC code with polynomial parity-check

matrix

and let

, or, let

be a convolutional code with polynomial parity-check matrix

and let

. Then

(4)

In particular, if

then

Proof: See Appendix A.

(3)

Again, as in Theorem 7, it is important to have the

op-

erator in Theorem 8 and not just the operator. This time the

[Note that for

the right-hand side (RHS)

of (2) and (3) need not be equal.]

Proof: We start by proving the QC code part of this the-

orem. Let be a size-

subset of and let

be

the corresponding codeword constructed according to Lemma

6. The result in the theorem statement follows by noting that

has Hamming weight

reasoning is a bit more involved, though, and we refer the reader

to the proof of Theorem 8 for details.8

Note that the upper bound in (2) depends on (because the

computations are done modulo

), whereas the bound in

(4) does not depend on .

Usually, the expressions in (2) and (3) yield upper bounds

that are not larger than the upper bounds from (4). However,

this does not need to happen. For example, there are polynomial

parity-check matrices for which (2) and (3) evaluate to ,

whereas (4) evaluates to some finite number.

Based on Theorems 7 and 8, the following recipe can be for-

mulated for the construction of QC LDPC codes with good min-

imum Hamming distance. (A similar recipe can be given for the

construction of convolutional LDPC codes with good free Ham-

The convolutional code part of this theorem then follows ming distance.)

from the observation that

is a field (and therefore a com-

mutative ring), and so the above derivation also holds for the

parity-check matrix

.

8We are grateful to O. Y. Takeshita for pointing out to us that in earlier (and

also less general) versions of Theorem 7 and Theorem 8 (cf. [8]) the oper-

ator has to be replaced by the

operator, see also [33].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE AND VONTOBEL: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

591

• Search for a suitable weight matrix with the help of The-

orem 8.

• Among all polynomial parity-check matrices with this

weight matrix, find a suitable polynomial parity-check

matrix with the help of Theorem 7.

• Verify explicitly if the minimum Hamming distance of the

code of the found polynomial parity-check matrix really

equals (or comes close to) the minimum Hamming distance

promised by the upper bound in Theorem 7.

This recipe is especially helpful in the case where one is

searching among type- polynomial parity-check matrices

with small , say

. In such cases it is to be

expected that there is not much difference in the upper bounds

(2) and (4). For type- polynomial parity-check matrices with

larger , however, we do not expect that the upper bounds

(2) and (4) are close. The reason is that when computing

in (2) there will be many terms that cancel

each other. Anyway, when constructing QC LDPC codes,

type- polynomial parity-check matrices with large are

somewhat undesirable because of the relatively small girth of

the corresponding Tanner graph. In particular, it is well known

that the Tanner graph of a polynomial parity-check matrix

whose weight matrix contains at least one entry of weight 3 (or

larger) has girth at most 6 (see also Theorem 18).

According to (2), the minimum Hamming distance of is upper bounded by
and the minimum Hamming distance of is upper bounded by
However, in both cases the bound in (4) gives since both polynomial parity-check matrices have the same weight matrix. Similarly, in both cases the bound in (5) gives

IV. TYPE-1 QC/CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

In this section, we specialize the results of the previous section to the case of type-1 parity-check matrices.

Corollary 9: Let be a type-1 QC code with poly-

nomial parity-check matrix

and let

, or, let

be a type-1 convolutional code

with polynomial parity-check matrix

and let

. Then

(5)

since both polynomial parity-check matrices have

.

In conclusion, we see that a 2 4 monomial parity-check

matrix can yield a QC code with minimum Hamming dis-

tance at most 6. However, when the entries of the polynomial

parity-check matrix are not chosen suitably, as is the case for

, then the minimum Hamming distance upper bound in

(2) is strictly smaller than the minimum Hamming distance

upper bound in (4).

For completeness, we computed the minimum Hamming dis-

tance of the two codes,9 and obtained 2 for the first code (e.g.,

is a codeword), and 4 for the second code for most

values of .

Proof: See Appendix B.

The rest of this section will be devoted to QC codes; however, analogous results can also be stated for convolutional codes.
Let us evaluate the minimum Hamming distance upper bounds that we have obtained so far for some type-1 QC code polynomial parity-check matrices. (Actually, the following polynomial parity-check matrices happen to be monomial parity-check matrices, i.e., polynomial parity-check matrices where all entries of the corresponding weight matrices equal 1.)

Example 10: Let

. Consider the

-regular length-

QC code given by the polynomial parity-check matrix

Let us discuss another example.

Example 11: Let

and let the

-regular QC LDPC

code be given by the polynomial parity-check matrix

(This code was obtained by shortening the last positions of

the

-regular type-1 QC LDPC code of length presented

in [36].10) Evaluating the bounds in (4) and (5) for this polyno-

mial parity-check matrix, we see that the minimum Hamming

distance is upper bounded by 24, and for suitable choices of

and the

-regular length-

nomial parity-check matrix

QC code

given by the poly-

9Here and elsewhere in the paper, we compute the minimum distance of various QC codes with the help of suitable Magma programs [34]. For analyzing the free distance of convolutional codes, a suitable program is, e.g., BEAST [35].

10Note that in [36],

, and the code parameters are

. Also

note that by shortening a code, the girth of the associated Tanner graph cannot

decrease.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

592

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

this upper bound is indeed achieved. We computed the min-

imum Hamming distance of the code for different values of

and obtained that

is the smallest such choice. The code

obtained for

has parameters

. The minimum

Hamming distance and rate for this and some other values of

are listed in the following table.

We start our investigations with the following motivating example.

Example 13: In Example 11 we saw that the minimum Ham-

ming distance of type-1

-regular QC codes with a 3 4

polynomial parity-check matrix cannot surpass 24. In this ex-

ample we show that type-2 -regular QC codes with a 3 4

polynomial parity-check matrix can have minimum Hamming

distance strictly larger than 24. Namely, consider the code

with parity-check matrix

As we have seen from the above examples, the minimum

Hamming distance upper bound (2) can be strictly smaller than

the upper bound (4). However, the upper bound (4) is computed

more easily, and it provides an upper bound on the Hamming

distance of all QC codes having the same weight matrix and

therefore also the same proto-graph.

Applying Corollary 9 to QC codes with monomial parity-

check matrices shows that for such codes the minimum Ham-

ming distance is upper bounded by

. We note that this

result was previously presented by MacKay and Davey [4] and

discussed by Fossorier [5]. However, as we show in this paper,

their techniques can be suitably extended to QC codes that are

described by scalar parity-check matrices composed of any cir-

culant matrices, and therefore to codes that are described by

polynomial parity-check matrices.

Example 12: It is clear that the higher the rate of a code is, the more difficult it is to achieve the upper bound in Corollary 9. However, the QC code defined by the polynomial parity-check matrix

with

shows that there exist also QC codes with de-

sign rate 4/7 that achieve the minimum Hamming distance upper

bound in Corollary 9, i.e.,

. (This example is taken

from [37, Table III].)

We would like to warn the reader that we do not claim that the “recipe” given at the end of Section III is an optimal strategy for obtaining QC codes that achieve the upper bounds presented in this paper. In particular, instead of fixing the polynomial paritycheck matrix and increasing , it might be a good idea to change the polynomial parity-check matrix as well with increasing , thereby allowing the degrees of the polynomials to grow with . Such a strategy might yield codes that achieve the upper bounds for smaller ; however, investigating this approach is beyond the scope of this paper.

(6)

(This polynomial parity-check matrix was obtained from the

parity-check matrix

in Example 11 by pairing some

monomials into binomials and replacing with 0 the positions

left, careful to preserve the

-regularity.) The corre-

sponding weight matrix is

and, according to (4), yields the following minimum Hamming distance upper bound

For small , the corresponding QC code does not attain this

bound, however, for

one can verify that the resulting QC

code attains the optimal minimum Hamming distance

. This is a

code of rate 0.2554.

After this introductory example, let us have a more sys-

tematic view of the possible weight matrices of

-regular

QC/convolutional codes and the minimum/free Hamming

distance upper bounds that they yield.

Corollary 14: Let be a

-regular type-2 QC code

with polynomial parity-check matrix

and

let

, or, let

be a

-regular

type-2 convolutional code with polynomial parity-check matrix

and let

.

Then all possible

-regular size-(3 4) type-2 weight

matrices (up to permutations of rows and columns) are given

by the following 5 types of matrices (shown here along with the

corresponding minimum/free Hamming distance upper bound

implied by (4)):

V. TYPE-2 AND TYPE-3 QC/CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

After having discussed minimum/free Hamming distance

upper bounds for type-1 QC/convolutional codes in the pre-

vious section, we now present similar results for type-2 and

type-3 QC/convolutional codes. In particular, we classify all

possible weight matrices of

-regular QC/convolutional

codes with a 3 4 polynomial parity-check matrix.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE AND VONTOBEL: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

593

Fig. 2. Decoding performance of the

QC LDPC code vs. a randomly generated (four-cycle free)

decoding when transmitting over a binary-input AWGN channel. (For more details, see Example 15.)

LDPC code under sum-product algorithm

zero or if a maximal number of 64 (respectively, 256) iterations

is reached. It is compared with a randomly generated -reg-

ular

LDPC code where four-cycles in the Tanner graph

have been eliminated. (When comparing these two codes one

has to keep in mind that because the randomly generated code

has slightly lower rate and because the horizontal axis shows

As can be seen from this list, the largest upper bound is and it can be obtained if the weight matrix
equals (modulo permutations of rows and columns) the first or the second matrix in the list.
Proof: Omitted.

, the randomly generated code has a slight “disadvantage” of 0.093 dB.) Note though that the decoding complexity per iteration is the same for both codes.
Let us mention on the side that we tried to estimate the minimum (AWGN channel) pseudoweight [23], [24] of this code. From searching in the fundamental cone we get an upper bound

Example 15: We see that the type-2

-regular QC code

with a 3 4 polynomial parity-check matrix and with

presented in Example 13 not only achieves the minimum Ham-

ming distance upper bound promised by (4) but, according to

Corollary 14, it achieves the best possible minimum Hamming

distance upper bound for any type-2 -regular QC code with

a 3 4 polynomial parity-check matrix. We note that this par-

of 27.6 on the minimum pseudoweight. The pseudoweight spec-

trum gap [26] is therefore estimated to be

,

which is on the same order as the pseudoweight spectrum gap

for the

-regular

code by Tanner [36], which

is estimated to be

. We also note that for the

aforementioned randomly generated

code we obtained

an upper bound on the minimum pseudoweight of 21.0.

ticular code has parameters

, girth 8, and diameter

8, i.e., the same girth and diameter as the Tanner graph of the

code in Example 11), which is a shortened version

of the

code in [36].

Fig. 2 shows the decoding performance (word error rate) of

the

QC LDPC code when used for transmission

over a binary-input additive white Gaussian noise channel. De-

coding is done using the standard sum-product algorithm [15]

which is terminated if the syndrome of the codeword estimate is

If we want to take into consideration all cases of -regular QC/convolutional codes with polynomial parity-check matrices of size 3 4, we also have to investigate the class of type-3 weight matrices of size 3 4, as is done in the next corollary.

Corollary 16: Let be a

-regular type-3 QC code

with polynomial parity-check matrix

and

let

, or, let

be a

-regular

type-3 convolutional code with polynomial parity-check matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

594

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

and let

. Then

all possible

-regular size-(3 4) type-3 weight matrices

(up to permutations of rows and columns) are given by the 5

types of matrices already listed in Corollary 14, together with

the following 3 types of matrices [shown here along with the

corresponding minimum/free Hamming distance upper bound

implied by (4)]

(By “ having submatrix ” we mean that contains a submatrix that is equivalent to , modulo row permutations, column permutations, and transposition.)
Proof: See Appendix C.

The Corollaries 14 and 16 focused on the case of

-reg-

ular QC/convolutional codes with a 3 4 polynomial parity-

check matrix. It is clear that similar results can be formulated for

any

-regular QC/convolutional code with a

poly-

nomial parity-check matrix. However, we will not elaborate this

any further, except for mentioning the following corollary about

-regular QC/convolutional codes with a 3 5 polynomial

parity-check matrix.

Corollary 19: An optimal -regular type-2 weight matrix of size 3 5 must (up to row and column permutations) look like

As it can easily be seen, the largest upper bound is and it can be obtained if the weight
matrix equals (modulo permutations of rows and columns) the last matrix in the above list.
Proof: Omitted.

This weight matrix yields the upper bound

Example 17: We can modify the matrix in Example 11 to

obtain one of the configurations in Corollary 16. For example,

Proof: Omitted.

the following matrix last configuration listed in Corollary 16:

corresponds to the

It would be desirable to obtain simply looking bounds for

type-2 and type-3 codes with

-regular parity-check ma-

trices of size

. Although it is straightforward to obtain

such simple bounds by suitably generalizing the derivation of

Corollary 9, the resulting bounds are usually not very useful.

We leave it as an open problem to find such relevant bounds in

For

we obtain a

code, whose rate is 0.25. the style of Corollary 9 for type-2 and type-3 codes.

(In comparison, the monomial

QC LDPC code in

Example 11 has rate 0.266 and the binomial

LDPC code in Example 13 has rate 0.2554.) For

tain a code with parameters

. For larger

imum Hamming distance could increase up to 54.

QC , we obthe min-

VI. THE EFFECT OF SMALL CYCLES ON THE MINIMUM HAMMING DISTANCE AND THE FREE HAMMING DISTANCE
If we know that the Tanner graph corresponding to some

Note that the Tanner graph of a polynomial parity-check matrix which has at least one trinomial entry cannot have girth larger than 6 (see, e.g., [5]). We state this observation as part of a more general analysis of the effect of the weight matrix on the girth.

polynomial parity-check matrix contains some short cycles then we can strengthen the upper bounds of Theorem 7 and 8. In particular, Theorems 22, 25, and 26 will study the influence of 4-cycles, 6-cycles, and -cycles, respectively, upon the minimum/free Hamming distance upper bounds. These theorems will be based on results presented in Lemmas 20 and 24 that

Theorem 18: Let be a QC code described by a polynomial characterize cycles in Tanner graphs in terms of some entries of

parity-check matrix

, let girth be the girth

of the Tanner graph corresponding to

and let be the

weight matrix corresponding to

. Or, let

be a con-

volutional code described by a polynomial parity-check matrix

, let girth be the girth of the Tanner

graph corresponding to

and let be the weight ma-

trix corresponding to

.

a) If has submatrix

then

.

the corresponding polynomial parity-check matrix, especially in terms of permanents of submatrices. In order to state such conditions, we will use results from [5] and [36]. (For other cycle-characterizing techniques and results, see also [38] and [39].)
As we will see, the smaller the girth of the Tanner graph, the smaller the minimum/free Hamming distance upper bound will be. This observation points in the same direction as other results do that relate the decoding performance of LDPC codes (espe-

b) If has submatrix

then

.

cially under message-passing iterative decoding) to the girth of their Tanner graph: firstly, there is a lot of empirical evidence

c) If has submatrix

then

.

that smaller girth usually hurts the iterative decoding perfor-

d) If has submatrix then

.

mance; secondly, there are results concerning the structure of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE AND VONTOBEL: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

595

the fundamental polytope that show that the fundamental polytope of Tanner graphs with smaller girth is “weaker,” see, e.g., [24, Sect. 8.3], [40].

A. Type-1 QC/Convolutional Codes With 4-Cycles

Lemma 20: The Tanner graph of a type-1 QC code with

polynomial parity-check matrix

has a

4-cycle if and only if

has a 2 2 submatrix

for

which

holds.11

An analogous statement can be made for the Tanner graph

of a type-1 convolutional code

defined by the polynomial

parity-check matrix

.

Proof: See Appendix D.

Corollary 21: The Tanner graph of a type-1 QC code

with polynomial parity-check matrix

has a

4-cycle if and only if

has a 2 2 submatrix

which

is monomial and for which

(in

) holds.

An analogous statement can be made for the Tanner graph of

a type-1 convolutional code

with polynomial parity-check

matrix

.

Proof: This follows from Lemma 20 and its proof.

With this, we are ready to investigate minimum/free Hamming distance upper bounds for Tanner graphs with 4-cycles.

Theorem 22: Let be a type-1 QC code with polynomial

parity-check matrix

, or, let

be a

type-1 convolutional code with polynomial parity-check matrix

. If the associated Tanner graph has a

4-cycle then

(7)

Proof: See Appendix E.

Example 23: Let us consider again the

-regular

length- QC code from Example 10 which is given by the

polynomial parity-check matrix

B. Type-1 QC/Convolutional Codes With 6-Cycles

Lemma 24: The Tanner graph of a type-1 QC LDPC code

with polynomial parity-check matrix

has a

6-cycle (or possibly a 4-cycle) if and only if

has a 3 3

submatrix

for which

holds, i.e., if and only if

has a 3 3 submatrix

for

which some terms of its permanent expansion add to zero.12

An analogous statement can be made for the Tanner graph

of a type-1 convolutional code

defined by the polynomial

parity-check matrix

.

Proof: See Appendix F.

With this, we are ready to investigate the minimum/free Hamming distance upper bounds for Tanner graphs with 6-cycles.

Theorem 25: Let be a type-1 QC code with polynomial

parity-check matrix

, or, let

be a

type-1 convolutional code with polynomial parity-check matrix

. If the associated Tanner graph has a

6-cycle then

Proof: See Appendix G.

C. Type-1 QC/Convolutional Codes With -Cycles

The previous two subsections have shown that the minimum Hamming distance of a type-1 QC/convolutional code whose Tanner graph has girth 4 or 6 can never attain the maximal value
of Corollary 9. These results are special cases of a more general result that we will discuss next. Note however that, compared to the girth-4 and the girth-6 case, this more general statement is uni-directional.

Theorem 26: Let be a type-1 QC code with polynomial

parity-check matrix

. Let

, be some integer, and suppose there is a set

of size , a set

of size , and two distinct

bijective mappings and from to such that

for all

and such that

(9)

It has at least two 4-cycles since and

Then

(in

). Therefore the bound (7) gives

If, in addition, the (bijective) mapping

from to is

(8)

a cyclic permutation of order and if the products on the lefthand side (LHS) and RHS of (9) are nonzero, then the associated

We note that for this

this upper bound equals the upper

bound (2) (cf. Example 10).

Tanner graph will have a cycle of length .

An analogous statement can be made for the Tanner graph

of a type-1 convolutional code

defined by the polynomial

11Because

for any

, parity-check matrix

.

the condition

is equivalent to

.

12The comment in Footnote 11 applies also here.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

596

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

Proof: See Appendix H.
For 4- and 6-cycles, the converse of the second part of the above corollary is true, i.e., 4- and 6-cycles are visible in, respectively, 2 2 and 3 3 submatrices (cf. Theorems 22 and 25). However, for longer cycles the converse of the second part of the above corollary is not always true: 8-cycles can happen in 4 4 submatrices, but also in 2 4 submatrices or in 3 4 submatrices. A similar statement holds for longer cycles.

have nonzero permanent (in

).

4) For any 2 2 submatrix with weight matrix

D. Type-2 QC/Convolutional Codes

With appropriate techniques/computations, similar statements as in the preceding subsection can also be made about type-2 QC/convolutional codes. We will not say much about this topic except for stating a lemma that helps in detecting if a polynomial parity-check matrix is 4-cycle free.

Lemma 27: A type-2 QC code is 4-cycle free if and only

if its polynomial parity-check matrix

has the following

properties.

1) If is even, then for any 1 1 submatrix like

(or row and column permutations thereof), the permanent

(in

) of this 2 2 submatrix has weight 4, 3, and 2,

respectively, i.e., the maximally possible weight.

An analogous statement holds for the Tanner graph of a

type-2 convolutional code

defined by the polynomial

parity-check matrix

.

Proof: It is well known that a 4-cycle appears in a Tanner

graph if and only if the corresponding (scalar) parity-check ma-

trix contains the 2 2 (scalar) submatrix

it holds that the permanent of

is nonzero (in

). (This condition is equivalent to

, or to

.)

2) For any 1 2 submatrix like

The lemma is then proved by studying all possible cases in which a polynomial parity-check matrix can lead to a (scalar) parity-check that contains this 2 2 (scalar) submatrix. The details are omitted.
Note that in the above lemma some of the conditions were expressed in terms of a double cover of the relevant submatrices. In particular, the modified matrices are obtained by applying the following changes to the entries of the relevant submatrices

or any 2 1 submatrix like

the product

(in

) has weight 4,

i.e., the maximally possible weight, or, equivalently, if all

the 2 2 submatrices of the matrix

have nonzero permanent (in

).

3) For any 2 2 submatrix like

(Note that similar double covers are also considered in Appendix I.)

Example 28: Consider, for

, the type-2 polynomial

parity-check matrix

in (6). There, 4-cycles could only be

caused by the two submatrices

and

Therefore, the conditions for the nonexistence of a 4-cycle are

(or row and column permutations thereof), the permanents

(in

) of the following two 2 2 submatrices

(Here the sum of two sets denotes the set of all possible sums involving one summand from the first set and one summand from the second set.) It is clear that, with suitable effort, similar have weight 3, the maximally possible weight, or, equiva- analyses could be made for the nonexistence of longer cycles. lently, if all 2 2 submatrices of the matrix
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE AND VONTOBEL: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

597

VII. TYPE-1 QC CODES BASED ON DOUBLE COVERS OF TYPE-2 QC CODES

So far, we have mostly considered

-regular QC codes

that are described by a

polynomial parity-check matrix.

However, one can construct many interesting

-regular

QC LDPC codes with a

polynomial parity-check ma-

trix where

and/or

. Given the enormity of the

search space, a worthwhile approach is to start with some small

code that has good properties and to derive longer codes from

it. In this section we present such an approach, along with an

analysis of it. Of course, there are many other possibilities; we

leave them open to future studies. (Note that this section deals

only with QC codes, however, similar investigations can also be

pursued for convolutional codes.)

Example 29: Let be a QC code described by a

-reg-

ular type-2 polynomial polynomial parity-check matrix

of size

. We would like to derive a type-1 polynomial

parity-check matrix

(of some code ) from

. One

idea for obtaining such a

is to replace all 1 1 subma-

trices of

by 2 2 submatrices in the following way:

• The submatrix is replaced by the submatrix

.

• A submatrix like

is replaced by the submatrix

(or the submatrix

).

• A submatrix like

is replaced by the submatrix

(or by the submatrix

).

Clearly, the resulting matrix

is

-regular and of size

, i.e., the same regularity as

, but vertically and

horizontally twice as large as

.

For example, consider the code defined by the polyno-

mial parity-check matrix

in Example 13,13

which for ease of reference is repeated here

For the choice

, applying the bounds (2) and

(4) to the code described by

, we obtain, respec-

tively,

and

. In addition, from

and Lemma 31 in Appendix I we obtain

. Moreover, because

the matrices

commute with each other, and because MacKay

and Davey’s upper bound [4] can be reformulated so that it

holds also for commuting matrices over polynomials, we obtain

. Because the code has parameters

,

this latter bound actually happens to be tight. Therefore, al-

though the above construction can produce a new code whose

minimum Hamming distance is up to twice as much as for the

base code, if the base code already reaches the bound given

by (2) then there is no further improvement possible for the

new code because the above extension of MacKay and Davey’s

upper bound to commuting matrices over polynomials will

yield exactly the same upper bound.

However, by changing some entries of polynomial blocks

(and thus adding some randomness) we can ensure that the

nonzero 2 2 polynomial block entries do not all commute

with each other anymore. Thus, the above-mentioned minimum

Hamming distance upper bound of 32 does not apply anymore.

(In fact, not even the above-mentioned minimum Hamming

distance upper bound of 64 applies anymore because the Tanner

graph of the modified parity-check matrix is not a double cover

of the Tanner graph of

.) Applying such a change to the

matrix

(in fact, changing only the first block of the matrix

) we obtain the following

-regular parity-check-ma-

trix

(Here,

and

.) Applying the

above-mentioned process to

we obtain the following

type-1

-regular polynomial parity-check matrix

for some code . Interestingly enough, for

the code

has parameters

, i.e., the minimum Hamming dis-

tance is 56, which is significantly above 32.15 Potentially, the

minimum Hamming distance increases even further for suitable

larger choices of . Note that the rate of is 93/368, i.e., it is

nearly the same as the rate of , which is 47/184. Of course,

the Tanner graph of

is not a double cover of the Tanner

graph of

, however, its proto-graph is a double cover of

the proto-graph of

and so the Tanner graph of

is a

-cover of the proto-graph of

.

The sum-product algorithm decoding performance of codes

(Here

and is shown in Fig. 3 and compared to a randomly gen-

.) Clearly, the Tanner graph of

is a double cover of the erated (four-cycle free)

-regular LDPC code of the same

Tanner graph of

.14 Similarly, the proto-graph of

is length and nearly the same rate. Actually, because the decoding

a double cover of the proto-graph of

.

performance of the codes and is nearly the same in the sim-

13Note that in Example 13 this code was called and its polynomial parity- ulated signal-to-noise range, only the decoding performance of

check matrix was called

.

14See Appendix I for more details.

15Note that the bounds (2) and (4) yield, respectively,

and

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

598

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

Fig. 3. Decoding performance of the

QC LDPC code and the

QC LDPC code from Example 29 vs. a randomly generated (four-

cycle free)

LDPC code under sum-product algorithm decoding when transmitting over a binary-input AWGN channel. Because the performance curve

for both QC LDPC codes is nearly the same in the simulated signal-to-noise range, we have only shown the performance curve of the QC LDPC code . We

observe the onset of an error floor of the word error rate at about 4.5 dB for the randomly generated (four-cycle free) LDPC code. A similar observation was made

for other randomly generated LDPC codes with the same parameters. (Not shown in the plot.)

the code is shown. For higher signal-to-noise ratios and cor- Afterwards, we have seen how these upper bounds can be

respondingly smaller word error rates we expect that the code strengthened based on the knowledge of Tanner graph param-

will perform better than the code .

eters like girth. We have also constructed several classes of

codes that achieve (or come close to) these minimum Hamming

The polynomial parity-check modification methods of this and the previous sections can now be combined and iterated. For example, one can start with a type-1 polynomial parity-check matrix and form (by rearranging entries) a type-2 or type-3 polynomial parity-check matrix. From this, a 2-cover type-1 matrix (that includes a few twists) can be obtained as discussed above.

distance upper bounds. Several extensions of these results have recently been presented by Butler and Siegel [41].
In future work it would be interesting to establish similar bounds for the minimum pseudo-weight (for different channels) of QC/convolutional LDPC codes. (Some initial investigations in that direction are presented in [42].)

Instead of 2-covers with twists one can also consider -covers

with

. For such , the nonzero

submatrices that

replace the nonzero 1 1 submatrices can be suitably chosen

APPENDIX A

so that they do not commute and so that consequently MacKay

PROOF OF THEOREM 8

and Davey’s minimum Hamming distance upper bound does not

apply.

The main part of this Appendix is devoted to proving the

This method is just one of many possible ways to construct convolutional code part of Theorem 8. The QC code part fol-

and analyze a

-regular QC LDPC code with a polynomial lows then simply by combining the convolutional code part of

parity-check matrix that has rows and columns with

Theorem 8 (applied to the convolutional code

defined by

and/or

. We leave it for future research to construct and the polynomial parity-check matrix

over

analyze such codes.

) with Tanner’s inequality (1).16

VIII. CONCLUSION

Let us therefore prove the convolutional code part of Theorem 8. We use the same notation as in Lemma 6 and Theorem

We have presented two minimum/free Hamming distance upper bounds for QC/convolutional codes, one based on the polynomial parity-check matrix and one on the weight matrix.

16Here and in the other appendices, we use the

instead of the longer

for denoting the polynomial parity-check matrix of a convolutional

code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE AND VONTOBEL: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

599

7 (and their proofs). We start by observing that, because the permanent is a certain sum of certain products, we can use the triangle and product inequality of the weight function to obtain
(10)

upper bound. We will do this by exhibiting a nonzero codeword

with Hamming weight not larger than 36.

In order to construct such a codeword , let

be the

2 5 submatrix of

that consists of the first two rows of

, and let be the 2 5 submatrix of that consists of

the first two rows of . Because of the aforementioned rank

deficiency of

, any vector

in the kernel of

that is zero at the fifth position must be a codeword in

.17

Now, applying the codeword generating procedure of Lemma 6

for

and for the set

we obtain the codeword

where in the last step we have used the definition

.

With this, the result in (4) is nearly established with the ex-

ception of the case when the codeword construction in Lemma 6

produces the all-zero vector ; in (3) of Theorem 7 we prop-

erly took care of this case by using the

operator instead

of the operator. However, such an all-zero vector can

yield a nonzero term

in (10) and we need to

take care of this degeneracy. Our strategy will be to show that

is never larger than such a nonzero term and there-

fore, although this nonzero term appears in the

operation

in (4), it does not produce a wrong upper bound.

Example 30: Before we continue, let us briefly discuss a polynomial parity-check matrix where the above-mentioned degeneracy happens. Let be a code with polynomial parity-check matrix

and with weight matrix

(Because of the choice of , it is clear that the fifth position

of

is zero. Moreover and most importantly, because the

matrix

has full rank,

is a nonzero codeword.18)

This nonzero codeword yields the free Hamming distance upper

bound

(12)
Clearly, 6 is not larger than 36, and so the value implied by yields a valid upper bound
on the free Hamming distance. Alternatively, the fact that the value in (12) is not larger than
the value in (11) can also be seen from the following observation. By multiplying the expression in (12) by 2 (the weight of the element in the third row and fourth column of , i.e., the entry of with row index 2 and column index 3), we obtain

which is a subexpression of (11). Because all terms in (11) are

positive, it is clear that the value in (12) cannot be larger than

where

, and

are some arbitrary polynomials

such that

. The corresponding convolu-

tional code

has parity-check matrix

.

Let

. Clearly, the matrix

is rank-de-

ficient because the last row of this matrix is the sum of the

first two rows. This implies that all 3 3 submatrices of

have zero determinant, so all 3 3 submatrices of

have

zero permanent, and so the codeword generating procedure in

Lemma 6 yields the codeword

for the

above choice of the set . However, the term in (10) is

the value in (11).

In order to complete the proof of Theorem 8, we will gen-

eralize the observations that we have just made in the above

example. Let be a subset of with

and let

be the codeword that is obtained by the codeword gener-

ating procedure of Lemma 6 for the set . Note that is the

all-zero codeword if and only if all

submatrices of

have zero permanent, if and only if all

submatrices of

have zero determinant, if and only if the matrix

is rank-deficient.

We want to show that the value of

, if it is

nonzero, is always an upper bound on

.

• Assume that

has full rank. Then is a nonzero

codeword and so

is a free Hamming

distance upper bound because of the inequalities in (10).

• Assume that

has not full rank and that

. Then

for

all

. It follows that

for all

(11)

and that is the all-zero codeword. Therefore, although

If we can show that sure that the value of

is not larger than 36 then we are does not yield a wrong

17“Fifth position” refers here to the vector entry with index 4.

18In the proof of the general case we will also have to take into account the

case where

does not have full rank.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

600

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

is the all-zero codeword, this case is properly taken

care of by the

operator in (4).

• Finally, assume that

has not full rank and that

. (Note that this can only happen

for

.) Without loss of generality, we can assume

that the rows of

are ordered such that the last row

of

is a linear combination of the first

rows

of

. Denote the entries of

by

and the

entries of by , and let

be the

submatrix of consisting of the first

rows of

and be the submatrix of that consists of the first

rows of .

Because of the assumption

, there

must be at least one

such that

.

Using the co-factor expansion of the permanent of ,

this implies that there is at least one

such that

(13)

Fix such an and let

. Assume for the moment

that

has full rank. Applying the codeword gen-

erating procedure in Lemma 6 for the polynomial parity-

check matrix

and the set we obtain a nonzero

vector

which is in the kernel of

. Because of

the rank deficiency of

and because

for

(and therefore

for

), the

vector

must also be a codeword in

. Therefore,

because

is a nonzero codeword, the free Hamming

distance of

can be upper bounded as follows:

where we have used the fact that the inequality

in (13) implies

. However, because

is a subexpression of

we obtain

where we have used the fact that

con-

tains only nonnegative terms.

It remains the case where

has not full rank. We can

solve this case with a similar procedure as above. Note that

the above choice of ensures that there will be a suitable

.

Let us therefore prove the convolutional code part of Corol-

lary 9. We have to consider two cases. First, assume that the

weight matrix is such that there is at least one set

with

such that

. Using

the fact that the weight matrix of a type-1 convolutional code

contains only zeros and ones, we can conclude that for such an

we have

for all

, which implies

that

This is the upper bound that we set out to prove.

Secondly, assume that the weight matrix is such that for all

sets

with

it holds that

. Notably, this implies that

for all sets and

all

. (Parity-check matrices with such a weight matrix

are rather degenerate and in general uninteresting. However,

we need to properly take care of this case too in order to verify

that the corollary statement holds for all possible type-1 convo-

lutional codes.) From the above condition, it follows that

must be such that for all sets

with

and for all

it holds that

, i.e.,

. This latter statement, however, is equivalent to the statement

that

does not have full row rank. The code

can there-

fore also be defined by a suitably chosen

submatrix of

. If

then applying this corollary recursively to this

submatrix we obtain

, which implies

. Otherwise (i.e., when

), it clearly holds that

.

APPENDIX C PROOF OF THEOREM 18

We prove only the QC code part of the theorem. The convo-

lutional code part follows by a similar argument.

Assume that has polynomial parity-check matrix

. We

establish upper bounds on the girth of the Tanner graph of

by exhibiting the existence of certain cycles in that graph. These

cycles are found using techniques from [5], [36].

a) Let

APPENDIX B PROOF OF COROLLARY 9

be any submatrix of uration. The path

having the first weight config-

The main part of this Appendix is devoted to proving the

convolutional code part of Corollary 9. The QC code part fol-

lows then simply by combining the convolutional code part of

Corollary 9 (applied to the convolutional code

defined by

the polynomial parity-check matrix

over

shows that the Tanner graph of 12-cycle since

has at least one

) with Tanner’s inequality (1).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE AND VONTOBEL: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

in (and therefore also in

).

b) Let

Note that a 2 2 submatrix permutations, look

601
must, up to row and column

be a submatrix matrix of

having the second weight for some

.

configuration. The path

In the first case

shows that the Tanner graph of 10-cycle since

holds if and only if has at least one
if and only if

in (and therefore also in

).

c) Let

if and only if

be a submatrix matrix of having the third weight con- if and only if figuration. The path

shows that the Tanner graph of 8-cycle since

has at least one

in (and therefore also in

).

d) Let

be a submatrix matrix of having the stated weight configuration. The path

which is equivalent to the existence of a 4-cycle in the Tanner

graph, see the conditions in [5] and [36].

In the second and third case,

holds if and only if

, i.e.,

if and only if

. However, this is never the case. This

agrees with the observation that such 2 2 submatrices cannot

induce a four-cycle in the Tanner graph [5], [36].

In the fourth, fifth, and sixth case,

holds if and only if

, i.e., if and

only if

. However, this is never the case. This agrees with

the observation that such 2 2 submatrices cannot induce a

four-cycle in the Tanner graph [5], [36].

The proof is concluded by noting that a 4-cycle can appear

only in a 2 2 submatrix of a type-1 polynomial parity-check

matrix.

shows that the Tanner graph of 6-cycle since

has at least one

APPENDIX E PROOF OF THEOREM 22

in (and therefore also in

).

APPENDIX D PROOF OF LEMMA 20

The main part of this Appendix is devoted to proving the

convolutional code part of Theorem 22. The QC code part will

be considered at the end of this Appendix.

The proof of this theorem is based on upper bounding the free

Hamming distance upper bound in (3), thereby taking advantage

of the fact that

is assumed to be of type 1 and

to have a 4-cycle. For ease of reference, (3) is repeated here, i.e.

We prove only the QC code part of the lemma. The convolutional code part follows by a similar argument.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(14)

602

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

Without loss of generality, we can assume that the rows and

columns of

are labeled such that the present 4-cycle im-

plies that the subblock

(15)

has permanent 0 (in

), i.e., that

(16)

We define the following sets.

• Let

be the set of all sets

with

that are not supersets of

.

• Let

be the set of all sets

with

that are supersets of

.

Then (14) can be rewritten to read

where in the last equality we have taken advantage of (16).

Clearly,

, so that

we can upper bound the weight of

as follows

(21)

where we have again used the fact that

is a type-1 polyno-

mial parity-check matrix. Combining (20) and (21), we obtain

(17)

The first argument of the min-operator in (17) can be addressed with a reasoning that is akin to the reasoning in the proofs of Theorem 8 (cf. Appendix A) and Corollary 9 (cf. Appendix B). This yields

(18)

(22)

Therefore, let us focus on the second argument of the minoperator in (17), i.e.
(19)

We consider two subcases. First, assume that the polynomial

parity-check matrix

is such that there is at least one set

such that

. Any

upper bound on this sum will be a valid upper bound on the

expression in (19). For

we find that

(20)

where we used the fact that

is a type-1 polynomial parity-

check matrix.

For

, however, we want to use a more refined

analysis. We define the following sets.

• We define to be the set of all permutation mappings

from to

.

• We define

to be the set of all permutation map-

pings from to

that map

to

or map

to

.

• We define

to be the set of all permutation mappings

from

to

.

With these definitions, we obtain

It remains to address the second subcase, namely

where we assume that the polynomial parity-check matrix

is such that for all sets

it holds that

. This, however, is equivalent

to the assumption that for all sets

and all

it holds that

, which in

turn is equivalent to the assumption that for all

the

submatrix

does not have full row rank.

Pick any

and let code

be the code defined

by

. Without loss of generality, we can assume that the

rows of

are ordered such that the last row of

is a

linear combination of the first

rows of

. Let

be the code that is defined by the

submatrix

of

. Clearly

where the first step follows from the fact that any nonzero code-

word in

induces a nonzero codeword in , the second

step follows from the equivalence of

and

, and the

third step follows from Corollary 9. Without loss of generality

we can assume that

(otherwise a type-1 polynomial

parity-check matrix

cannot have a four-cycle), and so we

can upper bound the previous result as follows:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(23)

SMARANDACHE AND VONTOBEL: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

603

Finally, combining (18) and (22), or (18) and (23), we con-

clude that the convolutional code part of Theorem 22 is indeed

correct, independently of which subcase applies.

The QC code part of Theorem 22 can now be obtained as

follows. Without loss of generality, we can assume that the rows

and columns of

are labeled such that the present 4-cycle

implies that the subblock

For this to hold, there must be at least two monomials that are

the same (in

). Two different cases can happen.

• Suppose that two monomials like

and

are

the same (in

).20 Then

i.e.

has permanent 0 (in

), i.e., that

Note that this does not imply (16) for

.

However, because multiplying a row of

by an invertible

element of

produces a parity-check matrix for

the same code, and because multiplying a column of

by

a monomial produces a parity-check matrix of an equivalent

code,19 we can, without loss of generality, assume that

is such that

For such a reformulated

, the polynomial parity-check ma-

trix

satisfies (16). With this, the application

of convolutional code part of Theorem 22, along with Tanner’s

inequality (1), yields the QC code part of Theorem 22.

APPENDIX F PROOF OF LEMMA 24

We prove only the QC code part of the lemma. The convolu-

tional code part follows by a similar argument.

We consider only the case where all the entries of

are

monomials, i.e.

According to the conditions in [5], [36], this is equivalent

to the existence of a 6-cycle in the Tanner graph.

• Suppose that two monomials like

and

are

the same (in

).21 Then

i.e.,

According to [5] and [36], this is equivalent to the existence of a 4-cycle in the Tanner graph. The proof is concluded by noting that a 6-cycle can only appear in a 3 3 submatrix of a type-1 polynomial parity-check matrix.

APPENDIX G PROOF OF THEOREM 25

The proof is very similar to the proof of Theorem 22 in

Appendix E and so we will only discuss the main steps of the

argument. The following steps are necessary to adapt the proofs

of Theorem 22 in Appendix E to the present corollary.

Convolutional code part:

•

is replaced by a similarly defined set

.

•

is replaced by a similarly defined set

.

• The line of argument leading to (22) is replaced by the

observation that for any

and any

it holds that

for some

. (The discussion for ma-

trices

where some entries are the zero polynomial is anal-

ogous.) By expanding the permanent

of

we ob-

tain

Therefore, for any

we have

Therefore

holds if and only if

19Two binary codes are called equivalent if the two codeword sets are equal (up to coordinate permutations). Clearly, equivalent codes have the same minimum Hamming distance.

20Here,

and

exponents are all distinct.

are such that the variables that appear in the

21Here,

and

are such that there is exactly one variable, i.e.,

, that appears in both exponents.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

604

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

• The line of argument leading to (23) is replaced by the Condition (9) can then be rewritten to read observation that

Without loss of generality we can assume that (otherwise a type-1 polynomial parity-check matrix cannot have a six-cycle), and so we can upper bound the previous result as follows

QC code part:

• Without loss of generality, we can assume that the rows

and columns of

are labeled such that

Clearly, this holds if and only if
(24)
Now we define to be the permutation mapping from to . (By assumption, is cyclic of order .) Moreover, we let be some element of and we set
. Then, (24) holds if and only if

(in

). Because multiplying a row of

by

an invertible element of

produces a polyno-

mial parity-check matrix for the same code, and because

multiplying a column of

by a monomial produces a

parity-check matrix of an equivalent code, we can, without

loss of generality, assume that

is such that

which holds if and only if

(25)

Because we assumed that

is a cyclic permutation

of order , the condition in (25) is equivalent to Tanner’s con-

dition on the existence of a -cycle, see [5], [36]. (Note that

and that

.)

(See the end of Appendix E for a similar reasoning.) For

such a

, the polynomial parity-check matrix

satisfies

(in

).

APPENDIX I GRAPH COVERS
This Appendix collects some results that are used in Section VII. The focus is on QC codes, however, similar results can also be stated for convolutional codes.
Let be a QC code with polynomial parity-check matrix

APPENDIX H PROOF OF THEOREM 26

We prove only the QC code part of the theorem. The convo-

lutional code part follows by a similar argument.

The proof of the first part of the QC code part of the theorem

is very similar to the proof of Theorem 22 in Appendix E and the

proof of Theorem 25 in Appendix G, and is therefore omitted.

So, let us focus on the second part of the QC code part of the

corollary. Because the products on the LHS and RHS of (9) are

assumed to be nonzero, for every

there exists an integer

such that

We define the decomposition with matrices and

Similarly, for every such that

there exists an integer

Based on this decomposition, we define a new code with the polynomial parity-check matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE AND VONTOBEL: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

605

Lemma 31: The minimum Hamming distances of and satisfy

(26)

Proof: Let us start by proving the first inequality in

(26). Let

be a codeword in with

Hamming weight

. We show that

. Indeed,

because

, we have (in

)

(27) (28)

thus proving the second inequality in (26).

Assume that the matrices

and

are such that

when

and

are added to obtain

, then no

terms cancel for any and and . In this case it can easily be seen

that the Tanner graph of

is a double cover of the Tanner

graph of

. This means that Lemma 31 relates the minimum

Hamming distance of a Tanner graph and the minimum Ham-

ming distance of a certain double cover of that Tanner graph.

There is another way to obtain the same double cover (up

to relabeling of the coordinates). Namely, based on code we

define the code with the polynomial parity-check matrix

Adding these two equations we obtain (in

)

This time the matrix

is obtained from

for each and each , the 1 1 entry

by replacing,

showing that

. If

then

by the 2 2 entry

thus proving the first inequality in (26). If

then

and so both (27) and (28) can be rewritten to

read (in

)

showing that

. With this

It can easily be checked that

equals

up to reshuf-

fling of rows and columns. Therefore, the Tanner graphs of

and of

are isomorphic, showing that they define

the same double cover of the Tanner graph of

(up to rela-

beling of the bit and check nodes).

Let us remark that [43]–[45] consider similar 2-covers.22

Namely, for some (scalar) parity-check matrix , these authors

first constructed the trivial 2-cover

thus proving the first inequality in (26).

We now prove the second inequality in (26). Let be a

codeword in with Hamming weight

and

define

. We show that

. Indeed,

because

, we have (in

)

Then, in a second step they split into

, where

the matrices and were chosen such that the nonzero en-

tries do not overlap. Finally, they formulated a modified 2-cover

as follows

Therefore (in

)

We conclude this Appendix by remarking that similar results can be proved for general -covers, where is a power of 2, by iterating the results of this section multiple times.

and so (in

)

which are exactly the equations that must satisfy in order to be a codeword in . Therefore, because

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge B. Butler, O. Takeshita, and P. Siegel for pointing out to them some incompleteness issues with some of the proofs in earlier versions of this paper. They also gratefully acknowledge discussions with I. Bocharova and F. Hug concerning the minimum Hamming distance of some of the presented codes and for providing them with the polynomial parity-check matrix in Example 12.

22The paper [45] also considers higher-degree covers, in particular covers whose degree is a power of 2.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

606

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2012

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] R. M. Tanner, “On quasi-cyclic repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 37th Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr., Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 22–24, 1999, pp. 249–259, Allerton House.
[3] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Rel. Top., Brest, France, Sep. 4–7, 2000.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay and M. C. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models (Minneapolis, MN, 1999), B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001, pp. 113–130.
[5] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[6] O. Milenkovic, K. Prakash, and B. Vasic, “Regular and irregular low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding based on cycle-invariant difference sets,” in Proc. 41st Allerton Conf. on Commun., Contr., Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 1–3, 2003, Allerton House.
[7] K. Lally and P. Fitzpatrick, “Algebraic structure of quasicyclic codes,” Discr. Appl. Math., vol. 111, pp. 157–175, 2001.
[8] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “On regular quasi-cyclic LDPC codes from binomials,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun. 27–Jul. 2 2004, p. 274.
[9] J. Thorpe, Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs, JPL, IPN Progress Rep., Aug. 2003, vol. 42–154.
[10] J. Thorpe, K. Andrews, and S. Dolinar, “Methodologies for designing LDPC codes using protographs and circulants,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun. 27–Jul. 2 2004, p. 238.
[11] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[12] W. S. Massey, Algebraic Topology: An Introduction. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1977, reprint of the 1967 edition, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, Vol. 56.
[13] H. M. Stark and A. A. Terras, “Zeta functions of finite graphs and coverings,” Adv. in Math., vol. 121, no. 1, pp. 124–165, Jul. 1996.
[14] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–78, Jan. 2006.
[15] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[16] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dep. Elect. Eng. Comput. Sci., Mass. Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[17] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[18] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On low-complexity linear-programming decoding of LDPC codes,” Eur. Trans. Telecomm., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 509–517, Aug. 2007.
[19] M. H. Taghavi N. and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5396–5410, Dec. 2008.
[20] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dep. Elect. Eng., Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[21] G. D. Forney, Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models (Minneapolis, MN, 1999), ser. IMA Vol. Math. Appl., B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001, vol. 123, pp. 101–112.
[22] B. J. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, “Signal-space characterization of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 766–781, Feb. 2001.
[23] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph covers and iterative decoding of finite-length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Rel. Top., Brest, France, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 75–82.
[24] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” in CoRR, Dec. 2005 [Online]. Available: http://www.arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/ 0512078
[25] R. Koetter, W.-C. W. Li, P. O. Vontobel, and J. L. Walker, “Characterizations of pseudo-codewords of (low-density) parity-check codes,” Adv. in Math., vol. 213, no. 1, pp. 205–229, Aug. 2007.

[26] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Pseudo-codeword analysis of Tanner graphs from projective and Euclidean planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2376–2393, Jul. 2007.
[27] C. A. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4013–4038, Nov. 2007.
[28] R. M. Tanner, Convolutional codes from quasi-cyclic codes: A link between the theories of block and convolutional codes, Univ. Calif., Santa Cruz, Tech. Rep. UCSC-CRL-87-21, Nov. 1987.
[29] Y. Levy and D. J. Costello, Jr., “An algebraic approach to constructing convolutional codes from quasi-cyclic codes,” in Coding and Quantization, Providence, RI, 1993, vol. 14, pp. 189–198, DIMACS Ser. Discr. Math. Theoret. Comput. Sci..
[30] M. Esmaeili, T. A. Gulliver, N. P. Secord, and S. A. Mahmoud, “A link between quasi-cyclic codes and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 431–435, Jan. 1998.
[31] R. Smarandache, A. E. Pusane, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Pseudocodeword performance analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2577–2598, Jun. 2009.
[32] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from LDPC block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 835–857, Feb. 2011.
[33] O. Y. Takeshita, “A new construction for LDPC codes using permutation polynomials over integer rings,” in CoRR, Jun. 2005 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/0506091
[34] W. Bosma, J. Cannon, and C. Playoust, “The Magma algebra system. I. The user language,” J. Symbol. Comput., vol. 24, no. 3–4, pp. 235–265, 1997, Computational Algebra and Number Theory (London, 1993).
[35] I. Bocharova, M. Handlery, R. Johannesson, and B. D. Kudryashov, “A BEAST for prowling in trees,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1295–1302, Jun. 2004.
[36] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. ICSTA 2001, Ambleside, U.K., 2001.
[37] I. E. Bocharova, F. Hug, R. Johannesson, B. D. Kudryashov, and R. V. Satyukov, “Searching for voltage graph-based LDPC tailbiting codes with large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory [Online]. Available: http:// arxiv.org/abs/1108.0840, submitted for publication
[38] X. Wu, X. You, and C. Zhao, “An efficient girth-locating algorithm for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 9–14, 2006, pp. 817–820.
[39] M. E. O’Sullivan, “Algebraic construction of sparse matrices with large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 718–727, Feb. 2006.
[40] M. J. Wainwright, “Codeword polytopes and linear programming relaxations for error-control coding,” in Workshop on Applications of Statistical Physics to Coding Theory, Santa Fe, NM, Jan. 11, 2005 [Online]. Available: http://cnls.lanl.gov/~chertkov/EC_Talks/Wainwright
[41] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “On distance properties of quasi-cyclic protograph-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Austin, TX, Jun. 13–18, 2010, pp. 809–813.
[42] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Absdet-pseudo-codewords and perm-pseudo-codewords: Definitions and properties,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seoul, Korea, Jun. 28–Jul. 3 2009.
[43] Y. Y. Tai, L. Lan, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Algebraic construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for the AWGN and erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1765–1773, Oct. 2006.
[44] M. Ivkovic, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.
[45] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.
Roxana Smarandache (S’96–A’01–M’04) is from Bucharest, Romania. She received the B.S. degree in mathematics from the University of Bucharest in 1996, with a thesis on number theory. She received the Ph.D. degree in mathematics from the University of Notre Dame in July 2001. Her thesis was in coding theory, with the subject of algebraic convolutional codes.
She then joined San Diego State University, where she is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Mathematics and Statistics. During the academic year 1999–2000, she was a visiting scholar at EPF Lausanne, Switzerland, working for six months in the Department of Communication Systems. During the academic year 2005–2006, she was on a leave at the University of Notre Dame, on a Visiting Assistant Professor position in the Department of Mathematics. During 2008–2009, she was on sabbatical leave in which she visited the Mathematics Department, University of Zurich, Switzerland, and the Mathematics and Electrical Engineering Departments, University of Notre

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE AND VONTOBEL: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

607

Dame. Her research topics are mainly related to coding theory. Her recent interests include low-density parity-check codes, iterative and linear programming decoding, and convolutional codes.
Pascal O. Vontobel (S’96–M’97) received the Diploma degree in electrical engineering in 1997, the Post-Diploma degree in information techniques in 2002, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering in 2003, all from ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
From 1997 to 2002, he was a Research and Teaching Assistant at the Signal and Information Processing Laboratory, ETH Zurich. After being a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, at the University of Wisconsin-Madison (visiting Assistant Professor), and at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, he joined the Information

Theory Research Group, Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA, in 2006, as a Research Scientist. His research interests lie in information theory, communications, and signal processing.
Dr. Vontobel is an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY and has been on the Technical Program Committees of several international conferences. Recently, he has co-organized a BIRS workshop in Banff on “Applications of Matroid Theory and Combinatorial Optimization to Information and Coding Theory,” a workshop at Tel Aviv University on “Linear Programming and Message-Passing Approaches to High-Density Parity-Check Codes and High-Density Graphical Models,” and a workshop at Princeton University on “Counting, Inference, and Optimization on Graphs.” Moreover, he has been a plenary speaker at international information and coding theory conferences three times and has been awarded the ETH medal for his Ph.D. dissertation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

