IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

10379

Comprehensive Review of Deep Unfolding Techniques for Next-Generation Wireless
Communication Systems

Sukanya Deka , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Kuntal Deka , Nhan Thanh Nguyen , Member, IEEE, Sanjeev Sharma , Senior Member, IEEE, Vimal Bhatia , Senior Member, IEEE, and Nandana Rajatheva , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The massive surge in device connectivity demands higher data rates, increased capacity with low latency, and high throughput. Hence, to provide ultrareliable, low-latency communication with ubiquitous connectivity for Internet of Things (IoT) devices, next-generation wireless communication leverages the incorporation of machine learning tools. However, standard data-driven models often need large datasets and lack interpretability. To overcome this, model-driven deep learning (DL) approaches combine domain knowledge with learning to improve accuracy and efficiency. Deep unfolding is a modeldriven method that turns iterative algorithms into deep neural network (DNN) layers. It keeps the structure of traditional algorithms while allowing end-to-end learning. This makes deep unfolding both interpretable and effective for solving complex signal processing problems in wireless systems. We first present a brief overview of the general architecture of deep unfolding to provide a solid foundation. We also provide an example to outline the steps involved in unfolding a conventional iterative algorithm. We then explore the application of deep unfolding in key areas, including signal detection, channel estimation, beamforming design, decoding for error-correcting codes, integrated sensing and communication (ISAC), power allocation, and physical-layer security. Each section focuses on a specific task, highlighting its significance in emerging 6G technologies and reviewing recent advancements in deep unfolding-based solutions. Finally, we discuss the challenges associated with developing deep unfolding techniques and propose potential improvements to enhance their applicability across diverse wireless communication scenarios.

Index Terms—Deep learning (DL), deep unfolding, integrated sensing and communication (ISAC), intelligent reflecting surfaces (IRSs), Internet of Things (IoT), model-driven machine learning, terahertz (THz), wireless communication signal processing.

NOMENCLATURE

AO AP AMP ADC

Alternate optimization. Access point. Approximate message passing. Analog-to-digital converter.

Received 26 November 2025; accepted 4 January 2026. Date of publication 12 January 2026; date of current version 9 March 2026. (Corresponding author: Kuntal Deka.)
Sukanya Deka and Kuntal Deka are with the Department of Electronics and Electrical Engineering, IIT Guwahati, Guwahati 781039, India (e-mail: sukanya.deka@iitg.ac.in; kuntaldeka@iitg.ac.in).
Nhan Thanh Nguyen and Nandana Rajatheva are with the Centre for Wireless Communications, University of Oulu, 90014 Oulu, Finland (e-mail: nhan.nguyen@oulu.fi; nandana.rajatheva@oulu.fi).
Sanjeev Sharma is with the Department of Electronics Engineering, IIT (BHU) Varanasi, Varanasi 221005, India (e-mail: sanjeev.ece@iitbhu.ac.in).
Vimal Bhatia is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Indore, Indore 453552, India (e-mail: vbhatia@iiti.ac.in).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JIOT.2026.3652234

ADMM BP BS BER CD CNN CSI CGD DL DNN DRL EM EP FDD GAN GNN HBF IRS IoT ISI ISAC ISTA LR LS LLR LDPC LMMSE MF ML MO MU MAP MPD mse MMSE MIMO MISO MSER mMTC mmWave NN NOMA NMSE OAMP

Alternating direction method of multipliers. Belief propagation. Base station. Bit error rate. Coordinate descent. Convolutional neural network. Channel state information. Conjugate gradient descent. Deep learning. Deep neural network. Deep reinforcement learning. Expectation–maximization. Expectation propagation. Frequency-division duplexing. Generative adversarial network. Graph neural network. Hybrid beamforming. Intelligent reflecting surface. Internet of Things. Intersymbol interference. Integrated sensing and communication. Iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm. Low resolution. Least squares. Log-likelihood ratio. Low-density parity check. Linear minimum mean square error. Matched filter. Maximum likelihood. Manifold optimization. Multiuser. Maximum a posteriori. Message passing detector. Mean square error. Minimum mean square error. Multiple-input multiple-output. Multiple-input single-output. Minimum symbol error rate. Massive machine-type communication. Millimeter wave. Neural network. Nonorthogonal multiple access. Normalized mean square error. Orthogonal approximate message passing.

2327-4662 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10380

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

OFDM Orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing. techniques, underscoring the potential advantages of using

OTFS

Orthogonal time–frequency–space.

classical algorithms [10], [11].

PGA PGD QAM QoS QPSK RF RNN RSMA

Projected gradient ascent. Projected gradient descent. Quadrature amplitude modulation. Quality of service. Quadrature phase shift keying. Radio frequency. Recurrent neural network. Rate-splitting multiple access.

Communication problems are inherently influenced by dynamic physical constraints that evolve in real time. These constraints stem from factors such as the physical environment, hardware limitations, and the specific operational requirements of communication systems. Different communication scenarios impose varying demands on bandwidth, power consumption, and latency, which fluctuate with user density, data rates, and service types. Interpreting and addressing these constraints using DNNs presents significant challenges. Data-

SD

Sphere decoder.

driven NN architectures were developed primarily to process

SE

Spectral efficiency.

language and vision data, rendering them suboptimal for

SER

Symbol error rate.

wireless communication tasks that involve channels, signals,

SCA SGD SIC SNR SSCA SINR THz TPGD

Successive convex approximation. Stochastic gradient descent. Successive interference cancellation. Signal-to-noise ratio. Stochastic successive convex approximation. Signal-to-interference and noise ratio Terahertz. Trainable projected gradient descent.

and outputs governed by complex constraints. Although certain constraints can be handled through the application of specific activation functions, for example, employing the tanh function to enforce a constant-modulus constraint in analog beamforming, standard activation functions generally lack the versatility to manage the intricate constraints characteristic of wireless communication systems. To mitigate these challenges, model-driven DL approaches facilitate the development of problem-specific network architectures and customized acti-

WMMSE Weighted minimum mean square error.

vation functions, optimized for the unique signal processing

ZF

Zero forcing.

requirements of wireless communication [12].

Compared to the conventional fully connected DL archi-

I. INTRODUCTION

tectures, model-driven DL has fewer trainable parameters, implying less training time and computational complexity.

T HE future mobile generations are expected to experience a surge in resource demand due to the exponential growth of connected devices. With the advent of 5G, billions of devices require seamless connectivity, intensifying competition for efficient spectrum allocation [1], [2], [3]. Each network has unique requirements and constraints, making resource allocation a complex challenge. Given the inherent limitations of available resources, problem formulation must prioritize flexibility, adaptability, and efficient utilization. Significant

Deep unfolding is an approach that falls into the category of model-driven DL [13]. There are several types of modeldriven DL approaches, including deep unfolding [14], [15], physics-informed NN [16], [17], and learned optimizers [18], [19]. A deep unfolded network can be trained in an easier and faster fashion with smaller datasets than DNNs. This is because deep unfolding incorporates domain knowledge from iterative algorithms into layers of DNNs, offering improved performance and interpretability [20].

advancements have taken place in wireless communication due to various exciting physical-layer technologies, including A. Related Works

massive MIMO, IoT, ISAC, IRSs, mmWave communication, The growing application of deep unfolding in commu-

physical-layer security, and next-generation multiple access nication systems highlights the need for a comprehensive

such as NOMA. Additionally, OTFS modulation is emerging survey in this area. There are limited survey articles that

as a promising alternative to OFDM, further improving SE comprehensively discuss deep unfolding applications in the

and resilience in next-generation networks.

context of the physical layer of communication. Here, we

DL, a machine learning subclass, maps the relationship present a few related survey articles on deep unfolding that

between input and output without explicitly modeling it in explore some particular task such as detection, channel esti-

the architecture [4]. It involves the use of DNN with multiple mation, or precoder design. Wang et al. [21] presented a

hidden layers (hence “deep”) to analyze and interpret data. review of DL and deep unfolding approaches that address

Numerous architectures have been proposed such as multilayer physical-layer signal processing challenges, including MIMO

perceptron (MLP), CNN, DRL, and GANs. DNNs have been detection, channel estimation, and channel decoding. He et al.

applied to various components of wireless communication, [22] provided an overview of deep unfolding applications in

including detection, channel estimation, beamforming designs, transceiver design, MIMO detection, and CSI estimation and

and power allocation [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]. However, DL feedback. Similarly, Qin et al. [23] highlighted the role of

architectures exhibit several inherent limitations. These include DL in communication, with a focus on DNNs, GANs, RNNs,

complex training procedures and a closed box nature of and end-to-end learning. They also explored deep unfolding

algorithms. The training process for these models requires for Bayesian optimal estimation, using MIMO detection and

extensive datasets, considerable time, and intricate fine-tuning. channel estimation as case studies. Balatsoukas-Stimming and

The complexity of implementing DNN architectures often Studer [15] focused primarily on MIMO detection while

constrains their applicability in real-world systems. Therefore, exploring its use in MU MIMO precoding and BP-based

DL models are highly sensitive to the specific configurations channel decoding. A survey on model-based, DL, and hybrid

of wireless systems, such as the number of antennas, users, and approaches in the context of wireless communication networks

operating frequencies, which require retraining or reimplemen- is provided in [24]. Monga et al. [14] conducted a survey of

tation whenever these parameters change. These challenges deep unfolding algorithms specifically implemented for appli-

are not typically encountered in conventional optimization cations in signal and image processing. Jagannath et al. [25]

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEKA et al.: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

10381

reviewed the implementation of deep unfolding in signal

processing tasks. A brief review on deep unfolding in MIMO

detection is presented in [26]. Shlezinger et al. [13] have

presented a general framework for optimization that lever-

ages the benefit of deep unfolding with signal detection as

one of the case studies. In [12], a chapter is dedicated to

model-based machine learning for communication. The deep

unfolding networks have been discussed for signal detection,

channel estimation, and channel coding. A machine learning-

based optimization framework is discussed in [27] with an

emphasis on deep unfolding in specific design paradigms

such as signal detection. Pham et al. [28] have presented a

survey on application of deep unfolding in signal detection,

channel estimation, and beamforming. Liu et al. [29] explored

the application of learning-based optimization techniques to Fig. 1. Typical block diagram of a modern wireless communication system.

enhance the capacity of communication networks. The survey The section number covering a particular component is shown as well.

reviews key domains such as encoding–decoding, equalization,

power control, and beamforming, emphasizing the impact aspects of the physical layer in wireless communication, which

of optimization through learning on network performance. has not been addressed in existing survey articles [15], [21],

A comparative study between purely data-driven and deep [22], [30]. This article provides an in-depth review of deep

unfolding is conducted with complete emphasis on HBF unfolding methods applied to the physical layer of wireless

optimization in [30]. The significant rise in the application communication. The contributions are summarized as follows.

of deep unfolding has led to the development of theoretical framework to validate and support practical experiments. There are several works [31], [32], [33], which primarily focus on the convergence rate of the unfolded ISTA and its variants such as learned ISTA (LISTA) [32] and analytic LISTA (ALISTA) [33]. Chen et al. [34] discuss the motivation and design methodology of deep unfolding, using LISTA as a representative case study. They have studied the design of learned parameter techniques to design the architecture of the network and parameterize the resulting unfolded network. Certain open mathematical problems pertaining to deep unfolding are also explored in [34].

1) This article presents a systematic, step-by-step approach for developing deep unfolding algorithms, with a detailed tutorial on the ADMM-based MIMO detection. The tutorial offers insights into the ADMM unfolding process and identification of the trainable parameters and demonstrates the design of the resulting unfolded network. Furthermore, we discuss the theoretical foundation of the convergence properties and guidelines for selecting hyperparameters that impact the algorithmic stability of deep unfolding. We have highlighted that the convergence properties can be studied under three categories: convergence order, generalization error, and

B. Contributions

NMSE. 2) Fig. 1 depicts the principal components of the physical

Recently, there has been a surge of application of deep

layer in contemporary wireless communication systems.

unfolding in various areas of physical layer of wireless com-

Considering this block diagram, we undertake a

munication. The existing survey contributions such as [15],

systematic survey of each component in detail. In

[21], and [22], all published before 2020, focus on some

particular, we investigate the role of deep unfolding for

particular areas of the physical layer of wireless communica-

signal detection, channel estimation, precoder design,

tion, such as detection, channel estimation, precoder design, or

ISAC, decoding, power allocation, and physical-layer

channel coding. Shlezinger et al. [30] have provided a survey

security. For each domain, we highlight the integration

on application of deep unfolding only in the area of HBF

of deep unfolding with key enabling technologies

design. However, the realm of deep unfolding has recently

for sixth-generation (6G) networks, such as IRSs,

expanded into emerging areas such as sensing and communi-

mmWave communications, and the IoT. The survey

cation, which have not been addressed in any of the previous

aims to provide a comprehensive perspective on the

works. Most of the previous literature discusses the general

design of adaptable and forward-looking frameworks

approach of deep unfolding without dedicated analysis con-

for next-generation wireless systems.

cerning communication perspective. Only a few works such 3) Furthermore, we discuss the key takeaways to

as [14] and [27] have given a tutorial description but with a

provide readers with deeper insights into the practical

biased emphasis toward signal processing tasks. Therefore, we

applicability and design considerations of deep

provide a detailed tutorial describing the deep unfolding from

unfolding in physical-layer communication.

communication perspective and discuss convergence proofs 4) This article concludes the survey by outlining a set

that impact algorithmic stability. In addition, in this work,

of challenges in developing deep unfolding models

the application of deep unfolding is explored in the context

and proposes future directions that could guide

of critical 6G technologies that are not addressed in existing

advancements in deep unfolding techniques to enhance

survey articles such as [15], [21], and [22]. Therefore, there

their performance. We point out that challenges in

is a lack of coverage of recent studies addressing critical 6G

designing a deep unfolding model mainly emerge

technologies, such as mmWave spectrum, new air interface that

from scenarios where these models do not offer

includes massive MIMO, IRS, and next-generation multiple

significant gain in performance–complexity tradeoff.

access, and is often limited to specific application areas. Con-

However, we also provide potential solutions that deep

sequently, a comprehensive survey is needed to encompass the

unfolding models can benefit from to overcome those

broad applications of deep unfolding techniques across various

challenges.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10382

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

Fig. 2. Outline of this article.

5) We also provide open-source representative works with their GitHub links for different design problems, such as detection, channel estimation, and ISAC, among others. We believe that this will enable readers to reproduce and develop new unfolding methods.
Moreover, we provide a systematic comparison between representative deep unfolding works and their classical counterparts, in the github link: https://github.com/kuntaliitg/ Supplementary-File-for-Deep-unfolding-Survey-Paper-.

Fig. 3. General framework of training for deep unfolding. The learnable parameters are shown in red.
respectively. N (µ, Σ) denotes the multivariate Gaussian distribution with mean vector µ and covariance matrix Σ, while CN (µ, Σ) denotes the complex multi-variate Gaussian distribution. Nomenclature lists the main acronyms used in this article.
II. DEEP UNFOLDING: GENERAL ARCHITECTURE AND FUNDAMENTALS

Deep unfolding, or algorithm unrolling [14], bridges model-

C. Article’s Outline
The skeleton of this article is depicted in Fig. 2. This survey article is organized as follows.

based iterative algorithms and data-driven DNNs [10], [22], [35], [36], [37], [38], [39], [40]. It maps each iteration of an iterative algorithm to a DNN layer, enabling end-to-end learning while retaining interpretability. In deep unfolding,

1) Part A: Section II presents the deep unfolding frame- the learnable parameters include model-specific variables and

work, which combines classical iterative algorithms with regularization coefficients, optimized layer by layer. Fig. 3

DNNs. The understanding of deep unfolding is exempli- illustrates the process of unfolding an iterative algorithm.

fied via ADMM-based MIMO detection. A step-by-step In general, for any iterative algorithm, the update equation

approach is presented for developing the unfolding of for each iteration is given as

ADMM specifically for MIMO detection. Also, a brief understanding on how trainable parameters impact the

sl+1 = h sl; θl

(1)

convergence order of the deep unfolded network is discussed. 2) Part B: This part explores deep unfolding applications in physical-layer tasks: signal detection (Section III), channel estimation (Section IV), precoder design (Section V), ISAC (Section VI), decoding for error-correcting code (Section VII), power allocation (Section VIII), and security (Section IX). 3) Part C: Section X discusses the limitations of existing deep unfolding approaches and the challenges associated with their adoption in wireless communications. We further outline potential directions and solutions to address these limitations, highlighting promising avenues for future research. Section XI concludes this article.

where {sl}lL=1 ∈ Rn denotes the sequence of variable vector updated across L layers of the algorithm. At each layer, the update is performed by executing h(·; ·). Repeated application of this update rule over L layers yields the unfolded network architecture, h(·; θl)lL=1. The trainable parameters {θl}lL=1 (shown in red fonts in Fig. 3) includes the model parameters and the step size for the regularization coefficients of the algorithm [27].
To learn the trainable parameters {θ}lL=1 in an end-to-end approach, the loss (sL, s) is computed, where sL is the output of the network and s is the ground truth target. The key idea behind end-to-end learning is that all parameters across L
layers are simultaneously adjusted through backpropagation,
where the loss is minimized using gradient-based optimization.
Feeding the data forward through the unfolded network with

trainable parameters in the testing stage is similar to executing

D. Notation and Acronyms

the parameter-optimized iterative algorithm for a finite number of iterations. Thus, the number of layers in deep unfolding

Lower case, boldface lower case, and boldface upper case models is fixed, resulting in a predefined computational comletters denote scalars, vectors, and matrices, respectively. (·)T plexity. Within these fixed layers, the model is trained to

and (·)H denote transpose and Hermitian transpose, respec- optimize the trainable parameters, enabling the problem to
tively. · denotes the Euclidean norm of a vector. Rn and be addressed using a structured algorithm with parameters Cn denote n-dimensional real and complex vector spaces, tailored for optimal performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEKA et al.: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

10383

Fig. 4. Deep unfolding training framework for ADMM-based MIMO detection. The learnable parameters are shown in red.

Example 1: To develop an understanding on deep unfolding, we take ADMM as an example. ADMM decomposes a complex optimization problem into simpler subproblems, which are solved iteratively. The algorithm combines the principles of dual ascent and the method of multipliers. Each iteration involves solving the subproblems for the primal variables in an alternating manner, followed by updating the dual variables (Lagrange multipliers) to enforce consistency with the original problem’s constraints [41]. This iterative process ensures that the subproblem solutions converge to the global solution of the main optimization problem. ADMM in its unfolded version has been widely used in MIMO signal detection [25], [42] and decoding in error correction codes [43], [44]. Here, we show the unfolding of ADMM for MIMO detection as an illustrative example.
Consider an MIMO system with M transmit antennas and N receive antennas. The received signal vector at the receiver can be given by
y¯ = H¯ x¯ + n¯

where H¯ ∈ CN×M represents the channel matrix, x¯ ∈ X¯ M is the transmitted symbol vector, and n¯ ∈ CN denotes the

additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) vector at the receiver. Here, X¯ represents the complex constellation set. In this

example, we consider the QPSK modulation scheme, and thus, (X¯ = {1 + i, −1 + i, −1 − i, 1 − i}). The ML detection

rule is given as

min
x¯∈X¯ M

y¯ − H¯ x¯

2.
2

(2)

where λ ∈ R2M is the dual variable (or Lagrange multiplier) and ρ > 0 is the penalty parameter. The iterative steps of the
ADMM involve alternating minimization of the augmented Lagrangian with respect to the primal variables x and z, followed by an update of the dual variable, λ [45], [46]. The closed-form solutions for x and z can be obtained as

xl+1

=

arg

min
x

Lρ

x, zl, λl

= arg min
x

y − Hx

2 2

+

λl T

x − zl

ρ +
2

= HT H + ρI −1 HT y + ρzl − λl

zl+1 = arg min Lρ xl+1, z, λl

z

= arg min − λl T z + ρ

z

2

xl+1 − z

2 2

ρ = arg min
z2

z

−

Â xl+1

+

λl ρ

Ã

2 2

=

Π[−1,1]

Â xl+1

+

λl Ã ,
ρ

and

λl+1 = λl + ρ xl+1 − zl+1 ∀l

x − zl

2 2

(5)

(6) (7)

where Π[−1,1](a) denotes an element-wise projection of a onto the set [−1, 1]. More specifically, if b = Π[−1,1](a), we have

8+1, <

if ai > 1

bi = −1, if ai < 1

:ai, otherwise.

Denote the following real-valued vectors and matrix:

y

ÄR (y¯) I (y¯)

,

x

ÄR (x¯) I (x¯)

,

n

ÄR (n¯ ) I (n¯ )

H

ÄR H¯ −I H¯ I H¯ R H¯

where R(·) and I(·) denote the real and imaginary parts

of a complex vector or matrix, respectively. With this

transformation, each element of x is drawn from the discrete

space {−1, 1}. We then relax this space to the continuous

domain X = [−1, 1]. Consequently, (2) can be relaxed to the

following problem in the real domain:minx∈X 2M

y

−

Hx

2 2

.

We further introduce an auxiliary variable z to reformulate

this problem as

min
x∈X 2M

y − Hx

2 2

s.t. x = z, z ∈ X 2M.

(3)

Algorithm 1 Unfolded ADMM for MIMO Detection

1: Input: Initial values z(0), λ(0)

2: Given: y and H

3: Learnable parameters θ = {ρ1(l), ρ2(l), ρ(3l)}lL=1

4: for l = 1 to L do 5: xl+1 = HT H + ρ(1l)I −1 HT y + ρ1(l)zl−1 − λl

Â

Ã

6: zl+1 = Πsoft

x + l+1 λl−1 ρ(2l)

7: λl+1 = λl + ρ(3l)(xl+1 − zl+1)

8: end for

9: Output: Final estimate zˆ = zL

The detailed procedure for the unfolded ADMM approach is provided in Algorithm 1. In deep unfolding, to ensure gradient flow during backpropagation in the training stage, all operations must be differentiable. To enable differentiable approximation, a soft projection is used that allows gradient to flow while keeping outputs near the desired constellation

The augmented Lagrangian is given as

points. Consequently, (6) becomes

Lρ

(x, z, λ) =
Authorized

ylic−ensHedxus22e+limλitTed(txo:−Yozn)se+i Uρ2niv.xDo−wznlo22aded

(4)
on June

24,2026

at

05:54:01

zl+1 =
UTC from

Πsoft

Â xl+1

+

λl Ã . ρ

IEEE Xplore. Restrictions

apply.

(8)

10384

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026
TABLE I SIMULATION PARAMETERS

Fig. 5. BER performance comparison for 16 × 16 MIMO system in EVA The introduction of trainable parameters makes it chal-

model [47]. For soft projection, tanh is used.

lenging to derive theoretical insights for unfolded algorithms

as compared to classical optimization algorithms. For any

Furthermore, the layer-wise unfolding of ADMM for MIMO optimization method, it is crucial to perform convergence

detection is illustrated in Fig. 4. The received symbol vector analysis. In the literature, the convergence studies of various

y and the channel matrix H are treated as fixed inputs and methods can be classified into three broad categories.

are provided to every layer of the network. Each layer of
the unfolded network corresponds to one iteration of the
ADMM procedure, specifically the update steps in (5), (7),
and (8). Corresponding to each of these equations, a specific ρ is considered to enable learning. These parameters form the trainable set θ = {ρ1(l), ρ2(l), ρ3(l)}lL=1, where each layer l has its own set of penalty coefficients. In the final layer L, the network produces the estimate zL = zˆ. For n = 1, . . ., N, data samples, the output zˆn(yn, H; ρ(1l), ρ2(l), ρ3(l)) is retrieved from the network as the predicted transmitted symbol for y. The

1) Convergence Order: In this category, the convergence properties of unfolded networks are explored to provide a comparison with classical methods. Under idealized choices of trainable parameters, different unfolded architectures are studied that yield an accurate solution with a faster convergence order. It is well known that the classical ISTA exhibits sublinear convergence [48]. Scarlett et al. [31] discuss how LISTA or unfolded ISTA produces a sequence of trainable parameters per layer exhibiting a linear convergence order. As discussed

network training loss function formed between the predicted

in [32], in the unfolded ISTA, due to the transfor-

output zˆ and the ground truth transmitted symbol zn is given as

mation of trainable parameters into learned weights,

ρ1(l), ρ2(l), ρ(3l)Á

=

1

N
X

N

n=1

zˆn

yn, H; ρ(1l), ρ(2l), ρ(3l)Á − zn

2
.
2

(9)

a linear convergence order is achieved. Chen et al. [34] point out that in deep unfolding, the most essential step in achieving better empirical performance and acceleration is to design the learnable parameters and analyze how the learnable parameters influence each other. For instance, in [32], the parameters related to

The network is trained by minimizing the loss with gradientbased learning techniques such as SGD to learn ρ1(l)–ρ(3l).
Fig. 5 presents the BER performance comparison of the

dictionary-based matrices in sparse signal recovery are not shared across the LISTA network’s layers. The learnable parameters are instead trained in each layer,

unfolded ADMM detector with ZF, MMSE, ADMM, and

similar to untying them across the layers. The increased

SD under QPSK modulation. For the unfolded ADMM, the

complexity in parameterization enables the network to

penalty parameters and step sizes are considered as learn-

learn complex mapping and exhibit better acceleration

able parameters. We consider a 16 × 16 4 QAM MIMO

in converging toward the solution. Chen et al. [33] have

system in the extended vehicular (EVA) propagation model.

proposed ALISTA, in which the weight matrices are

Table I summarizes the key simulation parameters. The train-

precomputed through an optimization procedure, thereby

ing and testing dataset, each are of size 10000. The number

eliminating the need for learning them from data. Only

of epochs is 20 with a batch size of 300. The unfolded

a small number of scalar parameters, the layer-wise

ADMM converges in 5 layers. The power delay profile

step size, threshold, and momentum factor, are learned.

of EVA propagation model [47] is given by [0, −1.5, −1.4,

Building upon this framework, the subsequent Hyper-

−3.6, −0.6, −9.1, −7.0, −12.0, −16.9] dB against the excess

LISTA model dynamically adapts these parameters in

tap delays [0, 30, 150, 310, 370, 710, 1090, 1730, 2510] ns. The

response to the reconstruction error, retraining them for

results demonstrate that the unfolded ADMM detector out-

each instance to match the current problem state. This

performs ZF, MMSE, and classical ADMM detectors. The

instance adaptive strategy yields a superlinear conver-

unfolded ADMM detector performs better due to the use of

gence order, a property that cannot be achieved when a

deep unfolding, where learnable parameters, penalty parame-

uniform set of optimal parameters is learned across the

ters and step sizes, are adaptively trained. The SD achieves

entire dataset. Although theoretical studies have been

near ML performance and is often used as a benchmark

attempted on the dependency of parameters on conver-

scheme for validating the performance of various detectors.

gence order and stability of the algorithm for ISTA,

This example has been included to provide the readers with an

there is a significant scope to explore theoretical studies

illustrative understanding of the deep unfolding process. The

on how other classical algorithms, such as ADMM and

comparative analysis highlights the advantage of the unfolded

AMP, perform compared to their respective unfolded

method over classical approaches. Additional performance

versions. For instance, channel estimation for ISAC in

improvements can be achieved by optimizing or introducing

intelligent transportation system is proposed in [49]. An

trainable parameters in the unfolded network.

unfolded network for channel estimation based on ISTA

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEKA et al.: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

10385

is designed with trainable parameters, which include the

to maintain convergence and algorithmic stability with

parameters related to dictionary-based matrices in each

robust generalization, the learnable parameters must be

ISTA iteration and the learnable threshold parameter

carefully designed. Consequently, exploring stability-

used in the soft-thresholding operator. In this work, the

aware parameterization and training strategies presents a

authors theoretically analyze the proposed unfolded net-

promising direction for advancing the theoretical foun-

work and establish that it achieves a linear convergence

dation of deep unfolding method.

order.

Moreover, Behboodi et al. [50] have discussed gener-

2) Generalization Error: A fundamental question for any

alization error that relies on Rademacher complexity

learned model is its reconstruction ability. Especially, the

analysis. The result presented in [50] suggested that

degree to which it can accurately recover a parameter

deep unfolding models may exhibit better generalization

from incomplete or corrupted data. Generalization error

capabilities than purely data-driven NNs, in line with

or bounds give a probabilistic estimate on the difference

empirical results. For example, the generalization error

between the true error (evaluated over the underlying

bound for LISTA depends on the number of layers only

data distribution) and the empirical error computed from

logarithmically, whereas the generalization error bound

the available training samples for a given hypothesis

for purely data-driven NN scales exponentially in the

function. Thus, such bounds predict how well a learned

number of layers. There have been works [52], [53] that

model performs on unseen data and assess whether the

discuss generalization error and Rademacher complexity,

training process has led to appropriate generalization

involving different learnable parameters and a variety of

[50]. The underlying machine learning algorithm of a

network architectures.

learned model can be viewed as a stochastic trans- 3) NMSE: The convergence rates of different approaches,

formation that maps training data to hypotheses. The

classical, purely data driven, and deep unfolding, are

algorithm stability largely depends on the generalization

examined through the NMSE with respect to the number

capability of learning algorithm and thus is of theoretical

of layers or iterations required to achieve the optimal

interest [51]. As described in [50], based on the training

solution. Some existing works that use NMSE as a

sequence S and given hypothesis space H, a learning

performance metric are as follows, for channel estima-

algorithm yields a function hS ∈ H. The function hS is defined as hS : X → Y for a training sequence from a distribution D on X × Y. Let us consider a training

tion [54], [55], [56], detection [57], precoder design [58], ISAC [59], and joint activity detection and channel estimation [60], [61], [62]. Generally, NMSE evaluates

sequence S = {(xi, yi)}i=1,...,m with m independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples drawn from the distribution D. Therefore, the empirical loss Lˆ(h) of a

the performance of any approach by evaluating the mse between ground truth, x, and estimated value, xˆ, followed by normalization as given in the following:

hypothesis h is the reconstruction error on the training sequence S, as given in the following:

Lˆ (h) =

1

m
X

m

(h, xi, yi) .

(10)

i=1

The loss function measures the reconstruction error and mse is the most commonly used loss function. The true loss L(h) defined as the risk of a hypothesis h is computed by evaluating expectation, E[·] over a distribution D as shown in the following:

NMSE =

E ||xˆ − x||2 E ||x||2

.

(13)

NMSE is used as a unified performance metric to compare classical iterative algorithms, purely data-driven models, and deep unfolding methods. It provides a direct measure of convergence speed in terms of the number of layers or iterations required to reach a target accuracy. The NMSE-vs-layers plots reported in [54], [55], [56], [57], [58], [59], [60], [61], and [62] visually illustrate the convergence behavior of unfolded networks

L (h) = Ex,y∼D (h, x, y) .

(11)

The generalization error of the hypothesis hS is based on the training samples S. It is defined as the difference between the empirical loss and the true loss as shown
in the following:

relative to benchmark algorithms. These results consistently show that NMSE decreases as the number of layers or iterations increases. Classical iterative methods exhibit slow NMSE reduction because they typically require many iterations to converge. In contrast, deep unfolding achieves the same NMSE performance with

GE (hS ) = ˇˇLˆ (hS ) − L (hS )ˇˇ .

(12)

significantly fewer layers, outperforming both purely data-driven models and classical approaches [54], [60].

Bousquet and Elisseeff [51] have identified several def-

While NMSE provides a direct measure of reconstruc-

initions to quantify the stability of a learning algorithm

tion accuracy with respect to the number of layers, it

such as hypothesis stability, point-wise hypothesis sta-

does not capture characteristics such as the convergence

bility, error stability, and uniform stability.

order of the algorithm or its susceptibility to overfitting.

The stability of a learning algorithm is quantified by

These aspects are instead characterized by convergence

the bound on the generalization error, which must be

order analysis and generalization error, which together

tight. The trainable parameters in deep unfolding are

describe the theoretical convergence behavior and algo-

trained via DL tools, so it is imperative that algorith-

rithmic stability of deep unfolding methods. However,

mic stability will be impacted by the choice of these parameters. Thus, the notion of algorithmic stability

NMSE can be complemented with these analyses to obtain an understanding of the efficiency and the reli-

can offer a theoretical bridge between optimization and

ability of unfolded architectures.

learning in deep unfolding. A proper parameterization The existing theoretical studies have examined the conver-

is fundamental to the empirical performance and accel- gence order [31], [32], [33] and generalization error [50],

eration achieved during training of the network. Hence, [51], [52] of unfolded networks. However, Shah et al. [63]

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10386

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

have provided optimization guarantees showing that unfolded to design the receiver in [11]. Learnable parameters, such as

networks can achieve near-zero training loss as the number the step size for updating the prior mean and variance in the

of learning epochs increases. Their analysis focuses on how MMSE estimator, are trained using SGD. These parameters in

the training loss decreases with more epochs while keeping OAMP-Net2 help compensate for channel estimation errors,

the number of layers fixed. In their numerical results, they improving performance compared to DetNet [70].

show that purely data-driven networks require significantly Furthermore, for overloaded massive MIMO systems,

more parameters to achieve the same near-zero training loss low-complexity detectors are essential. The TPGD algorithm

compared to LISTA and ADMM-based compressive sensing [71] unfolds the PGD method with trainable parameters (step

networks. This highlights the parameter efficiency and training size) optimized via backpropagation and SGD. To further

advantages of unfolded architectures.

improve PGD with an increase in convergence speed, Yun

In the following, we provide a comprehensive survey of et al. [72] added momentum components to the iterative

deep unfolding algorithms for a variety of critical wireless hidden layers. Momentum helps guide parameter updates

communication tasks.

in the right direction and reduces oscillations during PGD

optimization [73]. Both networks in [71] and [72] achieve

III. SIGNAL DETECTION

lower complexity and outperform DetNet [70] and OAMPNet2 [10]. A detector based on the Hubbard–Stratonovich

This section discusses the applications of deep unfolding transformation [74] avoids matrix inversion, offering faster

for signal detection. We segregate these signal detection training and lower execution cost compared to TPGD

techniques into various key technologies, as described in the [71] and OAMP-Net2 [11]. MMNet [75] unfolds ISTA,

following.

alternating linear detection and nonlinear denoising, designed

for ill-conditioned and non-i.i.d. channels. MMNet balances

A. Massive MIMO

complexity and flexibility, outperforming DetNet [70] and

Massive MIMO uses numerous antennas at both the transmitter and receiver, improving spectral and energy efficiency, but making symbol detection more complex due to ISI [3]. Designing low-complexity, high-performance detectors is still challenging. MIMO detection can be linear or nonlinear. Linear detectors, such as MF, ZF, and MMSE, involve matrix inversion and can be enhanced with lattice reduction [64]. Nonlinear detectors, such as SIC and parallel interference cancellation (PIC), remove interference in stages [3], [65]. SIC schemes (e.g., MF-SIC, ZF-SIC, and MMSE-SIC) use linear detectors to detect symbols, estimate interference, and remove it before detecting the next symbol. SD, a nonlinear method, approximates ML detection by searching a bounded hypersphere around the received lattice point, offering a more efficient search than exhaustive methods [66], [67], [68].
The PGD method is a popular optimization-driven approach for MIMO detection. In each iteration, PGD performs gradient descent to minimize detection error and then projects the solution onto a feasible, valid constellation set [69]. One of the first papers to use deep unfolding in detection is the DetNet architecture [70]. To achieve ML optimization, the PGD algorithm is unfolded, where the gradient’s step size is learned across layers. Samuel et al. [70] claimed that the computational complexity is reduced compared to the SD. DetNet nearly matches SD’s performance (within 0.5 order of BER at 18 dB). The computational complexity is linear [O(L.K2)], where L and K are the number of layers and constellation size, respectively. On the other hand, the SD exhibits (O(2K)) for worst case complexity. The FLOP count for QPSK, 8PSK, and 16 QAM constellations with varying transmitted symbol size shows that DetNet has a lower FLOP count than that for semidefinite relaxation (SDR)-based MIMO detection but has a higher FLOP count than the AMP detector. However, the proposed network is not flexible to changes in the size of the constellation or the number of users. To address MIMO detection under imperfect CSI, He et al. [11] introduced model-driven DL networks, OAMP network, OAMP-Net [10], and its enhanced variant OAMP-Net2. OAMP-Net2 outperforms OAMP-Net by adapting to varying channel conditions. However, the robustness of the OAMP-Net2 under hardware impairment has not been verified in [11]. The OAMP algorithm is unfolded, and the LMMSE channel estimator is used

OAMP-Net [10]. The MMNet outperforms the classical LMMSE detector with a performance gain of approximately 4 − 6 dB at an SER of 10−3 for different channel conditions.
The CONCRETE MAP method in [76] solves the MAP detection problem via CONtinuous relaxation of discrete random variables, approximating MAP solutions using gradient descent unfolding. It generates soft outputs for integration with soft-input decoders and outperforms DetNet [70], OAMP-Net2 [11], and MMNet [75] in BER under correlated channels. In [57], CGD iterations are unfolded to design the network, LcgNet. The authors also proposed a quantized version, QLcgNet, which minimizes memory usage with negligible performance degradation. LcgNet surpasses DetNet [70] in SER, complexity, and memory cost, making it suitable for massive MIMO systems. Olutayo and Champagne [77] improved LcgNet by adding a preconditioner during training, enhancing convergence speed by optimizing the receiver filter’s spectrum. Preconditioning improves the condition number of a matrix [78], optimizing the receiver filter’s spectrum. This enhancement significantly increases the convergence speed compared to the original LcgNet in [57]. A dynamic conjugate gradient network further adapts to time-varying channels using selfsupervised learning with forward error correction codes.
Physical-layer signal processing handles continuous-time analog waveforms, which must be quantized for hardware implementation. LR 1-bit ADCs are widely used at RF ends for high sampling rates, low cost, and low power [79]. Khobahi et al. [80] developed an LR detection network (LoRDNet), which unfolds the PGD method for symbol detection using the ML estimator, learning channel behavior implicitly from training data without requiring CSI. LoRDNet outperforms classical ML [81] and DL networks like DeepSIC [82], even with small datasets (∼500 samples). A generalized PGD algorithm was proposed in [83], where multiple gradient steps are performed before projection to balance convergence and performance. The self-correcting auto detector (SAD) unfolds the PGD algorithm by combining a self-correcting gradient module and a learnable denoising autoencoder projection. SAD [83] achieves better detection–complexity tradeoff than DetNet [70], using only 4 projection steps versus DetNet’s 15 projection steps, significantly reducing latency and computational cost.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEKA et al.: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

10387

The MIMO fading channel matrix can be modeled using graphs, such as Bayesian belief networks, Markov random fields, and factor graphs, which represent dependencies between variables for efficient detection [3]. Iterative MPDs, like BP, AMP, and channel hardening-exploiting message passing (CHEMP), reduce computational complexity. EP extends BP for efficient detection in large MIMO systems by approximating posterior distributions iteratively in polynomial time [84], [85]. Tan et al. [86] unfolded MPD iterations by learning prior probabilities and correction factors (damping, scaling, and LLR rescaling) via mini-batch SGD, improving performance in correlated channels and higher order modulation over classical MPDs. A low-complexity AMP-graph NN (AMP-GNN) model that avoids matrix inversion and outperforms OAMP-Net2 [11] is proposed in [87]. Due to high complexity, MPDs are not suited for single-carrier frequencydivision multiple access (FDMA) systems, where a low peakto-average power ratio is a key design objective for efficient transmission. Hence, an unfolded network in [88] simplifies generalized AMP iterations as discussed in [89] by approximating per-subcarrier statistics through statistical averaging. The unfolded network [88] maintains high performance even with channel mismatches and achieves 0.83 dB at BER = 10−3 gain over classical generalized AMP [89]. For EP-based detection, a modified EP MIMO detector (MEPD) [90] improved parameter selection via a modified moment-matching scheme, outperforming OAMP-Net2 [11] in high modulation cases. In [91], an approximate EP inspired by [92] is unfolded, achieving better detection performance and robust convergence.
To address high computational complexity of SD, Nguyen et al. [93] proposed a fast DL-aided SD algorithm inspired by [94]. The DNN generates reliable initial candidates for SD, prioritizing candidates closer to the DNN’s output for testing. This approach accelerates sphere shrinkage, reducing computational cost. The sparse network architecture eliminates matrix inversion, relying only on element-wise matrix multiplications. The proposed method performs better in highly correlated channels than DetNet [70], OAMP-Net2 [11], MMNet [75], and LcgNet [57]. An MIMO detector based on annealed Langevin dynamics is introduced in [95]. It replaces the traditional two-step iterative framework (continuous-space optimization followed by projection) with a single-step approximation of the MAP estimator by sampling from Langevin dynamics. This approach shows superior performance in correlated channels compared to DetNet [70], OAMP-Net2 [11], and MMNet [75]. To mitigate the computational costs of matrix inversion in classical detectors like ZF and MMSE, Berra et al. [96] proposed an unfolding accelerated Chebyshev successive over-relaxation algorithm. This network requires fewer trainable parameters and features a fast, stable training scheme. The unfolded detector achieves better performance compared to DetNet [70], OAMP-Net2 [11], TPGD-detector [71], MEPD [90], EP-Net [38], and other methods like [36].
To avoid the computational burden incurred due to matrix inversion, Datta et al. [97] have proposed a sparse refinement architecture for symbol detection in uplink massive MIMO. They incorporated deep unfolding for components in matrix inversion, to reduce the detection–complexity. The sparse weight matrix associated with the Jacobian iteration is trained across the layers of the network. Liao et al. [36] incorporated interference cancellation into DNN layers. Inspired by [98], their sequential detector trains residual error coefficients with mse loss, reducing complexity by avoiding matrix inversion

and relying on matrix addition and multiplication. Compared to DetNet [70], which requires 90 layers for convergence, their model achieves convergence with just 8 layers, offering significant computational simplicity. Kim and Park [42] developed an unfolded ADMM-based network for MIMO detection. They employed an inexact ADMM update as in [41] and [99] to reduce complexity while achieving near-optimal performance. Compared to DetNet [70], the proposed network [42] requires fewer trainable parameters, resulting in improved performance in terms of symbol error. Since, in [42], perfect CSI was assumed for MIMO detection, Sun et al. [100] proposed an ADMM-based unfolded algorithm with channel estimation errors. A set of penalty and relaxation parameters are learned layer-wise. Moreover, the complexity of the proposed network is reduced compared to OAMP-Net2 [11]. Arikawa and Hayashi [101] have proposed an unfolded coherent detector for optical communication. They have developed an MIMO filter architecture to compensate for hardware impairments such as transmitter and receiver in-phase/quadrature skew. The learnable parameters include the filter coefficients of the MIMO filter and are trained using the method in [71]. The results showed that the unfolded network performed well in the presence of chromatic dispersion, polarization rotation, and frequency offset accumulated over the fiber channel.
B. Modern Multicarrier Modulation
A cellular network must simultaneously support a growing number of active subscribers within a limited time–frequency spectrum [102]. By increasing bandwidth, the symbol period is reduced, which worsens the ISI in multipath fading channels. OFDM mitigates ISI by splitting wideband signals into orthogonal narrowband subcarriers [103]. MIMO-OFDM detectors face challenges due to a high-dimensional signal space. An unfolded OAMP-based low-complexity receiver for cyclic prefix-free MIMO-OFDM is explored in [104]. The network was tested in over-the-air experiments and it performed reliably with low synchronization errors under imperfect CSI. Similarly, detection of coarsely quantized or LR signals in 1-bit OFDM-based MIMO systems is a challenge. The 1-bit ADCs severely quantize received signals, discarding amplitude information, and hence, ML detection becomes intractable due to nonlinear quantization effects. Shao et al. [105] proposed an unfolded EM algorithm that iteratively estimates unquantized symbols, outperforming ZF detection at high SNR. Furthermore, Ullah et al. [106] unfolded a likelihood ascent search algorithm for joint detection and soft-output estimation. The likelihood ascent search algorithm is a neighborhood searchbased detector for the MIMO system. The algorithm begins with an initial symbol estimate from linear detectors (ZF or MMSE) and iteratively refines the solution by flipping bits in the detected symbols to minimize the likelihood cost function. Near-optimal detection is achieved with the unfolded network, 1.2-dB gap with 16-QAM compared to SD at BER of 10−5 at polynomial complexity. Zhang et al. [107] unfolded EP with trainable layer-specific damping factors, providing robust detection under varying channels and noise, validated in over-the-air tests. In underwater acoustic communication, where radio or light waves fail, Zhao et al. [39] proposed UDNet, an unfolded MMSE equalizer that generalizes well with low complexity in doubly selective channels. In terms of performance, UDNet achieved better generalization and maintained lower computational complexity than DetNet [70]. Li et al. [38] proposed EP-Net for OTFS detection, training

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10388

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF CLASSICAL VERSUS UNFOLDED METHODS FOR SIGNAL DETECTION. T : LAYERS, I: ITERATIONS, M: SYMBOL SIZE, Nt : NO. OF TRANSMIT ANTENNA, AND Nr : NO. OF RECEIVE ANTENNA

step size, damping, and posterior distribution parameters to improve detection performance.
In [108], an unfolded OAMP-based detector for OTFS is designed to handle channel estimation errors. This detector is trained using imperfect CSI and optimizes three trainable parameters: step sizes for updating the linear estimate, nonlinear estimate, and noise variance. Numerical analysis demonstrates that at SNR of 30 dB, the proposed detector achieves a BER of 2.4 × 10−4, while EP-Net [38] achieves a BER of 1.2 × 10−3.
C. Next-Generation Multiple Access
Multiple access techniques allow multiple users to share the same communication channel and resources, such as time, frequency, or code, to transmit data efficiently. Usually, multiple access schemes achieve this by dividing signaling dimensions orthogonally across time, frequency, or code [109]. This orthogonality enables low-complexity multiuser detection at the receiver. However, orthogonal multiple access cannot achieve the desired sum-rate capacity for an MU wireless system. To address this, NOMA has been introduced, allowing more users to be served than the number of orthogonal resource units by leveraging nonorthogonal resource sharing [102]. NOMA is categorized into power-domain NOMA and code-domain NOMA [110]. Power-domain NOMA multiplexes users by assigning different power levels on the same resource, such as time, frequency, or code, and relies on SIC at the receiver, whereas code-domain NOMA multiplexes users by assigning different nonorthogonal spreading codes on the same resource block.
A deep unfolded detector, named the learned preconditioned CGD network with SIC, is proposed for downlink MIMONOMA systems in [111]. The algorithm incorporates a data transfer learning strategy to achieve a robust model with low dataset requirements. This approach efficiently adapts the model to variations in environmental factors, such as channel models, modulation schemes, or power allocation, ensuring consistent performance in diverse scenarios. Tanner graphbased transmission schemes for NOMA are discussed in [112]. To enhance the detection efficiency, an MPD is unfolded, allowing the detector to improve as more information about transmitted data is learned during training epochs.
In sparse code-division multiple access (CDMA), each user transmits using sparse signature codes to reduce interference

and enable efficient MU access [113], [114]. Takabe et al. [115] proposed the complex sparse TPGD (C-STPG) detector, achieving superior detection over LMMSE with low complexity and minimal training due to few trainable parameters. They also introduced gradual sparsification, a deep unfolding method that jointly learns sparse signature matrices by minimizing mse, tuning step size, and a softness parameter.
D. Discussion and Takeaways
Deep unfolding has proven to be a compelling solution for signal detection in complex and high-dimensional problems, such as those in massive MIMO, LR ADC, and time-varying systems. By transforming iterative algorithms such as gradient descent variants, ISTA, ADMM, and AMP into structured networks, unfolding approaches bridge interpretability and performance. In Table II, we summarize the computational complexity, number of trainable parameters, and convergence speed of the most popular deep unfolding models against those of classical methods for signal detection.
While pioneering unfolding architectures such as DetNet [70] and LcgNet [57] have demonstrated the advantages of data-driven signal detection with explainable DNN structures, they exhibit limited generalization in challenging scenarios, such as correlated channels. More recent unfolding-based approaches, including MMNet [75] and ADMM-Net [42], address these limitations by offering robustness to both channel correlation and imperfect CSI. However, methods such as MMNet [75] and LoRDNet [80] introduce additional latency and training complexity due to their reliance on online training and periodic retraining, making them less suitable for fastvarying channel environments.
The research community has actively tested deep unfolded detectors in real-world scenarios. Over-the-air test platforms [39], [104], [107] have been employed to validate the performance of unfolded detector networks under practical conditions. These real-world experiments confirm the feasibility of model-driven deep unfolding networks that are trained offline and subsequently deployed on software-defined radios or software-based receivers for real-time inference. The results demonstrate that deep unfolding techniques in signal detection can achieve robust BER performance in practical indoor environments, outperforming both traditional and purely datadriven methods.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEKA et al.: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

10389

Although the aforementioned unfolded detectors achieved improved performance with reduced complexity under both perfect and imperfect CSI, their robustness over practical hardware and synchronization impairments has not been investigated. The performance analysis in this direction for different unfolded detectors is worth investigating in future works.
IV. CHANNEL ESTIMATION
Channel estimation is essential for signal detection because it allows the receiver to compensate for distortions introduced by the transmission medium, such as fading, delay, and phase shifts.
In the following, we discuss deep unfolding-aided channel estimation methods.
A. Massive MIMO
MMSE-based channel estimation is commonly used in MIMO systems to estimate the channel response in noisy environments. In massive MIMO systems with FDD, reducing CSI feedback overhead is challenging. A method in [116] combines DL and superposition coding to address this. Downlink CSI is encoded, superimposed on uplink user data, and sent to the BS. A multitask NN unfolds the MMSE process to reduce interference and reconstruct the CSI efficiently.
ISTA is commonly used for sparse channel estimation, enabling efficient CSI feedback. Each ISTA iteration includes a linear operation followed by a nonlinear soft-thresholding step, similar to the rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function [20]. Chen et al. [117] proposed a trainable DL architecture for sparse recovery problems using an adaptive depth approach. Instead of a fixed number of layers, the method dynamically adjusts the depth based on the problem’s complexity. Highly sparse channels use fewer layers, while more complex channels require additional layers. This adaptive approach improves accuracy and lowers computational costs compared to classical methods and fixed-depth networks. Results in [117] demonstrate that the method reduces reconstruction error and speeds up channel estimation, making it more efficient. A scenario-adaptive CSI compression framework is proposed in [118], requiring minimal channel measurements for training. They introduced a CSI feedback architecture designed for efficient encoder updates in dynamic wireless environments, which is essential for downlink precoding in massive MIMO systems. The encoding network focuses on improving the robustness and efficiency of CSI compression. It employs a deep unfolding-based feedback network to iteratively refine the feedback process and enhance feature extraction. Similarly, the decoding network uses a deep unfolding structure inspired by ISTA. This iterative approach improves CSI recovery accuracy, making the process more efficient and adaptable to changing conditions.
In massive MIMO, where channels exhibit sparsity, majorization–minimization (MM) is effective for sparse channel estimation [119]. Zhao et al. [120] propose a two-timescale joint uplink/downlink dictionary learning and channel estimation framework. The short-term subproblem estimates sparse channel vectors by unfolding the MM algorithm and treating these vectors as trainable parameters. The long-term subproblem updates the dictionary using a constrained SSCA method without unfolding. Simulation results show reduced pilot overhead and superior performance in both static and dynamic scenarios, especially with mobile users.

The matching pursuit algorithm is a greedy method used for sparse channel estimation, iteratively identifying channel components by correlating the residual with dictionary elements. Yassine and Le Magoarou [121] proposed mpNet, a deep unfolded matching pursuit-based network for unsupervised MU massive MIMO channel estimation, initialized with a dictionary of imperfect steering vectors. The network dynamically adjusts its number of layers based on the received data, providing efficient estimation in realistic settings. Building upon the unfolded network: mpNet [121], Chatelier et al. [122] have considered hardware impairments in the shifting of the subcarrier frequency to achieve SISO-OFDM channel estimation.
The basis pursuit algorithm is a widely used method for sparse signal recovery, particularly in compressed sensing. It identifies the sparsest solution to an underdetermined system by minimizing the 1-norm of the signal. This approach is crucial in scenarios where data is acquired under constraints, and the signal is assumed to be sparse in certain domains. Wu and Cheng [123] observed that existing sparse channel estimation schemes for downlink CSI often deliver suboptimal reconstruction due to the use of random measurement matrices. To address this, they proposed deep unfolding-based autoencoders that optimize the measurement matrix by unfolding the basis pursuit algorithm. This customized design enhances reconstruction performance in sparse channel estimation tasks.
Sparse Bayesian learning is another effective approach for channel recovery [124]. It estimates the nonzero elements of the channel matrix while utilizing prior knowledge of sparsity. Hu et al. [54] introduced a deep unfolding framework called deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) for MU-MIMO systems. DDPG, a variant of deep Q-networks, is designed to handle problems in continuous action spaces [125]. Unlike conventional deep unfolding NNs with fixed depth, they leveraged DDPG to dynamically adjust the network depth based on the complexity of the problem. This adaptive design enhances the efficiency and performance of sparse channel recovery in varying scenarios. The channel estimation problem is formulated using an off-grid sparse Bayesian learning model. The sparse Bayesian learning algorithm is unfolded with trainable parameter grid points and off-grid variables. Simulation results show that the proposed method significantly outperforms fixed-depth models, achieving a 30% reduction in the number of layers while improving NMSE performance.
B. mmWave Massive MIMO
The mmWave massive MIMO operates in the highfrequency range of 30–300 GHz, offering abundant spectral resources to alleviate the bandwidth crunch at sub-6-GHz frequencies [102]. However, mmWave signals suffer from severe propagation and penetration losses. To compensate for these losses, large-scale antenna arrays with tens to hundreds of elements are required to achieve high power gains. The short wavelength (1–10 mm) of mmWave signals allows compact integration of these arrays into small transceivers. These features introduce unique challenges in designing physicallayer transmission algorithms [126]. The BS, equipped with numerous antennas, must acquire downlink CSI. However, the requirement of large amount of feedback creates significant overhead, posing a challenge in channel estimation in mmWave massive MIMO systems.
Compressive sensing techniques are widely used to reduce feedback overhead by exploiting channel sparsity [127].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10390

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

The limited scattering properties of mmWave propagation and the power-focusing capability of lens antenna arrays transform the spatial domain channel into a sparse beamspace representation. Consequently, the channel estimation problem becomes a sparse signal recovery task, often addressed through compressed sensing methods. However, performing beamspace channel estimation in massive MIMO systems with limited RF chains remains a challenging task.
Compressive sensing-aided deep unfolding is explored by Borgerding and Schniter [128], where they apply the Onsager correction for AMP as explained in [129]. The architecture of the unfolded model, learned AMP (LAMP) [128], is similar to unfolded ISTA in [20]. A learned denoising-based AMP (LDAMP) network is proposed in [130] to learn beamspace channel estimates. They demonstrate that the iterative sparse signal recovery algorithm with denoising achieves robustness in channel estimation, particularly in scenarios with large antenna arrays and limited RF chains. Wei et al. [131] introduced an unfolded network called learned AMP with deep residual learning (LampResNet). In this model, the AMP algorithm is unfolded to estimate the channel, and deep residual learning is employed to mitigate channel noise. NMSE analysis shows that the proposed network in [131] outperforms LAMP [128] and achieves performance comparable to LDAMP [130] in terms of estimation accuracy. However, exploiting channel sparsity does not always yield optimal estimation performance. To address this, Zheng et al. [55] investigated the sparsity of the mmWave channel in the beamspace. They formulate the estimation problem as a sparse signal recovery task and improve convergence speed by unfolding the iterative PGD algorithm. In this approach, the step size of the descent step is treated as a trainable parameter. In [132], an unfolded iterative trimmed ridge regression algorithm is proposed for beamspace channel estimation. The method supports parallel computation for near-zero latency and is applicable to both narrowband and wideband massive MIMO systems, ensuring versatile channel estimation performance.
C. Modern Multicarrier Modulation
Wang et al. [133] proposed a CSI recovery network for FDD downlink massive MIMO-OFDM by unfolding ISTA, with compression and reconstruction modules for CSI feedback. Hu et al. [134] improved it with learnable optimization and regularization algorithm (LORA), by learning the regularization term via end-to-end training to adapt to different channel estimation errors. Zhang et al. [135] exploited the correlation between real and imaginary parts of CSI differential terms, enabling a shared model to reduce complexity and improve encoder efficiency. Each of the networks proposed in [133], [134], and [135] enhances CSI feedback performance for an FDD massive MIMO-OFDM system. Guo et al. [37] proposed FISTA-Net, unfolding fast ISTA with momentum, trainable step sizes, and thresholds for faster convergence and accurate low-rank OFDM mmWave CSI feedback. For quantized CSI feedback, Cao et al. [136] introduced TiLISTA, a deep unfolding bit-level feedback network using tied LISTA, reducing learnable parameters and enhancing robustness to quantization errors. Building upon ISTA, they used tied LISTA as discussed in [137]. Since the trainable parameters are shared across all layers, the number of learnable parameters is reduced, offering a faster and more accurate solution to the signal reduction

problem. FISTA-Net [37] focuses on faster convergence while TiLISTA [136] targets robustness to quantization errors.
In [138], an unfolded sparse Bayesian learning method is proposed for mmWave massive MIMO-OFDM with HBF, effectively capturing channel sparsity and reducing NMSE from 0.1203 to 0.033. Chen et al. [139] introduced an unfolded inverse-free variational Bayesian learning framework to avoid costly matrix inversions, improving sparse channel recovery by learning the prior parameters of the dictionary. In [140], a generalized expectation consistent algorithm is unfolded for sparse channel estimation in lens-based beamspace massive MIMO-OFDM, mitigating severe mmWave attenuation. In [139] and [140], accurate channel recovery with few RF chains is achieved. Additionally, Ma et al. [141] proposed an unfolded multiple measurement vector AMP network that exploits angle-domain sparsity to reduce uplink pilot overhead, jointly training the phase shift network and channel estimator for improved estimation performance.
Gao et al. [142] proposed a network, ComNet, that unfolds an OFDM receiver into two subnetworks: channel estimation and signal detection. The LMMSE and ZF are unfolded for channel estimation and signal detection, respectively. The weights of the LMMSE and ZF matrices are trained layerwise. The simulation results show that the BER performance is better compared to the classical LMMSE estimation. Furthermore, Wang et al. [143] proposed an unfolded LS estimation to enhance channel estimation for an OTFS MIMO system under fractional Doppler conditions. The network, CENet, is structured as parallel subnetworks, each responsible for estimating one row (delay tap) of the delay-time channel matrix. At BER = 3 × 10−3, CENet achieved ∼5-dB SNR gain over LS estimation algorithm.
D. Intelligent Reflecting Surface
To mitigate the blockage effect and extend the connectivity range for mmWave communication, IRS is a key technology proposed to enhance both energy and SE. IRS consists of many reflecting elements that steer the propagation of electromagnetic waves by adjusting their reflection coefficients. However, to unlock the full potential of IRS, accurate channel estimation is required for both direct and cascaded links. This is a challenging task because IRS-based channel estimation involves estimating multiple channels simultaneously: the direct channels between the BS and each user, the channel between the BS and IRS elements, and the channel between IRS elements and users.
He et al. [144] proposed a method for estimating the rankdeficient cascaded channel in an IRS-assisted single-input multiple-output system. They developed a deep unfolding network based on a gradient descent algorithm. The model structure is inspired by DetNet [70]. In massive MIMO, increasing the number of IRS elements and BS antennas enhances the system’s capacity. However, this leads to increased training overhead to obtain accurate channel estimates within the channel coherence time. The proposed network addresses this challenge by compensating for the computational complexity.
Awais et al. [145] developed two networks based on the MAP estimation criterion to address the challenges in IRS cascaded channel estimation. The first network is a deep denoising network designed for noise-dominated SNR regions, providing support at various noise levels. The second network is a deep unfolded half-quadratic splitting network that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEKA et al.: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

10391

alternates between optimizing extrapolation and denoising for interference-dominated regions. As the SNR increases, the proposed network shows significant improvement in NMSE. Under severe channel variations, the network delivers a performance gain of 20% in the high SNR range.
Tsai et al. [146] proposed a two-stage learned AMP network with row compression for joint estimation of direct and cascaded channels in IRS-aided mmWave systems. Using deep unfolding, the method integrates compressive sensing with learning to achieve reliable channel estimation with reduced training overhead, facilitating efficient IRS reconfiguration.
E. IoT Devices
Joint activity detection and channel estimation are critical in grant-free random access for mMTC, where numerous IoT devices access the network sporadically without scheduling. To enhance detection under imperfect CSI, Qiang et al. [35] proposed AMP-Net, an unfolded AMP-based network. Each AMP iteration alternates between MMSE-based denoising and residual updates to minimize the mse. The network uses four trainable scalar parameters to estimate activity probability, channel variance, regulate the denoiser, and control the state evolution. AMP-Net achieved accurate detection of the active device by extracting the CSI from the estimated device state matrix with a 4-dB gain over classical AMP at SNR = 15 dB. Li et al. [147] proposed a grant-free access protocol for mmWave cell-free massive MIMO using a hybrid structure based on learned vector AMP, reducing reliance on prior channel knowledge and improving convergence over classical AMP. Ma et al. [148] introduced a one-phase noncoherent scheme for mMTC. The data bits are embedded in pilot sequences to enable joint activity and data detection without channel estimation. They used unfolded AMP to leverage pilot correlation. In [149], an unfolded AMP with backpropagation was applied to an asynchronous random access scheme with data length diversity, addressing activity detection, channel estimation, and data recovery in mMTC.
Mao et al. [62] proposed an ADMM-based deep unfolding network for joint channel estimation and active user detection in massive IoT systems. The trainable parameters include an auxiliary variable for matrix inversion, a regularization term balancing sparsity and accuracy, and a shrinkage threshold controlling output sparsity per iteration. Similarly, in [150], the ADMM algorithm is unfolded to improve convergence rate and recovery accuracy in grant-free vehicular networks, particularly for BS with a limited number of antennas. In [151], two unfolded networks were introduced for sporadic user detection and channel estimation in mMTC: ADMM-Net and VAMPISTA-Net. ADMM-Net unfolds a linearized ADMM [99] to address constrained convex problems, using a single iteration of the proximal gradient method to avoid solving subproblems explicitly. VAMP-ISTA-Net unfolds a vector AMP enhanced with an ISTA-based denoiser. Both architectures required only five layers, significantly reducing the iteration count from 300 in classical algorithms and achieving faster convergence. Overall, the approaches in [62], [150], and [151] tackle the multiple measurement vector sparse recovery problem using unfolded ADMM frameworks for improved reconstruction performance.
Shi et al. [60] considered grant-free massive access in an IoT network. A large number of single-antenna IoT devices sporadically transmit nonorthogonal sequences to a multiantenna BS.

An unfolded ISTA with trainable weight matrices is designed. The network trains faster due to less number of trainable parameters. Zou et al. [61] formulated the joint activity detection and channel estimation problem as a group-row-sparse matrix recovery problem. A proximal gradient-based method is unfolded, and it achieves better convergence than the network in [60].
F. Discussion and Takeaways
Channel estimation in modern wireless systems, especially in massive MIMO and mmWave settings, poses distinct challenges due to high dimensionality, feedback overhead, and sparse propagation characteristics. Deep unfolding addresses these issues by embedding structural priors into learning pipelines, as demonstrated by models like LDAMP [130] and LampResNet [131]. Table III summarizes the computational complexity, number of trainable parameters, and convergence speed (in terms of layers required for convergence) of key unfolded algorithms for channel estimation. Additionally, studies reporting complexity in FLOPs are included to highlight the implementation cost.
Nonetheless, deep unfolding for channel estimation remains sensitive to model assumptions (e.g., sparsity or statistical independence). Performance degradation in dense or correlated environments, retraining overhead, and reliance on fixed unfolding depth are key limitations. Moreover, model-agnostic unfolding and joint learning of estimation and feedback (especially in IRS and wideband settings) will be crucial for making deep unfolding a mainstream tool in physical-layer design. Unlike deep unfolding models for signal detection, the practical deployment of such models for channel estimation remains limited. Moreover, their performance has yet to be thoroughly validated through real-world over-the-air experiments.
V. PRECODER DESIGN
This section reviews the applications of deep unfolding for precoder design used in key 6G technologies.
A. Massive MIMO
Beamforming in MIMO systems enhances signal transmission by steering signals toward the intended receivers using multiple antennas, thereby improving received SNR [152], [153]. Beamforming techniques can be broadly divided into three types: analog, digital, and hybrid [152]. Digital beamforming uses a digital precoding matrix with one RF chain per antenna, leading to high power consumption and complexity in large arrays. Analog beamforming employs phase shifters but struggles with interuser interference. HBF [154], [155] addresses these issues by combining digital and analog methods, reducing RF chain count while maintaining performance and efficiency, which is ideal for mmWave and massive MIMO in 5G and beyond.
Shlezinger et al. [30] discuss HBF optimization using classical, data-driven, and deep unfolding methods, highlighting deep unfolding’s efficiency with limited RF chains. For precoder design, the weighted MMSE (WMMSE) algorithm [156] maximizes the weighted sum rate via iterative updates involving matrix inversions and eigendecompositions. Given the nonconvexity of the power-constrained problem [157], a distributed inexact cyclic CD method is proposed for efficient locally optimal solutions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10392

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF CLASSICAL VERSUS UNFOLDED METHODS FOR CHANNEL ESTIMATION. T : LAYER, N f : NO. OF SUBCARRIERS, N : NO. OF DEVICES, M: NO. OF BS ANTENNA, m: SIZE OF TRANSMITTED SIGNAL VECTOR, n: SIZE OF MEASUREMENT VECTOR, L: PILOT LENGTH, AND G: NO. OF DISCRETE ANGULAR DOMAIN GRID OF CHANNEL CLUSTERS

A deep unfolded architecture, iterative algorithm induced deep unfolding network (IAIDNN) is proposed for precoder design in MU-MIMO systems in [158]. The iterative WMMSE algorithm is unfolded. To improve the efficiency, WMMSE is reformulated to approximate matrix inversions. A generalized chain rule in matrix form helps visualize the gradient recurrence between adjacent layers during backpropagation. Using this rule, the gradients of trainable parameters are computed effectively. To improve convergence while avoiding matrix inversion, a downlink beamforming method using an unfolded PGD-WMMSE algorithm for a multiuser MISO system is proposed in [159]. The authors replace matrix inversions with PGD and compute gradients in parallel. Unlike IAIDNN [158], this approach eliminates matrix inversion, making hardware implementation more practical. Additionally, it achieves a high weighted sum rate in fully loaded scenarios, where the number of users matches the number of transmit antennas at the BS.
In [158], learnable parameters approximate matrix operations in WMMSE, but the method does not exploit the graph structure of wireless networks. To address this, Schynol and Pesavento [160] unfolded WMMSE using graph convolutional networks for multicell MU-MIMO, enabling coordination with only local CSI, though with limited flexibility in learning exact transformations. Chowdhury et al. [161] improved this by proposing a hybrid unfolded WMMSE that uses GNNs to learn functional mappings, reducing the number of layers and accelerating convergence. Distributed precoding across cooperative BSs was achieved in [162], lowering complexity and backhaul load compared to centralized approaches [158], [159]. Finally, in [163], unfolded WMMSE is applied to massive MU-MIMO with imperfect CSI by leveraging CSI statistics, achieving faster convergence and near-optimal precoding relative to the classical WMMSE algorithm [156].
Shi et al. [164] designed a hybrid analog-to-digital transceiver using iterative gradient descent to obtain minimum SER (MSER) in massive MIMO systems. They unfolded the iterative gradient descent algorithm into a DNN, where step sizes for the gradients are the learnable parameters. They claim that their proposed network matches the performance of the MSER-based iterative gradient descent algorithm while significantly reducing complexity.
Gradient-based methods are widely used for beamforming optimization due to their reduced complexity, and further gains have been achieved using advanced frameworks such as PGD and PGA. In [165], a frequency-selective precoding algorithm for wideband MIMO-OFDM was unfolded using PGD with

trainable step sizes and projection parameters, achieving nearoptimal sum rate at low complexity. Zhu et al. [166] unfolded a parallel gradient projection method for MISO heterogeneous networks, where trainable step sizes and weighted sum-rate coefficients enable generalization across antenna and network configurations. PGA itself performs gradient ascent followed by projection onto the feasible set. Lavi and Shlezinger [167] applied unfolded PGA to hybrid precoding, with trainable step sizes for analog and digital updates; for noisy CSI, they used a projected mirror-prox scheme. Bilbao et al. [168] unfolded PGA with ZF projection for analog beamforming under constant-modulus constraints in full-duplex massive MIMO, exploiting convex ZF-feasible sets for faster convergence and improved performance. They have considered the CSI error to account for hardware impairment and nonlinearity in the channel. Beyond PGD and PGA, CGD has also been unfolded in [169]. They incorporated CGD with Riemannian MO for constant-envelope precoding, reducing complexity while effectively mitigating multiuser interference.
In [170], a fast and robust precoding network is proposed for MU-MIMO with imperfect CSI and per-antenna power constraints. The mse minimizing geometric program and its uplink–downlink duality-based iterative solution are unfolded to create RMSED-Net, which offers robustness to channel estimation errors and achieves sum-rate performance close to the benchmark upper bound.
In [171], an unfolded interior-point method is used for symbol-level precoding in multiuser MISO, where trainable proximal operators and Lagrange multipliers enable power minimization under SINR constraints with a 50%–70% reduction in runtime. Its main limitation is applicability only to PSK modulation. In [172], a constructive-interference-based precoding scheme unfolds the proximal Jacobian ADMM, yielding 98% lower transmit power and significantly reduced execution time. Since ADMM suffers from biased updates in discrete optimization, iterative discrete estimation (IDE) for unbiased convergence in finite-alphabet precoding is introduced in [173]. He et al. [174] unfolded this IDEbased algorithm for massive MU-MIMO, with learnable step sizes and damping, achieving improved BER across SNRs. Finally, Gao et al. [175] proposed a learning-based channel semantic acquisition and beamforming framework for cellfree massive MIMO, where a successive over-relaxation-based beamforming algorithm is unfolded to reduce estimation error, lower complexity, and enhance robustness under imperfect CSI.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEKA et al.: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

10393

B. mmWave MIMO
The mmWave MIMO systems rely on beamforming to mitigate multiuser interference while enhancing diversity and spectrum efficiency. Typically, the beam selection and digital precoding matrices are designed separately, leading to suboptimal solutions. To address this, Hu et al. [176] proposed a joint design approach combining DL and model-driven techniques. DRL optimizes beam selection, while a deep unfolding NN, based on iterative WMMSE, optimizes the digital precoding matrix. The goal is to maximize the system sum rate while satisfying beam selection constraints. The DRL and deep unfolding networks are trained sequentially, with one network’s output serving as the input to the other. Backpropagation and SGD are used for training and parameter updates. They verified that the proposed framework outperforms benchmarks in sum rate, complexity, and robustness while maintaining interpretability and scalability.
Lin et al. [177] unfolded the PGD algorithm for LMMSE transceiver design in uplink massive MU-MIMO with 1-bit ADCs, training only the step size per iteration to minimize system mse and reduce training overhead. In [178], deep generative models are combined with unfolding to solve HBF as a bilevel optimization problem. The upper layer optimizes the digital precoder given a fixed analog precoder, and the lower layer optimizes the analog precoder given a fixed digital precoder. Trainable CNN weights map between the precoders. This unfolded bilevel approach achieves near-optimal HBF with low feedback and computational complexity.
C. Next-Generation Multiple Access
RSMA is a flexible multiple access technology that merges the strengths of space division multiple access (SDMA) and NOMA [179]. It uses linearly precoded rate splitting at the transmitter and SIC at the receivers. RSMA balances interference management by partially decoding some interference while treating the rest as noise, bridging the gap between SDMA (which treats all interference as noise) and NOMA (which fully decodes interference). Wang et al. [180] applied fractional programming with hyperplane fixed-point iteration to design the RSMA beamformer. The algorithm is unfolded into an NN, replacing its inner loop with a small-scale DNN to predict Lagrangian dual variables. Simulations show that the proposed approach achieves high performance while reducing computational complexity.
D. Intelligent Reflecting Surface
Chen et al. [181] proposed the deep unfolded WMMSEMO (DU-WMMSE-MO) network for IRS-assisted mmWave MIMO-OFDM systems, jointly designing the HBF and IRS phase-shifting matrices. Trainable parameters include precoder and IRS phase weights and biases. The method improves IRS phase shift design by jointly updating step sizes, offering more flexibility than classical WMMSE-MO with Armijo backtracking line search method [182] but with higher runtime. Liu et al. [183] studied IRS-assisted MU MIMO full-duplex systems, using deep unfolding to approximate the stochastic SSCA beamforming algorithm, reducing matrix inversion complexity while achieving near-optimal weighted sum-rate performance.
Zhao et al. [184] proposed a two-timescale unfolded primal–dual HBF method for IRS-aided MU MISO systems

to reduce signal processing complexity and channel training overhead. By separating optimization into two timescales, the approach efficiently minimizes transmit power while meeting individual QoS constraints, improving computational efficiency and performance.
In [185], a low-complexity IRS-assisted downlink MISO system is designed using an unfolded block CD algorithm, decoupling the joint optimization of transmit beamforming and IRS phase shifts into two subproblems via Lagrange dual transformation. The numerical analysis validated that the achieved weighted sum rate is comparable to that of the classical approach in [186] but with reduced computational complexity. In [187], an unfolded network combining WMMSE and power iteration was proposed for joint beamforming, reducing computational runtime to about 3% of the classical approach in [186].
In [188], a deep unfolding algorithm based on gradient descent is proposed for IRS-assisted MISO covert symbiotic radio systems, jointly optimizing active and passive beamforming under covert constraints, with trainable step sizes and Lagrange multipliers. In contrast, Zhu et al. [189] focused only on passive beamforming, using unfolded Riemannian gradient descent to optimize the IRS phase shift matrix by maximizing the channel path gain. The network in [189] is simpler compared to that of [188], due to less number of parameters to train, but is specific to optimizing the phase shift of the IRS.
E. Terahertz
The 6G wireless networks are expected to achieve terabitper-second (Tbps) data rates to support ultrareliable lowlatency communication. To enhance spectral and energy efficiency, THz-enabled massive MIMO is a promising solution, leveraging the abundant bandwidth at THz frequencies to significantly boost data rates [190].
Nguyen et al. [191] proposed a deep unfolding framework that unfolds the iterations of Riemannian MO (specifically the MO-AltMin algorithm) [192]. Instead of directly solving the original SE maximization or WMMSE minimization problems, which are highly nonconvex and computationally intensive, they reformulated the HBF design as an approximate matrix factorization problem. This factorization leads to an LS formulation for analog and digital beamforming, enabling a more efficient solution. By leveraging this structure, their proposed ManNet-based approach [191] requires significantly fewer layers to estimate the analog precoder, resulting in faster training and lower computational complexity as compared to the approach in [167].
Wu et al. [58] proposed an unfolded network to enhance RSMA precoding in IRS-aided THz MU-MIMO systems under CSI imperfections. They unfold an approximate WMMSE algorithm to optimize the digital active precoding layers based on the estimated equivalent channels. The trainable set includes the transformer weights associated with the private and common streams and a regularization parameter. Compared to the original approximate WMMSE algorithm, the proposed unfolding method achieves superior precoding performance with substantially lower computational complexity.
In THz communication systems, ultralarge antenna arrays will be employed to form narrow beams and mitigate severe path loss. This objective naturally leads to the combination of massive MIMO and wideband THz, which introduces

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10394

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF CLASSICAL VERSUS UNFOLDED METHODS FOR PRECODER DESIGN. T : LAYERS, I: OUTER ITERATIONS, J: INNER ITERATIONS, INET : ITERATIONS OF NETWORK, NRF : NO. OF RF CHAINS, Nt : NO. OF TRANSMIT ANTENNA, Nr : NO. OF RECEIVE ANTENNA, K: NO. OF USERS, M: SYMBOL SIZE, AND Nf : NO. OF SUBCARRIERS

significant scalability challenges. In particular, deep unfolding algorithms for precoding must efficiently scale with the large number of antennas and multiple users, whereas existing designs have primarily focused on point-to-point massive MIMO [191] or single-antenna users [58]. Moreover, the frequency selectivity of THz channels makes the design and optimization of beamformers (both analog and digital) more challenging, as they must operate across a large number of subcarriers in wideband systems. The computational complexity of deep unfolding generally grows linearly with the number of subcarriers [58], [191]. This increase in complexity raises concerns about scalability in practical deployments. Moreover, THz systems face hardware constraints such as phase noise, LR ADCs, and synchronization errors, which remain largely unexplored in current deep unfolding designs and present opportunities for further optimization.
F. Discussion and Takeaways
Precoding design in massive MIMO and HBF systems involves solving nonconvex optimization problems under hardware constraints and channel uncertainty. Table IV lists some popular unfolded networks for precoding design and their performance metrics. Deep unfolding enables the incorporation of domain-specific constraints such as the constant-modulus constraint in analog beamformers through tailored activation functions. This approach significantly reduces computational complexity by avoiding matrix inversion and accelerates convergence, making it well-suited for real-time hybrid precoding under practical hardware limitations.
Despite their benefits, current unfolded precoding models often assume fixed system dimensions and ideal CSI, which limits generalization and applications in practical systems. Future work should focus on scalable, adaptive unfolding frameworks that can operate reliably in time-varying, multiuser, and wideband settings. Integration with channel estimation modules and robust designs under CSI uncertainty will be key for practical deployment in next-generation wireless networks. Moreover, applying such unfolded frameworks in real systems and analyzing the performance in real experiments will be very beneficial.
On the other hand, more emphasis should be placed on ensuring the scalability of deep unfolded precoding algorithms, especially for massive MIMO wideband systems. This requires not only unrolling conventional iterative algorithms but also rethinking the unfolding architecture and optimization so that

the models scale effectively with the array size, bandwidth, and number of users. Possible solutions include designing unfolding networks with sparse interlayer connections [191] and employing adaptive pruning or approximated computations to reduce redundant operations across layers [193], [194]. For distributed systems, scalability can also be achieved through hierarchical unfolding architectures that offload the main computational tasks to a central unit, as further discussed in Section X-B3.
VI. SENSING AND COMMUNICATION
The independent operation of sensing and communication faces challenges in the 6G era due to spectrum congestion in high-frequency bands like mmWave and THz [195]. This has driven the development of ISAC systems, which unify both functions using shared architectures and processing techniques [196], [197], [198]. ISAC includes active (monostatic) and passive (bistatic) sensing methods [199]. While ISAC enhances SE and system performance, understanding its fundamental limits is crucial. Key sensing parameter estimations have been thoroughly analyzed in [200], revealing theoretical and practical boundaries.
A. MIMO ISAC
The integration of deep unfolding in ISAC systems has shown promising advances in optimizing waveform design, beamforming, and communication–sensing tradeoffs. In [201], the challenge of designing constant-modulus waveforms for MU-MIMO ISAC systems was explored. Since constant-modulus waveforms help avoid signal distortion in nonlinear power amplifiers, their design is crucial. However, the nonconvex nature of the constant-modulus constraint makes optimization challenging. To address this, the authors employed a deep unfolded network based on PGD algorithm, ensuring efficient waveform design under these constraints.
HBF in MIMO ISAC systems introduces complexity by balancing communication rates and sensing accuracy. Nguyen et al. [202] addressed this by unfolding the iterative PGA algorithm, accelerating convergence, and improving system performance. Similarly, Zhang et al. [203] tackled joint radar–communication beamforming using symbollevel precoding with constructive interference constraints to enhance energy efficiency. To handle the nonconvex

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEKA et al.: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

10395

TABLE V
COMPARISON OF CLASSICAL VERSUS UNFOLDED METHODS FOR ISAC. I: INNER LAYER, J: OUTER LAYER, NRF : NO. OF RF CHAINS, Nt : NO. OF TRANSMIT ANTENNA, Nr : NO. OF RECEIVE ANTENNA, Nb : NO. OF BS ANTENNA, G: NO. OF UNIFORM GRID LOCATION, B: NO. OF BS, Lb : NO. OF UNIFORM GRID OF ANGLE, M: NO. OF OFDM SYMBOLS, N: NO. OF SUBCARRIERS, AND P: NO. OF MULTIPATHS

and high-dimensional optimization, a custom iterative algorithm based on block CD and primal–dual optimization was proposed. The deep unfolded network trains step sizes and a correction matrix for matrix inversion, reducing complexity, improving scalability, and enabling real-time implementation.
In mmWave MIMO systems, large antenna arrays allow submeter localization but with high computational cost. Fan et al. [204] proposed a fast direct localization method using an unfolded ADMM solver with trainable penalty, proximal parameters, and channel gain weights. Also, Zhang et al. [205] have unfolded ADMM to design a transceiver for ISAC in a cluttered environment. The learnable parameters consist of the per-layer step sizes in the network and the ADMM penalty coefficients. Both these approaches [204], [205] achieve faster convergence and lower computational time than classical ADMM.

C. IRS-Assisted ISAC
Liu et al. [208] addressed a robust beamforming design for an IRS-assisted ISAC system under imperfect CSI and target direction estimates. The objective is to minimize the sum of worst case Crame´r–Rao bounds (CRBs) for all sensing targets. They formulated a bilevel optimization structure that consists of two levels: the lower level problem finds the worst case CSI and worst case target sensing angles. The upper level problem optimizes the active and passive beamforming matrices. A double-loop deep unfolding NN is designed to tackle the bilevel optimization problem. The CSI and angle uncertainties are updated via PGD in the lower level loop. The beamforming variables are updated in the upper level loop using PGD and Riemannian MO optimization. The proposed network effectively achieves near-optimal performance by handling statistical CSI errors and bounded target direction errors.

B. Modern Multicarrier Modulation for ISAC
A joint passive sensing and communication demodulation for OFDM is addressed in [59]. The ISAC-Net is designed by unfolding two algorithms: a denoising-based AMP algorithm for the communication module and the 2-D discrete Fourier transform (DFT) for the sensing module. The step size is to update the channel and DFT matrix from the trainable set to balance the communication demodulation and sensing accuracy. Furthermore, Lin et al. [206] proposed an unfolded network (FISTA-Net) for joint target parameter estimation and communication in MIMO-OFDM systems. The fast ISTA is unfolded, with learnable parameters such as step size for the weight matrix, enabling high-precision solutions with low computational complexity. The proposed network converges with eight layers as compared to 2000 iterations in fast ISTA. Also, the network achieves an NMSE of −20.12 dB, while the classical complex ISTA achieved −16.8 dB. The problem of estimating parameters of moving targets in high-speed scenarios using OTFS modulation for ISAC systems is explored in [207]. The ADMM iterations are unfolded (ADMM-Net) to accelerate convergence and enhance the sparse recovery of target position. Regarding parameter estimation, ADMM-Net [207] and FISTA-Net [206] reduce NMSE significantly. Also, ISAC-Net [59] and FISTA-Net [206] show faster convergence than iterative baselines.

D. Discussion and Takeaways
Deep unfolding offers a structured and interpretable framework for tackling challenging optimization problems in ISAC systems. By unrolling classical algorithms like PGD and WMMSE into NN layers, unfolding enables the joint design of beamformers and waveforms that balance sensing accuracy and communication performance. These approaches reduce computational complexity and provide faster convergence compared to traditional iterative solutions. We summarize typical deep unfolding models for ISAC in Table V and present a comparison in terms of computational metrics. It is observed that deep unfolding exhibits advantages in constantmodulus waveform design, optimization of dual-functional beamformers, and power allocation. Indeed, the deep unfolding technique can effectively handle nonconvex constraints or objective functions like SINR, sum rate, and CRB, which are infeasible with closed box models.
Hu et al. [211] have provided techniques such as gradient calculation for estimating position that can be employed to facilitate practical deployment. However, the application of deep unfolding in ISAC is still underexplored. Indeed, most existing unfolding solutions are developed to optimize the transmit waveform in monostatic ISAC scenarios. In sensing functions, the processing of the received echo signal plays an important role in translating the observation into a decision on target detection and localization. Well-designed deep unfolding models can perform these tasks with low complexity and high

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10396

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

accuracy, which is important for real-time sensing applications. There is limited literature addressing the practical deployment of unfolded networks in ISAC systems.
VII. DECODING IN ERROR-CORRECTING CODES
Mobile communication has evolved across generations. The 1G used analog transmission (without any coding) and 2G introduced digital voice coding with convolutional and block codes. Turbo codes, adopted in 3G and 4G, offer near-Shannon limit performance with moderate complexity [212]. LDPC codes, rediscovered in the 1960s, are now widely used in 4G and 5G [213], [214], [215]. Polar codes, introduced in 2009, achieve the capacity of symmetric binary-input discrete memoryless channels [216], approaching the Shannon limit as the block length increases. They have been adopted in 5G new radio for both uplink and downlink control channels [217]. BP operates on a bipartite graph known as Tanner graph, introduced by Tanner [218]. The min-sum and max-sum algorithms are derived from the generic sum–product decoding [219]. Polar codes use successive cancellation decoding, where the received bits are decoded sequentially by leveraging frozen bits and previously decoded bits. More advanced techniques, such as successive list decoding assisted by cyclic redundancy check (CRC), further improve the performance of polar codes [220].
Wei et al. [43] proposed an unfolded ADMM-based penalized algorithm for binary linear codes to enhance the decoding performance. The learnable ADMM decoding network (LADN) trains the ADMM penalty parameters. Additionally, decoding irregular binary LDPC codes via unfolded ADMM is explored in [44]. The LADN [43] outperforms the original ADMM-penalized decoder in block error rate for LDPC codes, while the network in [44] outperforms the original ADMM-penalized decoder in block error rate for irregular LDPC codes.
He et al. [40] proposed the TurboNet architecture to improve turbo decoding by unfolding the max-log MAP algorithm. Trainable parameters were inserted into the max-log-MAP decoding flow like weights for prior LLRs. Numerical analysis demonstrated that TurboNet outperforms classical turbo decoding based on the max-log-MAP algorithm, particularly at moderate-to-high SNRs. Furthermore, TurboNet has been validated through over-the-air experiments confirming its robustness to SNR mismatches. Moreover, they have extended the work by including joint detection and decoding in [221]. A CGD-based OAMP detector (CG-OAMPNet) for the MIMOOFDM system is proposed by unfolding EP. The robustness of CG-OAMPNet was further validated through over-the-air experiments, demonstrating practical resilience to environmental variations. In correlated channel scenario, CG-OAMPNet outperforms OAMP-Net2 [11] by performance gain of ∼2 dB at BER = 10−3. Ma et al. [222] tackle the decoding challenges of marker codes in insertion and deletion channels without perfect CSI. They proposed a network called FBNet to improve detection performance; the forward–backward algorithm is unfolded for marker codes. The trainable weights are the CSI probabilities for insertion/deletion channels. FBNet performs quite close to the classical forward–backward algorithm but is robust to CSI mismatch. FBNet [222] is based on the RNN structure and target synchronization errors (insertions/deletions) without accurate CSI, while TurboNet [40] is a deep feedforward DNN structure and targets substitution errors in turbo codes under the AWGN channel.

Gao et al. [223] have unfolded the polar BP algorithm to improve polar code decoding performance under 1-bit quantization. The network with trainable weights for the factor graph edges outperforms standard BP with 2-bit quantizer by 0.2 dB. In [224], a double-loop iterative decoding algorithm for LDPC codes is unfolded within a penalty dual decomposition framework. The network alternately updates primal and dual variables in a double-loop structure. The penalty coefficients, penalty parameters, and over-relaxation factor form the trainable parameter set. The network has lower computational complexity than ADMM-based decoders. Additionally, by unfolding the iterative decoding process between check nodes and variable nodes for LDPC codes, a deep unfolded normalized min-sum LDPC decoder is implemented in [225]. The unfolded network outperforms the classical normalized min-sum LDPC decoder in BER and is robust across code lengths, rates, and different channel conditions. The networks in [224] and [225] focus on LDPC codes, while the network in [223] considers polar codes. Moreover, the networks in [224] and [225] use multi-SNR training for robustness.
In [226], theoretical results for the unfolded BP decoder for Tanner codes are presented. Adiga et al. [226] define the generalization gap of a decoder as the difference between the empirical and expected BER. They provide a set of theoretical results that bound this gap and examine its dependence on decoder complexity, which is influenced by code parameters (such as block length, message length, and variable/check node degrees), the number of decoding iterations, and the size of the training dataset.
Traditionally, channel estimation, signal detection, and channel decoding in an MIMO receiver are performed sequentially and independently. This disjoint approach leads to suboptimal performance. To address this, Sun et al. [227] propose an unfolded ADMM-based receiver for joint detection and decoding. The detection and LDPC decoding components are jointly unfolded from ADMM iterations. Simulations show that the proposed receiver outperforms classical turbo receivers. Zhang et al. [228] proposed a joint signal detection and channel decoding for MIMO systems. Signal detection is achieved by unfolding the EP algorithm. The channel decoding is based on an unfolded turbo code decoding network, TurboNet, as proposed in [40]. The damping factors in EP and decoder parameters in turbo decoding are learned in the training stage. The networks showed fast adaptation and strong BER gains in over-the-air experiments.
A. Discussion and Takeaways
Table VI compares various unfolded networks for decoding in error-correcting codes based on computational complexity, trainable parameter count, and convergence speed (in number of layers). Deep unfolding spans their applications in modern error-correcting codes, such as LDPC, turbo, and polar codes. The soft probabilistic estimates are progressively refined through learnable decoding layers in deep unfolding while enforcing parity constraints, enabling near-optimal hard decisions without the need for manual hyperparameter tuning. Hence, it merges model-based optimization for structured soft-output refinement and codeword validity with data-driven learning, for adaptive penalty tuning, outperforming traditional decoders in accuracy and efficiency.
Despite these advantages, there are several limitations in existing deep unfolding architectures for decoding and channel

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEKA et al.: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

10397

TABLE VI
COMPARISON OF CLASSICAL VERSUS UNFOLDED METHODS FOR DECODING IN ERROR-CORRECTING CODES. T : LAYERS, I: ITERATIONS, n: NO. OF VARIABLE NODES, Γa : NO. OF AUXILIARY VARIABLES, m: NO. OF CHECK NODES, dmax : MAXIMUM DEGREE OF CHECK NODES, Nt : NO. OF TRANSMIT ANTENNA, Nr : NO. OF RECEIVE ANTENNA, AND t: TIME SLOT

coding. For example, the unfolded decoders in [43] are tied to specific code structures, requiring retraining when parameters such as code length or interleaving patterns change. Some methods demand significant training effort or hyperparameter tuning to maintain generalization.
There are several works [40], [221], [228] that developed a prototyping system to experimentally validate the effectiveness and practical feasibility of unfolded networks in real-world channel conditions. The experimental results indicated that the unfolded network demonstrated strong robustness to environmental variations and operated effectively without the need for frequent retraining.
Future research should aim to create more adaptable unfolding architectures that can handle a variety of code structures, channel models, and SNR conditions. Joint optimization with modulation and detection, as well as hardware-aware training, may further improve the viability of deep unfolding for end-to-end error correction in next-generation wireless communication systems.
VIII. POWER ALLOCATION
Power allocation in wireless communication refers to the process of distributing available transmit power across different communication channels or users to optimize system performance. It aims to maximize throughput, minimize interference, and ensure fairness while considering factors like channel conditions, user requirements, and energy efficiency for improved overall network efficiency.
Several classical approaches, such as the Dinkelbach algorithm, Lagrange dual decomposition, interference pricing, SCA, WMMSE, and matching theory, have been employed for power allocation [156], [229], [230], [231], [232], [233]. However, a major drawback of these methods is their reliance on iterative algorithms, which are computationally intensive and result in long runtimes, ultimately degrading system energy efficiency. The deep unfolding approach mitigates this issue by reducing the number of iterations required to achieve a nearoptimal solution, thereby enhancing computational efficiency and energy savings.
Chowdhury et al. [234] unfolded WMMSE into the GNNbased architecture to learn a power allocation policy from the channel matrix. The key feature of their architecture is that graph topology is leveraged with GNN for efficient rate utility maximization. The unfolded WMMSE method integrates domain-specific elements with trainable components,

which are parameterized by the generated adaptive weight of the GNN. Hu et al. [235] propose an unsupervised power allocation optimization approach for ad hoc networks by integrating attentive graph representation with deep unfolded WMMSE. The key advantage of attentive graph representation is its ability to allow network nodes to selectively focus on the most relevant connections during learning, rather than treating all links equally. The power allocation framework is built upon this attentive graph representation, as described in [236] and [237]. The model [235] achieves improved interpretability and accelerated training over [234] while eliminating the need for supervised data. Li et al. [238] unroll the SCA algorithm into NN layers for energy-efficient power allocation in wireless interference networks. The proposed unfolded algorithm is highly adaptable, as it generalizes across varying network sizes and channel distributions. The power allocation policy is formulated based on the CSI matrix and the total power constraint, within a layered architecture incorporating trainable weights. Each of the networks discussed in [234], [235], and [238] leverages the GNN structure in the deep unfolding approach and achieves near-optimal performance of their benchmark iterative algorithm, i.e., WMMSE and SCA.
IX. PHYSICAL-LAYER SECURITY
Physical-layer security aims to ensure secure and reliable communication while preventing eavesdropping and impersonation attacks. Wireless communication’s broadcast nature exposes it to adversaries like eavesdroppers, who intercept transmissions, and jammers, who degrade signal quality. The primary objective is to maximize the secrecy rate, ensuring high transmission rates for the intended user while minimizing information leakage to the eavesdropper. The secrecy capacity represents the maximum rate at which secure communication can be achieved, balancing efficiency and confidentiality. It is defined as the difference between the mutual information between transmit and receive signals and information leakage to the eavesdropper [239].
Jamming attacks pose a serious threat to the reliable operation of wireless communication systems [239], [240]. A jamming attacker deliberately transmits interference or noise on the same frequencies as legitimate users. Marti et al. [241] explored solutions to combat smart jamming in massive MU MIMO systems. They proposed an optimization-based approach for joint jammer estimation, channel estimation, and data detection, using the BS multiantenna configuration. This

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10398

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

method does not require prior knowledge of the jammer’s behavior, making communication more resilient even during sporadic or bursty jamming. They have unfolded an iterative algorithm, called mitigation estimation and detection (MAED), that uses forward–backward splitting optimization to jointly estimate the jammer subspace, user equipment’s channels, and user equipment’s data within a coherence block. The softoutput MAED (SO-MAED) is the deep unfolded network. The trainable set includes error precision (to represent noise in symbol estimation), gradient descent step sizes, scaling factor, and momentum weights. SO-MAED improves detection accuracy, especially in high-interference environments, and does not require knowledge of the attack type.
There is limited literature on the application of deep unfolding techniques in physical-layer security. One possible reason is that physical-layer security strategies are often dynamic and must adapt to adversarial attacks. In contrast, deep unfolding methods typically rely on a structured iterative algorithm, which are seldom available in scenarios such as jamming attacks, where the system behavior must adjust rapidly to unpredictable threats.
X. CHALLENGES IN DEVELOPING DEEP UNFOLDING MODELS AND FUTURE RESEARCH SCOPES
The extensive review of recently emerging techniques and applications of deep unfolding has demonstrated its potential in addressing complex signal processing problems with reduced complexity and runtime. Despite these advantages, the adoption of deep unfolding in practical scenarios remains limited. In this section, we outline the main challenges in developing deep unfolding models, explore the reasons behind these challenges, and propose potential improvements to make deep unfolding a more powerful and widely applicable technique in wireless communications.
A. Limitations of Deep Unfolding Techniques
Although deep unfolding has found applications in various design problems, it also has important limitations. Most of these stem from the fact that deep unfolding is not an independent design methodology; it must be built upon existing conventional optimization frameworks. Consequently, it faces the following challenges in both development and real-world applications:
(C1) Methodological Challenges: Deep unfolding methods are inspired by the iterative procedures of conventional optimization algorithms, where each iteration is typically interpreted as a layer in an NN. In traditional transmitterreceiver design and signal processing, optimization problems are often nonconvex and highly coupled due to factors such as fractional SINR, constant-modulus constraints, or mixedinteger variables. These are typically solved by a two-layer approach. In the first layer, alternating optimization or block coordinate ascent/descent is used to decouple variables. In the second layer, convex optimization techniques such as SCA or ADMM are applied to the resulting subproblems. While this makes the problems solvable using convex solvers (e.g., CVX), it introduces auxiliary variables and nested loops that must converge at each stage, increasing algorithmic complexity. Deep unfolding, by contrast, attempts to approximate such iterative processes in a unified, trainable architecture, making it challenging to translate multistage solvers into compact unfolding models.

(C2) Unfolding Principle Algorithms: Deep unfolding typically enhances conventional iterative algorithms, but not all can be effectively unfolded. Complex operations such as matrix decompositions or convex solver calls (e.g., CVX and YALMIP with MOSEK or SeDuMi) are difficult to represent in differentiable NN layers. Furthermore, large-scale systems such as massive MIMO incur high complexity even for basic operations like matrix multiplications. Another issue is the fixed number of layers; iterative algorithms run until convergence, whereas unfolding models require the number of layers to be fixed a priori, often through empirical tuning. This can lead to suboptimal performance or lack of guaranteed convergence across different scenarios.
(C3) Handling Design Constraints and Objectives: Another major challenge is enforcing problem-specific constraints and objectives in the unfolding framework. Simple constraints (e.g., power or constant modulus) can often be imposed by normalization or suitable activation functions, but more complex QoS constraints are difficult to embed. Similarly, intricate objective functions result in complicated loss functions, especially when gradients are hard to compute for high-order or fractional functions. This complicates training and may limit the range of problems amenable to unfolding.
(C4) Sophisticated Mappings: While deep unfolding is powerful for problems with well-defined iterative solvers, many inference tasks lack such formulations. For example, in multimodal sensing-assisted beam tracking, there is no explicit relationship between environmental sensory data (e.g., images) and the optimal beam. Since these problems cannot be expressed as tractable optimization tasks, unfolding methods are not suitable, and closed box learning models remain necessary.
(C5) Real-World Applications: Deep unfolding architectures, while promising in theory, often require considerable network depth and parameter complexity. This creates challenges for real-time inference under stringent latency and throughput constraints, especially in high-dimensional systems such as massive MIMO-OFDM. Hardware-wise, unfolding designs are not naturally aligned with area-efficient or parallelizable architectures, leading to inefficient silicon utilization and high power consumption. Moreover, practical deployments face dynamic channel conditions, mobility, and hardware impairments that often violate the assumptions made in unfolding-based designs. As a result, models trained under idealized conditions may suffer significant performance degradation in practice.
The above five challenges (C1–C5) illustrate scenarios where deep unfolding is either not applicable or offers limited performance–complexity benefits. These include the absence of suitable iterative algorithms (C1, C2, and C4), the presence of highly complicated constraints or objectives (C3), and practical imperfections in real-world propagation environments and hardware (C5). It is clear that deep unfolding is not a universal replacement for conventional algorithms or closed box machine learning models, but rather a complementary tool most effective when problem structures are well matched to unfolding principles.
At the same time, several strategies can mitigate the negative impacts of these limitations in practice. Robustness can be improved by training on realistic datasets that incorporate mobility, propagation variability, and hardware impairments. Hybrid designs, in which unfolding is applied only to specific modules (e.g., replacing matrix inversion or

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEKA et al.: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

10399

accelerating convergence), while other parts rely on conventional or data-driven methods, can achieve better tradeoffs between interpretability and performance. Finally, hardwareaware unfolding architectures tailored for parallelism and energy efficiency can help overcome deployment challenges in large-scale systems. Moreover, the applicability of deep unfolding can be enhanced by overcoming those challenges, as will be discussed next.
B. Development of Deep Unfolding Techniques
1) Coexistence of Deep Unfolding Models, Conventional Solvers, and Closed Box Models: Deep unfolding does not need to fully replace conventional algorithms or closed box machine learning models. Instead, these approaches can coexist, leveraging their combined strengths. In hybrid designs, deep unfolding can: 1) reduce the number of subproblems; 2) lower the complexity of solving each subproblem; and 3) enhance the learning process in closed box models. Benefits 1) and 2) correspond to challenges C1 and C2, while 3) relates to C4.
Benefit 1) arises because deep unfolding can rely on techniques like PGA/PGD, which avoids transforming the original problem into convex subproblems. Benefit 2) comes from the fact that unfolded models typically exhibit lower complexity compared to methods like SCA, and their runtime is usually shorter than that of solvers like CVX. For example, in the AO framework (discussed in C1), the most challenging subproblem often dominates the overall complexity. By applying an efficient deep unfolding model to this subproblem, the overall efficiency improves, while simpler subproblems can be handled by conventional solvers like CVX. Benefit 3) is frequently seen when deep unfolding is used to preprocess input data for closed box models, as in multimodal sensing applications. The combination of deep unfolding structures with conventional solvers and closed box models leads to simpler yet more efficient designs.
2) Deep Unfolding for Multiobjective Learning: Most existing deep unfolding models are developed for singleobjective designs, such as maximizing throughput, SINR, or minimizing BER. However, in many scenarios, system designs involve multiple objectives. Traditional approaches often formulate these as constrained problems, such as maximizing energy efficiency under a QoS constraint (e.g., throughput or SINR). In ISAC designs, weighted sums of communication and sensing performance metrics are used when the goal is to balance both functions without prioritizing one over the other. The complexity grows in multistatic ISAC systems, where distributed sensing receivers have different performance metrics depending on their functions, such as signal clutter noise ratio (SCNR), mutual information, CRB, or probability of detection.
These designs are often difficult to solve using traditional constrained formulations, as the problem can easily become infeasible if constraints are not properly tuned. However, by incorporating all design metrics into the objective function with appropriate weights to form a multiobjective design, the feasibility of the problem can be significantly improved [202], [242]. This multiobjective formulation also makes it easier to develop unfolding models, optimizing multiple objectives simultaneously, and improving performance tradeoffs. However, developing unfolding models for multiobjective designs presents several challenges. First, as the number of terms in

the objective function increases, training the unfolding DNN becomes more difficult. This is because the loss function is typically set to mirror the objective function (or its negative in maximization problems). Furthermore, balancing the changes of these objectives with respect to the design variables across layers is crucial [202], [243], necessitating careful design of the unfolding models.
3) Scalable Distributed Deep Unfolding Architectures: While deep unfolding models provide advantages in terms of complexity due to faster convergence compared to conventional iterative algorithms, they can still face scalability issues due to challenge C2, especially when deployed on platforms with constrained computational resources such as edge devices or distributed APs. Future wireless networks will evolve into large-scale distributed systems, such as cell-free massive MIMO, that integrate advanced sensing, communications, and computing capabilities. However, most existing AI models, both data driven and model driven, are designed for centralized scenarios where they are executed at a powerful central node, making them poorly suited for distributed deployments. This highlights the need for scalable distributed unfolding architectures.
One potential solution is to develop distributed deep unfolding frameworks. Instead of executing all the unfolded layers at every AP or edge device, the layers can be partitioned across multiple platforms for parallel execution, thereby reducing latency and computational burden. For example, to design L precoders for L APs, a CPU with strong computational resources can process the majority of the layers and generate high-quality beamformers. These beamformers are then sent to the APs as initial solutions, which are refined locally by lightweight subunfolding models requiring only a few layers. This ensures reliable beamformers at the APs while maintaining scalability by reducing their computational load. Conversely, in the uplink, a distributed unfolding model can be deployed at the APs to generate initial solutions, which are then forwarded to the CPU for final refinement by a larger unfolding model.
Such a hierarchical CPU-AP cooperation framework directly addresses scalability challenges in distributed deployments by lowering the per-node computational cost, reducing fronthaul/backhaul signaling overhead, and enabling heterogeneous APs to operate with resource-aware lightweight submodels. In practice, this can be further enhanced by tailoring the unfolding depth at each AP to its available hardware resources and by adopting split-learning style execution, where unfolding layers are adaptively divided between CPU and APs. In this way, reliable symbol detection and beamforming can be achieved with scalable complexity across distributed networks.
4) Deep Unfolding to Enhance Closed Box Solution: As its name suggests, a closed box machine learning model operates with a closed box nature, making it unexplainable and resistant to restructuring beyond tuning parameters like the number of layers or nodes. The performance and efficiency of such models are heavily dependent on the quality of input data. Deep unfolding can contribute by performing preprocessing steps to improve the input data quality. One example is in multimodal sensing-assisted communication tasks, where data from distributed cameras, light detection and ranging (LiDAR), and radar sensors are used to enhance communication performance, such as in beam tracking and blockage prediction. However, significant challenges arise in collecting, transferring, and processing large sensory data. Specifically,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10400

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

TABLE VII OPEN-SOURCE IMPLEMENTATIONS OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES.
THE GITHUB LINKS ARE EMBEDDED DIRECTLY IN MODEL NAMES AS HYPERLINKS
high-resolution camera images generate considerable traffic overhead and latency, impacting real-time communication processing. Deep unfolding models can be particularly useful in preprocessing such high-resolution images. In image processing, deep unfolding has been successfully applied to tasks such as denoising, super-resolution, and image reconstruction, allowing for high-quality outcomes with fewer iterations than conventional algorithms. For example, unfolded algorithms based on ISTA for sparse coding have been shown to significantly accelerate image reconstruction while maintaining high-quality results [244], [245], [246]. This makes deep unfolding a valuable tool for handling large-scale sensory data in real-time communication systems.
5) Evaluation Protocols for Deep Unfolding: To facilitate the development of deep unfolding techniques, it is necessary to establish standardized evaluation protocols. A natural and broadly applicable criterion is the convergence profile, i.e., how quickly an unfolding model achieves satisfactory performance within a limited number of layers [159], [167], [191], [202], [243], [247], [248]. This metric reflects both computational complexity (since fewer layers correspond to fewer iterations and lower runtime) and model performance. Convergence profiles also allow direct comparison with conventional iterative algorithms, highlighting the performance–complexity tradeoffs of unfolding designs.
Another important aspect is the methodology for employing different learnable hyperparameters. Most unfolding techniques learn scalar parameters such as step sizes [159], [167], [191], [202], [243], [247], [248], while others consider richer structures such as trainable matrices [158]. Although the specific parameters vary, they share the common effect of shaping convergence speed and stability, which again makes the convergence profile a valid and unifying evaluation criterion. By contrast, training convergence criteria (e.g., number of epochs or early stopping) are less critical, as unfolding models typically converge quickly [191], and this detail is often omitted in the literature. Furthermore, reproducible opensource implementations of deep unfolding solutions with clear and consistent settings would not only enable fair comparisons but also facilitate the development of new unfolding models. In Table VII, we present several available implementations for representative tasks.
XI. CONCLUSION The integration of classical algorithmic principles with DL techniques has led to the development of deep unfolding, a method that overcomes the limitations associated with both

classical algorithms and standalone DL models in wireless communication. This article offers a comprehensive survey of deep unfolding techniques, examining their application across various facets of the physical layer in wireless communication systems. Key applications, such as signal detection, channel estimation, precoder design, ISAC, decoding for error-correcting codes, power allocation, and physical-layer security, are explored, with an emphasis on technologies anticipated for beyond-5G networks. The comparisons of the unfolded networks have also been given, which reflect the performance gains over the benchmark iterative algorithms. Also, we have analyzed the advantages and limitations of the design of various unfolding models. Moreover, we have explored the practical feasibility of deep unfolding networks across key application areas of wireless communications. The survey highlights the strengths of deep unfolding in addressing complex challenges, particularly in achieving lowlatency, high-accuracy performance in dynamic environments. We conclude by discussing the key challenges in developing deep unfolding models, including issues related to scalability, computational efficiency, and robustness across diverse scenarios. Finally, this article presents potential advancements to enhance the adaptability and resilience of deep unfolding, with the goal of solidifying its role as a robust and versatile technique for next-generation wireless communications.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Agiwal, A. Roy, and N. Saxena, “Next generation 5G wireless networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1617–1655, 3rd Quart., Mar. 2016.
[2] W. Jiang, B. Han, M. A. Habibi, and H. D. Schotten, “The road towards 6G: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 2, pp. 334–366, 2021.
[3] A. Chockalingam and B. S. Rajan, Large MIMO Systems. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2014.
[4] I. J. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2016.
[5] H. Huang et al., “Deep learning for physical-layer 5G wireless techniques: Opportunities, challenges and solutions,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 214–222, Feb. 2020.
[6] H. Ye, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. Juang, “Power of deep learning for channel estimation and signal detection in OFDM systems,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 114–117, Feb. 2018.
[7] M. B. Mashhadi and D. Gu¨ndu¨z, “Pruning the pilots: Deep learningbased pilot design and channel estimation for MIMO-OFDM systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 6315–6328, Oct. 2021.
[8] H. Huang, Y. Peng, J. Yang, W. Xia, and G. Gui, “Fast beamforming design via deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 1065–1069, Jan. 2020.
[9] Q. Bai, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, and J. Song, “Deep learning-based channel estimation algorithm over time selective fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 125–134, Mar. 2020.
[10] H. He, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “A model-driven deep learning network for MIMO detection,” in Proc. IEEE Global Conf. Signal Inf. Process. (GlobalSIP), Nov. 2018, pp. 584–588.
[11] H. He, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Model-driven deep learning for MIMO detection,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 68, pp. 1702–1715, 2020.
[12] A. G. D. G. Yonina C. Eldar and H. V. Poor, Machine Learning and Wireless Communications. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2022.
[13] N. Shlezinger, Y. C. Eldar, and S. P. Boyd, “Model-based deep learning: On the intersection of deep learning and optimization,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 115384–115398, 2022.
[14] V. Monga, Y. Li, and Y. C. Eldar, “Algorithm unrolling: Interpretable, efficient deep learning for signal and image processing,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 18–44, Mar. 2021.
[15] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming and C. Studer, “Deep unfolding for communications systems: A survey and some new directions,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), Oct. 2019, pp. 266–271.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEKA et al.: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

10401

[16] Q. Han, H. Zhang, Y. Li, D. Yuan, and X. Ma, “Physics informed [40] Y. He, J. Zhang, S. Jin, C.-K. Wen, and G. Y. Li, “Model-driven DNN

digital twin for RIS-assisted wireless communication system,” IEEE

decoder for turbo codes: Design, simulation, and experimental results,”

Wireless Commun., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 106–112, Jun. 2025.

IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 6127–6140, Oct. 2020.

[17] J. Shi et al., “Simplified neural network with physics-informed module [41] S. Boyd, “Distributed optimization and statistical learning via the

in MIMO visible light communication systems,” J. Lightw. Technol.,

alternating direction method of multipliers,” Found. Trends Mach.

vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 57–68, Jan. 15, 2024.

Learn., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–122, 2010, doi: 10.1561/2200000016.

[18] A. Agrawal, S. Barratt, and S. Boyd, “Learning convex optimization [42] M. Kim and D. Park, “Learnable MIMO detection networks based

models,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 1355–1364,

on inexact ADMM,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 1,

Aug. 2021.

pp. 565–576, Jan. 2021.

[19] A. Agrawal, S. Barratt, S. Boyd, and B. Stellato, “Learning convex [43] Y. Wei, M.-M. Zhao, M.-J. Zhao, and M. Lei, “ADMM-based decoder

optimization control policies,” in Proc. 2nd Conf. Learn. Dyn. Control,

for binary linear codes aided by deep learning,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,

2019, pp. 361–373. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/

vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1028–1032, May 2020.

v120/agrawal20a.html

[44] X. Guo, T.-H. Chang, and Y. Wang, “Model-driven deep learning

[20] K. Gregor and Y. LeCun, “Learning fast approximations of sparse

ADMM decoder for irregular binary LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun.

coding,” in Proc. 27th ICML. Madison, WI, USA: Omnipress, 2010,

Lett., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 571–575, Feb. 2023.

pp. 399–406.

[45] Q. Zhang, J. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Efficient QAM signal detector for

[21] T. Wang, C.-K. Wen, H. Wang, F. Gao, T. Jiang, and S. Jin, “Deep

massive MIMO systems via PS/DPS-ADMM approaches,” IEEE Trans.

learning for wireless physical layer: Opportunities and challenges,”

Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 8859–8871, Oct. 2022.

China Commun., vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 92–111, Nov. 2017.

[46] X. Li, C. Shan, H. Zhao, W. Yuan, and R. Zhang, “Iterative detection

[22] H. He, S. Jin, C.-K. Wen, F. Gao, G. Y. Li, and Z. Xu, “Model-driven

for orthogonal time frequency space modulation with ADMM,” IEEE

deep learning for physical layer communications,” IEEE Wireless

Commun. Lett., vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 993–997, May 2025.

Commun., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 77–83, Oct. 2019.

[47] Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Base Station

[23] Z. Qin, H. Ye, G. Y. Li, and B.-H.-F. Juang, “Deep learning in

(BS) Radio Transmission and Reception, document TS 36.104, 3rd

physical layer communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 26,

Generation Partnership Project, Apr. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://

no. 2, pp. 93–99, Apr. 2019.

www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/36 series/36.104/

[24] A. Zappone, M. Di Renzo, and M. Debbah, “Wireless networks design [48] A. Beck and M. Teboulle, “A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding

in the era of deep learning: Model-based, AI-based, or both?,” IEEE

algorithm for linear inverse problems,” SIAM J. Imag. Sci., vol. 2,

Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 7331–7376, Oct. 2019.

no. 1, pp. 183–202, Jan. 2009.

[25] A. Jagannath, J. Jagannath, and T. Melodia, “Redefining wireless [49] J. Yang, B. Ai, W. Chen, S. Yang, N. Wang, and C. Yuen, “Deep

communication for 6G: Signal processing meets deep learning with

unfolding-based sensing-assisted channel estimation with imperfect

deep unfolding,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 528–536,

radar arrays,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., early access, Sep. 16, 2025,

Dec. 2021.

doi: 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3610425.

[26] N. Shlezinger, J. Whang, Y. C. Eldar, and A. G. Dimakis, “Model- [50] A. Behboodi, H. Rauhut, and E. Schnoor, “Compressive sensing

based deep learning: Key approaches and design guidelines,” in Proc.

and neural networks from a statistical learning perspective,” 2020,

IEEE DSLW, Jun. 2021, pp. 1–6.

arXiv:2010.15658.

[27] Y. Shi et al., “Machine learning for large-scale optimization in [51] O. Bousquet and A. Elisseeff, “Stability and generalization,”

6G wireless networks,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 25, no. 4,

J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 2, pp. 499–526, Mar. 2002, doi: 10.1162/

pp. 2088–2132, 4th Quart., Apr. 2023.

153244302760200704.

[28] Q.-V. Pham, N. T. Nguyen, T. Huynh-The, L. Bao Le, K. Lee, and [52] A. Shultzman, E. Azar, M. R. D. Rodrigues, and Y. C. Eldar,

W.-J. Hwang, “Intelligent radio signal processing: A survey,” IEEE

“Generalization and estimation error bounds for model-based neural

Access, vol. 9, pp. 83818–83850, 2021.

networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent, 2023, pp. 1–29.

[29] Y.-F. Liu et al., “A survey of recent advances in optimization methods [53] V. Kouni and Y. Panagakis, “DECONET: An unfolding network for

for wireless communications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 42,

analysis-based compressed sensing with generalization error bounds,”

no. 11, pp. 2992–3031, Nov. 2024.

IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 71, pp. 1938–1951, 2023.

[30] N. Shlezinger, M. Ma, O. Lavi, N. T. Nguyen, Y. C. Eldar, [54] Q. Hu, S. Shi, Y. Cai, and G. Yu, “DDPG-driven deep-unfolding with

and M. Juntti, “Artificial intelligence-empowered hybrid multiple-

adaptive depth for channel estimation with sparse Bayesian learning,”

input/multiple-output beamforming: Learning to optimize for high-

IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 70, pp. 4665–4680, 2022.

throughput scalable MIMO,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 19, no. 3, [55] P. Zheng, X. Lyu, and Y. Gong, “Trainable proximal gradient descent-

pp. 58–67, Sep. 2024.

based channel estimation for mmWave massive MIMO systems,” IEEE

[31] J. Scarlett, R. Heckel, M. R. D. Rodrigues, P. Hand, and Y. C. Eldar,

Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 1781–1785, Oct. 2023.

“Theoretical perspectives on deep learning methods in inverse [56] L. Wei, C. Huang, G. C. Alexandropoulos, C. Yuen, Z. Zhang, and

problems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Inf. Theory, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 433–453,

M. Debbah, “Channel estimation for RIS-empowered multi-user MISO

Sep. 2022.

wireless communications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 6,

[32] X. Chen, J. Liu, S. Yan, and W. Yin, “Theoretical linear convergence

pp. 4144–4157, Jun. 2021.

of unfolded ISTA and its practical weights and thresholds,” in Proc. [57] Y. Wei, M.-M. Zhao, M. Hong, M.-J. Zhao, and M. Lei, “Learned

Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, p. 9079.

conjugate gradient descent network for massive MIMO detection,”

[33] X. Chen, J. Liu, Z. Wang, and W. Yin, “Hyperparameter tuning is all

IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 68, pp. 6336–6349, 2020.

you need for LISTA,” in Proc. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, [58] M. Wu, Z. Gao, Y. Huang, Z. Xiao, D. W. K. Ng, and Z. Zhang,

p. 11678.

“Deep learning-based rate-splitting multiple access for reconfigurable

[34] X. Chen, J. Liu, and W. Yin, “Learning to optimize: A tutorial for

intelligent surface-aided tera-hertz massive MIMO,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas

continuous and mixed-integer optimization,” Sci. China Math., vol. 67,

Commun., vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1431–1451, May 2023.

no. 6, pp. 1191–1262, Jun. 2024.

[59] W. Jiang, D. Ma, Z. Wei, Z. Feng, P. Zhang, and J. Peng,

[35] Y. Qiang, X. Shao, and X. Chen, “A model-driven deep learning

“ISAC-NET: Model-driven deep learning for integrated passive sens-

algorithm for joint activity detection and channel estimation,” IEEE

ing and communication,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 72, no. 8,

Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 2508–2512, Nov. 2020.

pp. 4692–4707, Aug. 2024.

[36] J. Liao, J. Zhao, F. Gao, and G. Y. Li, “A model-driven deep learning [60] Y. Shi, H. Choi, Y. Shi, and Y. Zhou, “Algorithm unrolling for massive

method for massive MIMO detection,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24,

access via deep neural networks with theoretical guarantee,” IEEE

no. 8, pp. 1724–1728, Aug. 2020.

Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 945–959, Feb. 2022.

[37] J. Guo, L. Wang, F. Li, and J. Xue, “CSI feedback with model- [61] Y. Zou, Y. Zhou, X. Chen, and Y. C. Eldar, “Proximal gradient-based

driven deep learning of massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,

unfolding for massive random access in IoT networks,” IEEE Trans.

vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 547–551, Mar. 2022.

Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 14530–14545, Oct. 2024.

[38] S. Li, C. Ding, L. Xiao, X. Zhang, G. Liu, and T. Jiang, “Expectation [62] Z. Mao, X. Liu, M. Peng, Z. Chen, and G. Wei, “Joint channel

propagation aided model driven learning for OTFS signal detection,”

estimation and active-user detection for massive access in Internet of

IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 9, pp. 12407–12412,

Things—A deep learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9,

Sep. 2023.

no. 4, pp. 2870–2881, Feb. 2022.

[39] H. Zhao, C. Yang, Y. Xu, F. Ji, M. Wen, and Y. Chen, “Model- [63] S. B. Shah, P. Pradhan, W. Pu, R. Randhi, M. R. D. Rodrigues, and

driven based deep unfolding equalizer for underwater acoustic

Y. C. Eldar, “Optimization guarantees of unfolded ISTA and ADMM

OFDM communications,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 5,

networks with smooth soft-thresholding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,

pp. 6056A–u6t0h6o7ri,zeMdaliyce2n0s2e3d. use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,202v6oal.t 7025,:5p4p:0. 132U7T2C–3fr2o8m6,IE2E0E24X.plore. Restrictions apply.

10402

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

[64] M. A. Albreem, M. Juntti, and S. Shahabuddin, “Massive MIMO [88] Y. Zeng et al., “A deep-learning-aided message passing detector

detection techniques: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 21,

for MIMO SC-FDMA,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 7,

no. 4, pp. 3109–3132, 4th Quart., 2019.

pp. 10767–10771, Jul. 2024.

[65] S. Yang and L. Hanzo, “Fifty years of MIMO detection: The road [89] Y. Zhao, Y. Xiao, P. Yang, B. Dong, R. Shi, and K. Deng, “Generalized

to large-scale MIMOs,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 17, no. 4,

approximate message passing aided frequency domain turbo equalizer

pp. 1941–1988, 4th Quart., 2015.

for single-carrier spatial modulation,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,

[66] S. T. McCormick, B. Peis, R. Scheidweiler, and F. Vallentin, “A polyno-

vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 3630–3634, Apr. 2018.

mial time algorithm for solving the closest vector problem in zonotopal [90] H. Chen, G. Yao, and J. Hu, “Algorithm parameters selection method

lattices,” SIAM J. Discrete Math., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 2345–2356, Jan.

with deep learning for EP MIMO detector,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,

2021.

vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 10146–10156, Oct. 2021.

[67] B. Hassibi and H. Vikalo, “On the sphere decoding algorithm [91] Y. Ge, X. Tan, Z. Ji, Z. Zhang, X. You, and C. Zhang, “Improving

I. Expected complexity,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 53, no. 8,

approximate expectation propagation massive MIMO detector with

pp. 2806–2818, Aug. 2005.

deep learning,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 10,

[68] H. Vikalo and B. Hassibi, “On the sphere-decoding algorithm

pp. 2145–2149, Oct. 2021.

II. Generalizations, second-order statistics, and applications to [92] X. Tan, Y.-L. Ueng, Z. Zhang, X. You, and C. Zhang, “A

communications,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 53, no. 8,

low-complexity massive MIMO detection based on approximate

pp. 2819–2834, Aug. 2005.

expectation propagation,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 8,

[69] S. Takabe, M. Imanishi, T. Wadayama, and K. Hayashi, “Deep learning-

pp. 7260–7272, Aug. 2019.

aided projected gradient detector for massive overloaded MIMO [93] N. T. Nguyen, K. Lee, and H. DaiIEEE, “Application of deep learning

channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), May 2019,

to sphere decoding for large MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless

pp. 1–6.

Commun., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 6787–6803, Oct. 2021.

[70] N. Samuel, T. Diskin, and A. Wiesel, “Learning to detect,” IEEE Trans. [94] N. T. Nguyen and K. Lee, “Deep learning-aided Tabu search detection

Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 2554–2564, May 2019.

for large MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19,

[71] S. Takabe, M. Imanishi, T. Wadayama, R. Hayakawa, and K. Hayashi,

no. 6, pp. 4262–4275, Jun. 2020.

“Trainable projected gradient detector for massive overloaded [95] N. Zilberstein, C. Dick, R. Doost-Mohammady, A. Sabhar-

MIMO channels: Data-driven tuning approach,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,

wal, and S. Segarra, “Annealed Langevin dynamics for massive

pp. 93326–93338, 2019.

MIMO detection,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 6,

[72] S. Yun, S. Moon, Y.-S. Jeon, and Y. Lee, “Intelligent MIMO detection

pp. 3762–3776, Jun. 2023.

with momentum-induced unfolded layers,” IEEE Wireless Commun. [96] S. Berra, S. Chakraborty, R. Dinis, and S. Shahabuddin, “Deep unfold-

Lett., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 879–883, Mar. 2024.

ing of Chebyshev accelerated iterative method for massive MIMO

[73] N. Qian, “On the momentum term in gradient descent learning

detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 52555–52569, 2023.

algorithms,” Neural Netw., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 145–151, Jan. 1999.

[97] A. Datta, A. Nema, and V. Bhatia, “Deep unfolded sparse refinement

[74] S. Takabe and T. Abe, “Hubbard–Stratonovich detector for simple

network based detection in uplink massive MIMO,” IEEE Trans. Veh.

trainable MIMO signal detection,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett.,

Technol., vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 6825–6830, Jun. 2022.

vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 701–705, Mar. 2024.

[98] M. Mandloi and V. Bhatia, “Low-complexity near-optimal iterative

[75] M. Khani, M. Alizadeh, J. Hoydis, and P. Fleming, “Adaptive neural

sequential detection for uplink massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Com-

signal detection for massive MIMO,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,

mun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 568–571, Mar. 2017.

vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 5635–5648, Aug. 2020.

[99] N. Parikh and S. Boyd, Proximal Algorithms. Boston, MA, USA: Now,

[76] E. Beck, C. Bockelmann, and A. Dekorsy, “CMDNet: Learning a

2014.

probabilistic relaxation of discrete variables for soft detection with low [100] Y. Sun, H. Shen, W. Xu, N. Hu, and C. Zhao, “Robust MIMO

complexity,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 12, pp. 8214–8227,

detection with imperfect CSI: A neural network solution,” IEEE Trans.

Dec. 2021.

Commun., vol. 71, no. 10, pp. 5877–5892, Oct. 2023.

[77] T. Olutayo and B. Champagne, “Dynamic conjugate gradient unfolding [101] M. Arikawa and K. Hayashi, “Adaptive equalization of transmitter and

for symbol detection in time-varying massive MIMO,” IEEE Open

receiver IQ skew by multi-layer linear and widely linear filters with

J. Veh. Technol., vol. 5, pp. 792–806, 2024.

deep unfolding,” Opt. Exp., vol. 28, no. 16, pp. 23478–23494, Aug.

[78] K. Chen, Matrix Preconditioning Techniques and Applications. Cam-

2020.

bridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005.

[102] W. Jiang and F. L. Luo, 6G Key Technologies: A Comprehensive Guide.

[79] J. G. Andrews et al., “What will 5G be?,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,

Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2023.

vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1065–1082, Jun. 2014.

[103] S. Weinstein and P. Ebert, “Data transmission by frequency-division

[80] S. Khobahi, N. Shlezinger, M. Soltanalian, and Y. C. Eldar, “LoRD-

multiplexing using the discrete Fourier transform,” IEEE Trans. Com-

Net: Unfolded deep detection network with low-resolution receivers,”

mun. Technol., vol. CT-19, no. 5, pp. 628–634, Oct. 1971.

IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 69, pp. 5651–5664, 2021.

[104] J. Zhang, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Artificial intelligence-

[81] J. Choi, J. Mo, and R. W. Heath Jr., “Near maximum-likelihood

aided receiver for a CP-free OFDM system: Design, simulation, and

detector and channel estimator for uplink multiuser massive MIMO

experimental test,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 58901–58914, 2019.

systems with one-bit ADCs,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 5, [105] M. Shao, W.-K. Ma, J. Liu, and Z. Huang, “Accelerated and deep

pp. 2005–2018, May 2016.

expectation maximization for one-bit MIMO-OFDM detection,” IEEE

[82] N. Shlezinger, R. Fu, and Y. C. Eldar, “DeepSIC: Deep soft interference cancellation for multiuser MIMO detection,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1349–1362, Feb. 2021.
[83] L. He, Z. Wang, S. Yang, T. Liu, and Y. Huang, “Generalizing projected

Trans. Signal Process., vol. 72, pp. 1094–1113, 2024. [106] A. Ullah, W. Choi, T. M. Berhane, Y. Sambo, and M. A. Imran,
“Soft-output deep LAS detection for coded MIMO systems: A learningaided LLR approximation,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 9,

gradient descent for deep-learning-aided massive MIMO detection,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1827–1839, Mar. 2024. [84] J. Ce´spedes, P. M. Olmos, M. Sa´nchez-Ferna´ndez, and F. Perez-

pp. 1–15, Sep. 2024. [107] J. Zhang, C.-K. Wen, and S. Jin, “Adaptive MIMO detector based on
hypernetwork: Design, simulation, and experimental test,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 65–81, Jan. 2022.

Cruz, “Expectation propagation detection for high-order highdimensional MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 2840–2849, Aug. 2014. [85] I. Santos, J. J. Murillo-Fuentes, R. Boloix-Tortosa, E. Arias-de-Reyna, and P. M. Olmos, “Expectation propagation as turbo equalizer in ISI channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 360–370, Jan. 2017. [86] X. Tan et al., “Improving massive MIMO message passing detectors with deep neural network,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 1267–1280, Feb. 2020. [87] H. He, X. Yu, J. Zhang, S. Song, and K. B. Letaief, “Message passing meets graph neural networks: A new paradigm for massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 4709–4723, May 2024.

[108] Y. Yue, J. Shi, Z. Li, J. Hu, and Z. Tie, “Model-driven deep learning assisted detector for OTFS with channel estimation error,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 842–846, Apr. 2024.
[109] B. Clerckx et al., “Multiple access techniques for intelligent and multifunctional 6G: Tutorial, survey, and outlook,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 112, no. 7, pp. 832–879, Jul. 2024.
[110] S. M. R. Islam, N. Avazov, O. A. Dobre, and K.-S. Kwak, “Powerdomain non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) in 5G systems: Potentials and challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 721–742, 2nd Quart., 2017.
[111] X. Wang, D. Zhang, B. Chen, T. Liu, Y. Xin, and Y. Xu, “Deep transfer learning for model-driven signal detection in MIMO-NOMA systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 10, pp. 13039–13054, Oct. 2023.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEKA et al.: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

10403

[112] J. Liu and X. Wang, “Tanner-graph-based massive multiple access—Transmission and decoding schemes,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 8468–8482, Nov. 2023.
[113] M. Yoshida and T. Tanaka, “Analysis of sparsely-spread CDMA via statistical mechanics,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2006, pp. 2378–2382.
[114] J. Choi, “Low density spreading for multicarrier systems,” in Proc. 8th IEEE Int. Symp. Spread Spectr. Techn. Appl.-Programme Book Abstr., Aug. 2004, pp. 575–578.
[115] S. Takabe, Y. Yamauchi, and T. Wadayama, “Deep-unfolded sparse CDMA: Multiuser detector and sparse signature design,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 40027–40038, 2021.
[116] C. Qing, B. Cai, Q. Yang, J. Wang, and C. Huang, “Deep learning for CSI feedback based on superimposed coding,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 93723–93733, 2019.
[117] W. Chen, B. Zhang, S. Jin, B. Ai, and Z. Zhong, “Solving sparse linear inverse problems in communication systems: A deep learning approach with adaptive depth,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 4–17, Jan. 2021.
[118] Z. Liu, L. Wang, L. Xu, and Z. Ding, “Deep learning for efficient CSI feedback in massive MIMO: Adapting to new environments and small datasets,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 12297–12312, Sep. 2024.
[119] F. Liu, X. Shang, and H. Zhu, “Efficient majorization-minimizationbased channel estimation for one-bit massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 3444–3457, Jun. 2021.
[120] Y. Zhao, Y. Teng, A. Liu, X. Wang, and V. K. N. Lau, “Joint UL/DL dictionary learning and channel estimation via two-timescale optimization in massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 2369–2382, Mar. 2024.
[121] T. Yassine and L. Le Magoarou, “MpNet: Variable depth unfolded neural network for massive MIMO channel estimation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 5703–5714, Jul. 2022.
[122] B. Chatelier, L. L. Magoaroul, and G. Redieteab, “Efficient deep unfolding for SISO-OFDM channel estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., May 2023, pp. 3450–3455.
[123] P. Wu and J. Cheng, “Deep unfolding basis pursuit: Improving sparse channel reconstruction via data-driven measurement matrices,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 8090–8105, Oct. 2022.
[124] S. Ji, Y. Xue, and L. Carin, “Bayesian compressive sensing,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 2346–2356, Jun. 2008, doi: 10.1109/TSP.2007.914345.
[125] K. K. Nguyen, T. Q. Duong, N. A. Vien, N.-A. Le-Khac, and L. D. Nguyen, “Distributed deep deterministic policy gradient for power allocation control in D2D-based V2V communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 164533–164543, 2019.
[126] T. Kebede, Y. Wondie, J. Steinbrunn, H. B. Kassa, and K. T. Kornegay, “Precoding and beamforming techniques in mmWave-massive MIMO: Performance assessment,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 16365–16387, 2022.
[127] K. Hassan, M. Masarra, M. Zwingelstein, and I. Dayoub, “Channel estimation techniques for millimeter-wave communication systems: Achievements and challenges,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 1, pp. 1336–1363, 2020.
[128] M. Borgerding and P. Schniter, “Onsager-corrected deep learning for sparse linear inverse problems,” in Proc. IEEE Global Conf. Signal Inf. Process. (GlobalSIP), Dec. 2016, pp. 227–231.
[129] D. L. Donoho, A. Maleki, and A. Montanari, “Message passing algorithms for compressed sensing: I. Motivation and construction,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Jan. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[130] H. He, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Deep learning-based channel estimation for beamspace mmWave massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 852–855, Oct. 2018.
[131] Y. Wei, M.-M. Zhao, M. Zhao, M. Lei, and Q. Yu, “An AMPbased network with deep residual learning for mmWave beamspace channel estimation,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1289–1292, Aug. 2019.
[132] P. Wu, J. Cheng, Y. C. Eldar, and J. M. Cioffi, “Learned trimmed-ridge regression for channel estimation in millimeter-wave massive MIMO,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 1128–1141, Feb. 2025.
[133] Y. Wang, X. Chen, H. Yin, and W. Wang, “Learnable sparse transformation-based massive MIMO CSI recovery network,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 1468–1471, Jul. 2020.
[134] Z. Hu, G. Liu, Q. Xie, J. Xue, D. Meng, and D. Gu¨ndu¨z, “A learnable optimization and regularization approach to massive MIMO CSI feedback,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 104–116, Jan. 2024.

[135] Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “Lightweight differential frameworks for CSI feedback in time-varying massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 5, pp. 6878–6893, May 2024.
[136] Z. Cao, J. Guo, C.-K. Wen, and S. Jin, “Deep-unfolding-based bit-level CSI feedback in massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 371–375, Feb. 2023.
[137] J. Liu, X. Chen, S. Yan, and W. Yin, “ALISTA: Analytic weights are as good as learned weights in LISTA,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018, pp. 1–33. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/ forum?id=B1lnzn0ctQ
[138] J. Gao, C. Zhong, G. Y. Li, J. B. Soriaga, and A. Behboodi, “Deep learning-based channel estimation for wideband hybrid mmWave massive MIMO,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 3679–3693, Jun. 2023.
[139] J. Chen, F. Meng, N. Ma, X. Xu, and P. Zhang, “Model-driven deep learning-based sparse channel representation and recovery for wideband mmWave massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 12, pp. 16788–16793, Dec. 2023.
[140] H. He, R. Wang, W. Jin, S. Jin, C.-K. Wen, and G. Y. Li, “Beamspace channel estimation for wideband millimeter-wave MIMO: A model-driven unsupervised learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1808–1822, Mar. 2023.
[141] X. Ma, Z. Gao, F. Gao, and M. Di Renzo, “Model-driven deep learning based channel estimation and feedback for millimeter-wave massive hybrid MIMO systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2388–2406, Aug. 2021.
[142] X. Gao, S. Jin, C.-K. Wen, and G. Y. Li, “ComNet: Combination of deep learning and expert knowledge in OFDM receivers,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2627–2630, Dec. 2018.
[143] Q. Wang, X. Chen, Q. Tao, L. P. Qian, P.-Y. Kam, and Y. Wu, “Modeldriven channel estimation network for orthogonal time-frequency space systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 7, pp. 11552–11556, Jul. 2025.
[144] J. He, H. Wymeersch, M. Di Renzo, and M. Juntti, “Learning to estimate RIS-aided mmWave channels,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 841–845, Apr. 2022.
[145] M. Awais, M. A. Khan, and Y. H. Kim, “Deep denoising and unfolding for IRS cascaded channel estimation with element-grouping,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 1726–1730, Oct. 2023.
[146] W.-C. Tsai, C.-W. Chen, and A.-Y. Wu, “Deep unfolding-based channel estimation for IRS-aided mmWave systems via two-stage LAMP network with row compression,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 11, pp. 1–14, Nov. 2024.
[147] T. Li, Y. Jiang, Y. Huang, P. Zhu, F.-C. Zheng, and D. Wang, “Modelbased deep learning for massive access in mmWave cell-free massive MIMO system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Workshops (ICC Workshops), Jun. 2024, pp. 828–833.
[148] Z. Ma, W. Wu, F. Gao, and X. Shen, “Model-driven deep learning for non-coherent massive machine-type communications,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 2197–2211, Mar. 2024.
[149] Y. Bai, W. Chen, B. Ai, and P. Popovski, “Deep learning for asynchronous massive access with data frame length diversity,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 5529–5540, Jun. 2024.
[150] X. Dang, W. Xiang, L. Yuan, Y. Yang, E. Wang, and T. Huang, “Deep unfolding scheme for grant-free massive-access vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 14443–14452, Dec. 2023.
[151] J. Johnston and X. Wang, “Model-based deep learning for joint activity detection and channel estimation in massive and sporadic connectivity,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 9806–9817, Nov. 2022.
[152] I. Ahmed et al., “A survey on hybrid beamforming techniques in 5G: Architecture and system model perspectives,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3060–3097, 4th Quart., 2018.
[153] A. F. Molisch et al., “Hybrid beamforming for massive MIMO: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 134–141, Sep. 2017.
[154] R. W. Heath Jr., S. Sandhu, and A. Paulraj, “Antenna selection for spatial multiplexing systems with linear receivers,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 142–144, Apr. 2001.
[155] F. Sohrabi and W. Yu, “Hybrid digital and analog beamforming design for large-scale antenna arrays,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 501–513, Apr. 2016.
[156] Q. Shi, M. Razaviyayn, Z.-Q. Luo, and C. He, “An iteratively weighted MMSE approach to distributed sum-utility maximization for a MIMO interfering broadcast channel,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 4331–4340, Sep. 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10404

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

[157] Y.-F. Liu, Y.-H. Dai, and Z.-Q. Luo, “Coordinated beamforming for MISO interference channel: Complexity analysis and efficient algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 1142–1157, Mar. 2011.
[158] Q. Hu, Y. Cai, Q. Shi, K. Xu, G. Yu, and Z. Ding, “Iterative algorithm induced deep-unfolding neural networks: Precoding design for multiuser MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1394–1410, Feb. 2021.
[159] L. Pellaco, M. Bengtsson, and J. Jalde´n, “Matrix-inverse-free deep unfolding of the weighted MMSE beamforming algorithm,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 3, pp. 65–81, 2022.
[160] L. Schynol and M. Pesavento, “Coordinated sum-rate maximization in multicell MU-MIMO with deep unrolling,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1120–1134, Apr. 2023.
[161] A. Chowdhury, G. Verma, A. Swami, and S. Segarra, “Deep graph unfolding for beamforming in MU-MIMO interference networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 4889–4903, May 2024.
[162] C. Yi, W. Xu, Y. Sun, D. W. K. Ng, and Z. Wang, “Distributed multiuser precoding via unfolding WMMSE for multicell MIMO downlinks,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2185–2200, Aug. 2025.
[163] K. Wang and A. Liu, “Robust WMMSE-based precoder with practiceoriented design for massive MU-MIMO,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1858–1862, Jul. 2024.
[164] S. Shi, Y. Cai, Q. Hu, B. Champagne, and L. Hanzo, “Deep-unfolding neural-network aided hybrid beamforming based on symbol-error probability minimization,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 529–545, Jan. 2023.
[165] Q. Xu, J. Sun, and Z. Xu, “Robust frequency selective precoding for downlink massive MIMO in 5G broadband system,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 12, pp. 15941–15952, Dec. 2023.
[166] M. Zhu, T.-H. Chang, and M. Hong, “Learning to beamform in heterogeneous massive MIMO networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4901–4915, Jul. 2023.
[167] O. Lavi and N. Shlezinger, “Learn to rapidly and robustly optimize hybrid precoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 10, pp. 5814–5830, Oct. 2023.
[168] I. Bilbao, E. Iradier, J. Montalba´n, P. Angueira, N. Thanh Nguyen, and M. Juntti, “Deep unfolding-powered analog beamforming for inband full-duplex,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 5, pp. 3753–3761, 2024.
[169] Y. He, H. He, C.-K. Wen, and S. Jin, “Model-driven deep learning for massive multiuser MIMO constant envelope precoding,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 1835–1839, Nov. 2020.
[170] J. Xu, C. Kang, J. Xue, and Y. Zhang, “A fast deep unfolding learning framework for robust MU-MIMO downlink precoding,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 359–372, Apr. 2023.
[171] A. Mohammad, C. Masouros, and Y. Andreopoulos, “An unsupervised deep unfolding framework for robust symbol-level precoding,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 4, pp. 1075–1090, 2023.
[172] J. Yang, A. Li, X. Liao, and C. Masouros, “ADMM-SLPNet: A modeldriven deep learning framework for symbol-level precoding,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 1376–1381, Jan. 2024.
[173] C.-J. Wang, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and S.-H. Tsai, “Finite-alphabet precoding for massive MU-MIMO with low-resolution DACs,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 4706–4720, Jul. 2018.
[174] H. He, M. Zhang, S. Jin, C.-K. Wen, and G. Y. Li, “Model-driven deep learning for massive MU-MIMO with finite-alphabet precoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 2216–2220, Oct. 2020.
[175] Z. Gao, S. Liu, Y. Su, Z. Li, and D. Zheng, “Hybrid knowledgedata driven channel semantic acquisition and beamforming for cell-free massive MIMO,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 964–979, Sep. 2023.
[176] Q. Hu, Y. Liu, Y. Cai, G. Yu, and Z. Ding, “Joint deep reinforcement learning and unfolding: Beam selection and precoding for mmWave multiuser MIMO with lens arrays,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2289–2304, Aug. 2021.
[177] Q. Lin, H. Shen, and C. Zhao, “Learning linear MMSE precoder for uplink massive MIMO systems with one-bit ADCs,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 2235–2239, Oct. 2022.
[178] E. Balevi and J. G. Andrews, “Unfolded hybrid beamforming with GAN compressed ultra-low feedback overhead,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 8381–8392, Dec. 2021.

[179] Y. Mao, B. Clerckx, and V. O. K. Li, “Rate-splitting multiple access for downlink communication systems: Bridging, generalizing, and outperforming SDMA and NOMA,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2018, no. 1, p. 133, Dec. 2018.
[180] Y. Wang, Y. Mao, and S. Ji, “RS-BNN: A deep learning framework for the optimal beamforming design of rate-splitting multiple access,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 11, pp. 1–6, Nov. 2024.
[181] K.-M. Chen, H.-Y. Chang, R. Y. Chang, and W.-H. Chung, “Deep unfolded hybrid beamforming in reconfigurable intelligent surface aided mmWave MIMO-OFDM systems,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1118–1122, Apr. 2024.
[182] X. Zhao, T. Lin, Y. Zhu, and J. Zhang, “Partially-connected hybrid beamforming for spectral efficiency maximization via a weighted MMSE equivalence,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 8218–8232, Dec. 2021.
[183] Y. Liu, Q. Hu, Y. Cai, G. Yu, and G. Y. Li, “Deep-unfolding beamforming for intelligent reflecting surface assisted full-duplex systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 4784–4800, Jul. 2022.
[184] M.-M. Zhao, A. Liu, Y. Wan, and R. Zhang, “Two-timescale beamforming optimization for intelligent reflecting surface aided multiuser communication with QoS constraints,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 6179–6194, Sep. 2021.
[185] W. Xia, Y. Jiang, B. Zhao, H. Zhao, and H. Zhu, “Deep unfolded fractional programming-based beamforming in RIS-aided MISO systems,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 515–519, Feb. 2024.
[186] H. Guo, Y.-C. Liang, J. Chen, and E. G. Larsson, “Weighted sum-rate maximization for reconfigurable intelligent surface aided wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3064–3076, May 2020.
[187] W. Jin, J. Zhang, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, X. Li, and S. Han, “Lowcomplexity joint beamforming for RIS-assisted MU-MISO systems based on model-driven deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 6968–6982, Jul. 2024.
[188] X. He, H. Xu, J. Wang, W. Xie, X. Li, and A. Nallanathan, “Joint active and passive beamforming in RIS-assisted covert symbiotic radio based on deep unfolding,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 9, pp. 14021–14026, Sep. 2024.
[189] G. Zhu, J. Hu, K. Zhong, X. Cheng, and Z. Song, “Sum-pathgain maximization for IRS-aided MIMO communication system via Riemannian gradient descent network,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 31, pp. 51–55, 2024.
[190] L. Dai, J. Tan, Z. Chen, and H. V. Poor, “Delay-phase precoding for wideband THz massive MIMO,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 7271–7286, Sep. 2022.
[191] N. T. Nguyen et al., “Deep unfolding hybrid beamforming designs for THz massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 71, pp. 3788–3804, 2023.
[192] X. Yu, J.-C. Shen, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “Alternating minimization algorithms for hybrid precoding in millimeter wave MIMO systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 485–500, Apr. 2016.
[193] A. Milstein, T. Yablonka, and N. Shlezinger, “Learned approximated optimization for rapid low-complexity hybrid beamforming design,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Apr. 2025, pp. 1–5.
[194] D. Avrahami, A. Milstein, C. Chaux, T. Routtenberg, and N. Shlezinger, “Deep unfolding with approximated computations for rapid optimization,” 2025, arXiv:2509.00782.
[195] F. Liu et al., “Seventy years of radar and communications: The road from separation to integration,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 106–121, Jul. 2023.
[196] W. Zhou, R. Zhang, G. Chen, and W. Wu, “Integrated sensing and communication waveform design: A survey,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 3, pp. 1930–1949, 2022.
[197] Z. Feng, Z. Fang, Z. Wei, X. Chen, Z. Quan, and D. Ji, “Joint radar and communication: A survey,” China Commun., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1–27, Jan. 2020.
[198] F. Liu, C. Masouros, A. P. Petropulu, H. Griffiths, and L. Hanzo, “Joint radar and communication design: Applications, state-of-the-art, and the road ahead,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 3834–3862, Jun. 2020.
[199] J. A. Zhang et al., “Enabling joint communication and radar sensing in mobile networks—A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 306–345, 1st Quart., 2022.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEKA et al.: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF DEEP UNFOLDING TECHNIQUES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

10405

[200] A. Liu et al., “A survey on fundamental limits of integrated sensing and communication,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 994–1034, 2nd Quart., 2022.
[201] P. Krishnananthalingam, N. T. Nguyen, and M. Juntti, “Deep unfolding enabled constant modulus waveform design for joint communications and sensing,” 2023, arxiv:2306.14702.
[202] N. T. Nguyen, L. V. Nguyen, N. Shlezinger, Y. C. Eldar, A. L. Swindlehurst, and M. Juntti, “Joint communications and sensing hybrid beamforming design via deep unfolding,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 901–916, Jul. 2024.
[203] J. Zhang, C. Masouros, F. Liu, Y. Huang, and A. L. Swindlehurst, “Low-complexity joint radar-communication beamforming: From optimization to deep unfolding,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 1–16, Jul. 2025.
[204] W. Fan, S. Liu, C. Li, and Y. Huang, “Fast direct localization for millimeter wave MIMO systems via deep ADMM unfolding,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 748–752, Apr. 2023.
[205] J. Zhang et al., “Deep unfolding learning aided ISAC transceiver design,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 8681–8695, Oct. 2025.
[206] J. Lin, H. Zheng, and X. Feng, “Target parameter estimation with deep unfolding networks for MIMO-OFDM based integrated sensing and communication systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Signal Process. (WCSP), Nov. 2023, pp. 371–376.
[207] W. Lin, H. Zheng, X. Feng, and Y. Chen, “Deep unfolding network for target parameter estimation in OTFS-based ISAC systems,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Apr. 2024, pp. 1–6.
[208] W. Liu, H. Xu, X. He, Y. Ye, and A. Zhou, “Bi-level deep unfolding based robust beamforming design for IRS-assisted ISAC system,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 76663–76672, 2024.
[209] N. Garcia, H. Wymeersch, E. G. Larsson, A. M. Haimovich, and M. Coulon, “Direct localization for massive MIMO,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 2475–2487, May 2017.
[210] Z. Wei, H. Qu, W. Jiang, K. Han, H. Wu, and Z. Feng, “Iterative signal processing for integrated sensing and communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Green Commun. Netw., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 401–412, Mar. 2023.
[211] Z. Hu, A. Liu, W. Xu, T. Q. S. Quek, and M. Zhao, “A stochastic particle variational Bayesian inference inspired deep-unfolding network for sensing over wireless networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2832–2846, Oct. 2024.
[212] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes. 1,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., vol. 2, Jul. 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[213] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[214] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Ph.D. thesis, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1962. [Online]. Available: https:// dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/13799
[215] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Feb. 1997, pp. 399–431.
[216] E. Arikan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009.
[217] Z. B. Kaykac Egilmez, L. Xiang, R. G. Maunder, and L. Hanzo, “The development, operation and performance of the 5G polar codes,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 96–122, 1st Quart., 2020.
[218] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[219] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[220] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2213–2226, May 2015.
[221] X. Zhou, J. Zhang, C.-W. Syu, C.-K. Wen, J. Zhang, and S. Jin, “Model-driven deep learning-based MIMO-OFDM detector: Design, simulation, and experimental results,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 5193–5207, Aug. 2022.
[222] G. Ma, X. Jiao, J. Mu, H. Han, and Y. Yang, “Deep learning-based detection for marker codes over insertion and deletion channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 72, no. 10, pp. 5945–5959, Oct. 2024.
[223] J. Gao, K. Niu, and C. Dong, “Learning to decode polar codes with one-bit quantizer,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 27210–27217, 2020.
[224] Y. Liu, M.-M. Zhao, C. Wang, M. Lei, and M.-J. Zhao, “PDD-based decoder for LDPC codes with model-driven neural networks,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 2532–2536, Nov. 2022.

[225] Q. Wang et al., “Normalized min-sum neural network for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 70–81, Feb. 2023.
[226] S. Adiga, X. Xiao, R. Tandon, B. Vasic, and T. Bose, “Generalization bounds for neural belief propagation decoders,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 4280–4296, Jun. 2024.
[227] Y. Sun et al., “Trainable joint channel estimation, detection, and decoding for MIMO URLLC systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 12172–12188, Sep. 2024.
[228] J. Zhang, Y. He, Y.-W. Li, C.-K. Wen, and S. Jin, “Meta learningbased MIMO detectors: Design, simulation, and experimental test,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1122–1137, Feb. 2021.
[229] K. T. K. Cheung, S. Yang, and L. Hanzo, “Achieving maximum energy-efficiency in multi-relay OFDMA cellular networks: A fractional programming approach,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 2746–2757, Jul. 2013.
[230] D. W. K. Ng, E. S. Lo, and R. Schober, “Energy-efficient resource allocation in OFDMA systems with hybrid energy harvesting base station,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 3412–3427, Jul. 2013.
[231] Z. Ding, S. M. Perlaza, I. Esnaola, and H. V. Poor, “Power allocation strategies in energy harvesting wireless cooperative networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 846–860, Feb. 2014.
[232] Z. Yang et al., “Energy-efficient wireless communications with distributed reconfigurable intelligent surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 665–679, Jan. 2022.
[233] W. Liang, Z. Ding, Y. Li, and L. Song, “User pairing for downlink non-orthogonal multiple access networks using matching algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 5319–5332, Dec. 2017.
[234] A. Chowdhury, G. Verma, C. Rao, A. Swami, and S. Segarra, “Unfolding WMMSE using graph neural networks for efficient power allocation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 6004–6017, Sep. 2021.
[235] H. Hu, Z. Xie, H. Shi, B. Liu, H. Zhao, and G. Gui, “Unsupervised power allocation based on combination of edge aggregated graph attention network with deep unfolded WMMSE,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 11, pp. 1–15, Nov. 2024.
[236] P. Velicˇkovic´, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio´, and Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. 6th ICLR, 2018, pp. 1–12.
[237] S. Mahbub and M. S. Bayzid, “EGRET: Edge aggregated graph attention networks and transfer learning improve protein–protein interaction site prediction,” Briefings Bioinf., vol. 23, no. 2, 2022, Art. no. bbab578.
[238] B. Li, G. Verma, and S. Segarra, “Graph-based algorithm unfolding for energy-aware power allocation in wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1359–1373, Feb. 2023.
[239] Y. Huo, Y. Tian, L. Ma, X. Cheng, and T. Jing, “Jamming strategies for physical layer security,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 148–153, Feb. 2018.
[240] K. N. Vaishnavi, S. D. Khorvi, R. Kishore, and S. Gurugopinath, “A survey on jamming techniques in physical layer security and antijamming strategies for 6G,” in Proc. 28th Int. Conf. Telecommun. (ICT), Jun. 2021, pp. 174–179.
[241] G. Marti, T. Ko¨lle, and C. Studer, “Mitigating smart jammers in multiuser MIMO,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 71, pp. 756–771, 2023.
[242] F. Liu, C. Masouros, A. Li, H. Sun, and L. Hanzo, “MUMIMO communications with MIMO radar: From co-existence to joint transmission,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2755–2770, Apr. 2018.
[243] M. Ma, T. Fang, N. Shlezinger, A. L. Swindlehurst, M. Juntti, and N. Nguyen, “Model-based machine learning for max-min fairness beamforming design in JCAS systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Apr. 2025, pp. 1–5.
[244] X. Deng and P. L. Dragotti, “Deep coupled ISTA network for multimodal image super-resolution,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 29, pp. 1683–1698, 2020.
[245] Z. Zheng, W. Dai, D. Xue, C. Li, J. Zou, and H. Xiong, “Hybrid ISTA: Unfolding ISTA with convergence guarantees using free-form deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 3226–3244, Mar. 2023.
[246] J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Xie, and Y. Zhang, “High-throughput deep unfolding network for compressive sensing MRI,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 750–761, Jun. 2022.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10406

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 6, 15 MARCH 2026

[247] L. Pellaco and J. Jalde´n, “A matrix-inverse-free implementation of the MU-MIMO WMMSE beamforming algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 70, pp. 6360–6375, 2022.
[248] N. Nguyen, M. Ma, N. Shlezinger, Y. C. Eldar, A. L. Swindlehurst, and M. Juntti, “Deep unfolding-enabled hybrid beamforming design for mmWave massive MIMO systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2023, pp. 1–5.
[249] O. Levy and N. Shlezinger, “Rapid and power-aware learned optimization for modular receive beamforming,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73, no. 9, pp. 7136–7150, Sep. 2025.
[250] Q. Wang, S. Wang, H. Fang, L. Chen, L. Chen, and Y. Guo, “A modeldriven deep learning method for normalized min-sum LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Workshops (ICC Workshops), Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.

Sanjeev Sharma (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from IIT Indore, Indore, India, in 2018.
He was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, as a Post-Doctoral Fellow. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electronics Engineering, IIT (BHU) Varanasi, Varanasi, India. His research interests include signal processing for wireless communications and networking; mathematical modeling; and simulation, design, and analysis of wireless systems.

Sukanya Deka (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.Tech. degree in electronics and communication engineering from IIT Guwahati, Guwahati, India, in 2018, where she is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Electronics and Electrical Engineering.
Her research interests include error-correcting codes, physical layer in wireless communication, machine learning in wireless communication, orthogonal time–frequency–space modulation, and multiple access techniques and optimization.
Kuntal Deka received the Ph.D. degree from IIT Guwahati, Guwahati, India, in 2016.
He was an Assistant Professor at IIT Guwahati from 2015 to 2018. From 2018 to 2021, he was an Assistant Professor with the School of Electrical Sciences, IIT Goa, India. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electronics and Electrical Engineering, IIT Guwahati. His research interests include error-correcting codes, modulation, and multiple access techniques for modern wireless communication systems.
Nhan Thanh Nguyen (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electronics and telecommunications engineering from Hanoi University of Science and Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam, in 2014, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and information engineering from Seoul National University of Science and Technology, Seoul, South Korea, in 2017 and 2020, respectively.
From October 2019 to March 2020, he was a Visiting Researcher with North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA. From 2020 to 2023, he was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Centre for Wireless Communications, University of Oulu (CWC-UOULU), Oulu, Finland. He was with the University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA, in 2023. He is an Assistant Professor with CWC-UOULU. His research interests include signal processing, optimization, and machine learning for wireless communications. Dr. Nguyen has been recognized with several honors, including the Best M.S. Thesis Award in 2017, the Best Ph.D. Dissertation Award in 2020, the Best Paper Awards at IEEE SPAWC in 2023, the IEEE SSP in 2023, and ATC in 2021. He was a recipient of the Nokia Foundation’s Jorma Ollila Grant in 2022 and the prestigious Research Council of Finland Fellowship in 2023. He is an Associate Editor of IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS.

Vimal Bhatia (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the Institute for Digital Communications, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, U.K., in 2005.
He was the Founder Head of the Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship, the Associate Dean of Research and Development, and the Dean of Academic Affairs. He is currently a Professor with IIT Indore, Indore, India, and an Adjunct Faculty Member with IIT Delhi, New Delhi, India. He is also the DRISHTI CPS Chair Professor with IIT Indore and the Chair Professor with Soochow University, Suzhou, China. He has worked with various IT companies for over 11 years, both in India and U.K. He is a Principal Investigator/Co-Principal Investigator/Coordinator for external projects with funding of over U.S. $20 million from MeitY, DST, UKIERI, MoE, AKA, IUSSTF, and KPMG. He has supervised 24 awarded Ph.D. theses and three Ph.D. theses submitted. He has more than 420 peerreviewed publications and has filed 16 patents (with ten granted). His research interests include communications, non-Gaussian nonparametric signal processing, and machine/deep learning with applications to communications and photonics. Dr. Bhatia is currently a fellow of IETE and OSI and a certified SCRUM Master. He is a member of the Steering Committee for IEEE ANTS. He was a recipient of the Prof. S. N. Mitra Memorial Award in 2024, the Prof. SVC Aiya Memorial Award in 2019, the National Slovak Fellowship, European Mobility Scheme for Senior Researcher with Czech Republic, and the Nokia Visiting Research Fellowship. During his Ph.D. degree, he received the IEEE Fellowship for collaborative research from the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, and is a Young Faculty Research Fellow of MeitY, Government of India. He has delivered many talks, tutorials, and conducted faculty development programs for the World Bank’s NPIU TEQIP-III and an invited talk at WWRF46-Paris. He has been mentioned among the World’s Top 2% Scientists by Stanford University from 2021 to 2023. He was the General Co-Chair of IEEE ANTS 2018 and the General Vice-Chair of IEEE ANTS 2017. He is also an Associate Editor of IETE Technical Review, Frontiers in Communications and Networks, Frontiers in Signal Processing, and IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS. He is a reviewer of IEEE, Elsevier, Wiley, Springer, and IET.
Nandana Rajatheva (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. degree (Hons.) in electronics and telecommunication engineering from the University of Moratuwa, Moratuwa, Sri Lanka, in 1987, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada, in 1991 and 1995, respectively.
From 1995 to 2010, he was with the University of Moratuwa and Asian Institute of Technology, Thailand. He is currently a Professor with the Centre for Wireless Communications, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, and leads the thematic area of wireless access technologies in the 6G flagship project. During his graduate studies, he was a Canadian Commonwealth Scholar in Manitoba. He is contributing to the intelligent radio air interface design task in the EU project Hexa-X-II. He has co-authored more than 200 refereed papers published in journals and conference proceedings. His research interests include physical layer (PHY) in 6G, machine learning for PHY and resource allocation, integrated sensing and communications (ISAC), and channel coding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

