2580

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

A Weakly Hybrid Decoding Algorithm for Staircase Codes via Multi-Level Bit Marking

Yi Lei , Member, IEEE, Xiang Wang, Bin Chen , Senior Member, IEEE, Minghua Cao , and Zhongyi Guo

Abstract—Reducing the complexity of soft-decision (SD) decoding algorithm or improving the performance of hard-decision (HD) decoding algorithm becomes an emerging trend on forward error corrections to ensure reliable optical transmission with high performance and low cost. In this paper, a hybrid decoding algorithm is proposed for staircase codes (SCCs), which performs HD decoding with the help of channel soft information via multi-level bit-marking (MLBM). The HD and SD in the proposed MLBM decoding algorithm is weakly hybrid that the soft information is only used for one-shot bit marking and does not involve in the decoding directly, thus providing good performance-complexity tradeoff. The marked bits indicate four reliability levels that are used to prevent miscorrections by checking conflicts with highly reliable bits and to enhance the error-correcting capability of the HD decoder by flipping unreliable bits. Particularly, three priority levels are set for bit flipping by combining with the decoding statuses of the associated component codes. The decoding results will, in turn, help to update the marked bits among the four reliability levels. Numerical results show up to 1.22 dB gains with steeper waterfall region and lower error floor when compared to conventional HD decoding for SCCs, at the cost of approximately a two-fold increase in the memory storage.
Index Terms—Optical fiber communications, forward error correction, staircase codes, hard-decision decoding, soft-decision decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
D RIVEN by the increasing demand for high-speed data transmission, the standardization of 400G is completed or nearly completed, and 800G techniques become the new focus for next generation optical transport networks (OTNs) [1], where forward error correction (FEC) technology is of key importance [2], [3], [4]. With the continuous increase in target rates, advanced FEC schemes that balance complexity and performance to provide higher coding gain, lower latency, and
Received 24 May 2025; revised 9 October 2025; accepted 8 December 2025. Date of publication 23 December 2025; date of current version 2 January 2026. This work is supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant JZ2024HGTG0312, the NSFC Program (No. 62001151, 62171175, 62265010), and the Anhui Provincial Natural Science Foundation (No. 2508085J041). The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was M. Shirvanimoghaddam. (Corresponding author: Bin Chen.)
Yi Lei, Bin Chen, and Zhongyi Guo are with the School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009, China (e-mail: leiyi@hfut.edu.cn; bin.chen@hfut.edu.cn; guozhongyi@hfut.edu.cn).
Xiang Wang was with the School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009, China. He is now with the State Key Laboratory of Information Photonics and Optical Communications, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: wangxiang2022s@163.com).
Minghua Cao is with the School of Computer and Communication, Lanzhou University of Technology, Lanzhou 730050, China (e-mail: caominghua@lut.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2025.3647757

lower power consumption are required. Therefore, reducing the complexity of soft-decision (SD) decoding algorithm and improving the performance of hard-decision (HD) decoding algorithm are two emerging and important trends on FEC to ensure reliable optical transmission with high performance and considerable cost [5], [6], [7].
Regarding to the HD-FECs, the product-like codes, e.g., product codes (PCs) [8], staircase codes (SCCs) [9] and zipper codes [10], have attained much attention in optical communication fields, featuring two parity constraints for each information bit. These codes are typically constructed from short component codes, e.g., Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) codes, and are decoded with iterative bounded distance decoding (BDD), yielding superior net coding gain. Particularly, SCC has been incorporated into industry standards, such as ITU-T G.709.2/Y.1331.2 [11] and 400G ZR [12].
To purse higher coding gain of the product-like codes, a straightforward way is to use high-performance SD-FEC codes as component codes, such as polar codes [13], [14], low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [15], and etc. Unsurprisingly, the achieved gains are significant, but at the cost of greatly increased decoding complexity and power consumption. Although several works have put effort on reducing the complexity of LDPC codes and polar codes [16], [17], [18], SD decoding is not the best candidates for productlike codes to meet the performance and power consumption demand for high data rate applications, or at least, not yet.
To keep the advantage in complexity of product-like codes, there are works that still focus on HD decoding itself. To lower error floor, the work in [19] proposes to locate stall patterns using the intersection of nonzero-syndrome component codes, and resolve the stall pattern through bit flipping. To mitigate the influence of BDD miscorrection, an anchor-based decoding (AD) algorithm is proposed in [20] by tracking the conflicts between the row and column component codes. Further, an enhanced AD algorithm is proposed in [21], which uses hard reliability scores obtained by the decoding results of BDD. To improve the energy-efficiency (i.e., to enable to use 1-errorcorrecting capability component codes while still achieving error floor below 10−15), a generalized SCC is proposed recently, where each bit is protected by an arbitrary number of component codewords rather than two [22]. Although these methods are simple for hardware implementation, the performance is limited, still with significant gaps to the HD Shannon limit (equivalent to binary symmetric channel) as well as the SD-FEC codes.

0090-6778 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: WEAKLY HYBRID DECODING ALGORITHM FOR SCCs VIA MULTI-LEVEL BIT MARKING

2581

To improve the performance while addressing practical implementation constraints, one line of research is to use concatenated FEC schemes, which use SD-FEC codes as inner codes and HD-FEC codes as outer codes. The inner code, designed such that its decoder fulfils a given complexity constraint, is used for error reduction at the input of the outer HD decoder, while the outer HD decoder then lowers the error rate to the desired target. In recent years, the concatenated schemes of SCC and LDPC [2], [23], SCC and Hamming code (using SD decoding algorithm) [2], [24], SCC and polar code [25], KP4 (i.e., RS (528,514)) and single-paritycheck code [26], zipper-LDPC code and zipper-BCH code [27] have been reported. These concatenated schemes show similar coding gains to those of existing SD-FEC schemes with significant complexity reduction. In addition, using mixed component codes (one is SD-FEC code and the other is HD-FEC code) is also proposed for the product-like codes enabling smaller decoding window size and faster convergence speed [28], [29].
Another promising FEC solution to strike a good balance between performance and complexity is hybrid decoding schemes, which aims to improve HD decoding performance with the help of channel soft information, i.e., log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) [30]. In [31], an iterative BDD with scaled reliability (iBDD-SR) is proposed, which makes hard decisions based on the reliabilities obtained by combining the properly scaled BDD outputs and the channel LLRs. In [32], the scaled reliability principle is extended to product codes based on generalized minimum distance decoding (GMDD) to update the LLRs at each iteration for finding the ordered least reliable bits. Further, a binary message-passing based on error-anderasure decoding (BEE) algorithm is proposed by using an improved iBDD-SR algorithm (in which the combine rule is optimized via density evolution), showing a significant performance gain with respect to iterative BDD [33].
In [34] and [35], a class of soft-aided bit-marking (SABM) algorithm is proposed for SCCs to prevent miscorrections and to enhance the error-correcting capability of BDD by marking bits into three reliability levels according to the channel LLRs. Although better performance has been shown than iBDD-SR and BEE, there still is a large space for performance improvement if an effective update algorithm is proposed to eliminate the effect of erroneous marking during the iteration decoding process. In [36], a variant of SABM and AD algorithm is proposed with dynamic reliability score (DRS), where DRS reflects the reliability of a bit from both its channel LLR and its behavior during decoding. Besides, the work in [37] proposes a soft-aided HDD algorithm based on ordered statistics decoding (OSD), which involves reprocessing the HD decoding result of the reliable information set to generate a candidate codeword list.
Although the above mentioned methods proposed in [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36], and [37] are all hybrid decoding schemes, there is significant difference on the complexity, depending on how the LLRs get involved in the decoding process. The algorithms based on scaled reliability [31], [32] and BEE [33] always need channel LLRs during the decoding process (to calculate the scaled reliabilities based on the

channel LLRs or to sort the scaled reliabilities to erase the least reliable bits for each component codeword at every iteration). By contrast, the SABM-based [34], [35], [36] and OSD-based decoding algorithms [37] only require the LLRs once at the initial step for marking bits or DRS assignment or Gaussian elimination, and thus no need to store LLRs. Therefore, inspired by the definition of the hybrid degree for hybrid vehicles [38], we roughly divide the hybrid decoding algorithms into strongly-hybrid and weakly-hybrid two categories, based on whether the LLRs are always involved in the decoding process. The former always requires LLRs during the decoding process, while the latter only performs oneshot utilization of LLRs. Hence, the proportion of complexity resulting from LLR-relevant operations in the total complexity of the decoding algorithm for strongly-hybrid cases is intuitively much higher than that for weakly-hybrid cases. The strictly accurate definition of hybrid degree for the HD/SD hybrid error-correction decoding algorithms is interesting to be studied in future.
In this paper, we propose a weakly-hybrid HD/SD decoding algorithm for SCCs based on multi-level bit-marking (MLBM), where the LLRs are only used to perform one-shot bit marking when the bits are received from the channel. The proposed MLBM algorithm belongs to the SABM family that performs HD decoding with the help of marked bits (MBs), achieving superior performance with more reliability levels, simple but effective MB update mechanism and bit-flipping priority, compared to the SABM [34] and improved SABM (iSABM) [35] algorithms. The key contributions of the paper are summarized as follows:
• An MLBM decoding algorithm is proposed for SCCs, in which the HD-estimated bits are marked as four levels, i.e., highly reliable bits (HRBs), reliable bits (RBs), unreliable bits (UBs) and highly unreliable bits (HUBs), according to the channel LLRs using three thresholds. The proposed algorithm prevents BDD miscorrections by checking conflicts with HRBs and decodes those cases with too many errors via flipping HUBs and UBs. The decoding results will in turn help the decoder to determine the priority of the flipping bits and to update the marked bits in time.
• Parameter optimization of the proposed MLBM decoding algorithm is carried out in detail through numerical simulations. In particular, the prediction of the optimal marking thresholds in theory has been derived based on the probability distribution functions (PDFs) of the LLRs.
• Performance analysis of the proposed MLBM algorithm are conducted in detail, which show up to 1.22 dB gain with steeper waterfall region and lower error floor, when compared to conventional SCCs using HD decoding.
• A qualitative complexity analysis of the proposed MLBM decoding algorithm for SCCs is performed, including the increased complexity caused by the additional BDDs and the increased memory usage.
• The effectiveness of the proposed MLBM alogirhtm for PCs has been demonstrated, which shows up to 0.78 dB gain with respect to conventional PC using HD decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2582

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Fig. 1. System model considered in this paper (a) and an illustration of SCC decoding schemes (b).

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce system model and review the principles of conventional SCCs. In Sec. III, we describe the proposed MLBM decoding algorithm for SCCs. The parameter optimization is given in Sec. IV and performance analysis is shown in Sec. V, while the complexity of MLBM is discussed in Sec. VI. In Sec. VII, the proposed MLBM algorithm has been extended to PCs. Finally, Sec. VIII concludes this paper.
Notation: Boldface letters are used to denote the matrix and vector, e.g., B and e, while the letters with math calligraphy, e.g., I, are used to denote the set. I(i) and e(i) represent the i-th element in set I and vector e, respectively. The expression, for example, P = {i : e(i) = 1} returns the positions where e(i) = 1. | · | returns the absolute value when its argument is a number, and returns the number of elements if its argument is a matrix, or a vector, or a set.

II. SYSTEM MODEL AND SCCS

A. System Model

The system model of this paper is depicted in Fig. 1
(a). Information bits are encoded by an SCC encoder and are mapped to symbol x every m bits {b1, b2, · · · , bm} at each time instant via a mapper. The symbol x is taken from an equally-spaced M -ary pulse amplitude modulation (PAM) constellation with M points S = {s1, s2, . . . , sM }, where M = 2m. After transmission over an additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN) channel, the received symbol is given by y = x + z, where z ∼ N (0, N0) and E[x2] = 1 (E[·] denotes expectation). The SNR is defined as γ = 1/N0 and we have y ∼ N (x, N0).
For conventional HD receiver, the received signal y is directly converted to binary bits ˆb1, . . . , ˆbm via an HD demapper and is decoded by an HD-FEC decoder, for example
conventional SCCs. Therefore, the main feature of HD receiver
is its low complexity, but with significant loss of channel infor-
mation. By contrast, for conventional SD receiver, the received signal y will be converted to channel LLRs λ1, . . . , λm, given by

λk =

(−1)b log

exp

b∈{0,1}

i∈Ik,b

− (y − si)2 2N0

,

(1)

with k = 1, 2, · · · , m, where b denotes bit negation, the set Ik,b enumerates all constellation points in S where the kth

bit is b. According to (1), we can know that λk > 0 means that there is a larger probability that the received bit is 1, while λk < 0 means that there is a larger probability that the received bit is 0. The larger |λk| is, the more reliable the result will be.
Particularly, the LLR for 2-PAM is given by

exp(−(γ/2)(y − 1)2)

λ = log exp(−(γ/2)(y + 1)2) = 2γy.

(2)

It can be seen that for 2-PAM case, λ is a Gaussian random variable, i.e., λ ∼ N (2γx, 4γ), where x = 1 for bit 1 and x = −1 for bit 0. The PDFs of the LLRs can be written as



1

(λ + 2γ)2

p0(λ)

=

√ 2 2πγ

exp

−

8γ

, if x = −1

1

(λ − 2γ)2

(3)

p1(λ)

=

√ 2 2πγ

exp

−

8γ

, if x = 1

The SD-FEC decoder will use the LLRs for FEC decoding to recover the transmitted bits. With more accurate channel information, SD receiver offers much better performance than HD receiver, but at the expense of complexity.
To tradeoff the complexity and performance, this paper considers a hybrid receiver. In this scheme, HD and SD demappers are both needed to obtain the HD-estimated bits and LLRs, respectively, which will all be sent to the FEC decoder to perform hybrid decoding for error correction. The key idea for the hybrid decoder is to use soft information to help HD decoding, and its performance and complexity depend on the way soft information is used.

B. SCCs
SCCs are considered in this paper, due to their popularity in optical communications in recent years. SCC combines ideas from recursive convolutional coding and block coding, which consists of a sequence of binary blocks {B1, B2, B3, · · ·}, as the bottom-left of Fig. 1 (a) shows. Each block Bi contains W ×W bits, while the rightmost W ×U bits are parity bits, for i > 0. The block B0 is initialized to be an all-zero block. For ∀i > 0, each row of the matrix [BiT−1Bi] is a valid codeword in a component code C (an extended or shortened BCH code is often used), where BTi−1 is the matrix transpose of Bi−1. Let (nc, kc, tc) be the parameters of a BCH code, where nc is the codeword length (an even number), kc is the information

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: WEAKLY HYBRID DECODING ALGORITHM FOR SCCs VIA MULTI-LEVEL BIT MARKING

2583

length, and tc is the error-correcting capability. The code rate of SCC is given by

R = 1 − U/W = 2kc/nc − 1,

(4)

where W = nc/2 and U = nc − kc. SCC decoding is performed using sliding window fashion
each covering L received SCC blocks. Fig. 1 (b) gives an illustration of SCC decoding in the ith window, which includes blocks {Y i, Y i+1, . . . , Y i+L−1} that Y i corresponds to the transmitted SCC block Bi for i ≥ 1 and Y 0 is an all-zero matrix. In conventional SCC decoding, BDD is used to
iteratively decode each row of two neighbor SCC block from
the bottom to the top of the window. When the maximum number of iterations G is reached or all the errors have been corrected, the sliding window outputs block Y i and moves to cover the next L blocks {Y i+1, Y i+2, . . . , Y i+L} and repeats the decoding process in the last window. This
process will persist until all the received bits have been
decoded. Let cj,w ∈ C and rj,w be the transmitted codeword and
received sequence, respectively, in the wth row of matrix [Y iT+j−1Y i+j] of the ith window, where j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , L−1} and w ∈ {1, 2, . . . , W }. The output cˆj,w of BDD with tc-error correcting capability can be written as

 cj,w ,  cˆj,w = c¯j,w,
rj,w ,

if d(rj,w, cj,w) ≤ tc if d(rj,w, cj,w) > tc and d(rj,w, c¯j,w) ≤ tc otherwise
(5)

where c¯j,w is another codeword in C, d(·, ·) represents the Hamming distance. The first two cases given in (5) both correspond to BDD success, but the second one is in fact a miscorrection (also known as decoding error). Miscorrection will introduce extra errors, and thus cause performance degradation, particularly in the iterative decoding fashion. The third case in (5) corresponds to BDD failure that will change nothing.
To yield more gains, several hybrid decoding algorithm are used to prevent miscorrections and/or to enhance the error-correcting capability of BDD, e.g., iBDD-SR [31], BEE [33], SABM [34] and iSABM [35]. Differently from conventional SCC decoding, these algorithms use soft-aided BDD (SA-BDD) to iteratively decode each row of two neighbor SCC blocks, as shown in Fig. 1 (b) (where cj,w is the output of the SA-BDD component decoder corresponding to rj,w). In next section, we will introduce our proposed new hybrid decoding algorithm for SCC in detail.

III. THE PROPOSED MLBM DECODING ALGORITHM
A. Main Algorithm Routine
The main routine of the proposed MLBM decoding algorithm is shown in Fig. 2, where the black and blue lines represent the decoding data flow and the MB data flow, respectively. Symbol sj+1,w denotes the decoding status corresponding to rj,w. The value of sj+1,w indicates four types of decoding status, including
• 0: decoding success with high confidence,

• 1: decoding success, • 2: identified miscorrection, • 3: decoding failure.
Let S denote an (L + 1) × W decoding status matrix, whose elements from the 2th row to the Lth row are given by sj+1,w with j = 1, 2, · · · , L − 1 and w = 1, 2, · · · , W . Particularly, the first and last rows of S are initialized to all 3. The MBs for the HD-estimated bits include HRBs, RBs, UBs, HUBs four types.
Like conventional SCC decoding, BDD will be used to decode the received sequence rj,w firstly and outputs the decoding result cˆj,w and detected error pattern ej,w (ej,w = cˆj,w ⊕ˆrj,w). As the block closer to the front of the window has been decoded more times (because of the decoding in the previous windows), there are fewer errors leading to smaller miscorrection probability. Therefore, a position threshold KMD (0 ≤ KMD < L) is defined to indicate where to start to perform miscorrection detection (MD). If BDD declares decoding success and j ≤ KMD, the decoder will directly trust BDD result that outputs cj,w = cˆj,w and the decoding status is sj+1,w = 0 ( 1 , i.e., the first path in Fig.2). If j > KMD, MLBM will perform miscorrection detection for success cases of BDD, assisted by HRBs. If not a miscorrection, the MLBM decoder outputs cj,w = cˆj,w and updates the decoding status to 0 or 1, i.e., sj+1,w = 0 or sj+1,w = 1 ( 2 , i.e., the second path in Fig.2). The specific value of sj+1,w in this case depends on the conflicting situation with HRBs, which will be explained in Sec. III-C. For identified miscorrections and BDD failures, bit flipping (BF) will be performed to try to correct some errors, which are HUBs and UBs, in rj,w. The output sequence rj,w of BF will be sent to the BDD decoder again followed by MD for BDD success. Similarly, if the output of the second BDD trial is not a miscorrection, the MLBM decoder will accept the decoding result c˜j,w, i.e., cj,w = c˜j,w, and the decoding status is sj+1,w = 0 or sj+1,w = 1 ( 3 , i.e., the third path in Fig.2). By contrast, if the second BDD output is regarded as a miscorrection, the decoder will change nothing with cj,w = rj,w and the decoding status is sj+1,w = 2 ( 4 , i.e., the fourth path in Fig.2). For the decoding failure in the second BDD trial, the MLBM decoder outputs cj,w = rj,w and the decoding status is sj+1,w = 3 ( 5 , i.e., the fifth path in Fig.2). Once the decoding corresponding to rj,w is done, the decoder will update the marked information in time, according to the decoding result and decoding status.
As can be seen from Fig. 2, to make the the proposed MLBM decoding algorithm work well, there are four important parts: bit marking, miscorrection detection, bit flipping, and marked bit update.
B. Bit Marking
Bit marking is the first step for the proposed MLBM algorithm when the decoder receives an SCC block from the channel. To divide the HD-estimated bits into HRB, RB, UB and HUB four levels, three reliability thresholds δ1, δ2 and δ3 are used, where δ1 > δ2 > δ3 ≥ 0. According to the value of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2584

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Fig. 2. The main routine of the proposed MLBM algorithm. The black lines indicate the decoding data flow, while the blue lines indicate the MB data flow.
Algorithm 1 Miscorrection Detection

Fig. 3. An illustration to indicate the relationship between the marked bits and the received bits.

|λk|, the marking result for a recovered bit ˆbk is given by

HRB, 

if |λk| ≥ δ1



RB,

if δ2 ≤ |λk| < δ1

(6)

UB,

if δ3 ≤ |λk| < δ2





HUB, if |λk| < δ3

When bit marking is done, the soft information is not needed anymore, and thus no need to be stored.
From (6), we know that HRBs are the most reliable bits, and HUBs are the most unreliable bits, then are UBs. Ideally, we hope that HRBs are all correct bits to correctly identify miscorrections, and HUBs are all errors to perfectly correct errors via BF. However, the practical case is that there are probabilities that HUB is a correct bit and HRB is an error bit. Fig. 3 illustrates the relationship between the marked bits and the received bits. Notations IHRB, IRB, IUB and IHUB represent the sets of HRBs, RBs, UBs and HUBs, respectively. The left and right sides of the dashed line represent the received error bits (denoted by Ierror) and correct bits (denoted by Icorrect), respectively. IPE will be used to denote the union of IUB and IHUB, i.e., IPE = IHUB ∪ IUB. These sets satisfy such a relationship IHRB ∪ IRB ∪ IUB ∪ IHUB = Icorrect ∪ Ierror. Ideally, we hope that all the errors are in the set IPE.
Let αHUB and αPE be the probabilities that the bit in IHUB and IPE is an error, βHUB and βPE be the probabilities that an error bit is marked as HUB and PE, respectively. And let αHRB be the probability that an HRB is a correct bit, βHRB be the probability that a correct bit is marked as an HRB, we have



αHUB = |IHUB ∩ Ierror|/|IHUB|



βHUB = |IHUB ∩ Ierror|/|Ierror|



αPE = |IPE ∩ Ierror|/|IPE|

(7)

βPE = |IPE ∩ Ierror|/|Ierror|





αHRB = |IHRB ∩ Icorrect|/|IHRB|





βHRB = |IHRB ∩ Icorrect|/|Icorrect|

The values of αHUB and αPE will determine the probability of flipping error bits via BF. Therefore, the values of αHUB and αPE are expected to be as large as possible. On the other hand, the value of αHRB will have a straightforward impact on the accuracy of the detection of miscorrection, which will be
explained in Sect. III-C. Ideally, we hope to have αHUB → 1, αPE → 1, and αHRB → 1. To avoid too many variables, IHRB, IRB, IUB, IHUB, and IPE will only represent the marked bits corresponding to rj,w in the rest of the paper.

C. Miscorrection Detection
Algorithm 1 shows the pseudocode for miscorrection detection whose input parameters are error pattern ej,w and a 1 × 2W vector H recording the number of conflicts between BDD outputs and HRBs for rj,w (if a bit in rj,w is not an HRB, the corresponding element value in H is 0). With the detected error pattern ej,w, MD will find where the errors are, i.e., the positions of ‘1’s in ej,w. Let P = {i : ej,w(i) = 1} denote the detected error positions. Since there is a high probability that HRBs are correct bits, MD will identify

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: WEAKLY HYBRID DECODING ALGORITHM FOR SCCs VIA MULTI-LEVEL BIT MARKING

2585

miscorrections by checking whether the detected errors are involved in any HRBs. If there is any conflict between BDD output and HRBs (i.e., ∃i ∈ [1, |P|], P(i) ∈ IHRB), we will have H(P(i)) = H(P(i)) + 1. If the number of conflicts for HRB exceeds a threshold THRB (THRB > 0), i.e., H(P(i)) > THRB, it indicates that this HRB is not reliable enough and should be removed from IHRB set. That is, we will trust BDD output with decoding status sj+1,w = 1. If H(P(i)) ≤ THRB, BDD output will be regarded as a miscorrection and the decoding status is sj+1,w = 2. For ∀i, if P(i) ∈/ IHRB (indicating that there is no conflict between the BDD output and the HRBs), BDD output will be trusted, and we have sj+1,w = 0.
D. Bit Flipping Algorithm 2 shows the pseudocode for bit flipping,
where fg is the number of flipped bits in the gth iteration, g = 1, 2, . . . , G. Vector f = [f1, · · · , fg, · · · , fG] will be used to indicate the number of flipped bits at each iteration. Let set Vs={2,3} = {i : sj,: (i) = (2 || 3)} ∪ {W + {i : sj+2,: (i) = (2 || 3)}}, where sj,: and sj+2,: denote the jth and (j +2)th rows of S, respectively. According to the MBs and decoding statuses related to the bits in rj,w, three priority levels are assigned for BF to flip bits, which are given by
• Highest priority: set R0 = IHUB ∩ Vs={2,3}, in which the bit is an HUB and the related sequences rj−1,w (for the first half of bits in rj,w) or rj+1,w (for the second half of bits in rj,w) exists errors, i.e., the decoding status is a miscorrection or an failure.
• Medium priority: set R1 = IPE ∩ Vs={2,3}, in which the bit is an HUB or UB and the related sequences rj−1,w or rj+1,w exists errors.
• Lowest priority: set R2 = IPE, in which the bit is an HUB or UB.
Algorithm 2 Bit Flipping
The three sets satisfy such relationships: R0 ⊆ R1 ⊆ R2. Based on the designed priority rule, BF will first randomly
flip fg bits from R0 if |R0| ≥ fg. If |R0| < fg but |R1| ≥ fg, BF will randomly flip fg bits from R1. Otherwise, BF will randomly flip fg bits from R2 if |R2| ≥ fg, or do nothing if |R2| < fg.

Particularly, we find that for miscorrection, d0 − tc − wH (ej,w) (which is used for SABM [34] and iSABM [35]) is still the optimal number of flipped bits for this algorithm at each iteration, where d0 is the minimum Hamming distance between any two codewords in C and wH (·) denotes the Hamming weight. While the optimal number of flipped bits for BDD failure at each iteration is different, which will be shown in Sec. V-A via numerical simulation. In the remaining contents, we will use vector f miscorrection and f failure to respectively indicate the number of flipped bits at each iteration, where f miscorrection = d0 − tc − wH (ej,w).
Note that with the definition of the three priority levels among the bits in UBs and HUBs, the whole bits are actually divided into five levels (depending on the LLRs and the decoding status), which are the sets IHRB, IRB, IPE − R1, R1 − R0 and R0 (in descending order by reliability). In addition, the operation that subsequently flipping bits from different reliability classes is somewhat similar to GMDD [39] when multiple reliability classes are adopted. However, there exists a significant difference that GMDD has no idea how many errors in the received sequence, while MLBM knows that there are more than tc errors (as decoding failure or miscorrection occurs in the first BDD trial), when bit flipping is performed. As a result, GMDD tries tc + 1 error and erasure decodings (each contains two BDDs) by erasing {d0 − 1, d0 − 3, · · · , d0 − 2tc − 1} least reliable bits, and selects the final decoding result using the generalized minimum distance decoding criterion. In contrast, according to the decoding status of the first BDD trial, MLBM purposefully executes different bit flipping strategies for decoding failures and miscorrections, allowing the errors in the received sequence to have a high probability to be decoded with only one extra BDD trial.
E. Marked Bit Update
To significantly improve the performance of SCC, marked bit update is key. On the one hand, updating the marked HUBs, UBs and RBs in time can avoid the correctly decoded bits to be reverted to wrong bits, due to BFs or BDDs in the following decodings. On the other hand, updating the unreliable HRBs can avoid identifying miscorrection mistakenly, and gives opportunity to the decoder to correct errors in HRBs.
Algorithm 3 shows how to update the marked bits in rj,w according to its decoding status sj+1,w. Let Vs={0,1} = {i : sj,: (i) = (0 || 1)} ∪ {W + {i : sj+2,: (i) = (0 || 1)}}. The details of MBU are as follows.
• For sj+1,w = 0, two cases are considered. One is the decoded sequence with no errors and the other is the sequence with errors. For the first case, since there is a large probability that the decoding is indeed correct, the decoder will update all the bits in Vs={2,3} to RBs. This will protect the bits from being flipped by BF in the following decodings. For the latter case, as the detected errors are from the successfully decoded sequence, i.e., P ⊆ Vs={0,1}, it is possible that the decoding is an unidentified miscorrection. Therefore, the decoder will update the detected error bits to HUBs. As a result,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2586

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

this gives a highest priority for BF to revert the bits for correction in the following decodings. • For sj+1,w = 1, as mentioned in Sec.III-C, it indicates the conflicting HRB is not reliable enough (since it conflicts with too many BDDs), and thus the corresponding decoding result is accepted. In this case, the decoder will update the conflicting HRBs (which is also an error) to RBs. In case that BDD is indeed a successful decoding, the remaining detected errors will be updated to RBs as well, to prevent from being flipped during the subsequent decodings by BF.
Algorithm 3 Marked Bit Update

Fig. 4. Numerical optimization results for (a) δ1 and δ2 (while δ3 is set to 0) and (b) δ3 under certain (δ1, δ2) for SCC based on BCH (256,239,2) and 2-PAM at SNR of 6.3 dB.

• For sj+1,w = 3, the decoder will update all the flipped bits via BF to UBs. This will give priority to the decoder to flip other HUBs in the following decoding, once the current decoding fails.
• Otherwise, the decoder will keep the marked bits unchanged.

Fig. 5. The calculated values of (a) αHRB, βHRB, (b) αPE and βPE, αHUB and βHUB in theory against marking thresholds for 2-PAM at 6.3 dB SNR.

IV. PARAMETERS’ OPTIMIZATION
Optimizing the marking thresholds δ1, δ2 and δ3 is the primary task for the proposed algorithm to yield additional coding gain. Therefore, in this section, we will first optimize the three marking thresholds δ1, δ2 and δ3 via numerical simulation and theoretical prediction both. Then we optimize the other parameters including f failure (the number of flipping bits for BDD failures), KMD (the position threshold for performing MD) and THRB (the unreliable HRB threshold). The optimization is performed for SCC based on BCH (256,239,2) with modulation format of 2-PAM. The decoding window size is L = 9 and the maximum of iteration times is G = 7.
A. Marking Thresholds δ1, δ2, δ3
1) Numerical Simulation: Numerical simulation is a straightforward way to optimize the parameters. In this way, the three thresholds normally should be optimized jointly to find the optimal values, however, this will make the optimization too complex. For simplicity, we first optimize δ1 and δ2 together by setting δ3 = 0, and then optimize δ3. Other parameters are initialized as follow: f failure = [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1], KMD = 2 (which is the optimal value for iSABM [35]), and THRB = 7 (which is the maximum iteration times).
Fig. 4 (a) shows the optimization results for δ1 and δ2 with 2-PAM at SNR of 6.3 dB (where the BER of the proposed

MLBM algorithm is around 10−3). The color gradient from

blue to red represents the reduction in BER. It shows that

the region around δ1 = 4.5 and δ2 = 1.75 has the lowest

BER, and larger or smaller δ1 and δ2 will lead to performance

degradation. If δ1 is too small, some error bits will be marked

as HRBs, leading to mistakenly reject correct BDDs. By

contrast, if δ1 is too large, few correct bits will be marked as

HRBs, which cannot help to identify the BDD miscorrections

efficiently. For δ2, small value will make it hard to have enough

UBs for flipping, while large value will it hard to flip the error

bits, as too many correct bits will be mistakenly marked as

UBs.

Fig. 4 (b) is the optimization result for δ3 when the values

for δ1 and δ2 are around their optimal ones. It shows that the

optimized thresholds for δ1, δ2 and δ3 are 4.6, 2 and 0.87,

respectively. The reason why larger or smaller δ3 will cause

performance degradation is the same as that for δ2, the only

difference is that the HUBs marked via threshold δ3 has higher

priority than the UBs marked via threshold δ2 for BF.

2) Theoretical Prediction: Let Ψb,[Il,Iu] =

Iu Il

pb(λ)dλ

with

b ∈ {0, 1}. For 2-PAM, we have Ψ1,[Il,Iu] = Ψ0,[−Iu,−Il]. In

particular, Ψ1,[−∞,0] denotes the probability that the received

bit is 0 when bit 1 is transmitted, while Ψ0,[0,∞] denotes the

probability that the received bit is 1 when bit 0 is transmitted.

The six probabilities αHRB, βHRB, αPE, βPE, αHUB, and βHUB

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: WEAKLY HYBRID DECODING ALGORITHM FOR SCCs VIA MULTI-LEVEL BIT MARKING

2587

can be theoretically written as



αHRB = Ψ1,[δ1,∞]/(Ψ1,[δ1,∞] + Ψ1,[−∞,−δ1])



βHRB = Ψ1,[δ1,∞]/Ψ1,[0,∞]



αPE = Ψ1,[−δ2,0]/Ψ1,[−δ2,δ2]

(8)

βPE 

=

Ψ1,[−δ2,0]/Ψ1,[−∞,0]



αHUB 

=

Ψ1,[−δ3 ,0] /Ψ1,[−δ3 ,δ3 ]



βHUB = Ψ1,[−δ3,0]/Ψ1,[−∞,0]

According to (3), the values of αHRB, βHRB, αPE, βPE, αHUB and βHUB under different values of δ1, δ2 and δ3 are calculated. The results are shown in Fig. 5. From Fig. 5 (a), we can see that αHRB increases as δ1 increases. To avoid mistakenly marking the correct BDD as miscorrection, δ1 should be large enough to make αHRB approaching 1 for the proposed MLBM algorithm. However, the dashed curve in the figure shows that a larger δ1 will lead to fewer HRB, limiting the capability of miscorrection detection. Therefore, the point δ1 = 4.5 (where αHRB starts to approach 1) is chosen as the optimal one. At this point, βHRB = 85%.
Fig. 5 (b) shows the value of αHUB and βHUB versus δ3. It can be seen that when δ3 increases, αHUB will decrease and βHUB will increase. Having more errors in HUBs (i.e., larger βHUB) and higher marking accuracy (i.e., larger αHUB) are both important for the MLBM algorithm to quickly find
enough errors via BF. Therefore, the intersection point of the two curves is the optimal value for δ3, i.e., δ3 = 0.83.
Note that the two curves in Fig. 5 (b) also indicate the relationship between αPE, βPE and δ2. To have opportunity to correct the cases with more than tc errors via BF, there are at least d(rj,w, cj,w)−tc errors in the set IPE. Therefore, we have βPE ≥ (d(rj,w, cj,w)−tc)/d(rj,w, cj,w) ≥ (d0 −tc)/d0 = 2/3 for the case with tc = 2 and d0 = 6. Considering that a larger βPE will lead to a smaller αPE, the optimal value for δ2 should be given by the position where βPE = 2/3. In this example, δ2 = 1.75.
It needs to be mentioned that since the theoretical prediction
does not consider the influence of the update of the marked
bits (as iteration goes on), the marked thresholds obtained are
slightly different from those obtained by numerical simula-
tions. However, in the next section we will show that this
mismatch will have a negligible impact on the performance of
the proposed MLBM algorithm.

Fig. 6. Optimization results of decoding parameters (a) KMD, (b) THRB and (c) f failure for the proposed decoding algorithm based on SCC with BCH(256,239,2) and 2-PAM. The obtained optimal values are highlighted
in each sub-figure.

B. Other Parameters KMD, THRB, f failure
With the optimized marking thresholds δ1 = 4.6, δ2 = 2 and δ3 = 0.87, next we vary the values for KMD. The results are shown in Fig. 6 (a). It shows that as the value of KMD decreases, the BER performance will gradually become better, and when KMD = 2 and KMD = 1, we will have the lowest BER. To keep the complexity as low as possible, KMD = 2 is used in the following simulations. In addition, we find that when KMD = 0, indicating that all the decoding of the blocks in the window will performance MD, the BER performance will degrade significantly with high error floor. This is because the BDDs for the front blocks of the window are reliable enough (as there are few errors), however, are mistakenly

treated as miscorrections due to the inaccurate HRBs, and thus are rejected by the decoder.
Fig. 6 (b) shows the result for optimizing the unreliable HRB threshold THRB. We can see that THRB = 7 is the optimal value. When the value of THRB is too small, the BER performance will degrade, as some correct HRBs will be updated to RBs that will make several miscorrections unrecognized. On the other hand, too large THRB will lead to the inaccurate HRB (i.e., the HRB is in fact an error) have few chance to be removed from the HRB set, and thus cause performance degradation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2588

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Fig. 7. BER performance of the proposed algorithm for SCC based on BCH (256,239,2) and 2-PAM. The three operations are (i) miscorrection detection, (ii) BF for the identified miscorrection followed by a second BDD trail, and (iii) BF for BDD failures followed by a second BDD trial. Iterative BDD and iSABM are used as the two baselines on HD decoding and weakly hybrid decoding, respectively.
Fig. 6 (c) shows the results for optimizing the number of flipped bits at each iteration for BDD failures. It shows that f failure = [3, 2, 2, 1, 1, 2, 1] is the optimal one to have the lowest BER. Each element in f failure is optimized one by one from 1 to 5, while the initial value is f failure = [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]. When one is optimized, the corresponding element in f failure will be updated for the optimization of next element, while the elements that need to be optimized are still 1s. As expected, since there are more errors in the front of iterations, the decoder needs to flip more bits to make the errors left fall within the error-correcting capability of BDD.
V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
With the optimized parameters, this section will analyze the BER performance of the proposed MLBM algorithm with 2-PAM and 8-PAM. At the same time, the marking accuracy will also be shown to validate the effectiveness of marked bit update algorithm.
A. BER Performance
Fig. 7 (red solid line) shows the BER performance of the proposed MLBM algorithm for SCC based on BCH (256,239,2), using marking thresholds obtained via numerical simulations. The modulation format is 2-PAM. The black and blue curves (with markers) show the performance of SCCs using iterative BDD and iSABM decoding [35], respectively, which are used as two baselines on HD decoding and weakly hybrid decoding, respectively. We can see that compared to conventional SCC using iterative BDD, the proposed algorithm can yield 0.97 dB gain at a BER of 10−7. When compared to iSABM algorithm, the proposed algorithm has 0.31 dB gain. Moreover, benefiting from the MB update during the iterative decoding, the proposed algorithm shows a steeper waterfall region and lower error floor, when compared to iSABM and iterative BDD.

Fig. 8. BER performance of the proposed algorithm for SCC based on BCH (256,239,2) and 8-PAM.
From an information-theoretic point of view, the required SNR of a bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) systems in theory can be predicted by achievable information rates (AIRs) [40], [41]. In Fig. 7, the solid and dashed gray lines are the required SNR of HD- and SD-based 2-PAM BICM systems for 2-PAM predicted by AIRs. We can find that there is a very small gap (around 0.05 dB) between the required SNR in practice for the proposed algorithm and the predicted SNR via AIRs of HD-FEC, and the gap to the predicted SNR of SD-FEC is reduced to 1.25 dB.
As introduced in Sec. III, there are three key operations for the proposed algorithm: (i) miscorrection detection, (ii) BF for the identified BDD miscorrections followed by a second BDD trail, and (iii) BF for BDD failures followed by a second BDD trial. Therefore, to know about the contribution of the three operations, we also look into the performance of the proposed algorithm only with operation (i) (red dashed line), and operations (i) + (ii) (red dotted line). The red solid line represents the performance of the proposed MLBM algorithm with operations (i) + (ii) + (iii). We can see that compared to conventional SCC, MD for the proposed algorithm can bring 0.15 dB additional gain, while the combination of MD and BF for the identified BDD miscorrections can bring 0.35 dB additional gain. Further, performing BF for the BDD failures will greatly improve the achieved gain to 0.97 dB.
Moreover, the green line shown in Fig. 7 is the performance of the proposed MLBM algorithm using theoretically calculated optimal marking thresholds. It almost overlaps with the one using the optimized marking thresholds via numerical simulation. This demonstrates the effectiveness of the theoretical derivation for predicting optimal marking thresholds, which can save much time for parameter optimization for the practical use of the proposed algorithm.
Fig. 8 shows the BER performance of the proposed algorithm with 8-PAM. The red lines for MLBM use the same parameters with that for 2-PAM obtained via numerical simulations, while the green line for MLBM uses the theoretically predicted marking thresholds given in Appendix. The results

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: WEAKLY HYBRID DECODING ALGORITHM FOR SCCs VIA MULTI-LEVEL BIT MARKING

2589

Fig. 9. Performance comparison of the proposed MLBM algorithm with other hybrid decoding algorithms. The SCC is based on BCH (254,230,3) and the modulation format is 2-PAM.

show that the achieved gains are slightly higher than that with 2-PAM, as interleaver is not used here.1 When compared to conventional SCC using iterative BDD, the gain obtained by the proposed algorithm is 1.22 dB, while MD brings 0.2 dB gain and the combination of MD and BF for the identified miscorrections brings 0.43 dB gain, at a BER of 10−7. With respect to iSABM, the achieved gain is 0.35 dB. Moreover, we have found that the required SNR in practice is slightly lower than that predicted by AIR of HD-FEC, while the gap to the predicted SNR of SD-FEC via AIR is 1.64 dB.
Further, we consider an SCC based on BCH (254,230,3) to make performance comparison with other hybrid decoding algorithms, including BEE [33], DRSD [42], and enhanced AD (an improved HD decoding algorithm) [21]. The BCH code is obtained by shortening one information bit from BCH (255,231,3). The resulted SCC code rate is R = 0.811. Other parameters, including L = 7 window size and G = 10 iterations, are the same as that in [33]. At the same time, a random interleaver is employed within each SCC block. The results are shown in Fig. 9 for 2-PAM. For the proposed algorithm, the optimized values for KMD and THRB are 2 and 10, respectively. The number of flipped bits for BDD failure at each iteration is f failure = [3, 2, 2, 1, 1, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1]. It shows that the proposed MLBM algorithm has superior performance than BEE and enhanced AD, and exhibits similar performance to DRSD. In this case, the proposed algorithm outperforms iterative BDD and iSABM by 0.82 dB and 0.24 dB, respectively, and the gaps to the SNRs predicted by AIRs of HD-FEC and SD-FEC are 0.24 dB and 1.56 dB, respectively, at the BER of 10−6.
B. Marking Accuracy
To validate the effectiveness of the marked bit update, we also analyze the marking accuracy of HUBs, PEs and HRBs,
1Due to the non-uniform distribution of the reliabilities in the large modulation size, the probability of burst errors becomes higher with respect to 2-PAM. As a result, miscorrections are more likely to happen, when an interleaver is not used.

Fig. 10. Marking accuracies of HUBs and PEs (a) and HRBs (b) at each iteration for SCC based on BCH (256,239,2) and 2-PAM at SNR of 6.3 dB.
i.e., αHUB, αPE and αHRB, at each iteration for the proposed algorithm with 2-PAM at SNR of 6.3 dB (corresponding to 1.65 × 10−3 BER shown in Fig. 7). The results are shown in Fig. 10, where the cases without MBU are also shown for comparison.
From Fig. 10 (a), we can see that without MBU, the marking accuracies of HUBs and PEs will gradually decrease as iteration goes on. This is because that as iteration goes on, more and more HUBs and PEs will be correctly decoded, which should be (but have not been) removed from the HUB or PE sets timely. When MBU is adopted, the marking accuracy of HUB can be maximum improved by 10.44% (from 30.46% to 40.9%) at the second iteration. Even though the values of αHUB will gradually decrease after the second iteration, the marking accuracy is still significantly higher than that without MBU. For PEs, the marking accuracy αPE will increase by 12.84% (from 21.24% to 34.08%) at the 7th iteration with respect to that with no MBU. When compared to the 1th iteration, the marking accuracy of PE will be improved by 10.57% (from 23.51% to 34.08%) from the 1th iteration to the 7th iteration.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2590

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Besides, from Fig. 10 (a) we can see that even though with the optimized marking thresholds and the MBU algorithm, we have αHUB < 40%, let alone αPE. This indicates that we only have less than 40% probability to correct errors via BF from the HUBs, which is not high obviously. Therefore, for the future work, other solutions, for example using side information provided by parity constraint violations [43], may need to be considered to increase αHUB and αPE to improve the efficiency of BF operation, and thus to yield more gains.
Fig. 10 (b) shows the marking accuracy of HRBs at each iteration. Generally, it shows that whether with MBU or not, the HRB marking accuracies are all beyond 99.9% with the optimized HRB threshold. Since the HRBs with no MBU are forbidden to be flipped or be decoded, the HRB marking accuracy keeps constant for all iterations. When compared to the case with no MBU, the case with MBU has higher HRB marking accuracy, even though the improvement is somewhat small.
VI. COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
In addition to performance, the complexity of the algorithm is also of great concern to practical applications. In general, the complexity of the class of hybrid decoders is higher than that of HD decoders (because of the usage of soft information), but is lower than that of SD decoders (as the core is still HD decoding). How far to the HD decoders or SD decoders (in terms of the complexity) is mainly determined by how to use the soft information. In order to clarify the complexity of the proposed MLBM algorithm, this section will discuss the complexity in detail from two aspects, including the complexity increased caused by additional BDDs and increased memory usage. Note that in this section, all the analyses on complexity are for one decoding window including L SCC blocks.

A. Complexity Increase Caused by Additional BDDs

The complexity of the proposed algorithm mainly stems

from the additional BDDs after BF. The relative complexity

increase (RCI) caused by these additional BDDs is given

by [34]

ηBDD

NProposed − NConv. , NConv.

(9)

where NProposed and NConv. in (9) are the total number of BDDs in the proposed decoding algorithm and the conventional

decoding within a window, respectively.

Normally, BDD includes syndrome calculation, error esti-

mation and error correction three steps for each input

sequence. This is referred as full BDD (FBDD). However,

when the calculated syndromes are zero, i.e., BDD thinks that

there is no error in the input sequence, error estimation and

error correction will not be performed. This will be referred as

partial BDD (PBDD), which is less complex than full BDD.

For SCCs at their working SNR region (where the post-FEC

BER is significantly lower than the pre-FEC BER), partial

BDD is required in most cases.

Fig. 11 (a) shows the number of FBDDs and PBDDs in

the first and second BDD trials of a window at different

SNRs. They are obtained by averaging the required number

Fig. 11. The number of FBDDs and PBDDs in the first and second BDD trials (a) and the relative complexity increase caused by the additional BDDs (b) for SCC based on BCH (256,239,2) and 2-PAM.

of BDDs in 10,000 successive windows for SCC based on

BCH (256,239,2) and 2-PAM. Let N1,FBDD and N1,PBDD be

the number of FBDDs and PBDDs in the first BDD trial,

respectively, the total number of BDDs for conventional SCCs

is given by

NConv. = N1,FBDD + N1,PBDD.

(10)

Since the second BDD trial only deals with BDD miscorrections and failures, which indeed have errors in the sequence, the second BDD trials are always FBDDs with non-zero syndromes. Therefore, the total number of BDDs for the proposed algorithm is given by

NProposed = N1,FBDD + N1,PBDD + N2,FBDD,

(11)

where N2,FBDD represent the number of FBDDs in the second BDD trail.
The green curve shown in Fig. 11 (b) is the calculated RCI resulted from the additional BDDs at different SNRs using equations (9)–(11). Generally, as SNR increases, the RCI ηBDD will decrease. When given the SNR of 6.3 dB, ηBDD is 31%. However, since the complexity of PBDD (with no error estimation and error correction) is far less than that of FBDD, the RCI obtained via (9)–(11) will be underestimated.
Further, we only consider the time-consuming FBDDs to estimated the RCI, i.e., NConv. = N1,FBDD and NProposed = N1,FBDD + N2,FBDD in this case. By substituting NConv. and NProposed into (9), we will have the upper bound of the RCI caused by the additional BDDs in the proposed algorithm. The red line in Fig. 11 (b) shows the results, indicating that the relative complexity increase almost keeps constant in this case, which are all beyond 80%. However, we can see from Fig. 11 (a) that due to the reduction of channel error probability, the proportion of full BDDs in the total BDDs will decrease significantly.

B. Increased Memory Usage
For the proposed algorithm, the required memories are mainly from four aspects:
• HD-estimated bits: There are L SCC blocks (each contain W × W bits) that need to be stored, i.e., LW 2 bits.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: WEAKLY HYBRID DECODING ALGORITHM FOR SCCs VIA MULTI-LEVEL BIT MARKING
TABLE I RELATIVE MEMORY INCREASE FOR THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM

2591

• Marked bits: As the marked bits includes four levels, including HRB, RB, UB and HUB, 2-bit marking is required for each HD-estimated bit. Therefore, the totally required memories are 2LW 2 bits.
• Decoding status matrix: In the proposed algorithm, 2 bits are required to represent the four decoding statuses: decoding success with high confidence, decoding success, miscorrection, and decoding failure. Therefore, the totally required memories are 2(L + 1)W bits to store the decoding statuses of a window.
• Conflict counts for HRBs: Even though many bits will be marked as HRBs (e.g., more than 80% for the considered SCC based on BCH (256,239,2) and 2-PAM), it is found that only small part of HRBs will conflict with BDD results. For example, for the proposed algorithm at SNR of 6.3 dB with 2-PAM, around 82.85% bits are marked as HRBs, while only 1.8% HRBs will conflict with the BDD results. To store the information on conflict counts for HRBs, an efficient way is to store the row index, column index, and its non-zero values. As the maximum value for the conflict count is THRB, it needs log2THRB -bit to represent these situations. Let γ be the ratio of the conflicting HRB counts to the total bits in an SCC block, the finally required memory to store the HRB conflict count can be obtained via (2 log2W + log2THRB )γLW 2.
As a result, the total required memory for the proposed algorithm can be written as

ΓProposed = LW 2 + 2LW 2 + 2(L + 1)W + $2 log2W

+ log2THRB )γLW 2.

(12)

And the relative memory increase is written as

Γ = (ΓProposed − ΓConv.)/ΓConv.

2(L + 1)

=2+ LW

+ (2 log2W + log2THRB )γ,

(13)

where ΓConv. is the required memories for conventional SCC, which is given by ΓConv. = LW 2 for a window.
Table I shows the memory required for the two kinds of SCCs we have been analyzed in Sec. V. The parameters in detail are also shown in the table. According to Eq. (12) and Eq. (13), the relative memory increase of the proposed algorithm with the considered two kinds of SCC parameters are both around 2.3-fold with respect to conventional SCCs.

Fig. 12. Performance comparisons of different decoding algorithm for PCs with around 0.87 code rate and BPSK modulation format.
VII. EXTENSION TO PCS
Finally, we extend the proposed MLBM algorithm to PCs to verify its performance. Since row and column decodings in PCs are performed within a block, we perform MD and BF on all sequences within the block. This is unlike SCCs, where only part of the blocks in the decoding window perform MD. To facilitate the comparison of the differences between methods, BCH (256, 239, 2) is selected as the component code for PC, and an interleaver is considered in the system. The modulation format is BPSK. The maximum iteration times is G = 10. The threshold for unreliable HRB is THRB = 6 and the number of flipping bits for the decoding failures at each iteration is always 1. The marking thresholds are δ1 = 4.5, δ2 = 1.75 and δ3 = 0.83, derived from the theoretical prediction for 2-PAM case.
Fig. 12 shows the results of the proposed MLBM algorithm for PC. For comparison, two HD decoding algorithms (iterative BDD and AD [20]), five hybrid decoding algorithms (BEE-PC [33], DRSD [44], threshold-based binary message passing (TB-TMP) [45], Polar-BCH PC [46], and iBDD-RF [47]), and one soft-decision decoding algorithm (turbo product decoder (TPD) [48]) are also shown in the figure. In addition to Polar-BCH PC (which uses polar code with parameters of (256, 239) and BCH (256, 239, 2) as row and column component codes, respectively), these algorithms use BCH (255, 238, 2) or BCH (255, 239, 2) or BCH (256, 239, 2) as component code. The resulted PC code rates are all around 0.87. The results show that compared to iterative BDD, the proposed MLBM algorithm has 0.78 dB SNR gain. The performance achieved is significantly better than that of AD, BEE-PC, TB-BMP, and iBDD-RF algorithms, but has 0.32 dB performance loss when compared to the SD-based TPD case.
Particularly, the proposed MLBM algorithm presents slightly better performance than DRSD for PCs, while the two cases (MLBM and DRSD) share similar specific operations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2592

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

such as detecting miscorrections via high reliable bits and updating soft information based on the decoding results. However, the two algorithms indeed have significant differences, mainly including three aspects:
• There is no sorting in MLBM, while DRSD needs to sort the bits according to their reliabilities to assign dynamic reliability scores and erase the most unreliable bits (this is not hardware-friendly).
• DRSD needs 5-bit memories to store the DRS (an integer in the range [0, 31]) for each coded bit. This means the relative memories increase is Γ > 5. However, as shown in Table I, the relative memories increase for MBLM is around 2.36.
• For each component decoding, MLBM requires the second BDD trial only when the first BDD is a miscorrection or a failure, while the majority cases only perform BDD once. By contrast, error-and-erasure decoding always runs BDD twice to decode the two test patterns. In this sense, the complexity of MLBM will be much lower than that of DRSD.

VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper proposes a hybrid hard-/soft-decision decoding algorithm for staircase codes to improve the performance. The core of the proposed algorithm is composed of four parts: bit marking, miscorrection detection, bit flipping and marked bit update. Based on channel soft information, the proposed algorithm initially marks bits into four reliability levels via three thresholds, which are then used to help the hard-decision component decoder to detect miscorrections and to decode those originally uncorrectable cases via bit flipping. Further, based on the decoding statuses and the marked bits, the algorithm proposes three kinds of priority levels for bit flipping and updates the marked bits timely. Numerical simulation results show that with limited complexity increase, this algorithm can bring up to 1.22 dB gains with respect to conventional SCC using hard-decision decoding, and can effectively lower the error floor as well. The results in this work demonstrate that hybrid decoding could be a good alternative for high-speed low-cost optical transmission systems offering substantial potential gains.
For future work, FPGA implementation of the proposed algorithm is an interesting topic to validate the performance and complexity analysis. This is important for the application of the proposed algorithm in practical optical fiber transmission systems.

APPENDIX THEORETICAL PREDICTION OF MARKING
THRESHOLDS FOR 8-PAM

Using the well-known max-log approximation, the LLR λk for the kth (k = 1, 2, 3) bit in a 8-PAM symbol is given by

λk (y )

≈

γ ( min |y
2 i∈Ik,0

− si|2

− min |y
i∈Ik,1

− si|2).

(14)

According to the bit-to-symbol Gray mapping rule shown in Fig. 13, the LLRs for the least significant bit (LSB), middle

√ Fig. 13. Bit mapping for LSB, MiSB and MSB for 8-PAM with = 1/ 21.

significant bit (MiSB), and most significant bit (MSB) can be

rewritten as

 4 12

   

β

y

+

β

,

if y ≤ −6

    

3

y

+

6

,

if − 6 ≤ y ≤ −4

  

β

β

      

2 β

y

+

2 β

,

if − 4 ≤ y ≤ −2

 

1

λ1(y) =

y, β

if − 2 ≤ y ≤ +2 (15)



 

2

2

    

β

y

−

, β

if + 2 ≤ y ≤ +4

    

3

y

−

6

,

if + 4 ≤ y ≤ +6

  

β

β

 

4

12

  

β

y

−

β

,

if y ≥ +6

and

 2 10

 y+ ,

  

β

β

if y ≤ −6

      

1 β

y

+

4 β

,

if − 6 ≤ y ≤ −2

  

2

6

λ2(y)

=

  

β

y 2

+

, β 6

if − 2 ≤ y ≤ 0 (16)

−  

β

y

+

β

,

if 0 ≤ y ≤ +2

  

1

4

−  

β

y

+

β

,

if + 2 ≤ y ≤ +6

  −

2 β

y

+

10 β

,

if y ≥ +6

and

1 6

   

β

y

+

, β

if y ≤ −4

  

1

2

λ3(y)

=

− 1

β

y

− 2

β

,

if − 4 ≤ y ≤ 0

(17)

   

β

y

−

, β

if 0 ≤ y ≤ +4

  

1

6

− β y + β , if y ≥ +4

√

where = 1/ 21.

According to the linear function for a Gaussian random

variable y ∼ N (x, 1/γ), the variable ay + b can still be

characterized by the Gaussian distribution with mean ax + b

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEI et al.: WEAKLY HYBRID DECODING ALGORITHM FOR SCCs VIA MULTI-LEVEL BIT MARKING

α

  

2

e , −

γ 2

|

βλ 2

+uxl

−5

|2

 

u∈{−1,1}

 α

e−

γ 2

|β

λ+ux−4

|2 ,



p2(λ|x)

=

u∈{−1,1}

α



  

2

e−

γ 2

|

βλ 2

+ux−3

|2 ,

 

u∈{−1,1}



0,

if

λ

≤

−

2 β

if

−

2 β

≤

λ

≤

2 β

if

2 β

≤

λ

≤

6 β

if

λ

≥

6 β

 α

e−

γ 2

|β

λ+ux−6

|2 ,





 

u∈{−1,1}

 p3(λ|x) = α

e−

γ 2

|β

λ+ux−6

|2

+

e−

γ 2

|βλ+ux+2

|2

,



 

u∈{−1,1}



0,

if

λ

≤

−

2 β

if

−

2 β

≤

λ

≤

2 β

if

λ

≥

2 β

2593
(19) (20)

Fig. 14. The values of (a) αHRB, βHRB, (b) αPE and βPE, αHUB and βHUB against marking thresholds with 8-PAM at SNR of 18.45 dB.

and

 αPE =
βPE =

1 k3

1 x4

0 −δ2

pk (λ|x)

1 k3

1 x4

δ2 −δ2

pk (λ|x)

1 k3

1 x4

0 −δ2

pk (λ|x)

1 k3

1 x4

0 −∞

pk (λ|x)

(22)

and

 αHUB =
βHUB =

1 k3

1 x4

0 −δ3

pk (λ|x)

1 k3

1 x4

δ3 −δ3

pk (λ|x)

1 k3

1 x4

0 −δ3

pk (λ|x)

1 k3

1 x4

0 −∞

pk (λ|x)

(23)

Fig. 14 shows the values of αHRB, βHRB, αPE, βPE, αHUB and βHUB against marking thresholds with 8-PAM at SNR of 18.45 dB. It shows that the optimal values for δ1, δ2 and δ3 should be around 4.5, 1.65 and 0.82, respectively, which are
similar to the case for 2-PAM.

and variance a2/γ. Therefore, the PDFs of the LLRs for 8-PAM can be given by Eqs. (18)–(20), as shown at the top of the page, which are

p1(λ|x)

=

αααα432eeee−−−−γ2γγγ222|β||| βββλ324λλλ−−−−xxxx|2−−−,23

|2 , |2 , |2 ,

              

α α2 α3

e− e− e−

γ 2
γ 2
γ 2

|

βλ 2

−x+

|

βλ 3

−x+2

|

βλ 4

−x+3

|2 , |2 , |2 ,

4

if

λ

≤

−

12 β

if

−

12 β

≤

λ

≤

−

6 β

if

−

6 β

≤

λ

≤

−

2 β

if

−

2 β

≤

λ

≤

2 β

if

2 β

≤

λ

≤

6 β

if

6 β

≤

λ

≤

12 β

if

λ

≥

12 β

(18)

Then the expressions for αHRB, βHRB, αPE, βPE, αHUB, and βHUB for 8-PAM can be written as

 αHRB =
βHRB =

1 k3

1 x4

∞ δ1

pk (λ|x)

1 k3
1 k3

1 x4
1 x4

−δ1 −∞

pk (λ|x)+

∞ δ1

pk (λ|x)

∞ δ1

pk (λ|x)

1 k3

1 x4

∞ 0

pk

(λ|x)

(21)

REFERENCES
[1] D. Zhang et al., “Technological prospection and requirements of 800G transmission systems for ultra-long-haul all-optical terrestrial backbone networks,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 3774–3782, Jun. 15, 2023.
[2] W. Wang et al., “Real-time FPGA investigation of potential FEC schemes for 800G-ZR/ZR+ forward error correction,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 926–933, Feb. 1, 2023.
[3] K. Tao et al., “Low-complexity forward error correction for 800G unamplified campus link,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Opt. Commun. Netw. (ICOCN), Shenzhen, China, Aug. 2022, pp. 1–3.
[4] W. Wang et al., “Investigation of potential FEC schemes for 800G-ZR forward error correction,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. Exhib. (OFC), San Diego, CA, USA, Mar. 2022, pp. 1–3.
[5] A. G. I. Amat, G. Liva, and F. Steiner, “Coding for optical communications—Can we approach the Shannon limit with low complexity?” in Proc. 45th Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun. (ECOC), Dublin, Ireland, Sep. 2019, pp. 1–4.
[6] G. Tzimpragos, C. Kachris, I. B. Djordjevic, M. Cvijetic, D. Soudris, and I. Tomkos, “A survey on FEC codes for 100G and beyond optical networks,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 209–221, 1st Quart., 2016.
[7] A. Zokaei, D. Truhachev, and K. El-Sankary, “Memory optimized hardware implementation of open FEC encoder,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 1548–1552, Oct. 2022.
[8] P. Elias, “Error-free coding,” Trans. IRE Prof. Group Inf. Theory, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 29–37, Sep. 1954.
[9] B. P. Smith, A. Farhood, A. Hunt, F. R. Kschischang, and J. Lodge, “Staircase codes: FEC for 100 Gb/s OTN,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 110–117, Jan. 1, 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2594

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

[10] A. Y. Sukmadji, U. Mart´ınez-Pen˜as, and F. R. Kschischang, “Zipper codes,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 40, no. 19, pp. 6397–6407, Oct. 1, 2022.
[11] ITU, OTU4, document ITU-T Recommendation G.709.2/Y.1331.2, Jul. 2018.
[12] Implement. Agreement 400ZR, Optical Internetworking Forum, Fremont, CA, USA, Mar. 2020.
[13] Z. Liu, B. Feng, J. Jiao, K. Liang, S. Wu, and Q. Zhang, “Performance analysis of soft decoding algorithms for polar-staircase coding scheme,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Signal Process. (WCSP), Hangzhou, China, Oct. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[14] C. Condo, V. Bioglio, and I. Land, “Staircase construction with nonsystematic polar codes,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. Exhib. (OFC), San Diego, California, Mar. 2020, pp. 1–3.
[15] V. B. Wijekoon, E. Viterbo, and Y. Hong, “LDPC-staircase codes for soft decision decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), May 2020, pp. 1–6.
[16] O. Griebel, M. Herrmann, B. Hammoud, and N. Wehn, “Energy-efficient decoding of spatially coupled low-density parity-check codes using adaptive window sizes,” in Proc. 12th Int. Symp. Topics Coding (ISTC), Brest, France, Sep. 2023, pp. 1–5.
[17] L. Sassatelli, S. K. Chilappagari, B. Vasic, and D. Declercq, “Two-bit message passing decoders for LDPC codes over the binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2009, pp. 2156–2160.
[18] F. Ivanov, V. Morishnik, and E. Krouk, “Improved generalized successive cancellation list flip decoder of polar codes with fast decoding of special nodes,” J. Commun. Netw., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 417–432, Dec. 2021.
[19] L. Holzbaur, H. Bartz, and A. Wachter-Zeh, “Improved decoding and error floor analysis of staircase codes,” Designs, Codes Cryptography, vol. 87, nos. 2–3, pp. 647–664, Nov. 2018.
[20] C. Ha¨ger and H. D. Pfister, “Approaching miscorrection-free performance of product codes with anchor decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 2797–2808, Jul. 2018.
[21] X. Zhao, S. Zhao, and Z. Li, “Enhanced anchor decoder for staircase codes with hard reliability scores,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 2826–2830, Dec. 2022.
[22] M. Shehadeh, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Y. Sukmadji, “Generalized staircase codes with arbitrary bit degree,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC), San Diego, CA, USA, Mar. 2024, p. W4C.2.
[23] M. Barakatain and F. R. Kschischang, “Low-complexity concatenated LDPC-staircase codes,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 2443–2449, Jun. 15, 2018.
[24] Y. Cai et al., “FPGA investigation on error-flare performance of a concatenated staircase and Hamming FEC code for 400G inter-data center interconnect,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 188–195, Jan. 1, 2019.
[25] T. Mehmood, M. P. Yankov, S. Iqbal, and S. Forchhammer, “Flexible multilevel coding with concatenated polar-staircase codes for M-QAM,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 728–739, Feb. 2021.
[26] T. Wettlin, S. Calabro´, N. Stojanovic´, Y. Lin, and T. Rahman, “Investigation of concatenated KP4 FEC with single-parity-check codes for short-reach IM/DD systems,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC), San Diego, CA, USA, Mar. 2024, p. M2B.5.
[27] M. Barakatain, Y. Hashemi, B. Karimi, H. Ebrahimzad, and C. Li, “Lowcomplexity zipper-LDPC and low-latency zipper-BCH concatenated codes,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 41, no. 24, pp. 7328–7335, Dec. 15, 2023.
[28] M. Zhu, M. Jiang, C. Zhao, and F. Yu, “A low-complexity RS-SPC product coding scheme for optical systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 658–673, Feb. 2023.

[29] M. Zhu, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “A class of staircase codes with mixed components and its low-complexity decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 1895–1911, Apr. 2023.
[30] S. Miao et al., “Trends in channel coding for 6G,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 112, no. 7, pp. 653–675, Jun. 2024.
[31] A. Sheikh, A. Graell i Amat, and G. Liva, “Binary message passing decoding of product-like codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 8167–8178, Dec. 2019.
[32] A. Sheikh, A. G. i. Amat, and G. Liva, “Binary message passing decoding of product codes based on generalized minimum distance decoding: (Invited Paper),” in Proc. 53rd Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst. (CISS), Baltimore, MD, USA, Mar. 2019, pp. 1–5.
[33] A. Sheikh, A. G. i. Amat, and A. Alvarado, “Novel highthroughput decoding algorithms for product and staircase codes based on error-anderasure decoding,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 39, no. 15, pp. 4909–4922, Aug. 1, 2021.
[34] Y. Lei et al., “Improved decoding of staircase codes: The soft-aided bitmarking (SABM) algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 8220–8232, Dec. 2019.
[35] Y. Lei, B. Chen, G. Liga, A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, K. Sun, and A. Alvarado, “A soft-aided staircase decoder using three-level channel reliabilities,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 39, no. 19, pp. 6191–6203, Oct. 1, 2021.
[36] S. Miao, L. Rapp, and L. Schmalen, “Improved soft-aided decoding of product codes with dynamic reliability scores,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 40, no. 22, pp. 7279–7288, Nov. 15, 2022.
[37] Y. Shen, Y. Ren, and A. Burg, “Iterative ordered statistics decoding of product codes,” in Proc. 12th Int. Symp. Topics Coding (ISTC), Brest, France, Sep. 2023, pp. 1–5.
[38] O. M. Govardhan, “Fundamentals and classification of hybrid electric vehicles,” Int. J. Eng. Techn., vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 194–198, Oct. 2017.
[39] G. Forney, “Generalized minimum distance decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-12, no. 2, pp. 125–131, Apr. 1966.
[40] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 927–946, Mar. 1998.
[41] A. Alvarado, T. Fehenberger, B. Chen, and F. M. J. Willems, “Achievable information rates for fiber optics: Applications and computations,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 424–439, Jan. 15, 2018.
[42] L. Rapp, S. Miao, and L. Schmalen, “Optimized soft-aided decoding of ofec and staircase codes,” in Proc. ECOC, 2024, pp. 539–542.
[43] V. Y. Krachkovsky, J. J. Ashley, C. J. Williamson, and G. Feyh, “Syndrome Reed–Solomon decoding using bit reliabilities,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 223–227, Jan. 2008.
[44] S. Miao, L. Rapp, and L. Schmalen, “Improved soft-aided erroranderasure decoding of product codes with dynamic reliability scores,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. Exhib. (OFC), San Diego, CA, USA, Mar. 2022, pp. 1–3.
[45] X. Zhao, S. Zhao, Q. Deng, Z. Li, and X. Tang, “A thresholdbased binary message passing decoder with memory for product codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 72, no. 9, pp. 5241–5254, Sep. 2024.
[46] B. Chen, W. Yin, Y. Lei, Q. Huang, and X. Li, “Hybrid decoding of asymmetric product codes with systematic polar and BCH codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 2223–2227, Oct. 2024.
[47] G. Li, S. Wang, and S. Zhao, “Iterative bounded distance decoding with random flipping for product-like codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73, no. 5, pp. 2864–2875, May 2025.
[48] R. M. Pyndiah, “Near-optimum decoding of product codes: Block turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 1003–1010, Aug. 1998.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:52:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

