11th EAI International Conference on Heterogeneous Networking for Quality, Reliability, Security and Robustness (QSHINE 2015) 
Streaming Data Transmission by Using Spatially 
Coupled LDPC Codes 
Sijie Wang, Zhongwei Si, Xuehong Lin 
Key Lab of Universal Wireless Communications, Ministry of Education 
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications(BUPT), Beijing, China 
Email: wangsijie@bupt.edu.cn.sizhongwei@bupt.edu.cn.xhlin@bupt.edu.cn 
Abstract-With the tremendous development of mobile In­
ternet and big data, much attention has been attracted on 
streaming data transmission. In this paper, we propose a quasi 
real-time transmission scheme using spatially coupled LDPC 
codes for forward error correction. 
Recursive encoder and 
sliding-window decoder with low-latency and low-complexity are 
employed for data transmission. When any error is reported, 
additional information is requested and retransmitted. Capacity­
approaching performance can be achieved by constructing proper 
ensembles according to channel conditions. Theoretical thresh­
olds and simulation results are provided, which illustrate the 
good performance. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Streaming transmission is applied in many scenarios, such 
as online transactions, real-time data fed from sensors, satellite 
system, etc. The proliferation of the mobile Internet and the 
big data have fueled the development of applications that 
treat data as a continuous stream instead of a fixed set. 
Unlike traditional fixed set, streaming data is massive and fast 
changing, which brings in challenges for data transmission. 
The transmission schemes with low-delay and low-complexity 
are worth investigations. In this paper we focus on the channel 
coding technique for transmitting streaming data. 
The low-density parity-check (LDPC) code was proposed 
by Gallager in [1]. Good performance can be achieved over 
various channel conditions by optimizing node degree distri­
butions. Its convolutional counterpart, the spatially coupled 
LDPC code was proposed in [2]. It has been proved [3] [4] 
that the spatially coupled LDPC code universally achieves 
the capacity of the general binary memory less synunetric 
channel. In addition, the regularity of degree distribution 
avoids complicated degree optimization. 
For the implementation aspects, a recursive encoder with 
low-latency and low-complexity was introduced in [5]. A 
modified method for constructing the parity-check matrix of 
spatially coupled LDPC codes was proposed in [6], which 
guarantees the recursive encoding of arbitrary rates. A sliding­
window decoder was invented in [7] and further discussed in 
[8] and [9]. The family of spatially coupled LDPC codes fea­
tures efficient and continuous encoding and decoding, which 
enables the feasibility for streaming data transmission. 
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation 
of China (No.61401037), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central 
Universities (No.2014RC0102, No.2014ZD03-01), and EU FP7 IRSES Mo­
bileCloudProject Grant (No.612212). 
In this paper, we propose the implementation of a quasi real­
time transmission scheme with hybrid automatic repeat request 
(HARQ) protocol. Spatially coupled LDPC codes are used 
for forward error correction (FEC) , and a recursive encoder 
and a sliding-window decoder are employed in the system. 
The low-latency and low-complexity of the encoder and the 
decoder improve the efficiency, and the HARQ protocol is 
used to increase the robustness of the system. A capacity­
approaching performance owing to the property of spatially 
coupled LDPC codes can be achieved by constructing proper 
ensembles according to channel conditions. Theoretical thresh­
olds and simulation results are provided, which illustrate the 
good performance. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. An 
introduction to the quasi real-time transmission system is given 
in Section II. Section III describes the implementation aspects 
of this system. Performance analysis and numerical results are 
provided in Section IV and Section V. Section VI concludes 
the paper. 
II. THE QUASI REAL- TIME TRANSMISSION SYSTEM 
In this section, a quasi real-time transmission system is 
introduced. Each module is discussed briefly. 
A. System Model 
The system is depicted in Fig.l. The source generates 
information bits continuously, then these data are encoded by 
an encoder and transmitted. The received data are decoded by 
a decoder and sent to the destination if they are recovered 
successfully. HARQ is applied when the decoder cannot 
recover the information completely, thus a feedback channel 
for retransmission request is required. If the encoding and 
the decoding of the information is carried out in a streaming 
manner with low latency and if the transmission over the 
feedback channel is very quick, the system can be considered 
as a quasi real-time transmission. Spatially coupled LDPC 
codes are suitable channel coding technique for the model. 
By dividing the whole streaming data into small blocks and 
then encoding and decoding them recursively, the latency of 
the system is significantly reduced while the good performance 
is maintained. 
B. Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes 
A rate R = 1 -dv/de semi-infinite spatially coupled LDPC 
code ensemble (dV1 de) is introduced in the following, where 
139 
978-1-63190-063-1 © 2015 ICST 
DOl 10.4108/eai.19-8-2015.2260883 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:41:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
------------------------------
(::,:::A7&7A7&7AVJ .. 
----------
Fig. 1. 
Streaming data transmission system. 
dv denotes the variable node degree, and de represents the 
check node degree. Let a = gcd(dv, de) denote the greatest 
common divisor of dv and dc, and the memory length is ms 
= 
a -1. Then there exist positive integers d7 and d8 such that 
dv = ad7, de = ad8 and gcd(d7, d8) = 1. We use t to denote 
the time instant of the code, then we obtain the parity-check 
matrix of the spatially coupled LDPC code as 
Ho(O) 
H1(O) 
Ho(1) 
H1(1) 
Ho(t -1) 
H1(t-1) 
Ho(t) 
Hl(t) 
, (1) 
where Hi(t) is a d7 x d8 submatrix, and each element of it is 
an M x M permutation matrix. 
Considering the encoding and decoding of streaming data, 
a recursive encoder and a sliding-window decoder based on 
spatially coupled LDPC codes are available. Low-delay and 
low-complexity of both modules guarantee the implementation 
of quasi real-time transmission system. 
C. The Recursive Encoder 
To introduce the recursive encoder, we start with some 
definitions for a (dv, de) ensemble of spatially coupled LDPC 
codes. First, an information sequence is denoted as 
U[O,oo] = [UO, UI,' .. , Ut,·· .], 
h 
[0 I 
M(d#-d")-ll 
k 
w ere Ut = 
Ut, Ut , ... , Ut 
,Ut E 
(2) 
GF(2), t > O. 
The code sequence is described as 
V[O,oo] = [Yo, VI,·· ., Vt,· .. ], 
(3) 
h 
[0 I 
Md#-ll 
k 
GF( ) 
w ere Vt 
= 
vt , vt, ... , vt 
, vt 
E 
2 , t ;::: 
O. 
The recursive encoder is systematic and therefore V t can be 
represented as Vt 
= [v!O), v!1)l, where v!O) is information 
bits and v!O) = Ut, and v!1) denotes the parity bits. The code 
sequence V[O,oo] satisfies the equation 
(4) 
L-__ -'-__ -L __ --'-___ L-_---.JI 
...... 
o 
3 
4 
Fig. 2. 
Procedure of recursive encoding. Gray circles denote information 
bits, and white circles represent parity bits. 
By using a (3,6) ensemble as example, we illustrate the 
procedure of recursive encoding in Fig.2. At the first time 
instant, one check node connects to only two variable nodes. 
Assuming variable node vbO) associates with only information 
bits, then the parity bits associated with vbl) can be determined 
accordingly. At the second time instant, via) represents infor­
mation bits, and the value of viI) can be computed using vbO) , 
vbl) and viO) . Similarly, at an arbitrary time instant, we can 
obtain the value of V!I) according to V! 2' vi:\ , Vi 
l
' V!=:
l and 
viO) . Therefore, the streaming data are encoded sequentially. 
Cooperated with the sliding-window decoder descried be­
low, an efficient transmission system can be realized. 
D. The Sliding-Window Decoder 
Exploiting the convolutional structure of spatially coupled 
LDPC codes that two bits contained in the same parity-check 
equation must be no more than ms instants away from each 
other, a sliding-window decoder has been proposed. Here, we 
again take the (3,6) ensemble as example to introduce the 
implementation of the sliding-window decoder. 
Some definitions are given as follows. The window size is 
defined as W, which represents that W M d7 rows and W M d8 
columns of H are included in the window. All the edges 
contained in the window are denoted as window configuration, 
that is, the window configuration of a size W sliding-window 
decoder consist rows from tMd7 to (t + W)Md7 -1 and 
columns from tMd8 to (t + W)Md8 -1 within H at instant 
t. Moreover, when the window is at time instant t, the variable 
nodes at instant t are called targeted symbols, namely the first 
M d8 symbols in the window. 
As illustrated in Fig.3, at any time instant t, the decoder 
performs belief propagation algorithm over the edges within 
the window with the aim of decoding all of the targeted sym­
bols in the window. The window slides down M d7 rows and 
right M d8 columns in H after all the targeted symbols have 
been recovered or a maximum number of belief propagation 
iterations have been performed. Then the decoder performs 
belief propagation algorithm in the new time instant. The 
streaming data are decoded in such a sequential manner. 
III. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE QUASI REAL- TIME 
TRANSMISSION 
Streaming data transmission can be realized by using spa­
tially coupled LDPC codes as we mentioned in Section II. 
In the following, we first propose a modified sliding-window 
140 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:41:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
I.--- - - ,-. ----..J 
rrnrmrll----rl-wMd" 
L 
_______ t 
I mMd'c 
I 
1-3 
1-2 
I-I 
1+1 
1+2 
1+3 
" .  
'. 
Fig. 3. Illustration of sliding-window decoding with window size W = 3 for 
a (3,6) ensemble of spatially coupled LDPC codes. The window configuration 
is the slash area, and the first 2M symbols are the targeted symbols. The 
symbols within the vertical area is a prior information to help the decoding. 
decoder. Then the implementation over the binary erasure 
channel is given. 
A. The Modified Sliding-Window Decoder 
Derived from the conventional sliding-window decoder, we 
propose in this paper a modified windowed decoder for the 
quasi real-time transmission system. It can be found that 
not only the targeted symbols but the symbols next to them 
are recovered quickly. Hence the modified sliding-window 
decoder does not slide until the iteration converges instead 
of recovering only the targeted symbols as the conventional 
decoder. As a result, it occurs with a probability that several 
frames can be recovered within one window. If the symbols 
in the first s blocks are all recovered successfully, the window 
slides down M sd7 rows and right M sd8 columns in H. The 
window in the modified decoder can slide faster without any 
performance loss when transmitting over the BEe. 
Because the complexity of belief-propagation decoding s­
cales linearly in block length, the complexity of the sliding­
window decoding is proportional to the window size. Accord­
ingly, the decoding latency is also decided by the window 
size. 
B. HARQ 
When the channel condition is too poor for the decoder to 
recover all the source information, automatic repeat request is 
required to help the decoding. The decoder sends a retransmis­
sion request to the transmitter via the feedback channel, then 
additional bits will be transmitted to help recover the source 
information. In this paper, we only consider chase combining 
that the decoder uses both of the original information and 
retransmission information to perform decoding. 
C. Transmission Procedure 
The implementation of the quasi real-time transmission is 
introduced in the following. Let Vt denote the tth frame 
transmitted. For each successfully decoded window, the de­
coder sends a acknowledgement(ACK) containing sign s to 
Sending window 
T'ansm;t(e' ......  
Original or HARQ 1 
t 
Infomlation 
B 
1 
t 
ACK 
Sign=2 
Rece;ve, ......  ..... . 
Sliding-window 
decoder 
Fig. 4. 
Illustration of transmission with window size W 
= 6 for quasi 
real-time system. When decoding at instant t has been finished, an ACK with 
sign that the first two frames has been recovered successfully is transmitted. 
Then two new frames are transmitted over the BEe. 
the transmitter, where s represents the first s frames in the 
window has been decoded successfully. 
Step 1) Transmission control: Streaming data are generated 
by the source. They are encoded by the recursive en­
coder and transmitted over the BEe. When the frame 
Vt to Vt+W-l is being transmitted, the transmitter 
waits for the ACK. When an ACK containing sign s 
(s i- 0) is received, next s frames will be transmitted. 
An example is illustrated in FigA. 
Step 2) Error detection: When W frames to be decoded have 
arrived at the receiver, the sliding-window decoder is 
triggered and belief propagation is performed within 
one window. If the targeted symbols in the window 
cannot be recovered after a maximum number of 
belief propagation iterations, the decoder sends a 
retransmission request to the transmitter , i.e., a ACK 
with sign O. 
Step 3) HARQ: The transmitter retransmits the targeted sym­
bols when receiving the retransmission request, and 
then the decoder updates the channel observations of 
the targeted symbols according to the retransmitted 
information. The sliding-window decoder repeats the 
decoding process, i.e., Step 2. 
Step 4) Re-encoding: If a maximum number of retransmis­
sions occurs but the targeted symbols are not recov­
ered still, the decoder discards all the information in 
the window. The encoder restarts the encoding from 
the information bits corresponding to the targeted 
symbols. Then return to Step 1. 
Streaming data are transmitted using the procedure we illus­
trated above. Moreover, if no frame is successfully recovered 
after a certain amount of re-encoding, a lower rate ensemble 
should be chosen to fit for the channel condition. Assuming the 
transmission over the feedback channel is quick, the streaming 
data transmission is considered as quasi real-time because the 
recursive encoder and the sliding-window decoder feature both 
low-latency and low-complexity. 
141 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:41:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
In this section, the latency of the system is discussed. 
Analysis based on density evolution is provided. 
A. Latency 
When ignoring the time for the transmISSIOn over the 
channel, the latency of the system only relates to the encoding 
and decoding. Moreover, the encoder can be considered as no 
delay since the information bits are encoded frame by frame. 
Therefore the latency of the decoder determines the latency of 
the system. We have the latency of the decoder 
AWD = Tw + Tdec(W), 
(5) 
where Tw is the time required to receive all the symbols in 
the window, and Tdec (W) is the time to decode one window 
when window size is W. As illustrated above, T w is the time 
to receive s frames except the first decoding instant which 
needs to receive all the symbols for the first window. 
Assuming a length-L data is transmitted, the latency is 
proportional to L when using block LDPC codes. When 
the data are divided into N blocks and then encoded using 
spatially coupled LDPC codes, the latency reduces to be 
proportional to LWjN. 
B. Density Evolution 
From the procedure we described above, no error propaga­
tion occurs because every frame is either recovered completely 
or discarded. Ignoring the influence of sliding-window decod­
ing at former time instant, the density evolution at any time 
instant retains the same. Let Xi define the remaining erasure 
probability at instant i and Yj denote the message passing 
from the check node j to variable node. For convenience, let 
i, j E {W} represent the ith variable node or the jth check 
node within the window. First, Xi is initialized as follows, 
{E' 
Xi = 
0, 
i E {W} 
otherwise 
Then the values of Xi and Yj are updated as 
and {1 - (1 - _
1 _ t Xi)dc-l, 
j E {W} 
Yj 
= 
ms + 1_. 
l.,-J-ms 
1, 
otherwise 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
The density evolution of the (3,6) ensemble for W 
= 10 
and E 
= 0.45 is shown in Fig.5. We find that the targeted 
symbols within the window converge quickly, e.g., the erased 
probability converges to 0 after approximately 20 iterations. 
This verifies the threshold saturation of terminated spatially 
coupled LDPC codes. The targeted symbols are recovered 
earlier than the rest because their check degree is lower than 
others. 
0.45 
0.4 
1 
/'
/ 
0.35 
0.3 
I 
@ 
I 
5 0.25 
e 
a. 
6 0.2 
.r 
I 
i" 
w 0.15 
I 
0.1 
I 
!> 
0.05 
/ 
/A- -+- -:_---:
j
k;=-=-;/;:f 
. -"'-
. "", " 
/" 
I 
I 
20 "' 
I 
I 
I 
.... 
/ 
4{ 
./ 
.¥ 
)1'/ 
/ 
./ 
:;t: 
30/ 
I 
" 
40 
10 
Fig. 5. 
Density evolution of the (3,6) ensemble, the number next to each 
dotted line is the iterative number. 
In addition, we find that, after 40 iterations, the erased 
probability of the symbols at time instant 2,3,4 also converges 
to O. That is, not only the targeted symbols but the symbols 
next to them also converge after a few more iterations. 
This phenomenon enables the implementation of the modified 
sliding-window decoder which has a higher sliding speed than 
the conventional one. Multiple frames may be transmitted 
when one ACK is received using this decoder. 
The purpose of density evolution is to calculate the belief 
propagation threshold (threshold in short) which is an erasure 
probability for the BEe. An ensemble can be recovered 
by belief propagation algorithm when the channel erasure 
probability is no large than the threshold. Threshold is a main 
parameter to measure the performance of spatially coupled 
LDPC codes. 
C. Throughput 
A key measurement of an HARQ system is the throughput 
efficiency, which is defined as the average number of infor­
mation bits successfully delivered to the destination through 
one channel use. In the system we descried above, using Nd to 
denote the number of discarded frames and Na to represent the 
number of all transmitted frames (including retransmissions), 
the throughput equals 
N -Nd 
Throughput = 
a 
N 
X Rate. 
(9) 
a 
The highest throughput achieves when all the frames are 
received successfully without retransmissions. Therefore the 
highest throughput is (1 -E) when the channel erasure prob­
ability of a BEC equals E. 
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS 
In this section, we provide the numerical results. The 
throughput of the system is provided according to both the 
density evolution and the finite-length simulations. 
The theoretical throughput of the system is related to the 
decoding threshold of spatially coupled LDPC codes obtained 
via density evolution. When the threshold of a rate rl ensemble 
142 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:41:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
-- Shannon limit 
0.9 
0 
LOPC ensembles 
* 
SC-LOPC ensembles 
0.8 
0.7 
6'. 
*0. 
_ 
0.6 
00 4. 
:J 
0
0 
*. 
Q. 
.c 
g> 0.5 
0 
* 
e 
.c 
0 
* 
f-
0.4 
0 
• 
0 
0 
0.3 
0 
• 
0.2 
0 
* 
0.1 
0 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
Erasure Probability 
Fig. 6. 
Theoretical throughput for quasi real-time transmission system. 
C1 is ECl, as mentioned earlier, the theoretical throughput is 'I 
when E :s; ECI if ensemble C1 is used. There also exists a rate '2 
ensemble C2 whose threshold is EC2, and EC2 is always smaller 
than ECI when'2 > 'I, SO when using this two ensembles, we 
choose C1 to achieve throughput 'I when E = ECI and C2 to 
achieve throughput '2 when E = EC2' In this way, a relationship 
between the threshold and the theoretical throughput is built. 
When fixing dv and varying the value of de, we construct 
a series of ensembles with various design rates. Diverse 
ensembles are generated for dv 
= {3, 4, 6, 8, 9}, and the 
theoretical throughput is illustrated in Fig,6, For the purpose 
of comparison, we also include the theoretical throughput 
achieved by using regular LDPC block codes with the same 
setup of node degrees. It can be observed that spatially coupled 
LDPC codes achieve in general a higher throughput than the 
regular LDPC block codes. Note that, in addition to the better 
performance, the spatially coupled LDPC codes also allows 
quasi real-time processing. 
In the following we provide the numerical results of the 
achieved system throughput using finite-length spatially cou­
pled LDPC codes. We use Ci(dv, de) to denote an ensemble 
of spatially coupled LDPC codes and construct 5 ensembles 
including: C1 (3,12), C2 (3, 9), C3 (4,10), C4 (3,6) and C5( 4,6). 
The parameter M is 512, the window size W is set to be 10, 
and the maximum retransmission number is 3. Simulations for 
erasure probability E E (0,1) are performed. 
As Fig.7 shows, with different channel erasure probabilities 
there exist different ensembles which provide the efficiency 
close to the Shannon limit. For different range of the channel 
condition, we may choose a proper coding realization to 
achieve the capacity-approaching performance. We can have 
a similar conclusion as from the theoretical throughput, the 
spatially coupled LDPC code provides a high-efficiency and 
low-latency solution to the streaming data transmission, 
-- Shannon limit 
0.9 
---A- (3,12)ensemble 
--+- (3,9)ensemble 
0.8 
--B- (4,1 O)ensemble 
--+- (3,6)ensemble 
0.7 
--B- (4,6)ensemble 
_ 
0.6 
:J 
Q. 
.c 
§l 0.5 
e 
.c 
f-
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
Erasure Probability 
Fig. 7. 
Simulation results by using Cl, C2, C3, C4 and C5. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
In this paper we have proposed a quasi real-time trans­
mission scheme by using spatially coupled LDPC codes as 
the forward error correction. Employing recursive encoder 
and sliding-window decoder, low-latency and low-complexity 
transmission for streaming data is realized. When any error 
is reported, a retransmission of additional information is 
triggered to aid the decoding, which increases the robust­
ness of the system, Capacity-approaching performance can 
be achieved by constructing proper ensembles according to 
channel conditions. Both theoretical thresholds and simulation 
results illustrate the good performance, 
REFERENCES 
[l] R. G. Gallager. Low Density Parity Check Codes. MIT Press, 1963. 
[2] A. Jimenez-Feltstrom, and K. Sh. Zigangirov. "Time-varying periodic 
convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix," IEEE Trans. 
Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181-2191. Sept. 1999. 
[3] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, O. J. Costello, Jr., and K. S. Zigangirov. 
"Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LOPC convolutional codes," 
IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274-5289. Oct. 2010. 
[4] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke. "Threshold saturation via 
spatial coupling: why convolutional LOPC ensembles perform so well 
over the BEC," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803-834. 
Feb. 2011. 
[5] A. E. Pusane, A. Jimenez-Felstrom, A. A. Sridharan, M. M. Lentmaier, K. 
S. Zigangirov, and O. J. Costello, Jr .. "Implementation aspects of LOPC 
convolutional codes," IEEE Trans. Commun, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060-
1069, Jul. 2008. 
[6] J. Ma, Z. Si, Z. He, K. Niu. "Recursive encoding of spatially coupled 
LOPC codes with arbitrary rates," 26th IEEE Int. Symp. PlMRC, Hong 
Kong, China, Aug, 2015. 
[7] M. Papaleo, A. R. Iyengar, P. H. Siegel, J. Wolf, and G. Corazza. "Win­
dowed erasure decoding of LOPC convolutional codes," IEEE Inform. 
Theory Workshop, Cairo, Egypt, pp. 78-82, Jan. 2010. 
[8] G. E. Corazza, A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, A. VaneJli­
Coralli, and J. K.Wolf, "Latency constrained protograph-based LDPC 
convolutional codes," 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative In! Process., 
Brest, France, pp. 6-10, Sep. 2010. 
[9] R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, 
and G. E. Corazza. "Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC 
convolutional codes over erasure channels," IEEE Trans. lriform. Theory, 
vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303-2320, Apr. 2012. 
143 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:41:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
