IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

1283

Improving the Belief-Propagation Convergence of Irregular LDPC Codes Using Column-Weight Based Scheduling
Chaudhry Adnan Aslam, Student Member, IEEE, Yong Liang Guan, Member, IEEE, and Kui Cai, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this letter, a novel scheduling scheme for decoding irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, based on the column weight of variable nodes in the code graph, is introduced. In this scheme, the irregular LDPC code is decoded using the shuffled belief-propagation (BP) algorithm by selecting the variable nodes in descending order of their column weight. Via numerical simulation, it is shown that the proposed high-to-low column-weight based decoding schedule can noticeably increase the convergence speed at medium to high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) over AWGN and Rayleigh fading channels without introducing additional complexity or error rate degradation. Furthermore, it is found that the improvement in decoding convergence is proportional to the maximum column-weight in the code graph.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, belief-propagation, shuffled decoding, column-weight, decoding schedule, AWGN, Rayleigh fading.
I. INTRODUCTION
L DPC codes [1], [2] are known for their capacity approaching performance when decoded using belief-propagation (BP) algorithm operating on the Tanner graph (TG) of the code. The BP decoder is an iterative algorithm in which soft messages are generated and passed between the variable and check nodes (mv→c and mc→v) along the edges of the Tanner graph. To execute the BP algorithm, there exist different decoding schedules which define the order of message propagation over the Tanner graph. These schedules can be broadly categorized into two schemes, namely flooding and serial schedule. In flooding schedule, all the variable node and check node messages are simultaneously computed and propagated along the edges of the Tanner graph. In contrast, in serial schedule, the variable and check nodes are sequentially updated one at a time. In general, for any iterative decoder, the convergence speed or the number of message updates required for convergence are very important from the practical implementation perspective. In this regard, both flooding and serial schedules can be simplified to reduce the computational complexity of BP decoder [3]. Regarding the serial schedule, it can be implemented from the perspective of check node sequencing, or variable node sequencing. In checknode-based serial schedule, also known as layered decoding [4], each check node and its connected variable nodes are updated one-by-one; whereas in the variable-node-based serial
Manuscript received January 15, 2015; revised June 8, 2015; accepted June 8, 2015. Date of publication June 11, 2015; date of current version August 10, 2015. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was E. Paolini.
C. A. Aslam and Y. L. Guan are with the School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: ad0001ry@e.ntu.edu.sg; EYLGuan@ntu.edu.sg).
K. Cai is with the Department of Science, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore 487372 (e-mail: cai_kui@sutd.edu.sg).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2015.2444381

schedule, also known as shuffled decoding [5], each variable node and its neighbors are updated one-by-one.
In this letter, we will focus on the convergence of shuffled BP decoding schedule. As the variable nodes are updated serially by the shuffled BP decoder, the order or sequence of variable node selection becomes very important. An appropriate order of variable node updating can improve the code’s error performance as well as the decoding convergence speed. With this motivation, an informed dynamic schedule (IDS) has been proposed in [6] where the variable node with the highest residual magnitude is updated first assuming that the selected variable node has not converged. The IDS scheme speeds up the convergence rate and improves the error performance but also increases the scheduling complexity. There are some other extensions of IDS technique which have further improved on the former scheme [7], [8]. However, they all have introduced additional complexity associated with the residual computations for the variable nodes. In addition to modifying the iterative decoder for faster convergence, other approaches are aimed at designing LDPC codes with inherent fast convergence properties [9], [10].
In this letter, we propose a novel shuffled BP decoding schedule, specifically for irregular LDPC codes, based on the column weight of variable nodes. Since an irregular LDPC code contains variable nodes with different column-weights, we propose to update them in a descending order such that high column-weight variable nodes are updated first, followed by low column-weight variable nodes. We refer to this scheduling as “high-to-low column-weight based scheduling.” For the proposed scheme, the decoder sorts the variable nodes by decreasing column weight order only once offline, thereby precluding the need for run-time computations for the selection of variable nodes. Thus, the proposed scheme does not introduce any additional run-time computational complexity. Investigations further reveal that the convergence rate of BP decoder can be noticeably improved using the proposed scheduler.
II. COLUMN-WEIGHT BASED SHUFFLED BP SCHEDULING
The pseudo-code of the proposed column weight based shuffled BP scheduling is given in Algorithm 1. The vector S is used to store the variable nodes in high-to-low column-weight order. Then the variable nodes are serially updated following the sequence of vector S. To investigate what brings about the improvement in convergence rate of the shuffled BP decoder, we first note that any sequence of variable node processing leads to the same number of edges to be updated over the Tanner graph per decoding iteration. Thus, in one decoding iteration, each edge is updated only once regardless of which sequence of variable node processing is executed. However, when we update the variable nodes in descending order of their column weight,

1558-2558 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized liceSneseedhtutpse://lwimwitewd.ietoe:eY.oorngs/peui Ublniciva.tiDoonws_nslotaanddeadrdosn/pJuubnleic2a4ti,2o0n2s/6riagth1ts6/:i3n8d:e1x0.hUtmTCl fforormmIoErEeEinXfoprlomreat.ioRne.strictions apply.

1284

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

respectively. This difference in the number of aggregated messages influence the convergence speed of shuffled BP decoder.

Algorithm 1 Column-Weight Based Shuffled BP Schedule

1: Load vector S = {v1, v2, . . . , vN}, ⇒ variable nodes sorted

by high-to-low column-weight order

2: for all n = 1 : N do

3: for every cm ∈ neighborhood of vn do

4:

Generate and propagate mcm→vn

5: end for

6: for every cm ∈ neighborhood of vn do

7:

Generate and propagate mvn→cm

8: end for

9: end for

Fig. 1. Illustration of message propagation: upper-part is the proposed highto-low column-weight based scheduling; lower-part is low-to-high columnweight based scheduling.

To compute the number of aggregated messages for a general

irregular LDPC code, let us denote the fraction of degree-i variable nodes with λ˜i, the maximum variable node degree with dv,max

and LDPC code-word length with N. Then, the number of

aggregated messages for high-to-low (MH−L) and low-to-high

(ML−H) column-weight ordering can be given by (1) and (2) as

⎡⎛

⎞⎤

dv,max Nλ˜ i dv,max

MH−L =

⎣ ⎝ j(Nλ˜ j) + ik⎠⎦

(1)

i=1 ⎡k=1 ⎛j=i+1
dv,max Nλ˜ i i−1

⎞⎤

ML−H =

⎣ ⎝ j(Nλ˜ j) + ik⎠⎦ .

(2)

i=1 k=1 j=1

For the case of random column-weight ordering, we can approximate the number of aggregated messages (MR) as

we effectively allow the decoder to generate a higher number of

MR

≈

d¯v

N 2

(N

+

1)

(3)

aggregated messages per decoding iteration. Here, aggregated

messages refer to the total number of updated massages (soft where d¯v is the average variable node degree, given by

information, mv→c) summed over all the variable nodes. This quantity measures the amount of updated information available for processing the next-in-queue variable node. Therefore, a higher number of aggregated messages provides more timely

dv,max

d¯v =

iλ˜ i

i=1

information updates for subsequent variable nodes and helps accelerating the convergence-rate of shuffled BP decoder.
We now present an example to demonstrate the difference in the number of aggregated messages when a particular sequence of variable node processing is followed. In Fig. 1, we show a

To plot the number of aggregated messages, we make use
of the capacity approaching rate-1/2 irregular LDPC codes with optimized degree distributions as given in [11]. For N = 2000 and LDPC codes with dv,max = 5, dv,max = 10, dv,max = 20, dv,max = 30, and dv,max = 50 obtained from [11], we plot

simple irregular LDPC Tanner graph with five variable nodes, MH−L, MR and ML−H quantities in Fig. 2. In this figure, we where three nodes have column-weight 2 and two nodes have notice that the value of MH−L is larger than both ML−H and

column-weight 3. The labeling on variable nodes from v1 to MR as expected. Furthermore, we also observe that the value v5 represents the sequence of node processing. In this figure, of MH−L is proportional to the maximum variable node degree both high-to-low and low-to-high column-weight sequencing dv,max. It will next be shown that the convergence speed is

are shown. We observe that, in both scenarios, the total number correlated with dv,max.

of updated edges per iteration are equal to 12. However, in the

high-to-low order, individual variable nodes v2, v3, v4 and v5 take advantage of 3, 6, 8, and 10 information updates respectively at the instance of their node processing. On the other side,

III. DECODING CONVERGENCE AND ERROR RATE PERFORMANCE

in the low-to-high order, the same variable nodes v2, v3, v4, In our simulations, we use the progressive-edge-growth and v5 receive 2, 4, 6, and 9 information updates, respectively. (PEG) [12] algorithm to construct the parity-check matrices
Overall, the number of aggregated messages for the high-to- for the irregular LDPC codes given in [11]. This algorithm is

low (MH−L) and low-to-high (ML−H) ordering are 39 and 33, well-known to construct finite-length LDPC codes with very

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:38:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASLAM et al.: IMPROVING THE BELIEF-PROPAGATION CONVERGENCE OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

1285

Fig. 2. Number of aggregated messages for high-to-low (MH−L), random (MR) and low-to-high (ML−H ) column-weight based scheduling schemes: Using N = 2000, and LDPC codes [11] with dv,max = 5, dv,max = 10, dv,max = 20, dv,max = 30 and dv,max = 50, respectively.

Fig. 4. Average number of decoding iterations for the proposed high-to-low column-weight ordering normalized by low-to-high column-weight ordering over AWGN and fading channels.

Fig. 3. Illustration of mutual-information curves for the high-to-low (MIH−L) and low-to-high (MIL−H ) column-weight based scheduling schemes for dv,max = 50 LDPC code [11] over AWGN channel.

Fig. 5. Average number of decoding iterations for the proposed high-to-low column-weight ordering normalized by random column-weight ordering over AWGN and fading channels.

denote IH−L, IL−H, and IR as the average number of LDPC good error performance. However, it is pertinent to mention that iterations performed per decoded code-word for the high-to-

our proposed scheme is not just applicable to PEG algorithm low, low-to-high and random column-weight based scheduling

but can also be incorporated with other code construction schemes, e.g., ACE [13] algorithm. To show the improvement in convergence-rate using Monte Carlo simulations, we first plot the average mutual-information (MI) computed at the

schemes, respectively. Then, the normalized average number of iterations can be given by the ratio IH−L/IL−H and IH−L/IR, as shown in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively. From these two figures,
we notice that the proposed high-to-low column-weight based

output of variable node processor versus the number of decoding iterations, allowing high-to-low (MIH−L) and low-to-high (MIL−H) column-weight ordering for the dv,max = 50 code, as shown in Fig. 3. We observe that, for moderate channel SNR
values, the mutual-information tends to converge faster for the
proposed high-to-low column-weight based scheduling.

scheduling scheme speeds up the convergence-rate. To be more precise, for dv,max = 50 code over AWGN channel, we get around 37% and 29% faster convergence speed compared to
low-to-high and random column-weight based scheduling. Similarly for dv,max = 50 code over Rayleigh fading channel, the proposed scheme increases the convergence speed by upto 35%

Using the same irregular LDPC codes, we simulate and and 22%. We also observe that the increase in the convergence

plot the normalized average number of decoding iterations to
visualize the increase in the convergence speed. In addition to rate-1/2 LDPC codes optimized for AWGN channel [11], we also plot the normalized decoding iterations for rate-1/2 LDPC

speed is proportional to the maximum column-weight dv,max, since the number of aggregated messages are directly related to this parameter as explained earlier.
To compare the error performance of different column-weight

codes optimized for Rayleigh fading channel [14]. For that, we based scheduling schemes, we simulate the bit-error-rate (BER)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:38:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1286

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

of BP decoder by plotting the mutual-information curves and the normalized average number of decoding iterations for different rate-1/2 irregular LDPC codes operating in AWGN and Rayleigh fading channels. Furthermore, we show that the convergence speed improves with higher maximum variable node degree dv,max of the LDPC code, and the speedier convergence does not degrade the error performance.

Fig. 6. BER and FER performance of high-to-low, random and low-to-high column-weight based scheduling for dv,max = 10 and dv,max = 50 codes over AWGN and fading channels.
and frame-error-rate (FER) curves and plot them in Fig. 6 for dv,max = 10 and dv,max = 50 codes over AWGN and fading channels using BPSK modulation. We observe that the error performance is not affected by any sequence of column-weight based processing. Hence, the convergence speed of shuffled BP decoder for an irregular LDPC code can be increased using high-to-low column-weight based scheduling, without incurring additional complexity or error rate degradation.
Finally, as a further merit of the proposed work, it is relevant to comment that the proposed high-to-low column-weight based scheduling is compatible with the existing lowcomplexity decoding schemes, such as [15], [16] wherein partial set of variable nodes are updated per decoding iteration, and can be used in complementary manner for achieving faster convergence speed.
IV. CONCLUSION
Noting the importance of decoding schedule on the complexity and convergence rate of iterative LDPC decoder, we present a novel shuffled BP decoding schedule based on the column weight of variable nodes. Specifically, we propose to update the high column-weight variable nodes first, followed by the low column-weight variable nodes. This schedule requires sorting of variable nodes in descending order of their columnweights only once in the offline mode, eliminating the need for run-time computations. Using computer simulations, we observe a noticeable improvement in the convergence behavior

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. MacKay and R. Neal, “Near shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[3] G. Han, Y. L. Guan, and X. Huang, “Check node reliability-based scheduling for BP decoding of non-binary LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 877–885, Mar. 2013.
[4] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “An efficient message-passing schedule for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. 23rd IEEE Conv. Elect. Electron. Eng. Israel, Sep. 2004, pp. 223–226.
[5] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. 36th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Nov. 2002, vol. 1, pp. 8–15.
[6] A. Vila Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470–3479, Dec. 2010.
[7] Y. Gong, X. Liu, W. Yecai, and G. Han, “Effective informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2683–2691, Oct. 2011.
[8] H.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Ueng, S.-M. Yeh, and W.-Y. Weng, “Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886–896, Mar. 2013.
[9] A. Grant, I. Land, and G. Wang, “Iteration-constrained design of IRA codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Zurich Semin. Commun., Mar. 2012, pp. 67–70.
[10] I. Mulholland, E. Paolini, and M. Flanagan, “Design of LDPC code ensembles with fast convergence properties,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Black Sea Conf. Commun. Netw., May 2015.
[11] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[12] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[13] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, and R. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun., May 2003, vol. 5, pp. 3125–3129.
[14] J. Hou, P. Siegel, and L. Milstein, “Performance analysis and code optimization of low density parity-check codes on rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 924–934, May 2001.
[15] E. Zimmermann and G. Fettweis, “Reduced complexity LDPC decoding using forced convergence,” in Proc. 7th Int. Symp. Wireless Pers. Multimedia Commun., 2004, pp. 12–15.
[16] D. Levin, E. Sharon, and S. Litsyn, “Lazy scheduling for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 70–72, Jan. 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:38:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

