IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

1299

On Fault Tolerance of the Gallager B Decoder Under Data-Dependent Gate Failures
Srdan Brkic, Student Member, IEEE, Omran Al Rasheed, Student Member, IEEE, Predrag Ivanis˘, Member, IEEE, and Bane Vasic´, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In this letter, we characterize the effect of datadependent gate failures on the performance of the Gallager B decoder of low-density parity-check codes. We show that this type of failures makes the decoder dependent on a transmitted codeword, thus rendering inapplicable the traditional analysis tools such as density evolution and trapping sets. By using Monte Carlo simulations, we identify two operating regions: one in which hardware unreliability leads to significant performance degradation and another in which the performance loss is negligible. Based on these results, we propose a simple modification of the decoder that ensures its fault tolerance.
Index Terms—Data dependence, fault tolerance, Gallager B decoder, low-density parity-check codes, timing errors.
I. INTRODUCTION
I NCREASINGLY stringent requirements for semiconductor device energy-efficiency has lead to a point where computation performed by using these devices is no longer reliable [1]. The need to ensure fault tolerance on inherently unreliable hardware has resulted in an increased interest in the analysis and design of novel and powerful error control schemes. The main direction of recent research in this area includes investigation of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and their decoders implemented on unreliable hardware, which relies on a theoretical framework developed by Vasic and Chilappagari [2]. The large body of knowledge on the analysis of codes on graphs and iterative decoding has enabled further progress in the analysis of fault-tolerant schemes based on LDPC codes (see [3]–[7] and references therein).
The majority of the results on decoding by circuits made of unreliable hardware relies on modeling the logic gate unreliability as transient, independent failures—a model proposed by von Neumann [8] in the fifties. In the von Neumann failure model, in each clock cycle, components of a (clocked) Boolean network fail with some known probability. Additionally, failures of a given component are independent of those in previous
Manuscript received January 8, 2015; accepted May 28, 2015. Date of publication June 9, 2015; date of current version August 10, 2015. This work was supported in part by the Seventh Framework Program of the European Union under Grant Agreement 309129 (i-RISC project) and in part by the Serbian Ministry of Science under Project TR32028. The work of B. Vasic´ was supported in part by the NSF under grants CCF-0963726 and CCF1314147 and the United States Department of State Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs through the Fulbright Scholar Program. The Associate Editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was E. Paolini.
S. Brkic, O. Al Rasheed, and P. Ivanis˘ are with the School of Electrical Engineering, University of Belgrade, Belgrade 11000, Serbia (e-mail: srdjan.brkic@ ic.etf.rs; omrano84@hotmail.com; predrag.ivanis@etf.rs).
B. Vasic´ is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: vasic@ece.arizona.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2015.2442981

clock cycles and independent of failures of other components. The simplicity of this model makes it amenable to theoretical analysis, but at same time limits its applicability. In new energyefficient CMOS technologies, the logic gate failures are highly data-dependent and correlated in time [9]. The main source of incorrect gate outputs in these technologies is timing violations, or timing errors. They depend on logic gate inputs, but they are most damaging when the gate output changes its value [9], [10].
In order to characterize the hardware unreliability phenomenon accurately, Brkic et al. in [7] used a Markov chain timing error model, which has enabled them to analyze the behavior of one-step majority logic decoders. Timing errors in the context of the stochastic decoders have been considered recently by Perez-Andrade et al. [11] who have shown an inherent tolerance to timing errors of these type of decoders. While the error injection at transistor level was thoroughly analyzed, the decoder data-dependence was not considered.
In this letter, we investigate the effects of timing errors to the performance of the Gallager B decoder, a simple hard decision decoder with a good trade-off between the complexity and the error-correcting capability. Based on the Markov model proposed in [7], we evaluate the frame error rate (FER) for several classes of LDPC codes. We first demonstrate the inadequacy of the von Neuman error model, and then show that the decoder performance is highly dependent on the sequence of codewords that is being decoded. Finally, we propose a simple modification of the decoder that increases the robustness to timing errors. Due to the lack of analytic techniques suitable to this failure model, we use Monte Carlo simulations.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. LDPC Codes and Decoding Algorithm
Let (N, K) be an LDPC code, with code length N and code rate K/N, represented by a bipartite graph G = (V ∪ C, E), where V is a set of N variable nodes, C is a set of check nodes, and E is a set of edges. An edge is an unordered pair (v, c) which connects two nodes v ∈ V and c ∈ C. The parity check matrix H is a bi-adjacency matrix of G. Nodes v and c are called neighbors iff Hc,v = 1, i.e., there is an edge between them. Let Nv (Nc) be a set of neighbors of a variable node v (check node c). In this letter, we consider (γ , ρ)-regular binary LDPC codes which means that |Nv| = γ , ∀v ∈ V and |Nc| = ρ, ∀c ∈ C, where | · | denotes cardinality.
Let x = (x1, x2, . . . , xN) denote a codeword of an LDPC code that is transmitted over a Binary Symmetric Channel (BSC) with crossover probability α, where xv ∈ {±1} is the polar representation of a bit value associated with a variable node v and let a vector received by the Gallager B decoder from the BSC be y = {y1, y2, . . . , yN }. Let νv(,c) (νc(,v)) be messages

1558-2558 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized liceSneseedhtutspe://lwimwitewd.iteoe:eY.oorngs/peui Ublniciva.tDioonws_nslotaanddeadrdosn/pJuubnleic2a4ti,2o0n2s/6riagth1ts6/:i4n1d:e4x7.hUtTmCl ffroormmIoErEeEinXfoprlomrea.tioRne.strictions apply.

1300

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

passed on an edge (v, c) from(to) variable node to(from) check model, e( ) is a Bernoulli random variable, and does not depend

node during the -th decoding iteration, respectively. We next summarize the Gallager B decoder.
• Variable to check node update: For each variable node v ∈ V. At iteration = 0: νv(0,c) = yv, ∀c ∈ Nv. At iteration > 0:

νv(,c) =

−yv if

c

∈

Nv

\

c

:

νc(

−1) ,v

= −yv

yv otherwise.

> γ /2

(1)

• Check to variable node update. For each check node c ∈

C and ∀v ∈ Nc, at iteration ≥ 0:

νc(,v) =

νv(

) ,c

.

(2)

v ∈Nc\{v}

The decoding is terminated when all parity-check equations are satisfied or the maximum number of iterations is reached.

on the gate input arguments [8]. In the timing failure model e( ) is data-dependent, and the
probability that the logic gate fails to switch is Pr{e( ) = −1|z( ) = z( −1)} = ε, where ε > 0. On the other hand, when the gate output is unchanged during two consecutive time
instants, the function f is always correctly computed as assumed in [9] and [10], i.e., Pr{e( ) = −1|z( ) = z( −1)} = 0. This corresponds to the gate switching probabilistic model [10], that
was shown to have reduced complexity with minor degradation
of accuracy when compared to more complex models that take
into account that different input patterns can cause gate failures
with different probabilities [9], [10]. The value ε depends on the technology parameters and can
be obtained experimentally or by the circuit-level simulations.
It typically differs from a gate type to a gate type. We denote by ε⊕ and εMAJ the failure rates of XOR and MAJ gates, respectively. The gate output at time instant , μ( ), is obtained by the mapping ϒ : {±1}3 → {±1} as follows:

The decoder comprises the processing units that correspond
to the nodes in the bipartite graph representation of the decoder. Each check node (CN) unit is composed of ρ XOR gates, each with ρ − 1 inputs, needed for calculation of the check to variable node messages. A variable node (VN) processing unit calculates the variable to check node messages, and employs γ majority logic (MAJ) gates, each with γ − 1 inputs [2]. The

μ( ) = ϒ z( ), z( −1), e( ) = z( ) e( )

z( )−z( −1) /2
,

(3)

where Pr{e( ) = −1} = ε. Note that the failure model is being redefined to take advantage of the fact that e( ) = 1 with probability 1, when z( ) = z( −1).

decoder also requires additional logic gates for the final bit

estimations and parity-checks calculation. If we allow these gates to be unreliable, the performance of the decoder would be determined by the failure probabilities of these gates, not by

III. FAILURES OF THE GALLAGER B DECODING ALGORITHM

the error control scheme. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that these gates are perfect, and that only gates used to calculate messages that are passed on edges of the bipartite graph are faulty. Such reliable gates in the final decision circuitry can be realized by using larger transistors, slowing down the clock or using higher voltage supply. Similar assumption was also used in other relevant literature [2], [7].
Note that we considered that the threshold in the variableto-check-node update operations is fixed, opposed to the original solution proposed by Gallager. Although the threshold adaptation increases the performance, it requires the additional logic which makes it more complex than described algorithm. The use of a fixed threshold value represents a good trade-off between performance and efficiency, especially if the targeted error rates are low.
B. The Failure Model
The recent work in the area of low-powered combinatorial circuits has identified the increased signal propagation delay as the main cause of the circuits unreliability [10], [12]. Timing violations happen when the propagation delay is longer than what can be tolerated by the circuit design, which results in propagating an outdated output value to the rest of the circuit.
Let f : {±1}m → {±1}, m > 1, be an m-argument Boolean function, which at time instant produces the result z( ) = f (y(1 ), y2( ), . . . , ym( )), where y(1 ), y2( ), . . . , ym( ) are input arguments at time . Due to unreliability of the logic gates used to calculate f , the result is not z( ) but μ( ) = z( )e( ), where e( ) ∈ {±1} is the error at time . In the von Neumann failure

The gate failure model introduced in Section II-B acts as a
binary channel with memory. We next explain how that mem-
ory makes the performance of the faulty Gallager B decoder
dependent on the transmitted codewords. Consider the received vector y = x · n, where “·” denotes pointwise multiplication of the codeword vector x and the noise vector n. Let νv(−,c1) and νc(,−v1) be output values of the update functions sent between variable node v and check node c in the time instant prior
to the initial decoding iteration of a current codeword. These
are the messages sent in the last iteration of decoding the
previous received word. The following theorem defines the
conditions under which the probability of successful decoding
is independent of the transmitted codeword.
Theorem 1: The frame error rate of the Gallager B decoder in
the presence of timing errors is independent of the transmitted codeword x iff νv(−,c1) = xvAv and νc(,−v1) = xvBv, ∀v ∈ V and ∀c ∈ C, where Av, Bv ∈ {±1}.
Proof: Let μc(,v) (y) and μ(v,)c(y) be, respectively, the messages passed from a check node c to a variable node v and from a variable node v to a check node c, at iteration ,
given the received y. They are obtained from Eq. (3) based on the correctly computed messages νc(,v)(y) and νv(,c)(y) and the corresponding error values ec(,v) and e(v,)c.
Let us assume νv(−,c1) = xvAv and νc(,−v1) = xvBv, for some Av, Bv ∈ {±1}. We use mathematical induction to prove the theorem statement. From the variable node symmetry condition at iteration = 0, we have νv(0,c)(y) = νv(0,c)(x · n) = xvνv(0,c)(n) [3]. As these values are received from the channel (not calcu-
lated using the combinatorial circuit), they are passed without

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:41:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BRKIC et al.: ON FAULT TOLERANCE OF THE GALLAGER B DECODER UNDER DATA-DEPENDENT GATE FAILURES

1301

errors to the neighboring check nodes. From the check node symmetry follows νc(,0v)(y) = xvνc(,0v)(n) [3], and we have
μ(c0,v) (y) = ϒ νc(,0v)(y), xvBv, ec(0,v) = xv νc(,0v)(n) e(c0,v) xv νc(,0v)(n)−Bv /2 = xvϒ νc(,0v)(n), Bv, ec(0,v) = xvμc(0,v) (n). (4)

Similarly, we conclude μ(v1,c) (y) = xvϒ(νv(1,c)(n), Av, e(v1,c) ) = xvμv(1,c) (n).
Let us assume μv( ,)c(y) = xvμv( ,)c(n), ∀v ∈ V, ∀c ∈ C and > 1. From the fact that v:N (c) xv = 1 and from the check node symmetry defined in [3], it follows that νc(,v)(y) = xvνc(,v)(n). Then, similarly as in Eq. (4), we have μ(c,v) (y) = ϒ(xvνc(,v)(n), xvνc(,v−1)(n), ec(,v) ) = xvμ(c,v) (n). Furthermore, by
invoking again the variable node symmetry condition and applying it to Eq. (3), we obtain μv( ,+c 1)(y) = xvμv( ,+c 1)(n). As all messages passed between a node v and its neighbors are
equal to the product of xv and the corresponding message when n is received, the decoder performance is independent of the

Fig. 1. The comparison of i.i.d. and timing error models for the LS(155,64) code (α = 0.01).

transmitted codeword.
On the other hand, if the theorem conditions were not satisfied, i.e., if νv(−,c1) = xvAv or νc(,−v1) = xvBv, then it would follow that μv(1,c)(y) = xvμv(1,c)(n). As messages μ(v1,c) continue to further propagate in the subsequent iterations, the error correction, and

limited to 100. We analyze LDPC codes free of small trapping sets. Such codes can be constructed, for example, from Latin Squares (LS) [14], or based on Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) technique [15]. In order to capture the effects of datadependence, three simulation modes are used:

thus FER, depends on x. The conditions required for FER independence of x are
highly unrealistic. They can be satisfied only by adjusting the initial logic gate states to a transmitted codeword, which is unknown to the decoder. Thus, in the case of timing errors, the decoder error-correction capability is conditional on x.
On the other hand, we have shown that the main reason for such decoder behavior is related to failing to satisfy the check and the variable node symmetry conditions in the first decoding iteration. If the first iteration were free of logic gate failures, the symmetry conditions would be satisfied. The faultfree iteration can be achieved by forcing all transistors in the decoding circuitry to reach a stationary state. Practically, this can be done by slowing down the clock in the first iteration and letting the signal level stabilize. Since the clock is slower, there are no timing errors and the computations are reliable. The decoder in which the first iteration is reliable in the rest of the letter is called the modified Gallager B decoder.

• mode M0: only the all-zero codewords are transmitted; • mode MH: the two codewords with large Hamming
distance are transmitted alternately in consecutive transmissions; • mode MR: randomly chosen codewords are transmitted.
In Fig. 1, we illustrate the decoder performance for the case of LS(155,64) code [14] evaluated under two failure models, when the most realistic setup MR is used. It is a (3,5)-regular code with |V| = 155 and |C| = 93. We consider two different scenarios: (i) when CN processing is reliable and only MAJ gates are faulty, and (ii) when VN processing is reliable and only XOR gates are faulty. Note that no performance degradation is observed for logic gate failure rates below 10−3 regardless of the failure model. When logic gates failures become more frequent, a threshold is reached, and the FER rapidly increases. The threshold depends on the logic gate type and has lower values when the MAJ gates are faulty.
The timing error model reduces to the von Neumann model

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS

when a gate is constantly in a “bad state”, i.e., changes its output value in every clock cycle. In that sense, the von Neumann

The past work related to the faulty Gallager B decoder was mostly dedicated to the infinite code length analysis under independent identically distributed (i.i.d.) failures (von Neumann failure model) [4]–[6]. Due to the decoder asymmetry, the density evolution technique cannot be applied to the timing error model, when failures are present in the first iteration. Although the modified decoder satisfies the symmetry conditions, the presence of memory in the VN and CN operations causes the complexity of density evolution computation to grow at least exponentially with the number of iterations [13]. For that reason, in this letter, we focus on the finite length simulation analysis, where the maximal number of decoding iterations is

model can be seen as pessimistic and misleading, which is especially pronounced in a case of highly unreliable XOR logic gates. The use of the timing error model reveals robustness of the Gallager B decoder to XOR gate failures. For example, even for the large bad state failure probability ε⊕ = 0.1, the decoder retains low FER value. On the other hand, according to the von Neumann model, the faulty decoder is in average outperformed by an uncoded system.
For low and moderate channel error rates, in most of the cases, only a few of 155 code bits are received incorrectly and the most of νv(0,c) messages represent the correct bit estimates. If during the first iteration the number of gate failures is also

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:41:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1302

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

modified Gallager B decoder, although built from unreliable components, performs approximately the same as a perfectly reliable decoder. On the other hand, the FER of the Gallager B decoder without modification is several magnitudes higher. For example, the code LS(2388,1793) is non-operational for a wide range of channel error probabilities.

V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 2. The performance dependence on codeword decoding order for LS(155,64) LDPC code.

We have shown that the performance degradation of the Gallager B decoder caused by the timing violations depends on the sequence of transmitted codewords. In addition, we proposed the modification that ensures decoder robustness to hardware unreliability. This result raises a number of open questions in analysis of faulty decoders. It is known that the capacity of LDPC codes under the von Neumann error model cannot be achieved [3], [4]. However, the finite code length analysis presented in this letter suggests more promising results for the timing error model. Additionally, in our future work, we will apply the presented framework to investigation and design of fault-tolerant LDPC code-based memories.

REFERENCES

Fig. 3. The performance comparison of different codes (ε⊕ = εMAJ = 0.05) under simulation mode MR.
low, most of the variable to check node messages will remain unchanged. However, if the number of gate failures is not negligible, after the first iteration, the number of incorrect bit estimates can be significantly increased. The effect of gate failures in the first iteration is illustrated in Fig. 2. It can be noticed that these failures have dominant influence on the decoder performance. When the same word is transmitted (mode M0), there is no performance degradation even for high bad state failure rate (ε⊕ = εMAJ = 0.05). On the other hand, mode MH reveals that the worst case FER degradation can be of several orders of magnitude. Significant degradation is also notable in the more realistic scenario, which corresponds to the successive transmission of randomly chosen codewords.
In Fig. 3, we illustrate the improvement achieved by using the modified Gallager B decoder in which the first iteration is fault-free, for several γ = 3 codes. It can be seen that the

[1] S. Ghosh and K. Roy, “Parameter variation tolerance and error resiliency: New design paradigm for the nanoscale era,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 98, no. 10, pp. 1718–1751, Oct. 2010.
[2] B. Vasic and S. K. Chilappagari, “An information theoretical framework for analysis and design of nanoscale fault-tolerant memories based on low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 2438–2446, Nov. 2007.
[3] L. Varshney, “Performance of LDPC codes under faulty iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 4427–4444, Jul. 2011.
[4] S. M. Sadegh, T. Yazdi, H. Cho, and L. Dolecek, “Gallager B decoder on noisy hardware,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1660–1673, May 2013.
[5] C. H. Huang, Y. Li, and L. Dolecek, “Gallager B LDPC decoder with transient and permanent errors,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 15–28, Jan. 2014.
[6] F. Leduc-Primeau and W. Gross, “Faulty Gallager-B decoding with optimal message repetition,” in Proc. 50th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, Il, USA, Oct. 2012, pp. 549–556.
[7] S. Brkic, P. Ivanis, and B. Vasic, “Analysis of one-step majority logic decoding under correlated data-dependent gate failures,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun./Jul. 2014, pp. 2599–2603.
[8] J. Von Neumann, “Probabilistic logics and the synthesis of reliable organisms from unreliable components,” in Automata Studies, C. E. Shannon and J. McCarty, Eds. Princeton, NJ, USA: Princeton Univ. Press, Jul. 1956, pp. 43–98.
[9] J. Chen et al., “Linear compositional delay model for the timing analysis of sub-powered combinational circuits,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Annu. Symp. VLSI, Jul. 2014, pp. 380–385.
[10] A. Amaricai, S. Nimara, O. Boncalo, J. Chen, and E. Popovici, “Probabilistic gate level fault modeling for near and sub-threshold CMOS circuits,” in Proc. 17th Euromicro Conf. DSD, Verona, Italy, Aug. 2014, pp. 473–479.
[11] I. Perez-Andrade, X. Zuo, R. Maunder, B. Al-Hashimi, and L. Hanzo, “Analysis of voltage- and clock-scaling-induced timing errors in stochastic LDPC decoders,” in Proc. IEEE WCNC, Shanghai, China, Apr. 2013, pp. 4293–4298.
[12] S. Zaynoun, M. S. Khairy, A. M. Eltawil, F. J. Kurdahi, and A. Khajeh, “Fast error aware model for arithmetic and logic circuits,” in Proc. 30th IEEE ICCD, Montreal, QC, Canada, Sep./Oct. 2012, pp. 322–328.
[13] E. Janulewicz and A. Banihashemi, “Performance analysis of iterative decoding algorithms with memory over memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 3556–3566, Dec. 2014.
[14] D. V. Nguyen, S. K. Chilappagari, M. W. Marcellin, and B. Vasic, “On the construction of structured LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2280–2302, Apr. 2012.
[15] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:41:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

