3104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

LDPC Decoding Scheduling for Faster Convergence and Lower Error Floor
Huang-Chang Lee and Yeong-Luh Ueng, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a maximum mutual information increase (M2I2)-based algorithm that can be used to arrange low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoding schedules for faster convergence, where the increase is used to guide the arrangement of the fixed decoding schedule. The predicted mutual information for the messages to be updated is used in the calculation of the increase. By looking ahead for several decoding stages, a high-order prediction can be realized, which can then be used to devise a schedule with an even faster convergence. For a single received frame, different decoding results can be obtained using different schedules, and, hence, schedule diversity, that lowers the error floor resultant from the dominant trapping sets, is proposed. By adopting the M2I2-based schedule together with the schedule diversity, both the convergence speed in the waterfall region and the error-rate in the floor region can be improved.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, messages-passing schedule, error-control codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
A S near-capacity performance can be achieved using a simple iterative Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) [1] codes have drawn significant attention. LDPC codes constructed using a single-edge protograph have been adopted in many communication standards, such as the WiMax [32] and G.hn [33] standards. The most straightforward decoding schedule is flooding, where all decoding messages are simultaneously propagated. However, the convergence speed of the error rate in the waterfall region for LDPC decoding is affected by decoding schedules, in addition to code structures and noise patterns. To accelerate the convergence speed, serial schedules can be used, and the decoding messages can be generated according to the information produced during the same iteration. Layered BP (LBP) [2], [3] and shuffled decoding [4] are commonly used serial schedules which, respectively, arrange the decoding process in the order of the row or the column of the parity-check matrices. By following these hardware-friendly fixed schedules, many sophisticated decoding circuits have been implemented [5], [6].
Manuscript received January 9, 2014; revised June 22, 2014 and August 9, 2014; accepted August 14, 2014. Date of publication August 20, 2014; date of current version September 19, 2014. This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of the R.O.C. under Grant MOST 103-2221-E007-025-MY3. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was D. Declercq.
H.-C. Lee is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30055, Taiwan (e-mail: akula.lee@gmail.com).
Y.-L. Ueng is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan (e-mail: ylueng@ee.nthu.edu.tw).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2014.2349943

The demand for reducing the number of decoding iterations continuously drives the design of decoding schedules. Code structures were considered in the design of fixed decoding schedules in [7] and [8], where it was suggested that highdegree check nodes could be updated more frequently [7], or that they could be updated first in each iteration [8]. Each of these fixed sequential schedules improves the convergence speed by about twice that of the flooding schedule [9], [10]. When the noise patterns are taken into consideration, the decoding process can be further accelerated. Informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) [11] decoders provide a customized decoding schedule for each individual received frame corrupted by a different noise pattern. Various IDS strategies were proposed in [12]–[16], and each significantly reduces the number of iterations required for decoding. However, due to the additional computation necessary for adapting to different noise patterns, the hardware implementation for IDS decoders is challenging.
Instead of dynamically decoding each individual received frame, a maximum mutual information increase (M2I2)-based algorithm which can be used to devise fixed decoding schedules that can then be applied to all received frames is proposed in this paper. Based on the concept of providing the maximum increase in the mutual information for the messages exchanged in the Tanner graph, these schedules are arranged so as to reduce the required number of iterations for a given errorrate performance. The M2I2-based algorithm first predicts the increment after each update to the messages, which can be measured from the increase in the mutual information. Then the decoding schedule is arranged by sequentially identifying the updates that provide the maximum increase in mutual information. The prediction can not only be generated using the mutual information for the messages to be updated in the next decoding stage, but can also be refined using the mutual information for the messages to be updated in the subsequent decoding stages. The schedule will then be determined so as to supply long-term benefits and provide a faster convergence speed. Since the decoding sequence arranged using the M2I2based algorithm can be pre-determined and fixed, the only increase in hardware implementation complexity will be the storage of the update sequence. The simulation results show that, following the schedules arranged by the M2I2-based algorithm, the number of iterations can be reduced by over 60% compared to the conventional flooding schedule.
Besides the faster convergence speed, the error-floor performance of LDPC codes is also critical for applications such as storage systems and optical communications, where very low error floors are required. Due to the sub-optimum iterative BP algorithm, trapping sets [18] can easily be triggered, and

0090-6778 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licensSeedeuhstetpli:m//witewdwto.i:eYeeo.nosregi/pUunbivli.cDatoiwonnslo_asdtaenddoanrdJsu/pnueb2li4c,a2t0io2n6sa/rti1g8h:t0s/3i:n3d8eUx.ThCtmfrlofmorImEEoEreXinpfloorrem. aRtieosnt.rictions apply.

LEE AND UENG: LDPC DECODING SCHEDULING FOR FASTER CONVERGENCE AND LOWER ERROR FLOOR

3105

are regarded as the major cause of the error floor. To reduce trapping sets, more robust code structures can be constructed using the progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [19], [20], the approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) property [21], [22], and their combined algorithms [23].
On the other hand, many studies have shown that once trapping sets are triggered, their effects can also be mitigated using modified decoding schemes [24]. The backtracking algorithm [25], [26] is a trial-and-error strategy, which mitigates the effect of trapping sets by flipping any suspicious bits, and re-executing the decoding process. The error floor can also be lowered by using the IDS decoders proposed in [11], since the decoding messages to be updated are dynamically adjusted. However, a massive amount of additional memory is required for the backtracking algorithm to store the indicators of the suspicious bits and to track the trial-and-error decoding [26]. For IDS decoders, as previously mentioned, dynamically adjusted schedules for distinct received codewords also introduce inefficient complexity. Therefore, neither the backtracking algorithm nor the IDS decoders are hardware friendly.
In this paper, the concept of schedule diversity is proposed to mitigate the effect of trapping sets and, hence, achieve a lower error floor without requiring any knowledge of the trapping sets. For the same received frame, the values of the decoding messages exchanged using different schedules will not be exactly equal, and diverse decoding results can be obtained. Conventionally, only a single decoding schedule is adopted, and a relatively low error rate can be achieved in the high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region for a well-constructed code, which implies that the probability of falling into trapping sets is low. Then, if multiple decoding attempts based on multiple distinct decoding schedules can be applied to a single received frame, schedule diversity can be achieved, and the probability of falling into trapping sets should be even lower. The simulation results show that, when the proposed schedule diversity is implemented, a more significant improvement in the errorfloor performance can be achieved compared to that of both the backtracking algorithm [25] and the IDS decoders [11]. In addition, adopting the schedule designed using the M2I2-based algorithm in the first decoding attempt, and combining it with schedule diversity for the following decoding attempts, both the convergence speed in the waterfall region and the error rate in the error-floor region can be improved.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly reviews the BP algorithm and the protograph-based LDPC codes. The proposed M2I2-based algorithm and the schedule diversity are presented in Sections III and IV, respectively. Finally, Section V concludes this work.

Fig. 1. Tanner graph for the LDPC code constructed according to the base matrix B in (1).

protograph-based LDPC codes [27], are preferred for practical

implementations. The protograph-based LDPC codes can be

constructed based on a blueprint, or a protograph, which can be

represented as an Mp-by-Np base matrix B. The base matrix contains the “type” of the variable nodes, the check nodes, and

the connective edges. The element at the i-th row and j-th

column, i.e., bi,j, denotes the number of type-(i, j) edges between type-i check node and type-j variable node in the

protograph. Initially, the codes are constructed by “lifting” the

protograph z times, where z is the lifting factor. The type-(i, j)

edge in the protograph with a non-zero bi,j expands to a z-byz sub-matrix hi,j, whose row weight and column weight are equal to bi,j, and each of the zero elements in the base matrix expands to a z-by-z all-zero matrix. Then, the connections of

the same type of nodes in the different copies of the protograph

permutated. After the “copy-and-permutate” operation, an M -

by-N parity-check matrix H, where N = Np · z, and M = Mp · z, is constructed.
An example of the base matrix B for Mp = 3 and Np = 4, is shown in (1), where bi,j ∈ {0, 1} for i = 1, . . . , Mp and j = 1, . . . , Np. Hence, all corresponding edges in the protograph are single connections. With a lifting factor z of 3, a complete

Tanner graph containing M = 9 check nodes and N = 12

variable nodes, as shown in Fig. 1, is obtained.

⎡

⎤

⎡

⎤

1110

h1,1 h1,2 h1,3 0z×z

B = ⎣1 1 1 1⎦, H = ⎣ h2,1 h2,2 h2,3 h2,4 ⎦. (1)

0101

0z×z h3,2 0z×z h3,4

B. BP Decoding for LDPC Codes

When the BP algorithm is applied to LDPC codes, variable-

II. PRELIMINARIES

to-check (V2C) messages and check-to-variable (C2V) mes-

A. Protograph-Based LDPC Codes
A binary LDPC code can be described using a Tanner graph consisting of N variable nodes and M check nodes, which corresponds to the M -by-N parity-check matrix. Although the

sages are iteratively updated during the decoding process. The
V2C message propagated from variable node vj to check node ci is denoted as Qj→i. Similarly, the C2V message propagated from check node ci to variable node vj is denoted as Ri→j. As the decoding scheme progresses, the a posteriori Log-

connections between the variable nodes and the check nodes Likelihood Ratio (LLR) of variable node vj, denoted as Lj, will can be randomly designed, structured LDPC codes, such as be updated by the C2V messages. The values of Qj→i, Ri→j,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

and Lj can be respectively generated using (2)–(4), as follows:

Qj→i =

Ra→j + Λj ,

(2)

ca∈N (vj )\c⎛i

⎞

Ri→j = 2 × atanh ⎝

tanh Qb→i ⎠ , (3) 2

vb∈N (ci)\vj

Lj =

Ra→j + Λj ,

(4)

ca∈N (vj )

where Λj represents the intrinsic LLR of vj, which is also known as the channel value, and N (n1) \ n2 denotes the neighbors of node n1, excluding n2, where n1 and n2 can be either a variable node or a check node.

index, and, hence, it cannot be expected that all C2V messages

will have the same number of updates. Therefore, a counter

ui,j is introduced to denote the number of times that the C2V messages associated with permutation sub-matrix hi,j have been updated, when bi,j = 0. If bi,j = 0, ui,j is always

zero. As a result, for a protograph having a total number of

edges EB, the number of iterations is calculated as =

(

Mp i=1

Np j=1

ui,j )/EB.

Based

on

this

definition

of

, the per-

formance and complexity of the protograph-based edge-wise

schedule can be compared to conventional decoding schedules.

B. M2I2-Based Algorithm
The M2I2-based algorithm is proposed to design a protograph-based edge-wise schedule that can accelerate the

convergence of the mutual information, and, hence, reduce the III. DECODING SCHEDULES FOR FASTER CONVERGENCE average number of iterations required to achieve a given error-

It should be noted that, for iterative BP algorithms, the variable-node operation in (2) and the check-node operation in (3) are edge-wise operations, which can be executed following a variety of schedules. In this section, an M2I2-based algorithm that arranges the edge-wise operations for fast convergence is proposed. With hardware implementation in mind, single-edge protograph-based LDPC codes, e.g., B in (1), are commonly used, and have been adopted in many standards [32]–[34]. As a result, the design of the M2I2-based algorithm is focused on single-edge protograph-based LDPC codes.

rate performance. The design of the schedule is arranged based

on the edge in the protograph.

Suppose that the first s elements in sequence S have been

determined, and the M2I2-based algorithm is preparing to

determine the (s + 1)-th element, i.e., S(s + 1). In addition,

the C2V messages associated with type-(i, j) edges have been

updated ui,j times during the first s decoding stages, and

the corresponding C2V mutual information, i.e., the mutual

information

for

the

C2V

messages,

is

denoted

as

I ui,j
E,C

(i,

j

).

Since the updated messages in the (s + 1)-th decoding stage

have not yet been determined, the predictions of the mutual

information for the (s + 1)-th stage are calculated according

A. Protograph-Based Edge-Wise Schedule
The sequential decoding process can be divided into several stages, and only part of the decoding messages are updated in each stage. For a single-edge protograph-based LDPC code, the messages updated in each stage can be indicated by the index of the corresponding protograph edge. Therefore, the decoding process can be described using a sequence S, whose elements contain the indices of the protograph edges. As the decoding process progresses, the decoding messages are

to the pre-computations rather than the actual updates. Let IEp ,C (i, j) denote the predicted C2V mutual information, which is provided by the pre-computations of the C2V messages
associated with hi,j. The pre-computations will be executed for
all protograph edges, and the increase can be defined as:

r(i,

j)

=

IEp ,C (i,

j)

−

I ui,j
E,C

(i,

j).

(5)

Then the protograph edge with the maximum increase can be identified from:

updated following the order of sequence S. When the LBP schedule is used, the decoding process is arranged based on the order of the check nodes. For the LDPC codes constructed based on the protograph shown in Fig. 1, and by following the LBP schedule, the C2V messages corresponding to the edges connecting to the type-1 check nodes will be updated first. Since the type-1 check nodes are connected to the type-1, the type-2 and the type-3 variable nodes, the first three elements of the sequence S are S(1) = (1, 1), S(2) = (1, 2), and S(3) = (1, 3). In the first stage of the decoding process, the C2V messages R1a→1a, R1b→1b and R1c→1c, are updated following the order of sequence S using (3). The updates to the messages

r(i∗, j∗) ≡ max {r(i, j)|i = 1, . . . , Mp, j = 1, . . . , Np, bij = 0}. (6)

Index (i∗, j∗) will then be stored as the (s+1)-th element of S,

i.e., S(s+1) = (i∗, j∗). By following the order of sequence S,

the C2V messages Ri∗→j∗ associated with hi∗,j∗ will be up-

dated in the (s+1)-th decoding stage, and, hence, the predicted mutual information for the (i∗, j∗)-edge, i.e., IEp ,C (i∗, j∗), can
be used in the (s+1)-th decoding stage in place of that obtained

by

the

actual

update.

i.e.,

I ui∗j∗
E,C

+1(i∗,

j∗)

=

IEp ,C

(i∗,

j∗).

Similar to the C2V mutual information, the V2C mutual

information, i.e., the mutual information for the V2C messages,

generated from the type-1 check nodes are completed in the can also be obtained. The V2C mutual information provided by

third stage. The updates to the messages generated from the the updated V2C messages associated with the protograph edge

type-2 check nodes begin in the fourth decoding stage, where (i, j) can be denoted as IE,V (i, j). The mutual information S(4) = (2, 1). In a similar manner, the updates to the messages can be calculated using the formulas provided in [29], and the

for the type-2 check nodes are completed in the seventh stage, mutual information for both the C2V and the V2C messages can

which is indicated by S(7) = (2, 4).

be iteratively evaluated for each decoding stage. The detailed

For the protograph-based edge-wise schedule, the decoding procedure for the proposed M2I2-based algorithm used to de-

sequence S does not necessarily follow the order of the edge termine S is described in Algorithm 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE AND UENG: LDPC DECODING SCHEDULING FOR FASTER CONVERGENCE AND LOWER ERROR FLOOR

3107

In the initial phase, the value of the sequence index is set
as s = 1, all the update counters are set as ui,j = 0, and the C2V mutual information associated with each edge is zero, i.e., IE0 ,C (i, j) = 0. When a rate-R single-edge protograph LDPC code and the AWGN channel with an SNR equal to Eb/N0 are considered, where the Eb/N0 value must be greater than the decoding threshold (Eb/N0)0 of the considered LDPC code. The mutual information for the channel messages to type-j
variable nodes is Ich(j) = J( 8R(Eb/N0)), where

∞

J(σ) = 1 −

√1

e−

(y−σ2 /2)2 2σ2

2πσ2

· log2(1 + e−y) dy.

(7)

−∞

Since J(·) is monotonic, the inverse function J−1(·) exists [28].

The initial V2C mutual information IE,V (i, j) sent from type-j variable nodes to the neighboring type-i check nodes is equal

to Ich(j).

To determine S(s), the C2V mutual information provided by

the pre-computations of the C2V messages associated with hi,j, transmitted from type-i check nodes to the neighboring type-j

variable nodes, can be evaluated as:

⎛

⎞

IEp ,C (i, j) = 1−J ⎝

(J −1(1−IE,V (i, b)))2⎠. (8)

vb∈N (ci)\vj

The predicted versions of the C2V mutual information and the

corresponding increases for all protograph edges are then calcu-

lated. These increases are compared based on (6), then the index (i∗, j∗) can be identified, and are stored as the s-th element of S.

Now, the edges that will be processed in the s-th decoding stage

have been determined. As shown in lines 5 and 6 of Algorithm 1,

the C2V mutual information actually provided in the s-th decoding stage is equal to the prediction for edge (i∗, j∗), and

the value of the update counter ui∗,j∗ is increased by one.

Based

on

the

new

I , ui∗,j∗
E,C

the

V2C

mutual

information

IE,V (i, j∗) propagated from type-j∗ variable nodes to the

neighboring type-i check nodes can be evaluated in line 7 of

Algorithm 1 as:

IE,V⎛(i, j∗)

= J⎝⎜

J −1

I ua,j
E,C

∗

(a,

j

∗)

ca∈N (vj∗)\ci

⎞ 2 +(J −1 (Ich(j∗)))2⎟⎠.
(9)

It can be observed from (8) and (9) that the mutual information

for both the C2V and the V2C messages is iteratively affected

by each other, and their mutual information values gradually

increase. The arrangement process will progress until the value

of the cumulative mutual information (CMI) for each variable

node converges to one, where the CMI for type-j variable nodes

can be evaluated as:

⎛

⎞

ICMI (j) = J ⎝

(J −1(IE,C (a, j)))2 +(J −1(Ich(j)))2⎠.

ca∈N (vj)

(10)

Here, the criterion adopted in the M2I2-based algorithm is to maximize the increase in the C2V mutual information based on (6). Since the schedule arrangement is completed when the ICMI (j) value for each j converges to one, another reasonable criterion can be used that maximizes the increase in the CMI, where the CMI increase can be generated according to the prediction of the CMI. The prediction of the CMI corresponding to the C2V messages transmitted from type-i check nodes to the neighboring type-j variable nodes can be obtained when all check nodes neighboring vj, except ci, provide a fixed C2V mutual information value. This predicted CMI is a function of IEp ,C (i, j) according to (10), and can be denoted as ICp MI (j, IEp ,C (i, j)). Then, the CMI increase associated with the type-(i, j) edges is rCMI (i, j) = (ICp MI (j, IEp ,C (i, j)) − ICMI (j)). The criterion of maximizing rCMI (i, j) can also be adopted in the M2I2-based algorithm. However, following the resultant decoding schedule, the average number of updates of the C2V messages varies with the associated variable node degree, and cannot achieve a faster convergence than that based on (6). Therefore, in this paper, a criterion using (6) is adopted in the proposed M2I2-based algorithm.
The proposed M2I2-based algorithm is used to arrange the decoding schedule for a code ensemble with the assistance of the EXIT analysis, which is used to evaluate the mutual information based on the assumptions of infinite length, and the statistically-independent Gaussian-distributed decoding messages exchanged within a cycle-free bipartite graph. Because of these assumptions, the arranged schedule may not provide the fastest convergence speed for the corresponding practical finitelength codes with cycles. Hence, the proposed M2I2-based algorithm cannot yet provide the optimum decoding schedule for a practical code.

Algorithm 1 Proposed M2I2-based schedule arrangement

Initialization:

s = 1, ui,j = 0 and IE0 ,C (i, j) = 0 for all (i, j).

Ich(j) = J ( 8REb/N0)

for

all

j,

where Eb/N0 > (Eb/N0)0. IE,V (i, j) = Ich(j) for ci ∈ N (vj).

1: for (i = 1, . . . , Mp, j = 1, . . . , Np, and bi,j = 0) 2: Generate IEp ,C (i, j) using (8). 3: Generate r(i, j) = IEp ,C (i, j) − IEui,jC (i, j). 4: end for

5: Determine (i∗, j∗) based on (6), S(s) = (i∗, j∗).

6:

I ui∗,j∗
E,C

+1

(i∗

,

j

∗

)

=

IEp ,C (i∗, j∗),

increase

ui∗ ,j ∗

by

1.

7: Generate IE,V (i, j∗) using (9).

8: Evaluate ICMI (j) for all j = 1, . . . , Np using (10).

9: if ICMI (j) == 1 for all j = 1, . . . , Np

10: Terminate.

11: else

12: Increase s by 1, position = 1.

13: end if

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

(s + 1)-th stage include the C2V messages associated with all

protograph edges. For the messages associated with the type-

(2,1) edges, which will possibly be updated in the (s + 1)-th

stage, both r(2, 1) and Δ(2, 1) can be generated. When deter-

mining Δ(2, 1), all depth-2 increments in the (s + 2)-th stage
are compared, except for r2(2,1)(2, 1). For the messages associated with the other type-(3,4) edges, r(3, 4) and Δ(3, 4) can be

similarly obtained. The updates to C2V messages associated

with the type-(2,1) and the type-(3,4) edges will renew the

values of the type-1 and the type-4 variable nodes, respectively.

Since the messages associated with the type-(2,1) and the

type-(3,4) edges affect different parts of the decoding messages

Fig. 2. Applying the order-2 M2I2-based algorithm to the protograph corresponding to the base matrix B generated in (1).

in the (s + 1)-th stage, they will produce different versions of both the depth-2 predictions and the depth-2 increments in the (s + 2)-th stage. Therefore, Δ(2, 1) and Δ(3, 4) are generated

C. High-Order Prediction for the M2I2-Based Algorithm

based on the different versions of the predictions, and their values can be different. It is possible that r(2, 1) > r(3, 4)

In (5), the difference in mutual information between two successive decoding stages, which can be regarded as an order-1 increment, is generated. However, when the protograph-based edge-wise schedule is used, the updated messages in the current decoding stage will affect all successive stages, rather than only the immediately subsequent one. Therefore, if the mutual information can be predicted using the messages produced during several successive decoding stages, the sequence S can be more precisely determined for an even faster convergence.
In the determination of S(s + 1) using the M2I2-based algorithm, all protograph edges can be candidates for S(s + 1), and, hence, all the corresponding depth-1 (i.e., s + 1) predictions

but Δ(2, 1) < Δ(3, 4), which implies that the updates to the messages associated with the type-(2,1) edges can provide a greater increase in mutual information in the next stage, i.e., the (s + 1)-th stage. However, the updates to the type-(3,4) messages in the (s + 1)-th stage can induce a greater increase in mutual information in the stage after the next one, i.e., the (s + 2)-th stage. Therefore, the selection for the updates based on the order-1 increment generated using (5) may not be good enough for the later decoding stages, which are beyond the scope of the order-1 increment.
To make a better decision, the order-1 increment and the depth-2 increment can be combined as the order-2 increment, which is defined as

and depth-1 increments in the mutual information should be evaluated. If the predictions of the mutual information for

rΔ(i, j) = IEp ,C (i, j)−IEui,jC (i, j) + Δ(i, j) = r(i, j) + Δ(i, j). (11)

messages to be produced in the (s + 2)-th stage, i.e., the

depth-2 predictions, are also available, the depth-2 increment, which is defined as the difference between the mutual information for the (s + 2)-th stage and that for the (s + 1)-th stage, can be generated. Since the updates in the (s + 1)-th stage can affect the depth-2 predictions and, hence, the depth-2 increment, the messages associated with distinct protograph edges will induce different versions of both the depth-2 predictions and the depth-2 increments. If the messages associated with type-(i, j) edges have been updated in the (s + 1)-th stage, then the depth-2 increments in the (s + 2)-th stage can be denoted as r2(i,j)(h, k), for all edges where bh,k = 0. The superscript (i, j) denotes that these depth-2 increments are generated in the (s + 2)-th stage following the updates to the edge-(i, j) messages in the (s + 1)-th stage. The maximum value of these depth-2 increments can be denoted as Δ(i, j). It is worth noting that the updates in the (s + 2)-th stage can be selected from the messages associated with all protograph edges, and are not limited to those affected by the messages updated in the (s + 1)-th stage. However, since repeated updates to the same messages cannot provide any additional mutual information, the depth-2 increment r2(i,j)(i, j) will be excluded from the comparison when determining Δ(i, j).

Now, if the order-2 increment rΔ(2, 1) has the maximum

value, the updates to the messages associated with the

type-(2,1) edges in the (s + 1)-th stage can be guaranteed to

provide the maximum increase in mutual information for the

later two stages, i.e., the (s + 1)-th and (s + 2)-th stages. In

fact, a higher order increment can be recursively generated

in the form of this order-2 increment, which is presented in

detail in Algorithm 2. The order-P increment rΔ(i, j) can replace the original order-1 increment r(i, j) used in line 3 of Algorithm 1, and, hence, an order-P M2I2-based algorithm

can be used, where the increase in the mutual information

provided by the updates from the (s + 1)-th to the (s + P )-th

decoding stages can be calculated to assist in the determination

of S(s + 1).

In Algorithm 2, an order-P increment is recursively cal-

culated order by order using the subroutine R_GEN. The

depth index δ is initially set to 1. The edge index (i, j) of the

protograph is used to indicate that the subroutine is executed

to refine the increment associated with type-(i, j) edges. The

mutual

information

IEp

,C

(μ,

λ),

I uμ,λ
E,C

(μ,

λ),

and

IE

,V

(μ,

λ)

for

all non-zero elements of the base matrix B, i.e., bμ,λ = 0, are

inherited from the previous state of the recursion, and their

In Fig. 2, where the codes constructed using the base matrix values can only be passed to the next state, but cannot affect

B in (1) are considered, the candidates to be updated in the the values in the previous state.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE AND UENG: LDPC DECODING SCHEDULING FOR FASTER CONVERGENCE AND LOWER ERROR FLOOR

3109

Algorithm 2 The order-P increment generator

1:

FUNCTION

R_GEN(δ,

(i,

j),

(IEp ,C

(μ,

λ),

I uμ,λ
E,C

(μ,

λ),

IE,V (μ, λ),∀ bμ,λ = 0))

2:

Set

r(i,

j)

=

IEp ,C (i,

j)

−

I ui,j
E,C

(i,

j)

and

Δ(i,

j)

=

0.

3: if δ < P

4:

Increase

δ

by

1

and

set

I ui,j
E,C

(i,

j)

=

IEp ,C (i,

j).

5: Generate IE,V (a, j) using (9) for all ca ∈ N (vj) \ ci.

6: Generate IEp ,C (a, b) using (8) for all ca ∈ N (vj) \ ci

and vb ∈ N (ca) \ vj.

7: for(h = 1 . . . Mp, k = 1 . . . Np, for all bh,k = 0 and

(h, k) = (i, j))

8: Generate rδ(i,j)(h, k) = R_GEN(δ, (h, k), (IEp ,C (μ, λ),

I uμ,λ
E,C

(μ,

λ),

IE,V

(μ,

λ),∀

bμ,λ

=

0)).

9: end for

10: Find Δ(i, j) = max{rδ(i,j)(h, k)|h = 1, . . . , Mp, k = 1,

. . . , Np, (h, k) = (i, j)}.

11: end if

12: RETURN(rΔ(i, j) = r(i, j) + Δ(i, j)).

Fig. 3. Error rate versus the number of iterations for the rate-0.5 G.hn code using different schedules. (P = 4, AWGN channel, Eb/N0 = 1.4 dB).

When δ < P , the value of the refined increment rΔ(i, j)

is evaluated under the assumption that the C2V messages

associated with type-(i, j) edges have been updated. To eval-

uate the next-order increments in line 4, the depth index δ

increases by 1, and the predicted C2V mutual information

IEp ,C (i, j) acts as the mutual information provided by the actual

updated

messages,

i.e.,

I ui,j
E,C

(i,

j)

=

IEp ,C (i,

j).

Then,

the

V2C

mutual information transfered from type-j variable nodes to

the neighboring check nodes, and the predicted C2V mutual

information associated with these neighboring check nodes can be calculated in lines 5 and 6 based on this assumption. Therefore, despite only part of the predicted C2V mutual information being renewed from line 4 to line 6, the increments for all types

Fig. 4. Convergence behavior of the average ICMI using different decoding schedules. (AWGN channel and Eb/N0 = 0.85 dB).
D. Performance Evaluation

of edges must be generated, except for any repeated edges. The As previously mentioned, the M2I2-based algorithm can be depth-δ increment rδ(i,j)(h, k) can be generated for all proto- initiated using any SN Rs values larger than the decoding graph edges by recursively executing the subroutine R_GEN threshold, and distinct schedules can be obtained for different

in line 8. The superscript (i, j) denotes that these increments decoding SNR values. For the rate-0.5 LDPC code used in the are generated based on the assumption that IEp ,C(i, j) will G.hn standard, the decoding threshold of the code ensemble is
be provided by the actual updates. The subroutine R_GEN 0.82 dB, then a total five schedules can be arranged respec-

will be recursively executed until δ = P . Then, the value of tively using SN Rs = 0.82, 0.85, 0.9, 1.4, and 3.0 dB. For the the maximum increment Δ(i, j) can be determined after the practical length-8640 G.hn code, a meaningful error rate can

comparison on line 10, and can be used to refine the increment be achieved when the SNR (Eb/N0) value is greater than 1.25

returned to the previous recursive state in line 12.

dB. Fig. 3 shows the error rate versus the number of itera-

To complete the arrangement of the schedule using the tions when different schedules are used, where the considered

order-P M2I2-based algorithm, a depth-P tree search should decoding SNR value is 1.4 dB. It can be observed that the

be performed. Since there are EB branches on each node, the decoding processes following different schedules can provide complexity of the predictions and comparisons is O(EBP ). In very similar performances, even when the schedule arranged the search tree, the branches on each node can be considered using SN Rs = 3.0 dB is used. Since the decoding performance

as the candidates of a list, then the concept of list decoding is not sensitive to the selection of schedules, only a single

[30] can be introduced. It is obvious that there is a trade-off schedule is used in the decoding for the entire SNR region.

between complexity and performance using different list sizes. The convergence trajectories for the average cumulative mu-

Since the M2I2-based algorithm is executed offline, and we are tual information ICMI are plotted in Fig. 4, where the results are

more interested in the performance of the resultant schedules, a respectively obtained using increments from order 1 to order 4.

full list of EB edges is considered in this work.

Fig. 4 also shows the trajectory of the flooding schedule,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 5. Convergence speed for the rate-1/2 length-8640 G.hn [33] code using different decoding schedules. (AWGN channel and Eb/N0 = 1.40 dB).

Fig. 6. Error rate performance for the rate-3/4 length-2304 WiMax code [32] using different decoding schedules.

which is obtained using the original PEXIT (protograph-based

extrinsic information transfer) chart analysis [29]. For all up-

date strategies, it can be observed that the protograph-based edge-wise schedule designed using the M2I2-based algorithm

based on the order-1 increment requires only half the number of

iterations compared to the conventional flooding schedule. With

higher order predictions, the convergence speed can be further

improved. For this rate-0.5 G.hn code, there is no significant

difference in performance when either order-3 or order-4 incre-

ments are used, and the number of required iterations is about

40% that of the conventional flooding schedule.

An evaluation of the frame-error rate (FER) and bit-error

rate (BER) performances for the schedules arranged using the M2I2-based algorithm based on different increment orders is
presented in Fig. 5. It can be observed from Figs. 4 and 5 that

Fig. 7. Error rate performance for the rate-1/2 length-8640 G.hn code [33] using different decoding schedules.

the relative improvements in the convergence speed for both the mutual information and the error rate provided by the M2I2based algorithm are consistent, which implies that the M2I2based algorithm is a useful method for arranging the decoding sequence.
The simulation results for both the length-2304, rate-3/4 WiMax code and the length-8640, rate-1/2 G.hn code are shown in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively. It can be observed that, for both codes, the error-rate performance achieved when using the schedule arranged based on the M2I2-based algorithm with 50 iterations is almost equal to those provided when using either the LBP schedule with 50 iterations or the FL schedule with 100 iterations.
However, it can also be seen from Fig. 6 that, for the highrate WiMAX code, using the schedule arranged based on the M2I2-based algorithm with 15 iterations can provide a better FER performance compared to that provided by using the LBP schedule with the same number of iterations. Moreover, the FER performance achieved when using the M2I2-based schedule with 20 iterations is equal to that provided by using the

limited to 10, using the M2I2-based schedule instead of the LBP schedule achieves a gain of more than 0.2 dB in the SNR at an FER of 2 × 10−4.
Based on the previous simulation results, it can be concluded that although the M2I2-based schedules can only achieve a similar convergence error-rate performance, they can indeed successfully provide a faster convergence speed.
The reason that the protograph-based edge-wise schedule arranged using the M2I2-based algorithm can provide a faster convergence compared to LBP is described as follows. When LBP is used, the decoding process is scheduled to sequentially follow the order of the types of check nodes in the protograph, and the messages associated with the same row of matrix B are updated simultaneously. Therefore, the protograph-based edgewise schedule can provide more freedom in the schedule design, and, hence, a faster convergence in error-rate performance is observed.
IV. LOWER ERROR FLOOR VIA SCHEDULE DIVERSITY

LBP schedule with 27 iterations. For the low-rate G.hn code, For LDPC codes, when the error floor appears in the high Fig. 7 shows that, the M2I2-based schedule with 15 iterations SNR region, the majority of erroneously decoded frames are

can achieve almost the same FER performance as that of the due to trapping sets. An (a, b) trapping set can be triggered

LBP schedule with 20 iterations. If the number of iterations is when its a variable nodes are simultaneously in error and its b

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE AND UENG: LDPC DECODING SCHEDULING FOR FASTER CONVERGENCE AND LOWER ERROR FLOOR

3111

Fig. 8. Example of a Tanner graph, where {v3, v4, v5, v6} and {c2} form a (4,1) trapping set.
check nodes connecting to these variable nodes are not satisfied. Fig. 8 shows an example of a Tanner graph, where the variable

Fig. 9. Error rate performance for the rate-1/2 length-2640 Margulis code [17] when a different number of decoding attempts are applied, where the number of decoding attempts is denoted as T . The maximum number of iterations is limited to 50 for each decoding attempt.

nodes {v3, v4, v5, v6} and the check node c2 potentially construct a (4,1) trapping set. Trapping sets with a small a value can be more easily triggered. If it also contains a few unsatisfied check nodes, i.e., those with a small b value, which can generate contributing decoding messages, then it is difficult to solve the erroneously decoded bits in this trapping set. Therefore, the trapping sets with small (a, b) values are most harmful to the error floor performance and, hence, are called dominant trapping sets.
When the sub-optimum iterative BP algorithm is used in LDPC decoding, a single received frame can converge at a variety of speeds using different schedules, such as flooding, LBP, or the protograph-based edge-wise schedule. This implies that the values of the decoding messages for the same received frame are certainly different when distinct schedules are used. According to the hard decision results from the received LLR values, a (4,1) trapping set is triggered. Using the decoding schedule that follows the order of sequence ST , the errors are unable to be corrected after 40 iterations, and, even worse, the number of erroneously decoded bits is increased, as shown in Fig. 8. In contrast, if decoding sequence SC is used, all erroneously decoded bits are corrected within a single iteration.

in the initial state of each decoding attempt. The decoding messages are then updated following a predetermined schedule, e.g., S, arranged using the M2I2-based algorithm. If the received codeword cannot be successfully decoded, the decoding messages are reset, and the channel values are reloaded as the next decoding attempt starts. To achieve a diverse decoding result, a schedule different to S must be used. The distinct schedule SR1 for this new decoding attempt can be obtained by randomly permutating the elements in S. The new schedule can be regarded as a permutated, or an interleaved, version of S. The random permutations can be generated using a pseudo-random scrambler, which is commonly used in CDMA systems [31]. Pseudo-random scrambling codes can provide low-correlation sequences. Following the low-correlation update orders of sequences S and SR1, there is a high probability that diverse decoding results can be obtained during these two decoding attempts.
Fig. 9 shows the error rate performances achieved when the proposed schedule diversity is applied to the (2640, 1320) Margulis code [17]. If only a single decoding attempt is used, both an FER floor and a BER floor can be observed when the SNR value is larger than 2.3 dB. As the number of decoding

A. Proposed Decoding Scheme Combined With Schedule Diversity

attempts increases, the error-rate floors can be significantly lowered. It can also be observed that the improvement in the FER is more obvious than for the BER. The reason is that, on average,

The example demonstrated in Fig. 8 shows that the schedules a single erroneously decoded frame contains more erroneously

indeed affect the decoding results. It can be expected that, decoded bits as the number of decoding attempts increases, as

when multiple decoding schedules are available for a single shown in Fig. 10. For the Margulis code, the dominant trapping

received frame, schedule diversity can be achieved. In the sets are (12,4) and (14,4), which account for about 75% and

high SNR region, a relatively low error rate can be achieved 23% of the error floor performance, respectively [24]. Hence, it

using a single decoding schedule for a well-constructed code. is expected that the average number of erroneously decoded bits

This implies that trapping sets rarely occur, even when only in each erroneously decoded frame following the first decoding

a single decoding schedule is available. If multiple decoding attempt (T = 1) will be about 12 × 75% + 14 × 23% = 12.22

schedules can be applied to a single received frame, an even in the error-floor region. The result observed from Fig. 10 at

lower probability of trapping sets occurring can be achieved. SNR = 2.5 dB and T = 1 is consistent with this expectation.

To increase the probability of successful decoding, multiple It can be deduced that the majority of the erroneously decoded

decoding attempts, respectively using distinct schedules, are ap- frames are likely due to the dominant trapping sets. Because

plied to a single received frame. The channel values are loaded of the diverse decoding results, by following different decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 10. Average number of erroneously decoded bits in a single erroneously decoded frame.

Fig. 11. Comparison of different error-floor lowering techniques.

schedules, there is a low probability that the dominant trapping

sets are triggered at exactly the same point in the decoding

process. Consequently, the erroneously decoded frames are

rarely a result of the dominant trapping sets following mul-

tiple decoding attempts. On the other hand, there is a higher

probability that the decoding fails due to the high-weight error

patterns, e.g., other trapping sets with larger a values, or even

other legal codewords. Therefore, it can be observed from

Fig. 10 that in the high SNR region, the average number of

erroneously decoded bits in a single erroneously decoded frame

continuously increases as more decoding attempts are executed.

At the same time, an improvement in FER of more than two

orders in magnitude can be achieved compared to the first

decoding attempt, as shown in Fig. 9. As a result, the proposed

schedule diversity indeed mitigates the effect of the dominant

trapping sets, and is able to lower the error floor.

B. Comparison With Other Error Floor Lowering Techniques In addition to the proposed schedule diversity, the decoding

Fig. 12. FER performance for the rate-1/2 length-2640 Margulis code [17] using different decoding schemes. For the backtracking algorithm, the number of decoding attempts is 6.

methods proposed in [11] are able to lower the error floor decoding attempt are not exactly the same as the original values,

with assistance of the scheduling technique, where both LBP and only one kind of schedule is used. The differences between

and Approximate Node-wise Scheduling (ANS) are employed. these three decoding methods are shown in Fig. 11. Although the switching of schedules was introduced in the Fig. 12 shows the FER performances when different decod-

LBP/ANS decoders proposed in [11], the decoding messages ing schemes are applied to the (2640, 1320) Margulis code,

are not cleared and the channel values are not reloaded. Since a where the maximum number of iterations is limited to 50.

complete decoding attempt includes the loading of the channel Since the LBP/ANS decoders in [11] have not been applied

values, there is only a single decoding attempt applied to each re- to the Margulis code, and the capability of lowering the error

ceived codeword for the LBP/ANS decoders. Moreover, the ca- floor comes from the ANS decoder, only the results for the

pability of lowering the error floor is derived from the dynamic ANS decoder are included in Fig. 12. The error floor can characteristics of the ANS, rather than the schedule switching. be observed when the SNR is higher than 2.3 dB for the

As with the proposed schedule diversity, the clear and reload decoding schedules based on Flooding, LBP, and the schedule operations have also been used in the backtracking algorithm arranged using the proposed M2I2-based algorithm. Although

presented in [25] to reset the decoder, when the previous the ANS decoder [11] and the backtracking algorithm are able

decoding attempt failed. However, in contrast to the proposed to significantly lower the error floor, the proposed schedule

schedule diversity, the sign of the channel value corresponding diversity can provide an even lower error floor. It is worth

to one of the suspicious error bits is flipped before the new noting that the proposed schedule diversity can provide a better

decoding attempt starts. The new decoding attempt is then FER performance than that of GLDPC decoding [24], which

initiated following the same LBP schedule. In other words, for is usually regarded as a benchmark for error floor lowering

the backtracking algorithm, the channel values used in each techniques when applied to the Margulis code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE AND UENG: LDPC DECODING SCHEDULING FOR FASTER CONVERGENCE AND LOWER ERROR FLOOR

3113

V. CONCLUSION
Using the proposed M2I2-based algorithm, fixed and predetermined decoding schedules can be designed based on high-order increments, which can be recursively constructed. Applying the M2I2-based schedule to LDPC codes, the number of iterations required to achieve a desired error-rate performance can be significantly reduced. In addition, without any knowledge of trapping sets, the proposed schedule diversity technique yields a diverse range of decoding results for a single received frame, and is able to efficiently lower the probability of falling into small trapping sets and, hence, lower the error floor. By combining the M2I2-based schedules with the schedule diversity technique, both the convergence speed in the waterfall region and the error rate in the error-floor region can be significantly improved.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT. Press, 1963.
[2] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic´, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput lowdensity parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Antonio, TX, USA, Nov. 2001, pp. 3019–3024.
[3] M. M. Mansourm and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[4] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[5] Y.-L. Wang, Y.-L. Ueng, C.-L. Peng, and C.-J. Yang, “Processingtask arrangement for a low-complexity full-mode WiMAX LDPC Codec,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 415–428, Feb. 2011.
[6] Y.-L. Ueng, B.-J. Yang, C.-J. Yang, H.-C. Lee, and J.-D. Yang, “An efficient multi-standard LDPC decoder design using hardware-friendly shuffled decoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 743– 756, Mar. 2013.
[7] X. W. Chen, H. Yu, and Y. Y. Xu, “Optimized decoding schedule for irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. IET Int. CCWMC, pp. 261–264.
[8] M. K. Kim, D. H. Kim, and Y. H. Lee, “Serial scheduling algorithm of LDPC decoding for multimedia transmission,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. BMSB, Jun. 27–29, pp. 1–4.
[9] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial message-passing scheduleds for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4076–4091, Nov. 2007.
[10] E. Sharon, N. Presman, and S. Litsyn, “Convergence analysis of generalized serial message-passing schedules,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1013–1024, Aug. 2009.
[11] A. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470– 3479, Dec. 2010.
[12] G. Elidan, I. McGraw, and D. Koller, “Residual belief propagation: Informed scheduling for asynchronous message passing,” in Proc. 22nd Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., Jul. 2006, pp. 165–173.
[13] G. Han and X. Liu, “An efficient dynamic schedule for layered beliefpropagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 950–952, Dec. 2009.
[14] Z.-X. Wang, X.-C. Wang, X.-Q. Yu, and D. Guo, “A BP decoding algorithm based on nodes residual for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. WCNIS, Aug. 2010, pp. 124–127.
[15] Y. Gong, X. Liu, W. Ye, and G. Han, “Effective informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2683–2691, Oct. 2011.
[16] H.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Ueng, S.-M. Yeh, and W.-Y. Weng, “Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886–896, Mar. 2013.
[17] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles and low-density codes,” Combinatorica 2, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982.

[18] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and RamanujanMargulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theoretical Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, Oct. 2003.
[19] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715–718, Dec. 2004.
[20] Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[21] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1248, Aug. 2004.
[22] D. Vukobratovic´ and V. Šenk, “Evaluation and design of irregular LDPC codes using ACE spectrum,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 2272–2278, Aug. 2009.
[23] D. Vukobratovic´ and V. Šenk, “Generalized ACE constrained progressive edge growth LDPC code design,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 32–34, Jan. 2008.
[24] Y. Han and W. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, Jun. 2009.
[25] J. Kang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An iterative decoding algorithm with backtracking to lower the error floors of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 64–73, Jan. 2011.
[26] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Hardware implementation of a backtracking-based reconfigurable decoder for lowering the error floor of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 2931–2943, Dec. 2011.
[27] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” Flintridge, CA, USA, Tech. Rep. IPN Progress Rep. 42-154, Aug. 2003, INP.
[28] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[29] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM Conf., Nov. 2007, pp. 3250–3254.
[30] V. Guruswami, “List decoding of error-correcting codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2001.
[31] I. Ahmed, “Scrambling code generation for WCDMA on the StarCore SC140/SC1400 Cores,” AN2254, Nov. 2004, Application Note.
[32] IEEE 802.16e WiMAX standard, IEEE P802.16e-2005, Oct. 2005. [33] ITU-TG.hn Standard forWiredHome Networking. [Online]. Available:
http://www.homegridforum.org/home/ [34] Wireless LANs WWiSE Proposal: High Throughput Extension to the
802.11 Standard, IEEE 802.11, Aug. 2014, IEEE 11-04-0886-00-000n.
Huang-Chang Lee received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from National Chi Nan University, Nantao, Taiwan, in 2002 and 2004, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. His research interests include channel coding, digital signal processing, and their applications to communications.
Yeong-Luh Ueng (M’05) received the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2001. From 2001 to 2005, he was with a private communication technology company, where he focused on the design and development of various wireless chips. Since December 2005, he has been a member of the faculty of the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, where he is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering. His research interests include coding theory, wireless communications, and communication ICs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

