ECOC 2014, Cannes - France Th.1.3.3

Next Generation Error Correcting Codes for Lightwave Systems

Laurent Schmalen(1), Vahid Aref(1,3), Junho Cho(2), and Kaveh Mahdaviani(4)
(1) Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent, Stuttgart, Germany, Laurent.Schmalen@alcatel-lucent.com (2) Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent, Holmdel, NJ, USA (3) University of Stuttgart, Institute of Telecommunications, Stuttgart, Germany (4) University of Toronto, ECE Department, Toronto, Canada
Abstract In this paper, we discuss and present some recent advances in the field of error correcting codes and discuss their applicability for lightwave transmission systems. We compare polar codes and spatially coupled codes and present recent modifications of the latter.

Introduction Since the introduction of forward error cor-
rection (FEC) in optical communications, coding technology has evolved significantly. Modern high-speed optical communication systems require high-performing FEC systems supporting throughputs of 100 Gbit/s or multiples thereof, low power consumption, coding gains in the order of more than 11 dB, and adaptation to the peculiarities of the optical channel 1.
Especially with the advent of coherent transmission schemes and the utilization of high resolution Analog-to-Digital Converters (ADCs), soft-decision decoding—which uses the samples computed by the DSP and the statistics thereof—have become an attractive means of reliably increasing the transmission reach of lightwave systems. Currently, there are two main classes of codes that allow for soft-decision decoding and that are attractive for implementation in optical receivers at decoding throughputs of 100 Gbit/s and above: Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes and Block Turbo Codes (BTCs), each with their own advantages and disadvantages.
Recently, two new coding schemes have emerged that are both asymptotically capacityachieving and have appealing encoding and decoding complexity: Polar codes 2 and spatially coupled codes 5. We highlight both coding schemes, discuss their applicability in optical communications, and present recent advances.
Polar Codes Polar coding, invented by Arıkan in 2009 2, was the first provably capacity-achieving coding scheme over discrete memoryless channels. The
This work has been partly funded by the German Government in the German CELTIC+/BMBF project SASER SaveNet. K. Mahdaviani’s work was conducted during an internship at Bell Labs funded by a DAAD-RisePro scholarship.

polar code encoder polarizes a vector u of length

N = 2n which contains the K information bits in

specific positions and (known) frozen values oth-

erwise by multiplication with the polarization ma-

trix F

x = uF = u

10 11

⊗n

where ⊗n denotes n successive applications of the Kronecker product. If the positions of the K information bits are carefully chosen, then after decoding with a successive cancellation decoder or variants thereof, these positions are unaffected by channel noise. Although polar codes are asymptotically capacity achieving, extremely long codelengths N are required to achieve low error rates, as the code word error r√ate of polar codes roughly decays with O(2− N ). The successive cancellation decoder consists of relatively simple atomic operations and is of complexity O(N log N ). Currently, research efforts are ongoing that aim at optimizing the finite-length behavior of polar codes by either modified code constructions or optimized decoders, and at developing hardware-friendly decoders.

LDPC Convolutional & Spatially Coupled (SC) Codes
LDPC convolutional codes were introduced more than a decade ago 3 but their outstanding properties have only been fully realized a few years ago, when Lentmaier et al. noticed 4 that the estimated decoding performance of a certain class of terminated LDPC convolutional codes with a simple message passing decoder is close to the MAP threshold of the underlying code ensemble. The MAP threshold of the code denotes the performance under optimal maximum likelihood decoding.
A left-terminated LDPC convolutional code can be basically considered to be an LDPC code with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. DownloaPdaedgeon1J/3une 24,2026 at 18:04:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECOC 2014, Cannes - France Th.1.3.3

a structured, infinitely extended parity-check ma-

trix, where we have in the most general case

⎛

⎞

H0(0)

H = ⎜⎜⎝⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜HHμ1...((μ1))

H0(1)
H1...(2) Hμ(μ + 1)

. .

. .

. .

...

H0(t)

H1

(t ...

+

1)

Hμ(t + μ)

. .

. .

..⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟

...

with Hi(t) being sparse binary parity-check matrices with dim Hi(t) = m × n. Every codeword x of the code has to fulfill HxT = 0. One advantage of LDPC convolutional codes is that virtually very long codewords can be constructed, which can conveniently be decoded with acceptable latency using a simple windowed decoder. The term spatial coupling has been introduced 5 to denote the more general phenomenon of coupling several independent codes (we can think of these as separate, independent codewords), by a superimposed, convolutional-like structure.
Spatially coupled codes are now emerging in various applications. Two examples of spatially coupled product codes are the staircase code 6 and the braided BCH codes 7, both of which are rate 239/255 codes targeted for 100 Gbit/s applications with hard decision decoding. It has also been shown that spatially coupled codes can be very attractive 12 in the scope of pragmatic coded modulation with iterative decoding, where they mitigate the tedious task of designing appropriate LDPC codes. Another application is the easy design of rate-adaptive codes 8.
Comparison of Coding Schemes
In Fig. 1, we compare the performance between a state-of-the-art LDPC code as it could be implemented in today’s coherent systems and two next-generation coding schemes. All codes have 25% overhead. The reference LDPC code is a regular variable node degree-3 code of size N = 32640. The systematic polar code is of size N = 32768 (n = 15) and is decoded with a conventional successive cancellation decoder 2. The LDPC convolutional code is a regular code with variable node degree-4 and is selected such that dim Hi(t) = 40 × 200, μ = 30 and the submatrices are repeated periodically with T = 5, i.e., Hi(t + T ) = Hi(t). In order to have a fair comparison, we employ a windowed decoder such that the decoding window comprises 32000 code bits.

10−1 10−2 10−3 10−4 10−5

Systematic Polar Code

BER

LDPC Code LDPC Convol.

10−62.2

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

3.2 3.4

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 1: Comparison between regular LDPC code, systematic polar code, and regular LDPC convolutional code.

From the simulation results in Fig. 1, we can see that the spatially coupled (LDPC convolutional) code is the clear winner and that the (systematic) polar code suffers from a higher BER than the LDPC code. Various approaches to improving the finite-length performance of polar codes are however being actively proposed, including e.g., list decoding. However, as of today, spatially coupled LDPC codes are more mature and perform better in the non-asymptotic regime.

Decoding Speed of Spatially Coupled Codes
In this section, we present some variations to spatially coupled codes that we have recently proposed. In the past, irregular block LDPC codes have been used to design codes that perform very well for low SNRs, but these schemes do sometimes suffer from relatively high error floors requiring the use of an outer code that leads to inherent rate losses. In the case of spatially coupled (SC) codes, we can use the degree distribution to control the propagation speed of the decoding wave of the code, which is the number of iterations Ireq that is necessary until a windowed decoder can advance by one step 1,10. We construct slightly irregular SC codes with degree-3 and degree- ( ∈ {4, 6}) variable nodes. We vary the fraction av, of degree- nodes between 0 and 1 and select the check nodes such that a 20% overhead code is constructed. We plot the required Eb/N0 value to achieve a certain Ireq for varying av, ( = 4, dashed blue lines, or = 6, solid red lines) in Fig. 2. The required Eb/N0 values have been obtained using density evolution. The decoding convergence improves by selecting a proper value of av, . The selection depends however on Ireq. For the (practical) value of Ireq = 1, we can see that the optimum is achieved with = 6 and av,6 = 0.2 (20% of degree-6 variable nodes, 80% of degree-3 variable nodes).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. DownloaPdaedgeon2J/3une 24,2026 at 18:04:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECOC 2014, Cannes - France Th.1.3.3

Required Eb/N0 (dB) BER

3

2.8

2.6

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Fract. deg.-4 nodes (av,4), Fract. deg.-6 nodes (av,6)

Fig. 2: Required Eb/N0 to operate a windowed decoder with Ireq iterations per segment for slightly irregular SC codes

Laterally Connected SC-Codes
In some cases, e.g., in polarization-multiplexed optical communications, we want to transmit data streams over multiple parallel channels. In the case of polarization dependent loss (PDL), one of these sub-channels can be significantly degraded. Another example where data is multiplexed onto multiple subchannels is OFDM, where some of these sub-channels may experience lower SNRs than others. In these cases, the use of single independent codes for each subchannel may not be optimal. Instead of interleaving a single code to the different sub-channels 11, we have proposed laterally connected spatiallycoupled (SC) codes 9, which assigns single codes to each subchannel that are then sparsely connected to help each-other during the decoding process.
For demonstrating the performance of laterally connected SC-codes, we construct a scenario with two AWGN channels where the second channel is degraded by ΔSNR and compare three cases: a) separate SC-codes for each channel, b) a single SC code of twice the size that is interleaved to both channels, and c) a laterally connected SC code. We see from the simulation results in Fig. 3 that the use of laterally connected SC-codes can offer significant gains, which is also partly due to the unique, superior code construction 9. Note that the error flare that starts to manifest in Fig. 3 is due to the special randomized construction of the codes and can be avoided by a more sophisticated design.

Conclusions
In this paper, we have highlighted some recent advances in the field of error correcting codes and have shed some lights on polar codes and spatially coupled codes. Currently, spatially coupled codes are the more mature coding schemes

Intl. SC-Code Lat. Conn. SC-Codes

10−1 10−2 10−3 10−4

ΔEb/N0=0.1 dB ΔEb/N0=0.7 dB
seperate SC codes

10−5

10−6 2.4

2.6

2.8

3

3.2

3.4

Average Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 3: Comparison between separate SC codes, an interleaved SC code, and laterally connected SC codes for
transmission over two parallel channels

and are an interesting option for future lightwave systems. Finally, we have presented some recent modifications of the scheme.

References
[1] A. Leven and L. Schmalen, “Status and Recent Advances on Forward Error Correction Technologies for Lightwave Systems,” J. Lightwave Technol., Vol. 32, No. 16 (2014).
[2] E. Arıkan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacity-achieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. 55, No. 7, p. 3051 (2009).
[3] A. Jiminez Felstro¨ m and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Vol. 45, No. 6 (1999).
[4] M. Lentmaier et al., “Asymptotically good LDPC convolutional codes with AWGN channel thresholds close to the Shannon limit,” Proc. ISTC, Brest (2010).
[5] S. Kudekar et al, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Vol. 57, No. 2, p. 803 (2011).
[6] B. Smith et al., “Staircase codes: FEC for 100 Gb/s OTN,” J. Lightw. Technol., Vol. 30, No. 1, p. 110 (2012).
[7] Y.-Y. Jian et al., “Iterative hard-decision decoding of braided BCH codes for high-speed optical communication,” Proc. GLOBECOM, Atlanta, (2013).
[8] Y. Zhang and I. Djordjevic, “Staircase rate-adaptive LDPCcoded modulation for high-speed intelligent optical transmission,” Proc. OFC, M3A.6, San Francisco (2014).
[9] L. Schmalen and K. Mahdaviani, “Laterally Connected Spatially Coupled Code Chains for Transmission over Unstable Parallel Channels,” subm. to Proc. ISTC (2014).
[10] V. Aref et al., “On the convergence speed of spatially coupled LDPC ensembles,” in Proc. Allerton Conf., arXiv:1307.3780 (2013).
[11] C. Ha¨ ger et al., “Optimized bit mappings for spatially coupled LDPC codes over parallel binary erasure channels,” Proc. ICC, Sydney (2014).
[12] L. Schmalen and S. ten Brink, “Combining spatially coupled LDPC codes with modulation and detection,” Proc. ITG SCC, Munich (2014).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. DownloaPdaedgeon3J/3une 24,2026 at 18:04:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

