2738

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

A Fully Parallel LDPC Decoder Architecture Using Probabilistic Min-Sum Algorithm for High-Throughput Applications
Chung-Chao Cheng, Jeng-Da Yang, Huang-Chang Lee, Chia-Hsiang Yang, and Yeong-Luh Ueng

Abstract—This paper presents a normalized probabilistic min-sum algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, where a probabilistic second minimum value, instead of the true second minimum value, is used to facilitate fully parallel decoder realization. The comparators in each check-node unit (CNU) are connected through an interconnect network based on a mix of tree and butterfly networks such that the routing and message passing between the variable-node units (VNUs) and CNUs can be efficiently realized. In order to further reduce the hardware complexity, the normalization operation is realized in the VNU rather than in the CNU. An early termination scheme is proposed in order to prevent unnecessary energy dissipation for both low and high signal-to-noise-ratio regions. The proposed techniques are demonstrated by implementing a (2048, 1723) LDPC decoder using a 90 nm CMOS process. Post-layout simulation results show that the decoder supports a throughput of 45.42 Gbps at 199.6 MHz, achieving the highest throughput and throughput-to-area ratio among comparable works based on a similar or better error performance.
Index Terms—High-throughput decoder, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, min-sum algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2] have received increased attention due to their excellent error-correction capabilities. An LDPC code can be decoded iteratively using either the sum-product algorithm [2] or the hardwarefriendly normalized min-sum algorithm (NMSA) presented in [3] based on its Tanner graph, which is a bipartite graph consisting of variable nodes (VNs) and check nodes (CNs). In [1] and [2], two-phase message passing, which divides the decoding operations in a single iteration into the VN-operation and the CN-operation phases, was used.
Nowadays, LDPC codes have been adopted in many standards, and a wide range of decoders have been implemented for both wireless and wired communications [4]–[7]. For wired communications, high-throughput decoders for high-rate LDPC codes are required. For example, the rate-0.84 regular (2048, 1723) LDPC code constructed based on a Reed-Solomon
Manuscript received September 12, 2013; revised December 19, 2013, January 30, 2014, and February 22, 2014; accepted March 12, 2014. Date of publication April 07, 2014; date of current version August 26, 2014. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor B.-H. Gwee.
C.-C. Cheng, J.-D. Yang and H.-C. Lee are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan (e-mail: s9961818@m99.nthu.tw; dad77911dad@yahoo.com.tw; akula.lee@gmail.com).
C.-H. Yang is with the Department of Electronics Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan (e-mail: chy@nctu.edu.tw).
Y.-L. Ueng is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan (e-mail: ylueng@ee.nthu.edu.tw).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2014.2312479

(RS) code [8], is adopted in the IEEE 802.3an standard (10GBASE-T) [9], where the throughput requirement is 6.67 Gbps. For next-generation Ethernet and optical communications, a throughput of more than 10 Gbps is desired.
In [10], the authors showed that the high check-node degree for high-rate LDPC codes leads to greater complexities in hardware, interconnects, and timing, which are difficult to manage using a fully parallel architecture without degradation in error performance. Consequently, partially parallel architectures, where either VNs or CNs are partitioned into several groups and each group is processed sequentially, were used in [10]–[13]. Although partially parallel decoders can maintain an adequate error-rate performance, these decoders can only achieve a maximum throughput of about 10 Gbps.
To meet throughput requirements in excess of 10 Gbps, nonprogrammable fully parallel architectures are required [14]. To reduce the number of interconnects and, hence, increase utilization, the Split-Row Threshold Algorithm (SRTA) presented in [15] and [16] can be used, where the parity-check matrix (variable nodes) is divided into several block columns (groups), and the local minimum in each group is compared with a predefined threshold value. The authors in [15] demonstrated that their decoder for the (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code, where the variable-node and check-node degrees are 6 and 32, respectively, can achieve a utilization of 97% using 16 partitions. However, this decoder suffers from a loss in error performance of 0.2–0.3 dB compared to the conventional NMSA [15].
The complex interconnects in a fully parallel decoder can also be reduced using a bit-serial architecture [17]. Moreover, it was shown in [18] that serial data processing in a bit-serial decoder can be deeply pipelined using digit-online arithmetic. The stochastic decoding method presented in [19] and [20] can also be used to avoid complex interconnects, where messages are conveyed in Bernoulli sequences with a sense that the probability of observing a “1” in a stream is equal to the original probability. It was reported in [19] that the (2048, 1723) bit-serial decoder occupies a small area. However, in order to achieve a throughput of more than 10 Gbps, the stochastic decoder should be operated at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) and a high clock frequency of 750 MHz. In addition, stochastic decoding will introduce significant latency compared to the bit-parallel approach.
In this paper, a fully parallel bit-parallel architecture is proposed in order to achieve the desired throughput for next-generation high-throughput applications. The resultant difficulties are overcome by utilizing the following techniques. A Normalized Probabilistic Min-Sum Algorithm (NPMSA), where a probabilistic second minimum value, instead of the true second minimum value, is proposed in order to simplify the CN operation.

1549-8328 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHENG et al.: FULLY PARALLEL LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE USING PROBABILISTIC MIN-SUM ALGORITHM

2739

To minimize the core area and the wire length, the compara-

tors in each CN unit (CNU) are connected through an intercon-

nect network based on a mix of tree and butterfly networks. The

resultant CNU is partitioned into several sub-units, where the

local minimum value for each partition is first established via

a comparison tree, and then the global minimum values are de-

termined by comparing the local minimum value with the min-

imum values from its neighboring partitions. Accordingly, the

VN units (VNUs) are partitioned such that the routing and mes-

sage passing between the VNUs and the CNUs can be efficiently realized. In order to further reduce the hardware complexity, the

Fig. 1. Tree-structure-based MVF for a CNU with 32 inputs.

normalization process is carefully executed in the VNU rather than in the CNU. An early termination scheme is proposed so as to avoid unnecessary energy dissipation for both the low and high SNR regions. The proposed techniques are demonstrated by implementing a fully parallel (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC decoder using a 90 nm CMOS process. Post-layout simulation re-

where

and is a nor-

malization factor. In the last iteration, i.e.,

, a hard

decision for each VN is made based on the sign of the a

posterior probability (APP) , which is given by

.

sults show that this decoder achieves the highest throughput and throughput-to-area ratio (TAR) among comparable works.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the proposed NPMSA. Section III presents the proposed decoder architecture, including the early-termination scheme. Chip implementation and comparison results are detailed in Section IV. Section V concludes the paper.

C. Normalized Probabilistic Min-Sum Algorithm

For high-rate LDPC codes, where the check-node degree is

usually large, and is significantly larger than the variable-node

degree, the computational complexity of the decoding is domi-

nated by the CN operation. Take the regular (2048, 1723) code

as an example, where

and

, it can be seen that

the CN operation is much more complicated than the VN oper-

II. LDPC CODES AND DECODING ALGORITHMS A. Review of LDPC Codes Constructed Based on RS Codes

ation. Consequently, efficient techniques were devised to overcome this challenge.
In order to produce the C2V messages for check node , it

The (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code used in this paper is

constructed based on the (64, 2) extended RS code [8]. The

RS-LDPC code is regular and the dimensions of its parity-check

matrix (PCM) are 384 2048, where the column weight and

row weight are 6 and 32, respectively. The PCM can be divided

into 6 32 submatrices, where the dimensions of each subma-

trix are 64 64. In addition, each submatrix is a permutation

matrix. Since the rank of this PCM is

, the

PCM is not full rank and there are 59 dependent rows in the

matrix. There are 384 CNs and 2048 VNs in the corresponding

Tanner graph.

can be seen from (1) that the first minimum value,

and

the second minimum value,

, must be determined among

V2C messages. A module called the minimum-value finder

(MVF) can be used to determine both of these minimum values

together with the index value for

. These minimum values

and the index are then used by the C2V-message calculators

to calculate the C2V messages.

Specifically, the first minimum value

is defined as

, and the corresponding index

is denoted as . The second minimum value

is de-

fined as

. Establishing the

value can be accomplished through

compar-

B. Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm [3]

Let

, which is produced during the th iteration, denote

the variable-to-check (V2C) message from VN to CN . Simi-

larly, the check-to-variable (C2V) message from CN to VN ,

which is produced during the th iteration, is denoted as

.

Let

denote the set of CNs connected to VN . Similarly,

denotes the set of VNs (bit nodes) connected to CN . For

regular LDPC codes, each CN has the same degree , and each

VN has the same degree . In other words, for regular LDPC

codes,

and

for each CN and each VN

, respectively. At the th iteration, the CN and VN operations

are described as follows:

VN operations: For each VN , compute

corre-

sponding to each of its CN neighbors , i.e.,

, ac-

cording to

, where

is the channel (reliability) value of VN .

CN operations: For each check node , compute

corresponding to each of its VN neighbors , i.e.,

,

according to

isons. After the

value is determined, additional

comparisons are required in order to ascertain the

value.

In [21], an efficient tree-structure based algorithm (the TS ap-

proach) was proposed to realize the MVF. The TS approach uses

connection units to simultaneously determine the first two min-

imum values and, hence, the delay of the resultant MVF is only

half compared to that of the conventional sorting-based method.

As a result, a high-speed MVF can be devised using the TS ap-

proach. This TS approach requires

comparisons in

order to determine the

and

values from inputs.

In this paper, a tree-structure-based MVF is proposed, where

connection units are not used to determine the second minimum

value. Instead, the last competitor of the first minimum is treated

as the second minimum. As a result, the number of comparators

can be further reduced by half by removing the connection units,

while still retaining the reduced delay when compared to [21].

The proposed MVF is detailed as follows. As shown in Fig. 1,

the

comparisons are arranged based on an -level tree

structure, where

, in order to determine the

value, where

and

. In this tree,

(1)

two groups of size- leaves (inputs), called the left and right groups, are at the top of the tree. If the two inputs of the last-level

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2740

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 2. Tree-structure-based MVF for a CNU with 8 inputs.

TABLE I

PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTION OF

(THE PROBABILISTIC

)

Fig. 3. BER versus SNR for the (2048, 1723) code. The numbers in the paren-

theses denote

. 16 partitions are used in the SRTA [15].

comparison are denoted as and , then either or is

the desired

value. Consider the case where is the de-

sired

value, which is also the minimum value of the left

TABLE II COMPARISON OF CN OPERATIONS

group shown in Fig. 1. Although the other input may not

be the correct

value, it is the minimum value among the

other group of size

(right group values). In other words,

(the last competitor of the first minimum) is at least the

This value is calculated based on an ASIC implementation, where the

th minimum value among the inputs. If the

comparators in each CNU are connected through an interconnect network

value is generated using this method, the resultant second min- based on a mix of tree and butterfly networks with 4 partitions.

imum value, i.e., , is called the probabilistic

value.

Based on

and BER

.

In other words, the last competitor of the first minimum in a

tree-structure-based MVF is taken as the probabilistic second

minimum. Fig. 2 shows an example that demonstrates how to

obtain the probabilistic second minimum for 8 inputs.

If we divide the index set

into two subsets

and

, where

and

, then the probabilistic

can be mathematically

written as

NMSA based on a BER of

and

. However, when

, the NPMSA achieves almost the same error-rate

performance compared to the NMSA. In contrast, the use of the

SRTA [15] induces a performance loss of about 0.2 dB com-

pared to the NMSA. It can also be seen that the error perfor-

mance for the NPMSA when

is similar to that of the

SRTA using

.

Table II shows a comparison of the complexity of CN oper-

ations executed using the NMSA, the SRTA, and the proposed

(2) NPMSA for the (2048, 1723) code, where the complexity is If we assume the occurrence of the second minimum is uni- measured based on the number of 2-input comparisons. It is

formly distributed over the inputs of the MVF, the probability worth noting that there are 2048 VNs and 384 CNs in the

that (the probabilistic

) is the correct second min- decoding Tanner graph. For the NMSA, the efficient MVF

imum is

. For our application, simulation results presented in [21] is used, since the first two minimum values

show that the probability is 51% for

, i.e.,

, which can be found correctly using this approach. Compared to the

confirms the derivation. The probability of being one of the NMSA combined with the MVF proposed in [21], the proposed

second to fifth minimum values for

is 96%, as shown NPMSA can achieve a 49.1% reduction in the number of

in Table I.

comparisons with a 0.05 dB loss in error-rate performance from

Although the value of the probabilistic

is different the algorithmic perspective. Compared to the SRTA, the pro-

from the value of the

, with a probability of about 50%, posed NPMSA can achieve a 35.4% reduction in the number

it will be used to update the C2V message that will be passed to of comparisons and a 0.15 dB enhancement in error-rate

only a single neighboring VN. In addition, an appropriate nor- performance from the algorithmic perspective. Although the

malization factor can be used to compensate for the effect of proposed ASIC implementation will increase the complexity

the optimistic probabilistic

value in order to enhance the of the CN operations, the reduction in complexity achieved

error-rate performance. Accordingly, (1) can be modified as fol- by using the proposed NPMSA is still significant compared to

lows:

both the NMSA and the SRTA.

if if

The reason that the NPMSA achieves a better error perfor(3) mance compared to that of the SRTA, and a similar performance
compared to that of the NMSA for the (2048, 1723) code, is de-

The resultant algorithm is called the NPMSA. The optimal nor- scribed in the following. In the NPMSA, one of the C2V

malization factor for it is related to the CN degree of the messages is generated using the probabilistic

value, and

LDPC code considered and can be determined using either the the other

C2V messages are generated using the cor-

BER simulation or the density evolution described in [3].

rect

value. Since

for the (2048, 1723) code, the

Fig. 3 shows the floating-point bit-error-rate (BER) simu- majority of the C2V messages (about 97%) are generated using

lation results for the (2048, 1723) code using different algo- the correct

value. Hence, the NPMSA can achieve a sim-

rithms. It can be seen that the use of the NPMSA introduces ilar error-rate performance compared to that of the NMSA, al-

a performance degradation of only 0.05 dB compared to the though the probability of selecting the correct second minimum

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHENG et al.: FULLY PARALLEL LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE USING PROBABILISTIC MIN-SUM ALGORITHM

2741

Fig. 4. Architecture of the CNU for the SRTA-based decoder with 16 partitions presented in [15].

Fig. 5. BER versus SNR for the (2048, 1723) code using NPMSA and different

quantization schemes, where

.

is around 50% assuming uniform distribution. In the SRTA, ei-

ther the threshold value, the correct

value, or the correct

value, are used to generate C2V messages. However, if

the number of partitions is large, e.g., 16 partitions, there is no

guarantee that the C2V messages are generated using the cor-

rect

and

values with a high probability. Hence, a

performance degradation is observed for the SRTA, although it

is also modified from the NMSA.

NPMSA-based decoder. It was reported in [15] that the quantization loss for the 5-bit SRTA-based decoder is 0.1 dB. As shown in Fig. 5, the wordlength of the channel value in the proposed NPMSA-based decoder can be further reduced to 4 bits with the same error performance loss of 0.1 dB. Although a smaller number of quantization bits is used, the proposed 4-bit decoder still provides a better error-rate performance compared to the 5-bit SRTA-based decoder. The utilization of this directly-mapped 4-bit NPMSA-based decoder is 75%.

III. HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE
Although the proposed NPMSA can reduce the computational complexity of the CNUs with a minimal error-rate loss, the hardware architecture must still be designed carefully in order to minimize the area, delay, and energy. Several techniques are proposed for achieving these goals.

Mixed interconnect network: A mixed interconnect network is proposed in order to reduce routing complexity and improve utilization. To implement the MVF of a single -input CNU, the tree structure shown in Fig. 1 is commonly used. Although this structure can minimize the usage of comparators, it is no longer optimal when considering the routing complexity in a fully parallel LDPC decoder. The tree comparison structure

A. Reduction in Routing Complexity

results in a tree interconnect topology for the MVF of a CNU. This means that a MVF receives V2C messages from

It was reported in [15] that a 5-bit fully parallel NMSA-based neighboring VNUs and passes the intermediate results through

(2048, 1723) decoder can only achieve a utilization of 38%. The comparators that are connected based on a tree interconnect

reason for the low utilization is that the two minimum values and topology. The resultant

and probabilistic

values

the corresponding index for each check node should be gener- produced in the last-level comparator are then used by the

ated and propagated throughout the entire decoder, resulting in C2V-message calculators to calculate the C2V messages,

complex interconnects. To reduce the routing complexity of an which are then fed back to the original VNUs for use

LDPC decoder, the SRTA, which can be viewed as an approxi- in the operations in the next iteration. The drawback of the

mation of the NMSA, was used in [15] and [16]. In the SRTA, pure tree-interconnect structure is that the C2V-message

the parity-check matrix is divided into several sub-matrices in calculators must be located in the same vicinity to receive the

a column-wise form such that a CNU is partitioned into several minimum values produced from the last-level comparator. This

sub-units, where only local minimum values for each sub-ma- will result in long global wires from the C2V-message cal-

trix, rather than the global minimum values for the entire matrix culators to the neighboring VNUs, as shown in Fig. 6(a). For

are found and compared with a predetermined threshold , high-rate LDPC codes, which usually have a larger value,

as shown in Fig. 4. Using this method, the global-wire intercon- the associated global interconnects is complicated, resulting in

nects can be significantly reduced and a utilization of 97% can routing congestion.

be achieved for the 5-bit decoder presented in [15]. However, In order to reduce the number of global wires, a comparator

the required first minimum value,

, may not be the correct can be added at the last level of the MVF such that a butterfly

one since the decoding messages are not fully exchanged. As a interconnect can be formed between the last two levels of the

result, this decoder suffers from an error performance loss of 0.2 MVF, as shown in Fig. 6(b). Using this architecture, it is not

dB compared to the conventional NMSA, as shown in Fig. 3. necessary to locate the C2V-message calculators in the same

Compared to the NMSA, the NPMSA has a lower compu- vicinity since there are two sources that can produce the de-

tational complexity and, hence, has a potential to be used for sired minimum values. Consequently, the C2V-message cal-

devising decoders with lower routing complexity. However, in culators can be divided into two groups, and the C2V-message

order to achieve a compatible utilization compared to the SRTA- calculators within each group are closely located, as shown in

based decoder presented in [15], using the NPMSA is not suf- Fig. 6(b). Accordingly, the VNUs can also be divided into

ficient. Consequently, two techniques are used in the proposed two groups. Using such an arrangement, the VNUs belonging

fully parallel NPMSA-based decoder:

to the same group can receive the C2V messages from its cor-

Reduction in quantization bits: Fewer quantization bits responding group of C2V-message calculators. This provides a

are explored in order to reduce hardware complexity in the better initial condition for placement and routing in the physical

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2742

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 6. Architecture for the proposed CNU at different partition levels (P).
TABLE III COMPLEXITY COMPARISON FOR A SINGLE 32-INPUT MVF

design stage, but at the cost of increased number of compara-

tors. An interconnect network with a mix of tree and butterfly Fig. 7. Hardware cost evaluation for different partition levels (P).

networks is therefore used to determine an optimized structure

that considers both area and wire length.

Fig. 6 shows the interconnect topologies for a single CNU at

different partition levels (P). The number of 2-to-1 tree inter-

connects, butterfly interconnects, and comparators for different

partition schemes are listed in Table III. It can be seen that the

number of comparators increases as the partition level increases.

For the NPMSA, the number of 2-input comparisons used in

the 384 CNUs is 11904, 12288, 13824, and 18432, when using

1, 2, 4, and 8 partitions, respectively. The number of 2-input

comparisons required when using

is also included in

Table II. It is worth noting that the number of 2-input com-

parisons required when using

is identical to that cal-

culated from the algorithmic perspective shown in Table II. It

can be seen that the hardware implementation of the NPMSA

still requires fewer comparators compared to the NMSA, and

the same number of comparators compared to the SRTA, even

when

is used for the proposed mixed network. By com-

paring Fig. 6 with Fig. 4, it can be seen that the proposed MVF

can obtain more accurate minimum values. An advantage of this

mixed interconnect network is that information exchanged be-

tween partitions is not lost so that there is no error performance

degradation compared to the SRTA-based decoder.

The proposed mixed interconnect network also relaxes

routing congestion and facilitates physical implementation.

The hierarchical layout methodology, which is used in [15] to

reduce the routing complexity introduced by a fully parallel

cost of a 0.2–0.3 dB performance loss. In this work, butterfly

interconnections are used to distribute routing wires, thereby

avoiding routing congestion without introducing any perfor-

mance loss. By leveraging the mixed interconnect network,

the global routing complexity is significantly reduced. The

interconnections are described only at the RTL level. The

mixed interconnect network also reduces the effort required to

implement a fully parallel LDPC decoder using automatic CAD

tools, and the layout design process is now the same as the

standard digital design flow. That is, the layout of each block

does not need to be first created independently. Instead, the

complete design is placed and routed through joint optimization

across block boundaries, resulting in a more compact layout.

To determine the optimal partitioning scheme, the total wire

length and core area for partitions

are evalu-

ated. As shown in Fig. 7, an optimal partition scheme exists for

due to the trade-off among the global routing complexity,

the local routing complexity, and the number of comparators.

A similar trend is seen for the core area since it is directly af-

fected by the routing complexity given the same timing con-

straint. Compared to the directly-mapped architecture

,

the core area and wire length of the optimal architecture

are reduced by 19.8% and 10.9%, respectively. Fig. 7 shows the

corresponding chip utilization.

also has the highest uti-

lization (91%) because it has the shortest wire length and the

smallest core area, resulting in the highest area efficiency.

architecture, is therefore not required in this work. In the hierarchical layout process, each block is first implemented

B. Reduction in Hardware Complexity

independently as a macro, and then several blocks are inte- Fig. 8 shows the proposed fully parallel LDPC decoder ar-

grated through global routing. Due to the tangled tree-structure chitecture, where

is adopted. Since the dimensions of the

interconnection, only a limited number of interconnections PCM for the RS-LDPC code are 384 2048, this decoder con-

are allowed for message passing in order to reduce routing sists of 384 CNUs and 2048 VNUs, where the V2C messages

complexity. Hence, the authors in [15] proposed the SRTA to are stored in registers in the CNUs. The channel values are

minimize the number of interconnects between blocks at the stored in registers in the VNUs, as shown in Fig. 9. It can be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHENG et al.: FULLY PARALLEL LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE USING PROBABILISTIC MIN-SUM ALGORITHM

2743

Fig. 10. Reduction in area and delay by applying NPMSA, a mixed interconnect network, and hardware optimization.

of CNUs. However, this is not the case in this work, since the

scaling factor for the normalization was carefully chosen to be

0.5, so that the normalization can be implemented using hard-

wired shifting, introducing almost zero hardware overhead. This

movement even provides two benefits for reducing hardware

complexity. First, the wordlength of the messages exchanged

between the VNUs and the CNUs can be reduced by 1 bit for

all datapaths. As a result, the total number of wires and, hence,

the routing complexity, can be reduced. Second, the wordlength

of all the comparators in the CNUs can be reduced by 1 bit,

yielding a more area-efficient implementation for the CNUs,

where a 2-bit wordlength is used for comparators.

The second technique is that the 2-to-1 comparison can be ef-

ficiently realized via a look-up table (LUT) if a 3-bit wordlength

Fig. 8. Block diagram for the proposed LDPC decoder.

is used in the CNU. A 3-bit datapath with sign-magnitude representation is used for the inputs of the CNU, where 1 bit is used

for Sign and 2 bits are used for Magnitude. The Sign bit is pro-

cessed by XOR gates, and the 2-bit Magnitude is processed by

the comparators. Thus the wordlength used in the 2-to-1 com-

parator of the CNU is 2. The 2-bit Magnitude of the comparator

output is determined via a look-up table. The “don’t-care” terms

allow further logic simplification so as to reduce the hardware

complexity.

Fig. 10 shows the cumulative reduction in both area and delay

Fig. 9. Block diagram for the VNU.

achieved after applying the proposed techniques, where the 5-bit

fully parallel NMSA-based (2048, 1723) decoder reported in

seen from Fig. 8 that each CNU is partitioned into 4 sub-units,

and butterfly interconnects are used to exchange messages be-

tween these partitions. In each partition, the local minimum is

generated through the comparison tree. The local minimum is

then compared with the minimum values from its neighboring

partitions through the butterfly interconnects. The global

,

probabilistic

, and the associated index are, hence, ob-

tained. The C2V messages are then updated using these global

minimum values and index. Using the updated C2V messages,

the V2C messages can be updated accordingly. In the fully par-

allel implementation, all the C2V and V2C messages are up-

dated in parallel during one cycle. As a result, cycles are

required to accomplish decoding iterations.

[15] is used as the baseline. In other words, the directly-mapped architecture without employing the NPMSA, the mixed interconnect network, and hardware optimization is used as the baseline design. The area and delay for this design are set to unity (100%) so as to illustrate the improvements in area and delay. Applying the NPMSA reduces the computational complexity of the decoding algorithm. An interconnect network based on a mix of tree and butterfly types used in the CNU simplifies the routing. Hardware optimization reduces the wordlength of the CNU and the wordlength of the messages between the VNUs and the CNUs. Logic synthesis estimates show that an overall reduction in area of 67.5% and an overall reduction in delay of 78.7% are achieved compared to the baseline design.

Through simulation, it can be found that using 0.5 as the normalization factor in the NPMSA achieves the best error-rate

C. Reduction in Energy Consumption

performance among the considered normalization factors 0.3, At high SNR values, the majority of the received words

0.4, 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7. As a result, the normalization factor used (blocks) will become correct before the number of iterations

in hardware implementation was selected as 0.5. Based on this reaches the maximum value . Early termination can help

normalization factor, the decoder hardware can be further opti- avoid unnecessary decoding computations and, hence, reduce

mized through the techniques described below.

energy consumption. A decoded codeword is considered to

The first technique is that normalization (multiplication by be a valid codeword if all the checksum values for all the

0.5) can be implemented using hard-wired shifting. Normally, check equations of the parity-check matrix (PCM) are 0, where

the implementation complexity for the normalization would in-

also denotes the number of CNs in the Tanner graph. As a

crease when moving the normalization logics from CNUs to result, the decoding process can be terminated if this condition

VNUs, since the number of VNUs is greater than the number is satisfied. Since the decoded codeword must be determined

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2744

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
TABLE IV CHIP SUMMARY

The number of equivalent NAND gates.

predefined threshold values for three consecutive iterations after

the number of iterations has reached a predetermined value.

In this paper, an early-termination scheme is devised in order

to reduce the number of decoding iterations for both the low and

the high SNR regions. At the completion of each iteration, the

checksum for each check node (parity-check equation) is first

calculated by summing [over GF(2)] all the signs (hard deci-

sions) of the APP values for the neighboring VNs. Then, ,

which denotes the summation of the checksum values for all

the CNs at the th iteration, is calculated. If

, it indi-

Fig. 11. Performance evaluation for the (2048, 1723) code, where (a) BER versus SNR and (b) average number of iterations versus SNR.

: cates that the decoder has produced a valid codeword and the decoding process can be terminated at the end of the th iteration. Otherwise, the summation of the checksum values is

from the APP values, additional routing networks and XOR gates are required in order to obtain the checksum values. Although this standard method can produce valid codewords if the received words are correctable, this method will increase the interconnect and gate complexity and introduce additional

compared with two predetermined thresholds

and

at

two distinct iterations and , respectively, where

. If

and

, then the decoding process can

be terminated at the end of the th iteration. Details of the pro-

posed scheme are summarized in Algorithm 1.

delay, especially for a decoder based on a fully parallel archi-

tecture.

Algorithm 1 Proposed Early Termination Scheme

In order to avoid these disadvantages, the authors in [17] pro-

posed using the sign of the V2C messages rather than the APP

values to determine the timing of the termination. Using this

method, the value of

for each

CN (check equation) is calculated first. The decoding process

is then terminated if the values for all the check equations

of the PCM are zero. Since the values are also calculated

when the values are calculated, additional circuits are not

required in order to obtain the values. This Q-based method,

which was implemented in the decoders presented in [15] and

[17], only requires OR operations to be performed on the

values of .

At low SNR values, an iterative decoder often cannot produce

a valid codeword due to a high BER, even when the number of

iterations reaches the maximum value . The standard early-

termination method and the methods presented in [15] and [17]

Set ,

,

and

for

do

Execute CN and VN operations

if

then

if

then

Terminate decoding

end if

if

and

else if

and

Terminate decoding

end if

else

Terminate decoding

end if

end for

then then

are not efficient under this scenario. However, as is well-known,

the instantaneous SNR of a channel varies with time. Hence, Obviously, the BER performance and the average number

the channel SNR is occasionally low such that the BER is high. of iterations depend on the values of

and

. The

Under this scenario, early detection for an uncorrectable re- method for determining the threshold values basically follows

ceived word in the early decoding stages is desired in order to the method used in [16]. We observe that for the majority of

avoid unnecessary iterations and, hence, reduce energy dissipa- correctable received words, the value decreases as the iter-

tion [16], [22], [23]. The two methods presented in [22] and [23] ation number increases and the probability that

track the fluctuation of the parity checksum at a certain number and

, where

, is low if

and

are

of iterations and compare its magnitude with threshold values large enough. Using several possible candidate values for

which are SNR dependent. The method presented in [16] (an and , we performed simulation to obtain the corresponding

enhanced version of [15]) compares the parity checksum with BER and the average number of iterations. Then, the best

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHENG et al.: FULLY PARALLEL LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE USING PROBABILISTIC MIN-SUM ALGORITHM

2745

TABLE V COMPARISON OF (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC DECODERS

values for

and

are 134 and 134, respectively. If we (61.7%) can be achieved, and the resultant energy efficiency is

wish to efficiently determine the threshold values, we can let 9.6 pJ/bit (9.4 pJ/bit) at SNR

dB (4.4 dB).

such that the search space can be reduced. For the A comparison of the metrics for the proposed LDPC decoder

(2048, 1723) code considered in this paper, the best values for with published results for other LDPC decoders is summarized

and can also be determined using the same threshold in Table V. It can be seen that the proposed LDPC decoder

value.

achieves the highest throughput and lowest latency based on a

Figs. 11(a) and 11(b) show the BER and the average number similar error-rate performance. The reason is that a bit-parallel

of iterations versus the SNR, respectively, for the (2048, 1723) architecture is used such that the number of cycles per iteration

code using the NPMSA and various early-termination (ET) is reduced to only one. In addition, fewer iterations are needed

schemes, where 4-bit fixed-point simulation is performed. As to achieve a similar error performance. The proposed decoder

shown in these two figures, the proposed ET method introduces occupies less normalized area than other designs, except for the

negligible difference in BER and achieves a reduction in the stochastic decoders presented in [19] and [20]. The high area

average number of iterations of 58% at an SNR of 3.0 dB com- efficiency of the stochastic decoders, is traded off with a de-

pared to both the standard method and the Q-based method. creased throughput and a significantly increased latency. The

The area overhead introduced by using the proposed method is throughput of the proposed decoder is much higher than that of

only about 6.8% compared to that of the Q-based method. At the stochastic decoders. The proposed LDPC decoder achieves

an SNR of 3.0 dB, the proposed method achieves a reduction the highest normalized throughput-to-area ratio.

in energy of 58% compared to the Q-based method.

It is worth noting that the previous works considered in

The major difference between the proposed method and the Table V, except for [16], did not address energy reduction for

methods presented in [22] and [23] is that the thresholds used in uncorrectable received words. As a result, the SRTA-based

the proposed method are independent of SNR, while the thresh- decoder presented in [16] is compared with the proposed

olds used in [22] and [23] are SNR dependent. Hence, the pro- NPMSA-based decoder for energy consumption since early

posed methods are suitable for applications where SNR values termination is implemented in each for both low and high SNR

are difficult to obtain. In contrast to the three thresholds that are regions. Based on almost the same BER performance (Fig. 11),

used in the method presented in [16], two thresholds are used the proposed NPMSA-based decoder combined with the pro-

in the proposed method. In addition, comparison at consecutive posed ET method can achieve a reduction in energy dissipation

iterations after the number of iterations has reached a predeter- of 54.6% at SNR

dB compared to the SRTA-based

mined value is not necessary in the proposed method. Hence, the decoder presented in [16].

average number of iterations when using the proposed method is expected to be lower compared to using the method presented in [16]. It can be seen from Fig. 11 that, based on almost the same BER performance, the proposed NPMSA-based decoder using the proposed ET method can achieve a reduction in the average number of iterations of 43.7% at an SNR of 3.0 dB compared to the SRTA-based decoder presented in [16].

V. CONCLUSION
For fully parallel LDPC decoders, several techniques have been presented for improving the complexity, throughput, and energy consumption. First, the NPMSA yields a lower computational complexity in the CNU. Compared with the conventional NMSA, the NPMSA requires 51% fewer comparators at the cost of a negligible error-performance loss of 0.05 dB. Second, a

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

mixed interconnect network is adopted in the CNU to balance the interconnect complexity and the logic overhead, thereby re-

A fully parallel (2048, 1723) LDPC decoder using a combi- ducing routing complexity and achieving a compact decoder.

nation of NPMSA and the proposed early termination technique Consequently, a reduction in area of 19.8% is achieved. Third,

was designed using 90 nm CMOS technology. The chip features hardware optimization is considered in order to further reduce

are summarized in Table IV. The core area is 9.6 mm with a the wordlength of the CNU and the messages between the VNUs

91% density of standard-cell placement. The total chip area with and the CNUs. To terminate uncorrectable blocks and unnec-

I/O pads is 12.67 mm . The chip consumes 1110 mW at 199.6 essary decoding iterations, an early termination scheme is pro-

MHz with a supply voltage of 0.9 V. Using the proposed early posed with negligible error performance degradation, achieving

termination method, a reduction in energy dissipation of 60.6% a reduction in energy dissipation of 60.6%. The proposed fully

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2746

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

parallel decoder architecture is a promising candidate for nextgeneration high-throughput applications.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[4] Y.-L. Wang, Y.-L. Ueng, C.-L. Peng, and C.-J. Yang, “Processing-task arrangement for a low-density full-mode WiMAX LDPC codec,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 415–428, Feb. 2011.
[5] Y.-L. Ueng, B.-J. Yang, C.-J. Yang, H.-C. Lee, and J.-D. Yang, “An efficient multi-standard LDPC decoder design using hardware-friendly shuffled decoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 743–756, Mar. 2013.
[6] S.-W. Yen, S.-Y. Hung, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, S.-J. Jou, and C.-Y. Lee, “A 5.79-Gb/s energy-efficient multirate LDPC codec chip for IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 2246–2257, Sep. 2012.
[7] Y. Sun, G. Wang, and J. R. Cavallaro, “Multi-layer parallel decoding algorithm and VLSI architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), May 2011, pp. 1776–1779.
[8] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[9] IEEE P802.3an, 10GBASE-T Task Force [Online]. Available: http:// www.ieee802.org/3/an
[10] L. Liu and C.-J. R. Shi, “Sliced message passing: High throughput overlapped decoding of high-rate low density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3697–3710, Dec. 2008.
[11] J. Sha, J. Lin, Z. Wang, L. Li, and M. Gao, “Decoder design for RS-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 724–728, Sep. 2009.
[12] Y.-L. Ueng, C.-J. Yang, K.-C. Wang, and C.-J. Chen, “A multimode shuffled iterative decoder architecture for high-rate RS-LDPC code,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2790–2803, Oct. 2010.
[13] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolić, “An efficient 10GBASE-T ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[14] C. Roth, A. Cevrero, C. Studer, Y. Leblebici, and A. Burg, “Area, throughput, and energy-efficiency trade-offs in the VLSI implementation of LDPC decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), May 2011, pp. 1772–1775.
[15] T. Mohsenin, D. Truong, and B. Baas, “A low-complexity messagepassing algorithm for reduced routing congestion in LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1048–1061, May 2010.
[16] T. Mohsenin, H. Shirani-mehr, and B. Baas, “Low power LDPC decoder with efficient stopping scheme for undecodable blocks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), May 2011, pp. 1780–1783.
[17] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1835–1845, Aug. 2008.
[18] P. A. Marshall, V. C. Gaudet, and D. G. Elliott, “Deeply pipelined digit-serial LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 2934–2944, Dec. 2012.
[19] A. Naderi, S. Mannor, M. Sawan, and W. J. Gross, “Delayed stochastic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 5617–5626, Nov. 2011.
[20] S. S. Tehrani, A. Naderi, G.-A. Kamendje, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Majority-based tracking forecast memories for stochastic LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 4883–4896, Sep. 2010.
[21] C.-L. Wey, M.-D. Shieh, and S.-Y. Lin, “Algorithms of finding the first two minimum values and their hardware implementation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3430–3437, Dec. 2008.

[22] D. Shin, K. Heo, S. Oh, and J. Ha, “A stopping criterion for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE 65th Vehicular Technol. Conf. (VTC2007-Spring), 2007, pp. 1529–1533.
[23] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, “An efficient early stopping scheme for LDPC decoding,” presented at the 13th NASA Symp. VLSI Design, Jun. 2007.
Chung-Chao Cheng received the M.S. degree from National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2007. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
His research interests include error control coding, related VLSI designs, and their applications to communications.
Jeng-Da Yang received the B.S. degree from the National Chin-Yi University of Technology, Taichung, Taiwan, in 2010. He is currently working toward the M.S. degree in electrical engineering at the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
His research interests include error control coding and related VLSI designs.
Huang-Chang Lee received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from National Chi Nan University, Taiwan, in 2002 and 2004. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
His research interests include channel coding, digital signal processing, and their applications to communications.
Chia-Hsiang Yang (S’07–M’10) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from the National Taiwan University, Taiwan, in 2002 and 2004, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 2010.
He then joined the faculty of the Electronics Engineering Department, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan, as an Assistant Professor. His current research interests include energy-efficient integrated circuits and architectures for biomedical and communication signal processing.
Yeong-Luh Ueng received the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2001.
From 2001 to 2005, he was with a private communication technology company, where he focused on the design and development of various wireless chips. Since December 2005, he has been a member of the faculty of the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, where he is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering. His research interests include coding theory, wireless communications, and communication ICs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

