5188

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

On Characterization of Elementary Trapping Sets of Variable-Regular LDPC Codes
Mehdi Karimi, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— In this paper, we study the graphical structure of elementary trapping sets (ETSs) of variable-regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. ETSs are known to be the main cause of error floor in LDPC coding schemes. For the set of LDPC codes with a given variable node degree dl and girth g, we identify all the nonisomorphic structures of an arbitrary class of (a, b) ETSs, where a is the number of variable nodes and b is the number of odd-degree check nodes in the induced subgraph of the ETS. This paper leads to a simple characterization of dominant classes of ETSs (those with relatively small values of a and b) based on short cycles in the Tanner graph of the code. For such classes of ETSs, we prove that any set S in the class is a layered superset (LSS) of a short cycle, where the term layered is used to indicate that there is a nested sequence of ETSs that starts from the cycle and grows, one variable node at a time, to generate S. This characterization corresponds to a simple search algorithm that starts from the short cycles of the graph and finds all the ETSs with LSS property in a guaranteed fashion. Specific results on the structure of ETSs are presented for dl = 3, 4, 5, 6, g = 6, 8, and a, b ≤ 10 in this paper. The results of this paper can be used for the error floor analysis and for the design of LDPC codes with low error floors.
Index Terms— Characterization of elementary trapping sets, elementary trapping sets, error floor, left-regular LDPC codes, Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, short cycles, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes under iterative decoding algorithms in the error floor region is closely related to the problematic structures of the code’s Tanner graph [5], [8], [9], [11], [16], [17], [28]–[30], [36], [39], [40], [42]. Following the nomenclature of [30], here, we collectively refer to such structures as trapping sets. The most common approach for classifying the trapping sets is by a pair (a, b), where a is the size of the trapping set and b is the number of odd-degree (unsatisfied) check nodes in the subgraph induced by the set in the Tanner graph of the code. Among the trapping sets, the so-called elementary trapping sets (ETS) are known to be the main culprits [5], [16], [17], [29], [30], [42]. These are trapping sets whose induced subgraph only contains check nodes of degree one or two.
Manuscript received June 21, 2013; revised June 23, 2014; accepted June 24, 2014. Date of publication July 2, 2014; date of current version August 14, 2014.
The first author was with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada. He is now with Infinera Canada Inc., Ottawa (e-mail: mkarimi@infinera.com). The second author is with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada (email: ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Communicated by D. Burshtein, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2014.2334657

For a given LDPC code, the knowledge of dominant trapping sets, i.e., those that are most harmful, is important. Such knowledge can be used to estimate the error floor [5], to modify the decoder to lower the error floor [4], [12], [24], or to design codes with low error floor [1], [15].
While the knowledge of dominant trapping sets is most helpful in the design and analysis of LDPC codes, attaining such knowledge is generally a hard problem [27]. Much research has been devoted to devising efficient search algorithms for finding small (dominant) trapping sets, see [2], [5], [19], [24], [31], [37], [38], [40], and to the (partial) characterization of such sets [6], [7], [10], [13], [18], [33]. Asymptotic analysis of trapping sets has also been carried out in [3], [10], [20], [21], [29], and [32].
Laendner et al. [18] studied the characterization of small (a, b) trapping sets of size up to 8 (a ≤ 8) and b/a < 1 in LDPC codes from Steiner Triple Systems (STS). STS LDPC codes are a special category of regular LDPC codes with variable node degree 3. Huang et al. [13] showed that for a regular LDPC code with variable node degree ρ and check node degree γ , and girth g ≥ 6, no (a, b) trapping set with a ≤ ρ and b ≤ γ can exist. They also studied the trapping sets of Euclidean Geometry (EG) LDPC codes and provided some bounds on the size and the number of unsatisfied check nodes of the trapping sets of such codes [6]. An EG-LDPC code with parameter q is a regular LDPC code of length q2, with variable node degree q + 1 and check node degree q. A consequence of the bounds derived in [6] is that for the case where q = 2s, there is no trapping set of size smaller than the minimum distance of the code, i.e., 2s + 2, with less than 2s + 1 unsatisfied check nodes. A subset of trapping sets, called absorbing sets, for array-based LDPC codes with variable node degrees 2, 3 and 4, were studied in [7] and [10]. Absorbing sets are trapping sets in which each variable node is connected to more satisfied than unsatisfied check nodes in the induced subgraph of the set [7], [39]. Array-based LDPC codes are a subclass of (regular) protograph LDPC codes which are constructed by lifting a fully-connected base graph using cyclic permutations. The analysis in [7] and [10] was focused on minimal absorbing sets, i.e., the ones with the smallest size and with the smallest number of unsatisfied check nodes for a given size. Vasic et al. [33] studied the topological structure of trapping sets of size up to 8 in regular LDPC codes with variable node degree 3, and proposed a hierarchical search method to find them.
The study of the graphical structure of trapping sets so far has been mainly limited to structured codes, codes with certain variable node degrees, and to relatively small trapping sets.

0018-9448 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON CHARACTERIZATION OF ETS OF VARIABLE-REGULAR LDPC CODES

5189

In this work, for the category of variable-regular LDPC codes with a certain variable node degree and a given girth, we study the topological structure of (a, b) ETSs for given values of a and b, and find all the non-isomorphic structures of such ETSs. A careful examination of these structures, which are independent of the check node degree distribution of the code, reveals that for relatively small values of a and b, the structures are all layered supersets (LSS) of small cycles, i.e., they can be characterized by a nested sequence of ETSs which starts from a short cycle and grows to the ETS one node at a time. The LSS property lends itself to a simple search algorithm that starts from short cycles of the code’s Tanner graph as input and can find all the ETSs with LSS property in a guaranteed fashion. Although the general approach discussed here can be applied to any category of variable-regular LDPC codes with arbitrary variable node degree dl and girth g and to any class of ETSs with arbitrary values of a and b, the results presented here are for dl = 3, 4, 5, 6, g = 6, 8, and a, b ≤ 10. One of the main advantages of the results presented here is that they are applicable to specific codes, rather than just to an ensemble or a category of codes. In particular, the search algorithm based on LSS property can be used to efficiently find the dominant ETSs of a code in a guaranteed fashion. This, for example, would imply having a faster and more accurate estimation of error floor for the code under consideration using techniques such as importance sampling. Moreover, the results presented here can be used in the design of LDPC codes with low error floor. This can be achieved by avoiding certain dominant ETSs in the Tanner graph of the code. In such a context, this work can help in identifying the dominant ETSs.
It has been known that dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes have a close relationship with short cycles in the code’s Tanner graph [19], [40], [41]. This work takes a rigorous step in establishing such a relationship. In general, in comparison with existing results on characterization of trapping sets such as [7], [10], [33], the results presented here are more general in terms of being applicable to both structured and random codes, and to cover a wider range of variable node degrees and trapping set classes.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Basic definitions and notations are provided in Section II. In Section III, we discuss the non-isomorphic structures of ETSs and how to find them efficiently. In Section IV, we present and discuss the LSS property and develop the algorithm which guarantees to find all the ETSs with the LSS property starting from the short cycles of the Tanner graph. Sections V contains the results on ETS characterization for variable-regular LDPC codes with variable node degrees 3, 4, 5 and 6, and girths 6 and 8. As part of the material presented in this section, we provide the lengths of short cycles that are required for the proposed algorithm to find all the (a, b) ETSs with LSS property in a guaranteed fashion, for different values of a and b. Section VI is devoted to discussions and conclusions.
II. DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS
Let G = (V = L ∪ R , E) be the bipartite graph, or Tanner graph, corresponding to the LDPC code C, where L

is the set of variable nodes, R is the set of check nodes and E is the set of edges. The notations L and R refer to “left” and “right,” respectively, pointing to the side of the bipartite graph where variable nodes and check nodes are located, respectively. A cycle of length k in a graph G is a non-empty alternating sequence v0e1v1 . . . vk−1ekvk of nodes and edges in G such that ei = {vi−1, vi } ∈ E, and vi ∈ L ∪ R for all 1 ≤ i ≤ k, v0 = vk , and all the other nodes are distinct. The length of the shortest cycle in a graph G is denoted by g and is called the girth of G. The degree of a node v ∈ L ∪ R is denoted by d(v) . A bipartite graph is called variable-regular or left-regular with left degree dl if d(v) = dl, ∀ v ∈ L.
The graphs G1 = (V1 , E1) and G2 = (V2 , E2) are isomorphic if there is a bijection f : V1 → V2 such that nodes v1, v2 ∈ V1 are joined by an edge if and only if f (v1) and f (v2) are joined by an edge.
For a subset S of L , (S) denotes the set of neighbors of S in R . The induced subgraph of S, represented by G(S), is the graph containing nodes S ∪ (S) with edges {(u, v) ∈ E : u ∈ S, v ∈ (S)}. The set of check nodes in (S) with odd degree in G(S) is denoted by o(S). Similarly, e(S) represents the set of check nodes in (S) with even degree in G(S). In this paper, we use the terms satisfied check nodes and unsatisfied check nodes to refer to the check nodes in
e(S) and o(S), respectively. Given a Tanner graph G = (L ∪ R , E), a set S ⊂ L is called an (a, b) trapping set if |S| = a and | o(S)| = b. The integer a is referred to as the size of the trapping set S. We also refer to all the trapping sets with the same parameters a and b as a class of trapping sets. An (a, b) trapping set S is called elementary if all the check nodes in G(S) have degree one or two. A set S ⊂ L is called an (a, b) absorbing set if S is an (a, b) trapping set and if all the nodes in S are connected to more nodes in e(S) than to nodes in o(S). Trapping sets with smaller values of a and b are generally more harmful to iterative decoding. Loosely speaking, such trapping sets are called dominant. Without loss of generality, we assume that the induced subgraph of a trapping set is connected. Disconnected trapping sets can be considered as the union of connected ones. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, almost all the structures reported as dominant trapping sets (of regular LDPC codes) in the literature have the property that every variable node is connected to at least two satisfied check nodes in the induced subgraph. We thus focus on trapping sets with this property. In the rest of the paper, we use the notation T to denote the set of all trapping sets S in a graph G whose induced subgraph G(S) is connected and for which every node v ∈ S is connected to at least two nodes in e(S). In the following, we also assume that the Tanner graph G has no parallel edges.
III. NON-ISOMORPHIC STRUCTURES OF ETSS
Elementary trapping sets in left-regular Tanner graphs are the main focus of this paper. To investigate the structure of ETSs of a certain (a, b) class in left-regular Tanner graphs with left-degree dl and girth g, we need to obtain all the non-isomorphic graphical structures of such trapping sets.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5190

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 1. A (5, 4) elementary trapping set and its normal graph.

Fig. 3. All the possible non-isomorphic normal graphs of (6, 2) ETSs in left-regular LDPC codes with dl = 4 and g = 6.

Fig. 2. All the possible non-isomorphic topologies for (6, 2) ETSs in left- Fig. 4. Growing the normal graph for Case ii (a) in the proof of Proposition 1. regular LDPC codes with dl = 4 and g = 6.

To simplify the representation of the subgraph induced by an ETS in a left-regular graph, we often use an alternate graphical representation called normal graphs [22]. The normal graph of an ETS is obtained from the induced subgraph of the set by removing all the degree-1 check nodes and their edges from the subgraph, and by replacing each degree-2 check node with an edge.
Example 1: Figures 1(a) and 1(b) represent the induced subgraph and the normal graph of a (5, 4) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 4 and g = 6, respectively. In Figure 1(a), and the rest of the paper, variable nodes are represented by circles, and satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes are shown by empty and full squares, respectively.
It is easy to see that there is a one-to-one correspondence between an ETS of a left-regular graph and its normal graph. Given dl, one can construct the subgraph of the ETS from a given normal graph by replacing each edge {u, v} of the normal graph with two edges {u, c} and {c, v}, where c is a degree-2 check node which is also added to the graph, and by connecting dl − d(v) check nodes of degree one to every variable node v with d(v) < dl.
In the following, we provide an example to demonstrate how all the non-isomorphic structures of a class of ETSs can be found for rather small values of dl, a and b.
Proposition 1: Any (6, 2) ETS of a left-regular LDPC code with dl = 4 and g = 6 has one of the structures presented in Figure 2.
Proof: We use the normal graph representation, and prove that any (6, 2) ETS in a left-regular LDPC code with dl = 4 and g = 6 has one of the normal graph representations given in Figure 3.
There are only two possibilities for (6, 2) ETSs: (i) Both unsatisfied check nodes are connected to the same variable node, and (ii) the two unsatisfied check nodes are connected to two different variable nodes. We show that there is only one structure for the first case and only 2 non-isomorphic structures for the second case.

For Case (i), let v1 be the only variable node connected to two unsatisfied check nodes. This means that in the normal graph representation, v1 is connected to only two other variable nodes. Suppose that those variable nodes are v2 and v3. Since the degree of all the other variable nodes v4, v5 and v6 in the normal graph is 4, each of them must have 4 distinct
neighbors. The only possibility is for each of these three nodes
to be connected to the other two nodes in addition to nodes
v2 and v3. This also satisfies the degree requirements for v2 and v3 (each of them has degree 4 and is connected to all the nodes v4, v5, v6 and v1). This topology is shown in Figure 3(a).
For Case (ii), let v1 and v2 be the two variable nodes, each connected to one unsatisfied check node. Since all the other 4
nodes have degree 4 and must be connected to 4 distinct nodes, each of them must be connected to at least one of the nodes v1 and v2. There are two possibilities: a) v1 and v2 are connected together, and b) v1 and v2 are not connected together. One can show that the only possible topology for Case (a) is the
one shown in Figure 3(b), and the only possible topology for Case (b) is the one shown in Figure 3(c). For Case (a), there always exists a node v3 which is connected to one of the nodes v1 and v2, but not to both. Otherwise, if all the other 4 nodes are connected to both v1 and v2, both v1 and v2 will have degree 5 which contradicts the assumption of the
proposition that dl = 4. Without loss of generality, we assume v3 to be connected to v1, and we grow the normal graph from v3 as the root. Figure 4(a) shows such a graph growth, in which all the nodes except v2 are located in the first layer and v2 is in the second layer. Node v2 must be connected to two nodes other than v1. Without loss of generality, we assume those nodes to be v4 and v5 (Figure 4(b)). From this point on, there is no option in connecting the nodes. Node v6 must be connected to 4 distinct nodes, and the only possibility is to have it connected to all the nodes v4, v5 and v1. This will satisfy the degree of v1, which must be 3. To satisfy the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON CHARACTERIZATION OF ETS OF VARIABLE-REGULAR LDPC CODES

5191

Fig. 6. Possible topologies for a (6, 6) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 4 and g = 6: the only two possible absorbing set topologies.

Fig. 5. A (6, 6) elementary trapping set and its normal graph.
degrees of v4 and v5 (d(v4) = d(v5) = 4), the only option is to have a connection between them, which results in the topology shown in Figure 3(b). To prove that the only topology for Case (b) is the one shown in Figure 3(c), we consider the growth of the normal graph from v1. Without loss of generality, we assume that the nodes connected to v1 are v3, v4 and v5. Node v6 is thus the only other node (in addition to v2) which is not connected to v1. As v6 has four distinct neighbours in the normal graph, it must be connected to all the nodes v2, v3, v4 and v5. Without loss of generality, we assume that the other two neighbours of v2 (in addition to v6) are v3 and v4. From this point on, there is no option in connecting the nodes. Node v5 must be connected to both v3 and v4 (in addition to v1 and v6). This will also satisfy the degree of the nodes v3, v4, which is 4. This results in the topology shown in Figure 3(c).
Remark 1: The structures in Figures 2(b) and 2(c) are absorbing sets while the one in Figure 2(a) is not. Moreover, Proposition 1 implies that there are no (6, 2) ETSs in leftregular graphs with dl = 4 and g > 6.
Finding the non-isomorphic structures for ETSs with rather large values of dl, a or b can be a formidable task. We thus resort to software programs to find such structures. One of the well-known software programs related to graph isomorphism is the nauty program [46]. This program can be used to efficiently generate all the non-isomorphic graphs with a given number of nodes (up to 32) and a given number of edges. The program has many input options to determine the minimum and maximum values of the node degrees, to select the girth, and to generate only bipartite graphs or all the possible graphs. For the case of bipartite graphs, however, the program does not have the option of taking the degree distribution of each part of the graph as an input. In the case of finding the non-isomorphic structures (for induced subgraphs) of ETSs, this limitation results in having a large number of undesired structures at the output of the program. One is thus required to check all the output structures to find the ones that satisfy the particular degree distributions of the class of ETSs under consideration. This difficulty can be circumvented by using the normal graph representation of ETSs as explained in the following example.
Example 2: Consider the class of (6, 6) ETSs in a leftregular graph with dl = 4 and g = 6. Figure 5(a) shows one such ETS.
It is easy to see that the induced subgraph of any ETS in this class has 6 variable nodes of degree 4, 6 check nodes of degree

Fig. 7. Possible topologies for a (6, 6) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 4 and g = 6: topologies with only one variable node connected to two unsatisfied check nodes.
1, and ((6 × 4) − 6)/2 = 9 check nodes of degree 2. This is a total of 21 nodes (check and variable nodes) and 24 edges. To generate the non-isomorphic structures of (6, 6) ETSs using nauty package, one way is to set the package parameters to generate all the connected bipartite graphs of girth at least 6 with 21 nodes and 24 edges, and with the minimum and maximum degrees of 1 and 4, respectively. This results in 53, 727, 932 graphs, from which an overwhelming majority are not (6, 6) ETSs.
Alternatively, we can use the normal graph representation of (6, 6) ETSs. Figure 5(b) shows the normal graph of the structure shown in Figure 5(a). Similar to Figure 5(b), any normal graph of a (6.6) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 4 has 6 nodes and 9 edges. To generate all the nonisomorphic normal structures using the nauty program, one needs to generate all the bipartite and non-bipartite graphs with 6 nodes and 9 edges, and with the minimum and maximum node degrees of 2 and 4, respectively. This reduces the number of possible graphs from 53, 727, 932 to only 11. All the 11 graphs correspond to valid normal structures for the class of ETSs under consideration. These structures are shown in Figures 6, 7, 8, and 9. Among the 11 structures, only 2 structures are absorbing sets. These are shown in Figure 6. The other structures are grouped together based on the number of variable nodes with two unsatisfied check nodes. The structures with 1, 2, and 3 variable nodes connected to two unsatisfied check nodes are shown in Figures 7, 8, and 9, respectively.
IV. LAYERED SUPERSET (LSS) PROPERTY
The layered superset relationship between an ETS and one of its subsets, as defined in the following, is essential to the rest of the paper.
Definition 1: Consider an (a, b) ETS S in T . Let C ⊂ S be an ETS in T of size α < a. We say that S is a layered

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5192

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 8. Possible topologies for a (6, 6) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 4 and g = 6: topologies with only two variable nodes connected to two unsatisfied check nodes.
Fig. 9. Possible topologies for a (6, 6) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 4 and g = 6: the only possible topology with three variable nodes connected to two unsatisfied check nodes.
Fig. 10. (a) A (6, 6) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 4, (b) A (7, 1) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 3.
superset (LSS) of C if there exists a nested sequence of ETSs: C = S(0) ⊂ S(1) ⊂ · · · ⊂ S(a−α) = S, such that S(i) ∈ T has size α + i for i = 0, . . . , a − α. When there is no risk of confusion, we also refer to S as having the LSS property.
Example 3: Consider the ETS S = {v1, v2, v3, v4, v5, v6} of a left-regular LDPC code with dl = 4 shown in Figure 10(a), and one of its subsets C1 = {v1, v2, v3}. It is easy to see that S and C1 are (6, 6) and (3, 6) ETSs. Careful inspection of Figure 10(a) reveals that S is not an LSS of C1. Set S however, is an LSS of C2 = {v3, v4, v5, v6} with the following nested sequence of ETSs: C2 ⊂ {v1, v3, v4, v5, v6} ⊂ S. Figure 10(b) shows a (7, 1) ETS S in a left-regular code with dl = 3. This set has LSS property with respect to C = {v2, v3, v4, v5} with the following nested sequence of

ETSs: C ⊂ {v1, v2, v3, v4, v5} ⊂ {v1, v2, v3, v4, v5, v6} ⊂ S. One should note that any simple cycle in a Tanner graph
is an ETS. In the sequel, we are particularly interested in the LSS property of more complex ETSs with respect to short cycles of the graph. The following proposition is an example.
Proposition 2: All the (6, 2) ETSs of a left-regular LDPC code with dl = 4 and g = 6 are layered supersets of any one of their 6-cycle subsets.
Proof: Based on Proposition 1, there are only 3 nonisomorphic structures for (6, 2) ETSs in left-regular LDPC codes with dl = 4 and g = 6. These structures are shown in Figure 2. It is not difficult to see that all three structures are LSS of any of their 6-cycle subsets. For example, the structure S in Figure 2(b) is an LSS of its 6-cycle subset C = {v1, v3, v6} with the following nested sequence of ETSs: C ⊂ {v1, v3, v6, v5} ⊂ {v1, v3, v6, v5, v4} ⊂ S.
One advantage of LSS property is that it corresponds to a simple algorithm for finding larger ETSs with LSS property starting from one of their subsets in the nested sequence of ETSs. The basic step is explained in the following lemma.
Lemma 1: Consider an ETS S ∈ T of size a + 1. Suppose that S has an elementary trapping subset S ∈ T of size a. Then, the variable node v ∈ S \ S is only connected to unsatisfied check nodes of S (at least two of them), i.e., there is no connection between v and the satisfied check nodes of S .
Proof: The proof is simple and is based on the definitions of an ETS and the set T .
The pseudo code of an algorithm corresponding to Lemma 1 is given in Routine 1.
Routine 1 Expansion of an ETS S of Size a to ETSs of Size a + 1. Routine EX = OneExpansion(S) 1: Initialization: EX ← ∅. 2: Let o(S) and e(S) be the set of unsatisfied check nodes
and satisfied check nodes of S, respectively. 3: Let O2(S) be the set of variable nodes which have at least
two connections with the check nodes in o(S) and have no connection with the check nodes in e(S) . 4: for each element v in O2(S) do 5: S ← S ∪ v. 6: EX ← EX ∪ S . 7: end for 8: Output: EX
Remark 2: Based on Lemma 1, the set O2(S) contains all the nodes that can be part of the expansion of the ETS.
Remark 3: Complexity of Routine 1 for expanding an (a, b) ETS to ETSs of size a + 1 in a (dl, dr ) regular graph, where dl and dr are left and right degrees, respectively, is of order O(bdr ). This comes from the fact that for finding the larger trapping sets, the algorithm needs to check at most b(dr − 1) variable nodes as possible candidates. The memory requirement in this case is of order O(abdr ). It should be however noted that, imposing the condition of Line 3 removes a large portion of neighboring variable nodes of S from the set of possible candidates for expansion. This highly reduces

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON CHARACTERIZATION OF ETS OF VARIABLE-REGULAR LDPC CODES

5193

Algorithm 1 Expansion of Input ETSs to ETSs of Size up to

k in G = (L ∪ R , E) . (Lin and Lout are the Lists of Input and Output Trapping Sets, Respectively.)

1: Inputs: G , Lin, k.

2: Initialization: Liout = {S ∈ Lin, |S| = i } for i = 2, . . . , k.

3: for each i < k starting from the smallest one do

4: for each element S ∈ Liout do

5: EX= OneExpansion(S)

6:

Lio+ut1 ← Lio+ut1∪ EX.

7: end for

8: end for 9: Output: Lout = L2out ∪ · · · ∪ Lokut.

Fig. 11. A (5, 1) trapping set in a left-regular graph with dl = 3.

the complexity of the algorithm. Consider the case where an ETS S of size a is an LSS of
an ETS C of size α. Clearly, starting from C, the successive application of Routine 1 will result in finding all the ETSs which are layered supersets of C. In particular, ETS S will be among the outputs after a − α applications of Routine 1. Algorithm 1 contains the pseudo code of an algorithm that starts from a set of ETSs and finds all the ETSs of size up to k that are layered supersets of the initial set of ETSs.

Fig. 12. Two possible structures of a (6, 6) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 4 and g = 6.

V. CHARACTERIZATION OF ELEMENTARY TRAPPING SETS OF LEFT-REGULAR LDPC CODES
A. Motivating Examples
It is easy to see that any trapping set in T , including ETSs, contains at least one cycle. It can thus be argued that cycles are the most basic structure for ETSs in T . This motivates the study of the relationship between cycles, as the most basic ETSs, and the more complex ETSs of T . Short cycles have long been known to be problematic for iterative decoding in general [26], and for the performance in the error floor region, in particular [19], [40], [41]. Short cycles are also easy to enumerate [40]. In this section, we establish a simple relationship between short cycles and the more complex ETSs. In particular, we prove that the majority of dominant ETS structures of left-regular LDPC codes are layered supersets of short cycles.1 One important implication of this result is that, starting from short cycles of the graph, Algorithm 1, presented in the previous section, can be used to find all such ETSs in a guaranteed fashion.
The following examples demonstrate the relationship between short cycles and the more complex ETSs of leftregular graphs.
Example 4: Figure 11 shows a possible structure S of a (5, 1) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 3 and g = 6. The (3, 3) ETS C = {v1, v2, v3} forms a 6-cycle and is a subset of S. Set S is an LSS of C with the following nested sequence
1One should differentiate between an ETS structure of a certain (a, b) class and actual (a, b) ETSs with that structure in a specific Tanner graph. While there may be a number of different non-isomorphic structures for a given ETS class in a general left-regular Tanner graph with left degree dl and girth g, all, some or none of those structures may appear in a specific Tanner graph with left degree dl and girth g. For those structures that do appear, also, the multiplicity would depend on the specific Tanner graph.

of ETSs: C ⊂ S(1) = {v1, v2, v3, v4} ⊂ S. Starting from C, in the first round of expansion by Algorithm 1, variable node v4 will be added and the (4, 2) ETS S(1) will be found. In the second round of expansion, with set S(1) as the input, variable node v5 will be added and S will be found.
Note that although v5 is not part of any 6-cycle, this node will be added at the second round of expansion. In other words, for a trapping set to be found by the algorithm, it is not
necessary that all the nodes in the set participate in short(est) cycles.
Starting from a short cycle, each round of expansion by
Algorithm 1, may result in several new ETSs. These trapping sets all have the same size, but may have different number
of unsatisfied check nodes, and thus belong to different
classes of trapping sets. This is demonstrated in the following example.
Example 5: Consider the structure in Figure 2(b) and one of its subsets C = {v3, v4, v6} which is a (3, 6) ETS. Starting from C, as the input to Algorithm 1, there are two variable nodes v1 and v5 as candidates for the first expansion. The resultant ETSs are {v3, v4, v6, v1} and {v3, v4, v6, v5}, which are (4, 6) and (4, 4) trapping sets, respectively.
It is important to note that if an element of a class of ETSs is an LSS of a short cycle, this does not necessarily mean that
all the elements of that class are also LSSs of short cycles of
the same length. The reason is that there may be other nonisomorphic structures in that class which are not LSSs of any
of the short cycles under consideration. Example 6: Figure 12 shows two possible structures for a
(6, 6) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 4 and g = 6. The structure of Figure 12(a) is an LSS of any of its 6-cycles and thus can be obtained by the recursive expansion of any of them through Algorithm 1. The structure of Figure 12(b),

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5194

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
TABLE I LSS PROPERTIES OF NON-ISOMORPHIC STRUCTURES OF (a, b) ETS CLASSES
FOR LEFT-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dl = 3 AND g = 6

Fig. 13. An (8, 2) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 3 and g = 6 which is not an LSS of any of its cycles.
on the other hand, is not an LSS of any of its 6-cycles, and is thus out of the reach of Algorithm 1, if the algorithm starts from any 6-cycle.
It is however, easy to see that the structure in Figure 12(b) is an LSS of the set {v3, v4, v5, v6}, which itself forms an 8-cycle. The trapping set can thus be found by Algorithm 1 if cycles of length 8 are included in the input set. In general, adding short cycles longer than the girth to the input of Algorithm 1 can improve the coverage of this algorithm. Nonetheless, there are structures which do not satisfy the LSS property with respect to any of their cycles. This means that even arbitrarily enlarging the size of the cycles in the initial input set will not result in finding such structures by the algorithm.
Example 7: Figure 13 shows an (8, 2) ETS S in a leftregular graph with dl = 3 and g = 6. Set S contains cycles of length 6, 8 and 10. It is easy to check that S does not satisfy the LSS property with respect to any of these cycles, and thus cannot be found using Algorithm 1 starting from any of them.

and study all the non-isomorphic structures of different classes of (a, b) ETSs with values of a and b up to 10. For each class of ETSs with given values of a and b, we first find all the non-isomorphic structures using the approach described in
Section III (with constraints on dl and g). We then examine each of these structures to find out whether the structure is an LSS of any of its cycles. This can be performed using Algorithm 1. Let S be the structure under consideration. We can start with the set of shortest cycles, say of length , in S, and apply Algorithm 1 to recursively expand them to larger subsets of S. If this process ends with finding S, then we report S as being an LSS of a cycle of length . In the case that this process will not result in finding S, we use the set of cycles of next larger size as the input and repeat the process. This will continue until S is identified as an LSS of one of its cycles or until all the cycles are exhausted and S is not an LSS of any of them. In the former case, if the cycle length is x, we refer to S as an LSSx structure. That is, parameter x is the length of the shortest cycle(s) for which S satisfies the LSS property. The results for different values of dl and g are reported in the following subsections. For each value of a, we mostly consider the values of b which satisfy b/a ≤ 1. For a given value of a, these values of b are believed to correspond
to dominant trapping sets [34]. It is easy to see that for a Tanner graph with girth g = 8, it is impossible to have any (a, b) trapping set in T with a < 4. For a Tanner graph with g = 6 and variable node degree dl, short cycles of length 6 are trivial (3, 3(dl − 2)) trapping sets. For this reason, we only consider (a, b) trapping sets with a ≥ 4.

B. Non-Isomorphic Structures of Dominant ETSs and Their Characterization
In this part of the paper, we investigate the structure of ETSs for left-regular LDPC codes with left degrees 3, 4, 5 and 6. For each category of codes, we consider girth values 6 and 8,

1) dl = 3, g = 6: Theorem 1: For left-regular graphs with dl = 3 and g = 6, the multiplicity of non-isomorphic LSSx structures for different values of x are listed in Table I for different classes
of ETSs in T .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON CHARACTERIZATION OF ETS OF VARIABLE-REGULAR LDPC CODES
TABLE II LSS PROPERTIES OF NON-ISOMORPHIC STRUCTURES OF (a, b) ETS CLASSES
FOR LEFT-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dl = 3 AND g = 8

5195

TABLE III ELEMENTARY TRAPPING SETS OF TSF (155, 64) CODE
OBTAINED BY ALGORITHM 1

Fig. 14. The only possible non-isomorphic structures for (6, 0) ETSs in leftregular graphs with dl = 3 and g = 6, and their normal graph representations.

(Each column in Table I corresponds to a specific size a

of an ETS, and each row corresponds to a specific number of

unsatisfied check nodes, b. For each pair (a, b), Table I lists

the multiplicity of LSSx structures for different values of x.

For example, having

g+2 g+4 31

for a specific class of ETSs

means that there are 4 different non-isomorphic structures for

that class of trapping sets: Three of them are LSSg+2 and one

of them is an LSSg+4 structure. Starting with cycles of length g +2 and g +4, Algorithm 1 is thus guaranteed to find all such

ETSs. Having the symbol “-” for a class of (a, b) trapping

sets means that for the underlying conditions, i.e., dl = 3 and g = 6, it is impossible to have such a class of trapping

sets. For the structures which do not satisfy the LSS property with respect to any of their cycles, we use the notation “NA” (stands for not applicable). Starting from any set of cycles of the graph, Algorithm 1 cannot find such structures.)
Proof: In general, the results reported in Table I for any (a, b) ETS can be proved by first obtaining all the nonisomorphic structures using the nauty program, as described in Section III, and then examining each such structure for the LSS property, using Algorithm 1, as described earlier in this subsection. We however, provide a formal proof for the results pertaining to the ETS class (6, 0) as well as all the classes that cannot exist in left-regular graphs with dl = 3 and g = 6 (i.e., those with designation “-” in the table). The general approach

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5196

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
TABLE IV FULLY ABSORBING SETS (FAS) OF PEGREG252 × 504 CODE OBTAINED BY ALGORITHM 1
AND THE EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM OF [23]

Fig. 16. A cycle of length 10 is the only possible structure for a (5, 5) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 3 and g = 6.

Fig. 15. Growing the normal graph of (6, 0) ETSs of a left-regular graph with dl = 3 and g = 6.
for the formal proof of the rest of the results is similar and not provided.
(6, 0) ETSs: We first prove that the two structures presented in Figure 14 are the only possible non-isomorphic structures for (6, 0) ETSs in left-regular graphs with dl = 3 and g = 6. We use the normal graph representation of these structures, also shown in Figure 14, for the proof.
Since the number of unsatisfied check nodes is zero, every node in the normal graph must be connected to three other nodes. Starting from an arbitrary node, say v3, as the root, we grow the normal graph, and will have three nodes in the first layer. We arbitrarily denote these nodes by v1, v4, and v5. Consider the case where the nodes in the first layer do not have any edges in common (see Figure 15(a)). In this case, they must have 6 edges connected to the two remaining nodes (v2 and v6). According to the girth constraint (i.e., g = 6), each pair of nodes can have at most one edge in common. This implies that the only possible scenario is the case where each of the three nodes in the first layer is connected to both v2 and v6. This results in the structure of Figure 14(b). Note that in this case, the length of the shortest cycles in the structure is 8.
Now, consider the case where the nodes in the first layer have some edge(s) in common. Based on the girth constraint (g = 6), the two remaining nodes (v2 and v6) must have at least 4 edges in common with the nodes in the first layer.

(Otherwise, for v2 and v6 to have degree 3, they need to have more than one edge in common, which contradicts the
girth constraint.) This implies that the nodes in the first layer
can have only one edge in common. Without loss of generality, we assume v1 and v5 are connected (see Figure 15(b)). From this point on, there is no choice in connecting the nodes. Node v4 must be connected to both v2 and v6, each of the nodes v1 and v5 must have one connection to v2 or v6 (switching the connections will result in isomorphic structures), and nodes v2 and v6 must be connected together to satisfy their degree constraint of 3. This results in the structure of Figure 14(a).
There are two cycles of length 6 in the structure S1 of Figure 14(a). However, S1 is not an LSS of any of them. There are also three cycles of length 8 in S1, and S1 is an LSS of all of them. For example, S1 is an LSS of C1 = {v1, v3, v4, v2} with the following nested sequence of ETSs: C1 ⊂ {v1, v3, v4, v2, v5} ⊂ S1. The structure S2 of Figure 14(b) does not have any 6-cycles. It has four 8-cycles
and has LSS property with respect to all of them.
Non-Existent Structures: All such cases in Table I can be proved using two facts: (i) An (a, b) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 3 has 3a edges and (3a − b)/2 satisfied check nodes. For the latter to be integer, there cannot be any (a, b) ETS with an odd a and an even b, or vice versa. (ii) By definition, each variable node of an ETS S ∈ T of a leftregular graph with dl = 3 can be connected to at most one unsatisfied check node. This means that it is not possible to have an (a, b) ETS with b > a.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON CHARACTERIZATION OF ETS OF VARIABLE-REGULAR LDPC CODES
TABLE V LSS PROPERTIES OF NON-ISOMORPHIC STRUCTURES OF (a, b) ETS CLASSES
FOR LEFT-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dl = 4 AND g = 6

5197

Fig. 17. The three structures corresponding to the “NA” cases in Table I for (6, 4), (7, 3) and (9, 1) ETSs.
The results of Table I indicate that the majority of ETS structures satisfy the LSS property with respect to short cycles. This is particularly the case for smaller values of a and b which correspond to more problematic trapping sets.
Example 8: A cycle of length 2a in a left-regular graph with dl = 3 is an (a, a) ETS. For example, Figure 16 shows the structure of a (5, 5) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 3, which is a cycle of length 10. In fact, as the results of Table I show cycles of length 2a are the only (a, a) ETSs for the graphs under consideration. Such cycles trivially satisfy the LSS property.
Example 9: In Figure 17, the three structures corresponding to the “NA” cases in Table I for (6, 4), (7, 3) and (9, 1) ETSs are presented. All three structures consist of two ETSs connected by a check node.

In the rest of the paper, we omit the proofs as they are

similar in nature to that of Theorem 1. 2) dl = 3, g = 8: Theorem 2: For left-regular graphs with dl = 3 and
g = 8, the multiplicity of non-isomorphic LSSx structures for different values of x are listed in Table II for different classes
of ETSs in T .

The results of Table II also indicate that the majority of

ETS structures satisfy the LSS property with respect to short cycles of the graph. Compared to the results of Table I, a

larger portion of ETS classes have the property that all their non-isomorphic structures are LSSs of short cycles.

Remark 4: In a left-regular graph with dl = 3, any ETS in T is also an absorbing set. So the results presented in Tables I and II are also applicable to the absorbing sets of these graphs.

Example 10: Consider the Tanner-Sridhara-Fuja (TSF) (155, 64) code [35], which is a regular structured code with variable node degree 3 and girth 8. Table III lists the number

of ETSs of different sizes for this code, found by Algorithm 1 starting from the short cycles of length k ∈ {8, 10, 12, 14}.

In the first column of Table III, for each value of a, let

the smallest value of b in the listed ETS classes be denoted

by bm(ai)n . For the results of Table III, this implies that the

multiplicity of For example,

(a, b) for a

ETSs = 6,

wweithhabve<bm(baim()nai)n=is

equal to zero. 4. This means

that, in this code, the multiplicity of (6, b) ETSs with b < 4

is zero. Note that based on the results of Table II, a code with

dl = 3 and g = 8 can potentially have (6, 0) and (6, 2) ETSs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5198

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
TABLE VI LSS PROPERTIES OF NON-ISOMORPHIC STRUCTURES OF (a, b) ETS CLASSES
FOR LEFT-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dl = 4 AND g = 6

TABLE VII LSS PROPERTIES OF NON-ISOMORPHIC STRUCTURES OF (a, b) ETS CLASSES
FOR LEFT-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dl = 4 AND g = 8

According to Theorem 2 and based on the results of Table II, except for the class of (8, 4) ETSs, the results presented in Table III for a ≤ 9 are exhaustive, i.e., Algorithm 1 is guaranteed to find all the possible elementary trapping sets.

(Note that the reason that the results for the class of (8, 4) ETSs may not be exhaustive is that the cycles of length 16 are not included in the initial set.) For the class of (10, 2) ETSs, comparison with the results of [44], which are based

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON CHARACTERIZATION OF ETS OF VARIABLE-REGULAR LDPC CODES
TABLE VIII LSS PROPERTIES OF NON-ISOMORPHIC STRUCTURES OF (a, b) ETS CLASSES
FOR LEFT-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dl = 5 AND g = 6

5199

on exhaustive search, reveals that Algorithm 1 has in fact found all the ETSs in this class as well. To demonstrate the relevance of the ETSs reported in Table III to the error floor performance of the code, we first note that the 465 (8, 2) ETSs listed in Table III are known to be the dominant trapping sets of this code on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel under iterative sum-product decoding algorithm [43]. In addition, we performed Monte Carlo simulations on this code with a 4-bit quantized min-sum decoder over the AWGN channel at signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 6.5 dB (which is in the error floor region of this code) to obtain 300 block errors. In all 300 cases, the error patterns in which the decoder was trapped were ETSs that are listed in Table III: 271×(8, 2), 23× (10, 2), 2 × (7, 3), 1 × (7, 5), 1 × (6, 4), 1 × (8, 4), 1 × (9, 3).

It is also worth noting that it took Algorithm 1 about 2 minutes to find all the ETSs listed in Table III on a desktop computer with 2-GHz CPU and 1 GB of RAM.
Example 11: As another example of an LDPC code with dl = 3 and g = 8, we consider a code constructed by the progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm [14] (PEGReg252x504 of [45]). The distribution of small fully absorbing sets for this code was investigated in [23]. To compare our results with those of [23], we first use Algorithm 1 to find the ETSs of this code, which are also absorbing sets based on Remark 4, and then examine the obtained absorbing sets for finding those that satisfy the definition of a fully absorbing set. The results obtained by Algorithm 1 are listed in Table IV based on short cycles of lengths 8 to 16. The second last column of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5200

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

the table shows the total multiplicity for different classes of fully absorbing sets obtained by Algorithm 1. Comparing this column with the last one which contains the multiplicity results reported in [23] based on an exhaustive search shows a perfect match. It is also worth mentioning that the exhaustive search algorithm of [23], using a desktop computer with an Intel Core2 2.4GHz CPU and 2GB memory [25], took about 7 hours to find only the first three rows of Table IV [23] (needless to say, the larger the size of the absorbing sets, the longer the running time of the algorithm of [23]). Algorithm 1, on the other hand, took about 5 hours on a desktop computer with 2-GHz CPU and 1 GB of RAM to find all the fully absorbing sets listed in Table IV (Note that if we exclude those (8, 4) ETSs which are LSSg+8 from the search, Algorithm 1 will take only about 10 minutes to find the rest of the ETSs listed in Table IV.) We also performed Monte Carlo simulations on this code with a 3-bit quantized min-sum decoder over the AWGN channel at SNR of 5.5 dB (which is in the error floor region of this code) to obtain 150 block errors. In 149 out of 150 cases, the error patterns in which the decoder was trapped were ETSs that are listed in Table IV: 71×(9, 1), 57× (8, 2), 11 × (10, 2), 6 × (7, 3), 3 × (5, 3), 1 × (6, 6). (The other pattern was a (5, 11) non-ETS.)
3) dl = 4 and g = 6: Theorem 3: For left-regular graphs with dl = 4 and g = 6, the multiplicity of non-isomorphic LSSx structures for different values of x are listed in Tables V and VI for different classes of ETSs in T . For graphs with dl > 3, not every ETS is an absorbing set. To identify the structures that are absorbing sets, we use the notation “AS” in the tables. For each class of ETSs, we thus have two sets of entries: the ones for absorbing sets denoted by “AS”, and those that correspond to all the ETSs denoted by “TS” to stand for “trapping sets”. For each entry, the number of possible non-absorbing set structures can be obtained by subtracting the corresponding results in the two sets. For example, the results for the ETS class (5, 4) in Table V indicate that there are two non-isomorphic structures for this class that are both LSSs of cycles of length g. Only one of the two structures however, is an absorbing set. Tables V and VI indicate that the majority of ETS structures satisfy the LSS property with respect to short cycles. In particular, all the ETSs of size less than 7 with less than 6 unsatisfied check nodes are LSSs of 6-cycles. 4) dl = 4 and g = 8: Theorem 4: For left-regular graphs with dl = 4 and g = 8, the multiplicity of non-isomorphic LSSx structures for different values of x are listed in Table VII for different classes of ETSs in T . The results of Table VII indicate that all the ETSs of size less than 10 with less than 9 unsatisfied check nodes satisfy the LSS property. Comparison with the results of Tables V and VI reveals that by increasing the girth of the graph from 6 to 8, the number of classes whose structures all satisfy the LSS property increases. 5) dl = 5 and g = 6: Theorem 5: For left-regular graphs with dl = 5 and g = 6, the multiplicity of non-isomorphic LSSx structures for different

TABLE IX LSS PROPERTIES OF NON-ISOMORPHIC STRUCTURES OF (a, b) ETS
CLASSES FOR LEFT-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dl = 5 AND g = 8
values of x are listed in Table VIII for different classes of ETSs in T .
Table VIII shows that except for a small fraction of ETS structures, all the rest of the structures of ETS classes with size less than 10 and with less than 10 unsatisfied check nodes satisfy the LSS property. In particular, all the structures of size less than 10 with less than 5 unsatisfied check nodes are LSSs of 6-cycles.
6) dl = 5 and g = 8: Theorem 6: For left-regular graphs with dl = 5 and g = 8, the multiplicity of non-isomorphic LSSx structures for different values of x are listed in Table IX for different classes of ETSs in T . Tables VII and IX, in comparison with their counterparts for g = 6, show that in graphs with larger girth, small trapping sets with small number of unsatisfied check nodes cannot exist. In particular, Table IX indicates that in left-regular graphs with dl = 5 and g = 8 no (a, b) ETS with a ≤ 7 and b < 10 can exist. The inspection of Table VIII however, reveals that many of these ETS classes can exist in left-regular graphs with dl = 5 and g = 6. The results of Table IX also demonstrate that, for a left-regular graph with dl = 5 and g = 8, all the (a, b) ETSs with a < 10 and b < 10 are LSSs of 8-cycles. Remark 5: It can be proved that it is not possible to have any (a, b) ETS with a < 10 and b < 10 in a left-regular graph with dl = 5 and g > 8. 7) dl = 6 and g = 6: Theorem 7: For left-regular graphs with dl = 6 and g = 6, the multiplicity of non-isomorphic LSSx structures for different values of x are listed in Table X for different classes of ETSs in T .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON CHARACTERIZATION OF ETS OF VARIABLE-REGULAR LDPC CODES
TABLE X LSS PROPERTIES OF NON-ISOMORPHIC STRUCTURES OF (a, b) ETS CLASSES
FOR LEFT-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dl = 6 AND g = 6

5201

All the other possible structures for all the ETS classes are
LSSs of 6-cycles.
8) dl = 6 and g > 6: Theorem 8: For left-regular graphs with dl = 6 and g > 6, there does not exist any (a, b) ETS in T with a < 10 and b ≤ 10.

Fig. 18. The only possible structure for a (9, 10) ETS in a left-regular graph with dl = 6 and g = 6 that does not satisfy the LSS property.
The results of Table X indicate that for left-regular graphs with dl = 6 and g = 6, all the possible (a, b) absorbing sets with a < 10 and b ≤ 10 satisfy the LSS property with respect to 6-cycles. Moreover, except for one structure (out of 5411 structures) of the ETS class (9, 10), all the structures of (a, b) ETS classes with a < 10 and b ≤ 10 are LSSs of short cycles. (The structure that does not satisfy the LSS property is shown in Figure 18.) Among these classes (excluding the (9, 10) class), only one structure out of the 2274 possible structures for the (9, 8) ETS class is an LSS of 10-cycles.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated the structure of elementary trapping sets (ETSs) of left-regular LDPC codes. We developed an approach to find all non-isomorphic structures of a given (a, b) class of ETSs, where a is the size and b is the number of unsatisfied check nodes of the ETS. For leftregular LDPC codes with left degrees dl = 3, 4, 5, 6, and girths g = 6, 8, we studied such structures and demonstrated that the majority of them are layered supersets (LSS) of short cycles in the Tanner graph of the code. In particular, we proved that for any category of left-regular LDPC codes with given dl and g, there exist integers α and β such that all the classes of (a, b) ETSs with a < α and b < β, are LSSs of short cycles. This implies that for any category of left-regular LDPC codes, the dominant ETSs are all LSSs of short cycles. The LSS characterization of dominant ETSs is particularly important as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5202

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

it corresponds to a simple algorithm that can find all such ETSs in a guaranteed fashion starting from the short cycles of the graph. For any class of (a, b) ETSs, the lengths of the required short cycles were provided in this paper.
One important contribution of this work is the approach developed to exhaustively find all the non-isomorphic structures of a given class of (a, b) ETSs for arbitrary values of a and b and for left-regular LDPC codes of arbitrary left degree and girth. In a more general context, the database of such structures can be very helpful in the analysis and the design of LDPC codes with low error floor. In particular, one can use this information to find all the ETSs of a certain class in a guaranteed fashion regardless of whether those ETSs satisfy the LSS property or not. To the best of our knowledge, the results presented in Tables I, II, and V - X are the most comprehensive results available so far on the structure of ETSs of regular LDPC codes.
Finally, we note that an approach similar to the one described in this paper can be applied to irregular LDPC codes to find their non-isomorphic ETS structures. For a given class of ETSs, however, the variety of such structures would increase significantly, compared to that of the left-regular codes, due to the variety of variable node degrees.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.
[2] S. Abu-Surra, D. DeClercq, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Trapping set enumerators for specific LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inform. Theory Appl. Workshop (ITA), San Diego, CA, USA, Jan./Feb. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[3] S. Abu-Surra, W. E. Ryan, D. Divsalar, and W. Ryan, “Asymptotic ensemble enumerators for protograph-based generalized LDPC codes: Computational complexity,” in Proc. Inform. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, Jan./Feb. 2008, pp. 63–65.
[4] E. Cavus and B. Daneshrad, “A performance improvement and error floor avoidance technique for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Symp. Personal, Indoor Mobile Radio Commun., vol. 4. Los Angeles, CA, USA, Sep. 2005, pp. 2386–2390.
[5] C. Cole, S. Wilson, E. Hall, and T. Giallorenzi, “A general method for finding low error rates of LDPC codes,” [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0605051
[6] Q. Diao, Y. Y. Tai, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Trapping set structure of finite geometry LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2012, pp. 3088–3092.
[7] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets for array-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Glasgow, Scotland, Jun. 2007, pp. 6261–6268.
[8] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Evaluation of the low frame error rate performance of LDPC codes using importance sampling,” in Proc. IEEE Inform. Theory Workshop (ITW), Lake Tahoe, CA, USA, Sep. 2007, pp. 202–207.
[9] L. Dolecek, P. Lee, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikolic, and M. Wainwright, “Predicting error floors of structured LDPC codes: Deterministic bounds and estimates,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 908–917, Aug. 2009.
[10] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[11] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[12] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “LDPC decoder strategies for achieving low error floors,” in Proc. Inform. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, Jan. 2008, pp. 277–286.

[13] Q. Huang, Q. Diao, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Trapping sets of structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory (ISIT), Aug. 2011, pp. 1086–1090.
[14] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[15] M. Ivkovic, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.
[16] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “The trapping redundancy of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 53–63, Jan. 2009.
[17] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Wireless Netw., Commun. Mobile Comput., Maui, HI, USA, Jun. 2005, pp. 630–635.
[18] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “Characterization of small trapping sets in LDPC codes from Steiner triple systems,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inform. Process., Brest, France, Sep. 2010, pp. 93–97.
[19] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
[20] C. Koller, A. Graell i Amat, J. Kliewer, and D. J. Costello, “On trapping sets for repeat accumulate accumulate codes,” in Proc. Inform. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 2009, pp. 164–168.
[21] C. Koller, A. Graell i Amat, J. Kliewer, and D. J. Costello, “Trapping set enumerators for repeat multiple accumulate code ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory (ISIT), Seoul, Korea, Jun./Jul. 2009, pp. 1819–1823.
[22] R. Koetter, W.-C. W. Li, P. O. Vontobel, and J. L. Walker, “Pseudocodewords of cycle codes via zeta functions,” in Proc. IEEE Inform. Theory Workshop, San Antonio, TX, USA, Oct. 2004, pp. 7–12.
[23] G. B. Kyung and C.-C. Wang, “Exhaustive search for small fully absorbing sets and the corresponding low error-floor decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Austin, TX, USA, Jun. 2010, pp. 739–743.
[24] G. B. Kyung and C.-C. Wang, “Finding the exhaustive list of small fully absorbing sets and designing the corresponding low error-floor decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1487–1498, Jun. 2012.
[25] G. B. Kyung, private communication, Jan. 2011.
[26] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-density parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Helsinki, Finland, Jun. 2001, pp. 41–44.
[27] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating stopping and trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1640–1650, Apr. 2010.
[28] D. J. C. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan–Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theoretical Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, Oct. 2003.
[29] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[30] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[31] E. Rosnes and O. Ytrehus, “An efficient algorithm to find all small-size stopping sets of low-density parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4167–4178, Sep. 2009.
[32] E. Pusane, D. J. Costello, and D. G.M. Mitchell, “Trapping set analysis of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory (ISIT), Seoul, Korea, Jun./Jul. 2009, pp. 561–565.
[33] B. Vasic, S. Chilappagari, D. Nguyen, and S. Planjery, “Trapping set ontology,” in Proc. 47th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Sep. 2009, pp. 1–7.
[34] C. Schlegel and S. Zhang, “On the dynamics of the error floor behavior in (regular) LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3248–3264, Jul. 2010.
[35] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Commun. Theory Appl., Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001, pp. 365–370.
[36] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finitelength analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/0512078

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON CHARACTERIZATION OF ETS OF VARIABLE-REGULAR LDPC CODES

5203

[37] C.-C. Wang, “On the exhaustion and elimination of trapping sets: Algorithms & the suppressing effect,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 2271–2275.
[38] C.-C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Finding all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1976–1998, May 2009.
[39] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Estimation of bit and frame error rates of low-density parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 2234–2239, Dec. 2007.
[40] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error rate estimation of low-density parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels using cycle enumeration,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1550–1555, Jun. 2009.
[41] H. Xiao, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Karimi, “Error rate estimation of low-density parity-check codes decoded by quantized softdecision iterative algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 474–484, Feb. 2013.
[42] Y. Zhang and W. E. Ryan, “Toward low LDPC-code floors: A case study,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1566–1573, Jun. 2009.
[43] S. Zhang and C. Schlegel, “Causes and dynamics of LDPC error floors on AWGN channels,” in Proc. 49th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), Monticello, IL, USA, Sep. 2011, pp. 1025–1032.
[44] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient algorithms to find all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf., Houston, TX, USA, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[45] D. MacKay’s Gallager Code Resources [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/
[46] Nauty and Traces [Online]. Available: http://cs.anu.edu.au/∼bdm/nauty/
Mehdi Karimi (S’10) received the B.A.Sc. degree and M.A.Sc degrees both in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran in 2003 and 2005, respectively. From 2005 to 2008, he was with the Information and Communication Technology Institute, Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran. During 2008-2013, he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Carleton, Ottawa, Canada, for his Ph.D. degree. He is currently working at Infinera Canada Inc., Ottawa. His research interests include graphical modeling, iterative coding, statistical signal processing and wireless communications.

Amir H. Banihashemi (S’90–A’98–M’03–SM’04) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran in 1988, and the M.A.Sc. degree in communications engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, with the highest academic rank in both classes.
From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology. During 1994-1997, he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, for his Ph.D. degree. He held two Ontario Graduate Scholarships for international students during this period. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, where he worked as a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Postdoctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering at Carleton University in 1998, where at present he is a Professor in the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include coding and information theory, digital and wireless communications, network coding, theory and implementation of communication algorithms, and compressed sensing and sampling. He has published more than 150 papers in refereed journals and conferences.
Dr. Banihashemi served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2003 to 2009. He has been involved in many international conferences as chair, member of technical program committee, and member of organizing committee. These include co-chair for the Communication Theory Symposium of Globecom’07, TPC co-chair of the Information Theory Workshop (ITW) 2007, member of the organizing committee for the International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) 2008, and co-chair of the Canadian Workshop on Information Theory (CWIT) 2009. Dr. Banihashemi is a recipient of Carleton’s Research Achievement Award in 2006 and 2012, and Faculty Graduate Mentoring Award in 2011. He has also been a two-time recipient of NSERC Discovery Accelerator Supplement (DAS) in 2008 and 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:00:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

