- ISIT 1997, Ulm. Germany, June 29 July 4
On the Construction of Efficient Multilevel Coded Modulations
Jug-F’u Cheng Department of Electrical Engineering, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA Email: jfc@systems.caltech.edu WWW: http://www.cco.caltech.edu/-rjm/

The methodology of multi-stage iterative decoding with exchange of soft information has recently been applied to a wide range of error-controlling codes with remarkable success, including parallel/serial concatenated convolu-
tional/block codes [11 and generalized concatenated convolutional codes [3]. A theoretical explanation of this decoding mechanism has recently been proposed [6] via the belief p r o p agation algorithm (BPA) [7], well-known in the artificial intelligence community. It is shown that, by representing a turbo
code with a Bayesian belief network, the application of BPA directly leads to the turbo decoding algorithm. In fact, it is argued that the decoding algorithms for all the aforementioned variations of the turbo coding construction as well as a wide range of low-density parity check codes can be explained by this principle.
It becomes evident from this Bayesian network perspective that the now classical turbo coding approach imposes unnecessary differentiation on parity checks and specifies a seemingly arbitrary sequential activation order of the network [6]. Low-density generator matrix (LDGM) codes are proposed as a generalization of turbo codes in which the parity bits are treated uniformly [2]. These codes can be encoded and decoded with complexity linear in the code length. Contrary to the turbo decoding paradigms where sequential processing is accomplished by very powerful central units, the proposed decoding algorithm based on BPA is formulated in a distributed parallel form. The decoders can thus enjoy modular pipeline design and the systems, therefore, seem more suitable for practical applications. The performances of these codes, as marked in Fig. 1by cross-plus signs, are 1dB or so of the channel capacity. They are superior to several optimal convolutional codes with either Viterbi or sequential decoding, and, when used with QPSK (without any coded modulation techniques), are comparable to some trellis coded modulations [B], though with marginal lower spectral efficiency.
To achieve higher frequency efficiency, LDGM codes are combined with M-ary signaling schemes using multilevel coding methods [5]. Instead of the traditional design rule of balanced squared Euclidean distances, component codes for individual partition levels are chosen such that their rates are matched to the corresponding equivalent channel capacities of the levels [4]. BP decoding algorithm for LDGM codes is applied to decode individual levels and hard estimates of the codewords are then fed to the lower levels. The performances for two such coded BPSK using Ungerboeck’s partitioning rules [8], as shown in Fig. 1by circled-cross-plus signs, are about 1 dB of the channel capacity and superior to some (multi-dimensional) trellis coded modulations. Some partitioning rules other than Ungerboeck’s are investigated and shown to provide a range of flexible coding systems, e.g., unequal error protection.

3

!

25TC6PSKx8PSK
TCBPSK

QPSK with LDGM Codes

BPSK

BPSK with LDGM Codes

+

+ (2.1s) VD

(2.1.31) Sequantial

+ {4,1,14) BVD

‘ 0’

-2

0

2

4

6

6

10

EblNo in dB

FIGURE1 Spectral efficiency comparison of codes. (Marks for specific coding systems are based on t h e code rates and the required &/No for BER=1OP5.)

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author is grateful to Prof. McEliece of Caltech for his valuable advice.
REFERENCES
(11 C. Berrou, A. Glavieux,and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon Limit Error-Correcting Coding and Decoding: Turbo-Codes,” Proc. IEEE International Communications Conference ’93.
[2] J.-F. Cheng and R. J. McEliece, “Some High-Rate Near Capacity Codecs for che Gaussian Channel,” Proc. 34th Allerton Conference on Communications, Control and Computing, 1996.
[3] J.-F. Cheng, “On the Decoding of Certain Generalized Concatenated Convolutional Codes,” submitted to I E E E Journal o n Selected Areas in Communications.
[4] J. Huber and U. Wachsmann, “Capacities of the Equivalent Channels in Multilevel Coding Schemes,” I E E Electronic Letters, Mar. 1996.
[5] H. Imai and S. Hirakawa, “A New Multilevel Coding Method Using Error-Correcting Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, May 1997.
[6] D. 3. C. MacKay, R. J. McEliece and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo Decoding as an Instance of Peral’s ‘Belief Propagation’ Algorithm,” submitted to I E E E Journal o n Selected Areas in Communications.
[7] J . Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference, Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[8] G. Ungerboeck, “Channel Coding with Multilevel/Phase Signals,” IEEE Transactions o n Information Theory, Jan. 1982.

‘This work was supported by US NSF grant NCR-9505975.

0-7803-3956-8/97/$10.00 0 1 9 9 7 I€€€

522

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:45:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

