ISIT 1997, Ulm, Germany, June 29 -July 4
Graph Theoretic Construction of Generalized Product Codes
P.S. Guinand and J . H. Lodge
Communications Research Centre
3701 Carling Avenue, Ottawa Canada K2H 8S2
(tel) 613-998-2646, (fax) 613-998-1686.

Abstract - In this note we describe a construction,
based on bipartite graphs of high girth, of codes which lend themselves to an iterative MAP decoding strat-
egy. In previous papers [l, 21 the authors have described
codes which resemble product codes and are suitable for iterative MAP decoding. In this note we appy these constructions to a class of biregular bipartite graphs of high girth constructed by Z. Furedi, F. Laxebnik, A. Seress,
V . A . Ustimenko and A.J. Woldar 131. The girth is related
to the minimum distance of the resulting codes. Also, the
statistical independence of the information used as the a priori input to the decoding, which affects the convergence of the iterative decoding, is related to the girth of the graphs.
A number of authors have used graph theoretic [4, 51 methods to construct error-correcting codes. In this note we consider such a construction which generalizes the notion of a product code. A product code gives rise t o a set of partitions of the bits, each partition consisting of sets of a fixed size. These partitions are such that a set from one partition intersects a set from another partition in at most one element. Each partition has associated to it a component code whose length matchs the sets in the partition. We refer to a code arising from a set of partitions, as above, and a set of appropriately sized component codes as a generalized product code. There is a combinatorial description of this situation in terms of hypergraphs [2]. For two dimensions the result is a biregular bipartite graph where each vertex set corresponds to a partition and the edges correspond to the bits.
Thus, we are considering a biregular bipartite graph G of bidegree ( b l , 62) with vertices VI U V2 where VI corresponds to one partition and V2 corresponds to the other. The edges correspond to the bits in the code. To construct a code from this graph we also need ( b l , k ~ a)nd ( 6 2 , k z ) component codes. The bits (edges) in (incident on) a partition (vertex) are constrained to lie in the subspace defined by the component code. Let d l and dz be the minimum distances of the component codes. A non-zero codeword in the generalized product code corresponds to a set of edges C, in the graph such that any vertex in &(resp.Vz) which is incident with an element of C,,,must be incident with at least dl(resp.dz) elements of C,,, . Thus C, must form the edges of a bipartite subgraph of G whose vertices on one side must be of degree at least dl and on the other of degree at least d2. If the component codes are single bit parity check codes, t,he minimum distance of the new code is given by the girth.

> For general dd and girth g, a lower bound on the mini-
mal distance is given by dmin maz(f(d1, &), f(&, dl))
where,

+ ((dl - l)(dz - l))[g/4+1/2J - 1

dl

( d l - l)(d2 - 1) - 1

Biregular bipartite graphs of high girth have been constructed by Furedi et al. [3]. In particular, for each odd
IC 2 1 and any prime power q , a bipartite, q-regular,
C D ( k ,q ) of order at most 2qk-L-J+’ can be constructed whose girth is at least k+5. The graphs C D ( k ,q ) have qk vertices on each side. These graphs arise as a connected component of a graph D ( k ,q ) . The incidence structures that the D ( k ,q ) come from allow one to remove lines and points in such a fashion that biregularity is maintained while producing arbitrary bidegree. This operation cannot decrease the girth and in fact may well increase it.
This reduction allows one to tailor the bidegree so that it is appropriate for use with one’s choice of component codes. Because the error bound involves powers of the minimum distance of the component codes-1, the interesting cases arise when one considers component codes whose minimum distance is at least 3. One can, for instance, construct these codes using Hamming component codes. The resulting codes have minimum distances which considerably exceed the general bound given above. The corresponding decoding procedure amounts to doing iterative decoding with Hamming codes and as such is relatively simple.

REFERENCES
[l] P. Guinand, J. Lodge and L. Papke,“Analternativeapproach t o the design of interleavers for block ”turbo” codes,” Information theory and its Applications I I , LNCS 1133 pp. 95-103, SpringerVerlag 1996.
[2] P. Guinand and J. Lodge, “Design of generalized product codes suitable for iterative decoding,” Proc. of the 1996 Symp. on InfOT. Thy. and i t s Applications, Victoria, BC Sept. 1996.
[3] Z. Furedi, F. Lazebnik, A. Seress, V.A. Ustimenko and A.J. Woldar, “Graphs of prescribed girth and bidegree,” J . of Combinatorial Theory (B), vol. 64 pp. 228-239,1995.
[4] R.M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. o n Info. Thy., vol. IT-27 no. 5 pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
151 N. Wilberg,H-A. Loeliger and R. Kotter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” European Trans. on Telecomm., vol. 6 no. 5 pp. 513-526,Sept. 1995.

0-7803-3956-8/97/$10 .OO 0 1 9 9 7 IEEE

111

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:44:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

