2023 6th World Conference on Computing and Communication Technologies (WCCCT) | 978-1-6654-6146-7/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/WCCCT56755.2023.10052347

2023 6th World Conference on Computing and Communication Technologies
Multiple Flipping Strategy LISBF for LDPC Codes

Yishan Sun School of Micro-Nano Electronics
Zhejiang University Hangzhou, China sunys@zju.edu.cn
Yichun Zhang School of Micro-Nano Electronics
Zhejiang University Hangzhou, China zhangyichun@zju.edu.cn

Pingyang Huang School of Micro-Nano Electronics
Zhejiang University Hangzhou, China py huang@zju.edu.cn
Zhiyuan Cheng School of Micro-Nano Electronics
Zhejiang University Hangzhou, China zycheng@zju.edu.cn

Abstract—The performance and complexity of low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoders have strict requirements since they are widely demanded in both communication and storage systems. Information storage bit flipping (ISBF) decoder and layered ISBF (LISBF) decoder demonstrate excellent decoding performance and throughput in which the global maximumfinding operation can be calculated in parallel to other decoding operations. However, their error-correction performance is not satisfactory. In this paper, we consider a variety of optimizations based on LISBF and propose a new algorithm named multiple flipping strategy LISBF (MLISBF). First, a high probability is adopted to flip those bits with high energy values. Second, strict flipping with a lower threshold is triggered when the syndrome weight is negligible. Then, we introduce perturbation flipping at specific iterations to help the decoder overcome trapping sets. We designed an efficient hardware implementation which realizes the layered calculation for BF decoders and reduces hardware resources for the MLISBF algorithm.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check codes, bit flipping, flipping strategy, layered decoding, trapping set
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) has been intensively studied in the past decades because of its wide application in communication and storage systems [1]. The decoding algorithms of LDPC codes can be divided into two main categories: soft-decision decoding and hard-decision decoding. On the one hand, soft-decision decoding algorithms such as the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm [1] have high performance in decoding ability but at the cost of increased computational complexity. Therefore, some optimization algorithms, such as the min-sum (MS) algorithm [2] and offset MS (OMS) algorithm [3], were developed to simplify the decoding complexity. On the other hand, hard-decision decoding algorithms such as the bit flipping (BF) algorithm have low complexity, but their performance is worse than that of soft-decision decoding algorithms. To increase the error-correction performance of the BF algorithm, some soft information-aided BF algorithms, such as the gradient descent BF (GDBF) algorithm [4] and noisy GDBF (NGDBF) algorithm [5], have been proposed. In some application scenarios with high complexity requirements,

the high complexity generated by using soft information leads to a limit on the application of soft-decision LDPC decoder. Therefore, this paper focuses on BF algorithms based only on hard information.
The differences between different BF decoding algorithms are mainly the computation of the inversion function (or energy function) and the operation to obtain flipping threshold or flipping mechanism at each iteration [6]. The probabilistic GDBF (PGDBF) algorithm [7] was proposed for LDPC decoding outperforms the GDBF algorithm by a wide margin due to the deliberate introduction of random perturbations. Unlike the GDBF algorithm, which flips all bits whose energy values are equal to the maximum value, the PGDBF algorithm flips these bits with a certain probability. A tabu-list randompenalty GDBF (TRGDBF) algorithm [8] was proposed. On the one hand, the TRGDBF algorithm introduces a tabu-list to overcome the repeated flip problem between iterations. On the other hand, it adds an additional random penalty term in calculating the energy function. Compared with the PGDBF algorithm, the TRGDBF algorithm has a better ability to overcome trapping sets and higher error-correction performance. However, those algorithms must perform a global maximum search operation to obtain the flipping threshold. This serial calculation increases the critical path and dramatically affects the achievable hardware frequency, especially in applications with long codeword lengths. The probabilistic parallel BF (PPBF) algorithm [9], the information storage BF (ISBF) algorithm [10], and the layered ISBF (LISBF) algorithm [11] have been proposed to reduce the critical path. Instead of calculating the flipping threshold, the PPBF algorithm flips with a certain probability according to its energy values. However, it does not have satisfactory error-correction performance. In the ISBF algorithm, the energy values of the previous iteration are stored and used to calculate the flipping threshold of the current iteration. Thus, the ISBF algorithm can compute bit energy values and flipping thresholds in parallel. In the LISBF algorithm, the column-layered strategy is used to speed up the convergence of ISBF. Despite this, the convergence speed and

978-1-6654-6146-7/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

61

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the ability to overcome trapping sets remain insufficient. In this work, we propose multiple flipping strategy LISBF
(MLISBF) for the BF decoder to increase the decoding convergence speed and the ability to overcome trapping sets. Because of the outstanding performance of the LISBF algorithm and its characteristics of parallel calculation of bit energy values and flipping threshold, we investigate it in detail and optimize the BF decoder based on this algorithm. The three effective flipping strategies we add are as follows: (1) flipping the bits whose energy value is larger than the flipping threshold with a higher probability than normal flipping; (2) introducing a dynamic flipping threshold determined by the number of unsatisfied check nodes (unsatisfied syndrome counts); (3) decoding with a low flipping threshold at some specific iterations that can help the decoder escape the trapping sets by introducing perturbation. We also present an efficient hardware implementation for the MLISBF algorithm. The simulation results and synthesis results show that the MLISBF algorithm has excellent error-correction performance, a low average number of iterations, and high area efficiency.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. Notation

We consider an (N, K) (dv, dc) regular binary LDPC code

in this paper, defined by an M × N parity check matrix

H which has dv 1’s in each column and dc 1’s in each

row.

The

code

rate

R

=

1

−

M N

.

Let

Nc(i)

and

Nv (k)

(i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , M − 1} , k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N − 1})donate the set

of variable nodes (VNs) connected to the i-th check node(CN)

and the set of CNs connected to the k-th VN, respectively. As-

sume a length-N standard codeword c = {c0, c1, . . . , cN−1} which satisfies cH T = 0 transmitted over a BSC with

crossover probability α, and y = {y0, y1, . . . , yN−1} de-

note the received codeword from the channel. Let x =

{x0, x1, . . . , xN−1} denote the estimated codeword during

decoding, and Tmax denote the maximum allowed number of

decoding iterations.

B. Overview of related BF Algorithms

We can compute the syndrome s = (s1, s2, . . . , sM ) by si = ⊕k∈Nc(i)xk. ⊕ represents the bit-wise ExclusiveOR(XOR) operation. The i-th CN is called unsatisfied if

si = 1. In addition, we name the number of unsatisfied CNs
the syndrome weight denoted by sw = i∈{0,1,...,M−1} si. Furthermore,

Sk =

si

(1)

i∈Nv (k)

refers to the number of unsatisfied CNs connected to k-th VN.

The energy values function of the original BF algorithm [1]

is defined as

Ek = Sk =

si

(2)

i∈Nv (k)

A VN with a large energy value is considered less reliable. Therefore, the BF algorithm adopts the flipping strategy of

flipping all the bits with the largest energy value at each iteration.
The GDBF algorithm converts the decoding problem into a maximum likelihood problem and solves it using gradient descent. Thus, the energy values function of the GDBF algorithm [4] is

Ek = xk ⊕ yk + Sk = xk ⊕ yk +

si

(3)

i∈Nv (k)

The energy values are calculated according to Equation (3)

in the ISBF and LISBF algorithms. After each flip operation,

the energy value of the k-th bit is updated according to Equation (4) when it is flipped in the t-th iteration. Ekt is used to roughly estimate the energy value of the bit and the

max energy value in the next iteration according to Equation

(5).

Ekt = dv + 1 − Ekt

(4)

Emaxt

=

max
k∈{0,1,...,N

−1}

Ekt−1

(5)

Therefore, their flipping threshold T h is obtained from the energy value of the previous iteration, so T h and Ek can be calculated in parallel to reduce the critical path. Considering that Sk and xk ⊕yk have different weights on the reliability of bits, those two algorithms flip the bits with probabilities p0 and p1 when Sk ⩾ T h and Ek ⩾ T h , respectively. Unlike from the ISBF algorithm, the LISBF algorithm uses column-layered BF and double-maximum method to update the flipping threshold in time. It achieves better error-correction performance and fewer average iterations. VNs are divided into L layers named V0, V1, . . . , VL−1 [11].

III. MULTIPLE FLIPPING STRATEGY LISBF

To further improve the BF decoder’s error-correction per-

formance and convergence, we propose the multiple flipping

strategy LISBF (MLISBF) algorithm based on the ISBF and

LISBF algorithms. The proposed MLISBF algorithm is shown

in Algorithm 1.

In Algorithm 1, we define the layer threshold T hl, which

is equal to the maximum energy value of each layer. Similar

to what is done in LISBF, we also use the forward-backward

computation←−of T h.←F−irst←, −at the b←eg−inning of each iteration, the vector T h = T h0, T h1, . . . , T hL−1 is calculated in a

backward manner to store the maximum values of the layer

threshold. Then, after decoding each layer, the m−a→ximum value of the layer threshold for the current iteration T h is updated

in a forward manner. We can update the flipping threshold at

each layer iteration using the forward-backward computation

by

−→ ←−

T h = max T h, T hl

(6)

We set Ek = dv + 1 − Ek to roughly estimate Ek of which bits have been flipped in current iteration for the next iteration. Line 11 and 12 of Algorithm 1 can calculate −T→h and ←en−ergy values in parallel, while the required message T h and T hl have been calculated with the updated Ek. Therefore,

62
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1: multiple flipping strategy LISBF

Input: y = {y0, y1, . . . , yN−1},p0,p1,p2,p3,T hper,SW . Output: x = {x0, x1, . . . , xN−1}.

// Initialize

1 x = y;

2 si = ⊕k∈Nc(i)xk, ∀0 ⩽ k ⩽ N − 1; 3 sw = ∀0⩽i⩽M−1 si 4 Ek = xk ⊕ yk + i∈Nv(k) si; 5 T hl = maxk∈Vl Ek, ∀0 ⩽ l ⩽ L − 1;
// Decoding

6

for t = 0 −→

to

Tmax − 1

do

−→

7 Th = 2 ;

// initialize T h

←−

8 T hL−1 = T hL−1;

←−

←−

9 T hl = max T hl, T hl+1 (l = L − 2, . . . , 0);

10 for l = 0 to L − 1 do

−→ ←−

11

T h = max T h, T hl ;

12

Sk = i∈Nv(k) si, k ∈ Vl;

13

Ek = xk ⊕ yk + Sk, k ∈ Vl;

14

for k ∈ Vl do

// Flipping strategy choose

15

if t ∈ Tper then

// Perturbation flipping

16

if Ek ⩾ T hper then Ik = B(p3);

17

else Ik = 0;

18

else if sw ⩾ SW then

// Normal flipping

19

if Ek > T h then Ik = B(p0);

20

else if Sk ⩾ T h then Ik = B(p1);

21

else if Ek ⩾ T h then Ik = B(p2);

22

else Ik = 0;

23

else

// Strict flipping

24

if T h > 2 then T h = T h − 1;

25

if Ek > T h then Ik = B(p0);

26

else if Sk ⩾ T h then Ik = B(p1);

27

else if Ek ⩾ T h then Ik = B(p2);

28

else Ik = 0;

29

end

30

if Ik = 1 then

31

xk = xk ⊕ Ik;

32

Ek = dv + 1 − Ek ;

// update

energy values

33

si = si ⊕ 1, ∀i ∈ Nv(k);

34

end

35

end

36

T hl −→

=

maxk∈−→Vl

Ek ;

37

T h = max T h, T hl ;

38 end

39

sw = i∈{0,1,...,M−1} si;

40 if sw = 0 then return x;

41 end

42 return y

this algorithm can shorten the critical path of decoding like the ISBF and LISBF algorithms do. Then, the inversion information Ik indicates whether the bit needs to be flipped in this iteration.
The relationship between T h and Emax of the ISBF algorithm has been considered in [10]. It shows that T h ⩽ Emax in most cases. Moreover, it shows that the sw can be used as the stopping criterion for the LDPC decoding in [12]. Furthermore, it can be seen from the definition of sw that it has a strong positive correlation with the number of error bits in decoding codewords. Therefore, we study the relationship between sw and Re, which denotes the percentage of error bits to the total number of bits at a specific energy value e, and Fig. 1 shows the result. Because R1 and R0 are very small for all sw, we do not consider them in this analysis.
Fig. 1. Relationship between sw and Re in the MLISBF decoding.
In Fig. 1, we find that RT h+1 is almost equal to 1 for different sw. It shows that the unreliability of those bits with Ek = T h + 1 is very high, so the original flipping strategy often misses many error bits with enormous energy values. Therefore, we modify the original flipping strategy to flip these bits with a higher probability of p0. Furthermore, We flip the bits with Sk ⩾ T h and Ek ⩾ T h with the probability of p1 and p2, respectively, where p1 ⩾ p2, the same way as the ISBF and LISBF algorithms. B(p) in Algorithm 1 is the Bernoulli distribution with a certain probability p.
It can be observed that RT h−1 keeps increasing while the sw decreases in Fig. 1. Therefore, only flipping bits with Ek ⩾ T h will miss many error bits when sw is small and limit the convergence speed of decoding. It is considered that bits with energy values equal to T h − 1 are no longer negligible when sw is small. Then, we propose a new flipping strategy named strict flipping to increase the convergence speed of decoding. Strict flipping is only triggered when the sw is less than the threshold SW . Moreover, T h in strict flipping is set to T h−1 but not less than 2, considering that the error bit rate at energy values equal to 0 or 1 is meagre. As a result, more bits will be flipped in strict flipping than in normal flipping.

63
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. A case of trapping set.

To further improve the decoding performance, we study some undecodable codewords in detail. Many will fall into trapping sets with only a few error bits left. Still, the ISBF and LISBF algorithms cannot overcome those trapping sets very well. Fig. 2 shows one of those cases. It can be observed that all unsatisfied CNs are connected to only one error bit in VNs, which causes the Sk of the error bits to be not larger than 1. It is difficult to proceed with decoding based on the previous algorithms once the decoder falls into those trapping sets. Then, we propose another new flipping strategy called perturbation flipping to help the decoder to escape from the trapping sets. The perturbation flipping is an iteration with a low flipping threshold T h = T hper at the certain number of iterations t ∈ Tper. The perturbation brought by this flipping strategy should not exceed the decoding ability of the decoder, so we limit the number of flipped bits by flipping with a low probability p3.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, the decoding performance of the MLISBF algorithm is illustrated and compared with the GDBF, PGDBF, TRGDBF, ISBF and LISBF algorithms. All algorithms are assumed to be simulated on a BSC with crossover probability α, and the simulation will terminate after collecting 100 failed codewords. We consider the LDPC code dv3R050N1296 with (dv, dc, N, R) = (3, 6, 1296, 1/2) which is widely used in the previous work [7], [8], [10], [11]. To evaluate the frame-errorrate (FER) performance and the average number of iterations of different BF algorithms, we set the maximum allowed number of iterations as Tmax = 50 and Tmax = 300, and set layer number as L = 4 in the LISBF and MLISBF algorithms. Moreover, we set p0 = 0.9, p1 = 0.75, p2 = 0.45 and p3 = 0.12 for the MLISBF algorithm, where p1 and p2 are the same in the ISBF and LISBF algorithms. We set T hper = 1 and Tper = {35, 50, 65, 80, . . .} for the perturbation flipping and SW = 35 for the strict flipping.
Fig. 3 shows the FER performance simulation results, which indicate the error-correction performance on the dv3R050N1296 LDPC code at Tmax = 50. Furthermore, Fig. 4 shows the FER performance at Tmax = 300. In comparison to other BF algorithms, the MLISBF algorithm has the best FER performance. Compared to the LISBF algorithm, the MLISBF algorithms show slightly better FER performance at Tmax = 50, which is better than that of the ISBF algorithm by

Fig. 3. FER performance of different BF algorithms on the dv3R050N1296 LDPC code at Tmax = 50.
Fig. 4. FER performance of different BF algorithms on the dv3R050N1296 LDPC code at Tmax = 300.
order. Moreover, the MLISBF algorithm significantly improves the FER performance at Tmax = 300 compared to the LISBF algorithm. The above results show that the MLISBF algorithm has excellent error-correction performance.
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show the average number of iterations at Tmax = 50 and Tmax = 300, respectively, which illustrate the decoding convergence speed. Compared to other BF algorithms, the ISBF algorithm has a higher average number of iterations, while the MLISBF algorithm has a lower average number of iterations. Although the average number of iterations of the GDBF algorithm is less than that of the MLISBF algorithm when the crossover probability α is less than 0.02, its FER performance is much worse than that of the LISBF. The reduction of the average number of iterations in the MLISBF algorithm is obtained by the combined effect of our optimization in three aspects. Perturbation flipping has a wider range of bit flipping and helps the decoder escape from

64
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

trapping sets. Furthermore, we study the trend of the FER performance of
different BF algorithms by increasing the maximum allowed number of iterations. Fig. 7 shows the FER performance of several BF algorithms at different Tmax when α = 0.03. It illustrates that the FER performance of the GDBF algorithm is saturated at Tmax = 50, while that of the other four algorithms still improved as Tmax increased. Moreover, it can be observed that the FER performance of the MLISBF algorithm performs the best at any Tmax. Therefore, we consider that the MLISBF algorithm has better decoding convergence speed and more robust error-correction performance than the other BF algorithms.
Fig. 7. FER performance of different BF algorithms under diferent maximum allowed number of iterations when α = 0.03.
synthesize it under TSMC 90-nm COMS technology. Unlike the GDBF and ISBF decoders, the MLISBF decoder requires layered by column. Therefore, we use a pipeline of resources multiplexing to decode each layer.
A. Top-Level Hardware Architecture
Fig. 5. Average number of iterations of different BF algorithms on the dv3R050N1296 LDPC code at Tmax = 50.

Fig. 8. Hardware architecture of the MLISBF decoder.

Fig. 6. Average number of iterations of different BF algorithms on the dv3R050N1296 LDPC code at Tmax = 300.
V. HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE AND SYNTHESIS RESULTS In this section, we propose the hardware architecture of
the MLISBF decoder for the dv3R050N1296 LDPC code and

Fig. 8 shows the top-level architecture of the MLISBF decoder. The decoder calculates one layer per clock cycle. First, VN units (VNUs) are initialized with the received codeword y and selected according to the currently calculated layer. Next, CN units (CNUs) calculate and store the syndrome vector s of y with VN message from V2C network after L clock cycles. Then, Sk is calculated from C2V network and transformed into inversion indicator (II) with xk ⊕ yk. At the same time, T h and Rk are calculated in the maximum finder (MF) and

65
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I SYNTHESIS RESULTS ON THE DV3R050N1296 CODE

Decoder
Frequency (MHz) Area (mm2)
Nc Tave @ α = 0.01 Throughput θworst @ Tmax (Gbps) Throughput θave @ Tave (Gbps) Area Efficiency (Gbps/mm2)

TRGDBF [8] 435 0.299 1 3.97 1.88 142 474.9

PGDBF [7] 483 0.236 1 4.83 2.09 129.6 549.2

ISBF [10] 769 0.334 1 5.46 3.32 182.5 546.4

MLISBF 753 0.141 4 3.13 0.81 77.9 552.5

random probability generator (RPG), respectively. Layered inversion information Ik is generated with Sk, xk ⊕ yk, T h and Rk accoring to Algorithm 1. Then, estimated codeword xk is flipped while Ik = 1 in VNUs. In order to update the syndrome s in CNUs after every clock cycle, we use Ik as vnk information. Decoding will be terminated while s = 0 or t = Tmax.
The implementations of the VNU and CNU are simple and C2V network and V2C network are related to the parity check matrix H . The RPG consists of a Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) circuit to generate a random number and provides Rk for II. Sk and Ek are extended to dv and dv + 1 bits, respectively, similar as [10] do. For example, Ek is represented by {Ek,dv+1 . . . Ek,2Ek,1}, where Ek,j = 1 if Ek ⩾ j. The T hl is calculated by MF and used to update T h according to Algorithm 1. Then, T hl can be obtained by bit-wise OR operation with Ek.
Thanks to the fact that the flipping threshold of each iteration is calculated by the previous T hl instead of the traditional energy value maximum-finding of VNs, this structure can realize the pipeline calculation between layers. The number of clock cycles for one iteration can be considered Nc = L. For LDPC codewords with long code lengths, a large amount of combinational logic and register resources will be used when one iteration is calculated in one clock cycle. However, if the calculation of one iteration is completed with multiple clock cycles, the traditional algorithm with global maximum-finding needs to wait for all Ek calculation to have been completed before starting the bits inversion operation, which significantly affects the throughput of the decoder. It is possible to solve this problem effectively using the MLISBF decoder, which calculates flipping thresholds and inversion indicators in parallel. Therefore, the MLISBF decoder has good application potential, especially in long code-length LDPC decoders.
B. Synthesis Results
We code the hardware architecture with register transfer level (RTL) on application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) with L = 4 and Tmax = 300. Table I shows the synthesis results for the dv3R050N1296 code. Due to the reuse of combinational logic and register on calculations between layers except for V2C and C2V networks, the area of the MLISBF decoder is 0.141mm2, which is 42.2% of that of the ISBF decoder. fmax is the decoder’s maximum working frequency, primarily related to the length of the critical path. Throughput

is

computed

by

θ

=

N ×fmax T ×Nc

where

T

equals

Tmax

and

Tave

for θworst and θave, respectively. Nc = 4 for the MLISBF

decoder and Nc = 1 for the other. Although the throughput

of the MLISBF decoder is about 42.7% of that of the ISBF,

the area efficiency of the MLISBF is about 101.1% of that

of the ISBF. Moreover, the MLISBF decoder offers the best

error-correction performance among those decoders presented

in Table I.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, we propose a new algorithm for LDPC decoding: multiple flipping strategy LISBF. We adopt three flipping strategies to handle different states of decoding. The proposed MLISBF algorithm improves the decoding performance by increasing the decoding convergence speed and the ability to overcome trapping sets. Simulation results demonstrate that the FER performance and the average number of iterations of the MLISBF algorithm are better than other BF algorithms. Then, layered hardware architecture is proposed for the MLISBF decoder. Some combinational logic and registers are multiplexed between layers and the decoder use inversion information to update syndrome in time. Therefore, it has potential application in the decoding structure of LDPC codes with long code lengths. Synthesis results show that the MLISBF decoder offers lower hardware resource cost with comparable area efficiency. In conclusion, the proposed MLISBF decoder provides excellent decoding performance with high throughput and low complexity, and it has the application potential on long-code-length LDPC decoders. Hence, it has strong competitiveness and potential in practical decoding applications.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406-414, 2002.
[3] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288-1299, 2005.
[4] T. Wadayama, K. Nakamura, M. Yagita, Y. Funahashi, S. Usami, and I. Takumi, “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 16101614, 2010.
[5] G. Sundararajan, C. Winstead, and E. Boutillon, “Noisy Gradient Descent Bit-Flip Decoding for LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 3385-3400, 2014.

66
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[6] K. Le, D. Declercq, F. Ghaffari, L. Kessal, O. Boncalo, and V. Savin, “Variable-Node-Shift Based Architecture for Probabilistic Gradient Descent Bit Flipping on QC-LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 2183-2195, 2018.
[7] O. A. Rasheed, P. Ivanis, and B. Vasic, “Fault-Tolerant Probabilistic Gradient-Descent Bit Flipping Decoder,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 1487-1490, 2014-09-01 2014.
[8] H. Cui, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “An Improved Gradient Descent BitFlipping Decoder for LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 3188-3200, 2019.
[9] K. Le et al., “A Probabilistic Parallel Bit-Flipping Decoder for LowDensity Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 403-416, 2019.
[10] H. Cui, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “Information Storage Bit-Flipping Decoder for LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 2464-2468, 2020.
[11] F. Luo, X. He, J. Xing, and X. Tang, “Layered Bit-Flipping Algorithms for Decoding LDPC Codes,” in 2022 7th International Conference on Cloud Computing and Big Data Analytics (ICCCBDA), 2022: IEEE.
[12] D. Shin, K. Heo, S. Oh, and J. Ha, “A Stopping Criterion for LowDensity Parity-Check Codes,” in 2007 IEEE 65th Vehicular Technology Conference - VTC2007-Spring, 2007: IEEE.
67
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

