420

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 4, 2023

A Graph-Based Soft-Decision Decoding Scheme for Reed-Solomon Codes
Huang-Chang Lee , Member, IEEE, Jyun-Han Wu, Chung-Hsuan Wang, and Yeong-Luh Ueng , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a soft decoding scheme based on the binary representations transferred from the parity-check matrices (PCMs) for Reed-Solomon (RS) codes. Referring to the modified binary PCM that has a systematic part and a high-density part corresponding to the least reliable variable nodes (LRVNs) and the most reliable variable nodes (MRVNs), respectively, an informed dynamic scheduling method, called Nested-Polling Residual Belief Propagation (NP-RBP), is applied to the corresponding Tanner graph. As with the popular adaptive BP (ABP) decoding approach, adaptation in a binary PCM based on the reliability of variable nodes is also conducted in the proposed NP-RBP decoding. The NP-RBP enables the LRVNs to receive significant updates and limits the correlation accumulation from the short cycles in the MRVNs. In order to enhance the error-rate performance for long codes, a bit-flipping (BF) technique is conducted in order to correct a selection of the errors in the MRVNs such that the propagation of these errors in the subsequent NP-RBP process can be avoided. The resultant decoder is termed NP-RBP-BF. For short codes such as the (31, 25) and (63, 55) RS codes, NP-RBP is able to provide an errorrate performance close to the maximum-likelihood (ML) bound. A more significant improvement can be observed for long codes. For instance, when the proposed NP-RBP-BF decoding is applied to the (255, 239) RS code, it can provide a gain of about 0.4 dB compared to the ABP decoding and the performance gap to the ML bound can be narrowed to about 0.25 dB at a frame error rate of 2 × 10−3.
Index Terms—Error-control codes, Reed-Solomon codes, soft-decision decoding, belief propagation, informed-dynamic scheduling, bit-flipping.
Manuscript received 11 January 2023; revised 7 June 2023 and 1 August 2023; accepted 9 September 2023. Date of publication 14 September 2023; date of current version 3 October 2023. This work was supported by the National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan, under Grant MOST 1112221-E-A49-065, Grant MOST 110-2221-E-007-029-MY3, and Grant MOST 111-2221-E-182-031. Parts of the results in this work have been presented in ISIT 2015 and ISIT 2017 [DOI: 10.1109/ISIT.2017.8007035]. (Corresponding author: Yeong-Luh Ueng.)
Huang-Chang Lee is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan City 333, Taiwan (e-mail: hclee@ mail.mail.cgu.edu.tw).
Jyun-Han Wu is with the IC Design Department, Phison Electronics Corporation, Miaoli 350, Taiwan (e-mail: zachary_wu@phison.com).
Chung-Hsuan Wang is with the Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan (e-mail: chwang@ nycu.edu.tw).
Yeong-Luh Ueng is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan (e-mail: ylueng@ee.nthu.edu.tw).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSAIT.2023.3315453

I. INTRODUCTION
R EED-SOLOMON (RS) codes have the ability to achieve the largest possible minimum distance among linear block codes that have the same code length and code rate, and have become one of the most popular error-correcting codes. They have been adopted in many applications [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], and are usually decoded using the algebraic hard-decision decoding (HDD) algorithms such as the Berlekamp-Massey algorithm [7], [8]. However, several softdecision decoding schemes, such as the Guruswami-Sudan list decoding algorithm [11], the Chase decoding [12], the generalized minimum distance (GMD) decoding [13], and a combination of these [14], have been proposed for further performance improvement. In addition, in [15], Koetter and Vardy modified the Guruswami-Sudan list decoding algorithm using algebraic soft interpolation. The resultant algorithm is called the KV algorithm. Other reliability-based decoding methods, such as the ordered statistics decoding (OSD) and the box and match algorithm (BMA), have also been applied to RS codes [9], [28]. Recently, the stochastic decoding technique has also been introduced to enhance the performance of the Chase decoding [16]. The performance bounds of maximum likelihood (ML) decoding also show that an additional 2-3 dB coding gain can be achieved at most compared with the hard-decision decoding.
Iterative belief propagation (BP) decoding can be applied to both binary and non-binary low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [17], and is regarded as one of the most efficient soft decision decoding categories. The Q-ary sum-product algorithm (QSPA) [18], [19] is a popular decoding algorithm for non-binary LDPC codes. The QSPA can also be applied to RS codes that have a nonbinary parity-check matrix, which has been studied in [20]. When the QSPA is applied to short RS codes, a better error-rate performance compared to that of the KV algorithm can be achieved. The nonbinary parity-check matrix can be transferred to the binary representation [21]. However, the conventional BP algorithm is not suitable for direct application to this binary representation of parity-check matrix due to its high density. In contrast to the QSPA used in [20], an iterative bit-level RS decoder based on information-set decoding has been studied in [22], where short codes are considered. For a high-density parity-check matrix, it is unavoidable that decoding messages are strongly correlated after a few iterations due to numerous short cycles in the decoding graph. Erroneous decoding messages can hence

2641-8770 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: GRAPH-BASED SOFT-DECISION DECODING SCHEME FOR RS CODES

421

accumulate rapidly so as to degrade the performance of an iterative decoder
In [10], the authors proposed adaptive belief propagation (ABP) decoding that adjusts the binary representation at each iteration according to the bit reliabilities. Through the matrix adaptation, a sparse submatrix is created corresponding to these least-reliable variable nodes (LRVNs) in order to limit the propagation of unreliable messages. The convergence error-rate performance, which means the performance after sufficient decoding iterations, can be significantly improved using ABP. In [23], ABP is applied to a serial concatenated coding scheme, where a single parity-check code and an RS code are used as the outer and inner code, respectively. In [24], ABP that has different decoding schedules is applied to codes with high-density parity-check matrices, including the RS codes. Compared to the ABP decoding, the decoders presented in both [23] and [24] improve the errorrate performance for the first few iterations. However, the ABP decoding still provides a better convergence error-rate performance.
Though the ABP decoding achieves an excellent convergence error-rate performance for RS codes, it is possible to further improve the performance for RS codes when the following viewpoints are taken into consideration. One is that the LRVNs should receive more updates in each iteration. However, directly increasing the number of flooding iterations for ABP could accumulate more correlations between the most reliable variable nodes (MRVNs), and it is consequently possible to degrade the decoding performance. Informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) [25], [26] is a potential solution for overcoming this difficulty, where more updates can be arranged for important messages, and the importance is measured according to the residual between the current and the pre-computation of the updating message. Based on the ideas of ABP and IDS, nest-polling residual BP (NP-RBP) is proposed in this work. This inherits the matrix adaptation, and arranges more updates to the LRVNs that usually have larger residuals than MRVNs. In order to limit the accumulation of correlations between the decoding messages for MRVNs, the variable nodes are first polled, and then each of their neighboring check nodes are also polled for message updating. NP-RBP usually converges toward a certain, maybe not correct, decoding result within a single iteration. A reset action can then be inserted between iterations, further reducing the correlations of the decoding messages.
Due to the high-density part of the binary representation, errors in the MRVNs are not easily corrected by using only BP-based decoding. For ABP, the MRVN errors are usually corrected after they are swapped to LRVNs after the matrix adaptation. The proposed NP-RBP is able to enhance the reliabilities of the LRVNs more rapidly, triggering additional swapping between MRVNs and LRVNs. On the other hand, when one of the errors in the MRVNs is corrected, a significant increase in the number of satisfied check nodes can be observed thanks to the high-degree MRVNs from the high-density part of the binary representation. Therefore, a bit-flipping (BF) process is introduced prior to the execution of the NP-RBP iteration, and the resultant decoder is

termed NP-RBP-BF. The BF technique does not serve as a post-processing technique but is used to correct a portion of the errors in the MRVNs at the beginning of each decoding iteration. Such an approach is able to enable the subsequent IDS-based decoding process to more easily correct the remaining errors. The NP-RBP-BF decoding process is very efficient for long RS codes where there is a large number of check nodes, as demonstrated by the (127, 101) and (255, 239) RS codes. When the NP-RBP-BF decoding technique is applied to the (255, 239) RS code, the performance gap to the ML bound can be narrowed to about 0.25 dB at a frame error rate (FER) of 2 × 10−3. Compared to the best soft-decision decoding for RS codes proposed in the prior literature, an improvement at least 0.4 dB can be achieved at an FER of 2 × 10−3.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the background to the binary representations and the ABP algorithm is introduced. In Section III, the limitations of the ABP decoding are described. Section IV presents the proposed NP-RBP algorithm that includes a reset technique and shows how the BF technique is embedded with the NPRBP algorithm to realize the NP-RBP-BF decoder. Section V shows the simulation results, and Section VI concludes the paper.

II. PRELIMINARY

A. RS Codes and Their Binary Representations

Let β be a primitive element in GF(2m). This means that

GF(2m) can be constructed using the primitive polynomial p(x) = p0 + p1x + · · · + pm−1xm−1 + xm that has β as its

root. In addition, from the viewpoint of the binary representation, βr, for r = 0, 1, . . . , 2m − 1, can be represented as Ar,

where A is the companion matrix [21] corresponding to p(x)

and can be written as:

⎡

⎤

0 0 · · · 0 p0

A = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣01...

0
1 ...

··· ··· ...

0
0 ...

p1 p2 ...

⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥.

(1)

0 0 · · · 1 pm−1

For an (N, K) RS code over GF(2m), its non-binary parity-

check matrix Hs can be expressed as:

⎛ 1β

...

β(N−1) ⎞

Hs = ⎜⎝⎜⎜1...

β2 ...

... ...

β 2(N −1) ...

⎠⎟⎟⎟,

(2)

1 βδ−1 . . . β(δ−1)(N−1)

where δ = N − K + 1 is the minimum (symbol) distance for
this (N, K) RS code. If each symbol for an RS code over GF(2m) is made up of m bits, then the element βr, for r = 0, 1, . . . , 2m − 1, in Hs can be transferred to an m-by-m binary matrix Ar. Then the entire binary representation Hb can be constructed [21], and the size of Hb is (n − k)-by-n, where n = N × m and k = K × m.
There are a total of n = N × m bits in a codeword since
each symbol of an (N, K) RS code is represented using m
bits. The transmitted codeword can be denoted as a vector

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

422

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 4, 2023

v = [v0, v1, . . . , vn−1], where vj ∈ {0, 1} and j = 0, 1, . . . n−1. In this study, the code bits are transmitted using binary phase
shift keying (BPSK) modulation through the additive white
Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with a two-sided power spectral density N0/2. The received vector can be represented as y = (−2v + 1) + w, where 1 is the all-one n-tuple. The noise vector is denoted as w = [w0, w1, . . . , wn−1], where wj follows Gaussian distribution with a zero mean and a variance of (N/K)(N0/2). The j-th component of the received vector y is denoted as yj.

B. The ABP Algorithm
The parity-check matrix Hb can be expressed using a Tanner graph, which is a bipartite graph that has n − k check nodes (CNs) and n variable nodes (VNs), where the i-th row and the j-th column of Hb correspond to CN ci and VN vj, respectively. In addition, the element on the i-th row and j-th column of Hb equals to “1” if and only if there is an edge connecting CN ci and VN vj in the Tanner graph. According to our experiments based on the companion matrix A from (1), the edge density of the Tanner graph corresponding to Hb can be around 0.5. Although the density of Hb is significantly lower than that of Hs which is 1, the error-rate performance when directly conducting the BP decoding based on Hb is still not satisfactory since the associated Tanner graph is not sufficiently sparse and contains a large number of short cycles.
The authors of [10] noted that the poor performance when applying BP decoding to RS codes is due to a number of unreliable bits “saturating” certain check nodes in the binary representation and, hence, the iterative decoding becomes trapped at certain pseudo-equilibrium points. This issue can be mitigated by adapting the parity-check matrix. It is easier for a VN that has a low reliability to be in error, where the reliability can be measured according to the magnitude of the LLR value. In order to limit the propagation of unreliable messages, the less reliable VNs should be arranged to have fewer connections or degrees in the Tanner graph. This means that the corresponding sub-matrix for these less reliable VNs in the parity-check matrix should be sparse. Therefore, the ABP decoder presented in [10] includes two stages: the matrix updating stage (we term it as “matrix adaptation” in this work) and the bit-reliability updating stage. Let Hlb denote the binary representation obtained in the l-th matrix adaptation. The bit-reliability vector denoted as |Ll| can be written as

Ll = Ll(v0) , Ll(v1) , . . . , Ll(vn−1) ,

(3)

where Ll(vj) denotes the LLR for vj obtained in the l-th bitreliability updating stage. The initial values of elements in L0

can be obtained from the channel values, which means that

L0(vj)

=

log

Pr(vj=0|yj) Pr(vj=1|yj)

for

j = 0, 1, . . . , n − 1.

In [10], the variable nodes are first sorted in an increasing

order of their reliabilities which are evaluated according to the bit-reliability vector |Ll−1|. Then the binary representation Hlb can then be obtained using elementary row operations and maybe column exchanges from Hb. Here Hbl is in the systematic form, and the first n−k columns form an (n−k)-by-(n−k)

identity matrix and correspond to the LRVNs. Let φl denote

Fig. 1. Tanner graph corresponding to the binary representation of paritycheck matrix used in the ABP decoding.

the transformation from Hb of |Ll−1|. Mathematically,

to Hbl based on the reliability this operation is denoted as

order

Hbl = φl Hb, Ll−1 .

(4)

Based on Hlb, we can have a corresponding Tanner graph l that has VNs denoted as vlj, for j = 0, 1, . . . , n − 1 and CNs denoted as cil, for i = 0, 1, . . . , n − k − 1, respectively. It is worth noting that vlj is not necessarily equal to vj. In addition, the permutation matrix l can be used to permute (v0, v1, . . . , vn−1) to (v0l , v1l , . . . , vln−1), i.e.,

vl0, vl1, . . . , vnl −1 = (v0, v1, . . . , vn−1) l,

(5)

and another matrix

−1 l

is

used

to

permute

(v0l , vll, . . . , vln−1)

back to (v0, v1, . . . , vn−1). Fig. 1 shows the corresponding

Tanner graph for the Hbl matrix, where the CNs and VNs are

represented as squares and circles, respectively, and the first

(n − k) VNs are mapped to the systematic part of Hlb, i.e., all

columns are weight-1.

In the conventional BP decoding, the message updating is

performed based on the edge-wise extrinsic message updating

formula. However, some edges in the Tanner graph may be

removed following matrix adaptation, and hence the edge-wise

updating approach is no longer applicable for ABP decoding.

The authors of [10] resort to a node-wise updating approach.

Based on Tanner graph l, the variable-to-check (V2C) mes-

sage propagated from the VN vjl to one of its neighboring CNs cli is generated as:

Qlj→i = L vlj .

(6)

Let N (cil) denote the set including all variable nodes neigh-

boring to cil. The check-to-variable (C2V) message from CN

cli to its neighboring VN vjl can be generated as:

⎛

⎞

mcl i→vj = 2tanh−1⎜⎜⎝

tanh

Qlb→i 2

⎟⎠⎟,

(7)

vlb∈N cli \ vlj

where N (cli) \ {vjl} denotes the set N (cli), except for vjl.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: GRAPH-BASED SOFT-DECISION DECODING SCHEME FOR RS CODES

423

After the updating corresponding to all edges in l, each variable node collects C2V messages from all its neighboring CNs. For the j-th variable node, the collected extrinsic LLR value can be evaluated as

Q vjl =

mcl a→vj ,

(8)

cal ∈N vjl

where N (vjl) is the set including all check nodes neighboring to vjl. The collections of the C2V messages for all the VNs are listed in the vector

Ql = Q v0l , Q v2l , . . . , Q vln−1 .

(9)

If its order is permuted to that of the initial receiving vector using the permutation matrix l−1, the l-th update for the bitreliability vector can be executed according to

Ll = Ll−1 + αQl −l 1,

(10)

decoding process from converging to the correct decoding result. Therefore, matrix adaptation is introduced by the ABP after executing each decoding iteration, expecting to break the cycles so as to mitigate the accumulation of the correlation between decoding messages. Since matrix adaptation includes the reordering of LRVNs and MRVNs according to their new reliabilities, certain MRVNs and LRVNs therefore swap. It is likely that errors in the LRVNs can be corrected after sufficient iterations when using ABP decoding. However, for MRVNs, decoding messages can be easily correlated, even if the matrix adaptation is used, and, hence, it is difficult to correct MRVN errors using the ABP decoding.
The limitations of ABP decoding include the insufficient updates to LRVNs, limited swapping between LRVNs and MRVNs, and the high correlations of decoding messages that are introduced during the decoding process. The details of these limitations are explained in the following sections.

where 0<α<1 is a given constant called the damping fac-

tor [10]. As shown in (4), we can use vector Ll to obtain

Hbl+1 from The Tanner

Hb using φl+1 in the (l + 1)th matrix adaptation. graph l+1 and the permutation matrix l+1 can

be obtained accordingly, and the LLR values for the VNs in

the Tanner graph 1+1 can be computed according to

L v0l+1 , L v1l+1 , . . . , L vnl+−11 = Ll l+1. (11)

A binary vector can be obtained once the hard decision is applied to Ll. If the inner products of the binary vector and all the rows of the binary representation are zeros, then an all-zero syndrome vector is evaluated and the binary vector is regarded as a valid codeword. If the ABP decoding process does not converge to a valid codeword, an algebraic hard-decision decoding method is used to correct the remaining errors, and a hard decoding result is available for each iteration. All the returned decoding results are kept in a list and finally the one that minimizes the Euclidean distance from the received vector is chosen.

III. LIMITATIONS OF ABP DECODING FOR RS CODES
The decoding messages for LRVNs are regarded as unreliable, and the propagation of those unreliable decoding messages should be limited in order to avoid a decoding failure. The ABP arranges the sub-matrix corresponding to the LRVNs as a systematic form; therefore, each LRVN only has a single neighboring check node in the Tanner graph. Following flooding schedule, unreliable decoding messages from each LRVN can propagate only once via the neighboring check node in a single iteration. Then the propagation of unreliable decoding messages is consequently limited.
Although the sub-matrix corresponding to the LRVNs has been arranged as a systematic form, the density in the remaining part of the binary representation remains high. Then the MRVNs consequently correspond to a high-density submatrix, and, unfortunately, many 4-cycles exist in the corresponding Tanner graph. The decoding messages for the MRVNs are correlated after applying two flooding iterations. If there are any errors in the MRVN part, this correlation will create undesired updates for the decoding messages, thereby preventing the

A. Limited Updates and Limited Swapping
To correct the errors in the LRVNs, more helpful decoding messages should be obtained from other reliable VNs. In the ABP decoding, each LRVN only has a single neighboring CN, and, hence, the opportunity for the errors in the LRVNs to be corrected is limited. In addition, since each of the LRVNs only receives a single update prior to matrix adaptation, the increase in the LLR magnitudes of the LRVNs is limited, and, hence, only a few LRVNs can be swapped as MRVNs for the next iteration, and vice versa. For example, we observe that less than 0.13% of the LRVNs nodes are swapped to be MRVNs after the matrix adaptation when the ABP decoding is applied to the (127, 107) RS code. This implies that when one of the MRVNs is in error, it has few opportunities to be swapped as an LRVN and therefore be corrected in the next iteration using the ABP decoding.
In ABP, matrix adaptation is introduced to mitigate the correlation accumulation between MRVNs. However, since only a few MRVNs and LRVNs are swapped or reordered prior to the matrix adaptation, any change in the new Tanner graph may not be as significant as expected. This means that most of the connections in the Tanner graph may still be retained subsequent to matrix adaptation. In the worst case of our experiments, more than 70% of the 4-cycles cannot be removed by the matrix adaptation for the (127, 107) RS code. The correlation between decoding messages will be introduced through the remaining 4-cycles following matrix adaptation, even though only a single flooding iteration is applied to each Tanner graph. Through this kind of correlation, errors can be propagated to other VNs, thereby introducing error propagation in the non-systematic part. Then the errors in the MRVNs are consequently difficult to be corrected in ABP due to the error propagation and lack of swapping between MRVNs and LRVNs.
B. Correlation Introducing Mechanisms
In order to increase the chance of correcting erroneous VNs, multiple decoding iterations together with the updating rule in (10) are required in ABP for a confident decision for the LRVNs. However, when using the flooding schedule,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

424

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 4, 2023

iteration is applied to the bipartite graph in Fig. 2(a), the V2C messages from VNs vl6 and vl7 are sent to CN cl2, and the corresponding C2V messages are fed back, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Then the decoding messages for vl6 and v7l are then correlated. Supposed that the Tanner graph is altered as shown in Fig. 2(b) aCva7lnf+Ntde1rcctm2l1lh+raa1ort.rueiIgxfbhrvao6lcd+k1la+e1pn1t=,aitbnivuodl6tnu,bacnoewdthhanevvr7l+6lee+1f1tfhe=aecntvcdsl7oi,vnm7lnt+hiel1eacrtruieotpmondsaaaitbne4esc-tcwotyonecnevlene6l+c, vt1se6lid,anncvtdoel7 the messages from v6l and vl7 are already correlated. Based on the above discussion, the correlation between decoding mes-
sages is also related to their propagation path in addition to the
cycle structure in the Tanner graph. Once we have an enclosed
propagation path, the correlation between decoding messages
will be introduced, and, hence the performance of BP decoding
can be easily degraded due to error propagation. The second
case shows that the message correlation can still be introduced
between variable nodes even without any 4-cycle structure in
the ABP decoding.
When using the ABP decoding, both cases exists between
two consecutive Tanner graphs and, hence, is harmful for the
message passing decoding, implying that the short-cycle effect
may not be as effectively mitigated as expected.

Fig. 2. An example of an accumulation of decoding message correlation following matrix adaptation.
the correlation between the decoding messages will be introduced after two consecutive ABP iterations if a 4-cycle can not be removed following matrix adaptation. Moreover, since the decoding messages are updated by (6) and (10), even if a 4-cycle can be removed subsequent to matrix adaptation, or no cycle exists among certain variable nodes, the correlation between the decoding messages will also be introduced within two consecutive ABP iterations. The example presented in Fig. 2 can be used as a detailed explanation, where the two cases mentioned above are presented.
We now consider the first case. In the Tanner graph shown in Fig. 2(a), variable nodes v4l , vl5 and check nodes c0l , cl1 form a 4-cycle. By using (10), the LLR values for vl4 and vl5 are correlated after they exchange their decoding message via c0l and cl1 in a single decoding iteration. Matrix adaptation is then applied, and the resultant Tanner graph is shown in Fig. 2(b). It can be observed that the original 4-cycle has been successfully ibnv.4lree+ow.,1kevaTn4ln+a.dn1Hnv=eo5l+rw1vge4lrrveaetpara,nhidn,v4li+tv.he15le+.,ia1rncl0l=do+c1vav5l+ta5lin.1odnIsnstcifl2ltl+rhos1imsh. aHctrhaeeserceeph, rewaeclvekthiosonuuuospgdpihetosesmreianatittohtrhinaxet, adaptation is able to break part of the original 4-cycles, new 4-cycles may be constructed in the subsequent Tanner graph. This means that the short-cycle effect may not be as effectively mitigated as expected by the matrix adaptation.
The second case can be demonstrated using v6l and v7l in the Tanner graphs shown in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b). These two variable nodes are not included in the 4-cycle. When a single

IV. PROPOSED DECODER FOR RS CODES
According to the observation presented in Section III, it can be found that very different strategies are needed in order to correct errors in LRVNs and MRVNs. LRVNs need significant and constructive updates so as to achieve a confident decoding result. For the flooding schedule used in the ABP decoding, multiple iterations together with the updating rules in (6) and (10) are required in order to accumulate sufficient updates to the LRVNs. In contrast, for MRVNs corresponding to the high-density submatrix of the binary representation, the correlation between corresponding decoding messages is rapidly increased as a result of multiple flooding iterations. If there are any of erroneous messages involved in this kind of correlation, it is easy to trigger error propagation. Therefore, erroneous MRVNs are difficult to be corrected under this condition. Although it is likely that erroneous MRVNs can be corrected after being swapped as LRVNs, the slow increase in LRVN reliability level limits the number of swaps between the LRVNs and the MRVNs, hence also limiting the chance of correcting MRVN errors.
In order to further improve the decoding performance, an IDS, rather than a flooding schedule, is considered in the proposed message-passing decoding method. This specially designed IDS is able to provide intense updates to the LRVNs within a single iteration, such that the chance of swapping between the LRVNs and the MRVNs can be increased. In addition, the message updating sequence is arranged in order to reduce the message correlation introduced for the MRVNs, thereby reducing the chance of error propagation.
Based on the ABP techniques, i.e., arranging the binary representation as a systematic form through matrix adaptation and the reordering of MRVNs and LRVNs, a new messagepassing decoding approach for RS code is designed in this

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: GRAPH-BASED SOFT-DECISION DECODING SCHEME FOR RS CODES

425

work. Although MRVNs are less likely to be in error compared to LRVNs, MRVN errors have a significantly negative impact on the decoding performance. Since the degrees of MRVNs are usually high, incorrect decoding messages from erroneous MRVNs will be propagated through its neighboring check nodes such that the subsequent BP decoding process is not able to reach a correct result. As a result, a bit flipping technique, which benefits from a promising feature where the high-density MRVN submatrix creates a significant difference in the syndrome when a correct flipping is used. This is introduced as a pre-processing task in order to reduce any possible MRVN errors that may be going to be propagated in the following message-passing procedure. The bit flipping process does not insist on correcting all errors in the MRVNs. The remaining errors can be corrected using our IDS-based BP decoding following the flipping task.
In this work, the limitations of ABP decodings described in Section III can be avoided using the combination of the bitflipping and dynamic scheduling techniques. The details are described in the following sections.

A. More in Updates to LRVNs Using IDS

Since each LRVN has only a single neighboring CN following matrix adaptation, it only receives a single update in a single iteration if the decoding follows the flooding schedule, as in ABP. Intuitively, we can devise a fixed schedule [27] that is able to provide significant updates to the LRVNs in a single iteration. However, if we use a fixed decoding schedule that is optimized for a specific Tanner graph, there is no guarantee a satisfactory performance can be provided once both the set of LRVNs and the corresponding decoding Tanner graphs are changed following the matrix adaptation. In ABP, a node-wise update approach is used, together with the flooding schedule. This means that a single LRVN and multiple MRVNs connected to the same CN are simultaneously updated, but, as mentioned before, they need really different update strategies. In order to provide different numbers of updates to the LRVNs and to the MRVNs, an IDS decoder based on edgewise updates can be considered. This means that any edge neighboring to the same CN can be selected and then updated individually based on some specific designed criteria. Using edge-wise updates, it is easy to schedule the decoding in order to increase the updates to the LRVNs without increasing the updates to the MRVNs, even though each CN is connected to both a single LRVN as well as multiple MRVNs. When considering the requirements for an edge-wise updating schedule for different decoding Tanner graphs introduced by matrix adaptation, an edge-wise IDS decoder is a reasonable candidate for this target.
The proposed IDS employs an edge-wise update. Suppose that there are a total of El edges in the Tanner graph corresponding to Hlb and each iteration includes El C2V message updates. After the u-th update in the l-th iteration, for u = 0, 1, . . . , El − 1, let Ll,u denote the vector of LLR values for the VNs corresponding to Hbl , which is initialized as

Ll,0 = Ll−1 l.

(12)

Here l is the same permutation matrix used in (5). For a more precise description of the edge-wise update, the notation mcl a→vj in (7) is replaced with mal,→u j to indicate the u-th update. After mal,→u j is updated, all the elements in Ll,u are equal to those in Ll,u−1 except that the j-th element is updated following

L vjl = L vlj + mal,→u j.

(13)

The updates for the l-th iteration are completed when the total

number of updates equals to El. This means that

Ll+1 = Ll,El−1 −l 1.

(14)

Since each variable node has a different chance of being updated, and the connections of the Tanner graph are fixed in a single iteration, then the V2C message is modified from (6) to (15)

Qjl→i = L vjl − mil→ ,u j.

(15)

The goal of the IDS decoders designed for LDPC

codes [25] is to increase the convergence rate in the error-

rate performance compared to the flooding schedule. In order

to achieve this goal, these IDS decoders firstly update the edge

that has the largest residual, where the residual is evaluated

as the magnitude of the difference between the C2V values

for the current and the next updates. After the u-th update of

the l-th iteration, the residual corresponding to the connection between the j-th VN, vjl, and the i-th CN, cli, denoted as rCl 2V (i, j), can be evaluated as

rCl 2V (i, j) = |mip→rej − mil→j|,

(16)

where mpi→rej is the pre-computation for the next update. In

addition, since all mil→ ,u j for the entire Tanner graph have zero

values instead of the one actually being updated in the u-

th update, the notation mil→ ,u j is simplified to mil→j. After the

update, the corresponding residual rCl 2V (i, j) is set to zero, such

that mli→j will not be The computation of

immediately selected mpi→rej is based on (7).

again. For each

VN

con-

necting to the same CN, the magnitude of the receiving C2V

update is dominated by the minimum magnitude of all the
other V2C messages. The VN with the minimum L(vlj) magnitude then has a higher probability of receiving an update

compared to all the other VNs, since its update is dominated

by the second minimum magnitude and the others are domi-

nated by the minimum magnitude. For each CN connecting to

a single LRVN and multiple MRVNs, we can expect that the

LRVN will have a much higher probability of being updated

using the residual-based IDS. Since the LLR magnitudes for

the LRVNs are initially small and, hence, the corresponding

connected edges will have large residuals, most of them will

have a high probability of being indicated during the IDS

decoding process and will be updated until they collect suf-

ficient LLR magnitudes. Therefore, the residual of (16) is a

reasonable indicator for the VNs desiring for more updates.

The IDS arranged based on (16) is able to allow the LRVNs

to accumulate more updates in a single iteration than with the

flooding schedule.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

426

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 4, 2023

Fig. 3. Tanner graph used to illustrate the proposed NP-RBP.
TABLE I UPDATES IN ONE ITERATION OF THE NP-RBP, INCLUDES 2 ROUNDS

Fig. 4. Update sequence for the Tanner graph shown in Fig. 3.

In order to balance the chances of distributing messages from all VNs, in the proposed IDS decoder, all VNs vjl are visited sequentially based on their order for j = 0 to j = n − 1 in the Tanner graph used in the current iteration. When a VN is visited, its neighboring CNs are also visited sequentially following their orders in the current Tanner graph. Although a single VN may have several neighboring CNs, only a single CN is used for each update. In the proposed IDS, a single “polling round” means that all VNs are visited once. In the first round of VN polling, for every VN, its first neighboring CN, i.e., the neighboring CN cil that has the minimum index i, is selected in order to generate the updating C2V message. Then in the second VN polling round, the updating message is generated from the neighboring CN cli that has the second minimum index i for every VN. Based on the concept where CNs are polled after the polling of VNs, the proposed IDS is named as NP-RBP. A single updating C2V message is generated by the visited CN. If the total number of updates executed equals the total number of edges in the Tanner graph, we can determine that the IDS decoder has completed a single decoding iteration. Therefore, a single IDS decoding iteration consists of multiple polling rounds, where every VN is visited once in each round.
Fig. 3 and Table I are combined to show an example for a single iteration for the proposed dynamic scheduling. The Tanner graph illustrated in Fig. 3 includes 8 VNs, and 8 updates are processed in a single VN polling round. Each round corresponds to a single row in Table I. The polling VN and the CN for each update are colored gray in Fig. 4. Since there are 16 connections in the Tanner graph, a single iteration consists of two VN polling rounds. In Table I, mi→j denotes the update of the decoding message propagated from the i-th CN to the j-th VN. Since all updates occur in a single iteration, here the notation for the l-th iteration is omitted in the following description.
In the first round indicated in Table I, each VN updates the messages generated by the first neighboring CN. The VN polling starts from the LRVNs, i.e., v1 to v4. Since these

LRVNs have the lowest reliability level, i.e., the smallest magnitudes for the LLRs, and the C2V messages being updated to them are most likely to have the largest residual. Then the first four C2V messages that are used to update the VNs are m1→1, m2→2, m3→3, and m4→4. Now it turns to v5, where c2 is its first neighboring CN. Suppose that the connection between c2 and v7 has the largest residual; then v7 will be updated by m2→7. It is worth noting that v2 has no chance of being updated by m2→2 since it has just been updated and the corresponding residual rC2V (2, 2) is reset to zero. Now consider v6, where c1 is its first neighboring CN. Suppose that v1 is updated by m1→1. The following polling round begins with v7, whose first neighboring CN is also c1, and suppose that m1→6 is updated from c1 to v6. The final polling VN is v8, where c3 is its first neighboring CN, and m3→3 is supposed to be updated.
The updates for the second round are also listed in Table I. Since each LRVN only has a single neighboring CN, the same CNs are selected in order to generate the C2V message. For the MRVNs, i.e., v5 to v8, the second neighboring CNs will be polled. For example, c3 is the second neighboring CN for v5; then in the second round, c3 is selected and m3→3 is updated. It can be observed that most of the LRVNs can be updated three times in a single iteration, except v1. In addition, most MRVNs are updated once, except v7. However, if the flooding schedule is applied, the number of updates for each VN will be equal to its degree.
Based on this example, NP-RBP indeed balances the chances of distributing messages from all VNs. It is expected to provide more constructive updates to the LRVNs within a single iteration, such that the reliability level for the LRVNs can be significantly increased. In addition to that, IDS reduces the number of updates to the MRVNs, and hence the increase in the LLR magnitudes for the MRVNs slows down. Consequently, a greater chance of swapping between the LRVNs and the MRVNs can be achieved.
According to our experiments, only 0.26 nodes are swapped on average when the ABP decoding is applied to the (127, 107) code, but this number increases to 15.70 when the NP-RBP decoding is applied to the same code. Compared to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: GRAPH-BASED SOFT-DECISION DECODING SCHEME FOR RS CODES

427

using ABP decoding, the number of swapping nodes increases by about 60 times when using the NP-RBP decoding. Thanks to the increase in the swapping rate, it is more possible for an MRVN error to become an LRVN error, and can be expected to be corrected in the next iteration since a new Tanner graph is derived after each NP-RBP iteration.
B. Reducing the Message Correlations Between MRVNs
It is known that there are massive 4-cycles corresponding to the non-systematic part of Hlb for an RS code. For the ABP following the flooding schedule, all messages are updated simultaneously. It can be expected that, for any 4-cycle in the Tanner graph, the decoding messages corresponding to the edges in the cycle become correlated within two iterations. If any erroneous VN is included in the 4-cycle, it can be quickly updated by the decoding messages generated using its own incorrect information before it is corrected by the decoding messages outside the 4-cycle. This erroneous VN could become more stubborn, and it then becomes even more difficult to be corrected. This is the hazard of the correlation introduced between decoding messages corresponding to the short cycles. The correlation that possibly corrupts the decoding process can be blamed on the flooding schedule.
In contrast to the flooding schedule used in ABP, when using an edge-wise IDS in the NP-RBP, the updates are selected according to the residuals, and not all decoding messages corresponding to the edges in the entire Tanner graph can be updated. For a 4-cycle in the Tanner graph, as long as one of the decoding messages corresponding to its four connections is not selected for updating, the erroneous VN mentioned previously will not be updated by the messages polluted by itself. This means that if we are able to devise an effective IDS that can collect sufficient healthy and constructive decoding messages before the messages are polluted by the highly correlated error, the error propagation in ABP due to massive short cycles can be mitigated, and, hence, the error-rate performance for the non-systematic part can be improved.
The schedule of the updates shown in Table I is demonstrated in Fig. 4, and the path of the message passing can be observed. Using the edge-wise NP-RBP, only the most important C2V messages are updated, and, hence, for a 4-cycle, the path of the message passing may not enclose immediately once both of the two CNs involved in the 4-cycle have completed their second update. Referring to the example shown in Figs. 3 and 4, and Table I, VNs v6, v7 and CNs c3, c4 are involved in a 4-cycle, and both c3 and c4 are selected for updating more than once. However, the C2V messages associated with this 4-cycle, i.e., m3→6, m3→7, m4→6, m4→7, will never have been updated, meaning that there is no chance for the path of the message passing to enclose; so there are no message correlations for this 4-cycle.
The example shows that the NP-RBP decoding is able to increase the number of updates to the LRVNs and simultaneously reduce the number of updates to the MRVNs. In addition, not all of their messages corresponding to a 2γ cycle are selected for updating within consecutive γ updates. Then the message propagation path is not enclosed within

consecutive γ updates. Since the NP-RBP decoding follows edge-wise updating, and only high-residual messages are selected for update, it can be expected that, on average, a greater number of updating steps are required in order to enable the C2V message corresponding to the same edge in the Tanner graph to be updated again. Therefore, when using NP-RBP compared to using the flooding schedule, we have a higher chance of collecting sufficient healthy and constructive decoding messages before the formation of message correlation.
C. Reset-Assisted Matrix Adaptation
From the previous description, NP-RBP can provide significant and constructive updates to the LRVNs within a single iteration. As NP-RBP allows the LRVNs to collect sufficient updates in a single iteration, the decoding process is able to converge to relatively large LLR values for a confident harddecision result. This means that additional updates from the next iteration may not necessarily be added to these relatively large LLR values, and the decoding results from the current iteration can be reset before the matrix adaptation. Once the LLRs of all VNs are reset to zero, the accumulation for the message correlation between two successive decoding graphs can, hence, be totally avoided. This means that the correlation accumulated across multiple iterations as described in Section IV-D can be limited. As the correlation introduced from (6) and (10) can be limited, any erroneous messages propagated among multiple iterations are also mitigated.
D. Applying Bit-Flipping to the MRVNs
For MRVNs, despite their large LLR magnitudes, the errors can still occur and are not guaranteed to be corrected via swapping. MRVN errors will degrade the decoding performance significantly since the degrees of the MRVNs are usually high and incorrect decoding messages from erroneous MRVNs will be severely propagated through its neighboring CNs. As a result, more of ABP decoding iterations can only provide limited assistance in reaching a correct result. In order to avoid the propagation of these possible MRVN errors, a bit-flipping approach is introduced as a pre-processing technique and is applied to the MRVNs. After a certain number of the MRVN errors are corrected via flipping, the remaining errors can be easily corrected in the following IDS decoding process.
It is known that the degree of MRVNs in the Tanner graph following matrix adaptation are usually high. If an MRVN error is corrected via flipping, the number of satisfied CNs will significantly increase thanks to the structure of Hb. This means that the positions of the flipping bits can be easily identified. The positions of the flipping bits are identified based on the number of satisfied CNs. Initially, only a single VN is presumed to be in error. Each VN is then flipped in sequence. After each single-bit is flipped, the number of satisfied CNs is evaluated. If this number significantly increases, then the sign of the LLR for this VN is inverted, and the subsequent IDS decoding process begins. Suppose that the maximum number of flipping is . Then after all single-error patterns are tested, two-bit error patterns are successively considered, until

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

428

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 4, 2023

Fig. 5. Example of bit-flipping techniques.

all -error patterns are tested. In the worst case, the total num-

ber of tested patterns will be

λ=1

k λ

.

In

order

to

enhance

the performance, one additional flipping bit is permitted in the

final iteration, i.e., ( + 1)-error patterns are considered for

testing.

An example is shown in Fig. 5(a), where a binary rep-

resentation, i.e., Hb, corresponding to 12 VNs and 6 CNs is demonstrated. Suppose that v2 and v9 are in error, and

their corresponding columns in Hb are colored in red. There are 5 unsatisfied CNs, and their corresponding rows are col-

ored in green. Since v9 is one of MRVNs, its incorrect

information may pollute the LRVNs that share the same CNs,

i.e., v1, v3, v5, and v6, whose corresponding columns are col-

ored in yellow. Fig. 5(b) shows that, if the hard decision result

of v9 is flipped, the number of unsatisfied CNs reduces from

5 to 1. This significant change implies a high possibility of

correct flipping, and the remaining error bit v2 is expected to

be corrected using the subsequent IDS decoding.

The bit flipping is only applied to the MRVNs, because

each LRVN has only a single CN, and a single flipping to

one LRVN is not able to introduce a significant increase in

the number of satisfied CNs. The bit flipping operation in this

work is rather than a post-processing technique aimed to cor-

rect the remaining errors of IDS decoding, but a pre-processing

technique to correct part of the erroneous MRVNs and reduce

the pollution from incorrect MRVNs. In this way, the following

IDS decoding can correct the rest errors more easily.

E. Proposed Bit-Flipping Assisted NP-RBP Decoder
The proposed decoding method which combines the NPRBP and bit flipping techniques is detailed in Algorithm 1. A corresponding flow-chart is also presented in Fig. 6, where the major operations of the decoding process are demonstrated. At first, the received signals are sorted according to their LLR magnitudes, based on which the matrix adaptation is applied. After that, the bit flipping is applied to the selected MRVNs so as to reduce the pollution from incorrect MRVNs. Then the decoding messages related to the polling VNs and CNs are generated, and their residuals are compared. The decoding messages with the maximum residuals are selected to be updated as described in the 12-th step of Algorithm 1. The l-th iteration of message passing is completed as the number of updates is equal to the number of edges denoted as El in the Tanner graph. At the end of each iteration, the corresponding syndrome is calculated. If an all-zero syndrome is achieved, the hard-decision result of the message passing output is regarded as a valid codeword, and the remaining steps

Fig. 6. Decoding flow of NP-RBP-BF decoder.
TABLE II PERCENTAGE OF UPDATED DECODING MESSAGES FOR
VNS THAT HAVE DIFFERENT RELIABILITY
of algebraic decoding can be bypassed. On the other hand, the algebraic decoding is applied to correct the remaining errors. The decoding result is stored as vl. Suppose that the maximum number of iterations is set as £M. Similar to the ABP decoding, after £M iterations of NP-RBP-BF decoder, the final decoding result is selected as that with the maximum inner product value vl, y with the received signal among the total £M decoding candidates.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION A. Number of Updates for the LRVNs and MRVNs
In the ABP decoder, the LRVNs correspond to the systematic part of the binary representation of the parity-check matrix. Since the ABP decoder updates the decoding messages by following the flooding schedule, the number of message updates that each LRVN can receive is also limited to one for each iteration. In contrast, when the NP-RBP decoding is used, the number of message updates that each LRVN can receive has been significantly increased. For demonstration, the (63, 55) RS code is considered, where the VNs are divided into four groups based on their reliability levels. The first group includes all nodes from the systematic part, i.e., the LRVNs. The second group contains the 18 MRVNs that have the lowest reliability level. Another 18 nodes having a higher reliability level are in the third group, and the 19 most reliable VNs are gathered in the final 4-th group. Table II shows the percentage of updates by C2V messages for each VN group, where both NP-RBP and ABP decoders are applied to the (63, 55) RS code. It can be observed that, since the number of updates in the ABP decoder is equal to the VN degree, the LRVNs have the lowest percentage of message updates.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: GRAPH-BASED SOFT-DECISION DECODING SCHEME FOR RS CODES

429

Algorithm 1 Proposed NP-RBP-BF Decoder for RS Code

Input: y = (−2v + 1) + w

1: for(iteration index l = 0, · · · , £M − 1). /*============LLR

Sorting==================*/

2: Order LRVNs and MRVNs.

/*============Matrix

Adaptation=============*/ 3: Apply matrix adaptation: Hbl = φl Hb, Ll−1 . /*============Bit

Flipping==================*/

4: Retain the signs for the LLR values.

5: Reset the magnitudes for the LLR values.

/*============Residual

Comparing===========*/

6: Set the value of the update counter u = 0.

7: Set the VN index j = 0.

8: Set the round index p = 0.

9: Set CN index i = p mod N (vlj) . 10: Compute rCl 2V (i, j), vlj ∈ N (ci). 11: Find rCl 2V (i, jmax) = max rCl 2V (i, j) . /*============Message

Passing==============*/

12: Update mli→jmax . 13: For all ca ∈ N (vjlmax ) \ ci, propagate Qjlmax→a. 14: if u < El − 1:

15: u = u + 1, j = (j + 1)modN,

16:

p=

u N

, go to the 6-th step.

17: else

/*============Algebraic

Decoding===========*/

18: 19:

Evaluate Apply a

Ll+1 = Ll,E−1 hard decision to

−1
lLl+1.

20: Conduct conventional algebraic decoding.

21: Store the algebraic decoding result as vl 22: end if

23: end for

24: Terminated

Output: Final decoding result v = arg max( vl, y ), for l = 0, · · · , £M − 1.

In contrast, the LRVNs are able to receive additional updates when using the NP-RBP decoder.
According to (7), the C2V message updated to the LRVNs is generated by the information from the MRVNs, and each of the messages updated to the MRVNs contains the information from the LRVN. It is worth noting that the total number of C2V message updates is fixed in a single iteration. When the number of C2V messages updated to the LRVNs is increased using the NP-RBP decoder, the number of messages updated to the MRVNs is simultaneously decreased. This means that the un-reliable message flow from the LRVNs to the MRVNs can be decreased, while the reliable message flow from the MRVNs to the LRVNs can be increased with the assistance of the NP-RBP decoder.

Fig. 7. FER performance for the (31, 25) RS code.
B. FER Performance
The FER performances when applying the NP-RBP decoder to the (31, 25) and (63, 55) RS codes are shown in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively. Also included in these two figures are error-rate results when using the ABP(20, 3), ChaseGMD(3) [14], KV(∞) [15], and OSD [9], [28] decoders, where the ABP(20, 3) decoder uses a total of 20 matrix adaptations for which 3 flooding iterations are conducted in each matrix-adaptation stage, i.e., £1 = 20 and £2 = 3. Here the Chase-GMD(3) decoder flips at most three least reliable received symbols, and the KV(∞) decoder has evaluated all candidates. In addition, the OSD(1), OSD(2) and OSD(3) decoders have a flipping order of 1, 2, and 3, respectively. It can be observed that the ABP(20, 3) decoder already has a much better FER performance compared to the ChaseGMD(3), KV(∞), and OSD(1) decoders. Compared to the ABP(20, 3) decoder, the NP-RBP decoder with 60 iterations, i.e., NP-RBP(60), can achieve an additional gain of about 0.2 dB at an FER of 10−4 for both codes, where a total of 60 iterations are conducted in both decoders. For the (31, 25) RS code, the FERs of the OSD(2) decoder are very close to those of the NP-RBP(60) decoder in the low SNR region, but the FERs of the OSD(2) decoder cannot approach the maximumlikelihood (ML) bound in the high SNR region. The OSD(3) decoder seems to be more promising to achieve the near ML performance, but requires an extremely high computational complexity. A near ML performance can be achieved when using the proposed NP-RBP decoding based on 60 and 480 iterations for the (31, 25) and (63, 55) RS codes, respectively.
According to the simulation results shown in Figs. 7 and 8, the NP-RBP can provide an FER performance approaching the ML bounds, meaning that the assistance of the bit-flipping operation may be not required. We now demonstrate the advantage of NP-RBP-BF over NP-RBP using longer codes, e.g., the (127, 121) and (127, 107) RS codes. Since the decision of the flipping bits is performed according to the change in the number of the satisfied CNs, a sufficient number of CNs is required in order to achieve the desired precision of the flipping-bit selection. A total number of 42 and 120 CNs are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

430

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 4, 2023

Fig. 8. FER performance for the (63, 55) code.

Fig. 10. Convergence behavior for the (255, 239) RS code using the NP-RBP and NP-RBP-BF decoding.

Fig. 9. FER performance for the (127, 121) and (127, 107) RS codes, which

are plotted in dash and solid lines, respectively.

Fig. 11. FER performance for the (255, 239) RS code.

respectively contained in the Tanner graphs for the (127, 121) and (127, 107) RS codes. Since the (127, 107) RS code has more CNs, the increase in the number of satisfied CNs can be easily observed when the set of flipping bits are correctly selected; then the NP-RBP-BF decoder with 60 iterations can provide a better FER performance compared to that of the NP-RBP decoder with 4000 iterations. When the same number of iterations are allowed, a more significant improvement, about 0.4 dB, can be achieved at an FER of 10−4 when the NP-RBP-BF decoder is used, as shown in Fig. 9. In contrast, the threshold of flipping-bit selection is more difficult to determine for the (127, 121) RS code that has only 42 CNs, and only about an additional 0.1 dB gain can be achieved at an FER of 10−4 with the assistance of the proposed bit-flipping technique.
The benefit provided by using the NP-RBP-BF decoding over the NP-RBP decoding can also be observed in Fig. 10, where the (255, 239) RS code and Eb/N0 = 5 dB are considered. The FER can be reduced to one-tenth with the assistance of the bit-flipping technique. Considering the decoding complexity, the maximum number of flipping bits is set to three.

The trajectory of the decoding convergence can be observed during 4000 iterations, where the NP-RBP-BF decoder converges to a significantly lower FER using a much smaller number of iterations compared to the NP-RBP decoder.
Fig. 11 shows the FER performance for the (255, 239) RS code, where different decoding algorithms are considered. It can be seen that the ABP(60, 1) is able to achieve an FER performance between that of the decoders based on the KV(100) algorithm, which has maximum 100 multiplicities [15], and the BMA presented in [9]. In addition, the hybrid dynamic perturbed ABP (HD-P-ABP) decoding method presented in [24] using 60 iterations provides a further improvement. If additional iterations are allowed, i.e., the ABP(80, 50) with a total of 4000 iterations, a better FER performance can still be achieved by using the ABP decoding. Even using the proposed NP-RBP decoder based on the same number of iterations, it is difficult to approach the ML bound, and the gain is marginal compared to the ABP (80, 50) decoder. However, the NP-RBP-BF decoder further improves the error rate performance by about 0.4 dB at an FER of 2 × 10−3 compared to the NP-RBP decoder. In addition, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: GRAPH-BASED SOFT-DECISION DECODING SCHEME FOR RS CODES

431

TABLE III GAP TO THE ML BOUND AT AN FER OF 2 × 10−3.

Fig. 13. FER performance for the (127, 64) RS code.
TABLE IV COMPLEXITY FOR DIFFERENT DECODERS

Fig. 12. FER performance for the (31, 27) code.

NP-RBP-BF decoder requires only 10 iterations to achieve a comparable FER performance compared to that of ABP (80, 50) decoder. When the NP-RBP-BF decoding technique is applied to the (255, 239) RS code, where £M = 4000 and
= 3, the performance gap to the ML bound can be narrowed to about 0.25 dB at an FER of 2×10−3. Table III summarizes the performance gap to the ML bound for the considered (31, 25), (63, 55), and (255, 239) RS codes. It can be seen that the longer the code is, the more iterations it needs to achieve near-ML performance.
In [20], the classical non-binary BP decoding, i.e., QSPA, was applied to an RS code that has a non-binary parity-check matrix, where the (31, 27) RS code is considered. Fig. 12 shows the FER results for the (31, 27) RS code when using the non-binary BP decoding. It can be seen from Fig. 12 that the non-binary BP decoding is able to achieve a satisfactory error performance even though the density of the non-binary parity-check matrix is 1. When using the binary representation of the parity-check matrix, it can be seen that either the ABP or the proposed NP-RBP decoding provides a performance gain compared to the non-binary BP decoding.
Although the high-rate RS codes are usually adopted in practical systems, it is interesting to study whether the proposed decoding methods are applicable to low-rate RS codes. Fig. 13 shows the FER results for the low-rate (127, 64) RS code for which its code rate is about half. It can be seen that the proposed NP-RBP decoding still has performance gain compared to the ABP decoding and the OSD(1) decoding. In addition, the use of bit-flipping technique still provides performance gain as can be seen from the performance curves of the NP-RBP and NP-RBP-BF decoding. These simulation

results demonstrate that the proposed decoding methods are applicable to low-rate RS codes.
C. Complexity Comparison
Table IV shows a comparison in decoder complexity for an (N, K) RS code, where major decoding operations for the Chase-GMD(η), OSD( ), ABP(£1, £2), and NP-RBP-BF(£M) decoders are considered.
When the Chase-GMD(η) decoder presented in [14] is conducted, an LLR sorting operation is used to locate the t least reliable symbols. Among these t symbols, η least reliable symbols are considered as flipping symbols, and the rest (t − η) ones are considered as erasing symbols. Although each symbol is represented using m bits, only the least reliable bit for each flipping symbol is considered to be flipped when using the algorithm proposed in [14]. The total number of algebraic decoding rounds is 2η(t−η). The total number of inner-product operations is also 2η(t − η). The estimated complexity is listed in Table IV.
When the OSD( ) decoding presented in [9] is applied to the binary representation of the RS code, the received N symbols will be transferred to a length-n LLR vector, where each element of the vector is the LLR value corresponding to one of the n binary bits. An LLR sorting operation is conducted to locate the k most reliable positions corresponding to independent bits and then re-encoding is applied after at most

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

432

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 4, 2023

least reliable bits from the k most reliable independent bits

are flipped. A total of

k ω=0 ω

re-encoding operations are

required. Among all of the re-encoding results, the one with

the maximum inner product value with the received signal is

selected as the final decoding result. As a result, a total of

ω=0

k ω

inner-product operations are required.

For the ABP(£1, £2) decoder, there are a total of £1 matrix

adaptations for which £2 flooding iterations are conducted in

each matrix-adaptation stage. To initiate each iteration, an LLR

sorting is conducted to locate the k least reliable bits. In addi-

tion, matrix adaptation and message passing decoding are also

required. Since the Tanner graph constructed in the s-th matrix-

adaptation stage has Es edges, a total of

£1−1 s=0

£2

Es

updates

of C2V message are required. Finally, an algebraic decoding

and inner-product operation are conducted after the message

passing decoding.

The proposed NP-RBP-BF(£M) decoder needs all the opera-

tions of ABP decoder, and additional complexity is introduced

owing to bit-flipping and dynamic scheduling. The increment

can be observed from Table IV. For the bit-flipping operation,

suppose that at most

bits are flipped; a total of

k λ=1 λ

flipping combinations are required in worst case. For short

codes, NP-RBP is able to provide a satisfactory error-rate

performance, and, hence, the bit-flipping operation may be

bypassed. Dynamic scheduling arranges the order of updates

based on the residuals of the decoding messages. Since there

are El edges in the l-th decoding Tanner graph, each check node has El/(n − k) edges on average, and each update of the

C2V messages are selected from the one with maximum resid-
uals among these El/(n − k) edges; then a total of El2/(n − k) comparisons between residuals are required for the l-th decod-

ing iteration. After £M iterations, the decoding ends, and,

hence, the total number of updates is

£M −1 l=0

El2/(n

−

k)

and

the total number of inner-product operations is £M.

In summary, the ABP decoder progressively improves its

FER performance, however, the improvement tends to saturate,

as the number of iterations increases. With the assistance of

bit-flipping and IDS techniques, the NP-RBP-BF decoder is

able to further improve the FER performance at the cost of

increased complexity.

VI. CONCLUSION
We have demonstrated that the proposed NP-RBP-BF decoder is able to achieve a near-ML performance for RS codes. The edge-wise dynamic scheduling used in NP-RBP decoding is able to provide the desired unequal updates for both LRVNs and MRVNs and, hence, can efficiently correct most of the erroneous bits that have a low reliability level. The LLR reset operation used is able to avoid the formation of message correlation between consecutive decoding Tanner graphs. In order to enhance the error-rate performance for long codes, a bit-flipping technique is conducted in order to correct part of the errors in the MRVNs such that the propagation of these errors in the following NP-RBP can be avoided. Compared to the best RS decoder presented in the previous literature, a performance gain of about 0.4 dB can be achieved at an FER of 2 × 10−3 for the popular (255, 239) RS code. Furthermore,

the performance gap to the ML bound can be narrowed to about 0.25dB at an FER of 2 × 10−3 when the NP-RBP-BF decoding is applied to the (255, 239) RS code.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge Tzu-Hsuan Huang and
Yi-Wei Lu for the inspiring discussions about OSD.
REFERENCES
[1] E. R. Berlekamp, R. E. Peile, and S. P. Pope, “The application of error control to communications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 44–57, Apr. 1987.
[2] W. W. Wu, D. Haccoun, R. E. Peile, and Y. Hirata, “Coding for satellite communication,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. SAC-5, no. 4, pp. 724–785, May 1987.
[3] “Recommendations for space data system standards: Telemetry channel coding,” Consul. Comm. Space Data Syst., Blue Book, Irvine, CA, USA, 1984.
[4] E. R. Berlekamp, J. Shifman, and W. Toms, “An application of ReedSolomon codes to a satellite TDMA system,” in Proc. MILCOM, Monterey, CA, USA, 1986, p. 12.
[5] B. C. Mortimer, M. J. Moore, and M. Sablatash, “The design of a highperformance error-correcting coding scheme for the canadian broadcast telidon system based on Reed-Solomon codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-35, no. 11, pp. 1113–1138, Nov. 1987.
[6] M. B. Pursley and W. E. Stark, “Performance of Reed-Solomon coded frequency-hop spread-spectrum communication in partial-band interference,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-33, no. 8, pp. 767–774, Aug. 1985.
[7] R. E. Blahut, Theory and Practice of Error Control Codes. Reading, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 1983.
[8] S. Lin and D. J. Costello Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd Ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice Hall, 2004.
[9] M. Fossorier and A. Valembois, “Reliability-based decoding of ReedSolomon codes using their binary image,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 452–454, Jul. 2004.
[10] J. Jiang and K. R. Narayanan, “Iterative soft-input soft-output decoding of Reed-Solomon codes by adapting the parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trasn. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3746–3756, Aug. 2006.
[11] V. Guruswami and M. Sudan, “Improved decoding of Reed–Solomon and algebraic-geometric codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 1757–1767, Sep. 1999.
[12] D. Chase, “Class of algorithms for decoding block codes with channel measurement information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 170–182, Jan. 1972.
[13] G. D. Forney Jr., “Generalized minimum distance decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 125–131, Apr. 1966.
[14] H. Tang, Y. Liu, M. P. C. Fossorier, and S. Lin, “Combining chase-2 and GMD decoding algorithms for nonbinary block codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 209–211, May 2001.
[15] R. Koetter and A. Vardy, “Algebraic soft-decision decoding of Reed-Solomon codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 2809–2825, Nov. 2003.
[16] H. Mani and S. Hemati, “Symbol-level stochastic chase decoding of Reed-Solomon and BCH codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 8, pp. 5241–5252, Aug. 2019.
[17] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[18] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Low-density parity check codes over GF(q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165–167, Jun. 1998.
[19] Y.-L. Ueng, K.-H. Liao, H.-C. Chou, and C.-J. Yang, “A high-throughput trellis-based layered decoding architecture for non-binary LDPC codes using max-log-QSPA,” IEEE Trans. Sig. Process., vol. 61, no. 11, pp. 2940–2951, Jun. 2013.
[20] V. B. Wijekoon, H. Dau, and E. Viterbo, “Iterative decoding of ReedSolomon codes based on non-binary matrices,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Paris, France, 2019, pp. 1082–1086.
[21] F. J. Mac Williams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North Holland, 1978.
[22] Y. Genga, O. O. Oyerinde, and J. Versfeld, “Iterative soft-input soft-output bit-level Reed-Solomon decoder based on information set decoding,” SAIEE Africa Res. J., vol. 112, no. 2, pp. 52–65, Jun. 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: GRAPH-BASED SOFT-DECISION DECODING SCHEME FOR RS CODES

433

[23] Y. Jing, W. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Chang, and Y. Liu, “Improved adaptive belief propagation decoding of Reed-Solomon codes with SPC Codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1464–1468, Jul. 2022.
[24] L. Deng et al., “Perturbed adaptive belief propagation decoding for high-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 2065–2079, Apr. 2021.
[25] A. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470–3479, Dec. 2010.
[26] H.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Ueng, S.-M. Yeh, and W.-Y. Weng, “Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886–896, Mar. 2013.
[27] H.-C. Lee and Y.-L. Ueng, “LDPC decoding scheduling for faster convergence and lower error floor,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3104–3113, Sep. 2014.
[28] S. Scholl and N. Wehn, “Hardware implementation of a Reed-Solomon soft decoder based on information set decoding,” in Proc. Design Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit. (DATE), Dresden, Germany, 2014, pp. 1–4.

Chung-Hsuan Wang received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 1994 and 2001, respectively. From August 2001 to July 2004, he held a faculty position with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Chung Yuan Christian University, Chungli, Taiwan. Since August 2004, he has been with the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu. His current research interests include error-correcting codes, information theory, digital communications, and signal processing.

Huang-Chang Lee (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from National Chi Nan University, Taiwan, in 2002 and 2004, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from National Tsing Hua University in 2014. From 2005 to 2009, he was with IC Design Service Company as a Circuit Designer. From 2014 to 2015, he was a Postdoctoral Researcher with National Tsing Hua University. Since February 2016, he has been with the faculty of the Department of Electrical Engineering, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan City, Taiwan, where he is currently an Associate Professor. His research interests include channel coding, and digital signal processing and their applications to communications.
Jyun-Han Wu was born in Kaohsiung, Taiwan, in 1992. He received the B.S. degree in electronic and computer engineering from the National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei City, Taiwan, in 2014, and the master’s degree in electrical engineering from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2016. From 2017 to 2020, he was a Digital IC Designer with Silicon Motion, Taipei City. He is currently a Technical Team Lead with Phison Electronics Corp., Miaoli, Taiwan. His duties include developing UFS and SSD controller.

Yeong-Luh Ueng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from National Taiwan University, Taipei City, Taiwan, in 2001. From 2001 to 2005, he was with a private Communication Technology Company, where he focused on the design and development of various wireless chips. Since December 2005, he has been a Faculty Member with the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, where he is currently a Full Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering. His research interests include coding theory, wireless communications, and communication ICs. In 2016, he was the recipient of the Wu TaYou Memorial Award from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST). In 2018, he was the recipient of the Outstanding Electrical Engineering Professor Award from the Chinese Electrical Engineering Association and the Outstanding Research Award from MOST, Taiwan.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:04:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

