7328

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 41, NO. 24, DECEMBER 15, 2023

Low-Complexity Zipper-LDPC and Low-Latency Zipper-BCH Concatenated Codes
Masoud Barakatain , Yoones Hashemi, Bashirreza Karimi , Hamid Ebrahimzad, and Chuandong Li

Abstract—A novel concatenated forward error correction (FEC) scheme is proposed that consists of an inner zipper framework with low-density parity-check component codes and an outer zipper framework with BCH component codes. The proposed softdecision inner codes have a universal, flexible, and implementationfriendly structure with low decoding complexity. The inner code is error-reducing, tasked with reducing the error rate on bits passed to the outer hard decision code below its threshold. The proposed outer codes have ultra-low overhead and are designed to have small decoding memory and latency. Computer simulations show that the proposed zipper-BCH codes can reduce the decoding latency and required memory by up to a factor of 30, compared to the conventional zipper codes, while maintaining a minimal performance loss. The proposed scheme is considered with higher-order modulation with both multi-level coding and bit-interleaved coded modulation. Simulations show that the concatenated FEC scheme can provide a 0.1 dB gain over the state-of-the-art FEC designs, making it a highly attractive FEC solution for high-throughput optical communication systems.
Index Terms—Coded modulation, concatenated coding, fiberoptic communications, forward error correction, low-complexity codes, low-density parity-check codes, zipper codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE need for high throughput and reliable communication over optical channels has driven the research into efficient and low-complexity Forward Error Correction (FEC) schemes [1], [2], [3]. Traditionally, optical communication systems have used hard-decision decoding FEC solutions, such as Reed-Solomon, Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH), and staircase codes [4] as per ITU-T recommendations G.975.1 [5] and 400ZR [6]. However, modern systems often require the use of soft-decision information, making use of all the available information as they operate close to the channel capacity [7], [8]. A prominent proposal in this regard is the open FEC (oFEC) scheme that consists of soft BCH component codes [9]. Recently, a power- and memory-optimized hardware implementation for oFEC has been proposed in [10].
Manuscript received 10 February 2023; revised 8 June 2023; accepted 7 July 2023. Date of publication 21 July 2023; date of current version 16 December 2023. (Corresponding author: Masoud Barakatain.)
Yoones Hashemi, Bashirreza Karimi, Hamid Ebrahimzad, and Chuandong Li are with the Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd., Kanata, ON K2K 3J1, Canada (e-mail: yoones.hashemi@huawei.com; bashirreza.karimi@huawei.com; hamid.ebrahimzad@huawei.com; chuandong.li@huawei.com).
Masoud Barakatain is with Marvell Technology, Inc, Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA (e-mail: mbarakatain@marvell.com).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2023.3297615.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JLT.2023.3297615

Meanwhile, the per-bit decoding complexity of the highthroughput optical channel (often carrying hundreds of gigabits per second) must be low, and the decoder memory and latency must be practical for implementation. To improve the performance while addressing practical implementation constraints, soft-aided schemes have been proposed in which the (usually algebraic) hard-decision decoding is assisted with soft channel information [3], [11].
This article presents a new concatenated FEC structure within the zipper framework [12]. The structure consists of an inner zipper code with low-density parity-check (LDPC) component codes and an outer zipper code with BCH component codes. The inner code is a low-complexity soft-decision zipper code, while the outer code is a low-latency hard-decision zipper code.
The inner code in our scheme is error-reducing, serving the purpose of reducing the bit error rate (BER) of the bits that are passed to the outer code to below its threshold, which enables the outer code to take the BER further down, below 10−15, as required by optical transport networks. Much of the error correction in this soft FEC scheme is therefore performed by the outer hard-decision decoder, taking a distinct approach to managing complexity compared to soft-aided FEC schemes.
In this scheme, the inner zipper code consists of short lowcomplexity soft-decision LDPC component codes designed to be implemented and decoded with low complexity. We allow only degree-1 and degree-2 variable nodes in the inner component codes. The inner code has a universal and flexible structure and provides excellent performance with varying overheads (OHs) and complexities.
In concatenated schemes recently proposed for optical communication, a hard-decision product-like code such as staircase or braided-block codes is often chosen as the outer code [13]. The best performance in such schemes is obtained when the OH of the outer code is ultra-low, around 1.0–2.5%. However, with a decrease in the OH, the required decoding memory also increases in such codes. Zipper codes address this issue to some extent by reducing the decoding memory requirement by up to a factor of 2 compared to staircase codes [12]. Still, in many high-throughput applications, the best performance requires very large decoding memory for zipper codes, leading to unacceptable latency and making them impractical to implement.
This work, which includes and expands on [14], proposes a novel structure within the zipper framework to realize practical codes with very low OHs. We obtain codes with OHs as low as 1.01% that, as stand-alone solutions, can operate within a 0.6 dB gap to the binary symmetric channel Shannon limit with

0733-8724 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BARAKATAIN et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY ZIPPER-LDPC AND LOW-LATENCY ZIPPER-BCH CONCATENATED CODES

7329

a decoding memory up to 30 times less than the conventional zipper frameworks. We utilize this structure in the outer codes of the proposed concatenated FEC solution and obtain practical FEC schemes with excellent performance and low decoding memory and complexity.
We evaluate the performance and complexity of our proposed concatenated FEC scheme in comparison with the recent code-design approaches in [15], [16]. We then establish the implementation complexity advantage of the proposed FEC scheme compared to the existing designs. While this work adopts a similar concatenated structure to [15], [16] with an inner error-reducing code and outer cleanup code, the low-complexity inner zipper-LDPC code structure with a universal and flexible design, as well as the ultra-low OH outer code design, is unique to this work. Our simulation results demonstrate that the proposed scheme can offer up to a 0.1 dB gain in performance while maintaining a similar decoding complexity compared to the state-of-the-art complexity-optimized design presented in [15]. Moreover, we apply the proposed scheme in higherorder modulation formats with multi-level coding (MLC) and bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) schemes. Our results show that the proposed FEC structure performs very well when combined with higher-order modulation, matching the results from [16].
The rest of this article is structured as follows. Section II provides a brief overview of the zipper framework. Section III explains the structure of the inner zipper framework and the properties of its LDPC component codes. Section IV explains the structure of the proposed low-latency and low-memory outer zipper framework. In Section V, simulation results are presented for the proposed concatenated FEC scheme with quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) modulation and in operation with MLC and BICM schemes in higherorder modulation. In Section VI, we provide the concluding remarks.
II. ZIPPER FRAMEWORK

map period. It was shown in [12] that a diagonal interleaver

map with

mi =

m

=

n 2

in all rows is able to provide good

performance. In Fig. 1(left), we show an example of the diagonal

interleaver map with m = 6. Note that in conventional zipper

frameworks, each bit is protected by 2 component codes, once

in the real buffer and once in the virtual buffer, while only the

bits of the real buffer are transmitted over the communication

channel.

A zipper code is decoded using a sliding-window decoding

algorithm where M consecutive received rows are decoded iter-

atively using the component code decoder. The component code

typically is an algebraic BCH code in the conventional zipper

frameworks. In such frameworks, the ratio M/m should be large

enough for a good performance. The decoding subroutine is

performed after receiving a block of μ rows, called a chunk.

At the arrival of each chunk, the decoder outputs the oldest

chunk within the window. Further details about the iterative

sliding-window decoding algorithm in the zipper framework can

be found in [12].

In order to determine the memory size for the window de-

coder, we first need to define a new parameter called maximum

lookback, denoted by λ. This parameter denotes the maximum

number of older rows required to fill the virtual bits of each

row. At the decoder, M m bits exist within the window decoder,

and an additional λm older bits are required to perform the

decoding. Thus, the total decoder memory size is (λ + M )m.

For example, the decoder memory size of a diagonal zipper code

is (m/2 + M )m.

To obtain codes with lower OHs, the length of the algebraic

component codes (2m) must grow longer. Although compared to

staircase codes, diagonal zipper codes can decrease the required

memory size for encoding and decoding by about a factor of

2, for ultra-low OHs, their required decoding memory is still

too large, resulting in impractical designs and unacceptable la-

tency in high-throughput applications. To deal with memory and

latency issues in conventional zipper frameworks, we introduce

a new interleaver map in the following.

A. The Conventional Zipper Framework
The zipper framework [12] is a newly proposed framework describing spatially coupled product-like codes, including staircase and braided-block codes. A zipper code framework is described by its three main elements: a component code, a zipping pair, and an interleaver map. In the original work [12], a BCH code C of length n, dimension k, and correction capability t was considered as the component code. The zipper buffer is an infinite sequence of BCH codewords C0, C1, C2 . . . that form a semi-infinite matrix with n columns. The buffer is divided into two sets: virtual buffer, A, and real buffer, B. Sets (A, B) are called a zipping pair (see [12, Sec. II]).
The bits of the virtual set are direct copies of the bits in the real buffer through the interleaver map φ. For practical purposes, the interleaver map is chosen to be bijective, periodic, and causal [12]. Let mi = |Ai| denote the length of the i-th row of the virtual set. The length of the corresponding real row, therefore, is n − mi. Generally, mi’s can be different for different rows, but we must have mi+ϑ = mi , where ϑ > 0 is the interleaver

B. The Quasi-Diagonal Zipper Framework
In the conventional (diagonal) zipper codes, the virtual bits of each row are obtained from the real bits of m previous rows. Equivalently, the real bits of each row are distributed among the next m rows. This induces a long dependency between the rows of real and virtual buffers. Also, a large decoding window size, M , as a multiple of m, is required to achieve a sharp waterfall performance.
In order to reduce the dependency between the rows of real and virtual buffers, we introduce a quasi-diagonal interleaver map and its coupling factor, denoted by c. This interleaver map allows up to c bits of the virtual part of a row to be copies of real bits of a single row, thereby reducing the dependency by a factor of c. In Fig. 1, we show two examples of quasi-diagonal interleaver maps with m = 6 and c = 2 (middle and right). As shown in Fig. 1, the maximum lookback for the diagonal design (left) is λ = 6, while λ = 3 for the quasi-diagonal designs (middle and right).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7330

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 41, NO. 24, DECEMBER 15, 2023

Fig. 1. Zipper code with m = 6 and three different interleaver types: diagonal (left), quasi-diagonal of type1 with c = 2 (middle), and quasi-diagonal of type 2 (right) with c = 2 structures. The bits of the same color are coupled together in the real buffer and stay together in the type-1 quasi-diagonal interleaver map
(middle) but are separated out in the type-2 quasi-diagonal interleaver map (right).

It is easy to see that with quasi-diagonal interleaving, the

required

encoder

memory

size

is

m(m/c+1) 2

+m

bits,

and

the

required decoder memory is m(m/(2c) + M ) bits. However,

here, M must be measured against m/c. Therefore, increas-

ing the coupling factor, c, considerably reduces the required

memory sizes. Note that the decoding latency, which is linearly

proportional to mM decreases significantly with increasing c.

Increasing c, however, may induce an early error floor to the BER

curve of the quasi-diagonal zipper code when hard-decision

bounded-distance decoding is used.

Error floor in decoding various zipper frameworks (including

staircase, diagonal, and quasi-diagonal zipper codes), where

hard-decision bounded-distance decoding is used, is caused by

specific structures called stall patterns. A stall pattern is a set of

error locations in various rows of the real buffer B that cannot

be corrected by the component BCH decoder, which corrects up

to t errors. Small stall patterns have the dominant impact on the

error floor performance of zipper codes [12]. The quasi-diagonal

interleaving reduces the smallest stall pattern size. For example,

when c > t, the minimum-size stall patterns are of size t + 1,

whereas with the diagonal interleaving, the smallest stall pattern

is of size (t + 1)(t + 2)/2.

Note that an error floor can be acceptable in a scenario where

the zipper framework is operating as an error-reducing code,

as is the case in the proposed inner code designs described in

the next section. In Section V, however, we propose a new

structure to address the error-floor problem within the outer

zipper framework where we use a quasi-diagonal interleaver

map, leading to powerful zipper code designs with low latency

and good waterfall and error floor performances.

III. INNER LOW-COMPLEXITY ZIPPER-LDPC CODE STRUCTURE
While zipper codes are usually considered with a harddecision component-code decoder, here, we consider soft quasicyclic LDPC component codes of length n and dimension k in the zipper framework for improved performance (see Fig. 2). We also utilize a quasi-diagonal interleaver map in the zipper framework that allows us to control the decoding memory size of the inner code while maintaining its desired performance.
In [17], generic LDPC component codes were considered for the staircase codes. However, here we carefully design and study LDPC component codes that are very practical to implement

Fig. 2. Inner code zipper framework structure.

and have low decoding complexity and optimal performance.

Moreover, as described in the previous section, we allow quasi-

diagonal interleaver maps in our design for reduced decoding

memory size.

The structure of the proposed zipper-LDPC code is closely

related to that of spatially coupled generalized LDPC codes [18].

We note that the zipper-LDPC framework can be described as

a spatially coupled generalized LDPC code where each compo-

nent

code

is

coupled

with

n 2c

component

codes

in

the

rows

above

and below it.

To minimize the inner code complexity and significantly

reduce the implementation complexity of the zipper-LDPC

scheme, we only allow degree-1 and degree-2 variable nodes in

the component LDPC codes. In particular, we assign all parity

bits (and copies of parity bits in the virtual part) to degree-1

variable nodes, and we assign the rest of the bits to degree-2

variable nodes. This routine realizes a universal method to design

ensembles for various code OHs and modulation formats.

We remark that a block-LDPC ensemble with only degree-1

and degree-2 variable nodes typically exhibits poor performance

and a very high error floor. In studying zipper-LDPC codes,

we observed that with degree-1 and degree-2 variable nodes in

the ensemble, the BER waterfall curve of the inner code starts

earlier (at lower input BERs), and the curve floors at a higher

BER. However, due to targeted designs for the outer code, the

proposed concatenated scheme works very well for various code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BARAKATAIN et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY ZIPPER-LDPC AND LOW-LATENCY ZIPPER-BCH CONCATENATED CODES

7331

lengths, OHs, and channel conditions, as shown in the simulation results.
We follow a similar routine for encoding the inner zipper code as in [12], except that an LDPC component code encoder is used. For decoding the inner zipper code, we use the same slidingwindow decoding algorithm explained in Section II-A, but with a soft (offset min-sum) LDPC decoder for the component codes. We use log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) in message-passing component decoders and in passing the extrinsic information.
The message-passing among the component codes is similar to the scheme in [17]. In particular, each bit participates in two component codes (once in the real buffer and once in the virtual buffer of the zipper framework) and stores two LLRs: a channel LLR and an extrinsic LLR. Each bit in the zipper framework uses its extrinsic LLR and channel LLR in component code decoding. It then updates its extrinsic LLR by subtracting the channel LLR from the corresponding component decoder output.
Unlike in [17], [19], we did not observe any performance improvement when using a scaling factor in updating the extrinsic messages. As explained in [19, Sec. VI], the purpose of scaling LLRs there is to take into account the fact that the standard deviation of the extrinsic information is high in the first decoding steps and decreases as we iterate the decoding. In the proposed inner-code structure, however, each check node is connected to one or two degree-1 variable nodes, and as we utilize a min-sum decoding algorithm, the statistics of the magnitude of the check messages is determined by that of the channel messages, thus remaining constant with iteration. The variable nodes in our scheme are either of degree 1, with extrinsic messages that remain constant at their channel observations, or of degree 2, with extrinsic messages being the sum of their channel observations and a check message. Since neither the mean nor standard deviation of the extrinsic messages change during decoding, scaling of these messages is unnecessary, and the optimal scaling factor is 1.
Another benefit of stable statistics in variable and check messages is that we can quantize the channel and variable node and check node messages with the same number of bits without compromising performance. In contrast, conventional LDPC codes typically require more bits for quantizing extrinsic messages than channel messages.
We now establish a trade-off between the waterfall and the error-floor performances of the proposed zipper-LDPC scheme. The trade-off arises from the level of protection the structure provides for the parity bits. Note that in a conventional zipper framework, every bit is protected by two component codes. Here, since the parity bits are not passed to the outer code and the inner code needs to act only as an error-reducing code, we allow for partial double-protection of the parity bits in the zipperLDPC framework. Fig. 2 shows the inner code zipper framework structure. As shown in Fig. 2, out of r = n − k parity bits of each component code, we copy rp bits in the virtual buffer of the zipper framework, where 0 ≤ rp ≤ r. While the zipper code OH and decoding memory remain the same, decreasing rp results in shorter component codes that are individually stronger. However, this comes at the cost of weaker protection for parity

Fig. 3. BER curves for the zipper-LDPC codes with various component-code

lengths

and

rp r

,

at

a

fixed

25%

overall

OH.

bits in the zipper framework, resulting in a trade-off between the

zipper-LDPC code performance (where its waterfall curve starts)

and its error floor, where decreasing rp results in an earlier start

of the waterfall but also a higher error floor in the BER curve.

In Fig. 3, for 25% OH, we plot the BER curves of the

zipper-LDPC framework with various levels of parity protection,

i.e.,

the

ratio

rp r

.

The

best

and

worst

waterfall

performance,

and conversely, the highest and lowest error floors, are obtained

for

rp r

=

0 and

rp r

=

1, respectively.

outer code threshold, we can design for

Thus, depending on the

a

proper

rp r

in

the

inner

framework to target that threshold.

IV. OUTER LOW-LATENCY ZIPPER-BCH CODE STRUCTURE
This section describes the proposed zipper framework we use as the outer code to realize practical hard-decision codes with ultra-low OH. In particular, we propose a new bit protection scheme for the zipper framework with a quasi-diagonal interleaver map that can significantly reduce the required decoding memory size and latency while maintaining a good FEC performance. We use BCH component codes in the zipper framework.
The main downside of using a quasi-diagonal interleaver map in the zipper framework is that it results in the formation of small stall patterns and, therefore, a high error floor. A stall pattern is formed because the component codes that protect the bits in error cannot correct them. We refer the reader to the analysis in [4, Sec. V] and [12, Sec. V] for the relationship between minimal stall pattern size and the decoding error floor when hard-decision bounded-distance decoding is used.
One way to resolve errors in a stall pattern is by protecting the bits with additional component codes. Thus, we propose a new zipper framework in which three component codes protect each bit. We realize this extra level of protection, as shown in Fig. 4, by considering the zipping triplet (A1, A2, B) with two virtual sets, A1 and A2, and their corresponding (and possibly different) interleaver maps denoted by (φ1, φ2) with coupling factors (c1, c2), respectively. For the zipper framework to resolve

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7332

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 41, NO. 24, DECEMBER 15, 2023

Fig. 5. An example of a stall pattern of size 9 for a zipper code with m = 8, a quasi-diagonal interleaver map, coupling factors c1 = c2 = 4, and triple-error correcting component codes.

Fig. 4. The structure of the outer zipper code with a quasi-diagonal interleaver map.
small stall patterns, we design (φ1, φ2) interleavers to map each bit in the real buffer to different rows of the two virtual buffers. For example, one can consider the type 1 and type 2 interleaver maps of Fig. 1 for each virtual buffer.
As shown in Fig. 4, due to this extra level of protection (additional virtual buffer), the length of the component codes is now n = 3 m, compared to n = 2 m in the conventional schemes. Therefore, at a target OH, one might need to utilize a BCH component code with a larger Galois Field (GF) size for the scheme with an extra level of protection. Moreover, the maximum lookback, λ, is now the maximum of that for the two virtual buffers, i.e., λ = max(λ1, λ2), which depends on how φ1 and φ2 interleaver maps are designed. The definition of a chunk remains the same, as explained in Section II.
Based on the discussion in [12], the size of the smallest stall pattern is related to the number of affected rows by that pattern. In conventional zipper codes with a diagonal interleaver map, if t + 1 errors exist in the i-th row of the real buffer, these errors are distributed in t + 1 distinct rows of the virtual buffer. As a result, the decoder is trapped in a stall pattern if all t + 2 rows (including the i-th row) have at least t + 1 errors. The size of the smallest stall pattern, therefore, is (t + 1)(t + 2)/2, which is proportional to the number of affected rows, t + 2.
In the proposed low-latency zipper framework, where we assume c > t, since we have two virtual buffers, the number of affected rows can differ depending on the interleaver maps (φ1, φ2). We carefully design interleaver maps to ensure that any pair of bits that are not coupled together belong to no more than one codeword. From the same reasoning for a diagonal interleaver map, it follows that with this constraint in place, the minimal stall pattern size is lower bounded by (t + 1)(t + 2)/3

in the zipper code with quasi-diagonal interleaver map. For example, when BCH code with error correction capability t = 3 is used, the smallest stall pattern size is larger than or equal to 8. Fig. 5 shows an example of a stall pattern of size 9 with six affected rows for triple-error correcting component codes. The circles represent bits in error, and different colors represent erroneous bits of different rows in the real buffer. Since t = 3, and each affected component code in Fig. 5 has more than 3 bits in error, the decoder is locked in a state in which no updates can be performed regardless of the number of decoding iterations.
Note that here, the lower bound on minimal stall pattern size is smaller than that in the zipper framework with a diagonal interleaver map. However, with the proposed interleaver map design and an extra level of protection, we did not observe any error floor in the region of interest for the proposed zipper frameworks with BCH component codes with correction capability t ≥ 3.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed scheme and compare it to the conventional schemes, we provide design examples and simulations of zipper codes with different types of interleaver maps. In presenting these results, we use the following acronyms to refer to the various interleaver maps: diagonal (D), quasi-diagonal (QD), and quasi-diagonal with an extra level of protection (QDE). We consider BCH component codes with correction capability t = 2, 3 in the zipper framework design.
In Fig. 6, we plot the post-FEC BER versus pre-FEC BER performance curves for various code designs with t = 3 BCH component codes over GF (213). For the zipper codes with QDE interleaver map, code parameters, (M, m, c), are chosen as (2400400, 8) and (1950400, 8), resulting in OHs 1.65% and 2.04%, respectively. As shown in Fig. 6, compared to the diagonal interleaver, the QD interleaver map enables the zipper code to reduce the memory size at the cost of an early error floor. The designed QDE interleaver map, on the other hand, enables the zipper code to provide a waterfall performance as sharp as the diagonal zipper code, without any sign of an error floor down to a 10−14 BER, while keeping the decoder memory size significantly smaller.
At a given OH, using BCH component codes with correction capability t = 2, instead of t = 3, has the advantage of lower decoding complexity. Furthermore, since at a fixed OH, component codes with correction capability t = 2 are shorter compared to when t = 3, using them may result in being able to perform arithmetic operations in a smaller GF. However, in the conventional zipper codes with diagonal interleaver map, using

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BARAKATAIN et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY ZIPPER-LDPC AND LOW-LATENCY ZIPPER-BCH CONCATENATED CODES

7333

Fig. 6. Performance curves of zipper codes with diagonal (D), quasi-diagonal (QD), and quasi-diagonal with an extra level of protection (QDE) interleaver maps at 2.04% and 1.65% OHs. All codes are constructed using BCH component codes with correction capability t = 3 over GF (213). The decoder memory size and the OH are indicated in the legend for each code.

with QDE interleaver map reduces the decoder memory size (and latency) by a factor of 30, compared to the conventional scheme with diagonal interleaver map (solid red curve), while maintaining a sharp curve without an error floor down to 10−15 BER. Note that the zipper code with a diagonal interleaver map has an early error floor around 10−11 BER and a much higher error floor if its decoding memory is reduced (dotted green curve). The main reason for the better error-floor performance of the proposed zipper frameworks compared to the conventional one is that, here, more constraints should be satisfied to form a stall pattern; thus, the error floor must be lower than in the conventional scheme.
We remark that the zipper codes with QDE interleaver maps of Figs. 6 and 7 all operate within a 0.6 dB gap to the binary symmetric channel Shannon limit. Our simulation results for the concatenated coded modulation scheme in the next section show that the performance loss of a zipper code with a QDE interleaver map is less than 0.03 dB compared to when a conventional staircase or zipper code is used.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS

A. The Concatenated FEC Scheme in QPSK Modulation

Fig. 7. Performance curves of zipper codes with diagonal (D), quasi-diagonal (QD), and quasi-diagonal with an extra level of protection (QDE) interleaver maps at 1.01% OH. The codes are constructed using BCH component codes with correction capability t = 2 over GF (213). The decoder memory size, in number of bits, is indicated in the legend for each code.
t = 2 BCH component codes results in an early error floor around 10−11 ∼ 10−12, depending on the OH. Thus, conventional zipper frameworks with t = 2 BCH component codes cannot meet the requirements of optical applications. On the contrary, with the proposed zipper framework with quasi-diagonal interleaver maps and an extra level of protection, we observed no error floor down to 10−15 at ultra-low OHs, around 1–2.5%, with t = 2 BCH component codes and practical decoding memory sizes.
For example, for t = 2, we consider an OH of 1.01% over GF (213). In Fig. 7, we plot the performance curve of the zipper code with t = 2 BCH component codes and with a QDE interleaver map. The code parameters, (M , m, c), are (2700, 600, 15). As shown in Fig. 7, the proposed zipper code

We consider signalling with QPSK modulation, and we model the channel as an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. We compare the proposed scheme to the scheme in [15], where a complexity-optimized block-LDPC inner code is designed to concatenate with the outer code. In comparing the FEC schemes, we use the measure of complexity, η, described in [15], which is a normalized measure of the number of probabilistic messages passed in iterative decoding of the inner code.
In designing the inner zipper-LDPC frameworks, we consider quasi-cyclic component codes with girths of at least 6 and lengths in the range of 200–1500. We use a maximum of 10 zipper decoding iterations, each with a maximum of two LDPC decoding iterations with flooding schedule. Note that the maximum variable-node degree allowed in the ensemble is 2.
In designing the inner block-LDPC codes, we consider quasicyclic codes with girths of at least 6 and lengths in the range of 2000–40000. The maximum variable-node degree allowed in the ensemble is 6, and we use a maximum of 12 decoding iterations with a flooding schedule in block-LDPC decoding.
Our designs consider various inner-code OHs in the range of 14.28%–66.67%. Consideration of higher OHs is motivated by the potential use case for the zipper-LDPC codes in a multi-level coding scheme similar to [16]. All scenarios assume that the inner code is concatenated to a practical outer hard-decision zipper code with 1% OH, obtained according to the techniques described in Section IV.
We quantize channel LLRs with 5 bits and use offset min-sum decoding on a flooding schedule. When decoding the zipperLDPC and block-LDPC code designs, we quantize extrinsic messages by 5 and 7 bits, respectively. While the measure η does not account for the number of quantization bits in message passing, the quantization of probabilistic messages to fewer bits marks a significant practical advantage for the designed zipperLDPC codes compared to block-LDPC codes. We also remark

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7334

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 41, NO. 24, DECEMBER 15, 2023

Fig. 8. Gap to CSL of the FEC schemes with zipper-LDPC and block-LDPC inner codes in various OHs and LDPC code lengths at the same decoding complexity.

Fig. 10. Performance-complexity comparisons of the proposed concatenated scheme with higher-order modulation of various orders with MLC and BICM at 25% overall OH, compared with the designs in [20]. The number of total inner-code component-decoding iterations required by each obtained code is indicated on the curves.

Fig. 9. Gap to CSL of the proposed FEC scheme with length-400 component code in the inner zipper-LDPC framework compared to the scheme with a blockLDPC inner code of length 20000 in various OHs. The FEC schemes are designed to have similar total decoding memory and complexity.
that with the zipper-LDPC code, a much shorter interleaver between the inner and outer codes is required.
In Fig. 8, we consider various OHs, at each of which we obtain 5 designs for the proposed FEC scheme with various inner component-code block lengths and 5 designs according to [15] with various inner code block lengths, all operating at a similar decoding complexity measured by η. We then plot the gap to the constrained Shannon limit (CSL) for these schemes, measured at the post-FEC BER of 10−15. The simulation results show that, first, with the zipper-LDPC inner code, a very short component code length is enough to achieve excellent performance, and second, the zipper-LDPC codes can achieve a performance similar to the block-LDPC codes with component-code lengths that are up to 50 times shorter than the block-LDPC code lengths. The significantly shorter block lengths and the use of only degree-1 and degree-2 variable nodes in the component codes, while

not accounted for in η, are greatly advantageous to hardware implementation.
In Fig. 9, we show the gap to the CSL of the proposed scheme with a length-400 component code in various OHs and compare it to the gap to the CSL of the FEC scheme with a block-LDPC inner code of length of 20 000. Here, the decoding complexity, measured by η, and the total decoding memory of the designs are almost the same. Note that for the Zipper-LDPC codes, the total memory includes all LDPC component codes in the zipper decoding window. As shown in Fig. 9, up to 0.1 dB gain can be achieved by the proposed design and with a very short component code.
B. The Concatenated FEC Scheme in Higher-Order Modulation
Here we evaluate the proposed concatenated scheme with higher-order modulation. We adopt similar MLC and BICM schemes to that in [16]. In particular, for a 16-QAM scheme with 25% overall OH, we obtain a BICM concatenated scheme consisting of an inner code with 23.5% OH and an outer code with 1.19% OH. For the same modulation and overall OH, we obtain an MLC scheme consisting of an inner code with 60% OH and an outer code with 1.56% OH. For a 64-QAM modulation with 25% overall OH, we obtain an MLC scheme consisting of an inner code with 133.3% OH and an outer code with 1.19% OH. The inner component LDPC code lengths in the obtained

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BARAKATAIN et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY ZIPPER-LDPC AND LOW-LATENCY ZIPPER-BCH CONCATENATED CODES

7335

schemes are in the range of 400–800. Similar to [16], in the MLC scheme with 16- and 64-QAMs, only the two least significant bit channels are protected by the inner code, while the other bit channels bypass the inner code and are only protected by the outer code.
Similar to the results shown in Fig. 9, we match or exceed the performance of concatenated code designs based on inner block-LDPC codes in [16]. In Fig. 10, we compare the obtained coded modulation scheme with those of [20]. As shown in Fig. 10, the obtained MLC and BICM schemes provide a superior performance-complexity trade-off compared to the MLC and BICM schemes of [20], respectively. At a similar operating SNR and compared to the MLC schemes of [20], we achieve a 23% and a 54% reduction in decoding complexity with the proposed MLC schemes in 16- and 64-QAM, respectively. Also, at a similar operating SNR with 16-QAM, we achieve a 73% reduction in decoding complexity with the proposed BICM scheme compared to the scheme of [20].
VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, we proposed a universal and flexible concatenated soft-decision FEC scheme within the zipper framework. The inner zipper code in this scheme has very short LDPC component codes, achieving an excellent error-reducing performance with very low implementation complexity. The LDPC component code ensembles consist of degree-1 and degree-2 only variable nodes. The outer zipper framework proposed realizes ultra-low OHs with practical decoding latency and memory. We proposed to add an extra level of protection, compared to the conventional scheme, to the outer zipper framework to realize a sharp waterfall performance. We presented simulation results for various OHs and complexities. We showed that the proposed FEC scheme could outperform the state-of-the-art designs with up to 0.1 dB gain while significantly reducing implementation complexity.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Graell i Amat and L. Schmalen, “Forward error correction for optical transponders,” in Springer Handbook of Optical Networks. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 177–257.
[2] M. Barakatain, “Low complexity forward error correction and modulation for optical communication,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Comput. Eng., Univ. Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 2021.

[3] A. Sheikh, A. Graell i Amat, and A. Alvarado, “Novel high-throughput decoding algorithms for product and staircase codes based on error-anderasure decoding,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 39, no. 15, pp. 4909–4922, Aug. 2021.
[4] B. P. Smith, A. Farhood, A. Hunt, F. R. Kschischang, and J. Lodge, “Staircase codes: FEC for 100 Gb/s OTN,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 110–117, Jan. 2012.
[5] Forward Error Correction for High Bit-Rate DWDM Submarine Systems, Rec. ITU-T G.975.1, International Telecommunications Union, Geneva, Switzerland, 2004.
[6] Implementation Agreement 400ZR, Optical Internetworking Forum OIF400ZR-01.0, Mar. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.oiforum.com/ wp-content/uploads/OIF-400ZR-01.0_reduced2.pdf
[7] A. Leven and L. Schmalen, “Status and recent advances on forward error correction technologies for lightwave systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 32, no. 16, pp. 2735–2750, Aug. 2014.
[8] A. Alvarado, G. Liga, T. Fehenberger, and L. Schmalen, “On the design of coded modulation for fiber optical communications,” in Proc. Signal Process. Photon. Commun., New Orleans, USA, Jul. 2017, Paper SpM4F.2.
[9] P. Humblet, “Forward error correction systems and methods,” U.S. Patent 10 201 026 B1, Jun. 2017.
[10] A. Zokaei, D. Truhachev, and K. El-Sankary, “Memory optimized hardware implementation of open FEC encoder,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integration Syst., vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 1548–1552, Oct. 2022.
[11] S. Miao, L. Rapp, and L. Schmalen, “Improved soft-aided decoding of product codes with dynamic reliability scores,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 40, no. 22, pp. 7279–7288, Nov. 2022.
[12] A. Y. Sukmadji, U. Martínez-Peñas, and F. R. Kschischang, “Zipper codes,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 40, no. 19, pp. 6397–6407, Oct. 2022.
[13] Y. Miyata, K. Kubo, H. Yoshida, and T. Mizuochi, “Proposal for frame structure of optical channel transport unit employing LDPC codes for 100 Gb/s FEC,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf., San Diego, USA, Mar. 2009, Paper NThB2.
[14] B. Karimi, M. Barakatain, Y. Hashemi, D. Chang, H. Ebrahimzad, and C. Li, “Low-latency low-overhead zipper codes,” in Proc. 45th Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun., Basel, Switzerlan, Sep. 2022, Art. no. Tu5.34.
[15] M. Barakatain and F. R. Kschischang, “Low-complexity concatenated LDPC-staircase codes,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 2443–2449, Jun. 2018.
[16] M. Barakatain, D. Lentner, G. Böcherer, and F. R. Kschischang, “Performance-complexity tradeoffs of concatenated FEC for higherorder modulation,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 2944–2953, Jun. 2020.
[17] V. B. Wijekoon, E. Viterbo, and Y. Hong, “LDPC-staircase codes for soft decision decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf., 2020, pp. 1–6.
[18] D. G. M. Mitchell, P. M. Olmos, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled generalized LDPC codes: Asymptotic analysis and finite length scaling,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 3708–3723, Jun. 2021.
[19] R. M. Pyndiah, “Near-optimum decoding of product codes: Block turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 1003–1010, Aug. 1998.
[20] Y. Koganei, T. Oyama, K. Sugitani, H. Nakashima, and T. Hoshida, “Multilevel coding with spatially coupled repeat-accumulate codes for high-order QAM optical transmission,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 486–492, Jan. 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

