DECC: Differential ECC for Read Performance Optimization on
High-Density NAND Flash Memory
Yunpeng Song, Yina Lv, Liang Shi
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
ABSTRACT
3D NAND flash memory with advanced multi-level-cell technology
has been widely adopted due to its high density, but with significantly
degraded reliability. To solve the reliability issue, flash memory often
adopts the low-density parity-check code (LDPC) as error correction
code (ECC) to encode data and provide fault tolerance. For LDPC
with a low code rate, it can provide a strong correction capability, but
with a high energy cost. To avoid the cost, LDPC with a higher code
rate is always adopted. When the accessed data is not successfully
decoded, LDPC will rely on read retry operations to improve the
error correction capability. However, the read retry operation will
induce degraded read performance. In this work, a differential ECC
(DECC) method is proposed to improve the read performance. The
basic idea of DECC is to adopt LDPC with different code rates for
data with different access characteristics. Specifically, when data is
hot read and retried due to reliability, LDPC with a low code rate will
be adopted to optimize performance. With this approach, the cost
from LDPC with a low code rate is minimized and the performance
is optimized. Through careful design and real-world workloads eval-
uation on a 3D triple-level-cell (TLC) NAND flash memory, DECC
achieves encouraging read performance optimization.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computer systems organization →Firmware; Embedded hard-
ware; Reliability.
KEYWORDS
ECC, LDPC, 3D NAND Flash, Read Performance
ACM Reference Format:
Yunpeng Song, Yina Lv, Liang Shi. 2023. DECC: Differential ECC for
Read Performance Optimization on High-Density NAND Flash Memory. In
28th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASPDAC ’23),
January 16–19, 2023, Tokyo, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3566097.3567853
*This work is supported by the NSFC (62072177), and Shanghai Science and Technol-
ogy Project (20ZR1417200, 22QA1403300). The corresponding author is Liang Shi
(lshi@cs.ecnu.edu.cn).
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPDAC ’23, January 16–19, 2023, Tokyo, Japan
© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9783-4/23/01...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3566097.3567853
1
INTRODUCTION
NAND flash memory is a popular technology used in modern com-
puting systems to build storage devices to meet large storage capacity
and I/O performance requirements. 3D NAND with multi-level-cell
technologies can continue to increase storage density, but they can
negatively impact the reliability of modern NAND flash chips. As the
density of flash memory increases, reliability-induced performance
degradation issues will hinder its further development [17]. To en-
sure data reliability, modern high-density flash-based solid state
drives (SSDs) typically use two main approaches. First, modern
SSDs use the powerful error correction code (ECC) that can detect
and correct dozens of raw bit errors (e.g., 72-bits per 1KiB code
word [17]). With powerful error correction capability, low-density
parity-check code (LDPC) has been adopted in state-of-the-art flash
[10]. Second, when the ECC is unable to correct all bit errors, the
SSD controller performs a read retry operation, reading the incorrect
page again using a slightly adjusted state sensing voltage [21]. Bit
errors occur when the threshold voltage offset of a flash cell exceeds
the reference voltage, so detecting cells with appropriately offset
reference voltage values can greatly reduce the number of raw bit
errors [1]. However, this read retry operation will introduce the sig-
nificantly degraded performance. This work will propose a scheme
to optimize the read performance induced by read retry operations.
Read performance degradation has been a critical issue for high-
density NAND flash memory. Previous works have proposed to
optimize the read performance from several aspects. First, some
works proposed optimizing the LDPC to improve read performance
[5, 10–12, 19, 20]. Dong et al. [5] proposed a non-uniform memory
sensing scheme. Second, some studies have proposed to optimize
read performance by designing data placement methods. Lv et al.
[15] proposed to identify hot read data and place them on highly
reliable pages of high-density flash memory. Third, some works
proposed to optimize flash read performance by reducing read retries.
Park et al. [17] adopt a pipelined model in multiple read retries to
optimize read performance. Zhao et al. [25] proposed to perform
read retry steps by starting from the lowest level of accuracy and
then adding additional sensing levels. Finally, there is also work
that focuses on optimizing flash read performance through multi-
ECC. Wu et al. [23] proposed to optimize flash read performance
through a combination of fine-grained programming and weak ECC.
But their optimization targets low-density NAND flash memory.
However, the retry operation cannot be avoided with the degraded
reliability of high-density NAND flash memory. Once the read retry
operation happens, especially on hot read data, the read performance
will be significantly degraded, which cannot be solved by the above
schemes.
Different from the above schemes, this work proposes a differen-
tial ECC (DECC) scheme for high-density 3D NAND flash memory
to improve the read performance. The basic idea is to adopt ECCs
104
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:01:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
ASPDAC ’23, January 16–19, 2023, Tokyo, Japan
Song and Lv, et al.
with different error correction capabilities for data with different
access characteristics. LDPC with a low code rate can provide high
error correction capability, but with a high parity and energy cost,
and vice versa. These reliability characteristics of LDPCs with differ-
ent code rates can be used for the reliability guarantee of data with
different characteristics. First, LDPC with a low code rate is adopted
for hot read data to provide a high-reliability guarantee to improve
the read performance. Second, for other read data, LDPC with a
high code rate is adopted to provide a uniform reliability guarantee
to control the storage overhead and power consumption. With this
approach, the number of read retry operations for hot read data can
be reduced due to enhanced reliability and thus the read performance
is optimized. To summarize, we make the following contributions:
• The construction and selection for DECC are present to meet the
reliability needs of data with different characteristics. A DECC
table is constructed to provide ECCs with different fault tolerance
capabilities.
• A hot read data identification scheme for DECC is proposed to
adapt to DECC’s requirements.
• A hot read data aware re-coding scheme is proposed to adopt
different strengths of ECC. The re-coding scheme is designed to
minimize the re-coding cost and improve the read performance.
• Through careful design and real workloads evaluation, experimen-
tal results show that DECC can achieve significant read perfor-
mance optimization.
2
BACKGROUND
2.1
High-Density NAND Flash Memory
Flash memory is organized by arrangements of storage cells, which
are interconnected by wordlines and bitlines. With the multi-bits-
per-cell technique, there are various densities of flash memory, such
as single-level-cell (SLC), multi-level-cell (MLC), triple-level-cell
(TLC), and quad-level-cell (QLC) flash, in the order of flash density
increases. In this paper, we take TLC as the default storage. Each
storage cell contains three bits, which are called least-significant-bit
(LSB), central-significant-bit (CSB), most-significant-bit (MSB),
respectively. In addition, the space of a page is logically divided into
two parts: user space and spare space. User space is used to store
user data, while spare space is used to store additional information,
such as error correction code (ECC). The reliability of high-density
flash memory has been a critical issue, which causes performance
and lifetime degradation [17]. Figure 1 shows the 𝑉𝑇𝐻distribution
of a 3D TLC flash cell. TLC flash with 3-bits-per-cell should divide
the voltage window into eight levels (𝐸𝑅, 𝑃1 −𝑃7).Here, we use 𝑆to
represent the number of voltage states, and 𝑛to represent the number
of bits in a storage cell. The relationship between the values of 𝑆
and 𝑛is 𝑆= 2𝑛. Such voltage distribution will be distorted due to the
retention loss or disturbance. For example, the voltage distribution
will shift to the left during retention time and shift to the right due to
the disturbance [16](the red dotted line in Figure 1). To this end, the
adjacent voltage states will be overlapped, making more bit errors.
2.2
Read on High-Density Flash Memory
To ensure reliability, the read process on high-density NAND flash
memory relies on error correction module in the SSD controller.
Specifically, the read process includes several steps. First, the read
111
110
001
101
100
000
010
011
濩瀇濻
P7
P1
PDF
E
Programmed States
MSB
CSB
LSB
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
Erase State
VREF0
VREF6
VREF1
VREF2
VREF3
VREF4
VREF5
VPass
Figure 1: 𝑉𝑇𝐻distribution of a 3D TLC flash cell.
request is issued. Second, the corresponding page is sensed. Third,
the data is transferred to the controller and corrected by ECC. If the
data is not corrected successfully, the retry operation is activated
to read the data again until the data can be corrected. During page
sensing, the reference voltage (𝑉𝑅𝐸𝐹0 to𝑉𝑅𝐸𝐹6) is used to distinguish
the voltage states of the flash cell. For the three bits of a TLC
flash cell, the added locations of reference voltages are different, as
shown in Figure 1. With the interference of various flash errors, the
reliability of the data stored in flash cells gradually decreases and
the raw bit error rate (RBER) of the data gradually increases [14].
To solve the reliability issue, high-density NAND flash mem-
ory always adopts LDPC as the default ECC module. LDPC is a
probability-based ECC that needs to obtain accurate information
for data error correction. When the RBER of the data is within the
error correction capability of the LDPC, the data is sensed only one
time. In this case, read performance is not affected. When the data is
not correctly decoded, read retry operations are issued to get more
accurate input information. Figure 2(a) shows the phenomenon of
retention loss leading to overlapping area. As the retention time
grows, the overlapping area will further increase, resulting in the
data failure decoded. In this case, the read retry operation reads
the data again with a different V𝑅𝐸𝐹value (e.g., V𝑅𝑅𝑖in the i-th
read retry step in Figure 2(b)). By adjusting the V𝑅𝐸𝐹, the V𝑂𝑃𝑇is
gradually approached so that the correct data can be read. When the
RBER of the data is high, we need to read retry several times. In
this case, the read operation needs to acquire the state information
multiple times until LDPC can correct the errors. The read latency
will increase exponentially. For high-density flash memory, degraded
reliability will result in severe performance degradation.
VREF
VREF
Vth
PDF
瀖
瀖
After retention loss Right after programming
Overlapping area
P(x-1)
state
Px
state
P(x+1)
state
Px
state
P(x+1)
state
VREFx
VRR1
VRR(N-1)
VOPT
(a) Retention loss
(b)Read retry:Adjusting VREF
Figure 2: 𝑉𝑅𝐸𝐹adjustment in the read retry operation.
3
PROBLEM STATEMENT
From the above discussion, it is clear that read performance is cor-
related with data reliability. Due to the rapidly decreased reliability
of 3D TLC NAND flash, adopting LDPC to guarantee data relia-
bility is an excellent choice. Many state-of-the-art flash chips have
adopted LDPC with a unified code rate to guarantee data reliability.
Existing uniform code rate based LDPC combined with reference
voltage tuning can guarantee the reliability of data stored in flash
cells. However, the process of reference voltage tuning triggers read
105
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:01:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
DECC: Differential ECC for Read Performance Optimization on High-Density NAND Flash Memory
ASPDAC ’23, January 16–19, 2023, Tokyo, Japan
retry operations, which leads to serious degradation of flash read
performance. A simple solution is to adopt a low code rate based
LDPC to provide strong error correction capability. In this case, read
retry will rarely happen, and then the performance can be optimized.
However, the low code rate based LDPC has several problems. One
of the most important problems is that this kind of LDPC will intro-
duce parity cost and power consumption. If it is adopted for all data,
the power consumption and parity cost will be high.
To understand the performance characteristics of different LDPC
for high-density NAND flash memory, we have done experiments as
follows. First, several LDPC with different code rates were simulated.
Second, based on their error correction capability, the percentages of
data enrolled in read retry are varied. For example, we assume that
the percentage of data enrolled in read retry is low for LDPC with
a low code rate and vice versa. Then, based on the above settings,
the percentages of data enrolled in read retry are varied from 0%
to 100% to represent LDPC with different code rates. FIO is used
as the workloads to evaluate the device and IOPS is used as the
metric. Specific experiment configurations can be found in Section 5.
Figure 3 shows the results. From the results, we have the following
observations. First, the access performance of high-density NAND
flash memory is highly related to the error correction capability of
LDPC. For LDPC with a low code rate, it can provide up to 2.2X
IOPS. Second, as we have stated above, LDPC with a low code
rate will introduce much high energy consumption even for data
with high reliability. In conclusion, simply adopting LDPC with a
low code rate or a high code rate cannot satisfy the performance or
reliability requirement of high-density NAND flash memory. The
above results motivate us to propose a new design, where data with
different reliability or performance requirements should be protected
by LDPC with different code rates.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90% 100%
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Percentage of Data that Suffer From One Read Retry
澽濃濄濇
2.2X
Figure 3: Motivational results with random read workloads.
4
DIFFERENTIAL ECC
4.1
Overview
In this section, a differential ECC (DECC) scheme is proposed for
read performance improvement of 3D NAND flash. The basic idea is
to adopt two LDPC with different code rates for data with different
access characteristics. Specifically, if data accesses need to activate
read retry and they are hotly accessed, the LDPC with a low code
rate will be adopted to boost performance. Otherwise, the LDPC
with a high code rate will be adopted to protect data reliability.
Figure 4 shows the architecture of DECC. DECC is implemented as
a module inside the SSD controller, which includes three methods, a
DECC table, a hot read data identification method, and a hot read
data re-coding method. To realize the above design, there are several
challenges: 1) ECCs with different fault-tolerance capabilities have
different implementation overheads. We should consider the trade-
off between benefits and overheads for DECC design. 2) DECC
provides ECC with different fault tolerance capabilities. Hot read
data needs to be identified and protected by taking strong ECC with
high fault tolerance. The identification should take the cost and
efficiency into consideration. 3) The re-coding method is designed
to adopt the strong ECC. This process is high cost, which includes
data read and write. Its design should be efficient and low cost.
To tame the above challenges, we presented three techniques
as follows. First, we construct a DECC table to record ECCs with
different code rates and elaborate the principles for selecting ECCs
with different error tolerance capabilities. Second, we analyze the
hot read data identification requirements of DECC and design a
hot read data identification scheme suitable for DECC. Finally, we
perform a hot read data aware re-coding scheme by the selection of
DECC. In the following, more details will be discussed.
Flash Interface Layer
Host Interface Layer
Differential ECC
Chip 0
FTL
DECC Table
SSD Controller
DRAM
Hot Read Data Identification
Hot Read Data Re-coding
…
Wear Leveler
Garbage Collector
濄
濅
濆
Chip M
Chip 0
Chip M
Channel #0
Channel #1
Chip 0
Chip M
Channel #N
…
…
…
Figure 4: Overview of differential ECC.
4.2
Construction and Selection for DECC
We construct DECC to provide different levels of reliability guaran-
tees for data with different characteristics. In this paper, the access
characteristics of data are classified into two types, hot reads and
other reads. Two fault-tolerant ECCs are provided. One strong ECC
(ECC𝑆) with a low code rate is used to encode hot read data and one
normal ECC (ECC𝑁) with a higher code rate is used to encode other
read data. With this approach, if the hot read data is accessed, retry
operations will rarely happen. Table 1 shows the features of ECC𝑆
and ECC𝑁. The adoption of ECC𝑆is designed based on the hot read
data identification and retry operation. Once the accessed data is
identified as hot read data and retry operation is activated, ECC𝑆will
be adopted. For example, read retries are triggered when the RBER
exceeds the error correction capability of ECC𝑁. If the RBER is
below the error correction capability of ECC𝑆, we are able to obtain
optimization of read performance. Even if the RBER exceeds the
error correction capability of ECC𝑆, we need less read retries to
bring the RBER down below the error correction capability of ECC𝑆
compared to ECC𝑁.
For the above design, the selection of ECC𝑆and ECC𝑁should
be careful. For ECC𝑆, it not only introduces a high error correction
capability but also introduces parity space and energy consumption
106
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:01:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
ASPDAC ’23, January 16–19, 2023, Tokyo, Japan
Song and Lv, et al.
Table 1: Differential ECC Table
Error Correction Capability
Symbol
Data Characteristic
Code Rate
Strong
ECC𝑆
For hot read data
0.8
Normal
ECC𝑁
For other read data
0.9 [17]
cost. If a very strong ECC is selected as ECC𝑆, the parity space
and energy consumption cost will be unacceptable. In contrast, if a
weak ECC is selected as ECC𝑆, the read performance will not be
optimized. The selection of ECC𝑆requires a trade-off between per-
formance gain and overhead. First, the energy consumption comes
from the decoding of the hot read data. Compared with ECC𝑁,
ECC𝑆can reduce the probability of retry operations. With this effect,
ECC𝑆can avoid the additional energy cost from retry operations.
Then, the energy cost from ECC𝑆should be comparable to that of
ECC𝑁. Second, for the parity space cost, it will be larger than that
of ECC𝑁. Based on our studies on the relationship between error
correction capability and code rates of LDPC, the error correction
capability can be significantly increased with a slight reduction of
code rates. Then, the parity space cost can be controlled based on
the requirement of error correction capability. The specific selection
of ECC𝑆will be presented in Section 5.1. For ECC𝑁, it is designed
to guarantee the integrity of the data. Considering that the ECC has
been taken in existing SSDs, we can adopt the existing ECC𝑁to
meet the demand. The identification and re-coding of hot read data
will be described in Sections 4.3 and 4.4, respectively.
4.3
Hot Read Data Identification for DECC
To optimize the read performance, a critical step is to identify hot
read data. DECC obtains read performance optimization by identi-
fying hot read data and improving its reliability. There are various
methods to identify hot read data. The advantages and disadvantages
of each method can be measured by accuracy and overhead. Meta-
data storage and computation overhead are essential if hot read data
is to be identified accurately. For DECC, the identification of hot read
data has two characteristics. First, the impact of mis-identification
of hot read data on DECC is unbalanced. If the data is cold read data
but identified as hot read data, it will increase the re-coding overhead,
but the performance impact is negligible. If the data is hot read but
is not identified, there will be an impact on performance. Second,
DECC requires a "sluggish" hot read data identification scheme.
An overly aggressive hot read data identification scheme will cause
over-protection problems, which will introduce more energy and
space costs. For non-hot read data, even ECC, which provides more
fault-tolerant space, has little benefit on performance.
Combining the above characteristics, we adopt the read count
method to identify hot read data. In this work, hot read data is de-
fined as the number of reads between updates exceeding a certain
threshold, T𝑅. The read counter of data is cleared when it is updated.
Adopting the read counter method, there are several advantages.
First, the read counter method does not require complex data struc-
tures and computational overhead. Second, the read counter method
is a "sluggish" hot read data identification scheme and meets the
requirements of DECC. The larger the value of T𝑅, the less data will
be identified as read hot, and vice versa. In the experiment, T𝑅is
evaluated to trade off read performance and re-coding cost.
4.4
Hot Read Data Aware Re-Coding
As presented above, ECC𝑆is used when the data is hot read data and
accessed with read retries with ECC𝑁. In this case, the data should
be re-coded with ECC𝑆. This design means that data are initially
encoded with ECC𝑁. Once the above requirements are satisfied, the
accessed data should be re-coded for read performance optimization.
The basic re-coding processes are as follows. First, data are read
and decoded by ECC𝑁. Second, data are encoded with ECC𝑆at the
storage controller. Finally, the coded data are written back to flash.
The above process is costly, especially when much data needs to
be re-coded. To minimize the cost, the re-coding process is designed
as follows. First, as we have presented, only data hotly read and
retried, can be re-coded. With this approach, only a limited number
of data are re-coded. Second, the re-coding process can be activated
at two timing points. The first timing is during background processes,
such as garbage collection (GC) or wear leveling (WL). The second
timing is when it is retried. Figure 5 shows the re-coding process
for the above two cases. Figure 5(a) shows the first case. During
runtime, hot read data with retry are identified and recorded. Once
the block is enrolled in GC or WL, the recorded data will be re-coded
with ECC𝑆. Figure 5(b) shows the second case. If the hot read data
is accessed and retried, it can be re-coded by encoding the data in
the controller. If many read requests waiting in the I/O queue, this
process should be delayed to the first case.
Plane
…
Re-coder
Victim Block
(b) re-coding with host read requests
(a) re-coding with internal management
…
B1
B2
Bk
Bk+1
BN
Hot Read Page
Cold Read Page
Invalid Page
1
Write Pointer
ECCS
ECCN
Hot Read Page with Retries
2
Plane
…
Re-coder
…
B1
B2
Bk
Bk+1
BN
Write Pointer
Host Reads
1
ECCS
Figure 5: Data re-coding for hot read data.
4.5
Implementation and Overhead Analysis
To implement DECC, the FTL (flash translation layer) of the SSD is
updated as follows. First, for DECC, each page should be identified
to distinguish the strength of its adopted ECC. One bit is used to
differentiate them, which is used to indicate ECC decoding and data
re-coding. Second, for hot read data identification, each page needs a
counter to record the number of times it has been read. The mapping
table always has a reserved area, where three bits will be used to
record them. Third, for ECC𝑆codes, we need extra space to store
parity information. Take the ECC presented in Table 1 as example.
The required extra space as a percentage of the total space is (0.9-
0.8)*100% = 10%. Although some storage space is sacrificed, DECC
can greatly improve read performance and guarantee data reliability.
Considering that high-density NAND flash memory has enough
capacity, this capacity cost can be negligible. More importantly,
DECC minimizes the power and performance impact of LDPC
with a low code rate while improving data reliability (e.g., only
the hot read data uses ECC𝑆). Finally, the re-coding scheme needs
additional program operations to encode the hot read data. The
program operations have an impact on lifetime and performance. In
this work, only hot read data with retry operations are re-coded. To
minimize the re-coding cost, we can increase T𝑅. In the experiment,
107
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:01:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
DECC: Differential ECC for Read Performance Optimization on High-Density NAND Flash Memory
ASPDAC ’23, January 16–19, 2023, Tokyo, Japan
T𝑅is carefully studied to avoid the cost. Furthermore, we propose re-
coding data during internal operations, which can further minimize
the impact on the performance.
5
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
5.1
Experiment Setup
We use FEMU [9] to evaluate the benefit of DECC. 3D TLC flash
is used as the default storage medium, and the capacity is 16GB.
There are 8 channels, each channel has 2 chips, and each chip is
equipped with 2 planes. Table 2 shows the configuration and work-
load characteristics. The latency configurations in Table 2 are con-
sistent with the work in [17]. We use FIO to generate workloads and
conduct tests. Our tests use skewed synthetic workloads. It has been
shown that real-world workloads typically exhibit skewed access
patterns [4, 8, 13]. Therefore, we use Zipfian distributions [7] to
generate workloads with skewed access characteristics. They have
been widely used to study device characteristics [18, 24]. As shown
in Table 2, we denote these workloads as Zipf x/y, and we adjust the
skew factors of the Zipfian distribution such that x% of the generated
operations access y% of the LBA space for a given device size.
Table 2: Evaluated 3D TLC NAND Flash Memory Configuration
Parameters
Value
Workloads
Footprint(GB)
# of chips
16
Zipf 70/20
10
Chip size
1GB
Zipf 70/10
10
Plane size
512MB
Zipf 80/20
10
Block size
4MB
Zipf 80/10
10
Page size
16KB
Zipf 90/20
10
Read latency
127𝜇s [17]
Zipf 90/10
10
We use quasi-cyclic low-density parity checking (QC-LDPC) to
implement different code rates of ECC in a single circuit without
using a dedicated circuit for each code rate [22]. Figure 6 shows
the code rate sequence synthesized from the state-of-the-art AR4JA
code [3]. The x-axis represents the code rates and the y-axis repre-
sents the fault tolerance capability. For data reliability and overhead
consideration, we need to encode data with an appropriate code
rate using LDPC. Table 1 shows the adopted two ECCs of DECC,
including ECC𝑆with a 0.8 code rate and ECC𝑁with a 0.9 code rate.
-2.3
-2.1
-1.9
-1.7
-1.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
RBER (log10)
Code Rate
Figure 6: Tolerable RBER at each code rate. Data size is 16KB.
Considering the variation in the reliability, a probability-based
read retry model is adopted to simulate the read retry in real sce-
narios, which is used to evaluate the performance improvement by
DECC. The model includes the number of read retries and probabil-
ity distributions. We denote the model as retry x/y/z and generate
various probability distributions by adjusting the values of x, y and
z. One of the most important configurations is the parameters asso-
ciated with above model. Among them, the x,y and z represent the
probability of zero, one and two read retries, respectively. In this
work, the number of read retries is limited to 3. For performance
comparison, the hot read data encoded with ECC𝑆will reduce one
read retry under all retry models. Detail sensitive studies will be
presented in the following section.
5.2
Experimental Results
To evaluate the benefit of our proposed DECC scheme, three state-
of-the-art works are compared in the following experiments. (1)
Uniform code rate LDPC (UECC): UECC represents the approach of
adopting a uniform code rate LDPC for the data. UECC uses 0.9 code
rate LDPC as the ECC [17]. (2) Refresh [6]: Refresh represents hot
read data encoded using ECC𝑁after refresh when retry happens. (3)
Multi-ECC (MECC): MECC represents the adoption of multi-code
rate LDPC [2], which adopts different code rate LDPCs according
to the P/E cycles. In this paper, MECC uses 0.94 code rate and 0.9
code rate LDPC codes for performance comparison evaluation.
1) Performance: Figure 7 shows the normalized average IOPS
under different read retry probability models. The DECC achieves
optimized read performance under the three read retry probability
models. First, MECC has not benefit on IOPS due to that it adopts
a high code rate based LDPC, which is harmful to performance.
Second, the refresh scheme can improve the IOPS by 18.3%, 14.3%
and 11.8% for the three models, respectively. This is because, with
the refresh, the reliability of data can be recovered. Third, DECC
further improves the IOPS by 41.7%, 15.7% and 16.2% for the three
models, respectively. This is because DECC uses ECC𝑆when hot
read data with retry is identified. Different from that of the refresh,
DECC will significantly delay the retry with ECC𝑆, which is critical
for high-density NAND flash memory. In addition, DECC achieves
more benefit when the workloads are more skewed and the storage
is less retried. This is because DECC pays attention to the hot read
data and can reduce the retry more with less retry operations.
2) Energy consumption: To understand the difference in en-
ergy consumption between UECC and DECC, we have collected
their energy consumption, respectively. The power consumption con-
figuration is consistent with the work in [19]. Figure 8 shows the
comparison of energy consumption between UECC and DECC. The
results show several observations: 1) Compared to UECC, DECC
reduces power consumption by 32%. The reason is that DECC can
effectively reduce the number of read retries. This will not only opti-
mize performance, but also reduce energy consumption. 2) As the
skewness of the workload increases, DECC achieves better energy
consumption optimization. This is because the higher the skew of
the workload is, the more read retries DECC can reduce.
3) Re-coding cost: Re-coding cost refers to the ratio of back-
ground operations generated during the re-coding process to the
total number of host requests. Here, for each data re-coding, it will
cause one rewrite operation. Therefore, background operations dur-
ing re-coding are as large as the footprint of hot read data. To this
end, the re-coding cost is determined by the footprint of hot read data
and the number of host requests. Our proposed re-coding scheme
reduces the re-coding cost by considering only hot read data. Take
Zipf 80/20 as an example. The ratio between the footprint of the
hot read data and the amount of data is about 20%. The re-coding
108
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:01:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
ASPDAC ’23, January 16–19, 2023, Tokyo, Japan
Song and Lv, et al.
Zipf
70/20
Zipf
70/10
Zipf
80/20
Zipf
80/10
Zipf
90/20
Zipf
90/10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Normalized Average IOPS
UECC
MECC
Refresh
DECC
(a) Retry model 20/80/0
Zipf
70/20
Zipf
70/10
Zipf
80/20
Zipf
80/10
Zipf
90/20
Zipf
90/10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Normalized Average IOPS
UECC
MECC
Refresh
DECC
(b) Retry model 10/40/50
Zipf
70/20
Zipf
70/10
Zipf
80/20
Zipf
80/10
Zipf
90/20
Zipf
90/10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Normalized Average IOPS
UECC
MECC
Refresh
DECC
(c) Retry model 0/20/80
Figure 7: Normalized average IOPS in different read retry probability models.
Zipf
70/20
Zipf
70/10
Zipf
80/20
Zipf
80/10
Zipf
90/20
Zipf
90/10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Normalized Energy 
Consumption
UECC
DECC
Figure 8: Normalized energy consumption in Retry 20/80/0.
overhead of hot read data is 0.5% to 1%. Moreover, as the degree of
workload skew increases, the re-coding overhead decreases further.
Based on the above analysis, the overall re-coding cost is negligible.
To understand the relationship between re-coding cost and T𝑅,
the have done experiments by varying T𝑅from 2 to 16. Figure
9(a) shows re-coding cost with different T𝑅varies from 2 to 16.
The results show that as T𝑅increases, the re-coding cost decreases.
In this work, to avoid the high re-coding cost and achieve read
performance optimization, T𝑅was set to 4.
4) Sensitive study: Figure 9(b) shows the read performance op-
timization effect of DECC when the number of read retries varies
from 1 to 16. The results show that as the number of read retries in-
creases, the optimization of read performance decreases. In the Zipf
80/20 workload, the read performance optimization decreases from
50% for one read retry to 4% for sixteen read retries. Importantly,
DECC optimizes read performance over the lifetime of the data.
Zipf 80/20
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
澜濖澝
Improvement of IOPS
1
2
3
4
8
16
Zipf 80/20
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
澜濕澝
Normalized Re-coding Cost
2
3
4
5
8
16
Figure 9: (a)Re-coding cost with different T𝑅and (b)IOPS im-
provement by different number of read retries.
6
CONCLUSION
This work proposes a differential ECC (DECC), which takes differ-
ent strength ECCs for data with different access characteristics to
improve the read performance of high-density flash memory. The
read performance is optimized by encoding the hot read data with
strong ECCs through a data re-coding scheme. We use workloads
with different skew levels to evaluate the proposed DECC scheme.
The experimental results show that DECC achieves significantly read
performance optimization. In future work, we will further perform
relevant tests on 3D QLC NAND flash to verify the performance of
DECC. Additional differential ECC designs will also be conducted
to further optimize read performance.
REFERENCES
[1] Yu Cai and Saugata Ghose et al. 2017. Error Characterization, Mitigation, and
Recovery in Flash-Memory-Based Solid-State Drives. Proc. IEEE 105, 9 (2017).
[2] Yu Cai and Yunxiang Wu et al. 2018. Error correction code (ECC) selection using
probability density functions of error correction capability in storage controllers
with multiple error correction codes. US Patent 10,153,782.
[3] Adrien Cassagne and Olivier Hartmann et al. 2019. Aff3ct: A fast forward error
correction toolbox! SoftwareX 10 (2019).
[4] L. Cherkasova and Gupta Minaxi et al. 2004. Analysis of enterprise media
server workloads: access patterns, locality, content evolution, and rates of change.
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 12, 5 (2004).
[5] Guiqiang Dong and Ningde Xie et al. 2010. On the use of soft-decision error-
correction codes in NAND flash memory. IEEE TCS 58, 2 (2010).
[6] Yajuan Du and Qiao Li et al. 2017. Reducing LDPC soft sensing latency by
lightweight data refresh for flash read performance improvement. In DAC.
[7] MW Green. 1986. Pareto Distributions.
[8] Sang-Won Lee and Bongki Moon et al. 2008. A Case for Flash Memory Ssd in
Enterprise Database Applications. In ACM SIGMOD.
[9] Huaicheng Li and Mingzhe Hao et al. 2018. The {CASE} of {FEMU}: Cheap,
accurate, scalable and extensible flash emulator. In FAST 18.
[10] Qiao Li and Liang Shi et al. 2017. Improving LDPC performance via asymmetric
sensing level placement on flash memory. In ASP-DAC.
[11] Qiao Li and Liang Shi et al. 2020. Process Variation Aware Read Performance Im-
provement for LDPC-Based nand Flash Memory. IEEE Transactions on Reliability
69, 1 (2020).
[12] Qiao Li and Min Ye et al. 2020. Shaving Retries with Sentinels for Fast Read over
High-Density 3D Flash. In MICRO.
[13] Songbin Liu and Xiaomeng Huang et al. 2013. Understanding Data Characteristics
and Access Patterns in a Cloud Storage System. In CCGrid.
[14] Yixin Luo and Saugata Ghose et al. 2018. Improving 3D NAND flash memory
lifetime by tolerating early retention loss and process variation. ACM on MACS 2,
3 (2018).
[15] Yina Lv and Liang Shi et al. 2020. Latency Variation Aware Read Performance
Optimization on 3D High Density NAND Flash Memory. In GLSVLSI.
[16] Nikolaos Papandreou and Haralampos Pozidis et al. 2019. Characterization and
analysis of bit errors in 3D TLC NAND flash memory. In IEEE IRPS.
[17] Jisung Park and Myungsuk Kim et al. 2021. Reducing Solid-State Drive Read
Latency by Optimizing Read-Retry. In ASPLOS.
[18] Roman Pletka and Ioannis Koltsidas et al. 2018. Management of next-generation
NAND flash to achieve enterprise-level endurance and latency targets. ACM TOS
14, 4 (2018).
[19] Shigui Qi and Dan Feng et al. 2015. A New Solution Based on Multi-rate LDPC
for Flash Memory to Reduce ECC Redundancy. In IEEE ISPA, Vol. 1.
[20] Shigui Qi and Dan Feng et al. 2017. CDF-LDPC: A New Error Correction Method
for SSD to Improve the Read Performance. ACM Trans. Storage 13, 1 (2017).
[21] Youngseop Shim and Myungsuk Kim et al. 2019. Exploiting Process Similarity
of 3D Flash Memory for High Performance SSDs. In MICRO. 13 pages.
[22] Yang Sun and Marjan Karkooti et al. 2007. VLSI decoder architecture for high
throughput, variable block-size and multi-rate LDPC codes. In IEEE ISCS.
[23] Guanying Wu and Xubin He et al. 2013. Exploiting Workload Dynamics to
Improve SSD Read Latency via Differentiated Error Correction Codes. ACM
Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst. 18, 4 (2013).
[24] Yue Yang and Jianwen Zhu et al. 2016. Write skew and zipf distribution: Evidence
and implications. ACM TOS 12, 4 (2016).
[25] Kai Zhao and Wenzhe Zhao et al. 2013. LDPC-in-SSD: Making Advanced Error
Correction Codes Work Effectively in Solid State Drives. In FAST.
109
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:01:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
