434

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2023

Tree-Search Techniques for Joint Iterative Compressive Sensing and LDPC Decoding
in Wireless Sensor Networks
Jue Chen , Tsang-Yi Wang , Member, IEEE, Jwo-Yuh Wu , Member, IEEE, Chih-Peng Li , Fellow, IEEE, Soon Xin Ng , Senior Member, IEEE,
Robert G. Maunder , Senior Member, IEEE, and Lajos Hanzo , Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract —Novel techniques are conceived for joint compressive sensing (CS) and low-density parity check (LDPC) coding in wireless sensor networks (WSNs), namely, a soft-input soft-output (SISO) tree search sphere decoding (SD) technique and an SISO Hamming distance (HD)-based solution. Factor graphs are utilized to describe the connectivity between the signals and sensors, as well as with the LDPC codes. In the fusion center (FC), the factor graphs may be used for iterative joint LDPC-CS decoding in order to recover the signals observed. However, the CS decoder of the FC suffers from high complexity if the exhaustive Maximum A Posteriori (e-MAP) technique is employed, which considers all possible combinations of source signals detected by each of the associated sensors. Hence, in the proposed SD and HD schemes, only the more likely combinations of source signals are tested for reducing the CS decoding complexity. More specifically, a tree search technique is used in the first step to find the most likely combination of source signal values. Then, in the second step, the proposed SD continues the tree search to find a set of alternative hypotheses. This facilitates the generation of high-quality extrinsic information, which may be iteratively exchanged with the LDPC decoder. By contrast, in the HD approach, the second step obtains the alternative hypotheses within a certain HD of the most likely source signal combination. Both our BLock Error Rate (BLER) results and EXtrinsic Information Transfer (EXIT) charts show that the proposed SD and HD techniques approach the performance of the full-search e-MAP approach at a significantly reduced complexity. In particular, we show that the e-MAP solution is about 56 times more complex than the SD approach and around 210 times more complex than the HD approach. Compared to a separate source-channel coding (SSCC) hard information benchmarker, the proposed SISO schemes improve the decoding performance by about 1.7 dB. Furthermore, the SISO schemes allow the iterations inside the CS decoding to eliminate the error floors and obtain a further 2.45-dB gain.
Index Terms— Compressive sensing (CS), EXtrinsic Information Transfer (EXIT) charts, factor graph, Hamming distance (HD) technique, joint source-channel coding (JSCC), low-density parity check (LDPC) coding, sphere decoding (SD), tree search.

Manuscript received 1 November 2022; accepted 8 November 2022. Date of publication 28 November 2022; date of current version 29 December 2022. The work of Tsang-Yi Wang was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) of Taiwan under Grant 110-2221-E110-021. The work of Jwo-Yuh Wu was supported in part by the MOST of Taiwan under Grant MOST 108-2221-E-009-025 MY3 and Grant MOST 110-2634-F-009-025, in part by the Higher Education Sprout Project of the National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University and the Ministry of Education of Taiwan, and in part by the MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare. The work of Chih-Peng Li was supported in part by the MOST of Taiwan under Grant MOST 1082218-E-110-014 and Grant MOST 109-2218-E-110-006. The work of Lajos Hanzo was supported in part by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council under Project EP/P034284/1 and Project EP/P003990/1 (COALESCE), and in part by the European Research Council’s Advanced Fellow Grant QuantCom under Grant 789028. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was Prof. Pierluigi Salvo Rossi. (Corresponding author: Lajos Hanzo.)
Please see the Acknowledgment section of this article for the author affiliations.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSEN.2022.3221663

BLER CNs CND CS e-MAP EXIT FC HD i.i.d. JSCC LDPC LLRs MI QPSK SD SISO

NOMENCLATURE BLock Error Rate. Check nodes. Check node decoder. Compressive Sensing. exhaustive Maximum A Posteriori. EXtrinsic Information Transfer. Fusion center. Hamming distance. Independent identically distributed. Joint source-channel coding. Low-density parity check. Logarithmic-likelihood ratios. Mutual information. Quadrature phase shift keying. Sphere decoding. Soft-input soft-output.

1558-1748 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licensed useSlimeeitehdtttpos: :Y//ownwsewi .Uieneive. .Doorgw/npluoabdliecdatoionnJsu/nrieg2h4ts,2/i0n2d6eaxt.h1t3m:5l8f:o5r2 mUToCrefrionmforIEmEaEtioXnp.lore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: TREE-SEARCH TECHNIQUES FOR JOINT ITERATIVE CS AND LDPC DECODING IN WSNs

435

SNs SND SSCC TSs VN VND

Sensor nodes. Sensor node decoder. Separate source-channel coding. Time slots. Variable node. Variable node decoder.

I. INTRODUCTION
S HANNON’S source-channel separation theorem [1] proves that there is no disadvantage in separating source coding from channel coding [2] under certain idealized circumstances. More specifically, Shannon shows that near-capacity communication does not require the source and channel coding to be performed jointly, provided that the delay and complexity are not limited. However, in finite block length transmission over nonstationary channels, JSCC (for convenience, all acronyms used in this article have been summarized in Nomenclature) has been shown to offer significantly improved coding gain [3] over SSCC when relying on limited complexity. More explicitly, JSCC uses source coding to compress a source signal by removing the uncontrollable source redundancy, while channel coding is employed to improve the error correction performance by adding carefully controlled redundancy before transmission [4], where the reduction and addition of redundancy are performed jointly between these two processes.
In particular, JSCC has been demonstrated to play a beneficial role in wireless sensor networks (WSNs) [5] to alleviate the problems of constrained energy [6], [7], [8], as well as unreliable communication channels [9], [10]. CS technology has been widely adopted in WSNs to solve energy-constrained problems. Li et al. [11] use CS in WSN in the presence of an eavesdropper. They propose a technique to maintain secrecy in the presence of an eavesdropper and achieve an excellent signal detection performance. Mohammadi et al. [12] focus their attention on the distributed detection problem of a localized phenomenon of interest resulting in sparse signals at each sensor, where CS and quantization are employed at each sensor. Recently, the combination of JSCC and CS has received particular attention in the literature on WSNs. Chen et al. [13] examine the tradeoff between the required transmission energy and the quality of the recovered signals in a WSN that employs a CS-coded JSCC scheme. Their results show that the CS technique is robust to both channel fading and noise. In [14], CS was used for source coding and linear network coding for channel coding, in order to recover the signal within a tolerance distortion level. In both [13] and [14], a large amount of traffic is generated by each of the N sensors, which can only be reduced moderately by the compression performed in each sensor [15]. More specifically, a set of N signals may be compressed into a set of M (M < N) observations made by a set of M sensors if only K out of N signals are activated at a time, which avoids an excessive amount of network traffic. Furthermore, WSNs typically rely on hostile channels, motivating the application of channel coding to protect the signals during transmission. In particular, LDPC codes are widely used in CS-coded JSCC schemes [16], [17], as a benefit of their excellent performance.

SISO techniques constitute the core of iterative decoding [18]. In JSCC schemes employing SISO techniques for the concatenated source and channel code [19], iterative joint source-channel decoding [20], [21] may be used for significantly improving the performance of hard decoding [22] for SSCC schemes. In the case of an SISO decoder used for CS, an approximate MAP decoder may be employed for discovering the presence/absence of the association between the signals and sensors, as well as for inferring the source statistics [23]. The e-MAP technique is capable of reliably inferring the specific association of N signals with M sensors, and it iteratively exchanges its soft values with an LDPC decoder. However, the MAP decoder suffers from high complexity when considering all possible associations between sensors and signals [24], which will be referring to the e-MAP in this article. To elaborate further, there may be many connected signals for each sensor with many possible combinations of values, which leads to a potentially excessive complexity upon considering every possible combination in the e-MAP decoder.
Against this background, we propose a pair of novel techniques for reducing the complexity of SISO CS decoding in the iterative JSCC receiver. SD is typically used for reducing the complexity of signal detection in order to solve minimum Euclidean distance problems in WSNs [25], [26]. Knoop et al. [25] propose an SD algorithm that performs maximum-likelihood decoding based on an extended distance metric. In [26], channel-quality-aware decision fusion rules are conceived for MIMO systems, and a generalized SD is employed for circumventing the exponentially escalating complexity. In this treatise, we also employ the SD technique for reducing the decoding complexity imposed by searching for the most likely candidates. However, in our scheme, we search for the most likely candidates by directly relying on the node metrics calculated using LLRs rather than on the node metrics calculated using the Euclidean distance [25], [26]. More specifically, we conceive SD- and HD-based techniques to search for the most likely combination of the source signal and associated sensor value, which contains not only the most likely combination but also the most likely alternative hypotheses. Explicitly, these alternative hypotheses are important for generating reliable extrinsic information, which may then be iteratively exchanged with the concatenated channel decoder. We commence by using a tree search to find the most likely combination of the source signal and associated sensor value based on the prior knowledge about the sparsity level and presence/absence of association between signals and sensors, as well as a priori information provided by the concatenated channel decoder. Following this, the SD finds the alternative hypotheses by continuing the tree search, while the HD-based technique finds the alternative hypotheses by considering the HD between the alternative hypotheses and the most likely combination. In this way, we avoid traversing all possible combinations and significantly reduce the complexity of CS decoding. We boldly and explicitly contrast our contributions to the state of the art in Table I and detail them in the following.
1) We reduce the complexity of SISO CS decoding by using a tree search to find the most likely combination of the source signal and associated sensor values

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

436

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2023

Fig. 1. Block diagram illustrating the relationship between signals, sensors, and the FC.

TABLE I CONTRASTING OUR CONTRIBUTION TO THE STATE OF THE ART
before using the SD to find the set of likely alternative hypotheses in order to glean high-quality extrinsic information, which can be iteratively exchanged with the concatenated channel decoder. Unlike the traditional SD routinely used for JSCC or MIMO detection based on the distance between adjacent points [27], [28], [29], the proposed scheme performs tree search-based SD relying on the input LLRs. Furthermore, our scheme exploits the additional constraints imposed by the sparsity upper bound K and the presence/absence of connectivity between the source signals and sensors, which makes the application of SD a challenge. We demonstrate that the proposed SD reduces the SISO CS decoding complexity by a factor of 56 compared to the e-MAP approach. 2) Furthermore, as a complement to the SD used for finding alternative hypotheses, we also conceive an HD-based technique. More specifically, all combinations of the source signal and the associated sensor values within a certain HD of the most likely combination are considered alternative hypotheses. Our results show that the proposed HD technique approaches the error rate of the e-MAP at a complexity, which is about 210 times lower. 3) We provide the EXIT chart-based characterization of the proposed solutions. In this way, we characterize the

iterative exchange of extrinsic information between the CS decoder and the concatenated channel decoder, and show that both the proposed SD and HD techniques approach the performance of the e-MAP approach. The rest of this article is organized as follows. A toplevel description of the system model and the iterative joint LDPC-CS decoder is provided in Section II. Then, the SD approach and HD techniques are introduced in Section III. Section IV characterizes the EXIT functions and decoding trajectory of the proposed scheme, before our complexity analysis in Section V. Our simulation results are provided in Section VI before offering our conclusions in Section VII. Throughout this article, the following notations are used: A, a, and A are matrix, vector, and scalar; Ai is the i th matrix among all matrices; ai is the i th row of matrix A; ai, j is the j th element of vector ai ; a˜ , a˜ a, a˜ e are LLR, a priori LLR, and extrinsic LLR; a˜i→ j is LLR from the i th node to the j th node; aˆ is the estimated value of a; and AT is the transpose.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
This section begins by describing the structure of the proposed system model in Section II-A, before the flow of the iterative joint LDPC-CS decoding is discussed in Section II-B.
A. Top-Level Description of the Proposed System Model
The proposed system model is shown in Fig. 1. The N VNs in Fig. 1 represent N signals, where each VN Vn (n ∈ [1, N]) can be considered to be a random variable, adopting a vector xn ∈ {0, 1}1×T of T nonequiprobable binary values across T TSs. Here, the binary signal values are sparse, with only K N of the N signals in each TS adopting a value of 1, with all of the other N − K binary values adopting a value of 0. In this treatise, we assume that the sparsity upper bound K , 1 ≤ K ≤ K , is prior knowledge available at the FC. In this context, two scenarios are considered: the first one is when the true sparsity K = K is known a priori to the FC and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: TREE-SEARCH TECHNIQUES FOR JOINT ITERATIVE CS AND LDPC DECODING IN WSNs

437

the other is when the true sparsity K is unknown to the FC, but the upper bound of the sparsity K , 1 ≤ K ≤ K , is known to the FC. In a practical CS-based WSN, the residual-based algorithms of [30] may be used either for directly estimating the sparsity or its upper bound during the training phase in the FC [30]. The binary value of the nth signal in the tth TS is represented by the notation xn,t , where n ∈ [1, N] and t ∈ [1, T ], allowing the representation of the nth signal vector as xn = [xn,1, . . . , xn,T ].
The proposed system model adopts M sensors, which form the WSN to observe the N signals, where the sparsity upper bound K of the system is exploited to facilitate M < N. Each sensor is represented by the notation Sm , where m ∈ [1, M], and is used for simultaneously observing several signals. In the proposed system model, the association between the signals and sensors is chosen randomly, while it is exemplified by the dashed lines in the factor graph of Fig. 1. Here, the edges of the factor graph are characterized by the sensing matrix  ∈ {0, 1}M×N , which is assumed to be prior knowledge available at the FC. Here, the nth column of the sensing matrix represents the association of the nth signal, while the mth row represents the association of the mth sensor. More specifically, a value of 1 in the sensing matrix indicates the association between the nth signal, n = 1, . . . , N, and the mth sensor, m = 1, . . . , M, while a value of 0 indicates no association. In the proposed system model, each sensor may observe both different numbers of signals and different combinations of the signals, where the degree of each sensor identifies the number of connected signals that it observes, corresponding to the number of 1 in each row of . Then, the set of degrees may be stored in a vector d = [d1, . . . , dm, . . . , dM ]T . However, in the proposed system model, the number of sensors used for observing each signal is a fixed value Ks, which means that the number of 1 in each column of  is fixed to Ks . Furthermore, the randomly selected connectivity between signals and sensors is assumed to be time-invariant across the T TSs. The proposed scheme may be applied in a real-life application of noninvasive wildlife monitoring in nature habitat. For example, we may consider a case where there are K wild animals living in a habitat, which has been divided into N number of 1 m2 tiles, wherein M microphones have been installed throughout the habitat to detect the actions of wild animals. Each microphone can detect wild animal activity within several neighboring tiles. In the case where we know that K wild animals live in the habitat, we will know that exactly K tiles will be occupied in any TS, and hence, these microphones allow us to track wild animals in a noninvasive manner.
In the proposed system model, the sensors perform an OR function to combine the binary values provided by the set of connected signals. Explicitly, a sensor outputs a binary value of 0 if all connected signals provide the value of 0 at a particular TS and a sensor output a value of 1 otherwise. In this way, the N binary signals provided in each TS are compressed to M binary observations provided by the M sensors. More specifically, the observation of the mth sensor is a binary vector ym = [ym,1, . . . , ym,T ] comprising T observations across the T TSs. Following this, each of the M

sensors processes its vector of observations ym using an LDPC encoder [31] having a parity check matrix H ∈ {0, 1}W ×U and a coding rate R = (T /E) in order to generate the encoded bit sequence am = [am,1, . . . , am,U ] having a length U . Then, rate matching adjusts the encoded bit sequence length to E. Afterward, QPSK modulation is performed individually for each pair of encoded bits before transmission in order to obtain the complex vector bm ∈ C1×(E/2). Here, the symbol energy Es is normalized to 1.
The complex vector bm is transmitted over an AWGN channel in order to obtain the received complex vector cm, while the components of the AWGN are zero-mean, i.i.d. complex Gaussian random variables with variance N0. Hence, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is given by (Es/N0). Soft demodulation for QPSK [32] and rate dematching are performed upon the received signal cm in order to obtain the channel LLRs a˜ m = [a˜m,1, . . . , a˜m,E ], which are forwarded to the FC as inputs of the iterative joint LDPC-CS decoder detailed in Section II-B.
B. Top-Level Description of the Proposed Iterative Joint LDPC-CS Decoding Scheme
The iterative joint LDPC-CS decoding block of Fig. 1 is comprised of the factor graphs shown in Fig. 2. These factor graphs are comprised of many CNs, VNs, and SNs. Algorithm 1 describes the operation of these various nodes during the iterative joint LDPC-CS decoding process. The function of the SNs will be introduced in Section III, while the operations of the CNs and VNs are described in [33].
The factor graphs of Fig. 2 include both LDPC decoder and CS decoding. Here, the LDPC decoder is comprised of the VND I (VNDI) and CND, having W VNs and U CNs in each layer. The number of LDPC decoding layers is equal to the number of sensors M, where each layer represents the CS decoder of the corresponding sensor. More specifically, the CNs and VNs in the same layer work together, while the M layers are operated in parallel but not directly together, as shown in Fig. 2. Similar to LDPC decoding, CS decoding comprises the SND and VND II (VNDII), where the former has M SNs in each of the T layers, while the latter has N VNs in each layer. To elaborate further, each layer of CS decoding considers one TS, which is in contrast to LDPC decoding, where each layer considers one sensor. This creates a time/sensor grade, which allows the TSs of the CS decoding to indirectly help each other via the sensors of the LDPC decoder and vice versa. More specifically, the SNs and VNs II in the same layer work together directly, while those of different layers work in parallel but without direct interaction, as shown in Fig. 2.
The input of the mth, m ∈ [1, M] layer in the LDPC decoder is the rate-dematched channel LLRs a˜ m, which is generated, as discussed in Section II-A and shown in Fig. 1. During iterative joint LDPC-CS decoding, the mth layer can also take input from the CS decoder, which provides a priori LLRs y˜ am . Each VN processes the LLRs gleaned from its connected CNs, CS decoding SNs, and channel LLRs and then passes the extrinsic LLRs μ˜ e to its connected CNs. Following this, each CN is operated, and extrinsic LLRs ν˜ e are passed to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

438

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2023

Fig. 2. Factor graph to show the iterative exchange of LLRs between VNDI, CN decoder for LDPC decoding, SN, and VNDII for CS decoding.

the connected VNs. Here, we add subscripts to the LLRs within the LDPC decoder and the CS decoder to represent the connectivity of the factor graph edge upon which the LLR is exchanged. For example, μ˜ Ue →1 represents an extrinsic LLR being exchanged from the U th VN I to the first CN. The connectivity of VNs and CNs in each layer depends on the factor graph adopted by the particular LDPC coding standard, with all layers having the same connectivity. In this work, we employ the 3GPP 5G NR LDPC code base graph (BG) 2 [31]. Following the completion of iLDPC number of iterations between the VNDI and CND in the LDPC decoder, the extrinsic LLRs Y˜ e generated by the VNDI comprise all extrinsic LLRs gleaned from all VNs I in the M layers, which are forwarded to the connected SNs. The subscripts of the LLRs exchanged between the LDPC and CS decoder represent the layers they belong to. For instance, y˜Me →3 represents an extrinsic LLR passed from the Mth layer in the LDPC decoder to the third layer of the CS decoder. The connectivity between the CS decoding SNs and VNs I is based on the layers that they belong to. More specifically, in the LDPC decoder, uth, u ∈ [1, T ] VN I in the mth, m ∈ [1, M] layer connects to the mth sensor in the tth layer of the CS decoder, where we have u = t. The number U of VNs in the VNDI is typically higher than T since the encoded LDPC bits comprise both systematic bits and parity bits. However, the CS decoder can only provide extrinsic information pertaining to the T systematic bits, and hence, it is not connected to the U − T VNs that characterize parity bits.

The input of the tth, t ∈ [1, T ] layer in the CS decoder is constituted by a priori LLRs z˜at provided by the LDPC decoder for the SNs. Furthermore, CS decoding also benefits
from a priori knowledge of the probability of each compressed signal ym , m = 1, . . . , M having the value 0, where this knowledge is represented by the LLRs l = [l1, . . . , lM ], which are added to a priori LLRs z˜ta provided by the LDPC decoder, as shown in Fig. 2. To elaborate further, the LLRs representing
the probability that the mth compressed signal ym adopts the binary value 0 is given by lm = log (Pm /1 − Pm ), where Pm = (P0)dm and P0 is the probability of occurrence of 0 in each TS. Further still, mth, m = 1, . . . , M, SN in the tth layer takes a priori LLR inputs γ˜ a from the connected
VNs II of the CS decoder. Following this, the SN processes z˜ma →t , γ˜ a in order to generate the extrinsic LLRs γ˜ e, which are passed to its connected VNs II. In response, each VN II generates the extrinsic LLRs λ˜ e, which are then passed back
to the SNs, where the SNs and the VNs II iterate over iC S iterations, as shown in Algorithm 1. The connectivity between
the SNs and VNs II in each layer mirrors the connectivity
between the signals and sensors in Fig. 1. Following the
completion of these iterations, all SNs in all T layers generate the extrinsic LLR Z˜ e, which are passed back to the LDPC decoder as a priori LLRs Y˜ a. Like the VNs I, the VNs II
operate according to [33]. By contrast, the operations of the
SNs are detailed in Section III-A.
After completing iLDPC−CS iterations between the LDPC and CS decoder, all VNs II in the CS decoder output

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: TREE-SEARCH TECHNIQUES FOR JOINT ITERATIVE CS AND LDPC DECODING IN WSNs

439

a posteriori LLRs ˜ p. Finally, SSCC hard decisions are made in order to obtain the estimated signals Xˆ = [xˆ 1, . . . , xˆ N ]T . Here, a posteriori LLR λ˜ p of a VN II is obtained by adding up all a priori LLRs λ˜ a arriving from its connected SNs.
Then, the final decision is made by exploiting the knowledge
that there are K signals having a binary value of 1 in each of the T TSs. Accordingly, a posteriori LLRs λ˜ tp in the tth, t = 1, . . . , T TS are sorted in decreasing order of values,
and those that have the K highest values are identified as
being the ones most likely to have binary values of 1 in each of
the T TSs.
As shown in Algorithm 1, each of the iLDPC−CS outer iterations between the LDPC and CS decoder comprises
iLDPC inner iterations and iCS inner iterations for the LDPC and CS decoders, respectively. Algorithm 1 relies on the signal combination matrices [Q1, . . . , QM ], which will be detailed in Section III. In the initialization of the LDPC decoder during the outer iterations, a priori LLRs Y˜ a provided by the CS decoder are set to zero, before the probability knowledge l = [l1, l2, . . . , lM ] is added. Furthermore, a priori LLRs M˜ a provided by the CND for the VNDI are reset to zero during the initialization of the LDPC decoder during each outer iteration. Similarly, a priori LLRs ˜ a forwarded by the VNDII to the SND are reset to zero

Algorithm 1 Iterative Joint LDPC-CS Decoding

Algorithm

Input: H, K , d = [d1, d2, . . . , dM ]T , i L D PC , iC S, i L D PC−C S, N, M, T , , Q1, . . . , QM , l = [l1, . . . , lM ]T , channel LLRs: a˜ 1,…,a˜ M
Output: Estimated binary signals xˆ 1, . . . , xˆ N 1 for i = 1 to i L D PC−C S do

2 Initialization for LDPC decoding;

3 VNDI update in the LDPC decoding;

4 for i i = 1 to i L D PC do

5

CND update in the LDPC decoding;

6

VNDI update in the LDPC decoding;

7 end

8 Initialization for CS decoding;

9 SND update in the CS decoding;

10 for j j = 1 to iC S do

11

VNDII update in the CS decoding;

12

SND update in the CS decoding;

13 end

14 end

15 Perform final decision to obtain the estimated binary signal xˆ 1, . . . , xˆ N ;

III. PROPOSED SD APPROACH AND HD APPROACH

during the initialization of the CS decoder during each outer In this section, the e-MAP technique of the SN update in

iteration.

the SND of the CS decoder is introduced in Section III-A,

Here, iterative joint LDPC-CS decoding employs SISO while the proposed SD and HD solutions are discussed in

decoding for the iterative exchange of extrinsic LLRs. By con- Section III-B.

trast, the SSCC benchmarker employs hard information decoding components and separate LDPC-CS decoding. In this benchmarker, the mth LDPC decoder converts the channel LLRs a˜ m into hard information bits, which are forwarded to the SNs of the CS decoder. The SNs then provide votes for their connected VNs in VNDII, where the votes express this opinion concerning the value gleaned from the connected VNs in VNDI and may be used for determining whether the corresponding signals have values of 1 in each of the T TSs. More specifically, an SN forwards a vote of 1 to its connected VNs in VNDII if it judges that the corresponding signal should adopt the binary value 1, otherwise a value of 0. Then, each VN in
VNDII selects a value of 1 for its corresponding signal if all of the connected SNs vote for this value. To elaborate further,

A. e-MAP Approach

In the e-MAP approach, each SN in the SND converts a priori LLRs γ˜ a and z˜a into the extrinsic γ˜ e LLRs by

considering all possible combinations of signal values for all connected signals. Let us illustrate this using an example based

on the SN S2 in Fig. 2 during the tth TS. As seen in Fig. 2,

S2 is connected to the second, third, fourth, and fifth VNs II,

and it also connects to the tth VN I in the second layer of the

LDPC decoder. The input LLRs are inferred from VII2 (γ˜2a→2),

VII3 (γ˜3a→2 the signals,

)a,nVdIVI4I2(γ˜(4az˜→ta→2)2,)ainsdprVoIvIi5de(γd˜5ab→y2t)h, ecoLrDrePspCodnedcinogdetor.

The target of the SN S2 is to calculate the extrinsic LLRs

(z˜2e→t , γ˜2e→2, γ˜2e→3, γ˜2e→4, and γ˜2e→5) for the connected VN I

and VNs II.

each VN in VNDII counts the number of votes for a binary In this example, we assume a sparsity upper bound of value of 1 provided by its connected sensors. If the count is K = 2 so that K = 2 of the N signals may have the

equal to the degree of the VN in VNDII, then it considers binary value of 1 in each of the T TSs with all other signals

the corresponding signal to have a value of 1. By contrast, adopting the value 0 in this particular TS. In this example,

in the SSCC hard information benchmarker, there is no iter- we assume that the true sparsity K = K , as well as signals

ative information exchange either within the CS decoder or corresponding to the VNs V3 and V5, has values of 1. The between the CS and LDPC decoders. Hence, the complexity possible combinations of connected signal values can be listed of CS decoding using the SSCC hard information approach is based on the prior knowledge of the node connectivity  and

quantified by

the sparsity upper bound K in the FC. For S2 of Fig. 2, the matrix of possible combinations can be expressed as

CChaSrd = N (M − 1) T .

(1)

The output of the decoder is a vector of estimated values xˆ n = [xˆn,1, . . . , xˆn,T ] across each signal n ∈ [1, N] for all T TSs for both the proposed SISO schemes and the SSCC

VI2 ⎛ 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 ⎞

VII2 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0

Qe2-MAP =

VII3 VII4

⎝⎜⎜

0 0

0 0

0 1

1 0

0 0

0 0

0 1

1 0

1 0

1 1

0 1

⎠⎟⎟.

VII5 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1

hard information benchmarker.

(2)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

440

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2023

Each column in the brackets represents a possible combination of the associated signal values, where the first bit of each combination represents the predicted value of VII2 in this particular combination, while the second, third, and fourth bits correspond to VII3, VII4, and VII5, respectively, in this example. The values at the top-line outside the brackets are stored in a row vector denoted by g2, and they correspond to the specific values of VI2, which are obtained by performing the OR function that describes the operation of the SNs on the corresponding combinations. The first column represents the particular combination, where all four connected VNs II have zero values, and hence, the predicted value from VI2 is 0. However, the combination represented by the second column predicts that VII5 has a value of 1; VII2, VII3, and VII4 all have zero values, in which case VI2 has 1. Because the sparsity upper bound K is prior knowledge in the FC, no combination has a number of 1 values higher than K . In this example, the true combination is [0 1 0 1]T , and the true value of VI2 is 1. Since the connectivity  of the factor graph does not vary across the T TSs, the combinations matrix Q corresponding to each SN does not change in this period, but the true combination of each SN may be expected to change in different TSs. While this example is fairly trivial, the number of possible combinations can be large, where the number of possible combinations for the mth SN Sm may be quantified as

min{K ,dm}
Pme-MAP =

dm k

.

(3)

k=0

According to its combination matrix Qm, the mth SN preforms the decoding. First, the probabilities in the logarithmic domain of for the set of Pme-MAP combination are calculated as

dm
ηm =
i =1

Qme-MAP (i, :) − 1

γ˜

a m

(i

)

+

gm − 1

z˜ma →t (4)

where ηm is a probability vector of length of Pme-MAP, while 1 vectors have the length of Pme-MAP, with all elements set to 1.

The notation | · | represents the elementwise absolute values of

a

vector.

Here,

γ˜

a m

is

a

column

vector

that

contains

all

a

priori

LLRs provided by the VNs II connected to the SN Sm , while

z˜

a m→t

=

y˜me →t

is

a

priori

LLR

provided

by

the

VN

I

connected

in the tth TS, and is the dot product.

The probabilities of the Pme-MAP combinations are then exploited for calculating the extrinsic LLRs γ˜ e of the SN Sm .

More specifically, the extrinsic LLR forwarded from the Sm

to its kth (k ∈ [1, dm]) connected VN II VIIn is calculated as

γ˜me →n = max ηm

Q

e-MAP m

(k,

:)

=

0

− max ηm Qme-MAP (k, :) = 1

− γ˜na→m (5)

where ηm ( Qem-MAP(k, :) = 0) represents the set of probabilities associated with the corresponding combinations having 0 values in the kth row, and ηm ( Qem-MAP(k, :) = 1) is the set of probabilities associated with the corresponding combinations

having 1 values in the kth row. Here, γ˜na→m is a priori LLR provided by the nth VN II for the SN Sm in the tth TS.
Similarly, the extrinsic LLR provided by Sm for its con-
nected VN I in the tth TS is calculated as

z˜te→m = ηm (gm = 0) − max ηm gm = 1 − z˜ma →t (6)

where z˜ma →t is a priori LLR provided for Sm by its connected VN I in the tth TS.

The complexity of each SN Sm employing the e-MAP approach is quantified in terms of the number of addition and

max calculations formulated as

min{K ,dm}

C

e−M Sm

A

P

=

2dm

×

Pme−M AP

−

k

dm k

.

(7)

k=0

B. Proposed Approaches
As shown by the binomial coefficients in (3) and (7), the number of possible combinations escalates rapidly with the sparsity upper bound K and the degree dm of the mth sensor, which leads to an excessive the complexity for the e-MAP approach. Hence, this section introduces the proposed SD and HD techniques, which aim for pruning the combination matrix Q of the e-MAP approach in order to reduce the associated complexity. This is achieved by generating a combination matrix, which contains only the more likely combinations and abandons the less likely ones. More specifically, the pruned combination matrix contains the single most likely combination, which is identified by using a tree search, as well as several alternative hypotheses having high likelihoods, which are necessary for obtaining high-quality extrinsic LLRs ˜ e and Z˜ e. The rest of this section is organized as follows. Section III-B.1 introduces a first step that is common for both the proposed SD and HD approaches, which identifies the most likely combination using a tree search. Section III-B.2 then elaborates further on the SD approach, while Section III-B.3 relies on Section III-B.1 to elaborate further on the HD approach.
1) Tree Search: Algorithm 2 shows the flow of search for the most likely combination using a tree search. Fig. 3 illustrates a specific example of tree search in a particular TS based on the example of S2 in Fig. 2, which has a degree of 4, and it is connected to the second, third, fourth, and fifth VNs II of Fig. 2, where the sparsity upper bound is K = 2. The proposed method of searching for the most likely combination is based only on a priori LLRs arriving from VNs II. A priori LLR z˜a provided by the VN I is not considered in the tree search because it only has to be used when considering the all-zero combination during the calculation of the extrinsic LLRs z˜e. Apart from the all-zero combination, all other combinations have binary values 1 for the values gm predicted from the LDPC decoder. Since the alternative hypothesis of the bits gm is required, the all-zero combination may be considered as a special case and always be included in the pruned combination matrix, as will be detailed in Sections III-B.2 and III-B.3. Owing to this, the bit corresponding to the LDPC decoding does not have to be considered in the tree search and may be removed in order to reduce the associated complexity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: TREE-SEARCH TECHNIQUES FOR JOINT ITERATIVE CS AND LDPC DECODING IN WSNs

441

Fig. 3. Example of the proposed SD approach based on S2 in Fig. 2, where [0 1 0 1]T is the most likely combination. Here, transitions to the left imply “0” values, while transitions to the right imply “1” values. The values alongside each edge in the tree are the metrics of the paths, while the
values in the circles are the metrics of each node, and the numbers next to the circles are the order that each node is traversed. The emphasized
paths correspond to the most likely combination, while the dashed lines represent the nodes and paths that are not traversed through at all.

To elaborate, let us consider a particular example where a priori LLRs γ˜ a of S2 provided by VII2, VII3, VII4, and VII5 are 2, −3, −1, and −5, respectively. Accordingly, there are four layers in the tree corresponding to the four connected
VNs II, as shown in Fig. 3. The tree search starts from the
root node in layer 0 with a node metric equal to 0. The path
metrics associated with the edges in the tree are dependent on
a priori LLRs of the corresponding layer in Fig. 3. In cases
where an a priori LLR is positive, the path metrics associated
with branches to the left in the corresponding layer are set to 0,
and the right-hand side path metrics are set to the negative of
a priori LLRs. By contrast, if a priori LLR is negative, the left
path metrics in that layer are set equal to that particular a priori
LLR, and the right path metrics are set to 0. A priori LLR
associated with the first layer is provided by VII2 in Fig. 3 and has a value of 2. Hence, the left path metric from the
root node down to the left child node in the first layer adopts the value of p1l = 0, while the right path metric adopts the value of p1r = −2, as shown in Fig. 3. In the first layer of the example, the metrics of the left child node and right child node are w1l = 0 and w2r = −2, respectively, which are defined by adding the path metrics of the respective branches to the node
metric of the root node. Upon generating two new child nodes,
the child node having a more positive node metric will be set
as the next parent node, and all other child nodes will be saved
in the stack for later traversal. In this example, the left child
node in the first layer is set as the parent node in the next step,
and the right node is saved in the stack. Then, the tree search
of Fig. 3 progresses to the second layer, whose a priori LLR from VII3 is −3. In the second layer, the left path metric is set as p2l = −3, and the right path adopts p2r = 0 accordingly. Hereafter, the metrics of child node 3 and child node 4 are calculated as w3l = w1l + p2l = −3 and w4r = w1l + p2r = 0.
Following the traversal rules, the tree search of Fig. 3
extends down to the last layer, whereupon the parent node is
node 6 with metric 0 and nodes 2, 3, and 5 are in the stack. The final a priori LLR from VII5 has a value of −5, which implies a binary value of 1 and a traversal to the right. However, the

transition to the right node, in this case, is not allowed because the number of right traversals would exceed the sparsity upper bound of K = 2 in this particular example. Hence, the only option is to traverse left to node 7 in the last layer, which corresponds to the combination [0 1 1 0]T and has the metric of −5. However, the first combination reached is not always the most likely combination, and hence, the traversal should be continued further.
Whenever the traversal reaches the last layer, the new parent node for the next step is selected as the entry in the stack with the most positive metric, before removing the new parent node from the stack and extending its child nodes. In cases where more than one nodes have the highest node metric in the stack, the node having the smallest index may be selected as the new parent node. Following this, the traversal continues from the layer where the new parent node is to the last layer. In order to limit the complexity of the tree search when the number of layers is large, a limit ξ may be imposed on the number of combinations that will be identified before terminating the search for the most likely combination. In this simple example, we set the threshold to ξ = 3, and the combination having the most positive metric is selected as the most likely combination when the limit of 3 combinations is reached. Therefore, the traversal continues until we reach the nodes 8 and 9 of Fig. 3, which have the metrics of −6 and −1, respectively. In this example, the combination [0 1 0 1]T that corresponds to node 9 with the highest node metric −1 may be set as the most likely combination. Alternatively, the search may be terminated when there are no remaining nodes in the stack having a node metric higher than that of the node in the final layer corresponding to the most likely combination found so far.
2) Proposed SD Approach: In the proposed SD approach, the tree search traversal will continue beyond finding the most likely combination until alternative hypotheses have been obtained for each layer. In the example of Fig. 3, on the way to reaching the most likely combination [0 1 0 1]T , we also obtained two other combinations [0 1 1 0]T and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

442

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2023

Algorithm 2 Tree Search for Searching the Most Likely

Combination

Input: dm, K , a priori LLRs from the connected VNs II γ˜1a, . . . , γ˜dam , threshold ξ
Output: the most likely combination

1 Stack: S = {root node}

2 for i = 1 to dm do

3 if γ˜ia > 0 then

4

pil = 0;

5

pir = −γ˜ia

6 else

7

pil = γ˜ia;

8

pir = 0;

9 end

10 end

11 while the number of combinations < ξ do

12 Parent node: the node with the most positive metric w p in the stack S.

13 Delete the parent node in the stack S.

14 L p: the layer that the parent node is in.

15 for j = L p + 1 to dm do

16

if the number of traversed right paths is smaller

than K then

17

Left child node metric = w p + plj ;

18

Right child node metric = w p + prj ;

19

if j = dm then

20

Set the node having more positive metric as

the new parent and save the other one in the

stack S.

21

else

22

Obtain two combinations;

23

end

24

else if the number of traversed right paths is

larger than or equal to K then

25

Left child node metric = w p + plj ;

26

if j = dm then

27

Always set the left child node as the new

child node;

28

else

29

Obtain one combination;

30

end

31 end

32 Store the combinations in the combination matrix.

33 end

34 Choose the combination with most positive metric as the

most likely combination.

[0 1 0 0]T , corresponding to node 7 and node 8, respectively. At this point, node 2 and node 3 of Fig. 3 are in the stack available for further traversal. The combinations [0 1 1 0]T and [0 1 0 0]T represent alternative hypotheses for the third and fourth bits of the most likely combination [0 1 0 1]T , but alternative hypotheses are missing for the first and second bits.
In cases like this where we do not have alternative hypotheses
for all bits, the SD approach continues to traverse, evolving
from the node in the stack having the most positive metric,
until all alternative hypotheses are obtained. As mentioned

in Section III-B.1, the all-zero combination may be treated as a special case. If the all-zero combination is not present in the combination matrix after the tree search, then it may be added to the last column of the combination matrix. After extending the tree search until alternative hypotheses are obtained for all bits in the example above, we obtain the following combination matrix for S2 using the proposed SD approach:

VI2 ⎛ 1 1 1 1 1 0 ⎞

VII2 0 0 0 1 0 0

QS2D =

VII3 VII4

⎝⎜⎜

1 1

1 0

1 0

1 0

0 1

0 0

⎟⎠⎟.

(8)

VII5 0 0 1 0 1 0

In order to constrain the complexity of the proposed joint iterative LDPC-CS scheme, the tree search seeking alternative hypotheses may be abandoned after the number of combinations considered has reached a limit ϕ. For example, we may consider the case where an alternative hypothesis that provides a binary value of 1 for the first bit is still missing after obtaining ϕ = 100 combinations. In this case, the left path of the first layer and the child nodes beneath that path of Fig. 3 will not be visited, and only the right path of the first layer and the child nodes beneath it will be visited. This helps us obtain at least one alternative hypothesis for each bit as quickly as possible.
The proposed SD approach significantly reduces the decoding complexity compared to the e-MAP approach by reducing the number of combinations that are used for calculating the extrinsic LLRs. After we obtain the combination matrix using the proposed SD approach, the combination matrix in (4) and (5) may be replaced by QmSD, while gm in (6) may be replaced by the specific gm corresponding to the QmS D.
The complexity of each SN Sm using the proposed SD approach in the CS decoder may be quantified in terms of the number of additions and max computations during the extrinsic LLR calculation. In contrast to the e-MAP approach, where the combination matrix of Sm does not vary across the T TSs, for the proposed techniques it may vary from TS to TS for the proposed SD approach, depending on the values of the input a priori LLRs. The complexity associated with each visit to an SN Sm using the proposed SD approach may be calculated as

CSSmD = 2dm × PmSD −

Q

SD m

+ numnodes − 2

(9)

where

Q

SD m

is

the

total

number

of

elements

having

a

value of 1 among all rows and columns of QSmD, which

corresponds to the second term of (7), and

min{ k=0

K

,dm

}

k

dm k

.

Here, PmSD is the number of combinations obtained by the

SD approach, which depends on the input LLRs for Sm .

Meanwhile, numnodes represents the number of nodes traversed

during the tree search. Note that the calculation complexity of

SN decoding in the SD approach is mainly influenced by the

number of combinations used for the extrinsic LLR since the

complexity of the tree search is low compared to the savings

attained by pruning the less likely combinations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: TREE-SEARCH TECHNIQUES FOR JOINT ITERATIVE CS AND LDPC DECODING IN WSNs

443

3) Proposed HD Approach: In contrast to the tree search of the proposed SD approach, our HD technique considers the HD between combinations for selecting alternative hypotheses. More specifically, the HD approach populates the combination matrix with the most likely combination obtained by the tree search and all other combinations that are within a specified HD of that most likely combination. Returning to the example of Section III-B.1, the most likely combination is [0 1 0 1]T , and the set of all valid combinations within an HD of say 2 are specified in the following combination matrix of S2:

VI2 ⎛ 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 ⎞

VII2 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0

Q

HD 2

=

VII3 VII4

⎜⎝⎜

1 0

0 0

1 0

0 0

1 0

0 1

0 0

1 1

⎟⎠⎟

(10)

VII5 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0

having said that we still exclude all combinations that are
within the specified HD of the most likely combination but
have more than K binary value of 1. The combination matrix QHmD may be used for performing
decoding processing of the SN by replacing the combination matrix Qme-MAP in (4) and (5), while gm in (6) is replaced by the specific gm corresponding to the combination matrix QmHD. As in the SD approach, if the combination matrix does not
include the all-zero combination, it may be added to the last
column. The number of combinations obtained for the SN Sm by employing the proposed HD approach may be formulated
as

min{HD,K ,dm}
PmHD =
k=0

dm k

.

(11)

The complexity of an SN Sm employing the proposed HD approach in the CS decoder may be quantified by the number of additions and max functions evaluations according to

C

HD Sm

=

2dm

×

PmHD

−

Q

HD m

+ nummost − 2

(12)

where ( QmHD) is the sum of all elements in QHmD, and nummost is the number of nodes that are traversed through while searching for the most likely combination. As mentioned in Section III-B, the complexity of the decoding in the SNs is mainly influenced by the number of combinations. When the specified HD is small, the number of combinations considered by the HD approach can be significantly reduced compared to the e-MAP approach, yielding a very significant decoding complexity reduction.

IV. EXIT CHART ANALYSIS
In Section IV-A, EXIT functions are introduced for the case of nonequiprobable bits. The LDPC EXIT function and the CS EXIT function are detailed in Sections IV-B and IV-C, respectively. Following this, Section IV-D portrays our trajectory plots for characterizing the iterative exchange of MI between the LDPC and CS decoders.

A. EXIT Function for Nonequiprobable Bit Sequence A constituent decoder in an iterative decoding process may
be characterized by its EXIT functions [34]. Typically, a pair

of constituent decoders engage in an iterative exchange of extrinsic information during iterative decoding, which may be characterized by a decoding trajectory that represents the MI evolution of the iterative exchange of extrinsic LLRs. The proposed iterative joint LDPC-CS decoding scheme is divided into LDPC decoding and CS decoding. In our scheme, the observations in the sensors ( y1, . . . , yM ) may be sparse according to the sparse signals (x1, . . . , x N ) and sparse sensing matrix . Owing to this, the extrinsic LLRs that are exchanged between the LDPC and CS decoder in Fig. 2 pertain to nonequiprobable bits. As a result of this, the EXIT chart analysis of the LDPC decoding and CS decoding is different from conventional EXIT chart analysis, where the iteratively exchanged extrinsic LLRs pertain to equiprobable bit values. In an EXIT chart, the quality of the exchanged a priori and extrinsic LLRs is quantified by the MI between the LLR sequence and its corresponding bit sequence [35]. In our software used for generating the EXIT functions, a priori LLRs are generated artificially based on their corresponding bit sequence in order to characterize each decoder individually. In this section, we adopt the notation ω to represent a bit sequence having nonequiprobable bit values and the notation ω˜ to represent its corresponding LLR sequence. Meanwhile, the quality of the LLR sequence ω˜ is quantified by the MI I (ω; ω˜ ). The probability that each bit of the bit sequence ω adopts the binary value 0 is Pω. We may artificially generate each LLR of ω˜ using

ω˜ i

=

σω2 2

(1 −

2ωi )

+

Nω

+

log

Pω 1 − Pω

(13)

where ωi is a bit of the bit sequence ω. Here, Nω is an independent Gaussian random variable with zero mean and variance σω2 [34], [36].
The MI I (ω; ω˜ ) between the sequence of nonequiprobable bits ω and the LLRs ω˜ may be calculated using the so-called
histogram-based method of [37]

I (ω; ω˜ )

+∞

=

fω˜ |ω (ω˜ i |ωi ) fω (ωi ) log2

ωi =0,1 −∞

fω˜ |ω (ω˜ i |ωi ) fω˜ (ω˜ i )

dω˜ i .

(14)

B. LDPC EXIT Function
Fig. 4 shows a block diagram illustrating our software used for characterizing an LDPC EXIT function. As discussed in Section II-B, M number of LDPC decoders are operated in parallel, and each layer works in parallel across the M layers of the factor graph of Fig. 2. Hence, Fig. 4 illustrates the generation of the LDPC EXIT function for one of these layers having an index m. Once the EXIT function of all M layers has been obtained, an overall LDPC EXIT function may be obtained by taking an average over the M layers.
As an inner decoding process, LDPC decoding has two input a priori LLR sequences, namely, a˜ m provided by the channel and ˜yma by the CS decoder, respectively. The channel LLRs a˜ m may be generated, as discussed in Section II-A and shown in Fig. 4, wherein a random bit sequence ym

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

444

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2023

Fig. 4. Adapted schematic used to depict the generation of the EXIT function for LDPC decoding, where solid lines are used for components of the real system and dash lines are used for components that are particular to the EXIT charts’ software components.

is processed by LDPC encoding, rate matching, and QPSK
modulation, before transmission over an AWGN channel.
At the receiver, QPSK soft demodulation and rate dematching are used for obtaining the channel LLRs a˜ m . By contrast, the other a priori LLRs ˜yam provided by CS decoding may be generated artificially according to (13), allowing the EXIT
function of LDPC decoding to be characterized independently
of the EXIT function of CS decoding.
As discussed in Section II-B, the processing of LDPC
decoding comprises initialization, CN update, and VN update. Upon completion of these processes, the extrinsic LLRs y˜ em are output by LDPC decoding, and each element in the vector ˜yme is added with an LLR quantifying the probability of the corresponding bit in ym adopting a value of 0. More specifically, these LLRs are given by lm = [log (Pm /1 − Pm ), . . . , log (Pm/1 − Pm )] ∈ R1×T , and the resultant superimposed extrinsic LLRs y˜ me may be used for quantifying the MI using (14).
Fig. 5 characterizes the iterative exchange of extrinsic LLRs ˜yme and z˜te between the LDPC and CS decoders, where the corresponding bit sequences of ym and zt have nonequiprobable binary values. Here, we adopt N = 500 signals, M = 150 sensors, a degree for each signal of Ks = 5, true sparsity of K = K = 5, the coding rate of R = (1/3), and T = 500 TSs using the 3GPP NR BG 2 to generate the
parity check matrix used by LDPC coding. Unless otherwise
specified, these fundamental parameters are adopted for all
simulation results throughout this article, including our EXIT
charts, complexity analysis, and BLER plots. The axes of the EXIT chart represent the average MI I ( y; y˜ e) of the extrinsic LLRs y˜ e and z˜ e, each of which ranges from 0 to the average entropy H¯ of all M bit sequences [ y1, . . . , ym; . . . ; yM ]. Here, an MI of I ( y; ˜y e) = 0 indicates that there is no information in the LLR sequences ˜y e about the corresponding bit sequences y, while an MI equal to the average entropy H¯ indicates that the LLR sequences ˜y e have perfect information
about the corresponding bit sequences y. Recall that the M
nonequiprobable bit sequences in the proposed system are
provided by the M different sensors, where each potentially has a different entropy H (ym,t) owing to their different degrees dm, m ∈ [1, M]. Owing to this, the bits in the different bit

Fig. 5. EXIT chart to analyze the iterations inside the LDPC decoding and CS decoding for the case of N = 500 signals, M = 150 sensors, a degree for each signal of Ks = 5, true sparsity K = K = 5, LDPC BG of 2, coding rate R = (1/3), T = 500 TSs, SNR = −4.4 dB, the threshold of finding the most likely combination ξ = ½¼ m, and the threshold of finding alternative hypotheses ϕ = 100 using the e-MAP approach for CS decoding with QPSK modulation for communication over an AWGN channel.
sequences ym have different probabilities of adopting a value of 0. In order to characterize the system as a whole, the EXIT chart shows the mean over all entropies H (ym,t), where m = 1, . . . , M, and the final average MI H¯ is the average of MI values that correspond to M layers in the LDPC decoder. Here, the entropy of each bit in the bit sequence ym with probability Pm of adopting a value of 0 is calculated as
H ym,t = −Pm × log2 (Pm ) − (1 − Pm ) × log2 (1 − Pm ) .
(15)
The LDPC EXIT functions of Fig. 5 show that, when the LDPC decoder is presented with a priori LLRs ˜yma having an MI of 0, it responds by providing extrinsic LLRs ˜yme having a nonzero MI. This may be explained by the information provided by the channel LLRs a˜ m, which contain information about the content of the bit sequences ym. Furthermore, when a priori LLRs y˜ ma provided by the CS decoder contain perfect information, the LDPC decoder responds by providing extrinsic LLRs having perfect information, hence allowing the LDPC decoder to converge to the top right-hand corner of the EXIT chart. Fig. 5 shows that increasing the number of iterations iL D PC performed within the LDPC decoder moves the LDPC EXIT functions upward. More specifically, as the number of iterations is increased, the value of the extrinsic MI I ( ym; ˜yme) increases for a given value of a priori MI I ( ym; ˜yam ), leading to improved decoding performance. However, when the number of iterations iLDPC performed by the LDPC decoder is higher than 16, Fig. 5 shows that only limited further gain may be obtained for channel SNRs above −4.4 dB. The capacity of the LDPC-CS scheme is expressed as the discrete-input continuous-output memoryless channel capacity when the transmission is over a QPSK-modulated

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: TREE-SEARCH TECHNIQUES FOR JOINT ITERATIVE CS AND LDPC DECODING IN WSNs

445

Fig. 6. Adapted schematic used to depict the generation of EXIT function for CS decoding; solid lines are used for components, which appear in the iterative decoding system, while dashed lines are used for EXIT chart software components.

AWGN channel. The capacity bound is given by the specific
SNR when the channel capacity equals the throughput of the
LDPC-CS scheme. Furthermore, the throughput is calculated as η = H (xn,t )(N/M) R log2 δ, where H (xn,t ) is the entropy of each signal in the xn, and δ is the modulation order. In our scheme, when N = 500, M = 150, K = K = 5, and R = 1/3 using QPSK modulation, the capacity bound is about −8.75 dB. Owing to this, we recommend striking an attractive performance versus complexity tradeoff by setting
the number of iterations performed in the LDPC decoder to iLDPC = 16 throughout this article.

C. CS EXIT Function

Fig. 6 illustrates the block diagram for characterizing CS

EXIT functions. As discussed in Section II-B, there are

T layers in the CS decoder, corresponding to the T TSs.

Here, the block diagram of Fig. 6 corresponds to a single

layer of CS decoding having an index t. More specifically,

the randomly generated bit sequence et represents the tth column of X and contains all N signal values in the tth TS.

As shown in Fig. 6, the bit sequence et is processed by CS
encoding based on the factor graph of Fig. 1. Rather than being provided by the LDPC decoder, a priori LLRs z˜at are generated artificially using (13), which includes the prior knowledge of

the probability that each bit in the compressed bit sequence

zt adopts the binary value 0. In contrast to LDPC decoding, where each bit of the sequence ym has the same probability of adopting a binary value of 0, the probability of each bit in zt adopting a binary value 0 is different. This may be attributed

to the different degrees of the M sensors, which results in the

different probabilities for the M bits obtained in the tth TS.

Hence, the prior knowledge of the bit value probabilities may

be represented by the vector of LLRs l = [l1, . . . , lM ], which

is included in the artificially generated a priori LLRs z˜at . The

CS

decoder

accepts

the

inputs

z˜

a t

and

generates

the

extrinsic

LLRs z˜te, as discussed in Section II-B and shown in Fig. 2.

Following this, the extrinsic LLRs z˜te of the CS decoder are

added to the vector l representing the MI, and the resultant

LLRs are measured using (14). The final MI of the system is

obtained by averaging across all T MI values corresponding

to T layers in the CS decoder. Fig. 5 shows that the MI I (zt ; z˜te) of the extrinsic LLRs
z˜te and the MI I (zt ; z˜at ) of a priori LLRs z˜a of the CS

Fig. 7. CS functions for e-MAP, SD, and HD approaches using N = 500 signals, M = 150 sensors, a degree for each signal of Ks = 5, true sparsity K = K = 5, LDPC BG of 2, coding rate R = (1/3), T = 500 TSs, the threshold of finding most likely combination ξ = 10, and the threshold of finding counterhypotheses ϕ = 100, iLDPC = 16, and iCS = 3 for the case of using QPSK modulation for communication over an AWGN channel.
EXIT functions are plotted as the swapped axes relative to the LDPC EXIT functions. This swapping is adopted because the extrinsic LLRs z˜te produced by the LDPC decoder become a priori LLRs z˜ta of the CS decoder and vice versa. Hence, inverting the CS decoder EXIT functions represents the corresponding MIs on the same axis. In contrast to the LDPC EXIT functions, Fig. 5 shows that the CS EXIT functions start from the bottom left corner of the EXIT chart, where I (zt ; z˜te) equals to 0, when I (zt ; z˜at ) is equal to 0. This is because the CS decoder has a single source of information, and when a priori LLR vector z˜ta contains no information, then the CS decoder is unable to generate any information for the extrinsic LLR vector z˜te. Fig. 5 shows that, when the number of iterations iC S performed within the CS decoder is increased, the CS EXIT functions move downward. More specifically, the extrinsic MI I (zt ; z˜te) increases with the number of iterations iC S performed within the CS decoder for a given value of a priori MI I (zt ; z˜at ), implying superior decoding performance. However, as shown in Fig. 5, there is diminishing returns beyond iC S = 3 iterations; hence, we adopt iC S = 3 throughout the rest of this article.
Fig. 7 compares the CS EXIT functions for the proposed SD and HD approaches, and adopts the e-MAP approach as a benchmarker. The CS EXIT functions in Fig. 7 show that the proposed SD and HD approaches result in very similar CS EXIT functions as the e-MAP approach, implying that the CS decoder can obtain the same decoding performance by employing the proposed techniques, with the benefit of substantially reduced complexity.
D. Decoding Trajectory
In an EXIT chart, a stair-case-shaped decoding trajectory may be used to illustrate the iterative exchange of extrinsic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

446

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2023

TABLE II COMPLEXITY EQUATIONS FOR DIFFERENT APPROACHES

Fig. 8. EXIT chart and trajectories for the proposed LDPC-CS scheme with N = 500 signals, M = 150 sensors, a degree for each signal of Ks = 5, true sparsity K = K = 5, LDPC BG of 2, coding rate R = (1/3), T = 500 TSs, iLDPC = 16, and iCS = 3, the threshold of finding most likely combination ξ = 10, and the threshold of finding counterhypotheses ϕ = 100 when using QPSK modulation for communication over an AWGN channel having various SNRs.
information between a pair of decoders, namely, the LDPC and CS decoders in the proposed scheme. This stair-case-shaped decoding trajectory characterizes the MIs measured during the iterative exchange of extrinsic LLRs in the proposed scheme. The calculation of MI for the decoding trajectory is performed using the same (14) as used for drawing the EXIT functions.
Fig. 8 illustrates the LDPC and CS EXIT functions together with the corresponding decoding trajectories. Here, each horizontal transition in the staircase characterizes the improvement in MI obtained by the CS decoder, while each vertical transition corresponds to the LDPC decoder. As shown in Fig. 8, for the case of SNR of −6 dB, when the LDPC and CS EXIT functions intersect, the EXIT chart tunnel may be deemed closed. In this case, the iterative decoding trajectory becomes curtailed at the intersection point of the LDPC and CS EXIT functions, and will become unable to pass beyond it toward the top right-hand corner of the EXIT chart, where a low BLER is achieved. Hence, a closed EXIT tunnel implies having a high BLER. By contrast, an open EXIT tunnel allows the iterative decoding trajectory to evolve toward the top right-hand corner of the EXIT chart, as exemplified for the case SNR = −4.4 dB in Fig. 8. It may be observed that, as the SNR is increased, the open EXIT chart tunnel becomes wider, and fewer steps are required to get through the tunnel, indicating that a low BLER can be achieved using fewer iterations. Increasing the number

of iterations iL D PC and iC S performed within the LDPC and CS decoder has the effect of widening the EXIT chart tunnel, as described in Sections IV-B and IV-C.
Fig. 8 shows that, at SNR = −4.4 dB, six steps/iterations are required for reaching the top right-hand corner of the EXIT chart, where a low BLER is attained. This implies that iLDPC-CS = 6 iterations are recommended between the LDPC and CS decoders. Note that there is a slight mismatch between the corner points of the decoding trajectory and the EXIT functions. This may be explained by the random independent generation of the LLRs in a priori LLR vector y˜ma and z˜ta when drawing the LDPC and CS EXIT functions. However, when iterating between the LDPC and CS decoders, the factor graph of Fig. 2 has many short cycles of length 4 in the connectivity between the LDPC and CS decoder, which creates a correlation between the LLRs, and this is not modeled by the EXIT charts analysis. However, Fig. 8 shows the general agreement between the trajectories and EXIT functions, which validates the proposed scheme.

V. COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
The complexity of each operation in each SN for each of the e-MAP, SD, and HD approaches was quantified in Section III. Furthermore, the complexity calculation for each VN I and VN II may be quantified by characterizing the forward and backward propagation algorithms [38] as follows:

CVNv = 3 dVv − 1

(16)

where dVv is the degree of the VN v. Likewise, the complexity of each operation of a CN c may
be quantified by [39]

CCNc = 3 dCc − 2

(17)

where dCc is the degree of the CN c. The complexity of the proposed iterative joint LDPC-CS
scheme may be compared to that of a benchmarker, which uses soft-input hard-output LDPC decoding and no iterations within the CS decoder or between the LDPC and CS decoders. The complexity of this hard information benchmarker may be calculated using (18) from Table II.
The overall complexity of the proposed iterative joint LDPC-CS decoding scheme takes into account each operation of all VNs, CNs, and SNs, and may be calculated according to (19) of Table II. Explicitly, the term of CSm in (19) represents the complexity of the SNs, which may be replaced by the superscripted versions provided in Section III for each of the e-MAP, SD, and HD approaches. Note that the complexity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: TREE-SEARCH TECHNIQUES FOR JOINT ITERATIVE CS AND LDPC DECODING IN WSNs

447

Fig. 9. Complexity of different approaches for the case of N = 500 signals, M = 150 sensors, a degree for each signal of Ks = 5, sparsity upper bound K = 5, LDPC BG of 2, coding rate R = (1/3), T = 500 TSs, iLDPC = 16, iCS = 3, threshold of finding most likely combination ξ = 10, and the threshold of finding counterhypotheses ϕ = 100 using QPSK
modulation for communication over an AWGN channel.

Fig. 10. Complexity of different approaches for the case of M/N = 3/10, a degree for each signal of Ks = 5, sparsity upper bound K = 5, LDPC BG of 2, coding rate R = (1/3), T = 500 TSs, threshold of finding most likely combination ξ = 10, and the threshold of finding counterhypotheses ϕ = 100, iLDPC = 16, and iCS = 3 using QPSK modulation over an AWGN channel.

associated with a tree search depends on the specific a priori LLRs γ˜ a provided for the SN; hence, we rely on Monte Carlo simulations for quantifying the complexity of SD and HD approaches.
Fig. 9 characterizes the average number of additions and max evaluations performed by the proposed iterative joint LDPC-CS decoding scheme as a function of the sparsity upper bound K , when employing the same parameters as in the EXIT charts of Section IV with the number of iterations performed within the LDPC and CS decoding of iLDPC = 16, iCS = 3, for each of the different approaches. As shown in Fig. 9, the complexity of the proposed HD approach is independent of the sparsity upper bound K . This is because the complexity is dominated by the number of combinations considered by the respective approaches, and in the case of the HD approach using HD = 1, the number of combinations considered using (11) depends only on the degree of sensors but not on the sparsity upper bound K . By contrast, the complexity of the proposed SD approach increases with the sparsity upper bound K . This may be explained by the higher complexity of the tree that results from using a higher sparsity upper bound K , typically leading to more nodes and more combinations in the SD approach, hence increasing the complexity. For the e-MAP approach, the complexity initially grows rapidly as the sparsity upper bound K is increased before such a rating. As shown in (3), the number of combinations considered by the e-MAP approach is influenced by the sparsity upper bound K when K is lower than the SN degree dm, but, when K is increased above dm, then the complexity only depends on the value of dm. The complexity of the SSCC hard information benchmarker only depends on the number of signals N, sensors M, and the number of TSs T , as shown in (18). Owing to this, the complexity of the SSCC hard information approach is not influenced by the sparsity upper bound K , as shown in Fig. 9. As expected, Fig. 9 shows that the SSCC hard information approach has the lowest complexity. However, it may be observed that the

specific choice of the scheme significantly inferences the JSCC complexity relative to the e-MAP approach.
Fig. 10 characterizes the complexity of the proposed iterative joint LDPC-CS as a function of the degree of the signals Ks for each of the different approaches when employing the same fundamental parameters as in the EXIT charts of Section IV, and the number of iterations inside within the LDPC decoder is iLDPC = 16 and within the CS decoder is iCS = 3. As the degree of signals Ks is increased, the average degree of sensors is also increased, and hence, the number of combinations considered by the SNs of the proposed SD approach, HD approach, and e-MAP approach escalates accordingly. Fig. 10 shows that the rate of complexity increases as the signal degree Ks is significantly higher for the e-MAP approach than for the proposed SD and HD techniques. However, the complexity of the SSCC hard information approach does not depend on the degree Ks of signals since no iterative decoding is performed within the CS decoder or between the LDPC and CS decoders.
VI. BLOCK ERROR RATE RESULTS
This section characterizes the BLER performance of the proposed joint LDPC-CS decoding scheme, which is compared to benchmarkers. The fundamental parameters adopted in the following investigations are the same as those mentioned above in Section IV, where we adopt N = 500 signals and M = 150 sensors; each signal has a degree of Ks = 5, an LDPC coding rate of R = (1/3), a true sparsity of K = K = 5, an LDPC block length that comprises T = 500 TSs, 3GPP BG 2, and QPSK modulation for communication over an AWGN channel. More specifically, we compare the BLER performance of the proposed SD and HD approaches against the SSCC hard information approach and the e-MAP approach, and investigate the impact of using different numbers of iterations in the various schemes. Our results show that the proposed SD and HD approaches can maintain the same performance as the e-MAP approach while

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

448

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2023

Fig. 11. BLER results for the e-MAP approach, the proposed SD
approach, and the proposed HD approach for the case of N = 500 signals, M = 150 sensors, a degree for each signal of Ks = 5, true sparsity K = K = 5, LDPC BG of 2, coding rate R = (1/3), T = 500 TSs, the threshold of finding most likely combination ξ = 10, and the threshold of finding alternative hypotheses ϕ = 100 using QPSK modulation for communication over an AWGN channel. The iteration combinations are
shown as iLDPC − iCS − iLDPC−CS in the legend.

Fig. 12. BLER results for SSCC hard information approach and JSCC
HD approach for the case of HD = 1 with N = 500 signals, M = 150 sensors, a degree for each signal of Ks = 5, true sparsity K = K = 5, LDPC BG of 2, coding rate R = (1/3), T = 500 TSs, the threshold for finding most likely combination ξ = 10, and the threshold for finding counterhypotheses ϕ = 100 and iCS = 1 using QPSK modulation for communication over an AWGN channel.

considerably reducing the complexity. Moreover, the BLER results of the joint LDPC-CS decoding schemes show that the use of soft information allows iterative decoding within the CS decoder to eliminate the limitation associated with the CS decoder in the SSCC hard information benchmarker. Joint LDPC-CS decoding allows iterations between the LDPC and CS decoders, which can further improve the decoding performance.
Fig. 11 displays the BLER performance for different JSCC schemes when employing different combinations of iLDPC, iCS and iLDPC-CS iterations. Fig. 11 shows that the proposed SD and HD approaches always achieve very similar performance as the e-MAP approach, across all combinations of iterations. This confirms the results of Fig. 7, which showed that CS decoding employing the proposed SD and HD approaches can maintain the same decoding performance as the e-MAP approach. According to (7), the CS decoding complexity relying on the e-MAP approach is around 4.02 × 1010 additions and max operations, which is about 57 times the 7.17 × 108 additions and max operations of the SD approach based on (9). Moreover, the complexity of CS decoding employing the e-MAP approach is around 211 times the 1.91 × 108 additions and max operations of the proposed HD approach based on (12). These numerical results demonstrate that the proposed SD approach significantly reduces the complexity compared to the e-MAP approach, and that the HD approach even further reduces it. Since the proposed HD approach achieves the same decoding performance as the e-MAP approach while having the lowest complexity, we adopt the HD approach for the joint LDPC-CS decoding scheme throughout the rest of this section.
Fig. 12 characterizes the BLER of the benchmarker using the hard information and the SISO scheme using the proposed HD approach. Observe that the BLER performance increases significantly when increasing the number of LDPC iterations toward iLDPC = 16 but then offers diminishing returns beyond

this point for both the proposed HD approach and the hard information approach in agreement with the results of Fig. 5. Upon considering the performance versus complexity tradeoff, iLDPC is an attractive choice. The proposed HD approach achieves about 1.7-dB gain at BLER = 10−1 compared to the hard information benchmarker when iLDPC = 16, iCS = 1. However, Fig. 12 shows that both the proposed HD approach and hard information benchmarker suffer from error floors when iCS = 1, which is caused by the limitation of the CS decoding performance. Fortunately, the soft information used in the proposed HD approach allows iterative decoding within the CS decoder and between the LDPC and CS decoders, which eliminates this error floor when iCS > 1.
Fig. 13 characterizes the BLER performance of the proposed HD approach as a function of SNR for different numbers of CS decoding iterations iCS in the JSCC scheme. It may be observed that an error floor emerges, when adopting only iCS = 1 iteration for CS decoding, but this error floor may be removed by increasing the number of iterations to iCS = 2. A further BLER improvement is attained by opting for iCS = 3, but we observe no further gain beyond iCS = 3, which is consistent with the results of Fig. 5. In order to achieve good performance without wasting resources, iCS = 3 is the best choice for the number of inner iterations in the CS decoding, which was determined by testing a range of different configurations. Hence, Fig. 13 demonstrates that iterative CS decoding is necessary for avoiding error floors, and hence, the complexity reduction in this article is strongly motivated.
Fig. 14 characterizes the BLER performance of the proposed HD approach for various numbers of iterations iLDPC-CS between LDPC and CS decoders in the JSCC scheme. It may be observed that significant BLER gain is obtained by increasing the number of iterations between the LDPC and CS decoders although diminishing returns are offered beyond

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: TREE-SEARCH TECHNIQUES FOR JOINT ITERATIVE CS AND LDPC DECODING IN WSNs

449

Fig. 13. BLER results for the HD approach with various numbers of CS
iterations for the case of N = 500 signals, M = 150 sensors, a degree for each signal of Ks = 5, true sparsity K = K = 5, LDPC BG of 2, coding rate R = (1/3), T = 500 TSs, and iLDPC = 16 in LDPC decoding, threshold for finding most likely combination ξ = 10, and the threshold for finding counterhypotheses ϕ = 100 and iCS = 1 using QPSK modulation for communication over an AWGN channel.

Fig. 15. BLER results of the HD approach when adopting various coding
rates R for the case of N = 500 signals, M = 150 sensors, a degree for each signal of Ks = 5, true sparsity K = K = 5, LDPC BG of 2, T = 500 TSs, iLDPC = 16 LDPC decoding iterations, iCS = 3 CS decoding iterations, iLDPC−CS = 6 iterations between LDPC decoding and CS decoding, a threshold for finding the most likely combination of ξ = 10, and a threshold for finding counterhypotheses of ϕ = 100 for the case
of using QPSK modulation for communication over an AWGN channel.

Fig. 14. BLER results for the HD approach for various number of iterations between LDPC and CS decoding iLDPC−CS for the case of N = 500 signals, M = 150 sensors, a degree for each signal of Ks = 5, true sparsity K = K = 5, LDPC BG of 2, coding rate R = (1/3), T = 500 TSs, and iLDPC = 16 in LDPC decoding, iCS = 3 in CS decoding, threshold for finding most likely combination ξ = 10, and the threshold for finding counterhypotheses ϕ = 100 using QPSK modulation for communication over an AWGN channel.
iLDPC-CS = 6, which is consistent with the result suggested by the trajectory of Fig. 8. In particular, the adoption of iLDPC-CS = 6 offers about 2.45-dB improvement at a BLER 10−3 compared to using iLDPC-CS = 1 but naturally at the cost of increasing the complexity by a factor of about six times.
Fig. 15 characterizes the BLER performance of the proposed HD approach for various LDPC coding rates R. As may be expected, when the coding rate increases, the BLER performance is significantly degraded, but this capability demonstrates the flexibility of the proposed WSN scheme.
Fig. 16 shows another scenario in that the sparsity upper bound K is known to the FC, and the true sparsity K is not

Fig. 16. BLER results of the proposed HD approach when adopting various values for the true sparsity K for the case of N = 500 signals and M = 150 sensors. Furthermore, the degree of each signal is Ks = 5, the sparsity upper bound K = 5, the LDPC BG is 2, the coding rate is R = 1/3, T = 500 TSs, and we use iLDPC = 16 LDPC decoding iterations, iCS = 3 CS decoding iterations, and iLDPC−CS = 6 iterations between LDPC decoding and CS decoding. We employ a threshold of ξ = 10 for finding the most likely combination and a threshold of ϕ = 100 for finding counterhypotheses for the case of using QPSK modulation for communication over an AWGN channel.
always equal to the K . In this case, we define the BLER as the particular fraction of blocks in which not all nonzero values of the signal are identified. As shown in the figure, when the true sparsity K is smaller than the upper bound K , the decoding BLER performance becomes better, and the lower the true sparsity is, the better the decoding performance becomes. The explanation for this is that the lower the value of K , the fewer nonzero entries are defined, and the easier it becomes to decode successfully when the FC has the prior knowledge of the sparsity upper bound K .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

450

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2023

VII. CONCLUSION
In this article, we have proposed a pair of novel techniques for reducing the complexity of a joint iterative LDPC-CS decoding scheme, namely, the proposed SD and HD approaches. In particular, these dramatically reduce the complexity required to generate high-quality extrinsic LLRs from the SN. Both techniques employ a tree search to explore the various combinations of signal values and identify the most likely combination. Following this first processing step, the SD approach continues the tree search to obtain alternative hypotheses, which are necessary for generating high-quality extrinsic LLRs. By contrast, the HD approach obtains the alternative hypotheses by selecting all candidates within a certain HD of the most likely combination. Our EXIT charts and BLER results demonstrate that the proposed SD and HD techniques achieve the same decoding performance as the full-search-based e-MAP approach, which considers all possible combinations of signal values during CS decoding. Our numerical results demonstrate that the e-MAP approach has about 56 times higher complexity than that of the proposed SD approach and about 210 times higher complexity than that of the proposed HD approach. Furthermore, we compare the proposed HD approach designed for the JSCC scheme to a benchmarker in the SSCC scheme, which performs CS decoding using hard information. Our results show that the use of soft information in the proposed HD approach improves the decoding performance by about 1.7 dB in the case of QPSK modulation over an AWGN channel. Furthermore, we demonstrate that invoking iterations both within the CS decoder and between the LDPC and CS decoder eliminates the error floor, which allows a further 2.45 dB of gain to be obtained. Our results are validated by EXIT chart analysis, which is consistent with the BLER results.
The proposed FC requires M number of LDPC decoders, and hence, our future work will consider hardware-efficient implementation of this. Among the state-of-the-art techniques for channel coding, LDPC decoding is widely considered to be the most hardware-efficient [40], [41]. In the proposed WSN scheme, all sensors transmit messages comprising the same number T of bits, which presents an opportunity for parallel LDPC decoding to be used. More specifically, the main complexity contribution of an LDPC decoder is typically that of the data handling routine and memory access, rather than the computation. In the case where all M LDPC decoders process messages of the same length, the routine may be considered to be common among them. Hence, an efficient hardware architecture, which shares the routine across all of the M decoders, may be conceived, which has M parallel computation units. Furthermore, even if the different sensors are using different coding rates, we may harness the rate-matching architecture of the 3GPP LDPC code to overcome this issue in our future research. More specifically, upon reception of short blocks from some sensor nodes employing high coding rates, zero padding can be applied to increase the length of the received vectors of LLRs to match the longest received signal vector of LLRs. In this way, all M LDPC codes may be decoded using the same lowest coding rate while sharing the associated routines and the memory access.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Jue Chen, Soon Xin Ng, Robert G. Maunder, and Lajos Hanzo are with the School of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ Southampton, U.K. (e-mail: jc7m17@soton.ac.uk; sxn@ecs.soton.ac.uk; rm@ecs.soton.ac.uk; lh@ecs.soton.ac.uk).
Tsang-Yi Wang is with the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan (e-mail: tcwang@mail.nsysu.edu.tw).
Jwo-Yuh Wu is with the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: jywu@cc.nctu.edu.tw).
Chih-Peng Li is with the Institute of Communications Engineering and the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan (e-mail: cpli@faculty.nsysu.edu.tw).
REFERENCES
[1] S. Vembu, S. Verdú, and Y. Steinberg, “The source-channel separation theorem revisited,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 44–54, Jan. 1995.
[2] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, 1948.
[3] A. Zribi, R. Pyndiah, S. Zaibi, F. Guilloud, and A. Bouallegue, “Low-complexity soft decoding of Huffman codes and iterative joint source channel decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1669–1679, Jun. 2012.
[4] M. Fresia, F. Perez-Cruz, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Joint source and channel coding,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 104–113, Nov. 2010.
[5] J. Yan, J. Huang, and C. Huang, “Deep learning aided joint sourcechannel coding for wireless networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CIC Int. Conf. Commun. China (ICCC), Jul. 2021, pp. 805–810.
[6] C. Karakus, A. C. Gurbuz, and B. Tavli, “Analysis of energy efficiency of compressive sensing in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1999–2008, May 2013.
[7] E. A. Hodgson, G. Brante, R. D. Souza, J. Garcia-Frias, and J. L. Rebelatto, “Compensating spectral efficiency loss of wireless RF energy transfer with analog joint source channel coding compression,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 16, no. 16, pp. 6458–6469, Aug. 2016.
[8] J. Zheng, H. Zhang, Y. Cai, R. Li, and A. Anpalagan, “Game-theoretic multi-channel multi-access in energy harvesting wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 4587–4594, Jun. 2016.
[9] Q. Chen and L. Wang, “Design and analysis of joint source channel coding schemes over non-standard coding channels,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 5369–5380, May 2020.
[10] M. A. M. Izhar, A. J. Aljohani, S. X. Ng, and L. Hanzo, “Distributed joint source coding and trellis coded modulation for symbolbased Markov sources,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 5, pp. 4031–4041, May 2018.
[11] C. Li, G. Li, B. Kailkhura, and P. K. Varshney, “Secure distributed detection of sparse signals via falsification of local compressive measurements,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 18, pp. 4696–4706, Sep. 2019.
[12] A. Mohammadi, D. Ciuonzo, A. Khazaee, and P. S. Rossi, “Generalized locally most powerful tests for distributed sparse signal detection,” IEEE Trans. Signal Inf. Process. Over Netw., vol. 8, pp. 528–542, 2022.
[13] F. Chen, F. Lim, O. Abari, A. Chandrakasan, and V. Stojanovic, “Energyaware design of compressed sensing systems for wireless sensors under performance and reliability constraints,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 650–661, Mar. 2013.
[14] S. Feizi and M. Medard, “A power efficient sensing/communication scheme: Joint source-channel-network coding by using compressive sensing,” in Proc. 49th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), Sep. 2011, pp. 1048–1054.
[15] S. Padalkar, A. Korlekar, and U. Pacharaney, “Data gathering in wireless sensor network for energy efficiency with and without compressive sensing at sensor node,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun. Signal Process. (ICCSP), Apr. 2016, pp. 1356–1359.
[16] L. Zheng, T. Zhu, and X. Ma, “Block compressed sensing-based joint source-channel coding for wireless image transmission,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Signal Process. (WCSP), Oct. 2020, pp. 13–18.
[17] R. Ma, Q. Hao, X. Hu, and C. Wang, “Space coding schemes for multiple human localization with fiber-optic sensors,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 4643–4653, Jun. 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: TREE-SEARCH TECHNIQUES FOR JOINT ITERATIVE CS AND LDPC DECODING IN WSNs

451

[18] L. Hanzo and T. Liew, Turbo Coding, Turbo Equalisation and SpaceTime Coding for Transmission Over Fading Channels. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, Oct. 2002.
[19] A. Golmohammadi and D. G. M. Mitchell, “Concatenated spatially coupled LDPC codes with sliding window decoding for joint sourcechannel coding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 851–864, Feb. 2022.
[20] C. Studer and H. Bölcskei, “Soft-input soft-output single treesearch sphere decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 4827–4842, Oct. 2010.
[21] L. Hanzo and P. Cherriman, Video Compression and CommunicationsX: From Basics to H.261, H.263, H.264, MPEG4 for DVB and HSDPA-Style Adaptive Turbo-Transceivers. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley-IEEE Press, Nov. 2007.
[22] B. M. Hochwald and S. T. Brink, “Achieving near-capacity on a multiple-antenna channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 389–399, Mar. 2003.
[23] I. E. Bocharova et al., “Multi-class source-channel coding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 5093–5104, Sep. 2016.
[24] X. Wang and X. Wu, “Index assignment optimization for joint sourcechannel MAP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 901–910, Mar. 2010.
[25] B. Knoop, T. Wiegand, and S. Paul, “Low-complexity and approximative sphere decoding of sparse signals,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. 46th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput. (ASILOMAR), Nov. 2012, pp. 1241–1244.
[26] D. Ciuonzo, G. Romano, and P. S. Rossi, “Channel-aware decision fusion in distributed MIMO wireless sensor networks: Decode-and-fuse vs. decode-then-fuse,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 2976–2985, Aug. 2012.
[27] P. Suárez-Casal, Ó. Fresnedo, L. Castedo, and J. García-Frías, “Analog transmission of correlated sources over fading simo multiple access channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 2999–3011, Jul. 2017.
[28] M. Mohammadkarimi, M. Mehrabi, M. Ardakani, and Y. Jing, “Deep learning-based sphere decoding,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 4368–4378, Sep. 2019.
[29] C. Xu, S. X. Ng, and L. Hanzo, “Multiple-symbol differential sphere detection and decision-feedback differential detection conceived for differential QAM,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 8345–8360, Oct. 2016.

[30] J. W. Choi, B. Shim, Y. Ding, B. Rao, and D. I. Kim, “Compressed sensing for wireless communications: Useful tips and tricks,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1527–1550, 3rd Quart., 2017.
[31] Physical Layer Procedures for Data (Release 15), Standard TS 38.214, 3GPP, Nov. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://portal.3gpp.org/ngppapp/ CreateTdoc.aspx?mode=view&contributionId=840513
[32] Y. Rosmansyah, Soft-Demodulation QPSK and 16-QAM for Turbo Coded WCDMA Mobile Communication Systems. Guildford, U.K.: University of Surrey, 2003, pp. 54–55. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=tZarnQEACAAJ
[33] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D.-M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), vol. 2, Nov. 2001, p. 1036.
[34] A. Movahed, M. C. Reed, N. Aboutorab, and S. E. Tajbakhsh, “EXIT chart analysis of turbo compressed sensing using message passing dequantization,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 64, no. 24, pp. 6600–6612, Dec. 2016.
[35] X. Zuo, R. G. Maunder, and L. Hanzo, “Design of fixed-point processing based LDPC codes using EXIT charts,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC Fall), Sep. 2011, pp. 1–5.
[36] S. Ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Nov. 2001.
[37] S. X. Ng, J. Wang, M. Tao, L. L. Yang, and L. Hanzo, “Iteratively decoded variable length space-time coded modulation: Code construction and convergence analysis,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 1953–1963, May 2007.
[38] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[39] M. Baldi, G. Cancellieri, A. Carassai, and F. Chiaraluce, “LDPC codes based on serially concatenated multiple parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 142–144, Feb. 2009.
[40] P. Hailes, L. Xu, R. G. Maunder, B. M. Al-Hashimi, and L. Hanzo, “Hardware-efficient node processing unit architectures for flexible LDPC decoder implementations,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 1919–1923, Dec. 2018.
[41] S. Shao et al., “Survey of turbo, LDPC, and polar decoder ASIC implementations,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2309–2333, 3rd Quart., 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

