Pelican: Radiation-tolerant Computational Storage
Alex G Swehla, Jason R Cerundolo

Abstract—Pelican is a radiation-tolerant, high-capacity solid state drive designed for spacecraft. This storage device provides high-capacity data storage through the use of 3D-NAND technology and a custom flash controller implementation. Pelican is designed from the ground up to mitigate the adverse effects of radiation while providing high performance with low Size, Weight, and Power (SWaP).
Keywords—storage, SSD, solid state drive, memory, NAND, computational storage
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern satellites generate, store, and transmit an everincreasing amount of data [1]. New sensing methods, such as hyperspectral and Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) require orders of magnitude more data storage than more traditional sensing methods such as optical imaging. There is an urgent need for reliable onboard data storage to support these new satellites. At a minimum, satellites need to temporarily store data between capture and downlink. However, new use cases for edge computing also benefit from access to large amounts of onboard reference data.
Onboard data storage capabilities are lagging data generation technologies. Currently, satellite integrators have two less-than-ideal options. They can use legacy systems that are reliable, but are large, heavy, and provide low capacity. Or they can use modern Solid-State Drives (SSDs), which have high capacity, but are not designed for the harsh environment of space.
Pelican provides high capacity with the use of modern 3DNAND along with high reliability with its custom flash controller design. Additionally, Pelican has built-in computing capabilities, enabling Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) workloads to run directly on data in the drive. Finally, the custom controller design provides a great deal of flexibility to tune the performance of the drive to the use case and even enable unique features.
II. DESIGN OVERVIEW
A. Overall Hardware Design
At the core of Pelican is a Versal AI Edge System on Chip (SoC) produced by US-based Xilinx, a subsidiary of AMD, based in the US [2]. The Versal AI Edge series of chips provides a complex heterogeneous compute platform based on the 7 nm FinFET process. The chip features a dual-core ARM Cortex-A72 processor running at up to 1,300 MHz, a dualcore ARM Cortex-R5 microcontroller running at up to 600 MHz, two Triple Modular Redundant (TMR) MicroBlaze microcontrollers, AI Engines, Digital Signal Processors (DSPs), Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) fabric, high speed differential transceivers, and a variety of peripherals. Its silicon process provides an increased radiation-tolerance by design compared with the previous generation, the UltraScale+, which uses a 16 nm FinFET process.
Versal has a variety of design features that provide a great deal of radiation tolerance, even in the commercial variants.
This work was funded in part by NASA.

On the processing side, every level of internal cache has Error Correction Codes (ECC). The dual-core ARM Cortex-A72 has ECC for both its L1 and L2 caches. The dual-core ARM Cortex-R5 has ECC for its L1 caches and its Tightly Coupled Memory (TCM). The 256 KB On-Chip Memory (OCM) also has ECC. In radiation tests on the UltraScale+, the researchers were not able to induce an upset in the processor with their neutron beam, almost certainly due to the extensive use of ECC [3]. The Versal design should outperform the UltraScale+, though it will require a large amount of beam time to prove it. Finally, the TMR MicroBlaze processor can be programmed to scrub the configuration memory of the programmable logic and monitor onboard telemetry to detect and correct radiation-induced errors.
The complete system will comprise the Versal SoC along with a rad-tolerant power system, RAM, NOR flash memory, oscillators, interface circuits, and 3D NAND chips. For RAM, the design will include up to 32 GB of LPDDR4 with ECC. This is significantly more than is required for normal SSD designs. However, this extra RAM is useful for enabling more comprehensive data caching as well as the computational engine. LPDDR4 was chosen over DDR4 primarily for its lower power consumption. Feasibility analyses indicate that the NAND itself will be the primary bottleneck, so the loss of performance compared to DDR4 was acceptable. The NOR flash memory stores the bootloader code that is used to program and initialize the SoC. It has a simpler interface than the NAND flash and is more inherently immune to radiation. As this is a critical component, a rad-tolerant version of the NOR flash is planned for Pelican. Below is a simplified electrical block diagram showing the major subsystems.
Fig. 1. Pelican Electrical Block Diagram
Pelican’s primary data interface is Non-volatile Memory Express (NVMe) protocol over a Peripheral Component Interconnect Express (PCIe) Interface. This was specifically requested by NASA, who funded an initial feasibility study and is now funding prototype development. It is also a commonly used standard in modern terrestrial computing. However, it will be possible to customize this as needed. The initial plan is to use two interfaces, each 4 lanes of PCIe at Gen4 speeds. This dual port design allows for redundant connections to multiple hosts.

EDHPC 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:08:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Another choice for a primary data interface is NVMe over dual 40G ethernet ports. This interface will use the same pins as PCIe, allowing reconfiguration without hardware modifications. It will also be possible to support one ethernet and one PCIe connection.
Other possible interfaces include SpaceFibre, SpaceWire, LVDS, RS-422, and CAN. The slower speed interfaces are more appropriate for a connection to a flight computer for telemetry, command, and control. Finally, dedicated debug interfaces will be used internally for development and initial programming.
Pelican’s form factor will initially be PC104, to support both CubeSat and SmallSat missions. The flexibility provided by a completely in-house design eliminates the need for mechanical and electrical interface adapters, reducing the size, weight, and power of a complete solution.
B. Controller Hardware Design Pelican’s NAND controller design provides redundancy
and reliability while maintaining high performance. At a high level, the design comprises two redundant strings of NAND managers and chips coordinated by a TMR core. Each string has its own hardware to manage the NAND arrays with independent connections to its own NAND chips. Electrical power to the NAND strings is independent, so even in the case of a radiation-induced power cycle of one string’s NAND, the other string can carry on.
Each NAND manager is implemented as a TMR microcontroller. This physically spreads out the computation and provides a method of detecting a radiation-induced upset. Below is a simplified model of the data flow through the system.
Fig. 2. Pelican Data Flow Model
C. Firmware Design Pelican will use Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes to provide error correction for the data stored in NAND. This is in contrast to many modern SSDs, which use Bose, Chaudhuri, Hocquenghem (BCH) codes [4]. BCH codes can correct multiple-bit errors, both clustered and scattered, and is relatively efficient in terms of computational power. LDPC codes are even more efficient, both in terms of computational power and with respect to data overhead. With long blocks, LDPC codes can approach the Shannon limit, the maximum rate data can be transmitted over a channel with a given noise level. Additionally, LDPC codes can decode both hard-bit and soft-bit information in the NAND flash. This allows the decoder to use reads at multiple voltage levels to distinguish adjacent digital values more accurately. These advantages provide an outsized advantage when increasing drive

capacity by moving to higher density 3D NAND. High-end commercial SSD manufacturers are starting to use LDPC as well. This will allow Pelican to take advantage of industry best practices from ground-based products and implement them in the space environment.
Within LDPC algorithms, there are many codes to choose from, providing a balance between redundancy and capacity. Some work remains to identify the best code to use for Pelican. In practice, the chosen code will be a function of use case, the radiation environment, drive age, and customer preferences. High altitude orbits crossing through the radiation belts will require more redundancy than low inclination, low altitude orbits. As the entire controller is designed in-house, this offers the ability to tune the strength of the LDPC codes. For example, customers using Pelican to store a filesystem for a critical system, such as a payload controller, might prefer to trade capacity for increased reliability. On the other hand, customers storing Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) data, for example, might be willing to tolerate some number of bit flips in the data in exchange for increased capacity. Finally, the NAND flash itself physically ages with continued use. This can reduce the voltage differences between neighboring digital codes, potentially introducing errors. Pelican’s controller can mitigate this effect by choosing progressively more redundant codes throughout the lifetime of the drive.
Unfortunately, error correcting codes are not enough to guarantee data integrity, especially in a high radiation environment. Larger hardware failures, such as losing anything from a whole page to an entire die, can cause a catastrophic loss of data. The commercial SSD market is solving this problem by implementing a solution similar to a Redundant Array of Disks (RAID) called a Redundant Array of Independent Silicon Elements (RAISE) [5]. Data is stored on one die with its parity data stored on another. If either die fails, all the data can be reconstructed. Pelican is taking this technique one step further with independent NAND managers storing duplicate copies of the data. Each manager has its own communication bus to its NAND chips. This defends against not only a die failure, but also a Single Event Functional Interrupt (SEFI) or other failure within the NAND manager, or even damage to the electrical bus used for communication between the manager and its NAND chips. The NAND managers report to a single Main Controller, which is designed in a TMR configuration, allowing it to continue functioning even with a failure of one of its three redundant cores. This design allows Pelican to continue to operate with up to half its NAND chips failed. Future work might allow more than two independent strings of a NAND manager with its NAND chips to provide further redundancy.
III. FEATURES AND KEY SPECIFICATIONS
A. Initial Performance Targets
Performance targets for the first version of the drive are listed the table below. These are considered minimum requirements. Actual performance will likely exceed these numbers. The source for these targets varies, but includes the requirements from NASA [6], feedback from potential customers, and internal feasibility studies.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:08:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I.

PERFORMANCE TARGETS

Metric

Requirement

Capacity

2 TB

Sustained Read 2,000 MB/s

Sustained Write
Input/Output Operations Per Second
Endurance
Electrical Interface
Input Voltage

1,000 MB/s 10,000-30,000 1,200 TBW NVMe over PCIe Gen4 x4 lanes 12 VDC

Volume

96 x 91 x 15 mm (without enclosure)

Mass Power Temperture

100 g (without enclosure)
<1 W idle 15 W active, normal reads and writes 30 W absolute maximum, using AI Engines
-40 to +85 C (operating) -55 to +105 C (non-operating)

1) Data Performance Target Selection.
The performance targets listed are minimum targets that were selected to be a balance between existing data recorders and the latest commercial drives. The primary goal is to provide an acceptable baseline level of performance that leaves room for additional optimization to be applied for specific applications. Overall, these targets are modeled after existing commercial PCIe Gen2 NVMe drives. A review of existing compute systems within space platforms led to the conclusion that a significant portion of customers’ needs fall within the performance capabilities of Gen2 drives. The selected SoC has existing PCIe Hard IP that supports up to 16 lanes of Gen4 PCIe. This provides significant room for expansion of performance informed by operational data, and a path to continue optimizing the data pipelines within the system. This flexibility and additional capacity should provide a solid base for application specific firmwares to accelerate storage performance as needed for specific workloads and use cases.
2) Data Reliablity Target Selection.
Similarly, the minimum data endurance was settled on by matching the existing industry standards for commercial 2 TB NVMe drives. Holding to this target puts the design in line with existing commercial drives while providing additional room to improve based on operational data of TLC flash onorbit. The system is significantly over provisioned with the addition of over double the flash needed to meet the target capacity, This endurance target will also be affected by application specific modes, for example trading data resiliency for additional capacity and endurance by using more of the flash as bulk storage outside the default dualredundant architecture. As with performance tuning, it is anticipated that there will be significant demand for tuning the endurance targets to achieve other performance metrics.
This minimum data endurance number is also consistent with the capabilities of the underlying flash. TLC flash typically lists an endurance of 3,000 program/erase cycles in

TLC mode. Assuming no over-provisioning, this would result in an endurance of 6,000 TBW. However, because the memory can only be erased in discrete blocks, it is not possible to perfectly match this theoretical maximum. The minimum target of 1,200 TBW represents an 80% derating, a comfortable margin.
B. Systems Reliability Design
The primary challenge with this design is mitigating the effects of radiation, which can be categorized as short-term Single Event Effects (SEEs) or longer-term Total Ionizing Dose (TID) effects [7]. Short Low Earth Orbit (LEO) missions, lasting up to 5 years, experience a fairly low total dose compared to Geostationary Earth Orbit (GEO) or Medium Earth Orbit (MEO), usually less than 20 krad vs more than 100 krad for long GEO missions. The initial focus of Pelican is on LEO, so TID is less of concern at this stage of the product development.
SEEs are the primary concern for Pelican’s initial LEO missions. These effects can be further categorized into two categories, hardware and software errors. Hardware errors include Single Event Latch-ups (SELs), where a transistor is activated by a particle of radiation, potentially leading to a short circuit that permanently damages the hardware. These effects are mitigated by the careful selection of radiationtolerant power supplies and the use of current-limiting load switches. Power supplies are chosen based on ground-based radiation testing, in-flight heritage, and design review. This design will also include load switches that can detect the signature of an SEL, even if the event doesn’t trigger a normal over current limit, allowing for a safe power cycle to return to a normal state. Software errors include Single Event Upsets (SEUs), aka bit-flips in data, and Single Event Functional Interrupts (SEFIs), aka bit-flips in instructions. The strategy to deal with these effects is detailed below.
Based on customer interviews and the team’s prior experience, commercial NAND flash itself holds up well to radiation, and most failures are the result of the controller malfunctioning. However, one failure mode for NAND chips is their built-in power supply for performing erasures. The topology of NAND requires a higher voltage for erasing than programming. Historically, this was broken out as a separate, necessary power rail, VPP. To simply the system design, most modern NAND includes a step-up power converter to generate the high voltage internally from the normal low voltage supply. This power supply involves the use of internal capacitors to implement a charge pump design. These large, parallel plates are an easy target for radiation, and if destroyed, render the chip useless [8]. However, in the interest of increasing power efficiency, some NAND chips now support an option to provide this high-voltage power supply externally. Pelican will take advantage of this external VPP pin to bypass this known weakness with NAND chips.
For missions beyond LEO, the system can be further hardened against radiation. Xilinx has already announced a QML Class B screened option for their Versal products [9]. Pelican’s power supplies can be swapped for similarly radhard components. This will increase the cost and lead times

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:08:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

beyond what the market will bear for LEO missions, making it a more appropriate option for missions to MEO, GEO, or beyond.
Overall, the goal of the system design is to provide a robust platform for the NAND controller by mitigating radiation-induced hardware faults. The controller itself will mitigate radiation-induced software faults.
C. Reliability Within the Flash controller system
To maintain both a high level of data protection and a high level of performance Pelican employs a multi-layered approach to error detection and correction. Each of these techniques provides resiliency against different fault categories. Implementing ECC at different levels within the system not only allows for surfacing detection and correction rates of errors through telemetry, but also allows for defense against errors in one part of the system entering the data handling pipeline and persisting to storage in the NAND flash.
1) Error Correction Codes
ECC is the first line of defense within the system. The design uses an SoC that contains ECC capability on not only the DRAM but also each cache layer within the system. This allows a level of confidence that cached results within the processors handling the data pipeline will not suffer from faults poisoning the caches or data in ram.
The SoC uses Hamming Codes for Single Error Correction and Double Error Detection within the RAM and cache layers of the systems. This is built into the Hard IP within the SoC for the DRAM controller and the individual Caches available to the processor cores. Additionally, Xilinx provides an option to enable ECC on the internal data streams between processors within the chip.
On the flash memory, Pelican implements the latest ECC technique being implemented on commercial SSDs, Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes. This scheme, much like Turbo Codes, allows for high data throughput while also providing correction of errors within a system approaching the theoretical Shannon limit. At a minimum, the design will be tuned such that the data encoded for writing onto the flash satisfy the manufacturer’s requirements. This will become the starting point for the system design. Other information, including the intended application, data resiliency targets, and minimum storage needs, will determine how much additional overhead is needed to enable detection and correction of additional errors within the flash. These parameters can also be tuned on a block by block basis to account for wear in the system as blocks sustain additional program/erase cycles. Each cycle physically wears the underlying silicon and increases the possible bit error rate. Monitoring and responding to the age of these blocks will allow Pelican to achieve higher endurance at the cost of reduced storage as the flash ages, possibly extending the useful life of assets on-orbit.
2) Triple Modular Redundency

ECC alone is not enough to appropriately guard against SEUs. To this end, every processing core within the system is implemented as a Triple Modular Redundant system. Dual Core Lock-Step (DCLS) was briefly considered, however the additional fault recovery ability afforded by a TMR system was worth the trade off in extra FPGA fabric needed for the system. Pelican uses multiple layers of TMR voters to attempt to safeguard the processing subsystems within the data pipeline from upsets. Where possible, the preference is for discreet redundant copies of peripherals to be positioned behind a TMR voter. This helps prevent persistent errors resulting from a failure within a single peripheral from entering the system. It also allows for more granular reporting of errors within the system. This is achieved at the expense of additional FPGA fabric. For peripherals like the DMA engines, however, the voter must be placed on the input to the DMA core. This allows for de-confliction and recovery from any faults within the system prior to issuing commands to the DMA engines. Finally, preferring DMA over discreet data streams not only improves performance of the system but allows for the processing of data in place and moves the ownership of the buffer to the system level, reducing the chance that an error will be introduced in transit.
3) Temporal Skew of Instructions within the TMR processors
As an extra layer of protection and mitigation of runtime upsets within the system, Pelican uses temporal skew of the instructions within the TMR system. The cores within the system will be delayed by a given number of instructions, for example, core one would have no delay, core two would have a delay of 1 instruction, and core three would have a delay of 2 instructions. Additionally, the output of the cores would be delayed as needed so the input to the voters is temporally consistent. This technique effectively spreads the processing of instructions within the system over time allowing for more resiliency from instantaneous upsets, forming the basis for additional soft error mitigation within the system. This technique is commonly used in safety oriented dual core lockstep systems to provide a level of immunity to common mode errors that occur over short periods of time. The temporal diversity of the cores allows the other cores within the system to effectively be used as “checker” cores. Extending this to the TMR system provides Pelican with an additional ability to detect errors within the system. This technique can be further enhanced with the use of dynamic delay selection, which would allow the TMR subsystem to respond to increases in common mode faults by providing more temporal skew and allowing for more instruction cycles for mitigation of these common mode errors.
4) Physical Layout Concerns within the FPGA Fabric
The final consideration within the FPGA core is the physical placement of the individual cores within the various clock domains of the FPGA fabric. Through careful control of constraints, the synthesis step of the system can be guided to physically spread out the various cores in a TMR subsystem. This increases fault immunity within the system. Physically placing the different cores in different clock

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:08:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

domains provides a level of resiliency against power glitches or other upsets within the running FPGA, or in the event of a localized upset, helps reduce the incidences of common mode errors. Careful control over placement during synthesis is key to increased resiliency, but also requires additional care to be taken. Since clock domain boundaries will be crossed, Pelican also makes use of registered buffers to ensure that data crossing clock domains is not affected by clock skew between different clock domains.
5) Dual-Redundant Nand Flash Arrays.
The final layer of defense in the Pelican architecture outside of the Flash controller core is the use of dualredundant strings of NAND flash. Much like terrestrial datacenters use multiple independent arrays of disks to safeguard data, Pelican uses multiple redundant arrays of flash chips to isolate failures within the system. The primary goal is to provide physical redundancy in the event of a complete failure of a flash chip within the system. This redundancy also allows for the same data to be retrieved from both strings to identify and correct potential upsets within the data as well. Physically separating the NAND arrays and providing them with power from different power supplies not only isolates the system from failures within a single chip, but also defends against failures arising from potential glitches on the power rails supplying the individual flash chips.
This system provides additional benefits beyond fault mitigation. Much like RAID arrays (Redundant Arrays Of Independent Disks), the overall topology of NAND devices can be adjusted to tune for different requirements. For example, in systems that require a high level of reliability in storage the two arrays can be configured as mirrors of each other. This allows the system to recover data in the event of failure of up to half of the NAND devices. If reliability targets are less of a concern, and some amount of bit flip errors can be tolerated in exchange for higher storage capacity, then the system can be configured to use all available NAND as a contiguous pool, reducing the system’s overall reliability, but increasing its raw throughput and data storage capability.
The system is also not limited to a binary choice of these modes but can incorporate combinations of storage schemes within the NAND arrays to achieve desired reliability, performance, and storage targets. For example, some of the flash can be configured as redundant for filesystem storage and the rest configured for high-capacity payload data storage. This adaptability is a unique feature of Pelican, allowing mission planners and spacecraft integrators to dial in parameters to meet their storage and performance needs.
D. Application Specific Firmware and Parameter Tuning
Pelican’s architecture enables adaptability to mission needs. Through experience in industry, the team has identified the need for adaptability and responsiveness to meet the highly variable mission goals of end users. Within terrestrial datacenters it is common to tune storage topologies, system configurations, and other parameters to achieve the needed performance for a given workload.

Pelican brings this adaptability to space systems through custom firmware that create different drive “personalities” that adapt to different needs. These changes can even be applied in flight to adapt to changing mission parameters, for example, hosted payload providers that experience shifting customer needs within the span of an asset’s lifecycle.
E. Additional Host Interface Extensions
The Pelican controller implementation uses NVMe (NonVolatile Memory Express) as its primary interface. While initial releases of this specification used PCIe exclusively for transport, newer implementations allow for the use of variety of transports. Currently implemented transports include, PCIe, Fiber Channel, Ethernet, RDMA, and Infiniband. Additional specifications exist for NVMe over fabrics as well. This extensibility in swappable transports allows Pelican to be configured to use many different transport layers. Some transports commonly found within spacecraft busses are PCIe, ethernet, SpaceWire, and SpaceFiber. Pelican can use excess FPGA fabric to implement any other interfaces that might be needed, reusing pins on the external connectors for those interfaces. This built-in flexibility allows for a much shorter path to integration with existing spacecraft buses. In most cases this only requires the addition of drivers to support the change in transport layer, as well as additional gateware to implement the hardware layer of novel interfaces.
F. Computational Storage and Additional Accelerators.
Lastly, Pelican provides the ability to run workloads alongside the data stored in the NAND flash. The Versal SoC selected for this system contains dual Arm Cortex-R5 cores, and Dual Cortex-A72 cores. These cores are connected through a Network on Chip (NoC) to the FPGA fabric allowing for high-speed communication directly with the flash controller system. This enables these cores to be used for data processing workloads collocated with the data for operations that benefit from a much higher bandwidth. This provides system integrators and mission planners with additional high performance processing systems for a marginal increase in power consumption. The NoC also allows the processing system to be connected directly to its own ethernet PHY or other external connection for direct access by C&DH systems or other units within the spacecraft.
The Versal also contains DSP engines for accelerating workloads within the system. Combining this with a large amount of memory for data caching from the NAND flash and the processing core can greatly accelerate DSP-based workloads for in-situ processing of data on the disk.
The Versal also contains AI Engines, which are specifically designed to accelerate ML workloads and similar workloads that benefit from wide vector SIMD processors. The AI Engines are a matrix of individual processors, each with their own housekeeping core, accelerator cores, and a small amount of memory. These engines are arranged in a tiled architecture and allow communication between adjacent tiles. This allows the Versal to achieve significantly higher

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:08:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

computational efficiency, up to five times better than a GPU on a performance per watt basis. Combined with the vector processors’ built in DMA engines and local instruction and data memories, these units can reach very high throughput for ML workloads within the system with extremely efficient power usage compared to GPUs. The AI Engines are also connected to the DSP engines for additional acceleration of workloads within the AI Engine subsystem.
Pelican is architected to provide access to any resources within the Versal that are not being used by the flash controller system. Customers are encouraged to take advantage of those resources to simplify mission planning, integration, and accelerate computational workloads. The FPGA fabric also supports partial reconfiguration to allow for the remaining FPGA fabric to be used for custom accelerators or other FPGA workloads the customer might require.
IV. DEVELOPMENT STATUS
Pelican is currently early in its development cycle, but progress will increase rapidly through 2023 and 2024. By the end of 2023, flight-ready prototype units will be ready for qualification and acceptance testing. The first customer missions will be launched by mid 2024.
A. Previous Work
A feasibility study and initial design work has been completed as part of a NASA Phase I Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) contract. This work proved out the core flash controller design and scoped the rest of the work to develop a prototype. The hardware design was implemented in FPGA fabric on a Xilinx development board. This informed the selection of a new FPGA chip by allowing detailed estimates of the amount of FPGA fabric required for the design. On NASA Technical Readiness Level (TRL) scale, the design advanced from TRL 2 to TRL 3.
This Phase I effort also involved interviewing potential customers and validating the market for this product. This provided invaluable feedback on the design. It also demonstrated strong commercial interest, including multiple offers for joint demonstration missions on a no-fundsexchanged basis.
Based on the Phase I effort, a Phase II effort was proposed and selected by NASA. This effort will improve the design from TRL 3 to TRL 8, taking the design from architecture to a demo mission.

B. Future Work
The next major objective is to design, build, and test a hardware prototype. This will validate the design ahead of an initial demonstration mission. Two iterations of prototypes are planned. The first design will be non-form factor and focus on enabling gateware and firmware development, electrical validation, and performance testing. A second design will be flight-ready, with an appropriate form factor for integration into a spacecraft.
V. SUMMARY
Pelican delivers high capacity and high reliability at low SWaP with its custom NAND flash controller built on robust hardware and modern NAND flash. Its flexible design enables reconfiguration for various missions and its built-in computational engine provides new capabilities. Pelican represents a revolutionary step forward in data storage for spacecraft.
REFERENCES
[1] Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA Turns to the Cloud for Help With Next-Generation Earth Missions”, Retrieved 30 March 2023, https://sealevel.nasa.gov/news/226/nasa-turns-to-the-cloud-for-helpwith-next-generation-earth-missions/
[2] Xilinx, “Versal AI Edge Series”, Retrieved 30 March 2023, https://www.xilinx.com/products/silicon-devices/acap/versal-aiedge.html
[3] J. D. Anderson, J. C. Leavitt and M. J. Wirthlin, "Neutron Radiation Beam Results for the Xilinx UltraScale+ MPSoC," 2018 IEEE Radiation Effects Data Workshop (REDW), Waikoloa, HI, USA, 2018, pp. 1-7, doi: 10.1109/NSREC.2018.8584297.
[4] E. Haratsch, “NAND Flash Media Management Algorithms”, Flash Memory Summit 2016, Santa Clara, CA
[5] T. Erickson, "SandForce seeks to improve SSD controllers". Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved 31 August 2010.
[6] NASA SBIR 2022 Program Solication, Retrieved 30 March 2023, https://sbir.nasa.gov/solicit/79614/detail?data=ch9
[7] M. J. Campola, J. A. Pellish, “Radiation Hardness Assurance: Evolving for NewSpace”, Radiation and its Effects on Components and Systems (RADECS), Montpellier, France, September 16th , 2019
[8] D. N. Nguyen, C. I. Lee and A. H. Johnston, "Total ionizing dose effects on flash memories," 1998 IEEE Radiation Effects Data Workshop. NSREC 98. Workshop Record. Held in conjunction with IEEE Nuclear and Space Radiation Effects Conference (Cat. No.98TH8385), Newport Beach, CA, USA, 1998, pp. 100-103, doi: 10.1109/REDW.1998.731486.
[9] AMD, “AMD Announces Completion of Class B Qualification for First Space-Grade Versal Adaptive SoCs Enabling On-Board AI Processing in Space“, Retrieved 24 August 2023, https://www.amd.com/en/press-releases/2022-11-15-amd-announcescompletion-class-b-qualification-for-first-space-grade

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:08:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

