2023 53rd Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks - Supplemental Volume (DSN-S)

2023 53rd Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks - Supplemental Volume (DSN-S) | 979-8-3503-2545-4/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/DSN-S58398.2023.00021

ACE: An Analog Cell Emulator for Dependability Study of NAND Flash Memory

Jeoungwon Lee∗, Heekwon Park†, Gunhee Choi∗, Bryan S. Kim‡, Seehwan Yoo∗§, Jaedong Lee∗, Jongmoo Choi∗§ ∗{gerdenlee960828, choi gunhee, seehwan.yoo, letsdoit, choijm}@dankook.ac.kr
Dankook University, Yongin-si, South Korea †heekwon.p@samsung.com, Samsung Electronics, Mountain View, CA, USA
‡bkim01@syr.edu, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, USA §corresponding author

Abstract—Reliability is one of the primary concerns in modern SSD designs. Despite the benefits of high performance, low power consumption, and increased density, the vendors struggle with the reliability of user data due to various sources of analog noise. There were consorted efforts and studies to improve the reliability issues in SSDs, but we still need experimenting tools that present analog states of errors. To address this issue, we propose a novel NAND flash memory emulator, called ACE (Analog Cell Emulator), that uses threshold voltages for dependability studies. The proposed emulator maintains data as analog values through threshold voltage modeling, enabling emulation of endurance, retention, and disturbance errors of flash memory. To reduce the emulation overhead, metadata in a cell, page, and block are managed separately, and emulation is performed while reading rather than periodic error emulation. We evaluate the accuracy of ACE by comparing its signal with that of actual devices, with the results indicating that the signal differences are up to 4.3%. Additionally, we analyze two reliability enhancement techniques, ECC (Error Correction Code) and read-retry, using ACE with adjusted reference voltages. This analysis, which could not be feasible with existing emulators, demonstrates the advantages of the proposed analog emulator.
Index Terms—Flash memory, Analog cell emulator, Noise modeling, Reliability enhancement techniques
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the primary objectives for flash memory vendors is to increase integration density, thereby providing cost-effective flash chips with greater capacity. This is often achieved through techniques such as storing multiple bits in a cell, such as MLC (Multiple Level Cell), TLC (Triple Level Cell), QLC (Quadruple Level Cell), and so on. Another approach is to utilize 3D NAND (3 Dimensional NAND), where memory cells are vertically stacked in multiple layers [1].
Such a density enhancement comes at a cost in terms of analog noise, generating more noise that can shift a cell’s threshold voltage, the minimum gate-to-source voltage. This shift eventually leads to flash memory errors such as endurance, retention, and disturbance errors [2], [7]. The
This work was supported in part by Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2021-0-01475, (SW StarLab) Development of Novel Key-Value DB for Unstructured Bigdata and No. 2022-0-01022) and by the MSIT (Ministry of Science, ICT), Korea, under the High-Potential Individuals Global Training Program (RS-2022-00154903), supervised by the IITP.

endurance error stems from the weakness of a cell to isolate electrons in the floating gate due to the increase of P/E cycles (Programming/Erase cycles), resulting in a threshold voltage shift. The retention error is caused by the leakage of electrons in a cell, which also triggers a voltage shift. Finally, the disturbance error is driven by a voltage shift due to the read or write of neighboring cells.
To suppress these errors, various techniques, such as ECC (Error Correction Code), read-retry, refresh, reprogramming, and wear-leveling, are proposed to enhance the reliability of flash memory. ECC employs specialized hardware logic to detect and correct errors [8], [9]. Read-retry adjusts a reference voltage to minimize errors that occur during reading [10]. The refresh technique involves rewriting old blocks to prevent data loss [11] while wear-leveling ensures that all blocks are used evenly to prevent certain blocks from wearing out faster than others [12]–[15].
These reliability enhancement techniques can be evaluated using either a hardware board [2], [16] or a software emulator [17]–[19]. While the hardware approach is accurate, exploring diverse errors can be expensive and less flexible. In contrast, the software emulation approach is easier to experiment than the hardware approaches. However, it is difficult to emulate analog noise, and an accuracy concern exists. In particular, retention and disturbance errors are caused by gradual threshold voltage shifts, making it difficult to evaluate the enhancement techniques precisely.
To address this difficulty, we propose a new flash memory emulator called ACE (Analog Cell Emulator) that has the following three features. First, it manipulates each cell with threshold voltages instead of binary digits (bit) data values. Depending on the NAND type, a cell can have various numbers of states. For instance, a cell in MLC has four states, and a cell in TLC has eight states. Existing emulators use bits to present the data in a cell, presenting distinct states (e.g., 00∼11 in MLC, 000∼111 in TLC).
ACE manages it using a range of voltages (e.g., 50∼100). We configure voltages of cells that have the same state, according to the Gaussian distribution since it is known as a good approximation of actual hardware behaviors [2]–[6]. This choice makes it possible for ACE to emulate various

979-8-3503-2545-4/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

28

DOI 10.1109/DSN-S58398.2023.00021

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:07:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

analog noises with the consideration of strong and weak cells.
Second, we devise four equations for threshold voltage distribution and noise modeling. We identify three groups of parameters: 1) mean and standard deviation for the voltage distribution, 2) metadata that affects noise such as P/E cycles, number of disturbances, and last write time, and 3) weights that govern how much the metadata influence both voltage shifts and distribution changes. Then, we obtain the values of these parameters by applying a polynomial regression [20], a machine learning method based on voltage shift data measured by previous studies using real NAND flash devices [2], [21]– [23].
Third, we develop an efficient emulation algorithm. For accurate noise emulation, especially the retention noise, we need to conduct the voltage shift periodically to reflect the electron loss over time. However, such periodic updates of all cells incur considerable computational overhead. To tackle this overhead, ACE assesses the voltage shift only during reads without periodic updates. Furthermore, each cell maintains a relative location in the distribution rather than an actual voltage value, enabling it to adapt to distribution changes in a lightweight manner.
We implement ACE by extending FEMU [18], an opensource SSD emulator widely used in various research. The evaluation of ACE comprises two aspects: accuracy and usability. For the accuracy evaluation, we compare the threshold voltage shifts emulated by ACE with those measured using real flash devices. Two different types of flash devices are used in the experiment, namely MLC [21]–[23] and TLC [2]. The experimental results indicate that the differences between the emulated and measured threshold voltage shifts are less than 4.3%. For the usability, we analyze the effectiveness of ECC and read-retry techniques by adjusting the reference voltages, which is impossible with existing emulators.
We make the following contributions:
• To the best of our knowledge, this is the first emulator for flash memory that operates on analog voltages rather than digital bits.
• We build a model for threshold voltage distribution and noise and obtain essential parameters by applying a polynomial regression based on actual flash memory data.
• We design an algorithm that can emulate various flash memory errors in a lightweight manner by estimating noise at a read time without periodic updates.
• Our proposal allows us to analyze diverse reliability enhancement techniques from the viewpoint of analog signals, which are infeasible in the existing emulators.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II explains flash memory errors and reliability enhancement techniques. We discuss the limitations of the existing reliability test environments in Section III. Details of ACE are given in Section IV. We describe the accuracy and usability of ACE in Section V. Finally, we present the conclusions and future work in Section VI.

Fig. 1. 2D/3D NAND flash memory structures: The floating gate stores electrons, which determine the threshold voltage of a cell.
Fig. 2. Example of threshold voltage distribution and voltage shift in MLC.
II. BACKGROUND In this section, we firstly provide an overview of the structure of 2D and 3D NAND flash memory. Then, we discuss three common flash memory errors from analog noise, and present the techniques in the literature to alleviate these errors.
A. NAND flash memory structure NAND flash memory is a data storage device composed of
cells. There are two types of NAND flash memory structures: 2D and 3D as shown in Figure 1. A cell consists of four core components: WL (Word Line), floating gate, tunnel oxide, and substrate. Flash memory provides three operations: read, program, and erase. The read and write operation are conducted on a page unit, while the erase is on a block unit.
To program data, an appropriate voltage is applied to the WL through electrical attraction, which inserts electrons into the floating gate. Programmed data can be retained for a long time since they are isolated by the tunnel oxide. To read data, a reference voltage is applied to the WL, and the switch status of selected cells is checked. Finally, to erase a block, a strong voltage is applied to the substrate, which makes electrons escape from the floating gate.
B. Threshold voltage distribution and errors Due to their physical characteristics, electrons held in the
floating gate and resulting threshold voltage follow a stochastic distribution. Previous studies have shown that the voltage distribution is well modelled by the Gaussian distribution [2]–[6]. Figure 2 presents an example of threshold voltage distribution in MLC, denoted as dotted lines. There are 4 states: 00, 01, 10, and 11. This figure also illustrates the voltage shift due to analog noise denoted as solid line. When the voltage goes beyond one of reference voltages, it results in an error.

29 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:07:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

There are three common errors in NAND flash memory. The first is the endurance error, which occurs when electrons become trapped in the tunnel oxide after numerous program/erase operations. This degrades the insulation function, leading to a weakened ability to store or retain data. The second is the retention error, caused by the leakage of electrons stored in the floating gate over time. The third error is the disturbance error, which occurs when a specific voltage is applied to the WL during the read or program operation. This can unintentionally insert electrons into the tunnel oxide, causing electrical noise. As a result, both the mean and standard deviation of the voltage distribution are altered, eventually resulting in data loss.
C. Reliability Enhancement Techniques
Various techniques have been proposed to mitigate errors in NAND flash memory and they have their own features and trade-offs [28]. One of the most popular techniques is ECC, which corrects errors using specific parity bits and hardware logic. Two representative examples of ECC are BCH (Bose Chaudhuri Hocquenghem) [8] and LDPC (Low Density Parity Check) [9].
Another popular technique is read-retry [10]. When it detects serious errors while reading, it adjusts a read reference voltage until the error rate is sufficiently low. Wear-leveling is a technique that tries to evenly distribute wear across memory cells [13]. It can delay the endurance error. Refresh is a technique that can reduce the retention error by rewriting data that has been stored for a long time onto a new page [27].
A scramble technique has also been proposed to reduce data loss [25], [26]. This technique prevents a certain pattern that is more prone to errors from being generated by randomizing programmed data. Reprogramming stores data multiple times in a single transistor, reducing the number of program/erase cycles and mitigating the endurance problem [24].
III. RELIABILITY TEST ENVIRONMENTS & LIMITATIONS
There exist two approaches to evaluate reliability enhancement techniques. The first is a hardware approach that utilizes a board such as FPGA (Field Programmable Gate Array) or a customized system. For instance, Cosmos OpenSSD is an FPGA-based hardware platform that allows both firmware modification and SSD internal exploration [16]. A customized system also has been used to investigate flash memory errors [2], [7]. While this approach is accurate and allows for examination of several anomalies, it is costly and not easily accessible to researchers.
The second approach involves a software-based emulator [17]–[19]. This approach is less expensive and easier to experiment with, but it is less accurate than the hardwarebased method. The existing software emulators manages bits per cell and utilizes random bit flipping for error injection. However, such error insertion can not emulate the retention or disturbance error caused by gradual voltage shifts. For instance, the read-retry technique changes a read reference voltage while reading, which is infeasible to be evaluated using

the bit-flip based emulator. To address this issue, prior studies have utilized probabilistic modeling equations, such as additive power-law model, to generate more realistic errors [7], [28].
However, accurate and efficient error modeling is challenging due to the characteristics of analog signals, where they are shifted by different causes in an integrated manner. The threshold voltage of a cell is determined by the amounts of electrons stored in the floating gate. A decrease in electrons caused by leakage or an increase in electrons due to traps triggers the threshold voltage to shift left or right. To address this challenge, this paper proposes a novel emulator that stores analog values for each cell, enabling experimentation with various flash noises while maintaining the cost-effectiveness and flexibility of the existing software-based methods.

IV. DESIGN
In this section, we describe how to model the threshold voltage distribution, which involves assigning different analog values to a cell. We also explain how to model analog noises caused by the endurance, retention, and disturbance error, respectively. Then, we discuss how to obtain key parameters via the polynomial regression. Finally, we present the implementation details of ACE.

A. Threshold voltage distribution modeling
The key difference between the existing emulators and ACE lies in how the state of a cell is manipulated. For instance, in the case of MLC NAND flash, each cell can have four states, which are manipulated as 00, 01, 10, and 11 in the existing emulators. In other words, they are expressed as digital values, that are bits. In contrast, ACE manipulates each state as a range of threshold voltages. Therefore, it is expressed as an analog value, and even if cells have the same state, the actual stored voltage values may differ.
We model the threshold voltage (Vth) distribution of cells using Equation (1):

Vth = Vmean + Cloc ∗ α

(1)

, where Vmean and α represent the mean value and standard deviation of the distribution, respectively. In addition, Cloc is used to represent the relative location of a cell on the distribution. Instead of absolute values, using these relative locations makes it easier to add analog noises, which will be further discussed in the next subsection.
A Gaussian random generator is utilized to assign a specific Cloc value to each cell. As the results, when all threshold voltages of cells that have the same state are collected, they follows the Gaussian distribution which is known to approximate real hardware characteristics well [2]–[6]. The Vmean and α determines the peak and the spread of the distribution. This analog manipulation enables to emulate strong and weak cells. For instance, cells with Cloc values located near the mean are more resistant to errors, while cells located at the edges of the distribution are more susceptible to errors.

30 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:07:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Analog noise modeling
We model three analog noises caused by three representative errors of flash memory, endurance, retention and disturbance. Note that we explain the read disturbance error only in this section, but the same mechanism is also applicable to the write disturbance error.
We devise the following three equations:

Vnoise+ = MBE ∗ Wend + Cloc ∗ β

(2)

Vnoise+ = MBR ∗ Wdis + Cloc ∗ γ

(3)

Vnoise+ = MP W ∗ Wret + Cloc ∗ ω

(4)

, where they consists of three metadata, namely MBE, MBR, MP W , and six parameters, namely Wend, Wdis, Wret, β, γ, and ω. In this study, metadata is defined as data that can affect errors. We define three core metadata: number of erases in a block (MBE), number of reads in a block (MBR), and the last write time of a page (MP W ). We gather these metadata when a flash memory operation is requested.
Six parameters can be divided into two groups, one for determining the weight of errors and the other for adjusting the standard deviation. In specific, Wend determines how much the number of erases affect the noise, while Wdis dictates how much the number of reads influences the noise. Finally, Wret determines how much the time elapsed from the last write affects the noise. By adding these noises, we can emulate the threshold voltage shift of a cell.
The β, γ and ω parameters are in the second group, that are used to adjust the standard deviation when noise occurs. In general, when a noise is injected, the standard deviation of the distribution tend to be widened. However, the degree differs according to the errors so we define them separately. By multiplying these parameters with Cloc, we can alter the voltage distribution of a cell.
The values of six parameters are obtained through the polynomial regression [20], a well-known machine learning technique used popularly to capture non-linear relationships between variables. For training, we utilize two types of real hardware data measured in previous studies, one from MLC [21]–[23] and the other from TLC [2]. The training results will be discussed later in Section V.

C. Implementation of ACE
To emulate flash memory errors, particularly the retention error, it is necessary to update the threshold voltage of a cell periodically to reflect the gradually leakage of electrons. Our initial version of ACE is implemented like this. But, it shows that this implementation incurs considerable overhead, specifically taking 0.46 millisecond for updates of all cells at each period. To tackle this overhead, we devise an algorithm that assesses analog noises and voltage shifts at the read time without periodic updates.
Algorithm 1 presents how ACE works. In the beginning, ACE initializes metadata, MBE, MBR, MP W , and goes into the main loop, handling a request from a host. For a program

Algorithm 1 Analog Cell Emulation

1: /* Metadata initialization */

2: MBE = MBR = MP W = 0; 3: /* Voltage distribution equation */

4: Vth = Vmean + Cloc * α ... (1) 5: /* Noise equations */
6: Vth += Wend * MBE + Cloc * β ... (2) 7: Vth += Wdis * MBR + Cloc * γ ... (3) 8: Vth += Wdis * MBR + Cloc * ω ... (4) 9: /* main loop */

10: while(1)

11:

if request == program then

12:

MP W = current time;

13:

locate cells for requested data;

14:

identify a state corresponding to bits in a cell;

15:

Cloc = Gaussian random generator(state);

16:

else if request == read then

17:

MBR ++;

18:

locate cells for the request;

19:

calculates voltage of a cell using Eq. (1);

20:

calculates noises using Eq. (2)∼(4);

21:

adds noises to the voltage;

22:

determines a state of a cell and convert it to bits;

23:

send bits of a request page to a host;

24:

else if request == erase then

25:

MBE ++;

26:

MBR = 0;

27:

MP W = 0;

28:

else

29:

miscellaneous;

request, it first updates MP W as the current time that ticks at every request. Then, it receives data from a host and locates cells for the requested data. Based on the bits of a cell, it identifies the state of the cell. Finally, it calculates Cloc, a relative location of the voltage distribution for the state using the Gaussian random generator, and assigns it to the cell .
For a read request, ACE first increments MBR and locates cells for the request. Then, it calculates the threshold voltage of a cell using Equation (1) and the assigned Cloc. Also, it calculates noises using Equation (2)∼(4) and adds them to the voltage, triggering the voltage shift. Then, it determines a state of a cell by comparing the current voltage with reference voltages. If the voltage shift of a cell exceeds one of references voltages, an error occurs in the cell. Finally, it converts the determined state to bits and return them to a host. For an erase request, ACE increments MBE and resets MBR and MP W .
We have implemented the algorithm by extending FEMU [18]. FEMU is an open-source SSD emulator popularly used for researches since it supports full system emulation using QEMU. We allocate memory space for metadata and Cloc, and adds our logic into relevant FEMU request handling procedures.
Note that MBE and MBR are maintained per a block, while MP W is maintained per a page. Cloc is managed per a cell,

31 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:07:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3. Threshold voltage shifts caused by the endurance (after 3K P/E cycles), disturbance (after 100K reads), and retention noise (after 1 year).

which has a potential to increase memory footprint. In current implementation, we use 2 bytes for Cloc, meaning that ACE uses 8 times more memory for MLC and 5.3 times for TLC. To reduce memory overhead, we can encode more frequently used Cloc (e.g. middle location in the distribution) with fewer bits than less frequently used Cloc (e.g. edge location in the distribution), like the Huffman code. We leave this as a future work.
V. EVALUATION
In this section, we first explain the derived values of the parameters used in our model. Then, we present the accuracy and usability evaluation results of ACE.
A. Analog noise analysis
To realize the equations proposed in this study, it is necessary to obtain the values of 8 parameters, namely, voltagemean, Wend, Wdis, Wret, α, β, γ, and ω. We make use of flash memory voltage shift data measured using real devices from previous studies. In specific, we use two different types of data, one from TLC [2] and the other from MLC [21]–[23]. Based on these data, we apply the polynomial regression to derive the values of parameters. Note that the values are derived separately per each state.
Figure 3 displays the analog noise modeling results reported by ACE. Due to the page limitation, we show TLC results only in this figure, but ACE can report MLC results, too. The average values of Wend, Wdis, Wret, β, γ, and ω used in this figure are 0.0013, 0.000769, 1.21, 11.34, 28.075, and 1.213, respectively. For the MLC case, they are 0.72, 0.57, 0.011, 10.5, 4, and 1. Note that, even though the direct comparison is not easy since these parameters are affected by not only MLC or TLC but also other factors such as manufacturing process and features, we can notice that Wret becomes relatively bigger in TLC meaning that the retention error becomes more serious in TLC.
From Figure 3, we can make the following five observations. First, compared to the voltage distribution of the initial cell (denoted as baseline in the figure), the noised voltage distributions become wider. For instance, the baseline of the P3 state ranges from 160 to 229, while the noised distribution due to

the retention error (1 year) ranges from 149 to 240. Second, the strong cells and weak cells are evident. For instance, the edged states (e.g. ER, P1, P2, and P7) tend to be shifted larger than the middle states (e.g. P4 and P5).
Third, the endurance error make the voltage shift toward higher values for all states. This is because the accumulation of additional electrons in the floating gate or holes as cells wear out. Fourth, the disturbance error causes additional electron insertions into the floating gate due to the applied pass voltage, which eventually shifts the voltage toward higher values, especially in the low states (e.g. ER, P1 and P2). But, in the high states (e.g. P6 and P7), due to the already high density of electrons in the floating gate, the insertion becomes less frequent , while the electron leakage effect is more prevalent. Fifth, the retention error leads to the voltage shift toward lower values due to the loss of electrons over time in the high states. However, in the low states, the weakened electric field and holes make it easy to insert additional electrons.
B. Accuracy evaluation
Figure 4 presents the accuracy evaluation results of ACE. We compare the voltage shifts and standard deviation changes reported by ACE and those measured by real devices, both MLC and TLC. In the figure, the y-axis are the mean voltage shift (mV) or standard deviation changes after the P/E cycles, number of reads, and retention periods denoted as the xaxis. Note that the P/E cycles, number of reads, and retention periods of MLC and TLC differ (e.g. 3K P/E and 4K P/E) since real devices have been measured under those conditions.
From this figure, we make two observations. First, ACE mimics the behaviors of real device quite well. To assess the accuracy quantitatively, we use the shift difference ratio that is defined as the difference between device shift value and ACE shift value over the device value. The average difference ratios are 0.2%, 1.2%, and 2.2% for the 3K P/E cycles, 100K reads, and 1 year retention period, respectively in TLC. For MLC, they are 0.5%, 4.3%, and 0.005% for 4K P/E cycles, 1000K reads, and 960 hours retention period, respectively. The average standard deviation difference ratios between ACE and TLC are 1.2%, 2.3%, and 1.9% for the 3K P/E cycles, 100K reads, and 1 year retention period, respectively in TLC. For

32 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:07:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 4. Accuracy evaluation of ACE: ACE shows similar behavior to real devices (TLC/MLC) in terms of mean voltage shift and standard deviation change.

MLC, they are 21% at 4K P/E and 3.8% at 1000K reads. Note that comparisons under 960 hours retention period are omitted since there are no real device data about standard deviation in the previous study [21].
The second observation is that the endurance error makes the voltage shift toward higher values for all states. In contrast, both the disturbance and retention error shift the voltage toward higher values in the low states and toward lower values in the high states, which are also noticed in Figure 3. All standard deviation changes toward higher values, implying that the distributions become broader. C. Usability evaluation
To evaluate the usability of ACE, we test two reliability enhancement techniques, ECC and read-retry. For the ECC technique, we adopt the BCH algorithm with 7 parity bits for every 512 bytes. For the read-retry techniques, we implement an algorithm that repeatedly adjusts a read reference voltage when ECC fails while handling a page read request.
Fig. 5. Usability evaluation of ACE: The analog manipulation of ACE allows to test the read-retry technique by adjusting the read reference voltage.
Figure 5 shows the evaluation results. The solid line represents the RBER (Raw Bit Error Rate) as the P/E cycle in-

creases. The results of ECC and read-retry are UBER (Uncorrectable Bit Error Rate) after correction. As we expect, ECC can correct some RBER, yielding less errors after correction. The read-retry technique yields further error reductions by adjusting the read reference voltage and by applying ECC to re-read data. This figure also demonstrates that, with increased number of repetitions, the read-retry technique enhances reliability more. This kind of experiment that adjusts the reference voltage is feasible due to the analog signal support of ACE.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes an analog cell emulator that manipulates cells with analog voltages instead of digital bits. We make use of a machine learning method to obtain key parameter values and devise an efficient algorithm for emulating in a lightweight manner. We validate the accuracy by comparing the voltage shifts of real flash devices and the usability by evaluating ECC and read-retry techniques with the capability of adjusting the reference voltages, which are infeasible in the existing emulators. We will open ACE on Github.
There are two directions for future research. The first one is validating the accuracy of ACE with more data. We are currently implementing an FPGA-based reliability test board to examine various analog data under diverse types of flash memory including QLC. The second direction is investigating reliability enhancement technologies such as ECC and readretry and analyzing their characteristics and trade-offs among performance, reliability, and memory usage.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Luo, S. Ghose, Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch and O. Mutlu, ”HeatWatch: Improving 3D NAND Flash Memory Device Reliability by Exploiting Self-Recovery and Temperature Awareness,” IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pp. 504517, 2018.

33 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:07:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[2] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, ”Error characterization, mitigation, and recovery in flash-memory-based solidstate drives,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1666–1704, 2017.
[3] W. Liu, F. Wu, J. Zhou, M. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Lu, C. Xie, “Modeling of threshold voltage distribution in 3d nand flash memory,” In 2021 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), pp. 1729-1732, 2021.
[4] Parnell, T., Papandreou, N., Mittelholzer, T., Pozidis, H., “Modelling of the threshold voltage distributions of sub-20nm NAND flash memory,” In 2014 IEEE Global Communications Conference, pp. 2351-2356, 2014.
[5] J. Moon, J. No, S. Lee, S. Kim, S. Choi, Y. Song,” Statistical characterization of noise and interference in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2153-2164, 2013.
[6] M. A. Kumar, M. Raquibuzzaman, M. Buddhanoy, M. Wasiolek, K. Hattar, T. Boykin, B Ray, “Total-Ionizing-Dose Effects on threshold Voltage Distribution of 64-Layer 3D NAND Memories,” In 2022 IEEE Radiation Effects Data Workshop (REDW)(in conjunction with 2022 NSREC), pp. 1-5, 2022.
[7] N. R. Mielke, R. E. Frickey, I. Kalastirsky, M. Quan, D. Ustinov, and V. J. Vasudevan, ”Reliability of solid-state drives based on NAND flash memory,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1725–1750, 2017.
[8] P. Huang, P. Subedi, X. He, S. He, and K. Zhou, ”FlexECC: Partially Relaxing ECC of MLC SSD for Better Cache Performance,” USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC), pp. 489–500, 2014.
[9] R. Gallager, ”Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on information theory, vol. 8, no. 1, 21–28, 1962.
[10] J. Park, M. Kim, M. Chun, L. Orosa, J. Kim, and O. Mutlu, ”Reducing solid-state drive read latency by optimizing read-retry,” 26th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), pp. 702–716, 2021.
[11] K. Ha, J. Jeong, and J. Kim, ”An integrated approach for managing read disturbs in high-density NAND flash memory,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 35, no. 7, 1079–1091, 2015.
[12] Z. Jiao, J. Bhimani, B. S. Kim, ”Wear-leveling in SSDs considered harmful,” 14th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Storage and File Systems, pp. 72–78, 2022.
[13] L. P. Chang, ”On efficient wear-leveling for large-scale flash-memory storage systems,” ACM symposium on Applied computing (SAC), pp. 1126–1130, 2007.
[14] Z. Chen, Y. Zhao, ”DA-GC: A Dynamic Adjustment Garbage Collection Method Considering wear-leveling for SSD,” Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI, pp. 475–480, 2020.
[15] M. L. Chiang, P. C. Lee, R. C. Chang, ”Using data clustering to improve cleaning performance for flash memory,” Software: Practice and Experience, 29, no. 3, 267–290, 1999.
[16] Y. H. Song, S. Jung, S. W. Lee, J. S.Kim, ”Cosmos openSSD: A PCIebased open source SSD platform,” Flash Memory Summit, pp. 1–30, 2014
[17] Y. Kim, B. Tauras, A. Gupta, B. Urgaonkar, ”Flashsim: A simulator for nand flash-based solid-state drives,” First International Conference on Advances in System Simulation, pp. 125–131. 2009.
[18] H. Li, M. Hao, M. H. Tong, S. Sundararaman, M. Bjørling, H. S. Gunawi, ”The CASE of FEMU: Cheap, accurate, scalable and extensible flash emulator,” USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST), pp. 83–90, 2018.
[19] J. Yoo, Y. Won, J. Hwang, S. Kang, J. Choi, S. Yoon, J. Cha, ”Vssim: Virtual machine based ssd simulator,” IEEE 29th Symposium on Mass Storage Systems and Technologies (MSST), pp. 1–14, 2013.
[20] R. M. Heiberger, E. Neuwirth, R. M. Heiberger, E. Neuwirth, ”Polynomial regression,” R Through Excel: A Spreadsheet Interface for Statistics, Data Analysis, and Graphics, pp. 269–284, 2009.
[21] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, E. F. Haratsch, K. Mai, O. Mutlu, ”Data retention in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, optimization, and recovery,” IEEE 21st International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pp. 551–563, 2015.
[22] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, S. Ghose, O. Mutlu, ”Read disturb errors in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, mitigation, and recovery,” 45th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, pp. 438–449, 2015.

[23] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, K. Mai, ”Threshold voltage distribution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling,” Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), pp. 1285–1290, 2013.
[24] S. Jaffer, K. Mahdaviani, B. Schroeder, ”Improving the Reliability of Next Generation SSDs using WOM-v Codes,” USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST), pp. 117–132, 2022.
[25] J. Cha, S. Kang, ”Data randomization scheme for endurance enhancement and interference mitigation of multilevel flash memory devices,” Etri Journal, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 166–169, 2013.
[26] C. Kim, J. Ryu, T. Lee, H. Kim, J. Lim, J. Jeong, Y. H. Jun, ”A 21 nm high performance 64 Gb MLC NAND flash memory with 400 MB/s asynchronous toggle DDR interface,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 4, 981-989, 2012.
[27] K. Ha, J. Jeong, J. Kim, ”An integrated approach for managing read disturbs in high-density NAND flash memory,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1079–1091, 2015.
[28] B. S. Kim, J. Choi, S. L. Min, ”Design Tradeoffs for SSD Reliability,” USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST), pp. 281–294, 2019.

34 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:07:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

