IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 31, NO. 1, JANUARY 2023

29

Low Routing Complexity Multiframe Pipelined LDPC Decoder Based on a Novel Pseudo Marginalized Min-Sum Algorithm for High Throughput Applications

Henry Lopez Davila , Tsung-Han Wu , Shyh-Jye Jerry Jou , Senior Member, IEEE, Sau-Gee Chen, Life Member, IEEE, and Pei-Yun Tsai , Member, IEEE

Abstract— This article presents a high throughput and low routing complexity multiframe pipelined low-density parity check (LDPC) decoder design based on a novel pseudo marginalized min-sum (PMMS) message passing approach. The proposed PMMS approach reduces the required number of interconnections in the routing network allowing the design to be implemented with reduced hardware complexity, low power consumption and high throughput capability while supporting multiple coding rates with short and long codewords as defined in many application standards. Implementation results for IEEE802.11ad/ay standards show that the proposed design satisfies a target bit error rate (BER) requirement of 3 × 10−7 with 64 quadrature amp mod (QAM) targeting high throughput applications. Furthermore, the proposed design is able to achieve a throughput of 62 and 101.8 Gb/s with two pipelining stages under 28-nm CMOS and 16-nm FinFET CMOS process, respectively. As compared to the existing NMS algorithm, the proposed design based on the PMMS approach reduces the number of wires in the routing network by 45.5%, and the wirelength of the overall decoder by 17%. The area and power consumption are also reduced by 9.4% and 12%, respectively, as compared to the conventional normalized min-sum (NMS) algorithm.
Index Terms— Low density parity check (LDPC) decoder, message passing, normalized-min-sum (NMS), pseudo marginalization.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW density parity check (LDPC) decoders [1], [2] have been widely adopted in wireline and wireless communi-
cation systems as a means to achieve reliable transmission
Manuscript received 4 March 2022; revised 18 August 2022 and 13 October 2022; accepted 13 November 2022. Date of publication 30 November 2022; date of current version 28 December 2022. This work was supported in part by Mediatek Inc., under Grant ACE MOST 110-2622-8-009-018-SB; in part by the Taiwan Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan Semiconductor Research Institute (TSRI); and in part by the University Shuttle Program of Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC) and Synopsys. (Corresponding author: Henry Lopez Davila.)
Henry Lopez Davila is with the EECS International Graduate Program, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan (e-mail: hlopezd005@gmail.com).
Tsung-Han Wu, Shyh-Jye Jerry Jou, and Sau-Gee Chen are with the Institute of Electronics, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan (e-mail: jasonwu0725@gmail.cim; jerryjou@nycu.edu.tw; sgchen@nycu.edu.tw).
Pei-Yun Tsai is with the Electrical Engineering Department, National Central University, Taoyuan 32001, Taiwan (e-mail: pytsai@ee.ncu.edu.tw).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TVLSI.2022.3224084.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2022.3224084

through a noisy channel. The low-density property of the LDPC decoder as well as the flexibility in the achievable degree of parallelism have allowed the LDPC decoder to become an attractive solution for error detection and error correction in practical communication systems, such as those described in IEEE 802.3an [3], IEEE802.15.3c [4], IEEE802.11ad [5], IEEE802.11ay [6], etc. Despite the outstanding error correction capability and the numerous efforts to reduce the architectural complexity, the implementation of the LDPC decoder still poses great challenges associated with the routing complexity of the message-passing algorithm. The message passing is based on the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm, for which the min-sum (MS) algorithm [7], [8] with suboptimal performance has been proposed and become a widely adopted alternative due to its reduced computational complexity. Significant performance improvements can be achieved through MS variations, such as normalized MS (NMS) [9] and offset MS (OMS) [13], [38]. However, the heavy routing interconnections required for message passing still constitute the bottle neck in practical implementations, especially during placement and routing optimizations, where the routing congestion imposes limitations on the achievable speed, area and power consumption of the design.
The BP algorithm is a marginalization problem [11], in which proper messages need to be sent from check nodes to variable nodes to prevent the self-feeding of information at the variable node side. In the MS algorithm (or related variations), the first minimum and the second minimum are computed and sent from check nodes to the adjacent variable nodes along with a control signal (index of the first minimum) to select the proper signal at the variable nodes. In practical applications of the NMS algorithm [14]/OMS [31], [32], each check node is connected only to a subset of the variable nodes (based on the check node degree), thus the message passing can be implemented by broadcasting the two minima and the index of the first minimum from a check node to its adjacent variable nodes [14], [34].
Several works, including [12], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], have introduced important hardware optimizations that address the computational and routing complexity. The works in [24], [25], and [27] use a single minimum approach,

1063-8210 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

30

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 31, NO. 1, JANUARY 2023

in which the check nodes compute only the first minimum and use a second minimum estimator to reduce complexity. As pointed out in [25], broadcasting can be advantageous in terms of routing congestion as compared to using singlelink approach. The single minimum broadcasting approach in [27] shows that wiring congestion can be further improved by broadcasting only the first minimum to adjacent variable nodes. Nevertheless, the variable nodes still require additional hardware to perform the second minimum estimation, which translates into a computational overhead at the variable node. Furthermore, as compared to single link methods, in which the node position is used locally within the check node [24], in a broadcasting approach the node position (node index) is required to be sent as part of the check to variable (C2V) message for proper message selection at the variable node as in [14] and [27]. Thus, despite the significant improvements introduced by existing architectures, the LDPC decoder still faces important challenges related to routing congestion that can only be mitigated. Furthermore, from a system perspective, the large bandwidth available at millimeter wave (mmWave) and channel bonding techniques are high throughput enabler factors, but in order to be fully exploited, important components of a baseband system, including the LDPC decoder, need to be implemented with a high degree of parallelism or high operational frequency. In this regard, a throughput support of over 100 Gb/s is another incoming challenge that needs to be addressed for the LDPC decoder.
In this article, an LDPC decoder design based on a novel pseudo marginalization message passing strategy is presented. The proposed approach, also referred to as pseudo marginalized MS (PMMS), allows the information generated by the first and the second minimum to be combined into a single message at the check node unit (CNU). The single message is then broadcasted and employed for variable node updating without further processing. Thus, it also removes the need for additional control signal (index of the first minimum) resulting in a significant reduction of the wire interconnections in the routing network of the LDPC decoder as compared to the above-mentioned state-of-the-art. The performance analysis shows that the proposed decoding strategy achieves a bit error rate (BER) performance comparable to that of the conventional NMS algorithm. Furthermore, the implementation results based on the IEEE802.11ay standard confirm the practicality of the proposed PMMS algorithm for high throughput applications.
The main contributions of this article are highlighted as follows.
1) A novel pseudo marginalization message passing strategy targeting low routing complexity for high throughput architectures.
2) A multicore LDPC decoder architecture capable of satisfying the multicode rate demand with short and long codewords in the IEEE802.11ad and IEEE802.11ay standards.
3) A control system with efficient layer accessing for row-based layer scheduling that allows the decoder to be implemented with a varying number of pipelines while avoiding pipelining bubbles.

Fig. 1. Message passing on a tanner graph.
4) Finally, an LDPC decoder architecture combines the three items above, resulting in a low routing and high throughput design with a throughput of over 100 Gb/s.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows: Section II provides a brief overview of the decoding process based on the conventional NMS algorithm. Section III introduces the proposed PMMS approach. Section IV presents the proposed architecture. Sections V and VI show the performance simulations and implementation results. Finally, Section VII presents the conclusions.

II. OVERVIEW ON DECODING ALGORITHMS

A binary LDPC code is described by a sparse parity-check

matrix of dimension M × N, which can be represented as

a bipartite graph composed of two types of nodes, namely,

check nodes and variable nodes, as shown in Fig. 1. During

the decoding process, the BP algorithm uses probabilistic

inference rules (through an iterative process) to check whether

certain conditions are satisfied at each check node, based on

the values of its adjacent variable nodes. In a communication

system, the initial values of the variable nodes represent the

intrinsic probabilities state, while the Rejx,it

anPdVini tQopi,ofjst

a node Vi represent

being in a the extrinsic

given and a

posteriori probabilities, updated and passed between check

node Ci and variable node Vi at each iteration. The message passed between nodes in the BP algorithm [2] is based on

a sum of products with forbidden computational complexity.

The MS and its variations, such as NMS and OMS are

based on log-likelihood ratios, which exploit the properties of

logarithmic arithmetic to transform products into sums with

reduced complexity. Because of its reduced complexity, the

MS has been widely adopted with different variations.

The decoding process with the MS algorithm is divided

into two main tasks; namely, check node and variable node

updating operations, which are further described as follows.

A. Check Node Updating
At each iteration, the check node C j sends an updated C2V message (Rejx,it) to the adjacent Vi node. This message

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LOPEZ DAVILA et al.: LOW ROUTING COMPLEXITY MULTIFRAME PIPELINED LDPC DECODER

31

is computed as

⎛⎧

⎫

⎞

⎨

⎬

Rejx,it

=

αnms

⎝ ⎩

sign

l∈Scj \i

Qlp,ojst

⎭

min
l∈Scj \i

Qlp,ojst ⎠ + βoms

(1)

minimum approach in [27] improves the routing congestion to some extent at the expense of acceptable BER performance degradation. Section III presents a message-passing approach that not only reduces the routing of the decoder but also improves the BER performance as compared to existing SAMS approach.

where Scj is the set containing all variable nodes connected to node C j , Qpi,ojst is the message received at the C j node from the corresponding Vi node, the constants αnms and βoms are the correction factors introduced by the NMS and

OMS algorithms, respectively. For the sake of simplicity, the

two algorithms have been exemplified in a single equation.

In practical applications, it is more efficient to compute and

broadcast the first and the second minimum [34] along with

a control signal for message selection. In this regard, the

message

R

ext j,i

is

performed

in

two

steps

as

shown

in

Fig.

1.

The check nodes compute the first and second minimum

(m1 and m2) as well as the sign and the index of m1. Then,

depending on the type of architecture, the message selection

is performed at the check node or variable node side. For the

broadcasting approach, message selection, and marginalization

on the magnitude and sign of the message are carried out

at the variable node. Magnitude marginalization is achieved

by selecting either the first or second minimum based on the

received index as

III. PROPOSED PSEUDO MARGINALIZATION APPROACH
In this article, we propose a pseudo marginalization approach that aims to reduce significantly the routing complexity in the decoder while maintaining a robust decoding performance. The term pseudo marginalization is employed to indicate that the original marginalization is not carried out to its full extent as in the original sum product or MS algorithm. As explained in Section II-A, the sign and the magnitude of the message are generated separately. At the CNU, the sign is computed through an XOR operation on the sign of all incoming messages; then at variable node Vi , the marginalization is completed with an additional XOR operation on the incoming and current sign of node Vi . However, the marginalization of the magnitude requires the presence of the second minimum as well as the index of the first minimum at the variable node unit (VNU), which increases significantly the complexity of the C2V routing network. To mitigate the routing complexity, existing works [24], [25], [27] apply either a second minimum

Rejx,it =

m2, if i = index of m1 m1, otherwise.

(2)

On the other hand, marginalization on the sign is computed through an additional XOR operation with the sign of node Vi .

emulator or an approximation of the latter. In such cases, the m2 is neither computed nor sent through the C2V network, yet the index of m1 is still required in the C2V message to indicate for which cases the variable node should emulate or compute an approximation for the second minimum. Thus, the

B. Variable Node Updating

routing associated with m2 is only partially reduced. In light of the above-mentioned routing complexity issues,

For each variable node Vi , the received Rejx,it after mar-
ginalization is used to update the corresponding posteriori probability Qipost as

we envision a more aggressive mitigation of routing congestion. The criteria for this approach are based on two important features of the logarithmic MS algorithm and the existing normalized decoding algorithm, as follows.

Q

post i

=

PVini t

+

Rejx,it

(3)

l=1

from which an estimate on the received bit is obtained through

1) In a regular parity check matrix with check node degree λ, during check node updating, the check node sends the first minimum to all the adjacent nodes except when the adjacent variable node corresponding to the

Vˆi =

0, if Qipost ≥ 0 1, otherwise

first minimum. In such case, the second minimum is

(4)

normally used instead of the first minimum to prevent

self-feeding of information. Thus, we can define the

and the subsequent variable to check (V2C) message (Qip,ojst) from Vi to C j is generated through

utilization rate of the first and second minimum as (λ − 1)/λ and 1/λ, respectively. Therefore, based on the utilization rate, the second minimum can be considered

Q

post i, j

=

PVini t

+

Rejx,it

Svi\ j

(5)

less relevant in the decoding process.

2) As it is known from the logarithmic BP algorithm

where Svi is the set of all check nodes adjacent to Vi . The second minimum approximated min-sum (SAMS)
in [27] computes and sends only the first minimum through the C2V routing network. The variable nodes then perform a second minimum estimation through a simplified two bits estimator architecture to mitigate the hardware overhead. Such an approach removes the wire interconnections related to the second minimum, yet the index of the first minimum is still required to be sent through the C2V routing network for proper message selection at the variable node. In general, the single

and the NMS algorithm, the C2V message is highly

dependent on the first minimum (m1). Furthermore, when more than one minimum is included in the C2V

message, the contribution from each additional factor

should follow an exponential decay [10], [12].

Using the above features as a guideline, an alternative C2V

message can be generated through a weighted-sum form as

⎧

⎫

⎨

⎬

Rejx,it = ⎩

sign Qlp,ojst ⎭ × (w1m1 + w2m2)

(6)

l∈Scj \i

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

32

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 31, NO. 1, JANUARY 2023

where Scj\i represents the set of all the variable nodes adjacent to C j except Vi , and w1/w2 represent the coefficients used
to adjust the contribution from each minimum. As can be

observed, the magnitude of the C j to Vi message is generated without excluding the i th component, that is, without mag-

nitude marginalization. Since the Vi node receives a single message, it does not require the additional control signal for

message selection. Furthermore, the sign marginalization in (6)

can be easily performed at the variable node through an XOR

operation on the current sign of Vi and the sign of the incoming message.

In order to get a notion of the contribution of each compo-

nent and the possible values for the weighting factors in (6),

in Fig. 1 we split the variable nodes adjacent to C2 into two subsets, namely Sc2a and Sc2b, in which Sc2a is composed

of the variable node corresponding to m1 and Sc2b contains the other λ − 1 variable nodes, including m2. Because of
the marginalization, the MS algorithm uses m1 and m2 with probabilities of Pm1 = (λ − 1)/λ and Pm2 = (1 − Pm1) = 1/λ, respectively. Consequently, the C2V updating process is

highly dependent on the first minimum. Furthermore, the C2V

message from C2 to the node in Sc2a provide information only about the nodes in the subset Sc2b. Notwithstanding, removing

the feedback effect from the node in Sc2a is not possible without marginalization. Instead, we can adjust the weight

factor w1 and w2 to increase the contribution from m2 while

maintaining w1 > w2. The contribution from the subset Sc2b

can be further increased by including the third minimum m3 in

the weighted-sum form as

⎧

⎫

⎨

⎬

R

ext j,i

=

⎩

sign Qlp,ojst ⎭ × (w1m1 + w2m2 + w3m3)

l∈Scj \i

mws

(7)

where mws is used to refer to the weighted-sum form for the magnitude of the message.

The coefficients in (7) are chosen based on experimental

results while following base-2 factors for practical application,

leading us t⎧o the following exp⎫ression:

⎨

R

ext j,i

=

⎩

⎬ sign Qlp,ojst ⎭ ×

m1 + m2 + m3 21 22 24

.

(8)

l ∈ Scj\i

mws

In (7) and (8), the sign of the C2V message follows

the marginalization as in the conventional MS algorithm;

however, the magnitude is generated through the weighted-

sum form. Therefore, in this article, a decoding procedure

based on (8) is referred to as the PMMS algorithm. The C2V message R2ex,1t = {m1, m2, index, sign} used by the conventional NMS algorithm in Fig. 1 becomes R2ex,1t = {mws, sign} with the proposed PMMS approach. The mws represents a single
magnitude value. Thus, the proposed PMMS algorithm reduces

the number of wires in the C2V routing of the decoder by a

significant factor as will be shown in the following section.

IV. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
The architecture presented in this section is based on the IEEE802.11ad/ay standards with row-based layer scheduling

and message-passing based on PMMS presented in Section III. Architectural optimizations based on the properties and relationship between the parity-check matrices of both standards are first considered, then the impact of the proposed PMMS algorithm in the routing network of the decoder is studied in comparison with the conventional NMS algorithm.
A. Parity Check Matrices
The quasi-cycle (QC) and regular properties of the parity check matrices allow multiple coding rates to be implemented with hardware sharing and reduced computational complexity. The IEEE802.11ay standard supports short and long codewords. The matrices for long codewords are generated from the matrices for short codewords encountered in the IEEE802.11ad standard through code lifting.
In Fig. 2, the integer value in each entry indicates a left circular shift applied to the identity submatrix Iz×z and the dash symbol (−) indicates the all-zero submatrix 0z×z, in which z equal to 42. Code lifting is used in IEEE 802.11ay standard to generate submatrices of 2z × 2z for long codeword from submatrices of smaller dimensions. The non-zero entries appear only in the diagonal direction (top-down or bottom-up diagonal); thus, a large matrix can be implemented in terms of two equivalents matrices of smaller size for short codewords by selecting the submatrices with even/odd indexed from the larger parity check matrices. In this regard, the LDPC decoder can be implemented in a dual-core fashion to handle short and long codewords. In the case of long codewords, the results from each core are merged together, otherwise, each core can process a separated short codeword. Fig. 2 also shows how the large matrices can be split into two matrices of smaller size. Notice that there are some special cases in which the adjacent entries in the larger matrix need to be switched (through crosscore switches) before classifying the rows and the columns as even and odd. Such entries are shown in dark color and correspond to the entries in the large matrices. The matrix splitting procedure for coding rates 1/2, 5/8, 3/4, and 13/16 is summarized as follows.
1) Apply cross-core column switching to submatrices of dimension 2z × 2z that appear in bottom-up diagonal form.
2) Generate the matrix for set A by selecting the odd-indexed rows and columns of the large matrix.
3) Generate the matrix for set B by selecting the even-indexed rows and columns of the large matrix.
For coding rate 7/8, the matrices for sets A and B are generated as follows.
1) Generate the columns of the matrix in set A by selecting the odd-indexed columns in the large matrix.
2) Generate the matrix for set B by applying row circular rotation to the matrix in set A.
Although the matrices in sets A and B for coding rate 7/8 are not identical, the matrices are still related through row cyclic rotation. Therefore, a dual-core approach can still be carried out by defining two separate control signals, allowing set A to operate two layers ahead as compared to set B to perform the row circular rotation. Moreover, for coding rate 7/8, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LOPEZ DAVILA et al.: LOW ROUTING COMPLEXITY MULTIFRAME PIPELINED LDPC DECODER

33

Fig. 2. Row and column splitting procedure of the parity check matrices for coding rates 1/2 and 7/8. The small matrices in sets A and B correspond to the matrices defined for short codewords in the IEEE802.11ad standard.

modules in sets A and B produce partial results, which need to be merged to compute the final result of each parity check equation.
The results from sets A and B are then combined to route the message to the proper variable nodes according to the indices of the large matrices. In the case of coding rate 1/2 the row and column combining is carried out as follows.
1) Insert a null column after each column of the matrix in set A and before each column of the matrix in set B.
2) Assign the rows from the matrix in set A to the odd-indexed rows of the large matrix.
3) Assign the rows from the matrix in set B to the even-indexed rows of the large matrix.

4) Apply cross-core column switch to the required entries. For coding rate 7/8, the results for the large matrix are obtained by assigning the columns from the matrix in set A to the odd-indexed columns in the large matrix and the columns from the matrix in set B to the even-indexed columns in the large matrix as follows.
1) Assign the columns from the matrix in set A to the oddindexed columns.
2) Assign the columns from the matrix in set B to the evenindexed columns.
Table I shows the properties related to the variable node and check node degree for short and long codewords.
The overall multiframe pipelined architecture of the LDPC decoder is shown in Fig. 3. It consists of a variable node

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

34

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 31, NO. 1, JANUARY 2023

TABLE I
PROPERTIES OF THE PARITY CHECK MATRICES FOR SHORT AND LONG CODEWORD

Fig. 4. Sorter tree structure to generate the required minimum values for sets A and B. An additional comparator is required in the CNPU extension for long codewords processing.

Fig. 3. LDPC decoder architecture.

processing unit (VNPU), cross-core switches, even/odd splitter and combiner modules, V2C and C2V routing networks, two check node processing units (CNPUs) corresponding to sets A and B, a long codeword CNPU extension to combine the results from the two sets, a normalization or weighted-sum unit and an early termination module for low power. The VNPU is composed of 32 variable node groups (VNGs) (equivalent to 1344 VNUs) and each CNPU is composed of 84 CNUs. Each CNU is connected to a set of λ variable nodes with λ ≤ λmax (λmax = 32). This decoder architecture is capable of simultaneously processing six short codewords or three long codewords with two pipelining stages.
B. CNU and C2V Routing
The check node updating process involves the computation of the first and the second minimum along with the sign and the index of the first minimum. The internal architecture of the CNU is shown in Fig. 4. The CNU computes the required minimum values through a sorter tree structure composed of log 2(λ) stages of comparators. In the case of long

Fig. 5. (a) CNU architecture with the conventional NMS algorithm. (b) CNU architecture with the proposed PMMS algorithm.
codewords, the results from the tree structure corresponding to sets A and B are merged together by performing an additional comparison to select the final minimum values. Then, at the output of the sorter, a single message for the case of short codewords or two messages for the case of long codewords are finally selected, depending on the coding rate and the layer being processed.
As can be seen in Fig. 5(a), in the case of NMS, the first and the second minimum obtained through the sorter are normalized by a factor α = 0.75 to account for the precision losses. The presence of m2 and the index in the C2V message represents a large overhead and contributes significantly to routing congestion, especially in the case of large parity check matrices for long codewords. In this regard, the proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LOPEZ DAVILA et al.: LOW ROUTING COMPLEXITY MULTIFRAME PIPELINED LDPC DECODER

35

TABLE II ESTIMATED WIRE REDUCTIONS IN THE ROUTING NETWORK

Fig. 6. VNG composed of 42 VNUs with support for three LDPC frames.
TABLE III MULTIFRAME LAYER ACCESS SEQUENCES

PMMS algorithm introduces significant reductions in the wire interconnections by using the weighted-sum form to generate a single magnitude value as shown in Fig. 5(b). To get quantitative insights on the improvements in wire interconnections introduced by the proposed PMMS algorithm, we assume designs in [14], [24], [25], and [27] are all implemented with the broadcasting method and the same parity check matrix as those specified for IEEE802.11ay with 84 check nodes in parallel. Each check node is connected to at most 16 variable nodes using a 6-bits quantization scheme and a 5-bits index to distinguish the location of up to 32 variable nodes. Under such conditions, Table II shows that existing single minimum approaches can reduce the routing by 22.73% as compared to the conventional NMS, while the proposed PMMS algorithm would reduce the routing by 45.5%. Furthermore, since there is no message approximation and message selection at the variable nodes, the PMMS also reduces the computational complexity as compared to the existing single minimum approach in SAMS [27]. The reduction in computational complexity of the variable nodes is important for high throughput architecture with a high degree of parallelism.
C. VNU and VNG
The architecture of a VNG as depicted in Fig. 6, is composed of 42 VNUs and the overall decoder is implemented with 32 VNGs for full variable node parallelism. Based on the proposed PMMS approach, each VNU receives one sign bit and a single C2V message. The sign marginalization is achieved through an XOR operation and the C2V is two’s complemented before updating the VNU. The comparators and multiplexers used for index comparison with the conventional NMS algorithm are no longer required with the PMMS algorithm. In this regard, the area of each VNU is also reduced. In a pipelined multiframe design, the computing

resources are shared among different LDPC decoding frames. However, additional storage elements are required to be included for each LDPC frame. The architecture presented in Fig. 6 includes storage elements to support three LDPC frames simultaneously. The label (i.e., F#L#) in each storage element indicates the LDPC frame and the Layer ID, respectively, in accordance with the layer definitions in the parity check matrices. Each decoding process traverses the layers in different layer scheduling sequences to avoid pipelining bubbles. The design can be easily configured during implementation to adopt a lower or a higher number of pipelining stages for low power or high throughput requirements. This flexibility is obtained with an efficient layer accessing scheme generated through the shared address generator as depicted in Fig. 6. The layer accessing scheme ensures conflict-free memory access by scheduling each LDPC frame in a unique sequence order, independently of the order in which the layers are defined in the parity check matrices. For instance, in the IEEE 802.11ay standard, the parity check matrix for coding rate 13/16 has fewer rows and can be split into three layers, while the rest of the matrices are split into four layers, as shown in Fig. 2. Under such conditions, an efficient layer accessing scheme is important to ensure continuous data flow, even when the number of layers in use is less than the maximum number of layers defined in the architecture. Table III shows the layer accessing sequences for one and two pipelining stages, while

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

36

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 31, NO. 1, JANUARY 2023

Fig. 7. Example of the layer accessing scheme with two frames and four layers.
Fig. 9. BER performance of coding rates 1/2 and 13/16 with 64 QAM with different quantization bits under AWGN channel.

Fig. 8. BER performance of coding rates 1/2 and 13/16 with 64 QAM with 6 bits quantization under additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.

Fig. 7 shows an example with a coding rate of 1/2 and one pipelining stage.

V. PERFORMANCE SIMULATION
The simulation results presented here are based on a baseband system with specifications as described in the IEEE802.11ad/ay and IEEE802.15.3c standards for single carrier (SC) with 16 quadrature amp mod (QAM) and 64 QAM modulation. The constellation points become closer for higher-order constellation schemes. Therefore, the channel information for 64 QAM requires a higher precision (larger number of bits for quantization) as compared to 16 QAM or binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation.
Moreover, as specified in the IEEE802.11ad/ay standards, an SC baseband system with 4096 bytes per package is expected to satisfy a 1% package error rate for reliable communication, which is equivalent to a BER requirement of 3 × 10−7 after decoding.
The fixed-point bit-true simulation results shown in Figs. 8–11 assume a 6-bits quantization scheme for both the NMS and the PMMS algorithms in two’s complement format (i.e., one sign bit, one integer bit, four fractional bits) with four decoding iterations. As shown in Fig. 8, although the PMMS algorithm presents a degradation of 0.7 dB for coding rates 13/16, with respect to the conventional NMS algorithm, it introduces significant improvements as compared to the SAMS [27] approach. The observed improvements are the results of the weighted sum form of the message passing in (7) and (8). For cases in which the SAMS uses an estimated value (mˆ2 = m1 + offset) with a constant

Fig. 10. BER performance of coding rates 1/2 and 3/4 with 16 QAM with 6 bits quantization in different standards. (a) IEEE802.15.3c. (b) IEEE802.11ay.
Fig. 11. Convergence rate in terms of the BER versus number of decoding iterations for coding rate 13/16 with 64 QAM modulation and 6 bits quantization under AWGN channel evaluated from 18 through 19 dB SNR. The specified BER of 3 × 10−7 is meet before the required SNR of 25.63 dB.
offset, the PMMS uses a weighted form of the actual m2 in addition to an offset value which is a function of the state of variable nodes corresponding to m1 and m3 through (w1 × m1 + w3 × m3), resulting in improved BER performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LOPEZ DAVILA et al.: LOW ROUTING COMPLEXITY MULTIFRAME PIPELINED LDPC DECODER

37

The proposed PMMS with weighted sum message passing is able to achieve the target BER performance of 3 × 10−7
within the waterfall region at signal to noise ratio (SNR)

TABLE IV
SNR REQUIREMENTS BASED ON THE IEEE802.11AY STANDARD FOR A BASEBAND SC SYSTEMS WITH 64 QAM MODULATION

conditions of 18 and 19 dB for coding rates 1/2 and 13/16,

respectively, which are lower than the required minimum SNR

for an SC baseband system based on the IEEE802.11ad/ay

standards with only four decoding iterations. As shown in

Fig. 9, with two additional bits, the PMMS algorithm can

achieve a BER performance similar to that of the conventional

NMS algorithm using 6 bits, with a negligible BER difference

of 0.1 dB at the target BER. By substituting WL = 8 on the

PMMS column in Table II, we can show that, despite the

additional 2 bits, the proposed PMMS would still provide a

27.27% reduction of wire connections in the overall decoder as

compared to the conventional NMS algorithm while targeting

similar BER performance. Thus, the quantization level of the

PMMS algorithm can be chosen according to the application

requirements.

Additional simulation results in Fig. 10 are shown to

highlight the wide range of applications through which the

proposed PMMS algorithm can be applied. In Fig. 10, the

simulation is performed with a codeword length of 672 and

1344 following the specifications in IEEE802.15.3c and

IEEE802.11ay standards, respectively. Fig. 10(b) shows that

with 16 QAM modulation, the PMMS algorithm achieves

a BER performance close to the NMS, with a performance

gap of only 0.2 and 0.3 dB for coding rates 1/2 and 3/4,

respectively.

Fig. 12. Routing congestion for the conventional NMS and proposed PMMS

The convergence rate in terms of the BER versus the approach.

number of iterations with coding rate 13/16 at SNR of 18, 19, and 20 dB is shown in Fig. 11. As can be observed, the PMMS has a very good convergence rate within the first four iterations. Beyond four iterations, the messages become correlated because the PMMS algorithm includes the first and second minimum in every message without magnitude marginalization. Consequently, the decoder encounters an error floors earlier than in the case with NMS. Notwithstanding, the PMMS algorithm can provide excellent performance results, provided that the system operates at SNR conditions as specified in the standards for practical multigigabit applications. The proposed algorithm is suitable for high throughput architectures and codes with a good convergence rate, in which the

to the conventional NMS algorithm. As demonstrated in this section, the PMMS approach is able to satisfy performance requirements of IEEE802.11ay and similar standards within SNR values that are even lower than the requirements for practical systems using 16 QAM and 64 QAM modulation; hence, the observed degradations can be said to be within a tolerance region. Furthermore, as shown in Table II, the PMMS introduces significant improvements in terms of wire congestion as compared to conventional NMS and existing single minimum approaches. Thus, the PMMS approach presents a viable trade-off between performance and routing complexity for high throughput architectures.

decoder can achieve the target BER within a reduced number of iterations.
In this section, we have shown that the PMMS algorithm can

VI. DESIGN IMPLEMENTATION AND OVERVIEW OF EXISTING STATE-OF-THE-ART

be implemented with different modulation schemes and parity The proposed LDPC decoder with PMMS approach has

matrices satisfying the QC properties, including those specified been implemented in a pipelined-multiframe and multicore

in IEEE802.11ad/ay standard. As can be seen from Fig. 8, the fashion to support short and long codewords, as shown in

decoder can easily satisfy the BER performance requirements Fig. 3. The implementation is carried out with 64 QAM mod-

for 64 QAM at SNR values of 17 and 20 dB with coding ulation in both 28-nm CMOS and 16-nm FinFET processes.

rates 1/2 and 13/16, respectively. These SNR values are lower In order to assess the improvements introduced by the

than the specified range for 64 QAM modulation shown in PMMS algorithm in terms of routing complexity, the decoder Table IV. Moreover, the target BER of 3 × 10−7 is achieved has been placed and routed (P&R) with both the proposed

within four iterations, which is suitable for high throughput PMMS approach and the conventional NMS algorithm using

applications. The BER results in Fig. 10(b) also satisfy the 28-nm technology. The P&R tool reveals a total wire length

requirements for 16 QAM modulations within the required of 83.2 × 106 and 68.5 × 106 μm for the NMS and PMMS

SNR range (15.6–20.6 dB). The proposed PMMS algorithm algorithms, respectively. This represents a reduction of 17.67%

simplifies the messages passing for reduced routing complex- in the overall routing of the LDPC decoder as compared to

ity at the expense of acceptable BER degradation as compared the design based on the conventional NMS algorithm. Fig. 12

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

38

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 31, NO. 1, JANUARY 2023

TABLE V IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS WITH ONE PIPELINING STAGE
shows the wire length across different metal layers with 28 nm for both NMS and PMMS algorithms. The routing is carried out mainly from M2 through M7. Metal layers M1, M8, and M9 are mostly used for VDD/GND and IO connections. As a consequence of the reduced wire interconnections and the lower number of switches in the routing network, the PMMS approach allows the P&R process to be carried out with less area and reduced power consumption. Thus, as shown in Table V, besides mitigating the routing congestion, the proposed design with the PMMS algorithm also reduces the core area by 9.4% and the power consumption by 12.0% as compared to a design based on the conventional NMS algorithm.
Both the NMS and the PMMS algorithms are implemented with early termination and clock-gating techniques for power management. Despite the faster convergence of the conventional NMS algorithm, the improvements in the power consumption introduced by the proposed PMMS approach (with reduced routing complexity and reduced computational complexity of the VNUs) are good enough to outperform the conventional NMS by 12%, even though the conventional NMS algorithm activates the early termination earlier than the proposed PMMS approach. By properly scaling the wordlength and the additional resources for pipelining, it can be shown that the proposed design based on the PMMS algorithm would consume less power as compared to a design based on the NMS and SAMS algorithms when implemented with similar specifications.
Table VI shows an overview of related existing designs and a summary of the throughput achievements of the proposed design with long codewords and two pipelining stages. The implementation results in Table VI are based on the IEEE802.11ay standard with codewords size twice the length as those defined in the IEEE802.11ad standard. As can be observed, the proposed design is able to achieve up to 62.2 and 101.8 Gb/s with coding rates 13/16 under 28- and 16-nm technology, respectively. The high throughput is achieved with an energy efficiency of 20.8 pJ/decoded bits and an area efficiency of 7.3 and 36.0 Gb/s/mm2 with 28- and 16-nm

technology, respectively. As shown in Fig. 6, pipelined multiframe architectures require additional storage elements that increase proportionally to the number of processing frames. In this regard, the major trade-off for high throughput is the area consumed by the storage elements at the VNUs. Furthermore, as can be observed from Tables V and VI, the design occupies a core area of 5.6 and 8.5 mm2 with two and three LDPC frames, respectively, which indicates an area increase proportionally to the number of LDPC frames as mentioned above. The proposed design achieves a 3.6× throughput with similar area efficient as compared to existing multiframe pipelining architecture in [16]. The works presented in [31] and [33] seem to achieve better area efficiency. However, these architectures use a larger number of pipelining stages with lower throughput as compared to the proposed design. Furthermore, increasing the throughput for [16], [31], and [33] seems unfeasible, as doubling the speed and throughput requires at least doubling the number of pipelining stages. The energy efficiency of the proposed design seems degraded as compared to [16] and [33] but improved as compared to the design in [31]. An exact comparison between the proposed design and existing references cannot be established due to different factors, including code block length, quantization scheme, and possible differences in the properties of libraries even within the same technology node. Table VI also shows that advanced 16-nm technology can boost the operational frequency of the LDPC decoder by 1.62 times and overall core area is reduced by a factor of 3× as compared to 28-nm technology. For rough and broad comparison purposes, let us define the dynamic power of an initial design as PDi = Ci Vi2 Fi , where Ci , Vi , and Fi account for the hardware complexity, voltage and operating frequency. Then, in a row-based layer scheduling decoder with interleaved pipelined multiframe, where the storage resources (area) increase proportionally to the frequency scaling factor (the number of pipelining stages pk), the capacitive component of the dynamic power can be modeled as C p = (1 + pk) × Ci . In this regard, a capacitance factor for further frequency scaling of an existing pipelined architecture can be defined as k p = (1 + pk)/(1 + p0), where p0 is the initial number of pipelining stages. The complexity of the decoder also increases proportionally to the quantization wordlength and the code block size. Thus, the effects related to quantization, codeword length as well as voltage and frequency between two designs can be roughly modeled through scaling factors such as kqwl, kcwl, kvs, k f , respectively. Based on the above parameters an estimated normalized dynamic power (ENP) for different designs can be obtained as

ENP

=

(1 + pk)αs Ci Vi2 Fi (1 + p0)

= (1 + pk)αs PDi

(9)

(1 + p0)

where αs = kqwl × kcwl × kvs × k f . The estimated power consumption with 28 nm at 900 MHz,

6 bits quantization and 64 QAM modulation for related

architectures is shown in Table VI. An estimated power con-

sumption for the PMMS at 900 MHz is obtained using initial

pipeline results ( p0 = 1) reported in Table V. The PMMS ENP

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LOPEZ DAVILA et al.: LOW ROUTING COMPLEXITY MULTIFRAME PIPELINED LDPC DECODER

39

TABLE VI IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS WITH TWO PIPELINING STAGES AND OVERVIEW OF EXISTING STATE-OF-THE-ART ARCHITECTURES

at 900 MHz is close to the actual post-layout design power (DP) with a 94.2% of accuracy, which is obtained as

Accuracy

{%}

=

min{ENP, DP} max{ENP, DP}

×

100.

(10)

Rough power estimations based on (9) for different designs with 28-nm are shown in Table VI. The estimated power is mainly shown for reference purposes, as an exact comparison cannot be established, even under the same technology node due to various reasons above-mentioned.
A brief overview of similar architectures is now presented as follows. The designs in [25] use single minimum with reduced complexity, due to the use of a fixed offset value for second minimum approximation, as compared to [24], in which different weighting factors are used for the same purpose. Achieving the desired BER performance with a fixed offset value would be more difficult in practical applications with variable environment conditions. In such cases, the works presented in [24] and [27] are more suitable. In this article, we have demonstrated that the proposed PMMS algorithm can

introduce further improvements in the BER performance with reduced routing complexity as compared [27] and existing single minimum approaches with second minimum approximation at the variable nodes. Furthermore, as shown in Table II the PMMS reduces the routing complexity by additional 22.76% as compared to the SAMS. Moreover, when the PMMS and conventional NMS are implemented under the same environment (speed, modulation scheme and pipelining stages, layer-scheduling, and coding rate) as in Table V, the PMMS approach provides an area and a power reduction of 9.4% and 12.0%, respectively.
The design in [16] employs eight pipelining stages with a loop unrolling technique and eSRAM for storage. Although [16] presents an acceptable solution for intermediate throughput, it would require a larger number of pipeline stages resulting in a high-power consumption at 900 MHz. Likewise, the works in [24] and [25] and the SAMS in [27] sends a single minimum with a second minimum approximation at the variable node. They all reduce the routing complexity with acceptable BER performance; however, if these designs were

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

40

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 31, NO. 1, JANUARY 2023

implemented with a broadcasting approach, the computational overhead due to the second minimum approximation at the VNUs and additional control signals for message selection would result in a slightly higher routing complexity as well as area and power consumption as compared to the LDPC design based on the proposed PMMS method.
The designs in [31] and [32] employ the OMS algorithm through flooding scheduling, fully parallelized variable nodes, and serialized check nodes architecture. The OMS algorithm also computes and sends the first and second minimum, thus these designs would present only subtle differences related to the variable node updating process due to the flooding strategy. The routing complexity and performance of the OMS algorithm with the broadcasting method would be similar to those reported in Tables II and V for the NMS. The works in [33] and [34] are hybrid, they employ both row-based and column-based partitioning of the parity check matrix. The routing is reduced at the expense of additional memory resources (registers) to store intermediate C2V values due to the check nodes process only half of the variable nodes at each step. Moreover, it requires more cycles to complete each layer, thus such a method is effective in reducing the routing complexity and increasing the operation frequency, but it has little effect in boosting the throughput for multiGb/s applications. A logical synthesis implementation based on the IEEE802.11ay standard with layer-based scheduling and multiframe pipelining have been reported [36] with promising results using 28- and 16-nm technology. In Table VI we have shown that the throughput of the decoder indeed can be boosted from 60 Gb/s at 28 nm to 100 Gb/s using 16nm technology. However, the area and speed of the LDPC decoder are limited by the routing complexity, which is not considered in a logical synthesis. For this reason, Table VI includes an overview covering mainly designs with post-layout and measurement results.
The proposed decoder with the PMMS algorithm can achieve multigigabit throughput with reduced wire interconnections, a smaller number of pipelining stages and reduced power consumption as compared to existing references. In the proposed design, the power consumption is reduced by using a shared address generator with effective clock gating techniques based on the early termination strategy that halts the decoding process after the last decoding frame has converged. As shown in Table VI, the proposed design with row-based layer scheduling is highly efficient in terms of the achieved throughput and the required number of pipelining stages as compared to the existing state-of-the-art architectures.
The layout view of the proposed design with 16-nm FinFET CMOS technology is shown in Fig. 13 with dimensions of 1.68 × 1.68 mm. In this design, the area is distributed as 70% for VNPUs, 3% for CNPUs, 1% for input and output registers, and 26% for routing network and control system. Similarly, the power consumption is distributed as 80% for the VNPUs, 11% for the CNPUs, 1% for the input and output registers, and 8% for the routing network and control system. The boundaries for some of the important modules have been roughly drawn to indicate their location, as shown in the layout view.

Fig. 13. Layout view of the proposed design with 16-nm FinFET technology (1.68 × 1.68 mm).
In summary, the proposed PMMS algorithm has been demonstrated to reduce routing congestion, and attain a high throughput capability for practical applications with 64 QAM modulation, while providing a BER performance comparable to the conventional NMS algorithm. The pipelining efficiency achieved with layer-based scheduling combined with the low routing complexity introduced by the PMMS algorithm allows the proposed design to represent a promising alternative for high throughput architectures.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this article, a PMMS algorithm based on a pseudo marginalization of the message passing has been proposed to reduce routing complexity. The simulation results show that the proposed algorithm outperforms existing low routing complexity approaches and provides a BER lower than 3 × 10−7 to satisfy the requirements as specified by the IEEE802.11ad and IEEE802.11ay standards. Furthermore, implementation results with the 28-nm CMOS process and 16-nm FinFET CMOS technology have shown that a design implemented with the proposed PMMS algorithm can be combined with existing pipelined multiframe approaches to satisfy the high throughput demand. The high throughput capability and low routing complexity of the proposed algorithm have been assessed through implementations with one and two pipelining stages in a pipelined multiframe architecture capable of supporting short and long codewords in a multicore approach. The post-layout results show that the proposed design with PMMS algorithm can achieve a throughput of 101.8 Gb/s with superior pipelining efficiency as compared to existing stateof-the-art architectures. Furthermore, the PMMS algorithm is able to reduce the overall routing in the LDPC decoder by 17% as well as the power consumption by 12% as compared to a design based on the conventional NMS. The proposed PMMS algorithm provides a low routing complexity approach that can be combined with multiframe architectures to satisfy the ever increasing demands for high throughput in upcoming generations of digital communication systems.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LOPEZ DAVILA et al.: LOW ROUTING COMPLEXITY MULTIFRAME PIPELINED LDPC DECODER

41

[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] IEEE Standard for Information Technology—Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems—Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Specific Requirements Part 3: Carrier Sense Multiple Access With Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) Access Method and Physical Layer Specifications, IEEE Standard 802.3AN, Sep. 2006.
[4] IEEE Standard for Information Technology—Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Specific Requirements—Part 15.3: Amendment 2: Millimeter-Wave-Based Alternative Physical Layer Extension, IEEE Standard 802.15.3c-2009 (Amendment to IEEE Standard 802.15.32003), Oct. 2009, pp. 1–200.
[5] PHY/MAC Complete Proposal Specification, IEEE Standard 802.1110/0433r, IEEE 802.11 Task Group AD, May 2010.
[6] IEEE Draft Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems—Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Specific Requirements Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) SpecificationsAmendment 2: Enhanced Throughput for Operation in License-Exempt Bands Above 45 GHz, IEEE Standard P802.11ay/D7.0, Dec. 2020, pp. 1–784.
[7] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[8] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[9] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[10] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[11] J. M. Mooij and H. J. Kappen, “Sufficient conditions for convergence of the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 4422–4437, Dec. 2007.
[12] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D.-M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), San Antonio, TX, USA, Nov. 2001, p. 1036.
[13] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[14] S.-W. Yen, S.-Y. Hung, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, S.-J. Jou, and C.-Y. Lee, “A 5.79-Gb/s energy-efficient multirate LDPC codec chip for IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 2246–2257, Sep. 2012.
[15] N. Onizawa, T. Ikeda, T. Hanyu, and V. C. Gaudet, “3.2-Gb/s 1024-b rate-1/2 LDPC decoder chip using a flooding-type update-schedule algorithm,” in Proc. 50th Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst., Montreal, QC, Canada, Aug. 2007, pp. 217–220.
[16] M. Milicevic and P. G. Gulak, “A multi-Gb/s frame-interleaved LDPC decoder with path-unrolled message passing in 28-nm CMOS,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 1908–1921, Oct. 2018.
[17] H. Motozuka, N. Yosoku, T. Sakamoto, T. Tsukizawa, N. Shirakata, and K. Takinami, “A 6.16 Gb/s 4.7 pJ/bit/iteration LDPC decoder for IEEE 802.11ad standard in 40nm LP-CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE Global Conf. Signal Inf. Process. (GlobalSIP), Orlando, FL, USA, Dec. 2015, pp. 1289–1292.
[18] S. Ajaz and H. Lee, “Reduced-complexity local switch based multimode QC-LDPC decoder architecture for Gbit wireless communication,” Electron. Lett., vol. 49, no. 19, pp. 1246–1248, Sep. 2013.
[19] S. Ajaz and H. Lee, “Multi-Gb/s multi-mode LDPC decoder architecture for IEEE 802.11ad standard,” in Proc. IEEE Asia Pacific Conf. Circuits Syst. (APCCAS), Ishigaki, Japan, Nov. 2014, pp. 153–156.
[20] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial message-passing schedules for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4076–4091, Nov. 2007.
[21] J. Chen, Y. Zhang, and R. Sun, “An improved normalized min-sum algorithm for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE/ACIS 12th Int. Conf. Comput. Inf. Sci. (ICIS), Niigata, Japan, Jun. 2013, pp. 509–512.

[22] I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras, “Approximate algorithms for identifying minima on min-sum LDPC decoders and their hardware implementation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 766–770, Aug. 2015.
[23] I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras, “A reconfigurable LDPC decoder optimized for 802.11n/ac applications,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 182–195, Jan. 2018.
[24] F. Angarita, J. Valls, V. Almenar, and V. Torres, “Reduced-complexity min-sum algorithm for decoding LDPC codes with low error-floor,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 2150–2158, Jul. 2014.
[25] S. Hemati, F. Leduc-Primeau, and W. J. Gross, “A relaxed min-sum LDPC decoder with simplified check nodes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 422–425, Mar. 2016.
[26] H.-C. Lee, M.-R. Li, J.-K. Hu, P.-C. Chou, and Y.-L. Ueng, “Optimization techniques for the efficient implementation of high-rate layered QC-LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 457–470, Feb. 2017.
[27] H. Lopez, H.-W. Chan, K.-L. Chiu, P.-Y. Tsai, and S.-J.-J. Jou, “A 75-Gb/s/mm2 and energy-efficient LDPC decoder based on a reduced complexity second minimum approximation min-sum algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 926–939, Apr. 2020.
[28] R. Ghanaatian et al., “A 588-Gb/s LDPC decoder based on finitealphabet message passing,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 329–340, Feb. 2018.
[29] S. Ajaz and H. Lee, “Area efficient half row pipelined layered LDPC decoder for gigabit wireless communications,” in Proc. Int. SoC Design Conf. (ISOCC), Gyeongju, South Korea, Nov. 2015, pp. 287–288.
[30] X. Huang, “Deriving the normalized min-sum algorithm from cooperative optimization,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop-ITW Chengdu, Punta del Este, Uruguay, Oct. 2006, pp. 204–208.
[31] M. Weiner, M. Blagojevic, S. Skotnikov, A. Burg, P. Flatresse, and B. Nikolic, “A scalable 1.5-to-6 Gb/s 6.2-to-38.1 mW LDPC decoder for 60 GHz wireless networks in 28nm UTBB FDSOI,” in IEEE Int. SolidState Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2014, pp. 464–465.
[32] M. Weiner, B. Nikolic, and Z. Zhang, “LDPC decoder architecture for high-data rate personal-area networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2011, pp. 1784–1787.
[33] M. Li et al., “An energy efficient 18Gbps LDPC decoding processor for 802.11ad in 28 nm CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conf. (A-SSCC), Xiamen, China, Nov. 2015, pp. 1–5.
[34] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, N. Preyss, A. Cevrero, A. Burg, and C. Roth, “A parallelized layered QC-LDPC decoder for IEEE 802.11ad,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. New Circuits Syst. Conf. (NEWCAS), Jun. 2013, pp. 1–4.
[35] X. R. Lee, C. L. Chen, H. C. Chang, and C. Y. Lee, “A 7.92 Gb/s 437.2 mW stochastic LDPC decoder chip for IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 507–516, Feb. 2015.
[36] M. Li, V. Derudder, C. Desset, A. Dewilde, A. Bourdoux, and Y. Huang, “A 100 Gbps LDPC decoder for the IEEE 802.11ay standard,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Hong Kong, Dec. 2018, pp. 1–5.
[37] S. Kumawat et al., “High-throughput LDPC-decoder architecture using efficient comparison techniques & dynamic multi-frame processing schedule,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1421–1430, May 2015.
[38] M. Shaghaghi, Y. L. Guan, K. Cai, and Z. Qin, “Combined normalized and offset min-sum decoding over partial response channels,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Inf., Commun. Signal Process. (ICICS), Dec. 2009, pp. 1–4.
Henry Lopez Davila received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronics engineering from the National Chiao Tung University (NCTU), Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2013 and 2015, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the EECS International Graduate Program, NCTU, in 2020.
His research interests include design and implementation of VLSI architectures, digital signal processing, and wireless communication systems in general.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

42

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 31, NO. 1, JANUARY 2023

Tsung-Han Wu received the B.S. degree in electronics engineering from the National Chiao Tung University (NCTU), Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2020, where he is currently working toward the M.S. degree at the Institute of Electronics.
His research interests include digital signal processing and digital VLSI design.
Shyh-Jye Jerry Jou (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the National Chen Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, in 1982, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electronics from the National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 1984 and 1988, respectively.
From 1990 to 2004, he joined the Electrical Engineering Department, National Central University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, and became a Professor in 1997. Since 2004, he has been a Professor with the Electronics Engineering Department, National Chiao Tung University, and served as the Chairperson from 2006 to 2009. He was appointed as the Director General of the Ministry of Science and Technology in charge of the Science Education and International Cooperation Department from January 2016 to December 2017. From August 2011 to December 2015, he was the Vice President of International Affair with the National Chiao Tung University. He was a Visiting Research Professor with the Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA, from 1993 to 1994 and 2010 academic years. In the summer of 2001, he was a Visiting Research Consultant with the Communication Circuits and Systems Research Laboratory, Agere Systems, Allentown, PA, USA. He has published more than 100 IEEE journal and conference papers. His research interests include design and analysis of high speed, low power mixed-signal integrated circuits, and communication and bio-electronics integrated circuits and systems. Dr. Jou received the Outstanding Engineering Professor Award from the Chinese Institute of Engineers in 2011 and the Chinese Institute of Electrical Engineering in 2013. He has served as the Chapter Chair for the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society Taipei Chapter in 2006 and a Guest Editor for IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID STATE CIRCUITS in November 2008. He was the Track Chair of Nanoelectronics and Gigascale Systems from 2011 to 2013. He also serves as the Conference Chair and the TPC Chair for many IEEE conferences, such as the Conference Chair for IEEE VLSI Design Automation and Test (VLSI-DAT) and the International Workshop on Memory Technology, Design, and Testing. He has also served as the Technical Program Chair or the Co-Chair for IEEE VLSI-DAT, the International IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuit Conference, and the IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems. He has served as the Distinguished Lecturer for the Circuits and Systems (CAS) Society from 2009 to 2010.

Sau-Gee Chen (Life Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 1978, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from The State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA, in 1984 and 1988, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the Department of Electronics Engineering, National Chiao Tung University (NCTU), Hsinchu, and a member of the Board of Governor, IEEE Taipei Section. He was the Chair of the Department of Electronics Engineering, NCTU, from 2012 to 2015. He was appointed as the Coordinator of IEEE VTS Asia–Pacific Chapters in 2014. He was the Director of the Honors Program, College of Electrical and Computer Engineering/College of Computer Science, NCTU, from 2011 to 2012. He was also the Associate Dean of the Office of International Affairs from March 2011 to July 2011, and the Director of the Institute of Electronics from 2003 to 2006, all at the same organization. He has published more than 100 conference and journal papers, and holds 20 U.S. and Taiwan patents. His research interests include digital communication, digital signal processing, and VLSI signal processing. Dr. Chen was the Chair of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society, Taipei Chapter, from 2012 to 2013. He served as an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS.
Pei-Yun Tsai (Member, IEEE) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1994, 1996, and 2005, respectively.
From 1996 to 2000, she worked at ASUStek, Taipei. She is currently a Professor of Electrical Engineering with the National Central University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. Her research interests include digital signal processing algorithms and VLSI design for wireless communication systems and biomedical systems. Prof. Tsai has received the Acer Longtern Award and the First Asian Solid-State Circuit Conference Student Design Contest Outstanding Award in 2005. She has also received the Macronix International Corporation (MXIC) Golden Silicon Award in 2005, 2010, and 2016. In 2011 and 2014, she received the Outstanding Chip Design Award Honorable Mention from the Chip Implementation Center, Taiwan. Since 2013, she has been serving as a TC Member for International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) Visual Signal Processing and Communications (VSPC) Track. Since 2015, she has been serving as a TPC Member for the Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference (ASSCC) in SoC Subcommittee and also a TC Member for Signal Processing Systems of the Asian–Pacific Signal and Information Processing and Association (APSIPA). Since 2016, she has been serving as a TC Member for the Design and Implementation of Signal Processing Systems (DISPS) of the IEEE Signal Processing Society.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

