IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 72, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

16031

Deep Learning Based Pilot-Free Transmission: Error Correction Coding for Low-Resolution Reception Under Time-Varying Channels
Rui Zeng , Zhilin Lu , Xudong Zhang , and Jintao Wang , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Recently, deep learning aided methods have been developed for error correction coding with quantitative constraints. However, previous studies only focus on additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels, which is not sufficient for actual communication environments. In this article, we propose a novel autoencoder aided error correction coding scheme for low-resolution reception under time-varying channels. Based on the symbol extension of the proposed autoencoder and the faster-than-Nyquist (FTN) technology, pilot-free transmission can be realized without adding additional bandwidth. The transformer block is introduced to lighten and improve the decoder. Additionally, two kinds of preamplification techniques are applied for further performance boosting. Simulations show that the proposed method can achieve better performance compared with the traditional methods at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) under different time-varying channels without quantization. Moreover, it outperforms the previous state-of-the-art ECCNet and can achieve remarkable transmission performance even under time-varying low-resolution reception scenarios.
Index Terms—Error correction coding, faster-than-Nyquist, low-resolution reception, pilot-free transmission, preamplification.
I. INTRODUCTION
L ARGE amounts of antenna arrays improve spectrum and energy efficiency while bringing intolerable power consumption and hardware implementation overhead [1]. Lowresolution reception is desirably effective for reducing the power consumption of analog-to-digital converters (ADCs), which increases exponentially with the number of quantization bits [2]. However, the nonlinear distortion caused by quantization will seriously affect the transmission performance even using popular coding schemes such as turbo codes, low density parity check (LDPC) codes, and Polar codes.
Deep learning has made extraordinary achievements in computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP), and
Manuscript received 22 February 2023; revised 29 May 2023; accepted 8 July 2023. Date of publication 12 July 2023; date of current version 19 December 2023. This work was supported by Tsinghua University-China Mobile Research Institute Joint Innovation Center. The review of this article was coordinated by Dr. Maged Elkashlan. (Corresponding author: Jintao Wang.)
The authors are with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with the Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: zeng_r17@163.com; luzl18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; zhang_xd18@qq.com; wangjintao@tsinghua.edu.cn).
The key results can be reproduced with the following github link: https:// github.com/DTMB-DL/TransECCNet
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2023.3294672

has been employed to design more powerful communication systems since first introduced in [3]. Impressive improvements have been achieved in channel estimation [4], [5], channel state information (CSI) feedback [6], [7], channel decoding [8], [9], and end-to-end communication systems [10], [11], [12]. Additionally, [13], [14], [15] focus on the combination of deep learning and non-orthogonal multiple access technology (NOMA), considering massive machine-type communication (mMTC) scenarios that require low cost and low power consumption. In low-bit scenarios, especially for one-bit quantization, which is an important means of reducing power consumption, learning based methods have been well studied in MIMO detection [16], [17], [18] and pilot design [19]. However, error correction coding for low-resolution reception is still challenging.
Recently, a deep learning based error correction coding scheme has been proposed for one-bit quantization reception [20]. The autoencoder is integrated with the turbo code to compensate for the distortion caused by quantization. ECCNet [21] replaces the heavy fully-connected (FC) layers with the convolutional layers for lighter design and higher performance. However, only additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels have been considered in previous work, which is not practical enough for the real time-varying environment. Additionally, the practical deployment is still difficult due to the heavy network parameters and the huge floating point operations (FLOPs).
As a network structure that can extract both temporal and spatial features, the transformer block has demonstrated amazing excellence in CV and NLP [22], [23]. Compared with the convolution layer which only focuses on local features, it can capture global and temporal features. With self-attention, the transformer captures the long-range dependency and achieves encouraging performance improvements. Inspired by this, we design a lighter and more powerful network named TransECCNet. In TransECCNet, the autoencoder extends the symbols after constellation mapping to cope with the imperfect environment of time-varying channels and quantization. And the faster-thanNyquist (FTN) transmission is utilized to solve the problem of the transmission rate decrease caused by the symbol extension while the bandwidth remains unchanged. Based on the symbol extension and FTN, pilot-free transmission can be realized, which can improve transmission efficiency since additional pilot overhead is no longer required.
Moreover, we propose two kinds of preamplification techniques to make TransECCNet robust to multi-path fading

0018-9545 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

16032

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 72, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

channels. One is bilinear production, which can effectively help

the end-to-end system to capture and counter the time-varying

characteristics of the channel [24]. And the other is based on the

squeeze and excitation (SE) block, which can extract the useful

part from noisy signals and model the temporal features.

To prove the superiority of our proposed method, its perfor-

mance under the flat fading channel and two multi-path fading

channels are given. Specially, a multi-tap channel with strong

echoes is considered to show the robustness of the proposed

scheme. Compared with the orthogonal frequency division mul-

tiplex (OFDM) system, TransECCNet can achieve better bit

error rate (BER) performance without quantization. Moreover,

effective transmission can be achieved within an acceptable

signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) loss, if low-resolution reception is

considered.

Or uAr cnoonvterilbeurtrioorncsocrraencbtieonsucmodminagriszcehdeamsefoblalsoewdso:n TransEC-

CNet is developed for time-varying channels. Experiments

show its superiority compared with the traditional OFDM

systems at high SNR without quantization. And the pilot-

free transmission can be realized since the symbol exten-

r

sion and FTN are utilized. The transformer block is introduced

to

lighten

and

im-

prove the decoder. Compared with ECCNet, TransECCNet

can reduce parameters and FLOPs while improving BER

performance. Therefore, the proposed scheme can achieve

r

effective transmission even with low-resolution reception. Two kinds of preamplification techniques are applied for

further performance boosting, with which the system can

be more robust.

The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II intro-

duces the system model. Section III explains the whole pipeline

of the proposed error correction coding scheme and the detailed

design of TransECCNet. And then, two kinds of preamplification

techniques are depicted in Section IV. After that, the numerical

results and analysis are presented in Section V. The conclusion

is drawn in Section VI.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

A. System Architecture

To compensate for the distortion caused by low-resolution quantization, we adopt the system shown in Fig. 1. The turbo code and the autoencoder are cascaded, which are treated as the outer code and the inner code respectively. Prior information provided by the outer code can help the autoencoder learn the best representation, and thus resist the influence of time-varying and quantization. Note that the turbo code can be replaced with other popular coding schemes such as LDPC codes and Polar codes.
Specially, original bits s are sent into the turbo encoder to get a codeword with the length of L bits. And then it will be modulated by M-ary modulation and form complex symbols d. Since the block fading channel is considered, the symbols can be divided into blocks of size N , which can be written as

d = d1T , d2T , . . ., dTS T ,

(1)

Fig. 1. The adopted system architecture for low-resolution reception. The turbo code is integrated with the autoencoder. Mod denotes the modulation module, while Demod denotes the demodulation module.

where dn ∈ CN×1, S =

L N log2 M

, and N <<

L log2 M

.

Each symbol block dn is treated as the input of the autoen-

coder and extended by G-fold as

xn = fE (ΘE , dn) = [xn1 , xn2 , . . ., xnGN ]T ,

(2)

where xn ∈ CGN×1, and ΘE denotes the trainable parameters of the encoder fE. The autoencoder increases redundancy reasonably by learning the optimal representation characteristics of modulated symbols to resist the non-ideal condition caused by quantization and time-varying, and thus additional explicit pilots are no longer required. The size of G is less than 2(1 + α) as explained in [20], where α is the raised cosine roll off coefficient of the root raised cosine (RRC) filter.
And then these extended symbols are transmitted by the FTN technology in [25] as

x(t) = √ρ

S

GN
xki g

t

−

(k

−

1)N

Tt

−

i

Tt G

,

(3)

k=1 i=1

where ρ, Tt, and g(t) denote the power of the transmitter, the symbol period for Nyquist transmission, and the pulse shaping function, respectively. By the FTN transmission, the proposed scheme keeps the same bandwidth as the traditional turbo code without the autoencoder. Due to the non-orthogonal transmission, inter-symbol-interference (ISI) and colored noise are introduced, which is not an issue since the corresponding effects can be learned and implicitly equalized by the autoencoder.
The transmitted signal is matched filtered after passing through the time-varying channel, which can be represented as

y(t) = (h(t) ∗ x(t) + z(t)) ∗ g(−t)

+∞
=
−∞

+∞
x(u)h(τ − u)du + z(τ ) g(τ − t)dτ,
−∞
(4)

where ∗, h(t), and z(t) denote linear convolution, the channel
impulse response, and the zero-mean Gaussian noise with variance σ2, respectively. Oversampling (4) at t = (n − 1)N Tt +

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZENG et al.: DEEP LEARNING BASED PILOT-FREE TRANSMISSION: ERROR CORRECTION CODING FOR LOW-RESOLUTION RECEPTION

16033

m

Tt G

yields

the

received

symbols

ynm = √ρ

S

GN
xki qnk [m − i] + znm ,

(5)

k=1 i=1

where

+∞
qnk [m − i] =
−∞

+∞
g
−∞

u

−

(k

−

1)N

Tt

−

i

Tt G

× h(τ − u)du × g

τ

−

(n

−

1)N

Tt

−

m

Tt G

dτ, (6)

and

+∞

znm =

z(τ )g

−∞

τ

−

(n

−

1)N Tt

−

m Tt G

dτ.

(7)

qnk [m − i] can be treated as the channel impulse response, and znm in (7) is colored Gaussian noise as depicted in the Ungerboeck model [26]. Note that qnk [m − i] = 0 if m = i, which generates the ISI.
For low-resolution reception, ynm is quantized as

rnm = Q (ynm )

(8)

where the real and imaginary parts are quantized respectively. Every GN quantized samples gather together to form a block
as

rn = [rn1 , rn2 , . . ., rnGN ]T .

(9)

The decoder compresses the dimension of rn by G-fold to reconstruct

dˆn = fD (ΘD, rn) =

dˆn1 , dˆn2 , . . ., dˆnN

T
,

(10)

where ΘD is the trainable parameters of the decoder fD. All S blocks make up the reconstructed codeword dˆ as

dˆ =

dˆ1T , dˆT2 , . . ., dˆTS

T
,

(11)

and finally dˆ is demodulated and decoded to obtain recovered information bits ˆs.

B. Channel Models
Generally, sampling the continuous channel yields the discrete channel model, which is modeled as a time-varying linear system with additive noise [27]. Block fading is considered, which means that the channel is constant within a transmission frame but changes from frame to frame.
As shown in Fig. 2, the transmitter and receiver can be regarded as two focal points of an ellipse, and all paths reflected by the same ellipse will have the same relative delay. At a specific time delay, all signals are combined to form a tap in the channel impulse response. Therefore, the multi-path fading channel is usually modeled as multi-tap filtering, while each tap is characterized by the power delay profile (PDP), p = {pi}. The output of the channel can be expressed as y = h ∗ x + n, where ∗ denotes the linear convolution and n denotes the noise. Considering that the channel impulse response is a vector h = [h1, h2, .., hl] sampled from distribution H, we

Fig. 2. The schematic diagram of a multi-path fading channel.

have E[|hi|2] = pi. The complex Gaussian distribution is widely used as a statistical model to characterize H, if we assume the environment is full of scatterings.
OFDM can resist multi-path fading, since each of the subcarriers is orthogonal and flat. For OFDM systems under unknown time-varying channels, the pilot data and the cyclic prefix (CP) are necessary, which brings additional overhead. We consider two channel estimation methods: least square (LS) and linear minimum mean square error (LMMSE). The latter has better performance on account of the use of second-order statistics RHH = E[HHH ]. The relationship between LS and LMMSE can be written as

HˆLMMSE = RHH

RHH

+

β I
SNR

−1
Hˆ LS ,

(12)

where β is a constant related to the modulation type. Specially, β = 1 for QPSK and β = 17/9 for 16-QAM.

C. Pilot-Free Transmission and FTN
Generally, pilots are necessary for channel estimation, which makes the traditional transmission methods available. The receiver estimates the channel matrix through the known pilot data and interpolation methods, and then realizes channel equalization based on the matrix inversion methods with high computational complexity. However, the additional pilot overhead will reduce the effective transmission rate and spectral efficiency.
In our proposed scheme, the transmitted symbols are extended by G-fold, which means the expanded symbols have the potential to carry more redundancy against the channel effects and utilize prior information learned from the end-to-end optimization. Fig. 3 gives a toy example of the transmitter constellation under a Rayleigh fading channel with QPSK modulation, where the channel effects are learned by the encoder. By encoding the original symbols into embedding vectors robust to the time-varying channels, the CSI can be implicitly inferred from received symbols due to the asymmetrical constellation, and thus explicit pilots are no longer necessary, which is similar to that in [24]. The symbol extension based on the autoencoder will cause a decrease in transmission rate, but this issue can be addressed by the FTN technology.
The FTN introduces a new factor ρ ∈ (0, 1], which accelerates the transmission rate to 1/ρ times the original Nyquist rate. As shown in Fig. 4 with ρ = 1/2, the green extended symbol can be loaded between the original two blue symbols, so the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

16034

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 72, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 3. A toy example of the transmitter constellation generated by the encoder under a Rayleigh fading channel with QPSK modulation, where the symbol extension coefficient G = 2.

Algorithm 1: Training Strategy of the Whole TransECCNet.
Require: learning rate η, network parameters Θ = [ΘE, ΘD] 1: for each epoch in total epochs do
2: Update temperature factor T in current epoch
3: for each batch in total epoch do
4: Sample a minibatch dn with M-ary modulation 5: Sample a channel vector h from H 6: Encoder: xn ← fE(ΘE, dn) 7: Channel: yn ← fh(h, xn) 8: Quantization: rn ← Q(yn) 9: Preamplification: Rn ← P (rn) 10: Decoder: dˆn ← fD(ΘD, Rn) 11: Calculate MSE loss L(dn, dˆn) 12: Back propagation: g ← ∇ΘL 13: Update network Θ ← Θ − ηg 14: end for
15: end for

Fig. 4. The sketch map of the FTN transmission with ρ = 1/2.
total transmission time will not increase. Note that the ISI is introduced at t/T = 0 and t/T = 1 because of the new green symbol. However, through the end-to-end optimization with sufficient training data, it can be learned and implicitly equalized by the transformer block in the decoder.
III. TRANSECCNET DESIGN FOR ERROR CORRECTION CODING
A. Network Pipeline Design
The whole pipeline of our proposed TransECCNet-based scheme is illustrated in Fig. 5. The turbo code is treated as the outer code, and the autoencoder is treated as the inner code. The original bits are sent into the turbo encoder, modulated by M-ary modulation, and divided into blocks of size N . The real part and the imaginary part are spliced in parallel as two feature channels, and then become the input of the encoder. The channel module consists of pulse shaping, real channel transmission, matched filtering, and oversampling. Note that the FTN technique is utilized to save bandwidth, since the transmitted symbols are

extended by G-fold. To cope with the non-differential problem caused by quantization, soft quantization is introduced. After preamplification, the received symbols are reconstructed by the decoder, and they gather together for further demodulation and decoding to obtain the recovered bits.
Consistent with ECCNet in [21], the encoder is composed of a residual block and a time distributed fully-connected (TDFC) layer. The TDFC layer uses a linear layer for every temporal slice rather than all elements, which can combine the correlation extracted by the convolution layer while reducing the parameters. Specially, N temporal slices of size 32 are mapped into vectors of size 2G by a parameter-shared linear layer. The encoder learns the best representation with redundancy, and extends the modulated symbols by G-fold to adapt to the harsh environment of time-varying channel and nonlinear distortion caused by quantization.
We redesign the decoder by replacing the ResSEBlock of ECCNet with the transformer encoder block in ViT [23]. The new decoder consists of L transformer blocks and one TDFC layer. The transformer block has long-term memory, and can capture the timing characteristics of the channels. By the multihead self-attention (MSA) and feedforward module, it reconstructs the received symbols from the redundant damaged data. Finally, the processed data are reorganized by the TDFC layer to obtain the recovered symbols. In this article, we fix L = 4.
Inferring the state of the current channel is still necessary though the transmission is pilot-free. Since no explicit pilots are transmitted, the CSI can only be obtained from the quantized symbols rn in (9). To make full use of the rn for implicit CSI estimation, the preamplification technique is applied to enhance and extract global channel features. The preamplification module is designed as a residual structure to reduce the information loss for the subsequent decoding while extracting the channel state. Two kinds of preamplification techniques are offered in this article, which will be shown in detail in Section IV.
Quantization makes the back propagation of the gradient infeasible, since the ideal quantization function is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZENG et al.: DEEP LEARNING BASED PILOT-FREE TRANSMISSION: ERROR CORRECTION CODING FOR LOW-RESOLUTION RECEPTION

16035

Fig. 5. The whole pipeline of the error correction coding scheme. The autoencoder is integrated with the turbo code, and the input is modulated symbols after blocking. (c × L) denotes the input feature shape of the corresponding block. The batch normalization layers, the ReLU activation functions, and the reshape blocks are left out for simplicity.

Fig. 6. The detailed design of the transformer block. (c × L) denotes the input feature shape of the corresponding block.

non-differentiable. Methods like low-pass filtering [28] are adopted to solve this problem at the cost of gradient mismatch and performance deterioration. To overcome these shortcomings, we adopt the soft quantization function as ECCNet [21], which can be expressed as

n

Q(x) = (ασ (βx − bi) − o),

(13)

i=1

where n is the quantization order, α and β are scale factors, bi is the i-th offset, and o is the global offset. Wherein, the σ(x) is

σ(x)

=

1

+

1 exp(−T x) ,

(14)

where T denotes the temperature factor. By gradually increasing the temperature factor, the gap between the soft quantization function and the ideal quantization function can be narrowed. Based on the soft quantization function, the proposed TransECCNet can be trained in an end-to-end way. The training strategy is summarized as Algorithm 1.

B. Transformer Based Decoder Design
The detail of the transformer block is given in Fig. 6. Each transformer block consists of an MSA module and a feedforward module, both of which follow a layer normalization block. In addition, the residual structure is adopted for spatial information preserving.

Fig. 7. The diagram of the self-attention.

The core of self-attention is the MSA module. Generally,
self-attention can be illustrated in Fig. 7. The input X with the dimension of Dx × N is mapped into the matrix Q, K, and V through the FC layer, each of which is of Dk × N size. Matrix Q and KT are multiplied to calculate the correlation, which
then will we√ight the matrix V . The softmax function and the scale factor Dk are used for normalization. The process can be expressed by (15). For multi-head self-attention, X is mapped
into multiple groups of QKV to obtain the similarity and weight
of different focuses.

Attn(Q, K, V ) = softmax Q√· KT V

(15)

Dk

The feedforward module is an inverted bottleneck structure. The dimension of features is first increased and then reduced to avoid information loss. The activation function is GeLU, and the dropout layer is adopted.
The decoder is composed of L identical transformer block and one TDFC layer. More specifically, the quantized symbols after preamplification r0 pass through the MSA module and the feedforward module alternately in L iterations, and finally are sent into the TDFC layer to yield the recovered symbols. The specific steps are shown in Algorithm 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

16036

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 72, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Algorithm 2: Detail Algorithm of the Transformer Aided
Decoder. Input: quantized symbols after preamplification R0 Output: the recovered symbols y 1: for l = 1, 2, . . ., L do 2: Rl ← MSA(LN(Rl−1)) + Rl−1 3: Rl ← MLP(LN(Rl)) + Rl 4: end for 5: y ← TDFC(RL) 6: return y

Fig. 9. The detailed design of the SE preamplification.

the extractor has generous parameters, increasing the burden of network training. To address this issue, another light preamplifier is designed.

Fig. 8. The sketch map of the bilinear preamplifier design.

IV. PREAMPLIFICATION TECHNIQUE AGAINST TIME -VARYING CHANNEL
To be more robust in time-varying channels, we utilize the preamplification technique to augment the quantized symbols. Like data augmentation, preamplification can generate more representations from the original data to reasonably expand the training feature domain. And thus, the robustness and versatility of the model can be greatly improved. Below are two kinds of preamplification techniques applied in this article.

A. Bilinear Preamplifier Design

Bilinear production is widely used for features combination
in CV fields [29], and is proved to be effective to fully leverage
the channel information in the received symbols [24]. To have a
robust performance in multi-path fading channels, we embed
it into the proposed TransECCNet, before the decoder. The
structure of the bilinear preamplifier is shown in Fig. 8. In the bilinear preamplifier, the quantized symbols r ∈
R2×GN flows through two branches respectively. In one branch, r is sent to a feature extractor composed of convolution layers to obtain the channel feature z ∈ RNk×1, and then sent to the bilinear combiner. In the other branch, r is sent directly to the combiner. With the bilinear production, r is augmented by each element of z, which can be written as

R = r ⊗ z ∈ R2Nk×GN ,

(16)

where ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product. The network parameters of the extractor are consistent with those in [24].
By bilinear production, the received signal is combined with the global channel characteristics generated by the extractor to help the decoder realize more accurate demodulation. However,

B. Squeeze and Excitation Preamplifier Design
The SE block is applied to explicitly model the interdependencies between feature channels, while enhancing effective information and suppressing irrelevant parts as first presented in [30]. In ECCNet [21], the residual SE block is adopted as the backbone network of the decoder. Differently, we use 1 × 1 convolution in the inception layer and the identity layer, and treat it as the SE preamplifier drawn in Fig. 9.
In the inception branch, the quantized symbols first pass through two convolutional operations of size 1 × 1 to augment the number of feature channels from 2 to K. After that, they are global average pooled to one dimension, which is named “squeeze”. And then, two FC layers are applied to predict the importance of each channel to obtain a group of weights, which is named “excitation”. The channel-wise weights are used to scale the convoluted features. Meanwhile, the quantized symbols are sent into an identity branch for the final summation operation.
The SE block enables the preamplifier to fully extract the most effective part of channel information from the damaged redundant symbols, thereby improving the generalization ability and robustness of the decoder. The additional overhead of the SE preamplifier is negligible compared with that of the bilinear preamplifier, since the large convolutional subnetwork extractor is no longer required.
V. SIMULATION PERFORMANCES AND RESULTS ANALYSIS
A. Experiment Setting and Benchmarks
In our experiments, we set G = 4, N = 16, and K = 40, respectively. And thus the raised cosine roll off coefficient α is 1 as explained in II-A. The input of the 1/3 turbo code utilized in LTE standard [31] is 6144 bits, and the output codeword is 18444 bits. For the turbo decoder, a Max-Log-MAP algorithm is employed to perform decoding by 5 iterations. The channel varies once every 64Tt, and keeps constant within one frame.
For both QPSK and 16-QAM modulation, TransECCNet is trained when Eb/N0 is fixed to 35 dB, and tested at a wide

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZENG et al.: DEEP LEARNING BASED PILOT-FREE TRANSMISSION: ERROR CORRECTION CODING FOR LOW-RESOLUTION RECEPTION

16037

range of Eb/N0. The learning rates of the Adam optimizers are 1 × 10−4 for flat fading channels and weak multi-path fading channels, and 5 × 10−4 for strong multi-path fading channels,
if quantized. For the unquantized network, the learning rate is set to 5 × 10−4. During the training phase, the unit temperature increment ΔT is set to 1 for every 10 epochs, in which 30 batches
are randomly sampled. The total epochs are 500, and the batch
size is fixed to 100. Each batch generates a mean square loss
function as

(Θ∗E ,

Θ∗D )

=

arg min
ΘE ,ΘD

1 B

B i=1

di − dˆi 2,

(17)

where B, di, and dˆi denote the batch size, the symbols after blocking, and the reconstructed symbols. The whole network is implemented based on PyTorch, and simulated on an Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-10900 K @ 3.70 GHz CPU and an NVIDIA RTX 2080 8 GB GPU.
In our benchmarks, LS and LMMSE are used to estimate the CSI for the OFDM systems. Second order statistics of the channel, which are known as the prior information, will be exploited to provide better performance for LMMSE. The number of subcarriers is 64, 25% of which are pilots. The CP occupies 16 samples in total. The OFDM systems are also integrated with the 1/3 turbo code and M-ary modulation, but they require additional overhead resulting from the pilots and the CP compared with TransECCNet. No quantization is considered in benchmarks since low-resolution reception is too hard for these systems to deal with.
For further clarification, we abbreviate the compared schemes as follows:
1) OFDM + LS: the OFDM system with channel estimation of LS
2) OFDM + MMSE: the OFDM system with channel estimation of LMMSE
3) TransECC + unQAT: TransECCNet without quantization
4) TransECC + SE + unQAT: TransECCNet with the SE preamplifier and without quantization
5) TransECC + q bit: TransECCNet with q-bit quantization 6) TransECC + SE + q bit: TransECCNet with the SE
preamplifier and q-bit quantization 7) TransECC + Bi + q bit: TransECCNet with the bilinear
preamplifier and q-bit quantization 8) ECC + q bit: ECCNet with q-bit quantization 9) ECC + SE + q bit: ECCNet with the SE preamplifier and
q-bit quantization 10) ECC + Bi + q bit: ECCNet with the bilinear preamplifier
and q-bit quantization
B. Flat Fading
We first show the performance of our proposed TransECCNet under the flat fading channel with QPSK and 16-QAM modulation. For flat fading, we consider one-tap filtering with average power E[h2] = 1. Experimental results are demonstrated in Fig. 10.

Fig. 10. BER curves under the flat fading channel. (a) QPSK. (b) 16QAM.
From the curves in Fig. 10(a), the proposed TransECCNet is able to achieve a rapid reduction of the BER compared with the OFDM systems, while additional overhead is saved since it transmits without any pilots. After one-bit quantization, TransECCNet and ECCNet have an almost fixed SNR loss respectively, while the downward trend of the waterfall is kept. By G-fold symbol extension, the autoencoder aided scheme can learn the best representation with redundancy against the harsh environment of time-varying channel and quantization. The flat fading channel is simple enough, so vanilla ECCNet is still better than the benchmarks at high SNR despite one-bit quantization. The proposed TransECCNet slightly outperforms ECCNet when quantized, since the transformer block can improve the ability of the decoder to track the channel. Moreover, parameters and FLOPs of TransECCNet are greatly declined compared with ECCNet, which further shows the advantage of the proposed network.
Similar results can be observed in Fig. 10(b). The gap between the network with and without one-bit quantization becomes larger. It must be pointed out that one-bit quantization in 16-QAM modulation is a formidable task, since traditional

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

16038

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 72, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 12. The BCE loss curves with QPSK modulation under the channel A while training TransECCNet.

Fig. 11. BER curves under the channel A. (a) QPSK. (b) 16QAM.
turbo codes fail to recover any effective information from the quantized symbols as proved in [21]. However, the proposed scheme makes it possible by introducing redundant information similar to inner coding. At high SNR, TransECCNet can achieve performance comparable to the benchmarks even with one-bit quantization, which greatly reduces the power consumption of the receiver.
C. Weak Multi-Path
To show the effectiveness of the two kinds of preamplification techniques, we consider a weak multi-path channel, called channel A, with the PDP of p = [0, −8, −17, −21, −25](dB) and corresponding relative delay of [0, 3, 5, 6, 8](Tt).
Similar to the situation above, the proposed scheme enjoys better performance over the benchmarks at high SNR as illustrated in Fig. 11(a). By one-bit quantization, schemes based on networks experience performance degradation, but still have a comparable performance with the OFDM systems at high SNR. All TransECCNet aided schemes outperform those based on ECCNet. The gains from the transformer and the SE preamplifier are given at the top-right of the figure. Specially, only

TransECCNet has nearly 3 dB gain compared with only ECCNet when the BER is 10−3, which also proves the superiority of our proposed network. The performance improvement of about 2 dB for TransECCNet can be achieved when using either of the preamplifiers at the above BER, by which the channel information is fully extracted. The curve of TransECCNet with the SE preamplifier is close to that with the bilinear preamplifier, but the parameters and FLOPs are greatly reduced. Note that the performance of ECCNet with the bilinear preamplifier is degraded unexpectedly, because the decoder and the extractor are both based on large convolutional layers, which increases the burden of the convergence of the network training.
Similar conclusions can also be found under 16-QAM modulation as shown in Fig. 11(b). TransECCNet with the SE preamplifier can still obtain a lower BER over the benchmarks at high SNR despite one-bit quantization, while that with the bilinear preamplifier seems slightly inferior. Besides, TransECCNet without any preamplifier fails to give a satisfactory BER performance, which in turn proves the effectiveness of the preamplification technique. None of schemes based on ECCNet can achieve effective transmission if quantized, since their network capacities are not sufficient under time-varying channels.
Fig. 12 gives the curves of the binary cross entropy (BCE) loss varying with the epochs when training TransECCNet with QPSK modulation and one-bit quantization. Compared with TransECCNet only, that with the SE preamplifier converges faster and has better performance. The curves of training and validating are very close, indicating that the network does not have serious overfitting and is easy to train.
D. Strong Multi-Path
To further illustrate the superiority of the proposed network and preamplification techniques, we consider channel B with strong echoes, where the average power of each tap is equal. Specially, the PDP is p = [0, 0, 0, 0, 0](dB) with the relative delay of [0, 1, 2, 3, 4](Tt).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZENG et al.: DEEP LEARNING BASED PILOT-FREE TRANSMISSION: ERROR CORRECTION CODING FOR LOW-RESOLUTION RECEPTION

16039

Fig. 13. The PDFs of the LLR before the turbo decoder with QPSK modulation under the channel B when SNR=10 dB.

First, we compare the probability density functions (PDFs) of the log likelihood ratio (LLR) through different networks with QPSK modulation to illustrate the impact of network structures on the final turbo decoding performance, as shown in Fig. 13. The PDF of the LLR of TransECCNet without quantization tends to present two different peaks, while the PDF presents a single peak if one-bit quantization is considered. TransECCNet with the SE preamplifier has a wider and flatter PDF of the LLR, compared with TransECCNet only, providing more decoding possibilities and thus achieving lower BER performance, which can be verified in Fig. 14(a).
As illustrated in Fig. 14(a), TransECCNet with the SE preamplifier is still superior to the OFDM system at high SNR even under one-bit quantization. With the bilinear preamplifier, TransECCNet requires higher SNR for the same BER performance. The gap between TransECCNet with and without quantization widens even further, since the ISI caused by the strong echoes seriously affects the learning ability of the network when quantized. ECCNet fails to reduce the BER even under no quantization from Fig. 14(c), while TransECCNet can, which further shows the reliability of the transformer based decoder. The SE preamplifier brings only about 0.5 dB gain for TransECCNet when the BER is 10−3, since the QPSK modulation is a vanilla scenario for the network without quantization and TransECCNet is enough powerful. The remaining conclusions are consistent with the foregoing.
During the situation of the strong multi-path channel under 16-QAM modulation, one-bit quantization is so difficult that no useful features can be extracted even after adopting TransECCNet with the SE preamplifier, which performs well before. However, two-bit quantization is available as shown in Fig. 14(b). TransECCNet with the SE preamplifier can realize reliable transmission with an acceptable SNR loss compared with the unquantized scheme, and can outperform the benchmarks if SNR is high enough. Without any preamplifier, TransECCNet experiences a near 8 dB loss even under no quantization as shown in Fig. 14(c). Similarly, all schemes based on ECCNet fail to work whether quantized or not, since they are not robust enough to overcome both strong multi-path interference and time-varying.

Fig. 14. BER curves under the channel B. (a) QPSK. (b) 16QAM. (c) Gains under QPSK and 16QAM.
E. Complexity Analysis We compare the theoretical complexity of the schemes in-
volved, as shown in Table I. M denotes the number of the subcarriers, with M = GN for fair comparisons. DE and DD denote the number of the convolutional layers, NE(l,k) and ND(l,)k denote

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

16040

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 72, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023
TABLE I COMPLEXITIES OF INVOLVED SCHEMES

TABLE II PARAMETERS, FLOPS, AND AVERAGE RUNNING TIMES OF INVOLVED SCHEMES
ON DIFFERENT BATCH SIZES

scheme, meanwhile the low-resolution reception can greatly reduce the power consumption. However, the network based methods require enough data and time for offline training, which is unnecessary for the conventional methods.

VI. CONCLUSION

the kernel size of the l-th convolutional layer, CE(l,)in and CD(l,)in denote the number of the input channels, and CE(l,)out and CD(l,)out denote the number of the output channels for the encoder and the decoder, respectively. h denotes the number of the multi-heads, and the feature channel CD is unified for all layers in the decoder of TransECCNet. In this article, the number of feature channels is larger than M , resulting in network-based methods exhibiting higher complexity than conventional methods. However, if M is large enough, the complexity of ECCNet and TransECCNet is lower than OFDM+MMSE. Additionally, ECCNet consistently demonstrates a higher complexity compared to TransECCNet due to its noticeably higher feature channel values.
Furthermore, to show the major improvements in storage and calculation, we compare the parameters, the FLOPs, and the average running times of the involved schemes without quantization on different batch sizes. For the convenience of comparison, we do not consider the running time of the turbo code and modulation. Under channel B, the transmission time of each block modulated with QPSK is tested on an NVIDIA RTX 2080 8 GB GPU. The complexity analysis is given in Table II.
Compared with ECCNet, TransECCNet is much lighter and faster, since large convolution kernels and numerous channel filters are abandoned. More specifically, the amount of the parameters of TransECCNet is reduced by nearly 2.7 times, while the FLOPs are decreased by two orders of magnitude.
The extractor based on a convolutional subnetwork is required for the bilinear preamplifier, which brings nontrivial storage and computing overhead. Meanwhile, the overhead caused by the SE preamplifier can be almost ignored.
Compared with the conventional methods, the scheme based on TransECCNet is slightly slower when batch size is 1, since the symbols are represented as an embedded vector with redundancy. But when the batch size becomes larger, multiple data can be processed in parallel on the GPU, thus speeding up the calculation, which is the advantage of networks over conventional methods. Moreover, better performance at high SNR and pilot-free transmission can be achieved by the proposed

In this article, we proposed a novel error correction coding scheme with a transformer-based autoencoder named TransECCNet. By the symbol extension and FTN technology, pilot-free transmission was available without any additional bandwidth cost. Two kinds of preamplification techniques were applied for further robustness and performance boosting. Compared with previous ECCNet, parameters and FLOPs were greatly declined while the BER performance was improved. TransECCNet outperformed the conventional OFDM systems without quantization under time-varying channels, and had better spectral efficiency since the overhead of pilots and CP was not required. Moreover, it worked with a tolerable SNR loss under the hard low-resolution reception scene where the traditional benchmarks became totally invalid.
REFERENCES
[1] T. S. Rappaport et al., “Wireless communications and applications above 100 GHz: Opportunities and challenges for 6G and beyond,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 78729–78757, 2019.
[2] R. Walden, “Analog-to-digital converter survey and analysis,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 539–550, Apr. 1999.
[3] T. O’shea and J. Hoydis, “An introduction to deep learning for the physical layer,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 563–575, Dec. 2017.
[4] H. Ye, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. Juang, “Power of deep learning for channel estimation and signal detection in OFDM systems,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 114–117, Feb. 2018.
[5] H. Huang, J. Yang, H. Huang, Y. Song, and G. Gui, “Deep learning for super-resolution channel estimation and DOA estimation based massive MIMO system,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 8549–8560, Sep. 2018.
[6] C.-K. Wen, W.-T. Shih, and S. Jin, “Deep learning for massive MIMO CSI feedback,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 748–751, Oct. 2018.
[7] Z. Lu, J. Wang, and J. Song, “Multi-resolution CSI feedback with deep learning in massive MIMO system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun.2020, pp. 1–6.
[8] H. Zhu, Z. Cao, Y. Zhao, and D. Li, “Learning to denoise and decode: A novel residual neural network decoder for polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 8725–8738, Aug. 2020.
[9] H. Kim, Y. Jiang, R. Rana, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Communication algorithms via deep learning,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id= ryazCMbR-
[10] B. Zhu, J. Wang, L. He, and J. Song, “Joint transceiver optimization for wireless communication PHY using neural network,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1364–1373, Jun. 2019.
[11] H. Ye, L. Liang, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. Juang, “Deep learning-based end-toend wireless communication systems with conditional GANs as unknown channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3133–3143, May 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZENG et al.: DEEP LEARNING BASED PILOT-FREE TRANSMISSION: ERROR CORRECTION CODING FOR LOW-RESOLUTION RECEPTION

16041

[12] H. Jiang, L. Dai, M. Hao, and R. MacKenzie, “End-to-end learning for RIS-aided communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 6778–6783, Jun. 2022.
[13] J. Pan et al., “AI-driven blind signature classification for IoT connectivity: A deep learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 6033–6047, Aug. 2022.
[14] Y. Ahn, W. Kim, and B. Shim, “Active user detection and channel estimation for massive machine-type communication: Deep learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 14, pp. 11904–11917, Jul. 2022.
[15] N. Ye, X. Li, H. Yu, L. Zhao, W. Liu, and X. Hou, “DeepNOMA: A unified framework for noma using deep multi-task learning,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2208–2225, Apr. 2020.
[16] S. Khobahi, N. Shlezinger, M. Soltanalian, and Y. C. Eldar, “LoRD-Net: Unfolded deep detection network with low-resolution receivers,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 69, pp. 5651–5664, 2021.
[17] A. Klautau, N. González-Prelcic, A. Mezghani, and R. W. Heath, “Detection and channel equalization with deep learning for low resolution mimo systems,” in Proc. 52nd Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst., Comput., 2018, pp. 1836–1840.
[18] L. V. Nguyen, A. L. Swindlehurst, and D. H. N. Nguyen, “Linear and deep neural network-based receivers for massive MIMO systems with one-bit ADCs,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 7333–7345, Nov. 2021.
[19] Y. Zhang, M. Alrabeiah, and A. Alkhateeb, “Deep learning for massive MIMO with 1-bit ADCs: When more antennas need fewer pilots,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1273–1277, Aug. 2020.
[20] E. Balevi and J. G. Andrews, “Deep learning-based encoder for one-bit quantization,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2019, pp. 1–6.
[21] R. Zeng, Z. Lu, J. Wang, and J. Song, “Error correction coding for one-bit quantization with CNN-based autoencoder,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 1814–1818, Aug. 2022.
[22] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
[23] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16 × 16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy
[24] H. Ye, G. Y. Li, and B. Juang, “Deep learning based end-to-end wireless communication systems without pilots,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 702–714, Sep. 2021.
[25] A. Liveris and C. Georghiades, “Exploiting faster-than-Nyquist signaling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 1502–1511, Sep. 2003.
[26] G. Ungerboeck, “Adaptive maximum-likelihood receiver for carriermodulated data-transmission systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 624–636, May 1974.
[27] T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA:Prentice-Hall, 1996.
[28] Z. Lu, J. Wang, and J. Song, “Binary neural network aided CSI feedback in massive MIMO system,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 1305–1308, Jun. 2021.
[29] T. Lin, A. RoyChowdhury, and S. Maji, “Bilinear CNN models for fine-grained visual recognition,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2015, pp. 1449–1457.
[30] J. Hu, L. Shen, G. Sun, S. Albanie, and E. Wu, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 2011–2023, Aug. 2020.
[31] LTE; Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Multiplexing and Channel Coding, document TS 36.212, Version 15.9.0, Release 15, 3GPP, European Telecommunication Standard Institute Standard, 2020.

Rui Zeng received the B.S. degree in 2021 from the Department of Electronic Engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, were is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree. His research interests include deep learning for channel equalization, data detection, and modulation recognition.
Zhilin Lu received the B.S. degree from the Department of Electronic Engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, were he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree. His research interests include deep learning for wireless communication, and neural network architecture design.
Xudong Zhang received the B.S. degree in 2022 from the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree. His research interests include deep learning for wireless communication, massive MIMO, and neural network architecture design.
Jintao Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2001 and 2006, respectively. From 2006 to 2009, he was an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University. Since 2009, he has been an Associate Professor and Ph.D. Supervisor. He has authored or coauthored more than 100 journal and conference papers and holds more than 40 national invention patents. His research interests include space-time coding, MIMO, and OFDM systems. He is the Standard Committee Member of the Chinese national digital terrestrial television broadcasting standard.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

