IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 72, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2023

12349

A New Receiver Design for Protograph-Coded Reference Reused DCSK Systems
Yunye Li , Yi Fang , Senior Member, IEEE, Lin Dai , and Pingping Chen , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—In this letter, we investigate the performance of protographcoded reference reused differential chaos shift keying (DCSK) systems to improve the transmission reliability. The traditional protograph-coded DCSK receiver does not take full advantage of the reused chaotic reference signals and hence cannot obtain desirable error performance. To solve this problem, we design a new receiver architecture called weighted reference estimation and iterative decoding (WRE-ID), which can universally improve the performance of protograph-coded reference reused DCSK systems over both multipath Rayleigh fading and additive white Gaussian noise channels. In particular, we put forward the WRE algorithm to estimate reference signal in order to calculate log-likelihood ratio (LLR) more precisely. Furthermore, extrinsic information output from the decoder is utilized to iteratively recalculate the weight of the WRE algorithm. As a further illustration, we derive the LLR expressions of the proposed WRE-ID-aided receiver of a typical protograph-coded reference reused DCSK (i.e., high-efficiency DCSK) system. Analytical and simulated results show that the proposed WRE-ID-aided receiver can always overtake the traditional receivers in reference reused DCSK systems. Hence, the protograph-based reference reused DCSK systems with the proposed receiver are very promising for high-rate high-reliability wireless applications.
Index Terms—Differential chaos shift keying (DCSK), weighting reference estimation and iterative decoding, protograph codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the characteristic of inherent wideband, chaotic signals are well suited for spread-spectrum communications [1]. Among all the chaotic modulation schemes, differential chaos shift keying (DCSK) has been most studied in [2]. In the DCSK systems, the receiver does not require complex signal synchronization and channel estimation [3], which makes it especially friendly to low-power and low-complexity communication devices. However, half of bit energy is used to transmit reference signal in DCSK systems, causing only half left for the information-bearing signal, which reduces the spectrum efficiency and transmission rate [4]. To solve this problem, various DCSK schemes that reuse reference sequence have been proposed in [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. For example, short reference DCSK (SR-DCSK) shortens the number of chaotic samples that constitute the reference signal and repeats information-bearing signal multiple times to enhance energy
Manuscript received 1 November 2022; revised 1 March 2023; accepted 27 March 2023. Date of publication 10 April 2023; date of current version 19 September 2023. This work was supported in part by the NSF of China under Grants 62071131 and 62171135, in part by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant 2022B1515020086, in part by the International Collaborative Research Program of Guangdong Science and Technology Department under Grant 2022A0505050070, and in part by the NSF of Fujian Province under Grant 2022J06010. The review of this article was coordinated by Prof. Gabriella Olmo. (Corresponding author: Yi Fang.)
Yunye Li, Yi Fang, and Lin Dai are with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangdong 510006, China (e-mail: huohuasysu@hotmail.com; fangyi@gdut.edu.cn; bs0109dl@163.com).
Pingping Chen is with the Department of Electronic Information, Fuzhou University, Fujian 350116, China (e-mail: ppchen.xm@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2023.3264642

efficiency [5]. High-efficiency DCSK (HE-DCSK) has been proposed to enhance bandwidth efficiency by recycling each information-bearing signal twice [6]. Multi-carrier DCSK (MC-DCSK) has been conceived to transmit the reference and information-bearing chaotic signals in the different subcarriers [8]. All of these schemes mentioned above share one common characteristic, which is that multiple information-bearing signals are constructed by using the same chaotic reference signal. We refer to these systems as reference reused DCSK systems. Because of the significant advantage in error performance and spectrum efficiency, the reference reused DCSK schemes have become a type of the most promising DCSK techniques in recent years.
In the reference reused DCSK systems, detector receives multiple “corrupted” information-bearing signals based on the same chaotic reference signal. However, traditional receiver directly utilizes the “corrupted” chaotic reference signal for detection, which is not precise enough. It is because the information provided by the informationbearing signals based on the given “corrupted” chaotic reference signal are wasted in the detection process. To solve this problem, an iterative receiver for MC-DCSK system has been proposed in [12]. In this receiver, the correlation coefficients between the reference signal and information-bearing signals are evaluated and used to update the reference signal. Nonetheless, there has been no existing iterative receiver design tailored for protograph-coded reference reused DCSK systems yet. Motivated by the above issue, we propose a weighted average algorithm that substantially utilizes the information-bearing signals to acquire a more precise reference signal.
To further improve the performance of DCSK systems, errorcorrection coding can be introduced to alleviate the effect of channel noise and fading. Among the existing coding schemes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are the most popular since they can asymptotically approach the Shannon capacity [13], and several theoreticalanalysis tools have been put forward, e.g., protograph extrinsic information transfer (P-EXIT) algorithm [14]. The protograph code has been first introduced to DCSK system in [15]. Furthermore, iterative decoding (ID) between the coherent detector and the decoder helps to further boost the protograph-coded DCSK systems performance [16].
In this article, we systematically investigate the performance of protograph-coded reference reused DCSK systems, such as HE-DCSK, SR-DCSK and MC-DCSK systems. In particular, we concentrate on HE-DCSK as an example to elaborate our work. The main contributions can be summarized as follows:
1) We propose a new receiver architecture called weighted reference estimation and iterative decoding (WRE-ID) for protographcoded reference reused DCSK systems, which helps iteratively estimating reference signal and hence provides more accurate a priori log-likelihood-ratio (LLR) for the decoder.
2) We derive the expression for the a priori LLR for the protographcoded HE-DCSK system without WRE-ID. Since the WRE-ID architecture changes the probability distribution function (PDF) of LLR, we further derive the LLR expressions of the protographcoded WRE-ID-aided HE-DCSK system.
3) Analytical and simulated results show that the proposed WRE-ID architecture can improve the error performance of protograph-coded HE-DCSK systems. We also demonstrate that the proposed WRE-ID architecture is suitable for other reference reused protograph-coded DCSK systems, e.g., protograph-coded SR-DCSK and MC-DCSK systems.

0018-9545 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

12350

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 72, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2023

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the proposed protograph-coded HE-DCSK system.
Fig. 3. Proposed WRE-ID receiver for the protograph-coded HE-DCSK system.

Fig. 2. Signal format of the HE-DCSK modulation.

Ref i and Msgi. First, ri is delayed to generate its replicas ri−M and ri−3M . Afterwards, ri is multiplied by these two replicas to produce the observation values Z2m and Z2m+1 respectively. Specifically, we have

II. SYSTEM MODEL
Without loss of generality, we consider a protograph-coded HEDCSK system [6] shown in Fig. 1 as an example of the reference reused DCSK systems, where the dash line represents the feedback of the proposed WRE-ID architecture. The WRE-ID receiver can be easily applied to other reference reused DCSK systems. In the following, we will elaborate the structure of the protograph-coded HE-DCSK system and the proposed WRE-ID receiver.

A. Transmitter of Proposed Protograph-Coded HE-DCSK

In the protograph-coded HE-DCSK transmitter, the message bits are

encoded by a protograph LDPC encoder to generate coded bits b2m and b2m+1 in the m-th frame. In this article, we assume that a rate-0.5

accumulate-repeat-by-4-jagged-accumulate (AR4JA) protograph code

is adopted as the channel coding scheme, which has been widely used

in protograph-coded DCSK systems [15], [17], [18], [19]. The base

matrix

of

a

rate-

e+1 e+2

(e

=

0,

1,

2,

.

.

.)

AR4JA

code

is

given

by

[18]

2n

⎡

⎤

1 2 0 0 0 0 0 ··· 0 0 BAR4JA = ⎣0 3 1 1 1 1 3 · · · 1 3⎦ .

(1)

0 1 2 2 1 3 1 ··· 3 1

Then, the base matrix of a rate-0.5 AR4JA code can be obtained by setting e = 0. Based on (1), one can exploit the modified progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm [13] to generate a protograph code. Although the AR4JA code is adopted as the channel coding scheme in this article, the proposed iterative receiver can be also applied to the scenarios with other types of protograph codes.
The transmitter then generates a chaotic sequence xi of length M (i.e., M is the spreading factor) as the reference for b2m in the first fragment Ref m, where a logistic map x(j + 1) = 1 − 2 × x2(j) is used. Afterwards, a pair of encoded bits b2m and b2m−1 are separately modulated onto the current and former reference sequence by changing the polarity of the waveform. At last, the sum of these two informationbearing signals are transmitted in the second fragment Msgm. For further illustration, the signal format of an HE-DCSK modulation is shown in Fig. 2, where the signals modulated from the same chaotic sequence are painted in the same color.

B. Proposed WRE-ID Receiver
The proposed WRE-ID receiver for the protograph-coded HE-DCSK is shown in Fig. 3, where the received signal ri contains the “corrupted”

M

Z2m = Ref mi · Msgmi,

(2)

i=1

M

Z2m−1 = Ref m−1i · Msgmi,

(3)

i=1

where Ref m represents the estimation of reference signal Ref m. Then, the WRE algorithm utilizes Z2m and Z2m+1 to generate precise reference estimation and log-likelihood ratio (LLR). Finally, a beliefpropagation (BP) decoder is used to generate decoding result. The soft output of BP decoder will serve as extrinsic information and feed back to the WRE algorithm. After several iterations, the recovered bits are obtained.

III. DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF PROPOSED WRE-ID ARCHITECTURE
The novelty of the proposed WRE-ID receiver are two-fold: 1) WRE algorithm and 2) iterative decoding architecture. To be specific, the proposed WRE algorithm is performed to estimate reference sequence, hence providing more accurate LLRs for protograph decoder. To further boost the system performance, the extrinsic information output from protograph decoder can be fed back as the a-priori information of the WRE algorithm for the reference estimation.

A. Proposed WRE-ID Architecture
To explain the drawback of traditional HE-DCSK receiver [6], we use the reference sequence of the first fragment Ref m as an example. In this case, the chaotic reference sequence (filled with red slash in Fig. 2) is reused in three fragments. However, the traditional HE-DCSK receiver only utilizes the first 2 replicas of all 3 replicas.
To solve this problem, the main idea of the proposed WRE algorithm is to use both Ref m and Msgm to estimate reference sequence more accurately. The proposed WRE-ID architecture is shown in Fig. 3. In particular, the proposed WRE algorithm utilizes the detector output Zi and the a posteriori LLR LP(i) output from decoder in order to produce the estimated reference Ref i for the i-th bit.
Moreover, we refer to the index of this bit as x1, the index of the other bit recycling the same chaotic sequence as x2, and the index of the reference chaotic signal as y. The weight of reference signal Ref y is set to 1, while the weight of information-bearing signal Msgx2 is set to LP(i) / Avg. Based on the above discussion, the estimated reference

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 72, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2023

12351

sequence Ref i of bi can be formulated as

Ref i =

Ref y

+

Msgx2

·

LP(i) Avg

Algorithm 1: Proposed WRE Algorithm. 1 + LP(i) , (4)
Avg

where Avg is denoted as the average absolute value of LP(i) of all

coded bits in a codeword. Thus, we have Avg =

N i=1

|LP(i)|/N

,

where N represents the codeword length. The weights of Ref y and

Msgx2

are

set

to

1

and

LP (i) Avg

,

respectively.

Thereby,

the

fragment

with relatively higher reliability dominates the estimation of reference

sequence Ref y, which can further improve the LLR accuracy for the

protograph decoder.

As a further illustration, the detailed process of WRE algorithm in

shown in Algorithm 1. Once receiving ri of the entire codeword, the observation vector Z = {Z1, Z2, . . . , ZN } is calculated as an input of

the WRE algorithm. During the first iteration, LA(i) is calculated by

(10) and fed to the WRE algorithm. Then, Ref i can be obtained and

used to calculate the accurate a priori LLRs LA(i) via (2), (3) and (10).

These accurate LLRs LA(i) will be passed into the protograph decoder

to generate LP(i), which is served as the updated input of the WRE

algorithm in the next iteration. After several iterations, the decoded bits

can be obtained.

The proposed WRE algorithm restores the “corrupted” signal to

offer extra performance gain. Since the hard decision may introduce

extra noise, we use the weighting operation to minimize negative effect

of the error hard decision. It seems that the DCSK system reusing

chaotic reference signal bearing different information bits may benefit

more from the proposed WRE algorithm. Moreover, iterative decoding

between the coherent detector and the channel decoder can be used to

enhance the system performance.

B. LLR Computation

As Algorithm 1 shown above, the a priori LLR LA(i) of each bit bi is necessary for WRE algorithm and protograph decoder. Since coded HE-DCSK systems have not been studied yet, we first derive the expression of LA(i) in the standard HE-DCSK system over multipath Rayleigh fading channel. Afterwards, the LLR expression is extended to the protograph-coded WRE-ID-aided HE-DCSK system. In this article, we assume that the multipath time delays are much shorter than chaotic signal duration, thus the inter symbol interference (ISI) can be reasonably ignored [19]. In traditional HE-DCSK system without WRE-ID, we assume bi = 1 without loss of generality. Then, the mean and variance of the detector output Zi can be computed by

EZ

=

E(Zi

| bi) =

E(Zi

| bi

=

1) =

1 2

hi

2

,

(5)

varZ

=

3 2

σ

2 hi

2

+ Mσ4

+

hi 4 4M

,

(6)

where hi2 =

L j=1

hij

2,

hij

represents

the

fading

factor

of

the

bit

bi

from the j-th path, and σ2 represents the noise variance.

The PDF of Zi in protograph-coded WRE-ID-aided HE-DCSK sys-

tem is a little different from traditional one without WRE-ID, because

the signals affected by different fading factor are used in the process

of estimation. In protograph-coded WRE-ID-aided HE-DCSK system,

the mean and variance of Zi can be calculated as

EZ

=

E(Zi

|

bi)

=

E(Zi

|

bi

=

1)

=

1 2 hihi,

(7)

varZ

=

hi 2

2
+ 2hi 2

· σ2

+ Mσ4

+

hi2hi2 , 4M

(8)

TABLE I DECODING THRESHOLDS ε OF PROTOGRAPH CODE IN THE PROPOSED WRE-ID-AIDED HE-DCSK SYSTEM AND TRADITIONAL HE-DCSK SYSTEM,
OVER AWGN AND MULTIPATH RAYLEIGH FADING CHANNELS

2
where hi =

L j=1

hij

2
,

hij

represents

the

fading

factor

of

the

other

bit recycling the same reference sequence on the j-th path.

Then the PDF of Zi in the protograph-coded WRE-ID HE-DCSK system is expressed as

⎧

⎪⎨ √ 1 exp

P

(Zi

|

bi)

=

2π varZ
⎩⎪ √ 1

exp

2π varZ

− (Zi−EZ )2 2 varZ
− (Zi+EZ )2 2 varZ

, if bi = 1, , if bi = 0.

(9)

Finally, the a priori LLR LA(i) of bi is then fed to the protograph decoder, given by

LA(i)

=

log

P P

(Zi (Zi

| |

bi bi

= =

0) 1)

=

2Zi

·

(EZ

/ varZ).

(10)

C. Theoretical Analysis
The P-EXIT algorithm based on the protograph-coded DCSK systems is elaborated in [19]. In the P-EXIT algorithm, the mutual information between the transmitted symbols and the LLRs sent from check-to-variable nodes can be computed as follows.

I = J(ϕ) = 1 −

∞ exp
−∞

−

(μ−ϕ2 /2)2
2ϕ2

2πϕ2

log2[1 + exp(−μ)]dμ, (11)

where ϕ2/2 represents the mean of the LLRs values that obtained by

Monte Carlo simulations. According to [17], the P-EXIT algorithm can

be utilized to trace the mutual information between decoder and demod-

ulator. To validate the proposed WRE-ID architecture, we perform the

same algorithm to calculate the decoding thresholds ε of the protograph

code in the proposed WRE-ID-aided HE-DCSK system and traditional

HE-DCSK system, and the result is illustrated in Table I, where it

represents the number of iteration. The threshold of protograph code in

the proposed WRE-ID architecture in the first iteration (it = 1) has a

gain of 0.75 dB over the traditional threshold in traditional HE-DCSK

over an multipath Rayleigh fading channel. Moreover, the threshold

gain can be further improved as the number of iterations increases.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

12352

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 72, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2023

TABLE II VE IN THE PROPOSED WRE-ID-AIDED HE-DCSK SYSTEM AND TRADITIONAL
HE-DCSK SYSTEM, OVER AWGN AND MULTIPATH RAYLEIGH FADING CHANNELS, SNR = 15.5 DB

TABLE III COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY FOR THE PROPOSED WRE-ID ARCHITECTURE
AND THE TRADITIONAL HE-DCSK RECEIVER

As a further advance, we investigate the estimation accuracy of the proposed WRE-ID architecture. The performance gain of WRE-ID mainly comes from the improvement of estimation accuracy. Hence, the estimation error can be also used to analyze the corresponding system. Here, a Monte Carlo method is proposed to measure the estimation variance VE, which is computed as

VE = E

M (Ref i − Ref i)2 M

.

(12)

i

Instead of the traditional mean square error (MSE) method which does not take account of the effect of spreading factor M , VE can reflect the estimation accuracy of reference sequences with different M . The analysis results are listed in Table II. The lower variance VE proves that the estimation accuracy can be significantly boosted by the proposed WRE-ID architecture.

D. Complexity Analysis
The comparison of computational complexity between the proposed WRE-ID HE-DCSK system and traditional HE-DCSK system is listed in Table III, where d¯v and d¯c denote the average degree of the variable nodes and check nodes in a protograph code, respectively. Note that the computational complexity for each iterative BP decoding is countered, and BP decoder always acquires a large amount of iterations to obtain decoded bits. Typically, the computational complexity of the protograph decoder is much higher than demodulator, especially when WRE-ID architecture is implemented with only one iteration.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section, we perform simulations over AWGN and multipath Rayleigh fading channels. Unless otherwise specified, the simulation parameters of the multipath Rayleigh fading channel are set as follows: the number of paths and their corresponding delays are set to L = 2 and (τ1, τ2) = (0, 1), respectively, and the average power gains are assumed the same. Moreover, The length of fading block is set to 200, where the spreading factor M is set to 100. The AR4JA code is applied to the considered DCSK systems, and the codeword length and code rate are set to 2560 and 0.5, respectively.
As shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), a considerable gain can be obtained by the proposed WRE-ID architecture in protograph-coded HE-DCSK

Fig. 4. BER curves of the proposed WRE-ID-aided HE-DCSK system and traditional HE-DCSK system, over (a) an AWGN channel and (b) a multipath Rayleigh fading channel.
system over AWGN and multipath Rayleigh fading channels. To be specific, in an AWGN channel, a gain of 0.35 dB can be obtained at the BER of 1 × 10−5 when the WRE algorithm is performed in the first iteration. It should be noted that, when it = 1, the protograph decoder only works once. Since the decoder occupies the major complexity in coded communication systems, we conclude that the WRE-ID architecture improves the BER performance without increasing system complexity in the first iteration. Moreover, about 0.06 dB gain can be further reached when it increases from 1 to 4. In multipath Rayleigh fading channel, a gain of 0.8 dB at the BER of 1 × 10−5 can be obtained when the WRE algorithm is performed in the first iteration, and 0.09 dB gain can be further reached when it increases from 1 to 4. Therefore, the proposed WRE-ID-aided receiver can achieve a larger iteration gain over a multipath Rayleigh fading channel as compared with that over an AWGN channel. Besides, it seems that a higher iteration number only contributes slightly improvement of BER performance. Furthermore, we find that the BER performance no longer improves when it increases from 4 to 12. Thereby, the BER performance converges when it 4. This indicates that it = 4 is the maximum available iteration number that enables the proposed protograph-based HE-DCSK system to achieve iterative performance gain.
BER results of the proposed WRE-ID architecture in the HE-DCSK systems with different values of M over the multipath Rayleigh fading channel are presented in Fig. 5. As shown, the HE-DCSK system can achieve desirable performance gains by using the proposed WER-ID receiver under the condition of different spreading factors.
As a further insight, we investigate the effect of the fading parameters on BER performance of the HE-DCSK system. As shown in Fig. 6,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 72, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2023

12353

Fig. 5. BER curves of the proposed WRE-ID-aided HE-DCSK system and traditional HE-DCSK system over a multipath Rayleigh fading channel, where three different spreading factors M = 60, 100, 160 are considered.

Fig. 7. BER curves of the proposed WRE-ID-aided HE-DCSK system and
traditional HE-DCSK system over three-path Rayleigh fading channels with average power gains E(λ21) = 4/7, E(λ22) = 2/7, E(λ23) = 1/7, where the path delays τ1 = 0, τ2 = 3, 12, 21 and τ3 = τ2 + 3 are considered.

Fig. 6. BER curves of the proposed WRE-ID-aided HE-DCSK system and traditional HE-DCSK system over a multipath Rayleigh fading channel, where different numbers of paths L = 1, 2, 5 are considered.

the BER performance of the HE-DCSK system is evaluated with different numbers of paths L = 1, 2, 5. As an essentially wideband communication technique, the protograph-coded HE-DCSK system performs better as L increases. Referring to this figure, the proposed WRE-ID architecture can achieve obvious performance gains in the protograph-coded HE-DCSK system over multipath Rayleigh fading channels with different L. In addition, to evaluate the effect of path delay, we carry out the BER curves of the protograph-coded HE-DCSK system over three-path Rayleigh fading channels with different delays (τ1, τ2, τ3) in Fig. 7. Irrespective of the path-delay setting, the proposed WRE-ID architecture can provide almost the same performance gain in the HE-DCSK system. In summary, the HE-DCSK system with the proposed WRE-ID architecture exhibits great anti-multipath-fading capability.
To further demonstrate the benefit and universality of our design, we extend the proposed WRE-ID architecture to SR-DCSK and MC-DCSK systems. The number of replicas P of SR-DCSK system is set to 4, and the numbers of subcarriers of MC-DCSK systems are set to m = 8, 16. As shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b), the results are pretty similar to HE-DCSK system. In the proposed WRE-ID-aided SR-DCSK system, a gain of 0.6 dB can be obtained in the first iteration at the BER of 1 × 10−5, while an additional 0.2 dB gain can be further obtained in the fourth iteration. Moreover, the MC-DCSK system can achieve a more remarkable gain with the use of the proposed WRE-ID architecture. The reason is that the number of subcarriers in MC-DCSK system is relatively large in practice, which provides more replicas of reusing chaotic signal and

Fig. 8. BER curves of (a) the WRE-ID-aided SR-DCSK system and traditional SR-DCSK system, and (b) the WRE-ID-aided MC-DCSK system and traditional MC-DCSK system over a multipath Rayleigh fading channel.
thus yields a more accurate reference estimation.1 All in all, DCSK systems with a larger chaotic-signal reused time can obtain a higher gain.
1To be specific, the reused time of the chaotic signal in the HE-DCSK system is only 2. In the SR-DCSK and MC-DCSK systems, the reused time of the chaotic signal is determined by the number of replicas P and the number of subcarriers m, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

12354

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 72, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2023

V. CONCLUSION
In this article, a new receiver architecture, called WRE-ID, has been proposed to improve the performance of the protograph-coded reference reused DCSK systems. In particular, the HE-DCSK was used as an example to illustrate the principles of such technique. In the proposed WRE-ID architecture, the receiver can flexibly choose the number of iterations to get a balance between the performance and complexity. Actually, the major gain can be obtained in the first iteration without increasing the implementation complexity comparing to traditional receiver. Both simulation results and theoretical analysis tools proved the superiority of the proposed WRE-ID architecture over AWGN channel and multipath Rayleigh fading channel. Thereby, the proposed WRE-ID architecture is of great usefulness to enhance the reliability of DCSK communication devices.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Abel and W. Schwarz, “Chaos communications-principles, schemes, and system analysis,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 90, no. 5, pp. 691–710, May 2002.
[2] W. Xu, L. Wang, and G. Chen, “Performance of DCSK cooperative communication systems over multipath fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I Reg. Pap., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 196–204, Jan. 2011.
[3] G. Kolumban, M. Kennedy, Z. Jako, and G. Kis, “Chaotic communications with correlator receivers: Theory and performance limits,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 90, no. 5, pp. 711–732, May 2002.
[4] R. Luo, H. Yang, C. Meng, and X. Zhang, “A novel SR-DCSK-based ambient backscatter communication system,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II Exp. Briefs, vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 1707–1711, Mar. 2022.
[5] G. Kaddoum, E. Soujeri, and Y. Nijsure, “Design of a short reference noncoherent chaos-based communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 680–689, Feb. 2016.
[6] H. Yang and G.-P. Jiang, “High-efficiency differential-chaos-shift-keying scheme for chaos-based noncoherent communication,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II Exp. Briefs, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 312–316, May 2012.
[7] Y. Tao et al., “Multi-carrier DCSK with hybrid index modulation: A new perspective on frequency-index-aided chaotic communication,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 3760–3773, Jun. 2022.

[8] G. Kaddoum, F.-D. Richardson, and F. Gagnon, “Design and analysis of a multi-carrier differential chaos shift keying communication system,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 3281–3291, Aug. 2013.
[9] H. Ma, Y. Fang, P. Chen, S. Mumtaz, and Y. Li, “A novel differential chaos shift keying scheme with multidimensional index modulation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 237–256, Jan. 2023.
[10] Y. Fang, J. Zhuo, H. Ma, S. Mumtaz, and Y. Li, “Design and analysis of a new index-modulation-aided DCSK system with frequency-and-time resources,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 7411–7425, Jun. 2023.
[11] H. Ma, Y. Fang, P. Chen, and Y. Li, “Reconfigurable intelligent surfaceaided M -ary FM-DCSK system: A new design for noncoherent chaosbased communication,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 4829– 4843, Apr. 2023.
[12] B. Chen, L. Zhang, and Z. Wu, “General iterative receiver design for enhanced reliability in multi-carrier differential chaos shift keying systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 11, pp. 7824–7839, Nov. 2019.
[13] Y. Fang, G. Bi, Y. L. Guan, and F. C. M. Lau, “A survey on protograph LDPC codes and their applications,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1989–2016, Oct.–Dec. 2015.
[14] Q. Chen and L. Wang, “Design and analysis of joint source channel coding schemes over non-standard coding channels,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 5369–5380, May 2020.
[15] Y. Lyu, L. Wang, G. Cai, and G. Chen, “Iterative receiver for M -ary DCSK systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 3929–3936, Nov. 2015.
[16] F. Schreckenbach, N. Gortz, J. Hagenauer, and G. Bauch, “Optimization of symbol mappings for bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 593–595, Dec. 2003.
[17] P. Chen, L. Shi, Y. Fang, G. Cai, L. Wang, and G. Chen, “A coded DCSK modulation system over rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 9, pp. 3930–3942, Sep. 2018.
[18] Q. Chen et al., “Designing protograph-based LDPC codes for iterative receivers on M -ary DCSK systems,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II Exp. Briefs, vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 466–470, Apr. 2018.
[19] P. Chen, Y. Fang, K. Su, and G. Chen, “Design of a capacity-approaching chaos-based multiaccess transmission system,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 10 806–10 816, Dec. 2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

