Chinese Journal of Electronics Vol.24, No.4, Oct. 2015

A Novel Construction Approach of Irregular
LDPC Codes Based on QC Structure and Zigzag Pattern∗

LEI Jing, YAO Chunguang, CHEN Bin, WEN Lei and LIU Wei
(College of Electronic Science and Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China)

Abstract — This paper presents a novel construction method of irregular Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes based on Quasi-cyclic (QC) structure and zigzag pattern. By using the proposed method, a class of irregular and highly structured LDPC codes can be designed with the advantages of low storage requirement and linear time encoding complexity. The constructed codes are called Irregular repeat-accumulate like (IRA-like) codes since their parity-check matrices are similar with those of IRA codes, which all contain a sparse zigzag pattern submatrix. The left part of the parity-check matrix of IRA-like codes is a kind of circulant permutation matrix. A best-effort analyzing method for optimizing the cycle structure of IRAlike codes is presented. We further details the proper constraints for avoiding short cycles and low-weight codewords. Simulation results show that the proposed IRA-like codes have low encoding complexity, good iterative decoding performance and flexible choice of code parameters.
Key words — LDPC codes, QC structure, Zigzag pat-
tern, IRA-like codes.
I. Introduction
More and more LDPC codes[1] with good performance are constructed through graph-based or algebraic methods rather than random constructions. The reason for this trend is that the lack of structures makes the hardware implementation impracticable for both encoding and decoding process. And the LDPC codes applied in many standards, such as the China mobile multimedia broadcasting (CMMB)[2] and the Consultative committee for space data systems (CCSDS)[3], have their own structures to facilitate the hardware implementation while remaining good iterative decoding performance.
QC structure[4] helps reduce the memory required to store the parity-check matrix H by a factor 1/p when p × p circulant permutation matrices are employed. The zigzag pattern used in Irregular repeat-accumulate (IRA)[5] codes transforms H into an triangular matrix to realize linear time encoding[6].

Therefore, there is no need to transform H into generator matrix again since the zigzag pattern helps to encode the messages through H directly. Based on the QC structure and zigzag pattern, we propose a novel method to construct a kind of LDPC code called the IRA-like code. We take both short cycles and low-weight codewords into account to avoid bad cycle structures. These codes are called IRA-like codes because of its similarity with IRA codes, mainly on the using of zigzag pattern. Detailed analysis of avoiding short cycles and lowweight codewords is presented, and cycle optimization constraints are proposed to ensure good performance. We compare the decoding performance of IRA-like codes with some LDPC codes currently in use from the standards of CMMB and CCSDS. Simulation results show that properly designed IRA-like codes outperform the aforementioned LDPC codes in the same Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region. The study indicates that IRA-like codes have the advantages of low storage memory requirements, linear time encoding complexity, good iterative decoding performance and flexible choice of code parameters.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the structure of IRA-like codes. Detailed cycle analysis of the QC part in H for avoiding short cycles is presented in Section III. Section IV investigates the short cycles and low-weight codewords caused by the combination of QC part and zigzag pattern. Section V describes a detailed construction method of IRA-like codes. Section VI presents the corresponding simulation results. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper.
II. Structure of IRA-like Codes
Variable nodes (VN) of IRA-like codes can be divided into two parts: Information nodes (IN) and Parity nodes (PN)[5], as shown in Fig.1.

∗Manuscript Received Jan. 11, 2012; Accepted Jan. 22, 2015. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.61372098).
c 2015 Chinese Institute of Electronics. DOI:10.1049/cje.2015.10.020

784

Chinese Journal of Electronics

2015

Fig.2 presents the QC matrix H1 that corresponds to Eqs.(2) and (3). It shows that the length-4 block cycle in Eq.(2), whose corners are the crossings of row 1 and 3 and column 1 and 5, is extended to a cycle of length 12 which is three times longer than the original block cycle length.

Fig. 1. Tanner graph of IRA-like codes

We can see that PN and CN constitutes the zigzag pattern,

and the degree of all PN is 2 except the last one. The parity

check matrix H of IRA-like codes is given as

2

z

H

=

666666666466666|z

I (S1,1) I (S2,1)
... I (Sl,1)

}k| I (S1,2) I (S2,2)
...
I (Sl,2) {z
H1

}n|

{z

· · · I (S1,t) 1

· · · I (S2,t) 1

...

...

...

· · · I(Sl,t) 0 }|

m=}n|−k 0 ··· 1 ··· ... . . .
··· 1 {z
H2

3

{

0 0 ... 1

{}777777777775777

.

(1)

Submatrix H1 is a sparse m × k QC matrix which denotes the connections between IN and CN. Submatrix H2 is a sparse m × m zigzag matrix which denotes the connections between

PN and CN. k and m denote the number of IN and CN, re-

spectively. Obviously, the number of PN is also m. I(Sα,β) is a p × p Identity circulant permutation matrix (ICPM) or a

zero matrix. And Sα,β is the right shift value of I(Sα,β) over identity matrix, −1 ≤ Sα,β ≤ p − 1 and Sα,β ∈ Z. I(−1) represents a p × p zero matrix. I(0) represents a p × p identity

matrix. The number of IN is k = tp and the number of CN is

m = lp.

Every ICPM I(Sα,β) is a block element and all of them compose a binary base matrix B for QC matrix H1. Element ‘1’ in B corresponds to an ICPM I(Sα,β) with nonnegative Sα,β. Element ‘0’ in B corresponds to an ICPM I(Sα,β) with Sα,β = −1. All the shift values Sα,β are collected in a matrix called the shift matrix S. The cycles in the base matrix, which

are composed of the element ‘1’ in B, are called block cycles.

The structure of block cycles and their corresponding shift val-

ues largely affect the final cycle length of IRA-like codes. For

example, Eq.(3) shows the shift matrix S corresponding to the

base matrix B in Eq.(2).

2

3

10101

B = 64 0 1 0 1 0 57

(2)

10011

2

3

0 −1 1 −1 0

S = 64 −1 2 −1 2 −1 57

(3)

1 −1 −1 0 2

Fig. 2. The extending of block cycle
H2 is a nonsingular matrix as shown in Eq.(1), so is H . Some studies[7] show that VN of degree-2 is helpful to simplify the encoding process and achieve the sparse and optimal irregular properties, while VN of low degrees are bad for iterative decoding convergence and performance. Considering the encoding and decoding performance trade off in constructing IRA-like codes, the degree of IN should be larger than 2, i.e., all the VN of degree-2 or less should be PN.
An equivalent conversion of Tanner graph corresponding to zigzag matrix H2 is made in our method and it is called H2-chain as shown in Fig.3. H2-chain is made up of PN and CN alternately, and the construction of good IRA-like codes is a process of selecting proper connections between IN and CN to reduce short cycles and low-weight codewords.
Fig. 3. H2-chain corresponding to zigzag matrix H2
III. Cycle Analysis of QC Structure
Cycles, especially short cycles are harmful to the performance of LDPC codes under the standard Belief propagation (BP)[8] decoding method. This section focuses on the analysis of avoiding short cycles in QC matrix H1 and we will start with the discussion of cycles in block cycle.
1. Cycles in block cycle Theorem 1 Any traversal, which begins from column i of the first p × p non-zero block element ICPM I(Sα,β) of a block cycle in the base matrix B, will form a closed path by ending in the same column i of the same starting block element ICPM I(Sα,β) for the first time. In order to prove this theorem, the following lemma is required.

A Novel Construction Approach of Irregular LDPC Codes Based on QC Structure and Zigzag Pattern

785

Lemma 1 length-2k block

The 2kth element ‘1’ of cycle is in the column

ja»itr+averP2skal(−fo1r)ma

–

ff

m=1

Sαm,βm mod p of the 2kth block element ICPM I(Sα,β),

where i is the starting column number and Sαm,βm is the right shift value of the mth block element.

Proof of Lemma 1 Without loss of generality, assume

the traversal starts from element ‘1’ in column i of the first

block element ICPM I(Sα,β) of any block cycle. Let it traverse from row path first and then column path alternately as

shown in Fig.2. The row number of the starting element ‘1’

is [(i − Sα1,β1 ) mod p] because of the characteristic of ICPM. The second element ‘1’ in the second block element has the

same row number with the first one such that the column

number of the second one is

[(i − Sα1,β1 ) mod p + Sα2,β2 ] mod p

(4)

= (i − Sα1,β1 + Sα2,β2 ) mod p

Then the row number of the third element is [(i − Sα1,β1 + Sα2,β2 − Sα3,β3 ) mod p] and so on. Thus the column number of the 2kth element ‘1’ in the 2kth block element
is

(i

−

Sα1",β1

+

Sα2 ,β2

−

Sα3 ,β3

+·· #

·

+

Sα2k,β2k )

mod

p

X 2k

= i+

(−1)mSαm,βm mod p

(5)

m=1

This completes the proof. Proof of Theorem 1 Let

So

=

» P2k

– (−1)m Sαm ,βm

m=1

mod p, then So ≤ p − 1. By the proof of Lemma 1 we know

that if the block cycle is selected, Sαm,βm is then determined and the column number of all the elements are fixed. Then the

column number of the 2kth element is fixed as [(i + So) mod p]

for a block cycle of length 2k. The column number of the

(2 × 2k)th element is [(i + 2So) mod p] and so on. Thus the

column number of the (n × 2k)th element is [(i + nSo) mod p].

Assume that the traversal of the block cycle forms a closed

path ending in the [(m + 1) × 2k]th element for the first time,

then the proof of {[i + (m + 1) So] mod p = i} is an equivalent

proposition of Theorem 1. If we have

[i + (m + 1) So] mod p = (i + nSo) mod p, 0 ≤ n ≤ m (6)

then [(m + 1) So − nSo] mod p = [(m + 1 − n) So] mod p (7) =0

So

[i + (m + 1 − n) So] mod p = i

(8)

where Eq.(8) means that the closed path has already ended in the [(m − n + 1) × 2k]th element first if n = 0. This violates the ‘first time’ assumption of the traversal. Thus n = 0 and [i + (m + 1) So] mod p = i. This completes the proof.
Theorem 1 implies that the elements ‘1’ which form a block cycle of length 2k in B, may not be able to form a cycle within one traversal of the block cycle. It may need more traversals to form a cycle, and the cycle length will be larger than 2k.

Therefore, it is possible to extend the cycle length and re-

duce the number of short cycles with properly selected ICPM

I(Sα,β). By the proof of theorem 1, we derive the following

corollary. Corollary 1

Given

So

=

» P2k

– (−1)mSαm,βm mod p

m=1

and So ≤ p − 1, the block cycle of length 2k contains only

one cycle of length 2pk if and only if (So, p) = 1, i.e., So and

p are coprime.

Proof of Corollary 1 By Theorem 1, we have

(i + mSo) mod p = i with the assumption that the traversal of the block cycle forms a closed path ending in the (m × 2k)th

element for the first time. That is

(mSo) mod p = 0, m ≥ 1

(9)

It shows that if m satisfies Eq.(9), a closed path will be

formed. If (So, p) = 1, then m should be a multiple of p to

satisfy Eq.(9) and the minimum m is p. It means that a cycle

is formed in the block cycle when it comes to the (m × 2k)th

element for the first time where m = p. Then a cycle of length

2pk is formed. Eq.(9) also shows that the formation of a length-

2pk cycle is unrelated to the position of the starting element

‘1’. The block cycle contains only one length-2pk cycle which

includes all the elements ‘1’ of the block cycle, wherever the

traversal starts from. This proves the sufficiency.

An equivalent proposition of the ‘if only’ part is that if

(So, p) = 1, the block cycle contains no cycle of length 2pk. It is easy to see that Eq.(9) will always be satisfied if So = 0.

Then every traversal of the length-2k block cycle will form a

length-2k cycle for different starting element ‘1’. Hence the

block cycle will contain only p different length-2k cycles. If

(So, p) = 1 and So = 0, there exists a positive integer l smaller than p and m = l satisfy Eq.(9) where l is the minimum valid

value. In this case, the length-2k block cycle contains only

2pk 2lk

=

p l

= (So, p) length-2lk

cycles.

This

proves

the

neces-

sary and thus completes the proof.

A similar argument can be found in Ref.[9]. We find that

the first theorem of Ref.[9] is not accurate from the proof of

Corollary 1 above. In Ref.[9], it shows that the tanner graph

of a Partition-and-shift LDPC (PS-LDPC) code does not con-

tain length-2k cycles if and only if any block cycles of length

2k has So = 0 being valid. But it shows that a length-2k cycle

can be formed from a smaller block cycle by the proof above.

The condition is (So, p) = 1 and So = 0. Then a cycle will be formed after p/(So, p) times traversal of the block cycle. So So = 0 is just a sufficient condition that forms a length2k cycle, not necessary. The accurate conclusion is given in

corollary 1 and its proof. With the consideration of more cases

of short cycles, this correction for the first theorem of Ref.[9]

also helps to eliminate more short cycles in the construction

of PS-LDPC.

To conclude the above arguments, every block cycle con-

tains one cycle at least. A block cycle of length 2k contains only

one cycle of length 2pk if and only if (So, p) = 1. If p is prime

and So = 0, then (So, p) = 1 is always valid because of So < p.

Hence the corresponding length-2k block cycle contains only

the longest cycle of length 2pk. We can make a best-effort to

improve the length with a selection of prime p and proper right

shift value Sαm,βm which makes So = 0.

786

Chinese Journal of Electronics

2015

2. Cycles between block cycles The connections of different block cycles have two major cases: connecting with each other by sharing some common edges or through a common chain. Cycles between different block cycles will be formed with the common edges and chains. Here we only analyze the case of cycles between two block cycles and the cases of more block cycles can be similarly analyzed upon request. Theorem 2 A cycle of length 2 (2k1 + 2k2 − cedge) will be formed with the traversal path shown in Fig.4, where 2k1 and 2k2 are the length of block cycles and cedge is the total length of their common edges.

A more complicated discussion of this argument has been given in Ref.[9], but the proof given above is more concise and easier to understand.

Fig. 4. The traversal path of Theorem 2
Proof of Theorem 2 Assume el, vn and cm are the corresponding right shift value, variable block node and check block node of a block element. Then the ith node of vn will connect with the [(i − el) mod p]th node in cm. The jth node of cm will connect with the [(j + el) mod p]th node in vn. According to the traversal path in Fig.4, we have

(i − e1 + e11 − e6 + e5 · · · + e10) mod p

(10)

where each distinct el appears exactly twice with opposite sign. Hence we have the following results with arbitrary el

(−e1 + e11 − e6 + e5 · · · + e10) = 0

(11)

Then

(i − e1 + e11 − e6 + e5 · · · + e10) mod p = i

(12)

By Theorem 1 and Lemma 1 we know that a cycle is formed with the traversal path. And it is easy to see that the length of this cycle is 2 (2k1 + 2k2 − cedge). This completes the proof.
Theorem 3 A cycle of length 2 (2k1 + 2k2 + 2cchain) will be formed with the traversal path shown in Fig.5, where 2k1 and 2k2 are the length of block cycles and cchain is the total length of their common chains.
Theorem 3 can be similarly proved as Theorem 2. The details are omitted here. Then the following corollary is derived based on Theorem 2 and Theorem 3.
Corollary 2 If any two block cycles are connected, 2 (2k1 + 2k2 − cedge) or 2 (2k1 + 2k2 + 2cchain) will be an upper bound of the girth for the cycles.
Proof of Corollary 2 The girth is the shortest cycle. So the length of any existing cycles will be the upper bound of the girth. This completes the proof.

Fig. 5. The traversal path of Theorem 3
3. Cycle optimization constraints Combining all the theorems and corollaries above, the following cycle optimization constraints is introduced in the construction of QC matrix H1: 1) The dimension p of the block element ICPM I(Sα,β) is better to be a prime. 2) Try the best to satisfy (So, p) = 1 with a deliberate selection of the right shift value Sαm,βm in a block cycle. It only needs to satisfy So = 0 if p is a prime. By the constraint 1 and 2, a best-effort search of proper right shift values is required to extend the length of cycles which are contained in block cycles. 3) In order to increase the upper bound of the girth mentioned in Corollary 2, the longer the block cycles, the fewer the common edges and the more the common chains the better.
IV. Analysis of Cycles and Low-Weight Codewords on H2-Chain
As mentioned in Section II, the construction of IRA-like codes is a process of connecting IN to CN in H2-chain properly. In order to obtain the proper connections, the following constraint is proposed to reduce short cycles and low-weight codewords during the selecting process.
Connection constraint of H2-chain: The total number of VN between any two CN which connect with IN should be large enough to improve the length of cycles and reduce low-weight codewords.
Before the analysis of different cases in the connecting process, we first present the concept of legal codeword. A codeword is called legal codeword if and only if all the CN have even connections to the non-zero VN of the codeword. The number of non-zero VN of the codeword is called its weight. Here we present several cases when the IN of degree-2, degree-3 and degree-4 are connected to H2-chain.
1. IN of degree-2 As shown in Fig.6, an IN of degree-2 is connected to H2chain. All the VN in the cycle compose a legal codeword since all the CN in the cycle have even connections to the corresponding VN. If the number of PN between these two connected CN is small, a low-weight codeword is formed. It is also clear that a low-weight codeword occurs even though the length of the cycle per se is acceptably large. We hope that all

A Novel Construction Approach of Irregular LDPC Codes Based on QC Structure and Zigzag Pattern

787

the IN have degrees larger than 2, i.e., all the VN of degree-2 are PN in H2-chain.

enough. A more feasible approach with some modifications on the zigzag pattern which achieves the connection constraint to a better extent is proposed in Section V. By this approach, we obtain a better complexity-performance trade-off.

Fig. 6. Connections of degree-2 IN

V. A Simple and Feasible Construction Method of IRA-Like Codes

2. IN of degree-3
The PN between ci and cj , ck and co, cp and cq and the IN vl and vm in Fig.7 compose a legal codeword whose weight is equivalent to the total number of these PN and IN. The cycles connect with each other through a common chain. A low-weight codeword will appear if the connection constraint is violated.

Low-weight codewords will appear easily as shown in Fig.10 if the zigzag matrix H2 is connected to the QC matrix H1 directly. All the CN which connect to the VN in the bold line cycles have an even number of connections. Thus the corresponding IRA-like code has a codeword of weight equal to the number of VN in the cycle and the total number of VN is just 5. Hence a low-weight codeword of weight 5 appears.

Fig. 7. Connections of degree-3 IN without overlapping The case in Fig.8 is similar to Fig.7 except that these two cycles connect with each other through some common edges.
Fig. 8. Connections of degree-3 IN with overlapping 3. IN of degree-4 More cases as shown in Fig.9 need to be considered if IN of degree-4 or more are connected to H2-chain while the corresponding analysis is similar. We find the cases which have legal codewords first and then the connection constraint is applied to reduce short cycles and low-weight codewords.

Fig. 10. Low-weight codeword of direct zigzag connection
A simple and feasible approach is proposed to construct IRA-like codes by taking the connection constraint of H2-chain into account. Some modifications are made on the zigzag pattern first as shown in Fig.11, which widely separate the CN to some extent. It shows that the modifications eliminate the low-weight codeword which appears easily in Fig.10.

Fig. 9. Connections of degree-4 IN
Those three constraints proposed in Ref.[10] are essentially part of the connection constraint in this section. Ref.[10] puts forward the constraints aiming at the cases of degree-3 IN and proposes a recursive construction approach in a twisting manner. Although QC extension is applied, the offset value in Ref.[10] is still hard to select if the base matrix is not small

Fig. 11. Modifications on zigzag pattern
The detailed modifications are described as follows. From Eq.(1) we know that all the CN of a (n, k) IRA-like code can be divided into (n − k)/p groups and every group has p nodes. Let CNG i denotes the ith group of CN. Let PN 1 denotes the first node of PN, PN 2 denotes the second node of PN and PN i denotes the ith node of PN. Then PN 1 connects with the first node of CNG 1 and CNG 2, PN 2 connects with the first node of CNG 2 and CNG 3 and PN (n − k)/p − 1 connects with the first node of CNG (n − k)/p − 1 and CNG (n − k)/p. PN (n − k)/p connects with the first node of CNG (n − k)/p and the second node of CNG 1 and so on. PN (n − k) which is the last node of PN, connects with the last node of CNG (n − k)/p only. These modifications can be conveniently expressed in the following example matrix formed with p = 3 and m = 12 as shown in Fig.12.

788

Chinese Journal of Electronics

2015

It is called improved zigzag pattern. It is a best-effort consideration of connection constraint on H2-chain which widely separates the connected CN. A good complexity-performance trade-off is achieved through this approach and it continues with the following steps:
Fig. 12. An example of modifications on zigzag pattern in the matrix form
1) A base matrix of H1 is constructed first by applying the cycle optimization constraint 3 in Section III.3 and the Connection constraint of H2-chain. Then the Progress edge growth (PEG)[11] method is used to construct the low-dimensional base matrix B.
2) A proper selection of the right shift value Sα,β for every non-zero block element I(Sα,β) in B is made to meet the cycle optimization constraints 1 and 2, and the Connection constraint of H2-chain. Then the QC matrix H1 is constructed based on B and its corresponding shift matrix S.
3) After that, the corresponding improved zigzag matrix H2 is connected to the QC matrix H1 to form a temporal matrix Htemp. A row order adjustment is then used on Htemp to change the form of the improved zigzag matrix H2 into the original zigzag matrix as shown in Eq.(1). Then we have the parity-check matrix H after row order adjustment.
4) Finally, a test of local girth for every VN is made to check if the constructed IRA-like code meets the requirement. If not, go back to step 2 and start again.
VI. Code Performance
All the following simulation results are obtained by simulating the codes with the standard BP decoding method in

a Binary input additive white Gaussian noise (BI-AWGN) channel. The signal modulation is Binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation. The standard BP decoder stops when either a valid codeword is found or the maximum number of decoding iterations is reached. The simulation results show that IRA-like codes have comparably better performance.
A (9216, 4608) IRA-like code is constructed first. It has the same block length and code rate with CMMB-LDPC code. The latter is indeed a High structure (HS) LDPC code with regular row and column degrees. The largest VN degree of the (9216, 4608) IRA-like code is 4 while the CMMB-LDPC code has a regular VN degree of 3. The total number of non-zero elements of our code is one less than that of the CMMB-LDPC code. So they have almost the same sparsity. We compare the Bit error rate (BER) performance of these two codes in Fig.13. The maximum number of decoding iterations is 100 for these two codes.
We observe that in the low SNR region, the BER of our proposed IRA-like code is about one to two orders of magnitude below that of the CMMB-LDPC code. And in the high SNR region, the result becomes more than three orders of magnitude below that of the CMMB-LDPC code. It can be seen that our proposed IRA-like code outperforms the CMMBLDPC code by a noticeable margin.
Furthermore, we also construct a (8192, 4096) IRA-like code. It has the same code length and rate parameters with the (8192, 4096) CCSDS-LDPC code. The latter code is actually called Accumulate-repeat-4-jagged-accumulate (AR4JA) code[12], which belongs to an irregular punctured RA code constructed by using irregular repetition (it also can be viewed as IRA code). The BER performance of these two codes is compared in Fig.14. It shows that the proposed IRA-like code slightly outperforms the CCSDS-LDPC code in the low SNR region while their performance is almost the same in high SNR region.
In order to test the performance of our IRA-like codes with a high code rate, we construct a (8176, 7154) IRA-like code and compare it with the (8176, 7156) CCSDS-LDPC code. The latter is indeed a Euclidean geometry (EG) LDPC code. Their code rates are both 0.875. All the IN of our (8176, 7154) IRA-like code have a uniform degree of 4, and all the PN have a uniform degree of 2 except the last degree-1 node. But all the VN of the (8176, 7156) CCSDS-LDPC code have a uniform

Fig. 13. Performance comparison of (9216, 4608) IRA-like code and CMMBLDPC code

Fig. 14. Performance comparison of (8192, 4096) IRA-like code and CCSDSLDPC code

Fig. 15. Performance comparison of (8176, 7154) IRA-like code and (8176, 7156) CCSDS-LDPC code

A Novel Construction Approach of Irregular LDPC Codes Based on QC Structure and Zigzag Pattern

789

degree of 4. Therefore, our (8176, 7154) IRA-like code has a better sparsity. Fig.15 depicts the BER performance comparison of these two codes. We can see that our code performs slightly better than the (8176, 7156) CCSDS-LDPC code under different maximum decoding iterations of 50 and 10.
VII. Conclusion
We propose a class of LDPC codes called IRA-like codes based on QC structure and zigzag pattern. IRA-like codes have the advantages of low storage memory requirements and linear time encoding complexity. Cycle optimization constraints and connection constraint of H2-chain are investigated to ensure a good iterative decoding performance. A feasible design method with good complexity-performance trade-off is presented to construct IRA-like codes with flexible code parameters. Simulation results show that the proposed IRA-like codes can achieve better performance than CMMB and CCSDS-LDPC codes under the same conditions.
References
[1] R.G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes”, IRE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol.8, No.1, pp.21–28, 1962.
[2] GY/T220.1: 2006, China Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting Part 1: Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Broadcasting Channel.
[3] CCSDS 131.1-O-2: 2007, Experimental Specification: Low Density Parity Check Codes for Use in Near-earth and Deep Space Applications.
[4] M.P.C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes form circulant permutation matrices”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol.50, No.8, pp.1788–1793, 2004.
[5] H. Jin, A. Khandekar and R.J. McEliece, “Irregular repeataccumulate codes”, Proceeding of 2nd International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Brest, France, pp.1–8, 2000.
[6] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol.47, No.2, pp.638–656, 2001.
[7] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi and R. Urbanke, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol.47, No.2, pp.619–637, 2001.
[8] F.R. Kschischang, B.J. Frey and H.A. Loeliger, “Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol.47, No.2, pp.498–519, 2001.
[9] J. Lu and J.M.F. Moura, “Structured LDPC codes for highdensity recording large girth and low error floor”, IEEE Transaction on Magnetics, Vol.42, No.2, pp.208–213, 2006.
[10] J.H. Chen, R.M. Tanner, J.T. Zhang, et al., “Construction of Irregular LDPC Codes by Quasi-Cyclic Extension”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol.53, No.4, pp.1479–1484, 2007.
[11] X.Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou and D.M. Arnold, “Progressive edgegrowth tanner graphs”, IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, San Antonio, Texas, USA, pp.995–1001, 2001.
[12] A. Abbasfar, D. Divsalar and K. Yao, “Accumulate-repeataccumulate codes”, IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol.55, No.4, pp.692–702, 2007.

LEI Jing was born in Xi’an, Shanxi Province, in 1968. She received her B.S. degree in communication engineering and her M.S. and Ph.D. degree in information and communication engineering from the National University of Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 1990, 1994 and 2009, respectively. She is a distinguished professor of Department of Communications Engineering, College of Electronic Science and Engineering as well as a group head in Communication Experiment Center in NUDT. She is also a visiting scholar in the School of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, U.K. She has published many papers in various journals and conference proceedings and five books. Her researching interests include information theory, correction coding, wireless communication system and physical layer security. (Email: leijing@nudt.edu.cn)
YAO Chunguang was born in Lanlin, Shandong Province, in 1975. He received his B.S. degree in electrical engineering and his M.S. and Ph.D. degree information and communication engineering from the NUDT, Changsha, China, in 1998, 2003 and 2008, respectively. His research interests include information theory, signal processing, channel coding and modulation.
CHEN Bin was born in Shangrao, Jiangxi Province, in 1988. He received his B.S. (first class) degree in Communication Engineering from the NUDT, Changsha, China in 2010. He is a Ph.D. candidate of the College of Electronic Science and Engineering, NUDT. His research interests include massive MIMO, physical layer security, signal precoding and detection.
WEN Lei was born in Changsha, Hunan Province, in 1980. He received his B.S. degree in electrical information engineering from Xiangtan University, Xiangtan, China, in 2003, and his M.S. degree in wireless communication systems from National University of Defence Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2006. He is currently a lecturer in NUDT and a Ph.D. candidate in mobile communications in the 5G Innovation Centre (5GIC), University of Surrey, UK. His research interests include channel coding, multi-user detection techniques and multi-carrier systems.
LIU Wei was born in Shaodong, Hunan Province, in 1979. He received his B.S. degree in communication engineering and his M.S. and Ph.D. degree in information and communication engineering from the National University of Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2002, 2005 and 2010, respectively. He joined the Institute of Electrical, Communication and Information Technology, Queen’s University of Belfast, U.K., as a visiting Ph.D. student from 2008 to 2009. He is currently a lecturer of Department of Communications Engineering, College of Electronic Science and Engineering in NUDT. His research interests include MIMO and OFDM, spacetime codes and physical layer security.

