2512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

An Iterative Detection and Decoding Receiver for LDPC-Coded MIMO Systems
Wei-Cheng Sun, Wei-Hsuan Wu, Chia-Hsiang Yang, Member, IEEE, and Yeong-Luh Ueng, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a high-throughput, area-efficient

and energy-efficient iterative detection and decoding (IDD) re-

ceiver for low-density parity-check (LDPC)-coded multiple-input

multiple-output (MIMO) systems. A layered non-resetting IDD

technique is used to minimize the number of inner iterations

for a required error performance. An area-efficient minimum

mean-square error with parallel interference cancellation

(MMSE-PIC) detector is devised to simplify matrix inversion. A

detector-decoder interface that is used to exchange soft messages

efficiently is proposed. Given the throughput specifications, inner

and outer loops are optimally combined to maximize the error per-

formance. The design specifications defined in the IEEE 802.11n

standard are adopted as the design target. A 4 4 antenna

configuration with BPSK, QPSK, 16-QAM modulations are real-

ized in silicon. The designs that support 64-QAM and 256-QAM

modulations are also demonstrated for comparison with prior

work. Fabricated in 40 nm technology, the chip integrates 998k

logic gates in 1.33

and achieves a maximum throughput

of 794 Mb/s. The chip dissipates 135 mW at 0.9 V, achieving an

energy efficiency of 170 pJ/bit.

Index Terms—CMOS digital integrated circuits, iterative detection and decoding (IDD), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, soft-input soft-output (SISO) MIMO detector.

I. INTRODUCTION
M ULTIPLE-INPUT multiple-output (MIMO) technology has been widely deployed in the modern wireless communications systems thanks to their capability to achieve higher data rates [1]. A powerful channel code, such as turbo codes [2] or low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [3], [4] can be serially concatenated with a MIMO mapper in order to achieve near-capacity performance [4]–[10]. As a result, LDPC-coded MIMO schemes have been adopted in many wireless communication standards, such as IEEE 802.11n [11]. It was also demonstrated in [5]–[9] that an iterative detection and decoding (IDD) receiver, where a soft-input soft-output (SISO) channel decoder and a SISO MIMO detector exchange messages between each other, can provide a much better communication performance

Manuscript received March 15, 2015; revised June 30, 2015; accepted July 27, 2015. Date of current version September 25, 2015. This work was supported by Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, under Grants MOST 103-2218E-007-020 and MOST 104-3115-E-007-003. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor V. Chandra.
W.-C. Sun is with the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: s101064803@m101.nthu. edu.tw).
W.-H. Wu is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: u9661153@oz.nthu.edu.tw).
C.-H. Yang is with the Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan (e-mail: chyee@ntu.edu.tw).
Y.-L. Ueng is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan (e-mail: ylueng@ee.nthu.edu.tw).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2015.2468998

than non-iterative receivers, and can achieve near-capacity performance. However, an IDD receiver is seldom adopted in a practical system due to its high hardware complexity and accompanying power and area costs [12], [13]. As a result, the majority of prior work has been focused on the stand-alone MIMO detector or the LDPC decoder.
An exhaustive search-based maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) MIMO detector is able to achieve optimal performance. However, the complexity of the implementation, which grows exponentially with the number transmit antennas and the modulation order, has proved to be too high to be considered for practical applications. Consequently, MIMO detectors that have a lower complexity have been presented in previous literature. These MIMO detectors can be roughly classified into tree-search-based detectors [14]–[17] and MMSE-based detectors [18]–[20]. The majority of these MIMO detectors, except for the detectors presented in [16] and [20], are unable to receive soft messages from the decoder and are, hence, not suited for use in IDD receivers. Even though the detectors presented in [16] and [20] are SISO, the feasibility of using them in an IDD receiver has not been well investigated.
An LDPC code can be described using a Tanner graph [21], which is a bipartite graph consisting of variable nodes and check nodes. An LDPC code can be iteratively decoded through its Tanner graph using message passing. In [3] and [4], a flooding schedule is used to update the check-to-variable (C2V) and the variable-to-check (V2C) messages, where messages are computed using the sum-product algorithm [4]. In order to reduce the computational complexity, min-sum-based algorithms [22], [23], which can be viewed as approximations of the sum-product algorithm, are used in the hardware implementation [24], [25]. Using either layered decoding [26] or shuffled decoding [27], the number of iterations required to achieve the same frame-error-rate (FER) performance can be reduced. Consequently, both layered decoding and shuffled decoding are widely used in LDPC decoders [28]–[31]. Although the implementation of these LDPC decoders is quite efficient, and the decoders are SISO-based, appropriate integration of an LDPC decoder in an IDD receiver has not been investigated well.
The direct implementation of the IDD algorithms presented in [5]–[10] will encounter throughput issues since a number of outer iterations need to be performed between the detector and the decoder, and a data dependency exists between these two modules. Even though two codewords (frames) are interlaced and are processed concurrently in the IDD receiver presented in [12], the gross throughput is only 44 Mb/s with a gate count of 1.58M when two outer iterations are performed. To achieve the target throughput of several hundreds of Mbps, together with the desired error-rate performance, the complexity of both the

1549-8328 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:26:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: AN ITERATIVE DETECTION AND DECODING RECEIVER FOR LDPC-CODED MIMO SYSTEMS

2513

detector and the decoder must be greatly increased, so that the

hardware design becomes more difficult. In this paper, several

design techniques are proposed to address both throughput and

complexity issues.

In the IDD algorithms presented in [5]–[10], the message

memory for the LDPC decoder is reset when performing

the outer iterations. The reset mechanism results in perfor-

mance loss when (the number of inner iterations) is not

large enough. An increased , however, imposes a higher

throughput constraint on the decoder. Consequently, a non-re-

setting IDD receiver, which has a lower performance loss with

fewer inner iterations, is adopted. In order to further reduce

the required number of inner iterations, a joint IDD scheduling

is proposed that can increase the convergence speed in FER

performance for a non-resetting IDD receiver. In the receiver,

early termination is also considered in order to avoid unneces-

sary energy consumption. An area-efficient detector-decoder

interface is proposed that is used to efficiently exchange mes-

sages between the decoder and the detector.

It was demonstrated in [20] that the performance of the IDD receiver is not sensitive to the MIMO detector, especially when
(the number of outer iterations) increases. Consequently, a

Fig. 1. (a) A conventional LDPC-coded MIMO system, and (b) an IDD receiver.

sub-optimal MMSE-PIC detector was adopted in the convolu-

tional coded MIMO system presented. For LDPC-coded MIMO

systems, the gap in performance between the MMSE-PIC de-

tector and the MAP detector is also closed, especially when a

sufficient is used. In this work, an area-efficient and high-

throughput MMSE-PIC detector has been designed, where ma-

trix inversion, the most computationally intensive operation, is

simplified by leveraging QR decomposition and block-wise ma-

trix inversion. An optimal

combination that considers

both the area and the error performance metrics is determined.

The proposed IDD receiver achieves a better error performance

with higher area and energy efficiencies when compared to prior

work.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-

tion II briefly introduces the IDD receiver and the implemen-

tation challenges. The MMSE-PIC detector and the LDPC de-

coder are also described. In Section III, the scheduling scheme

between the MMSE-PIC detector and the LDPC decoder is pre-

sented. In Section IV, the proposed MMSE-PIC detector, in-

cluding the computation of matrix inversion and the associated

simplification, is described. Section V presents the integration

of the MMSE-PIC detector and the LDPC decoder, and also

provides a comparison in performance with the state-of-the-art

work. Finally, Section VI concludes this paper.

II. LDPC-CODED MIMO SYSTEMS

is a coded modulation symbol from

a constellation of size , where denotes the transpose

operation. The modulation symbol from transmit antenna

is labelled using code bits , where

. The re-

ceived signal is sequentially processed by an MIMO detector

and an LDPC decoder. The detector generates the log likeli-

hood ratio (LLR) for each code bit and then feeds these LLRs

(soft messages) to the decoder. The iterative LDPC decoder

subsequently processes these soft messages after executing

inner iterations. Finally, the desired decoded bits are produced

via the hard decision unit.

For the system illustrated in Fig. 1(a), the decoder does not

return the soft messages to the detector for further processing.

Hence, the resultant receiver is a non-iterative receiver. If the

detector re-processes the received signal with the aid of de-

coder's output soft messages, the resultant receiver is an IDD

receiver, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Based on the turbo principle [2],

the MIMO detector and the LDPC decoder iteratively exchange

messages to produce the desired information bits. The MIMO

detector calculates the a posteriori LLR (log-likelihood ratio)

for denoted as

using the a priori LLR of the detector, i.e.,

which is ob-

tained from the extrinsic LLR

of the LDPC decoder. The

extrinsic LLR of the detector is calculated according to:

(1)

A. LDPC Coded MIMO Systems

Fig. 1(a) shows the block diagram of a conventional LDPC-

coded MIMO system with transmit antennas and receive

antennas. The receive

MIMO signal vector can be written

as

, where is the

channel matrix, is the

The LDPC decoder then uses the extrinsic LLR

from the

detector as the a priori LLR to produce the a posteriori LLR

. Following that, the extrinsic LLR of the decoder is calcu-

lated according to:

transmit signal vector, and is the

noise vector.

(2)

Elements of the channel matrix are independently and iden-

tically distributed zero-mean complex Gaussian random vari- Subsequently,

is forwarded to the detector and is used

ables. In addition, the channel is assumed to be fast fading.

as the a priori information for the detector. By iteratively ex-

At the transmitter, the information bits are sequentially changing messages between the detector and the decoder, an

processed by an LDPC encoder and an MIMO mapper. IDD receiver is able to achieve a much better error performance

As a result, each element of the transmit signal vector than the non-iterative counterpart.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:26:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2514

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
TABLE I LLR COMPUTATION FOR DIFFERENT MODULATIONS

Fig. 2. (a) Block diagram of the MMSE-PIC detector presented in [20], and (b) block diagram of the proposed MMSE-PIC detector.

the real and imaginary parts, only the real part is explained here for simplicity, as given by [32]
(7)

B. MMSE-PIC Detector and LDPC Decoder
An MMSE-PIC detector is a constant-throughput SISO MMSE-based detector that first computes the expectation and the variance of each modulation symbol using the a priori probabilities for the associated labelling bits and then applies parallel interference cancellation so as to enhance the detection reliability. After applying MMSE-PIC filtering, the detector generates soft outputs based on the mapped constellation. A low-complexity MMSE-PIC detector [20] is adopted as the baseline design, as shown in Fig. 2(a). The inputs of the MMSE-PIC detector include channel matrix , received signal
, noise variance , and a priori LLR . The function of each block is described as follows.
Modulated Symbol Statistics Calculator: The a priori information from the LDPC decoder is used to calculate the expectation and the variance for each symbol according to:

where functions

, are described in Table I for those con-

stellations that are based on Gray mapping.

If we let be the th LDPC coded bit represented by the th

variable node (VN) of the Tanner graph, then the extrinsic LLR

from MIMO detector will be used as the a priori LLR of

the th VN, i.e.,

. In the th inner iteration, let

denote the V2C message from variable node VN to check node

(CN) and

denote the C2V message from CN to VN

. Let

denote the set of CNs connected to VN and let

denote the set of VNs connected to CN . CN and VN

operations based on the offset min-sum algorithm [23] at the th

inner iteration, are described as follows:

VN operations: Each VN receives the information

and computes , i.e.,

corresponding to each of its CN neighbors as

(8)

(3)

(4)

where

,

and de-

notes the th labelling bit for modulation symbol , and

.

MMSE-PIC Filter: The MMSE-PIC filter yields matrices

and , which are respectively given by

where the

value does not change within the same outer

iteration, and is only updated when a new outer iteration begins.

CN Operations: CN computes corresponding to each

of its VN neighbors, i.e.,

as

(9)

and

(5)

(10)

(6)

where

,

matrix and

for

. For

vector is computed according to

where is the th column of .

, is a diagonal , and the PIC matrix
, the PIC column ,

where

is an offset value. When a flooding schedule is

used, all the V2C messages are updated in the VN operation

phase, then all the C2V messages are updated in the following

CN operation phase for every inner iteration. In the last inner

iteration, the a posteriori LLR is computed according to

LLR calculator: The diagonal elements of and , denoted

(11)

as

and , respectively, are used to calculate the LLR.

Let

, the real (imaginary) part of denoted

as

determines the LLR values for half (the The extrinsic LLR is then calculated and is returned to the

other half) of the labelling bits for each modulation symbol. MIMO detector. A hard decision for each variable node can

Since the computation of the LLR values is the same for both be made based on the sign of .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:26:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: AN ITERATIVE DETECTION AND DECODING RECEIVER FOR LDPC-CODED MIMO SYSTEMS

2515

Fig. 3. Performance of the MAP-based receiver and the MMSE-PIC based re-

ceiver, where

denotes

.

C. IDD Performance and Implementation Challenges

In [8], an IDD algorithm using the optimal MAP detector and

the updating rules defined in (1) and (2) was investigated. Based

on the results presented in [8], the performance of an IDD re-

ceiver is much better than that of a non-iterative receiver (equiv-

alently, an IDD receiver with

). In order to reduce

the receiver complexity, the possibility of using a less complex

MMSE-PIC detector is considered. The original updating rules

defined in (1) and (2) may not provide the best error-rate per-

formance for the suboptimal MMSE-PIC detector. Hence, new

updating rules are considered, defined as

Fig. 4. (a) Single codeword scheduling. (b) Dual codeword scheduling. (c) Modified two-codeword scheduling (with fractional inner iteration). (d) Modified two-codeword scheduling with early termination. Scheduling methods (c) and (d) are adopted in this work to achieve a 100% hardware efficiency.

(12)

That is, the a posteriori LLRs, rather than the extrinsic LLRs,

are exchanged between the detector and the decoder. Therefore,

the extrinsic LLRs for both the detector and the decoder do not

need to be calculated and, hence, the complexity of the receiver

can be further reduced.

An LDPC coded MIMO system that uses a length-1944

rate-0.5 LDPC code, 16-QAM modulation,

, and

, as specified in the IEEE 802.11n standard, is now considered. Fig. 3 shows the simulation results, where both the

Fig. 5. Architecture of the proposed MIMO compliant LDPC decoder.

original and the new updating rules are considered for both the

MAP detector and the MMSE-PIC detector, and

denotes

. Using the new updating rules, a better error-rate

performance of 0.5 dB for the (2, 8) combination can be

achieved compared to using the original updating rules for the

MMSE-PIC detector. In contrast, for the MAP detector, using

the original updating rules, a better error-rate performance

can be achieved compared to using the new updating rules.

Although the performance of using the MAP detector is better

compared to using the MMSE-PIC detector when

,

the gap becomes much smaller when is increased, and

is almost the same when

. Since the complexity of

hardware utilization can be improved by processing two inter-

laced frames, as shown in Fig. 4(b) [12]. Using such a sched-

uling method, the IDD receiver presented in [12] has a gate

count of 1.58M and can achieve a gross throughput of 44 Mb/s at

when

. To achieve the target throughput

of several hundreds of Mbps, as well as the desired error-rate

performance, the complexity of both the detector and the de-

coder needs to be greatly decreased. A high-throughput IDD

receiver is realized through the techniques presented in the fol-

lowing sections.

III. MIMO COMPLIANT LDPC DECODER

the MMSE-PIC detector is much lower than that of the MAP The architecture of the LDPC decoder is depicted in Fig. 5,

detector, the MMSE-PIC detector using the new updating rules where two barrel shifters are employed. One barrel shifter ro-

is used in the proposed IDD receiver.

tates the array of a posteriori probabilities (APPs) by the shift

Fig. 4(a) shows a scheduling method for the IDD receiver. index and feeds the rotated APPs to an LDPC processing unit;

Since data dependency exists between the MIMO detector and the other barrel shifter is used to maintain the original array of

LDPC decoder, one module must wait for the other so that idling APPs and to store APPs in an LDPC APP memory block. The

is inevitable and, hence, the hardware efficiency is low. The MMSE-PIC detector also accesses the LDPC APP memory. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:26:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

Fig. 6. Performance of both non-resetting and resetting receivers, where

denotes

.

Fig. 7. Performance of non-resetting receivers using different scheduling

methods, where

denotes

.

inclusion of an additional barrel shifter reduces the routing congestion, so as to facilitate backend chip implementation. In order to increase the convergence speed in the FER performance, a new IDD scheduling method is proposed.

In the following, the layered decoding for the quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes considered in this paper is described. The
parity check matrix (PCM) of a QC-LDPC code can be represented in a block-matrix form, where the PCM contains
circulant matrices. Therefore, the PCM contains

A. Non-Resetting Receiver Using Layered LDPC Decoding
In [6]–[8], a resetting IDD receiver is used, where the C2V messages in the LDPC decoder will be reset to zero at the beginning of every outer iteration. In [9], both resetting and non-resetting IDD receivers are considered. For a non-resetting receiver, the LDPC decoder retains the C2V messages during the entire IDD processing procedure and only updates its a priori LLRs at the beginning of every outer iteration. From the results described in [9], the non-resetting receiver achieves almost the same convergence performance as the resetting re-

block rows and block columns. If the check nodes (the

rows of the PCM) are divided into groups (layers), where the

size of each group is check nodes, the CN and VN operations

for layer 0, layer 1, , layer

, are performed sequentially

to complete a single (inner) iteration. For layered decoding, the

operations performed at the variable are modified as follows:

VN operations: For each VN associated with CN in layer

, i.e.,

, compute

messages

corresponding to each of its check node neighbors according

to

ceiver, and usually converges faster, where the optimal MAP detector is considered. In this work, it is interesting to investigate

(13)

whether this conclusion holds for the sup-optimal MMSE-based where detector considered. As shown in Fig. 6, the non-resetting re-

ceiver achieves almost the same convergence error performance

(14)

compared to the resetting receiver, but converges faster. That

is, a smaller can be used in the non-resetting receiver to

achieve the same error-rate performance. Thus, the non-resetting receiver is adopted.
For LDPC codes, it is known that the number of iterations required to achieve the same FER performance when using either layered decoding or shuffled decoding methods can be reduced,

In a layered LDPC decoder, two main memory blocks are

needed. One is the APP memory that stores

and the

other is the CN memory (R memory) that stores

, as

shown in Fig. 5.

compared to flooding scheduling [26], [27]. In the non-resetting

receiver, the latency constraint can be further relaxed if either B. The Decoder-Detector Interface and Fractional Inner

layered or shuffled decoding is adopted. Fig. 7 shows the FER Iteration

results for the non-resetting receiver, where both layered and shuffled decoding are considered. For a non-iterative receiver, layered decoding achieves almost the same error-rate performance compared to shuffled decoding, which is consistent with

For simplicity, the superscripts and and suffixes and

for LLRs such as

are omitted in the following discus-

sion. In addition,

denotes the a posteriori LLR produced

the results presented in [26], [27]. However, for an IDD receiver, by the detector in the th outer iteration. Similarly,

de-

a better error-rate performance can be achieved by using layered notes the a priori LLR used by the decoder in the th outer it-

decoding. Consequently, a layered LDPC decoder is adopted in eration. For a non-iterative receiver, the a posteriori LLRs pro-

the proposed non-resetting receiver. It can be seen from Fig. 7 duced from the detector are stored in the MIMO APP memory,

that the layered-based non-resetting receiver where

and as shown in Fig. 8(a). At the beginning of a decoding operation,

achieves almost the same error performance compared the contents of the MIMO APP memory are read and stored to

to the flooding-based non-resetting receiver using

and the LDPC APP memory if a layered LDPC decoder is used in the

. This indicates that the throughput requirements for the receiver. However, for a non-resetting IDD receiver, the MIMO

decoder can be significantly reduced.

detector generates new a posteriori LLRs every outer iteration,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:26:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: AN ITERATIVE DETECTION AND DECODING RECEIVER FOR LDPC-CODED MIMO SYSTEMS

2517

Fig. 8. (a) Non-iterative receiver interface design; (b) direct-mapped interface design; (c) proposed interface design.
and the LDPC APP memory does not be reset to the new a posteriori LLRs of the MIMO detector. Based on the turbo principle, the message updating can be processed according to:
(15)

phase. If an LDPC APP memory block is accessed by the de-

coder in the decoder phase, then the same memory block will

be accessed by the detector in the detector phase. Since the de-

coder reads from and writes to the LDPC APP memory block

simultaneously, but at different addresses, a two-port memory

block is used. Based on the architecture illustrated in Fig. 8(b),

two two-port memory blocks need to be used for storing the a

posteriori LLRs

. This architecture, however, is ineffi-

cient since only read operations are executed when the detector

uses the LDPC APP memory. In contrast, the capability of the

two-port LDPC APP memory illustrated in Fig. 8(c) can be fully

utilized by both the decoder and the detector. This architecture

avoids the use of the LDPC intrinsic memory, creating a saving

in memory of 31 104 1944 8 2 bits compared to the

direct-mapped implementation shown in Fig. 8(b), where each

LDPC intrinsic message is represented by 8 bits.

Using the scheduling method presented in [12], the hardware

efficiency can be increased. However, idle cycles still exist since

the number of processing cycles of the detector and the decoder

may not match. Although the difference in the number of pro-

cessing cycles can be minimized by adjusting the number of

inner iterations performed by the LDPC decoder, idle cycles

are still inevitable when the number of processing cycles per-

formed by the MIMO detector is not a multiple of the number

of processing cycles required for executing a single iteration. A

modified IDD scheduling scheme that is able to eliminate the

idle cycles is presented. It is capable of removing the boundary

between the inner and outer iterations by utilizing a fractional

number of inner iterations. As shown in Fig. 4(c), the processing

time required by the detector per iteration is longer than that

of the decoder when

, but shorter than that of the de-

coder when

. The LDPC decoder is able to process

an additional three layers after executing two inner iterations.

The idle cycles can be eliminated, thereby improving hardware

efficiency.

where

denotes the a posteriori LLR for the decoder

IV. AREA-EFFICIENT MMSE-BASED MIMO DETECTOR

at the th outer iteration. Fig. 8(b) shows a direct-mapped design, where the decoder includes an additional LDPC intrinsic memory that is used to store the difference in LLR, i.e.,
. The updating process is executed by
adding the contents of the LDPC APP memory and the LDPC intrinsic memory during the VN operations of the decoder. In the direct-mapped design, the LDPC decoder uses the difference in LLR from the detector to update its a priori LLR

A high-throughput, area-efficient MMSE-PIC detector is proposed in this work, as shown in Fig. 2(b). A 4 4 MIMO system using 16-QAM modulation is considered. By simplifying the matrix inversion block, the complexity of the MMSE-PIC filter and the LLR calculator is reduced accordingly. Compared to the baseline design, as shown in Fig. 2(a), the hardware efficiency of the proposed detector is greatly improved.

when the decoder requires these a priori LLR values in order to update the V2C messages. Fig. 8(c) shows the proposed interface design, where the operation described in (15) is

A. Division-Free MMSE-PIC Filter and Modified LLR Calculator

executed only when the detector has produced the difference

in LLR. Although the updating architecture for the proposed

design requires an additional 16 adders located between the

MIMO APP memory and the LDPC APP memory, it also

eliminates 81 adders that are required in the LDPC decoder of

the direct-mapped design. As a result, the number of adders

required for the proposed interface architecture is reduced by

65.

Since two frames are processed concurrently, the a posteriori

LLRs

for the two processing frames must be stored in

two blocks of the LDPC APP memory. An outer iteration is

For the MMSE-PIC filter, computation of is required in

both (5) and (6). Matrix inversion is the most computationally

intensive operation, and occupies 33.7% of the area of the de-

sign presented in [20], even if a sequential back-substitution

scheme is used. To reduce the complexity, linear transforma-

tion is first applied to matrix , resulting in

. The

linear transformation can be applied through QR-decomposition

(QRD). The resulting upper-triangular matrix can be lever-

aged to facilitate the matrix inversion. After the linear transfor-

mation, (5) and (6) can be rewritten as

now divided into two phases: the decoder phase and the detector

(16)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:26:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

The matrix inversion can then be implemented efficiently by taking advantage of the inversion of the sub-matrices [33], as given by

(17)

where , , , , , and are all 2 2 complex matrices,

and

. For

a 4 4 upper-triangular matrix, (17) can be expressed as

(18)

If and are 2 2 upper triangular matrices, their inverse matrices can be computed using

(19)

Since is a 4 4 upper triangular matrix, (18) and (19) can be

used to compute . As can be seen from (19), an additional

scaling factor is necessary for a 2 2 matrix inversion. If

the scaling factors of

and

are denoted as and ,

respectively, we have

, where division

operation is not needed in the computation of

. Finally,

the proposed MMSE-PIC filter outputs are

and

rather than and as defined in (16).

Since the computation of

is division free, the proposed

MMSE-PIC filter is also division free.

Fig. 9. Hardware implementation for the proposed LLR calculator.

As the division-free MMSE-PIC filter is used, the following

LLR calculator must be modified.

and , the diagonal

elements of matrices and , are used to calculate the LLRs.

As a result, (7) must be reformulated. Here, the reformulation

is illustrated by considering the case of 16-QAM when

.

Since

,

and

, for all

,

used in parallel so as to accelerate the processing rate, as adopted in [34]. The imaginary part of the elements in the same row and the real part of the elements in other rows are eliminated using 4D, 3D, or 2D CORDICs operations. Processing of the first column can be performed by nullifying the imaginary part of the second, third, and fourth rows, followed by nullifying the

real part of the second, third, and fourth rows. The succeeding

operations can be performed in a similar manner. The diagonal

elements of are real numbers, so four 2D CORDIC units can

be saved. The scaling operation that was used to compensate for (20) the product of the cosine terms in the original CORDIC compu-

tation can be eliminated here since only the ratio of the CORDIC

Since

is a positive real number, where

, the

division operation involved in (20) can be avoided by writing

(20) as

outputs is required. For the QRD, the resulting 4 4 upper-triangular matrix contains 4 real diagonal elements and 6 complex off-diagonal elements. Overall, 16 real scaling operations can be removed, which reduces the required number of constant-mul-

tipliers by 16 in our fully parallel structure.

Applying matrix inversion on (18), rather than (17),

eliminates two

complex matrix inversions, six 2 2 com-

(21)

plex matrix multiplications, and two 2 2 complex matrix additions, as shown in Table II. In the MMSE-PIC filter, several

where

. Following a similar deriva- matrix multiplications can be eliminated due to the upper tri-

tion, the LLR-calculation formula can be obtained for other angular characteristics of . As shown in Fig. 10(a), when

cases as

, where the definition of computing the multiplication of

by

, only the

is given in Fig. 9(a). The associated hardware lower triangular elements of

are needed for mul-

architecture is shown in Fig. 9(b).

tiplying the non-zero elements in . This indicates that the

B. Hardware Complexity Reduction

operations required for computing the upper triangular elements

of

can also be eliminated. As shown in Fig. 10(b),

To apply the linear transformation on matrix , a QRD block the six upper triangular elements in

do not need to be cal-

is employed. The QRD can be efficiently realized by CORDICs culated. Considering that each element in and is com-

using only adders and shifters. 2D, 3D, and 4D CORDICs are puted using 4 complex multiplications and 3 complex additions,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:26:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: AN ITERATIVE DETECTION AND DECODING RECEIVER FOR LDPC-CODED MIMO SYSTEMS

2519

TABLE II COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY COMPARISON:

VERSUS

TABLE III PERFORMANCE OF MIMO DETECTORS FOR 4 4 ANTENNAS

Normalized to 40 nm and 0.9 V. Without pre-processing (QRD) unit.

Fig. 10. (a) Elements in the shaded region are don't care terms for calculating

both

and

due to the upper triangular nature of

.

(b) Hence, six complex elements in the shaded region do not to be considered

when calculating both

and .

Fig. 11. Block diagram of the proposed IDD receiver.
rate-1/2 channel code, the proposed MMSE-PIC outperforms

24 complex multiplications and 18 complex additions can be

eliminated for 6 elements. The proposed matrix inversion does

not need any divisions since the scaling factors for 2 2 matrix

inversion (

in (19)) are factored out in the succeeding

LLR calculation stage. Note that one division operation is still

required for calculating in the LLR calculator, which is re-

alized by CORDIC in the linear-vectoring mode. Compared to

the SISO signal detector proposed in [40] (see [40] for details). The approach described in this work achieves a 1.8 higher throughput at a 2.6 area cost, after excluding the QRD module. Thanks to the parallel signal processing and extensive clock gating, the energy dissipation of the proposed design is only 27% of the design described in [40].
V. SYSTEM INTEGRATION

the back-substitution method, the proposed matrix inversion al- Fig. 11 shows the block diagram of the proposed IDD re-

gorithm produces a much shorter latency since all the elements ceiver. Since a two-codeword scheduling is adopted, the APP

can be calculated in parallel.

memory stores two frames of APP information. The permuta-

A comparison with the other state-of-the-art SISO MIMO de- tion unit properly exchanges the data between the LDPC de-

tectors [20], [40] is shown in Table III. The gross throughput, the coder and the MMSE-PIC detector. The prior information for

throughput-to-area ratio (TAR), and the energy efficiency are the MMSE-PIC detector is set to zero for the first outer iteration.

normalized to 40 nm, 0.9 V to make a fair comparison. Com- In order to enhance the throughput and reduce the energy con-

pared to a similar work [20], our approach requires only four sumption, an early termination unit is included that can properly

divisions for the overall MMSE-PIC detector, but [20] requires determine whether or not to stop a processed frame.

twenty. The area (gate count) of the proposed MMSE-PIC de- Optimal and values can be determined through sen-

tector with 64-QAM modulation is significantly smaller based sitivity analysis by considering the tradeoff between hardware

on the fact that a 2 folded realization of this work is only complexity and error performance. Fig. 12 shows the perfor-

1.46 larger than the 18 folded implementation presented in mance space with respect to and . It can be clearly seen

[20]. The proposed design also enjoys higher throughput and, that the performance gain saturates at

with a

hence, a higher TAR.

marginal hardware overhead compared to the reference design

Also included in Table III is the SISO MIMO detector where

. If a higher performance gain is re-

proposed in [40]. This detector is a tree-search based detector quired, another operation point can be chosen at the expense of

that does not include the essential pre-processing QRD module. much greater hardware complexity. In the proposed implemen-

The error-rate performance of the MIMO detector proposed in tation,

is adopted so as to achieve an optimal

[40] is better than that of the MMSE-PIC detector presented operation, where a gain of 1.6 dB over the base-line MMSE-

in this paper for many cases. However, for the considered based non-iterative receiver

is achieved. As

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:26:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2520

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

Fig. 14. FER and average number of outer iterations vs. SNR.

Fig. 12. (a) Error performance (normalized SNR gain) versus and . (b) Receiver complexity (gate count) versus and .

Fig. 15. Chip micrograph.
TABLE IV CHIP SUMMARY

Fig. 13. Performance of the MAP-based and MMSE-PIC-based receivers,

where

denotes

.

shown in Fig. 13, the proposed IDD receiver degrades only 1.2

dB from the optimal iterative MAP-based receiver ,

. However, the proposed IDD receiver outperforms the

best non-iterative MAP-based receiver

, de-

spite the reduced latency and the tractable hardware complexity. where

. It can be seen that the number of iterations can

In the high SNR region, a majority of the receive frames will be reduced, yielding higher throughput and energy efficiency.

become correct before the number of both the inner iterations As a proof of concept, the proposed IDD receiver was fabri-

and the outer iterations reach the maximum values, and cated in a 1P10M 40 nm CMOS technology. Fig. 15 shows the

, respectively. As a result, an early termination unit, com- chip micrograph, and the chip features are described in Table IV.

posed of barrel shifters connected to XOR units, can be imple- Focused on the IEEE 802.11n WLAN standard, the IDD re-

mented in order to avoid unnecessary computations. If all the ceiver supports the 4 4 antenna configuration for SISO de-

checksum values for the LDPC code are zero, the iterative tection, and BPSK, QPSK, and 16-QAM modulations are also

receiving procedure can be terminated and the detector can start supported. A length-1944 rate-0.5 LDPC decoder is adopted,

to process the following frame, as shown in Fig. 4(d). The use of and the throughput and energy efficiency can be improved by

early termination will not disrupt the interlaced receiver sched- leveraging early termination. The chip supports a peak gross

uling. Therefore, an approach using interlaced scheduling with throughput of 794 Mb/s when

. The power con-

early termination is well suited for IDD receivers. Fig. 14 shows sumption is 135 mW at 288 MHz from a 0.9 V supply, yielding

the FER and the average number of outer iterations versus SNR, an energy-efficiency of 170 pJ/bit.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:26:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: AN ITERATIVE DETECTION AND DECODING RECEIVER FOR LDPC-CODED MIMO SYSTEMS
TABLE V COMPARISON TABLE

2521

The energy efficiency and TAR are normalized to 40 nm and 0.9 V.

efficiency of this work lies between the energy values reported for two modes in [39] for different inner-iteration conditions.

VI. CONCLUSION

This paper has presented a high-throughput IDD for the IEEE

802.11n standard. A layered, non-resetting LDPC decoder

is used to greatly reduce the number of inner iterations. An

IDD scheduling method based on a fractional inner iteration

and early termination allows for 100% hardware utilization

and energy-efficient operation. An area-efficient MMSE-PIC

detector has also been proposed. The hardware complexity is

minimized by leveraging the features of upper-triangular ma-

trices and LLR computation. Fabricated in 40 nm technology,

the chip supports a throughput of 794 Mb/s. It supports fully

Fig. 16. FER for the proposed IDD receiver and the IDD receiver proposed in

[12] based on 64-QAM, where

denotes

.

iterative message exchange and achieves higher throughput than prior IDD receivers. The proposed IDD receiver provides a promising solution for next-generation LDPC-coded MIMO

Table V shows the performance of the proposed IDD receiver communication systems.

and the receivers presented in [12] and [39]. The IDD receiver presented in [12] is a direct-mapped design based on the binary

REFERENCES

LDPC code together with the modulation types specified in the IEEE 802.11n standard. However, neither the detector nor the decoder of [12] are jointly designed to optimize information processing for minimized area and maximized throughput. For comparison, a reference design based on 64-QAM modulation has been added. As can be seen from Table V and Fig. 16, the proposed receiver achieves a 10 higher throughput, a 1.42 smaller area, and an FER gain of 2 dB when compared to the receiver presented in [12] based on the same binary LDPC code and 64-QAM modulation.
The IDD receiver presented in [39] supports only a single 256-QAM modulation. The code considered in [39] is a 256-ary (52, 26) LDPC code with an equivalent length of 416 bits. For comparison, the synthesis estimates of a reference design with a length-648 binary LDPC code defined in the IEEE 802.11n standard and 256-QAM modulation are added. Since only individual performances for the MMSE detector and the LDPC decoder are reported in [39], making a fair comparison from the IDD perspective difficult. Assuming there is no area overhead for the message-exchange interface presented in [39], the proposed IDD receiver for 256-QAM has a lower hardware complexity than the design proposed in [39].
Considering that the throughput is bounded by the slowest module in the receiver, the proposed receiver achieves a higher normalized gross throughput of around 1.5 times, even when operating at a lower clock frequency. The normalized energy

[1] G. J. Foschini, “Layered space-time architecture for wireless communications in a fading environment when using multi-element antennas,” Bell Labs Tech. J., pp. 41–59, Autumn, 1996.
[2] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimal error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[3] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[5] A. Stefanov and T. M. Duman, “Turbo coded modulation for systems with transmit and receive antenna diversity over block fading channels: System models, decoding approaches, practical considerations,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 958–968, May 2001.
[6] B. M. Hochwald and S. ten Brink, “Achieving near-capacity on a multiple-antenna channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 389–399, Mar. 2003.
[7] G. Yue and X. Wang, “Optimization of irregular repeat-accumulate codes for MIMO systems with iterative receivers,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 2843–2855, Nov. 2005.
[8] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[9] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, and L. B. Milstein, “Design of multi-input multioutput systems based on low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 601–611, Apr. 2005.
[10] Y.-L. Ueng, C.-J. Yeh, M.-C. Lin, and C.-L. Wang, “Turbo coded multiple-antenna systems for near-capacity performance,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 954–964, Aug. 2009.
[11] IEEE Draft Standard; Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications; Amendment 4: Enhancements for higher throughput IEEE P802.11n/D3.0, Sep. 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:26:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2522

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

[12] F. Borlenghi, E. M. Witte, G. Ascheid, H. Meyr, and A. Burg, “A 2.78 65 nm CMOS gigabit MIMO iterative detection and decoding
receiver,” Proc. ESSCIRC, pp. 65–68, Sep. 2012. [13] N. Preyss, A. Burg, and C. Studer, “Layered detection and decoding in
MIMO wireless systems,” in Proc. Conf. Design Archit. Signal Image (DASIP), Oct. 2012, pp. 1–8. [14] A. Burg, M. Wenk, M. Zellweger, M. Wegmueller, N. Felber, and W. Fichtner, “VLSI implementation of the sphere decoding algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Solid State Circuits Conf. (ESSCIRC), Leuven, Belgium, Sep. 2004, pp. 303–306. [15] C.-H. Liao, T.-P. Wang, and T.-D. Chiueh, “A 74.8 mW soft-output detector IC for 8 8 spatial-multiplexing MIMO communications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, pp. 411–421, Feb. 2010. [16] E. M. Witte, F. Borlenghi, G. Ascheid, R. Ascheid, R. Leupers, and H. Meyr, “A scalable VLSI architecture for soft-input soft-output single tree-search sphere decoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 706–710, Sep. 2010. [17] K.-W. Wong, C.-Y. Tsui, R.-K. Cheng, and W.-H. Mow, “A VLSI architecture of a K-best lattice decoding algorithm for MIMO channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), 2002, vol. 3, pp. 273–276. [18] A. Burg, S. Hane, D. Perels, P. Luethi, N. Felber, and W. Fichtner, “Algorithm and VLSI architecture for linear MMSE detection in MIMOOFDM systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Kos, Greece, May 2006, pp. 4102–4105. [19] J. Eilert, D. Wu, and D. Liu, “Implementation of a programmable linear MMSE detector for MIMO-OFDM,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process. (ICASSP), Las Vegas, NV, USA, Mar. 2008, pp. 5396–5399. [20] C. Studer, S. Fateh, and D. Seethaler, “ASIC implementation of soft-input soft-output MIMO detection using MMSE parallel interference cancellation,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 1754–1765, Jul. 2011. [21] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981. [22] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999. [23] J. Chen, R. M. Tanner, C. Jones, and Y. Li, “Improved min-sum decoding algorithms for irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, SA, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 449–453. [24] B. Xiang, D. Bao, S. Huang, and X. Zeng, “An 847–955 Mb/s 342–397 mW dual-path fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder for WiMAX system in 0.13 m CMOS,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 46, pp. 1416–1432, Jun. 2011. [25] C.-H. Liu, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-S. Hsu, and S.-J. Jou, “An LDPC decoder chip based on self-routing network for IEEE 802.16e applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, pp. 684–694, Mar. 2008. [26] M.-M. Mansour and N.-R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003. [27] J. Zhang and M.-P.-C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005. [28] Y.-L. Ueng, Y.-L. Wang, C.-Y. Lin, J.-Y. Hsu, and P. Ting, “Modified layered message passing decoding with dynamic scheduling and early termination for QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2009, pp. 121–124. [29] Y.-L. Ueng, C.-J. Yang, K.-C. Wang, and C.-J. Chen, “A multimode shuffled iterative decoder architecture for high-rate RS-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2790–2803, Oct. 2010. [30] Y.-L. Wang, Y.-L. Ueng, C.-L. Peng, and C.-J. Yang, “Processing-task arrangement for a low-complexity full-mode WiMAX LDPC codec,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 415–428, Feb. 2011. [31] Y.-L. Ueng, B.-J. Yang, C.-J. Yang, H.-C. Lee, and J.-D. Yang, “An efficient multi-standard LDPC decoder design using hardware-friendly shuffled decoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 743–756, Mar. 2013. [32] I. B. Collins, M. R. G. Butler, and M. R. McKay, “Low complexity receiver design for MIMO bit-interleaved coded modulation,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Int. Symp. Spread Spectrum Tech. Appl. (ISSSTA), Sydney, Australia, Aug. 2004, pp. 12–16. [33] A. J. Laub, Matrix Analysis for Scientists and Engineers. Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, 2004. [34] D. Patel, M. Shabany, and P. G. Gulak, “A low-complexity high-speed QR decomposition implementation for MIMO receivers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2009, pp. 1409–1412.

[35] A. Tomasoni, M. Ferrari, D. Gatti, F. Osnato, and S. Bellini, “A low

complexity turbo MMSE receiver for W-LAN MIMO systems,” in

Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Istanbul, Turkey, 2006, vol. 9,

pp. 4119–4124.

[36] K. K. Parhi, VLSI Digital Signal Processing Systems: Design and Im-

plementation. New York: Wiley, 1998.

[37] B. Noethen et al., “A 105GOPS 36mm2 heterogeneous SDR MPSoC

with energy-aware dynamic scheduling and iterative detection-de-

coding for 4G in 65 nm CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits

Conf. (ISSCC), San Francisco, CA, USA, Feb. 2014, pp. 188–189.

[38] X. Peng, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, D. Zhou, and S. Goto, “A 115 mW 1 Gbps

QC-LDPC decoder ASIC for WiMAX in 65 nm CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE

Asian Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ASSCC), Jeju, Korea, Nov. 2011, pp.

317–320.

[39] C.-H. Chen, W. Tang, and Z. Zhang, “A 2.4

130 mW

MMSE-nonbinary-LDPC iterative detector-decoder for 4 4

256-QAM MIMO in 65 nm CMOS,” in Dig. IEEE ISSCC, Feb. 2015,

pp. 1–3.

[40] L. Liu, “Energy-efficient soft-input soft-output signal detector for iter-

ative MIMO receivers,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol.

61, no. 8, pp. 2422–2432, Aug. 2014.

Wei-Cheng Sun received a B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung, Taiwan, in 2009, and an M.S. degree from the National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, in 2011. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. His current research is focused on channel coding and communication ICs.

Wei-Hsuan Wu received a B.S. and an M.S. degree in electrical engineering from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2011 and 2013, respectively. His current research interests include channel coding and communication ICs. He is currently with MediaTek Inc. and is responsible for hardware design.

Chia-Hsiang Yang (S’07–M’10) received his B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from National Taiwan University in 2002 and 2004, respectively. He received his Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 2010. He then joined the faculty of the Electronics Engineering Department at the National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan. In 2015, he moved to the National Taiwan University, where he is currently an Associate Professor. His research interests are in energy-efficient integrated circuits and architectures for biomedical and communication signal processing.
Yeong-Luh Ueng (M’05–SM’15) received his Ph.D. degree in communications engineering from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2001. From 2001 to 2005, he was with a private communication technology company, where he focused on the design and development of various wireless chips. Since December 2005, he has been a member of the faculty of the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, where he is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering. His research interests include coding theory, wireless communications, and communication ICs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:26:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

