Unequal Error Protection of Memories
in LDPC Decoders
Carlo Condo, Guido Masera, Senior Member, IEEE, and Paolo Montuschi, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Memories are one of the most critical components of many systems: due to exposure to energetic particles, fabrication
defects and aging they are subject to various kinds of permanent and transient errors. In this scenario, Unequal error protection (UEP)
techniques have been proposed in the past to encode stored information, allowing to detect and possibly recover from errors during
load operations, while offering different levels of protection to partitions of codewords according to their importance. Low-density
parity-check (LDPC) codes are used in many communication standards to encode the transmitted information: at reception, LDPC
decoders heavily rely on memories to store and correct the received information. To ensure efficient and reliable decoding of
information, the need to protect the memories used in LDPC decoders is of primary importance. In this paper we present a study on
how to efficiently design UEP techniques for LDPC decoder memories. The devised UEP method is divided in four adjustable levels,
each one offering a different degree of protection. The full UEP, along with simplified versions, has been implemented within an existing
decoder and its area occupation and power consumption evaluated. Comparison with the literature on the subject shows an unmatched
level of protection from errors at a small complexity and energy cost.
Index Terms—Unequal error protection, LDPC, decoder
Ç
1
INTRODUCTION
C
MOS technology scaling has reached deep sub-micron
level: such a degree of integration has been shown to
rise reliability problems that cannot be overlooked. In fact,
the achieved degree of control on the fabrication process of
the latest nodes is much lower than before [1]: this leads to
process variations and less reliable components. Moreover,
deeply scaled integrated circuits are very sensitive to exter-
nal influences even in presence of ideal components. Conse-
quently, depending on the application, it is necessary to
apply error protection techniques to memories and logic.
Memories are particularly critical devices, that are sub-
ject to various types of faults. Soft errors are faults in the
stored data that are not caused by permanent hardware
damage. They can be induced by different kinds of ener-
getic particles hitting memory cells. The subsequent voltage
rise can cause bit flipping and consequent faulty data [2].
The downscaling of both cell dimensions and operating
voltage has increased the sensitivity of memories to such
events, since a lower amount of energy is required to change
logic states [1], even affecting multiple cells at the same
time. Opposite to soft-errors, permanent or hard errors are
caused by hardware damages, that can be the result of
fabrication defects or aging: stuck-at bits, i.e., bits which
value cannot be modified, are a common permanent error.
Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes [3] are block
error correcting codes employed in a variety of communica-
tion standards, like WiMAX, Wi-Fi, DVB-S2, CMMB and
DTMB. LDPC decoders rely on decoding algorithms that
iteratively update bit error probabilities: these are stored, in
between iterations, in dedicated memories, whose imple-
mentation requires the largest amount of area and at the
same time accounting for most of the power consumption
[4], [5]. The quantities stored in memories during LDPC
decoding are soft amounts (usually represented as Logarith-
mic Likelihood Ratios or LLRs) that express both the value
of codeword bits (sign) and their reliability (magnitude).
The values of these parameters evolve as the decoding pro-
ceeds, ideally towards correct decoded bits. A property of
LDPC decoders is to be moderately resistant to hardware
errors: this characteristic has been exploited in past error
fault tolerant designs [6]. On the other hand, since in LDPC
codes each LLR is correlated with many others, an error
during a read operation can be propagated, possibly
compromising the whole decoding process.
This paper focuses on providing error resilience to
LDPC decoders, to ensure correct functionality also in
presence of permanent and transient memory error condi-
tions under which current decoders cannot work. Our
approach starts from the analysis of the impact of mem-
ory errors on the decoding performance, in order to deter-
mine the specific effect of each bit of an LLR on the
decoding process. To be able to sustain high soft error
probabilities and large numbers of permanent errors, dif-
ferent degrees of protection are proposed, leading to the
development of an Unequal Error Protection (UEP) meth-
odology [7]. The idea behind UEPs is that each bit is pro-
tected proportionally to its relevance, i.e., the higher the

C. Condo is with the Department of Electronics and Telecommunications,
Politecnico di Torino, Torino 10129, Italy. E-mail: carlo.condo@polito.it.

G. Masera is with the Department of Electronics and Telecommunications,
Politecnico di Torino, Torino 10129, Italy. E-mail: guido.masera@polito.it.

P. Montuschi is with the Department of Control and Computer Engineer-
ing, Politecnico di Torino, Torino 10129, Italy.
E-mail: paolo.montuschi@polito.it.
Manuscript received 26 Feb. 2014; revised 28 Oct. 2014; accepted 23 Nov.
2014. Date of publication 4 Dec. 2014; date of current version 10 Sept. 2015.
Recommended for acceptance by J. Villalba.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to:
reprints@ieee.org, and reference the Digital Object Identifier below.
Digital Object Identifier no. 10.1109/TC.2014.2378271
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS,
VOL. 64,
NO. 10,
OCTOBER 2015
2981
0018-9340  2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
importance the higher the degree of protection. UEP tech-
niques have been designed in the past targeting applica-
tions like image transmission and storage [8], [9], [10],
[11] and are usually based on error correcting codes.
However, LDPC decoders are characterized by deep, nar-
row memories (usually < 8 bits) which have convoluted
access address patterns. It turns out that in these condi-
tions, protection techniques based on information encod-
ing have unsatisfying performance or cause very large
overheads, since the access patterns do not allow LLRs to
be grouped together. In this paper we present a special
purpose UEP scheme that is, as we will see throughout
the paper, particularly suitable for LDPC decoders and
applications that use narrow memories with frequent
accesses and complex address patterns.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
introduces LDPC decoding. Then, Section 3 provides an
overview on previous works on UEP and error protection
in LDPC decoders and Section 4 analyzes the impact of
errors on the performance of a generic decoder. Subse-
quently, Section 5 describes the proposed method. The
UEP’s implementation is presented in Section 6, while per-
formance results are reported in Section 7. Comparison
with the state of the art is performed in Section 8 and con-
clusions are drawn in Section 9. Finally, in the Appendix,
which can be found on the Computer Society Digital
Library
at
http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/
TC.2014.2378271, (separate file) interested readers can find
the zoomed version of all the graphs shown in the paper,
for an even better visual understanding of the details of
our test.
2
LDPC DECODING
LDPC codes are characterized by a binary parity check
matrix H [3] with M rows and N columns. The H matrix is
sparse and identifies the set of valid codewords related to a
particular LDPC code; all codewords x satisfying H  x0 ¼ 0,
where x0 is the transposed of x, are considered valid.
LDPC decoding is usually handled via Belief Propaga-
tion (BP) algorithm or one of its approximations, following
one of two scheduling approaches: the two-phase schedul-
ing and the layered scheduling [12]. In the following we
will focus on the layered scheduling technique, which has
been shown to be more performing, nearly doubling the
convergence speed of the decoding process with respect to
two-phase scheduling. In layered decoders the H matrix is
subdivided into sets of consecutive, non-communicating
parity-check constraints, called layers: these can be decoded
in sequence, with the extrinsic information being propa-
gated from one layer to the following ones [12].
Let us denote with ½c the LLR of symbol c; the bit LLR
k½c is initialized, for column k in H, to the corresponding
received soft value. The sign of an LLR is associated to the
value of an LDPC codeword bit, while its magnitude is a
measure of how reliable the information is. A low magni-
tude expresses little confidence on the current bit value: its
weight on the overall decoding is low, and it is more likely
to be influenced by other, more reliable LLRs.
The BP algorithm involves some computationally inten-
sive operations, including the calculation of a hyperbolic
tangent [13]. Out of the several approximations present in
the literature, we have considered the Self-Corrected-Min-
Sum (SCMS) [14] as it combines easiness of implementation
with negligible BER performance losses. For all parity-check
constraints l in a given layer, and for every iteration i up to a
maximum of Imax iterations, the following operations are
executed:
Qi
lk½c ¼ old
k ½c  Ri1
lk
(1)
dlk ¼
Y
n2NðlÞ;n6¼k
sgnðQln½cÞ
(2)
Ri
lk  dlk 
min
n2NðlÞ;n6¼k jQln½cj
f
g;
(3)
new
k
½c ¼ Qi
lk½c þ Ri
lk;
(4)
where old
k ½c is the extrinsic information coming from one of
the previous layers and updated in (4), before being passed
to one of the subsequent layers. The term Ri1
lk
in (1) is ini-
tialized to zero in the first iteration; the same term is then
updated in (3), obtaining Ri
lk, and stored until the next itera-
tion. In (2) NðlÞ is the set of bit indexes that contribute in the
lth parity check. At the end of each iteration, by observing
the sign of all k½c, the corrected version of x is obtained.
Please observe that while Rlk and Qlk½c are updated only
once per iteration, and are thus endowed with the iteration
indicator i, k½c is updated multiple times during each iter-
ation, and the apexes ‘old” and ‘new” are consequently
used to differentiate the values before and after each
update. The SCMS approximation adds a dynamic correc-
tion factor to (1). When Qi
lk½c is computed at the ith itera-
tion, it is compared with Qi1
lk ½c. If their signs differ, then
Qi
lk½c is substituted with zero for the current iteration, thus
inducing a conservative behavior when a sign changes.
3
PREVIOUS WORK
Several memory-protection techniques and algorithms have
been presented in the specialized literature over the years.
Certainly, one of the most popular frameworks is the encod-
ing of codewords and pages before storage in order to guar-
antee error detection and recovery at load time [15]. Many
types of codes have been experimented with, from simple
Hamming and BCH [16] codes to more complex turbo codes
and LDPC codes themselves [17], [18], [19]. The concept of
unequal error protection of memories has been proposed
for the first time in [7]: codewords are subdivided in slots,
to which different degrees of protection are applied. From a
practical point of view, it has then been studied effectively
for wireless transmissions and storage of of images, where a
certain degree of unreliability can be tolerated [9], [20], [21].
For example, in [22] UEP is applied to image transmission
on mobile channels, and a UEP SRAM coding scheme for
multimedia applications has been proposed in [10].
To the best of our knowledge only a few works in litera-
ture deal with resilient LDPC decoders. Stochastic decoders
[23], [24] implement an LDPC decoding approach based on
an alternative representation of the bit probabilities.
While inherently robust to hardware errors, in [25] statis-
tical error compensation is used to overcome the severe
2982
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS,
VOL. 64,
NO. 10,
OCTOBER 2015
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
performance loss brought by voltage overscaling. The
work in [26] builds and updates a list of cells that are
probably faulty. This allows parity check results to be
cross-referenced and the faulty cells to be replaced: at the
same time, relative computation errors are managed by
ad-hoc bit flipping. The work presented in [6] applies sep-
arate protection techniques to the different functional
blocks of an existing LDPC decoder architecture, according
to their level of exposure to failures and importance for
the correct operations of the system. Memories, as some of
the most critical modules, are protected according to their
role in the decoding process by doubling or tripling of the
Most Significant Bit (MSB) and dynamic corrections.
4
ERROR ANALYSIS
We now study the impact of the errors on the performance
of a generic LDPC decoder.
Almost all practical implementations of LDPC decoders
make use of memories to store LLRs between iterations or,
in case of multi-core decoders, to exchange data information
between processing elements (PEs). The number of memory
read and write accesses can be extremely high both when
we consider the total lifetime of the decoder and each single
decoding process. For example, WiMAX LDPC codes
require from 7,200 to 32,800 memory accesses between read
and write operations for a single iteration, but this number
can exceed one million of accesses in case large codes are
employed, like in DVB-S2.
The two quantities usually stored in LDPC decoder
memories are k½c and Rlk, that are read in (1) and updated
in (3) and (4). Depending on the involved quantities, errors
in read and write operations impact differently on the
decoding process. For example, a wrong Qi
lk½c (1) does not
necessarily result in an incorrect Ri
lk. As (3) shows, only the
first and second minimum among the Qi
lk½c involved in the
check node computation are considered for the selection of
Ri
lk: consequently, the error might not be propagated to
other new
k
½c. Moreover, since the LDPC decoding process
relies on soft information, the performance degradation
caused by a flipped bit in old
k ½c or Ri1
lk
depends on the posi-
tion of the error, as shown later in this section. In the follow-
ing, for sake of clarity but with no loss of generality, we will
refer to a practical case study. Assuming a quantization on b
bits, let us call MSB1 the Most Significant Bit, and MSBb the
Least Significant Bit. As a case of study, both old
k ½c and Ri1
lk
have been quantized with b ¼ 7 (7 bits for the integer part
and 0 for the fractional part) [27], [28].
In the following sections we move to analyze the effect of
errors on different bits on the metrics stored in LDPC decoder
memories, and how they influence the decoding performance
at the variation of different parameters. In particular, we plot
the Frame Error Rate (FER) while varying the MSB of old
k ½c
and Ri1
lk
on which the error was injected, alone and in combi-
nation with the following cases, where we are varying:

the maximum number of allowed iterations Imax;

the code rate r;

the code size N;

the quantization;

the decoding algorithm.
Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 have been obtained through simula-
tions on a bit-accurate software model. To better highlight
the characteristics of the results of our tests, in Figs. 2, 3
and 4 we have provided separate sub-figures for the differ-
ent error cases.
The curves in Fig. 1 show the Frame Error Rate for the
WiMAX code of size N ¼ 2;304 and rate r ¼ 1=2 in case
of transmission on an Additive White Gaussian Noise
(AWGN) channel. The decoding has been performed with
the SCMS approximation. The “no error” curve plots the
FER under ideal hardware conditions, i.e., without any
error in the read and write operations. The other curves
have been obtained by allowing errors on a single bit of
old
k ½c and Ri1
lk
with a probability equal to P(e) ¼ 0.0005.
Errors injected on the sign bit (MSB1) are disruptive at every
Signal-to-Noise Ratio value (SNR), and cause unrecoverable
errors. The criticalness of the sign bit in LDPC decoding is
well documented and protection has been employed in the
past [6]. The MSB2 and MSB3 error curves show severe deg-
radation with respect to the ideal one. Both MSB2 and
MSB3 account for a considerable percentage of the total
dynamic, and can cause strong variations in both Ri
lk and
new
k
½c: particularly disruptive occurrences can easily lead
to sign bit flips. Less critical is the impact of MSB4 errors,
while errors injected in MSB5, MSB6 and MSB7 result in
similarly small performance degradations.
4.1
Variation of Imax
The bit-per-bit error analysis has been extended to different
choices of the maximum number of iterations Imax. The
increased correction capability brought by additional itera-
tions can in fact be dampened by the introduction of new
errors. Fig. 2 plots the FER for three different error bits and
three Imax values. While the effect of errors is almost the
same with Imax ¼ 10 and Imax ¼ 15, the degradation caused
by erroneous bits is more consistent when Imax ¼ 20: in fact,
we observe the existence of a larger gap between the “no
error” curve and the MSB7 curve with respect to the two
other cases, while the MSB3 curve is proportionally shifted.
4.2
Variation of Code Rate r and Size N
Code rate and code size play a major role in the overall
impact of errors. Fig. 3 considers three codes with different
Fig. 1. FER-errors on different MSBs.
CONDO ET AL.: UNEQUAL ERROR PROTECTION OF MEMORIES IN LDPC DECODERS
2983
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
size N and the same code rate r. The error injection proba-
bility has been kept constant at P(e) ¼ 0.0005 for all the
codes: this means that codes with smaller N will lead to a
lower number of wrong bits per frame. However, it can be
noticed how smaller codes are more sensitive to faults,
regardless of the fewer injected errors. Taking as a reference
point FER ¼ 104, MSB7 errors cause a loss of 0.05 dB to the
N ¼ 2;304 code, while 3.5 dB are lost with N ¼ 576.
Fig. 4 is complementary to Fig. 3, with fixed code size
and varying rate. In the structure of WiMAX LDPC codes,
increasing the code rate, the total number of old
k ½c and Ri1
lk
is kept almost constant, since the rows of the H matrix
increase their weight. However, SCMS can often mask
errors on Ri1
lk : increments in code rate consequently lead to
a lower number of potentially erroneous bits per frame.
Fig. 4 shows that rate and error injection variations do not
scale proportionally, as it has been already observed with
changes in code size: high rate codes are more sensitive to
faults. The performance loss caused by MSB7 errors at
FER ¼ 104 is 0.05 dB for code rate 1/2, and 2.5 dB for code
rate 5/6.
4.3
Variation of Quantization and
Decoding Algorithm
Fault tolerance of LDPC decoding has been analyzed in
terms of quantization too. The results meet our expectations
as errors affect the decoding performance proportionally to
the weight of the erroneous bit on the overall dynamic
range, regardless of the quantization. Obtained FER curves
are similar to what has been shown in Fig. 1.
A final practical test has been carried out by comparing
different decoding algorithms. The decoding performance
of the SCMS approximation is intrinsically more resistant to
hardware errors than more common approximations of the
BP algorithm like the Normalized-Min-Sum (NMS) [29].
Fig. 5 shows the FER degradation due to P(e) ¼ 0:0005 for a
code decoded with both NMS and SCMS, and the inherent
resilience of SCMS can be easily noted. This is due to the
puncturing of Qi
lk½c in presence of a sign change, that intro-
duces an additional barrier to the propagation of disruptive
errors.
The previous analysis has clearly shown that errors on
MSBs always cause destructive effects, and therefore this
issue must be tackled accordingly. On the other hand,
even if errors on LSBs have a minor impact on the decod-
ing performance, they cannot be ignored either in the
more critical cases, such as in presence of high-rate codes
and small-size codes.
5
UNEQUAL ERROR PROTECTION
The analysis on the impact of the different memory errors
carried out in Section 4 highlighted that not all errors on
the LLR bits have the same influence on the FER of LDPC
decoders. This is an important result, as it identifies a
characteristic of LDPC decoders that can be used to
increase the reliability of the decoding process. In particu-
lar, based on the study of Section 4, we observe that it is
possible to apply distinct error protection techniques to
each bit or group of bits stored in memories depending
on their importance and influence on the FER. The choice
on the number and type of error protection techniques is
subject to a suitable tradeoff. On one side, it should be
guaranteed that the UEP is granted sufficient granularity
to effectively act upon errors with different impacts on
the decoding capability. On the other side, as this number
should be kept small to save area, execution time and
Fig. 2. FER—errors on different MSBs and variation of Imax for N ¼ 2304, r ¼ 1/2, P(e) ¼ 0.0005, (7,0)-bit quantization.
2984
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS,
VOL. 64,
NO. 10,
OCTOBER 2015
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
complexity of the decoder, bits with similar significance
should be protected with the same technique. In this
paper, after having analyzed different tradeoff alterna-
tives, we have opted for a UEP subdivided into four lev-
els of possible error protection.
5.1
Level 1—Towards Full Recovery
The highest level of protection is applied to bits which
reliability is mandatory for a correct decoding, i.e., the
sign bit and possibly the magnitude MSBs. In fact, as we
have seen in Section 2, LDPC decoders base their hard
decision on bits (i.e., the selection if a codeword bit is
zero or one) on the sign of their respective LLRs. Errors
on sign bits and on bits representing a large part of the
total dynamic will consequently have catastrophic effects
on the decoding; sign changes and sudden increments or
decrements in LLRs may cause an avalanche of metrics to
evolve towards misleading directions. To provide a high
level of reliability and recovery, our choice has been that
bits falling within the Level 1 protection level are tripled
during write operations: at load time, a majority voter
selects the most probable output.
5.2
Level 2—Tentative Recovery from Critical Errors
An extensive simulation campaign has been performed to
observe the characteristics of old
k ½c and new
k
½c that are most
sensitive to memory errors and that can lead to unsuccessful
decoding. A very large percentage of cases in which a
wrong bit in old
k ½c leads to an incorrect new
k
½c (4) is charac-
terized by recognizable sequences of bits within the repre-
sentation of new
k
½c. It is possible to observe the occurrence
of these bit patterns in case of errors and to determine their
impact on the overall decoding process. We have chosen to
add a parity bit to the Level 2 bits, and in case of discrep-
ancy during load operations the pattern recognition system
is activated. If new
k
½c matches the critical bit pattern, recov-
ery is possible by observing how new
k
½c varies with changes
of the Level 2 bits in old
k ½c. The distinctive bit pattern is
dependent on the total quantization of the LLRs and on the
position of the wrong bit, while the Level 2 bits must be cho-
sen with care to obtain the maximum effectiveness: thus,
every case must be analyzed separately.
Level 2 is not able to give the same level of protection as
Level 1, but gives a very good percentage of identification
and recovery of errors that have been observed to be the
main cause for LDPC decoder performance loss.
5.3
Level 3—Bounding of Error Impact
As we have said in Section 2, the magnitude of an LLR is a
measure the information reliability. We have chosen to
apply the same concept to the third level of protection,
designed for bits of medium-to-low significance. A parity
bit is added to the protected bits during write operations.
When the LLR is loaded, parity is recomputed and in case
of discrepancy the contribution of all the bits falling within
Level 3 is nulled or reduced. With a two’s complement
representation bit puncturing can require bits to be flipped
among Level 2 and Level 1 bits as well: to avoid complex
operations, depending on Level 2 and Level 1 values, a par-
tial puncturing can be employed.
Level 3 protection does not allow to recover from errors,
but reduces their impact by decreasing the LLR magnitude,
that in turn induces a conservative behavior in the decoder.
This method can not be applied to bits expressing large per-
centages of the total dynamic, since the LLR magnitude
change would be too large and cause errors.
Fig. 3. FER—errors on different MSBs and variation of code size for Imax ¼ 10, r ¼ 1/2, P(e) ¼ 0.0005, (7,0)-bit quantization.
CONDO ET AL.: UNEQUAL ERROR PROTECTION OF MEMORIES IN LDPC DECODERS
2985
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5.4
Level 4—No Protection Zone
As shown in Section 4, errors on the least significant bits sel-
dom affect the overall decoding performance. For Level 4,
our choice for this set of low-importance bits has been to
leave them unprotected, as possibly this will not incur in
any impacting degradation.
5.5
UEP—Full Design
The partition of memory bits among the four levels of the
proposed UEP has been carried out through extensive simu-
lations. We have considered an LLR quantization with b ¼ 7
and Imax ¼ 10, a common enough choice that allows good
decoding performance without excessive overheads [30],
[31]. We have then simulated a large set of codes with a
wide range of possible combinations of UEP levels. The
design choices reported here were selected among those
simulated for their very good error protection performances
(shown in detail in Section 7), granting good results regard-
less of strong variations in code size and rate.
In our scheme. Level 1 protection provides the highest
degree of reliability, but requires two additional bits for
each protected bit: therefore, its usage should be limited to
the most critical sets of bits only. We are well aware, thanks
to previous works like [6], that the correctness of the sign bit
is the minimum and necessary requirement for a decoder to
correctly operate. For this reason, Level 1 protection has
been applied on both Rlk and k½c sign bits, resulting in a
28.6 percent increase in memory bits (i.e., 7 bits + 2 bits). It
has also been observed that errors on Rlk are less critical
than those on k½c and less prone to propagating, thanks to
the local nature of Rlk and the masking capabilities of the
min-sum algorithm already addressed in Section 4. Conse-
quently, Level 1 is the only UEP level applied to Rlk values,
while the complete UEP is applied to k½c values.
As mentioned in Section 5.2, the pattern recognition and
error recovery involved in Level 2 protection must be evalu-
ated according to the LLR quantization and to the number
and position of bits assigned to Level 2. With b ¼ 7 and
Level 1 protecting MSB1, Level 2 has been chosen to include
MSB2 and MSB3. In fact, the set of simulations that allowed
us to select the number and type of UEP levels has revealed
that the precision of the identification of critical errors
through output bit patterns shows a decreasing trend when
we increase the number of protected bits, while the com-
plexity of the error recovery system increases. This means
that the smaller the number of bits at Level 2, the more accu-
rate the identification of errors based on pattern analysis,
Fig. 4. FER—errors on different MSBs and variation of code rate for Imax ¼ 10, N ¼ 2,304, P(e) ¼ 0.0005, (7,0)-bit quantization.
Fig. 5. FER—errors on different MSBs and variation of decoding
algorithm.
2986
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS,
VOL. 64,
NO. 10,
OCTOBER 2015
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
and the simpler the error correction. However, as shown
later in this section, a minimum of two bits must be
included in Level 2 to be able to recover from errors. Let us
define as new
k
½cC the correct result of (4) (i.e., the one
obtained when no errors are present in Level 2 of old
k ½c),
and new
k
½cI the incorrect one (obtained when an error is
detected among the Level 2 bits of old
k ½c). The simulation
campaign performed for Level 2 revealed that regardless of
the channel conditions, the majority of cases in which errors
on MSB2 or MSB3 result in uncorrectable codewords are
characterized by new
k
½cC and new
k
½cI with small magnitude
and opposite signs, meaning that
MSB1 ¼ MSB2 ¼ MSB3
(5)
for both new
k
½cC and new
k
½cI, whereas
MSB1

new
k
½cC
6¼ MSB1

new
k
½cI
;
(6)
where k is the same also for the erroneous old
k ½c in (1). This
pattern is observed either in case a single error is introduced
in MSB2 or MSB3 of old
k ½c, or in case both MSB2 and MSB3
are incorrect: this characteristic is exploited to recover from
the error.
1)
A parity bit considering MSB2 and MSB3 is added to
k½c at storage time.
2)
When old
k ½c is loaded from the memory, MSB2-3 are
XORed: if the result is different from the parity bit,
an error alert is raised.
3)
In case of error, three different versions of old
k ½c are
produced: old
k ½c1 is the one read from the memory,
while in old
k ½c2 and old
k ½c3 the MSB2 and MSB3 are
respectively flipped. Two of them are wrong (one
has a single erroneous bit, the other has two incorrect
bits) and one is correct, but it is not possible to deter-
mine which is which at this stage.
4)
Eqs. (1)-(4) are evaluated with old
k ½c1, old
k ½c2 and
old
k ½c3 separately. Three sets of results are produced,
containing new
k
½c1, new
k
½c2 and new
k
½c3 respectively,
with the awareness that two of them are new
k
½cI and
one is new
k
½cC.
5)
If at least one among new
k
½c1, new
k
½c2 and new
k
½c3
does not follow (5), then there is a high probability
that the error is not critical or that the wrong bit was
the parity bit: in this case the set containing new
k
½c1
is selected.
6)
If new
k
½c1, new
k
½c2 and new
k
½c3 follow (5) then two
of them (new
k
½cI) will have the same sign and the
other (new
k
½cC) will have an opposite sign (6). The
set of results containing the new
k
½c with the discor-
dant MSB1 is the correct one, and is consequently
selected.
This proposed technique can handle a single Level 2 mem-
ory error in every parity check computation, that usually
involves between five and a few tens of LLRs depending on
the LDPC code. Even though the probability of two Level 2
errors within the LLRs under consideration is very low, it
can be further reduced by protecting memories against
burst errors as we will describe later in this section.
Together with Level 1, the additional cost in memory
requirements increases to 42.9 percent.
To bind the impact of errors on the least significant bits of
the representation of k½c, the remaining four bits have been
divided between Level 3 and Level 4. Our choice has been to
consider MSB4-5 for error protection and include them in
Level 3, while not to provide any protection for the two least
significant bits MSB6-7 by leaving them in Level 4. With this
choice, we do not mean that they do not contribute to the
decoding, but, as we have observed in our tests, occasional
error events on these bits do not affect the overall perfor-
mance. The additional memory cost of the complete UEP is
57.1 percent, i.e., the same as applying Level 1 to MSB1-2,
but in this case shielding from errors 5 bits instead of 2: the
impact on the decoder architecture and the additional logic
required are discussed in Section 6.
5.6
Remarks on Burst Errors
With the level of current integration the problem of burst or
multi-cell errors has gathered increased interest [17], [32].
All levels of the proposed UEP are able to detect and possi-
bly recover from single-bit errors, and do not take in
account burst errors. However, it is possible to greatly limit
the impact of burst errors by scrambling the bits of LLRs
before storage, and rearranging them at load time. Scram-
bling is a technique widely used in communications and
data storage, where the probability of burst errors is
larger than the probability of single errors, as it allows,
under certain conditions, to avoid long error correcting
codes to recover from burst errors [32]. For our design an
example of possible scrambling is shown in Fig. 6. By
interleaving the bits belonging to the same level with
those from other levels, multiple errors are spread over
the different protection techniques and can still be han-
dled. Every bit is placed as far as possible from those
belonging to the same level, with priority being Level 1 >
Level 2 > Level 3 > Level 4. According to this priority
sorting, Level 1 can sustain up to 9-bit burst errors
depending on the involved bits, while it guarantees
immunity to burst errors as large as 5-bit. Level 2 has a
maximum resiliency of 8-bit burst errors, and guaranteed
immunity to 3-bit bursts, while Level 3 sustains up to 6-
bit bursts and guarantees protection from 2-bit bursts.
Burst errors can affect various LLRs concurrently: to
avoid multiple wrong LLRs within the same parity check
computation (1), it is sufficient to store the various k½c
sorted from the MSB of the LDPC frame to the LSB. In
Fig. 6. Example of LLR rearranged bits for burst error protection.
CONDO ET AL.: UNEQUAL ERROR PROTECTION OF MEMORIES IN LDPC DECODERS
2987
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
fact, the sparse structure of the parity check matrix acts as
an interleaver and does not require loading consecutive
LLRs.
5.7
Additional Schemes
As will be shown in Section 7, the described UEP is able to
guarantee a very high degree of error protection. However,
such a high degree of confidence is not always necessary. As
a matter of example, here we have reported two cases where,
assuming that a lower protection is sufficient, a simplified
version of the UEP is designed. This is achieved by including
only some of the previous protection levels and has the
advantage to guarantee the required lower level of protec-
tion by using a reduced overhead. Table 1 summarizes the
previously designed UEP case of study together with the
two new ones, with details being given on the protection of
k½c. In all three cases, Rlk is protected with Level 1 on
MSB1. UEPfull refers to the case of study detailed previously
in this section. The second scheme UEPsim1 applies Level 2
protection to MSB1 and MSB2, while MSB3-7 are left in Level
4. Finally, in UEPsim2, MSB1 falls within Level 1, while all the
other bits are in Level 4. The performance of UEPsim1 and
UEPsim2 is evaluated along with that of UEPfull in Section 7.
6
HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION ARCHITECTURE
AND EVALUATION
6.1
Architecture
The logic flow of the operations needed by UEP in the con-
ditions portrayed in Section 5 for UEPfull is shown in Fig. 7;
UEPsim1 and UEPsim2 can be derived from it considering
only the employed levels. After reading the LLR from the
memory, the tripled MSB1 value is obtained through major-
ity voting. The parity of Level 3 bits is then computed and
compared to the parity bit from memory. In case of mis-
match, total or partial puncturing is applied to obtain
MSB4-5. Three datapaths are necessary to implement the
Level 2 operations: the parity comparison is performed on
the Level 2 bits, and if an error occurred, each datapath
receives a different version of the LLR (k½c1, k½c2 and
k½c3). The outputs are checked according to (5)-(6) to iden-
tify whether the error is critical or not and to select the cor-
rect new
k
½c. However, if no error is detected by the parity
comparison, all datapaths work with the same set of data.
The three outputs can be used to recover from possible
errors in the datapath logic, and the value of every LLR is
decided with a majority voter.
Based on the logic flow of Fig. 7, the hardware structure
depicted in Fig. 8 has been designed. The light gray blocks
identify functions pertaining to the different UEP levels,
whereas LLR bits subdivided in the different levels are
shown at the top of the picture. The L1 bit and its tripled
versions TR enter the Level 1 block, that implements a
TABLE 1
UEP Alternative Schemes
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
UEPfull
MSB1
MSB2-3
MSB4-5
MSB6-7
UEPsim1
–
MSB1-2
–
MSB3-7
UEPsim2
MSB1
–
–
MSB2-7
Fig. 7. UEPfull logic flow.
Fig. 8. UEPfull hardware structure.
2988
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS,
VOL. 64,
NO. 10,
OCTOBER 2015
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
simple majority voting to decide on MSB1. The output of
Level 1 block is used, along with the rest of the LLR as
read from memory, within the Level 3 block to decide on
what kind of puncturing to apply, if any. The OR operation
is applied to bits belonging to the same level to identify the
relative positions of 1s within the LLR. MSB4-5 are either
cleared or set, depending on MSB1, the ORed bits, and the
parity bit comparison. The dark gray Datapath blocks
implement the serial datapath detailed in [30]. The com-
puted MSB1 and MSB4-5 are given as inputs to the standard
Datapath and to the Level 2 block, that comprises the
two additional Datapath blocks. If no discrepancy is
detected in the parity comparison among L2 bits, the three
datapaths run the same calculations: at the output, majority
voters add another layer of reliability to the system against
errors within the logic. Two inverters flip MSB2-3, that are
fed to the additional datapaths in case the parity compari-
son presents a mismatch: the output majority voters are cut
off, and the pattern recognition system chooses the correct
output.
6.2
Implementation Evaluation
The described architecture for UEP has been implemented
in 90 nm CMOS technology with a target frequency of 200
MHz. Table 2 reports the area occupation of the logic neces-
sary for the different levels and for a single datapath. It can
be seen that while the complexity of Level 1 and Level 3 is
negligible, Level 2 introduces a consistent overhead due to
the two additional datapaths, that dominate the UEP logic
area overhead. The total power consumption and area occu-
pation introduced by UEP over a complete decoder archi-
tecture for UEPfull, UEPsim1 and UEPsim2 has been reported
in the last part of Table 2. The considered decoder is the one
presented in [30] as A, after adaptation to support only
LDPC codes and to use the SCMS decoding algorithm;
quantization of LLRs is b ¼ 7. This version of the A imple-
mentation has been named AREF and has been used as a ref-
erence in the following comparisons. It relies on 22
Processing Elements connected by means of a Kautz [33]
network-on-chip, with routing elements of degree three.
The decoder supports all LDPC codes in WiMAX and Wi-Fi
standards, with N ranging between 576 and 2,304, and r
between 1/2 and 5/6. To help a fair evaluation of the over-
head
introduced
by UEP with respect
to alternative
schemes, a straightforward “brute force” error protection
technique has been applied in ABF, where MSB1-4 of both
k½c and Rlk are tripled and voted. The additional memory
bits result in +78.7 percent area occupation and +92.8 per-
cent power consumption.
Between additional logic and extra memory bits, the
implementation of UEPfull in Afull leads to a 36.3 percent
area overhead with respect to AREF, while a 43.9 percent
increment is noticed in power consumption. Both area
and power overheads are less than half than those shown
by ABF, even though their error correction capabilities are
comparable. Compared to AREF, both Asim1 and Asim2
show similar area increments (22.8 and 19.6 percent
respectively), mainly due to the additional Level 2 data-
paths in Asim1 and to Level 1 extra memory bits in Asim2.
The difference in power consumption increments (24.9
and 23.3 percent) is even smaller, since the Level 1 mem-
ory bits in Asim2 contribute to a higher percentage of the
total power consumption.
To prove that the devised UEP does not influence the
performance of the decoder in terms of throughput and
maximum frequency, Table 3 reports the delay introduced
by each UEP level and by the whole architecture for differ-
ent target frequencies in 90 nm CMOS technology. The syn-
thesis process has been carried out with exact mapping and
low mapping effort. Regardless, timing requirements have
been met for frequencies as high as 1 GHz, much higher
than those commonly used in current LDPC decoders, thus
showing that the critical path of the complete system is not
affected by the proposed UEP.
7
UEP PERFORMANCE
This section presents the performance evaluation of the
proposed UEP under the same conditions of Section 4 and
Section 5, showing the impact of each level of UEP as
described in UEPfull. Both Rlk and k½c are represented in
two’s complement and quantized with b ¼ 7, where all bits
are used to represent the integer part. In our evaluations we
have considered SCMS algorithm, because of its enhanced
error
resiliency
w.r.t.
other
min-sum
approximations.
Figs. 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 are referred to a WiMAX
N ¼ 2;304, r ¼ 1=2 LDPC code, with a maximum of 10 itera-
tions per frame.
The decoders in [31] and [30] present similarities with
many other decoders in the state of the art (serial core, min-
sum-based layered decoding, partial parallelism, shared or
dedicated memories, either high-throughput or flexible
design). We have decided to consider them for our perfor-
mance evaluation, as they are representative examples of
the current literature on the subject. Before entering the
details of our discussion, we wish to highlight that the effect
TABLE 2
UEP—Area Occupation, Power Consumption
(90 nm CMOS, 200 MHz)
Area
Power
Level 1 unit
8 mm2
102.0 nW
Level 2 unit
13,655 mm2
503.5 mW
Level 3 unit
102 mm2
12.7 mW
Single Datapath
6,667 mm2
278.1 mW
AREF
2.59 mm2
97.1 mW
ABF
4.63 mm2
187.5 mW
Afull
3.53 mm2
139.8 mW
Asim1
3.18 mm2
121.3 mW
Asim2
3.10 mm2
119.7 mW
TABLE 3
UEP—Achievable Frequency and Delay (90 nm CMOS)
Target Frequency
Delay [ns]
L1
L2
L3
UEPfull
200 MHz
0.06
3.25
0.34
3.59
500 MHz
0.06
1.75
0.33
1.93
1 GHz
0.06
0.93
0.29
0.93
CONDO ET AL.: UNEQUAL ERROR PROTECTION OF MEMORIES IN LDPC DECODERS
2989
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
of errors in an LDPC decoder is strongly dependent on the
speed of the decoder. Usually, in literature errors in memo-
ries and logic are mostly identified by the Mean Time
Between Failures (MTBF, [s]) or Failure In Time (FIT, num-
ber of errors in 109 hours). This turns out that, for example,
a small MTBF will have little effect on the performance of a
fast decoder like [31]: on the other hand, the same MTBF
could be disruptive for [30], as it works at less than 1/5 of
the frequency and has a lower degree of parallelism, thus
requiring a higher number of clock cycles to complete an
iteration. A fair error measure can consequently be the aver-
age number of errors encountered by the decoder during
each iteration, here defined as Average Failures Per Itera-
tion (AFPI). The frequencies and memory structure of [31]
and [30] have been used to provide three error scenarios
each (low, medium and high error probability), resulting in
six AFPI values, i.e., 248.9, 24.9 and 2.5 for [30], and 8.7, 0.9
and 0.1 for [31].
Fig. 9 shows the FER of the considered code under the
influence of the aforementioned six AFPI values: each bit
of the stored Rlk and k½c has an equal probability of being
flipped in presence of a soft error. From Fig. 9 we observe
that, as it is reasonable, high values of AFPI highly
degrade the FER well beyond any possibility of recovering.
We also notice that even low AFPI values greatly affect the
decoder.
Fig. 10 has been obtained by applying only Level 1 pro-
tection of UEPfull. A relevant improvement can be noticed
for all the AFPI values except the largest (i.e., AFPI ¼ 248.9),
while no degradation is observed for the smallest AFPI ¼
0.09 case.
Fig. 10. FER with different AFPI—Level 1 on MSB1.
Fig. 11. FER with different AFPI—Level 1 on MSB1, Level 2 on MSB2-3.
Fig. 9. FER with different Average Failures Per Iteration—No error
protection.
Fig. 12. FER with different AFPI—Complete UEP.
Fig. 13. UEP performance in presence of stuck-at bits.
2990
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS,
VOL. 64,
NO. 10,
OCTOBER 2015
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
The curves plotted in Fig. 11 have been obtained by con-
sidering both Level 1 and Level 2 of UEPfull. Error protec-
tion is complete for AFPI ¼ (0.1, 0.9, 2.5), and consistent
improvements are observed for AFPI ¼ (8.7, 24.9) with
respect to Fig. 10. At the reference point of FER ¼ 104, for
AFPI ¼ 8.7 there is a 0.1 dB performance loss, whereas val-
ues slightly less than 0.2 dB are observed for AFPI ¼ 24.9.
Degradation is still strong for AFPI ¼ 248.9.
The complete UEPfull has been employed to obtain the
curves in Fig. 12. In this case, UEPfull is able to bind the per-
formance degradation caused by low AFPIs to very small
values (e.g., 0.1 dB loss for AFPI ¼ 24.9 at FER ¼ 104), with
positive effects also on AFPI ¼ 248.9, which impact is highly
reduced.
Let us move to the evaluation of another characteristic of
the proposed protection technique: stuck at bits errors. In
Fig. 13 and Table 4 we have reported the results. In particu-
lar, the resilience of UEPfull against permanent memory
errors is shown in Fig. 13, where each curve is affected by 45
stuck-at bits affecting different groups of bits. Level 1 gives
total protection from single stuck-at bits, and Level 3 is suffi-
cient to protect relatively critical MSB4 and MSB5. As with
soft errors, MSB6 and MSB7 can be left without protection
without any noticeable performance degradation. Fourty
five stuck-at bits, however, are equivalent to a minimum of
AFPI ¼ 45, a rate of failures that can not be afforded by the
single Level 2 when all errors are on MSB2. This is reflected
also in the results presented in Table 4, where the number of
stuck-at bits that can be withstood without performance deg-
radation by different codes on every bit is shown. It can be
noticed how the number of stuck-at bits that can be recov-
ered is influenced not only by UEP, but also by the inherent
characteristics of the code.
The error protection capability of UEPsim1 and UEPsim1
with respect to UEPfull can be measured by observing the
AFPI value for which a 0.1 dB loss is observed at FER ¼ 104.
For UEPfull the 0.1 dB loss is encountered with AFPI ¼ 24.9,
while UEPsim1 is able to sustain up to AFPI ¼ 1.8. Finally,
UEPsim2 can stand an even lower AFPI ¼ 0.3.
8
COMPARISON
The resilient LDPC decoder designed in [6] protects both
memories and logic from errors. The decoder works at a fre-
quency of 400 MHz, obtaining a throughput of 333 Mb/s
with 30 iterations and the WiMAX code with N ¼ 2,304 and
r ¼ 1=2, and implements the -min algorithm, that gives
better performance than traditional min-sum approxima-
tions, since more than two minimums are considered. A
dedicated 9-bit RAM is used to store k½c values, and it is
protected with MSB1 tripling (+22 percent memory incre-
ment), while the initial LLRs received from the channel are
stored in a 6-bit RAM and protected with MSB1 duplication
and puncturing in case of discrepancy (+23 percent memory
increment). The 6-bit Rlk values are not protected. The maxi-
mum memory error resiliency obtained with this method is
MTBF ¼ 2 ms, corresponding to AFPI ¼ 0.0017. Our UEPfull
proposal is more expensive in terms of memory (+57 per-
cent for 7-bit k½c and +28 percent for 7-bit Rlk), and the tri-
pling of the whole datapath foreseen by Level 2 adds more
complexity than the MSB1 duplication with algorithmic
puncturing employed for the datapath in [6]. On the other
hand, the proposed UEP targets much more degraded envi-
ronments, since total error protection is achieved in pres-
ence of AFPI four orders of magnitude greater than those in
[6]: moreover, this work tackles permanent errors as well,
together with burst errors, both neglected in [6]. If we take
in account the less expensive UEPsim1 and UEPsim2, we have
memory increments that are comparable to those observed
in [6]: for k½c, +14.2 percent in UEPsim1 and +28.4 percent
in UEPsim2, while +28 percent for Rlk in both UEPsim1 and
UEPsim2. Still, the sustained AFPI is much larger than that
of [6]. We can also observe how the achieved frequency is
lower than that that can be reached by the proposed UEP
implementation, as shown in Table 3.
The two-level UEP devised in [32] splits each codeword
in two partitions: in the most important one burst errors can
be corrected, while in the less important partition only sin-
gle errors can be corrected. Assuming to fit our case of study
into [32], MSB1-3 are assigned to the important part, while
MSB4-7 are left in the other. The number of redundancy bits
required by the encoding is linked to the size of the
sustained bursts: five bits (a +71 percent memory increment
in our case) are necessary to correct 2-bit bursts, while
much larger bursts are considered in our case. The work in
[32] can potentially reach performance similar to this
work’s, but at a much higher complexity cost.
The statistical error correction scheme devised in [25] is
built around a concept different from the proposed UEP:
voltage overscaling is introduced in the decoder to save
energy, and the performance loss brought by the timing
errors caused by this technique must be compensated.
Regardless of the different target, a fair comparison with this
work is difficult, since the system performance in [25] has
been evaluated with random regular codes, which character-
istics and performance are far from those used in practical
communication systems and in this paper. The obtained
results in terms of error resiliency are promising, being com-
parable to those presented in this paper. The error estima-
tor/detector circuit introduces a small power consumption
overhead, and requires a considerable level of precision to
guarantee acceptable BER levels. To these overheads must
be added those linked with the the calculation of the statistic
itself, that requires non negligible computational power.
9
CONCLUSION
This paper proposes a novel Unequal Error Protection
technique for memories used in LDPC decoders. It is
divided in four levels, that can be adjusted and applied
TABLE 4
UEP—Single Stuck-At Bits that Can Be Recovered
Code
N, r
MSB
Level 1
MSB2-3
Level 2
MSB4-5
Level 3
MSB6-7
Level 4
2,304, 1/2
1
24
190
256
1,152, 1/2
1
21
175
223
576, 1/2
1
19
152
206
2,304, 5/6
1
17
138
191
1,152 5/6
1
15
119
152
576, 5/6
1
12
107
136
CONDO ET AL.: UNEQUAL ERROR PROTECTION OF MEMORIES IN LDPC DECODERS
2991
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
according to the decoder parameters and desired degree of
protection. A complete design is presented, together with
results for other two alternative schemes, showing a high
level of resilience to transient and permanent errors, both
single-bit and multi-bit. The design of an hardware archi-
tecture implementing the UEP is proposed, and applied to
an existing LDPC decoder to evaluate area and power con-
sumption overheads. Comparison with the state of the art
shows superior error resiliency even at comparable com-
plexity overheads.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Eyuel Zewdu Teferi for his
valuable contribution in the VHDL description and valida-
tion of UEP.
REFERENCES
[1]
(2011). Process integration, devices and structures, International
Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) [Online]. Available:
http://www.itrs.net/Links/2011ITRS/2011Chapters/2011PIDS.
pdf
[2]
S. Srinivasan, A. Gayasen, N. Vijaykrishnan, M. Kandemir, Y. Xie,
and M. Irwin, “Improving soft-error tolerance of FPGA configura-
tion bits,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Comput. Aided Des., 2004,
pp. 107–110.
[3]
R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[4]
C.-H. Liu, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-S.
Hsu, and S.-J. Jou, “An LDPC decoder chip based on self-routing
network for IEEE 802.16e applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits,
vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 684–694, Mar. 2008.
[5]
T.-C. Kuo and A. Willson, “A flexible decoder IC for WiMAX QC-
LDPC codes,” in Proc. Custom Integr. Circuits Conf., 2008, pp. 527–
530.
[6]
M. May, M. Alles, and N. Wehn, “A case study in reliability-aware
design: A resilient LDPC code decoder,” in Proc. Design, Autom.
Test Eur., 2008, pp. 456–461.
[7]
B. Masnick and J. Wolf, “On linear unequal error protection
codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–607,
Oct. 1967.
[8]
K. Namba and F. Lombardi, “Parallel decodable two-level
unequal burst error correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Comput., early
access papers, DOI: 10.1109/TC.2014.2378290.
[9]
C. W. Yung, H. F. Fu, C. Y. Tsui, R. Cheng, and D. George,
“Unequal error protection for wireless transmission of MPEG
audio,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., 1999, vol. 6, pp. 342–
345.
[10] X. Yang and K. Mohanram, “Unequal-error-protection codes in
SRAMs for mobile multimedia applications,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM
Int. Conf. Comput.-Aided Design, 2011, pp. 21–27.
[11] M. Chen and M. Murthi, “Optimized unequal error protection for
voice over IP,” in Proc. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process. Conf., 2004,
vol. 5, pp. V-865–8.
[12] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via lay-
ered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Pro-
cess. Syst., 2004, pp. 107–112.
[13] M. Martina, G. Masera, S. Papaharalabos, P. T. Mathiopoulos, and
F. Gioulekas, “On practical implementation and generalizations
of max* operator for turbo and LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Ins-
trum. Meas., vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 888–895, Apr. 2012.
[14] V. Savin, “Self-corrected Min-Sum decoding of LDPC codes,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2008, pp. 146–150.
[15] W. Liu, J. Rho, and W. Sung, “Low-power high-throughput BCH
error correction VLSI design for multi-level cell NAND flash
memories,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. Des. Imple-
mentation, 2006, pp. 303–308.
[16] R. C. Bose and D. K. Ray-Chaudhuri, “On a class of error correct-
ing binary group codes,” Inf. Control, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 68–79, 1960.
[17] C. Argyrides, H.-R. Zarandi, and D. Pradhan, “Multiple upsets
tolerance in SRAM memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits
Syst., 2007, pp. 365–368.
[18] T. Miller, R. Thomas, J. Dinan, B. Adcock, and R. Teodorescu,
“Parichute: Generalized turbocode-based error correction for
near-threshold caches,” in Proc. 43rd Annu. IEEE/ACM Int. Symp.
Microarchit., 2010, pp. 351–362.
[19] R. Motwani and C. Ong, “Design of LDPC coding schemes for
exploitation of bit error rate diversity across dies in NAND flash
memory,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput., Netw. Commun., 2013,
pp. 950–954.
[20] A. Naghdinezhad, M. Hashemi, and O. Fatemi, “A novel adaptive
unequal error protection method for scalable video over wireless
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Consumer Electron., 2007,
pp. 1–6.
[21] Y. C. Chang, S.-W. Lee, and R. Komiya, “An efficient FEC alloca-
tion algorithm for unequal error protection of wireless video
transmission,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Inf. Netw. Appl., 2009,
pp. 175–181.
[22] D.-F. Yuan, Z.-W. Li, A.-F. Sui, and J.-M. Ning, “Research on
unequal error protection with punctured convolutional codes in
image transmission system over mobile channels,” in Proc. IEEE
Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf., 2000, vol. 3, pp. 1253–1257.
[23] S. Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W. Gross, “Fully parallel stochastic
LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 11,
pp. 5692–5703, Nov. 2008.
[24] A. Naderi, S. Mannor, M. Sawan, and W. Gross, “Delayed stochas-
tic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59,
no. 11, pp. 5617–5626, Nov. 2011.
[25] E. Kim and N. Shanbhag, “Energy-efficient LDPC decoders based
on error-resiliency,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst.,
2012, pp. 149–154.
[26] C. Huang, Y. Li, and L. Dolecek, “Gallager B LDPC decoder with
transient and permanent errors,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62,
no. 1, pp. 16–28, Jan. 2014.
[27] G. Gentile, M. Rovini, and L. Fanucci, “A multi-standard flexible
turbo/LDPC decoder via ASIC design,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo
Codes Iterative Inf. Process., 2010, pp. 294–298.
[28] M. Alles, T. Vogt, and N. Wehn, “FlexiChaP: A reconfigurable
ASIP for convolutional, turbo, and LDPC code decoding,” in Proc.
Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, 2008, pp. 84–89.
[29] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity
iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on
belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–
680, May 1999.
[30] C. Condo, M. Martina, and G. Masera, “VLSI implementation of a
multi-mode turbo/LDPC decoder architecture,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. I, vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1441–1454, Jun. 2013.
[31] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “A high-throughput LDPC
decoder architecture with rate compatibility,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. I: Regular Papers, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 839–847, Apr. 2011.
[32] K. Namba and E. Fujiwara, “Unequal error protection codes with
two-level burst and capabilities,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Defect
Fault Tolerance VLSI Syst., 2001, pp. 299–307.
[33] M. Imase and M. Itoh, “A design for directed graphs with mini-
mum diameter,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. C-32, no. 8, pp. 782–
784, Aug. 1983.
Carlo Condo received the MSc degree in electri-
cal and computer engineering from Politecnico di
Torino, Italy, and the University of Illinois at Chi-
cago in 2010. He received the PhD degree in
electronic and telecommunication engineering
from Politecnico di Torino and Telecom Bretagne,
France, in 2014. His research interests include
design and implementation of architectures for
channel coding and digital signal processing.
2992
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS,
VOL. 64,
NO. 10,
OCTOBER 2015
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Guido Masera (SM’07) received the Dr.Ing.
degree (summa cum laude) in 1986 and the
PhD degree in electronic engineering from the
Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy, in 1992.
From 1986 to 1988, he was a researcher with
the Centro Studi e Laboratori in Telecomunica-
zioni (CSELT), Torino, Italy, involved in the
standardization activities for the GSM system.
Since 1992, he has been an assistant profes-
sor and then associate professor with the Elec-
tronic Department, where he is a member of
the VLSI-Lab group. His research interests include several aspects in
the design of digital integrated circuits and systems, with special
emphasis on high-performance architecture development (especially
for wireless communications and multimedia applications) and on-
chip interconnect modeling and optimization. He has coauthored 230
journal and conference papers in the areas of ASIC-SoC develop-
ment, architectural synthesis, VLSI circuit modeling and optimization.
In the frame of competitive National and European research projects,
he has been codesigner of several ASIC and FPGA implementations
in the fields of artificial intelligence, computer networks, digital signal
processing, transmission and coding. He is an associate editor of the
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II. He is a senior member
of the IEEE.
Paolo Montuschi (M’90-SM’07-F’14) received
the PhD degree in computer engineering in 1989.
Since 2000, he has been a full professor of com-
puter engineering at Politecnico di Torino, Italy,
where he served as a chair of department from
2003 to 2011, and as a chair or member of sev-
eral Boards, including the Board of Governors.
He is currently serving as an associate editor-in-
chief at the IEEE Transactions on Computers, as
a member of the steering committee and associ-
ate editor at the IEEE Transactions on Emerging
Topics in Computing and currently as a member of the Advisory Board
of Computing Now. He is also serving as a member of the IEEE Publica-
tion Services and Products Board. Previously, he served as chair of the
Magazine Operations of the Electronic Products and Services and of the
Digital Library Operations Committees, member-at-Large of the Com-
puter Society’s Publications Board, and a member of the Board of Gov-
ernors of the IEEE Computer Society. He served as a guest and an
associate editor of the IEEE Transactions on Computers from 2000 to
2004 and from 2009 to 2012, and a cochair, program and steering com-
mittee member of several conferences. His current research interests
and scientific achievements are in computer arithmetic, computer archi-
tectures, computer graphics, electronic publications, semantics & edu-
cation,
and
new
frameworks
for
the
dissemination
of
scientific
knowledge. In April 2014, he has been inducted into the International
Academy of Sciences of Turin. In June 2014, he has been appointed to
serve as an editor-in-chief of the IEEE Transactions on Computers for
the term 2015-2016. He is a fellow of the IEEE and a Computer Society
Golden Core Member.
" For more information on this or any other computing topic,
please visit our Digital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
CONDO ET AL.: UNEQUAL ERROR PROTECTION OF MEMORIES IN LDPC DECODERS
2993
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
