A Mixed Behavior/Structural Model for Analog LDPC Decoders Including Mismatch Effects and Dynamic Behavior

Zhe Zhao1*, Fei Gao1, Hanyue Li1, Yimin Li2, Haikun Luo3
1School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China 2Beijing Institute of Remote Sensing Equipment, Beijing, China
3Science and Technology on Electronic Information Control Lab, Chengdu, China
*Email: 3120130329@bit.edu.cn

Abstract—The analog implementation of error control decoders is a power efficiency and speed competitive methodology comparing with the digital implementation. In this paper, we propose a mixed behavioral/structural model for the analog implementation of low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoders based on the sum-product algorithm, while taking transistor mismatch effects and circuit dynamic behavior into account. The model, relating transistor-level parameters to system-level specifications, can be used for both estimating the system performance of the analog decoders and providing circuit-optimization guidelines for complex decoder. The model is applied to a (40, 16) linear block code and simulation results demonstrated the model can reliably predict the system performance in a short time.
Keywords—analog LDPC decoders; mixed behavioral/ structural model; transistor mismatch effects; circuit dynamic behavior
I. INTRODUCTION
Inspired by Wiberg’s work on iterative graph decoding [1], Hagenauer’s [2] and Loeliger’s [3] groups independently proposed the novel analog electronic network to decode error correcting codes in 1998, and successfully realized analog iterative decoders in BiCMOS technology [4,5]. Since then, the research efforts aimed at moving from the proof-of-concept design toward real-world applications have multiplied. The first step was to move from a bipolar to a more attractive full CMOS implementation [6], though only for a very simple Hamming (8, 4) code. The successful implementation of a chip for decoding a (132, 40) Turbo code defined in the UMTS standard was reported by Vogrig et al. in [7].
The prototypes realized so far have shown an outstanding improvement in power efficiency and speed comparing with their digital counterparts, with only a little error-correcting performance loss. However, all these implementations are limited to proof-of-concept decoders, with very short block lengths, and thus, they are not suitable for practical applications.
Due to the large size of the analog circuit, it is difficult to obtain reliable estimations of the circuit performance in a short time for the analog implementation of high-complexity decoders. Circuit-level simulations are then restricted to small sub-blocks of the overall decoder. Only very small analog decoders may be simulated for a few selected decoding configurations. A more detailed system performance evaluation,

particularly in terms of the BER, thus needs to rely on highlevel simulation models. It is therefore essential to capture the main characteristics of the analog decoder in sufficient detail and reduce the computational complexity at the same time in order to facilitate simulations for system level specification.
In this paper, the model relating transistor-level parameters to system-level specifications is investigated, which can be used for estimating the analog decoding circuit performance and providing circuit-optimization guidelines for complex decoder. Firstly, the circuit implementation of analog LDPC decoders is briefly introduced, in which the sum product module is the basic cell. Then, an approach based on the physical background of the device parameters is introduced to analyze mismatch effects. Moreover, a first-order delay model for single module is presented to discuss the dynamic behavior in analog LDPC decoders. Finally, a mixed behavioral/structural model for analog implementation of LDPC decoders is proposed, and the simulation analysis is also undertaken.

II. CIRCUIT IMPLEMENTATION OF ANALOG LDPC DECODERS
The graphical model is an apparent way to describe Turbo codes and LDPC codes. The decoding of such codes is achieved by applying “sum-product algorithm” to the graphical models [8].

The basic computations of the sum-product algorithm in the iterative decoding can be expressed as

pZ (z) = γ ∑ ∑ pX (x)pY (y) f (x, y, z) , ∀z ∈ Z ,

(1)

x∈X y∈Y

where X, Y and Z are finite sets, pX (x) , pY (y) and pZ (z)
are probability mass functions defined on sets of X, Y and Z respectively, f is a function denoting X×Y×Z→{0,1}, and γ is an appropriate scale factor which does not depend on z [9].

In order to implement the sum-product algorithm, multiplication and addition operations are necessary, and the third operation, normalization, is also helpful for realization.

As shown in [9], the multiplicative part of (1) can be computed by the circuit of Fig. 1, in which the inputs are current vectors representing probability mass functions. The function of the circuit is then given by

978-1-4673-7687-7/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

( )( ) Ii, j = I z I x,i I x I y, j I y ,

(2)

where

Ix

=

∑m i =1

I

x,i

,

∑ I y =

n j =1

I

x,i

and

Iz

=

∑ ∑ m i =1

n j =1

Ii,

j

=

Ix

.

The summation computation of (1) is realized by summing
the currents Ii, j , for each z ∈ Z while f (x, y, z) = 1 . This is
easily accomplished by connecting wires together according to the Kirchhoff current law.

Fig. 3. Canonical sum product modules.

a) soft-XOR module

b) soft-EQU module

Fig. 4. Trellis representations of soft-XOR and soft-EQU modules.

Fig. 1. Fundamental circuit: pairwise multiplication of probabilities.

The scale factor γ of (1) can be implemented by the normalization circuit as shown in Fig. 2, from which the sum of overall output is equal to the unit current IU. The current IU, which is provided by the reference current source and is adjustable, is globally used in all modules. The normalization circuit is actually a degenerate version of the fundamental
circuit of Fig. 1 with m=1 and Ix,1 fixed to IU, and its function
is given by

∑ Iz,k = IU I ′z,k

n l =1

I

z′ ,l

,

(3)

where Iz′,k is the output current from the summing circuit.

Fig. 2. Normalization circuit with PMOS.
Iterative sum-product algorithm can be directly implemented in analog VLSI as a network of sum product modules as shown in Fig. 3. The sum product module consists of input current mirrors, the Gilbert multiplication circuit, the summing circuit, and the normalization circuit. Note that there is a large family of modules that is uniquely parameterized by the function f.
There are only two different types of modules applied in the LDPC decoders: the soft-XOR module and the soft-EQU module. The {0, 1}-valued functions f of them are conveniently illustrated by trellis diagram, which are shown in Fig. 4.

III. TRANSISTOR MISMATCH EFFECTS
Two identical designed devices on an integrated circuit have random differences in their behaviors and show a certain level of the random mismatch in parameters which model their behaviors [10].

In this section, an approach based on the physical background of the device parameters is proposed to calculate and model the mismatch effects on the whole sum product module.

In the analog LDPC decoding network, it is important to match the transistors within one building block rather than between different building blocks. This implies that local mismatch is more important than global mismatch. We therefore focus on local mismatch sources.

For the circuit shown in Fig. 3 which is the basic building block for an analog decoder, the mismatch analysis of the multiplication part is carried out firstly. As shown in Fig. 1, the fundamental circuit is divided into two parts: the diodeconnected transistors within dashed box and the kernel multiplication transistor matrix. All the transistors in Fig. 1 are assumed to be in weak inversion, but the consequence of the parameter mismatch on the transistor behavior is calculated differently because transistors of two parts are biased in two ways [11].

In the first part, the current I y, j through the diode-
connected transistor is imposed, and the gate-source voltage VGS is the dependent variable. For current biasing, the variance of the gate-source voltage difference becomes:

( ) σ 2 ΔVGS = AV2T 0 (WL) ,

(4)

where AVT 0 is the process-dependent constant, W is the transistor gate-width, and L is the transistor gate-length.

For simplicity, the absolute error ΔVGS can be converted into the relative current error ε j , which is shown as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

( ) ( ) ID 1+ ε j

=

I

0

⎜⎛ ⎝

W L

⎟⎞ ⎠

exp⎛⎝⎜⎜

VGS nUT

⎟⎠⎞⎟ 1 + ε

j

,

( ) =

I

0

⎜⎛ ⎝

W L

⎟⎞ ⎠

exp⎜⎝⎛⎜

VGS

+

nUT ln nUT

1+

ε

j

⎟⎟⎞⎠

(5)

( ) ΔVGS = nUT ln 1+ ε j ≈ nUTε j ,

(6)

ε j ≈ ΔVGS nUT .

(7)

So the variance of the relative current difference is

( ) σ 2 ε j = σ 2(ΔVGS ) (nUT )2 = AV2T 0 WL(nUT )2 .

(8)

In the transformation in (8), the input current I y, j in Fig.1
( ) is changed to I y, j 1+ ε j .

In the second part, the voltage Vy, j is imposed at the gate terminal of the transistors in the multiplication matrix, and the drain current ID is the dependent variable. For voltage biasing, the variance of the relative current difference εi, j for the transistor in row j and column i is expressed by
( ) σ 2 εi, j = (σ [ΔID ] ID )2 = AV2T 0 WL(nUT )2 . (9)

According to the equation (8) and (9), the mismatchinfected output current Ii′, j from the multiplication circuits is

expressed by

( ( ) )( ) ∑ Ii′, j = Ix,i

Iy, j 1+ ε j

n j

I

y,

j

1+

ε

j

1+ εi, j

,

(10)

where ε j and εi, j are Gaussian-distributed variables with zero mean.

The normalization circuit is also divided into two parts: the scaling circuit and the global unit current source circuit. The scaling circuit is implemented as a Gilbert multiplication circuit, so the mismatch analysis is similar to the multiplication circuit as above in Fig. 1.

The global unit current source circuit is actually a current mirror as shown in Fig. 2. Transistor M4 is usually a global device located outside of the local node, and its gate voltage is distributed throughout the network as a global voltage. Transistor M3 is a local current source whose drain current is equal to IU. However, due to the transistor mismatch, there are random differences in local unit current IU through M3 for different building blocks. Note that transistor M3 should work in strong inversion and saturation region. As a result, the variance of the relative current error εU in the local unit currents IU becomes
σ 2(εU ) = (σ [ΔID ] ) ID 2 = 4 AV2T 0 WL(VGS −VT )2 . (11)

According to the equation (8), (9) and (11), the mismatchinfected output current I z,k from the normalization circuits is changed to

( ) ∑ I z,k = IU (1+ εU )

I z′,k (1 + ε k )

( n
k

=1

I

z′ ,

k

1+εk

)

1+

ε1,k

,

(12)

where εU , εk and ε1,k are Gaussian-distributed variables with zero mean.

Moreover, the equation (10) and (12) are able to incorporate transistor mismatch effects into the high level model.

IV. DYNAMIC BEHAVIOR OF ANALOG ITERATIVE DECODER
The dynamic of asynchronous analog decoding is in fact different from that of synchronous digital decoding. Hemati et al. have previously adopted a method based on the successive over relaxation procedure to analyze this problem [12].

In an analog LDPC decoder, there are two parts of delays: the node processing delays and the interconnect propagation delays. The node processing delays are a function of different factors, such as transistors sizing normalizing current, node architecture and wire length. The interconnect propagation delays depend on parasitic resistor and capacitor of wires between nodes.

Good matching properties require larger transistor sizing and lower normalizing current, which is helpful to keep transistors in weak inversion region and maintain the fine exponential behavior. On the other hand, it results in the cost of slowing circuit response and increasing the node processing delays. To simplify the analysis, our proposed model ignores the propagation delays and only takes account of the processing delays.

The processing delays of sum product modules within the analog network can be modeled with a first-order RC delay approximation, as shown in Fig. 5. Using RC delay model, the change in the output current I′z is shown in the equation (13).
I′z (t0 + Δt) = (1− exp(− Δt /τ ))Iz (t0 )+ exp(− Δt /τ )I′z (t0 ). (13)

Therefore, the equation (13) can be reduced to the following recursive equation

I

z′

[n

+

1]

= =

(1 − exp(− Δt /τ ))Iz [n] αIz[n]+ (1− α )I′z [n]

+

exp(−

Δt

/τ

)I

z′

[n]

,

(14)

where n is the discrete-time index, α = 1 − exp(− Δt /τ ), and Δt

is the sampling period. According to (14), each delay model is completely characterized by the single parameter τ that is properly computed by approximating the step response of the sum product modules.

Fig. 5. First-order RC delay simulation model.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. SIMULATION MODEL OF ANALOG LDPC DECODER AND RESULTS
In this section, we propose a mixed behavioral/structural model for analog implementation of LDPC decoders based on the sum-product algorithm, while taking transistor mismatch effects and circuit dynamic behavior into account.
The simulation model of the analog LDPC decoding network is schematized in Fig. 6 where “XOR” module denotes a column of soft-XOR cells, corresponding to the check nodes in the factor graph, and “EQU” module denotes a column of soft-EQU cells, corresponding to the variable nodes. All cells modeled according to (10) and (12) introduce mismatch effects into the decoding network. “DELAY” modules modeled according to (14) are also embedded after every cell output in the decoding network, which indicate the processing delay of the cells. The initialization module restores the network to a uniform starting condition, corresponding to the reset circuit. “DEC” module performs hard decisions on the a posteriori probabilities (APPs) at each step. Therefore the proposed analog decoding network model is used to implement the iterative decoding in a parallel scheduling framework.
Fig. 6. Analog LDPC decoding network simulation model.
In order to testify the feasibility of the model proposed in Fig. 6, it is applied to a (40, 16) linear block code whose factor graph is shown in Fig. 7. Variable nodes and parity-check nodes are shown by circles and squares respectively in Fig. 7.

The analog decoder circuit is designed and fabricated in the CSMC 0.35 μm CMOS technology. Based on the consideration of power consumption, the unit current IU is set as 1μA. According to the equation (15), the ratio W/L should be

W L ≥ 10IUκ 2μCOXUT2 ⋅ exp(κVT 0 UT ) ≈ 15.2 .

(16)

For convenience, W/L is chosen as the minimum integer, 16.

Once the unit current IU and the ratio W/L are fixed, the transistor channel width and length are chosen in order to
ensure good decoding system performance. Three sets of
transistor sizing parameters, W1/L1 = 16μm/ 1μm, W2/L2 = 32μm/ 2μm and W3/L3 = 64μm/ 4μm, are selected for the proposed simulation model.

The mismatch parameters ε of all transistors are considered as independent Gaussian random variables, truncated to the range [-1, +1]. According to the equation (8) and (9), the variances of the relative current difference ε for transistors in the Gilbert multiplier circuit and the scaling circuit are shown in Table I. Using transistor-level simulation in the CADENCE design environment, the parameters α of the first-order delay model are reported in Table II.

As an example, for a particular frame simulation with Eb/N0 = 5dB, the normalized output probabilities P(ui=0) from the proposed model are shown in Fig. 8. In these cases, the decoder with W1/ L1 settles to the correct solution in the shortest time (less than 20ns). On the contrary, the decoder with W3/ L3 evolves to the highest reliability in the longest time (more than 250ns), and the decoder with W2/ L2 accomplish the correct solution within 40ns. Simulation results show that transistor size is inversely proportional to the operational speed of decoder. It is because the larger device size means larger parasitic capacitance, which slows down the speed of circuit.

Fig. 7. Factor-graph of the simulated code.

The Gilbert multiplier circuit and the scaling part of the normalizer circuit, in which MOS transistors should operate in the weak inversion, are key consideration in the design of the sum product modules. MOS transistors operating in weak inversion satisfy the following condition

ID

≤

IU

≤

1 10

⋅ IS

≤

1 10

⋅

2μCOXUT2 κ

exp⎜⎛⎜⎝ −

κVT 0 UT

⎟⎟⎠⎞

⋅

W L

,

(15)

where μ is the mobility of charge carriers in the device, Cox is the gate capacitance per unit area, UT≈0.0258 V is the wellknown thermal voltage, and κ and VT0 are constants of the fabrication process.

(a) W1/ L1 = 16μm/ 1μm

(b) W2/ L2 = 32μm/ 2μm

(c) W3/ L3 =64μm/ 4μm Fig. 8. Dynamic behavior of decoder normalized output probabilities.
The simulated BER performance curves obtained from the proposed model for three transistor sizing cases are reported in Fig. 9. For the decoding time Td=500ns, the BER performance of the decoder with W1/ L1 is the worst in three cases, and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BER performance of the decoder with W3/ L3 is worse than the BER performance of the decoder with W2/ L2. For the decoding time Td=1μs, the BER performance of the decoder with W1/ L1 is also the worst, and is not significantly improved with the increase of decoding time; moreover, the BER
performance of the decoder with W3/ L3 is closed to the BER performance of the decoder with W2/ L2. Simulation results show that the decoder with larger device size has better BER
performance. Notice that while the matching property of the
decoder with W3/ L3 is best in three cases, the corresponding delay parameter α is minimum, so the decoder with W3/ L3 needs more time to establish the same performance compared
with the decoder with W2/ L2.

TABLE II.

PARAMETER OF FIRST-ORDER DELAY MODEL

W/L XOR module EQU module

16μm/1μm
2.868 × 10-2 2.237 × 10-2

32μm/2μm
1.463 × 10-2 9.969 × 10-3

64μm/4μm
1.569 × 10-3 8.539 × 10-4

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a mixed behavioral/structural model is proposed for the analog LDPC decoding network, which relates transistor-level parameters to system-level specifications. The mismatch effects are calculated by the proposed approach based on the physical background of the device parameters. The dynamic behavior of the analog decoder network is analyzed by the proposed first-order model, which takes both the accuracy and the computational efficiency into account. The model is applied to a (40, 16) linear block code, and simulation results show that enlarging the device size can reduce the mismatch effects, but it will slow down the operational speed of the circuit. The optimum design of the device size is a tradeoff between system performance considerations and acceptable speed. The proposed model can reliably predict the analog decoding system performance in an acceptable time. Furthermore, the model provides circuitoptimization guidelines for complex decoders.

Fig. 9. BER performance of the analog decoder.
Through the above analysis and comparisons, the optimal transistor sizing parameter is W2/ L2 = 32μm/ 2μm. In Fig. 10, we plot the BER performance curves of the decoder with W2/ L2 for more decoding times, together with the benchmark curve based on ideal BP algorithm. Fig. 10 shows that performance increases with the decoding time and tends to the ideal performance as well. For instance, the curve corresponding to 250ns matches the curve of ideal BP algorithm. A decoding time of 250ns corresponds to a channel data rate about 160 Mb/s for (40, 16) linear block code.

Fig. 10. BER performance of the analog decoder with W2/ L2 = 32μm/ 2μm.

TABLE I.
W/L multiplier circuit
scaling circuit

VARIANCES OF THE RELATIVE CURRENT DIFFERENCE

εi, εi,j εk, ε1,k

16μm/1μm 0.063 0.182

32μm/2μm 0.016 0.045

64μm/4μm 0.004 0.011

REFERENCES
[1] Wiberg N, Loeliger H A, Kotter R. “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs. European Transactions on telecommunications”. Italy, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 513-525, 1995.
[2] Hagenauer J, Winklhofer M. “The analog decoder. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory. Cambridge, USA, pp. 145, 1998.
[3] Loeliger H A, Tarkoy F, Lustenberger F, et al. “Decoding in analog VLSI”. IEEE Communications Magazine. USA, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 99101, 1999.
[4] Lustenberger F, Helfenstein M, Moschytz G S, et al. “All-analog decoder for a binary (18, 9, 5) tail-biting trellis code”. Proceedings of the 25th European Solid-State Circuits Conference. Duisburg, Germany, pp. 362-365, 1999.
[5] Moerz M, Gabara T, Yan R, et al. “An analog 0.25 μm BiCMOS taibiting MAP decoder”. 2000 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference. USA, pp. 356-357, 1999.
[6] Winstead C, Dai J, Yu S, et al. “CMOS analog MAP decoder for (8, 4) Hamming code. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits”. USA, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 122-131, 2004.
[7] Vogrig D, Gerosa A, Neviani A, et al. “A 0.35-μm CMOS analog turbo decoder for the 40-bit rate 1/3 UMTS channel code”. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits. USA, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 753-762, 2005.
[8] Kschischang F R, Frey B J, Loeliger H A. “Factor graphs and the sumproduct algorithm”. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory. USA, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498-519, 2001.
[9] Loeliger H A, Lustenberger F, Helfenstein M, et al. “Probability propagation and decoding in analog VLSI”. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory. USA, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 837-843, 2001.
[10] Pelgrom M J M, Duinmaijer A C J, Welbers A P G. “Matching properties of MOS transistors”. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits. USA, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1433-1439, 1989.
[11] Kinget P, Steyaert M. “Analog VLSI integration of massive parallel processing systems”. USA, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997.
[12] Hemati S, Banihashemi A H. “Dynamics and performance analysis of analog iterative decoding for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes”. IEEE Transactions on Communications. USA, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 61-70, 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

