IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

1733

Iterative Receiver Design for ISI Channels Using Combined Belief- and Expectation-Propagation
Peng Sun, Chuanzong Zhang, Zhongyong Wang, Carles N. Manchón, and Bernard H. Fleury, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this letter, a message-passing algorithm that combines belief propagation and expectation propagation is applied to design an iterative receiver for intersymbol interference channels. We detail the derivation of the messages passed along the nodes of a vector-form factor graph representing the underlying probabilistic model. We also present a simple but efficient method to cope with the “negative variance” problem of expectation propagation. Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm outperforms, in terms of bit-error-rate and convergence rate, a LMMSE turbo-equalizer based on Gaussian message passing with the same order of computational complexity.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, expectation propagation, turbo equalization.
I. INTRODUCTION
S INCE optimal detection of data transmitted across an intersymbol interference (ISI) channel, like the multipath wireless channel, is typically impractical, suboptimal receiver structures that approach the performance of the optimal detector have been proposed, with turbo equalization [1] being the most emblematic instance. In turbo equalization, the turbo principle–originally used for decoding concatenated codes [2]–is applied by regarding the ISI channel as an encoder acting on the transmitted symbols.
The above “turbo”-processing algorithms are instances of belief propagation (BP) applied on a factor graph representing the underlying probabilistic model [3]. Additional equalizer structures, which implement other variants of BP, have been proposed, e.g. [4]. However, BP-based equalizers suffer from an
Manuscript received December 04, 2014; revised January 22, 2015; accepted January 22, 2015. Date of publication February 19, 2015; date of current version May 11, 2015. This work was conducted in cooperation with the 4GMCT cooperative research project funded by Intel Mobile Communications Denmark ApS, Agilent Technologies, Aalborg University, and the Danish National Advanced Technology Foundation. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under NSFC Grants 61172086, 61201251, 61401401 and also by the National 863 Program of China under Grant 0214AA01A705 . The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. Rodrigo C. de Lamare.
P. Sun and Z. Wang are with the School of Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China (e-mail: iepengsun@gmail. com; iezywang@zzu.edu.cn).
C. Zhang is with the School of Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China, and the Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University, Aalborg 9220, Denmark (e-mail: ieczzhang@gmail.com).
C. N. Manchón and B. H. Fleury are with the Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University, Aalborg 9220, Denmark (e-mail: cnm@es.aau.dk; fleury@es.aau.dk)
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LSP.2015.2404822

inherent drawback: their complexity grows exponentially with

the channel length or the number of non-zero coefficients (de-

pending on the selected factor graph representation) and the

modulation order.

Different approaches have been proposed to circumvent the

aforementioned complexity issue. Basically, they introduce ap-

proximations that make the messages passed in the subgraph

representing the ISI channel Gaussian. In [5] this is achieved

by assuming the interference plus noise component with respect

to each modulation symbol to be Gaussian and exploiting a re-

lationship between the extrinsic values of the symbols when the

channel is driven by these symbols and the LMMSE symbol es-

timates when the channel is driven by Gaussian inputs. This ap-

proach turns out to be equivalent to that in [6] when applied to

turbo-equalization [5]. In [7] a combined use of Gaussian ex-

pectation propagation (EP) [8], [9] and BP is proposed. The use

of EP, however, leads to an unstable algorithm due to the fact

that computed Gaussian EP messages may have a negative vari-

ance. In [7] the authors propose to circumvent this problem by

replacing each EP message with a geometric mixture of said

message and a standard Gaussian message, parameterized with

a damping/mixing factor. However, “good” sequences of values

of the damping factor versus the iteration index of the algorithm

need to be tuned in advance via simulations, which severely

limits the practicability of the proposed approach.

In this paper we formulate an approximate inference method

combining BP and EP and apply it to a vector-form factor graph

representation of the probabilistic model for ISI channels to de-

sign a receiver algorithm performing joint equalization of ISI

channels and data detection. The obtained design is similar to

that presented in [7]. We propose a simple solution to avoid the

instability problem of EP that leads to a fast converging algo-

rithm. We present a detailed derivation of the turbo-equalizer

and a numerical evaluation that compares its performance with

that of the receiver proposed in [5]. The simulation results show

that for the same complexity our design performs better and con-

verges faster than that in [5], while avoiding the practical issues

inherent to that in [7].

Notation- Boldface lowercase and uppercase letters denote

vectors and matrices, respectively. The identity matrix of size

is represented by . Superscript indicates transposition

of a vector or matrix. The probability density function (pdf) of

a multivariate Gaussian distribution with mean vector and

covariance matrix is represented by

. The relation

for some positive constant is written as

.

1070-9908 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:29:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1734

IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

III. COMBINED BP-EP MESSAGE-PASSING RULE

Fig. 1. Vector-form factor graph representation of the probabilistic model (2).

We consider a factor graph of a generic probabilistic model

made of a set of factor nodes , and a set of variable nodes .

The variable nodes are grouped into two disjoint subsets

and , i.e.

and

. Let

denote the messages from a factor node

to a

variable node

, and

be the message from variable

node to factor node . With these definitions, the message

update rules read

II. SYSTEM MODEL

The information bit vector

is encoded and

interleaved, yielding the codeword vector

. The

coded bits are then mapped onto a binary phase shift keying

(BPSK) constellation, resulting in the vector of modulated sym-

bols

, which are then transmitted over a fre-

quency-selective channel corrupted with AWGN. The (base-

band discrete-time) signal observed at the receiver is described

by the vector

with entries

(1)

Here,

with

for

and

,

denotes the vector of channel weights,

and is the th sample of a white Gaussian noise vector with

component variance .

A. Probabilistic Model and Factor Graph
The posterior probability mass function (pmf) of vectors , , and given the received signal vector reads

(4)

(5) (6)

Here,

is the sum over all variables of

excluding

,

and

denote respectively the set of factor nodes

connected to variable node and the set of variable nodes con-

nected to the factor node . The superscript of the message

in the right-hand expression in (5) indicates that this message

from factor to

is computed using the BP rule, i.e. (4).

Moreover in this expression

is the projection of the

pdf given as an argument on a specified exponential family 2.

Note that computing the messages from any factor node to any

variable node requires the computation of a BP message. More-

over, messages passed from and to a variable node

(

) are computed using the BP (EP) rule.

IV. ITERATIVE RECEIVER DESIGN

In this section we derive a receiver that performs joint equal-

ization and decoding for ISI channels by passing messages along

the edges of the factor graph depicted in Fig. 1. The complexity

of standard BP applied on this factor graph grows exponentially

with , the dimension of the state vectors , . Such intractable

complexity can be reduced by approximating messages passed

(2)

along the edges of the channel part of the graph (to the left of and including the variable nodes , ) with Gaussian messages.

In this expression

is the uniform prior pmf of the th

information bit,

stands for the coding and interleaving

constraints,

denotes the

likelihood term for , and

represents the modula-

tion mapping. Finally,

expresses the determin-

istic relationship between , and , given by

(3)

This can be done by approximating the messages from to

, , with Gaussian messages. The EP framework provides

an elegant and efficient tool to do so. Similarly to [7] we split

the variable nodes in the graph as follows:

and

. Moreover we set

, , where is the

Gaussian family.

A. Calculation of Messages 1)Equalization–Input Messages: Assuming that, for the

with the

matrix

and the vector

, where is a zero column vector with length

.

Note that factorizes as

with

and

[5].

The vector-form factor graph representation [5] of the pos-

th symbol, the message from

from to
the belief variance

has the form

to can be expressed as and the message ,
of has mean and

terior pmf in (2) is depicted in Fig. 1. It will be used for the derivation of the BP-EP-based receiver described in Section IV.

(7)

Note that in this representation the subgraph representing the ISI

(8)

channel (left part) in Fig. 1 has a tree structure1.

1Cycles appearing in the “channel” subgraph of the scalar-form factor graph representation of the probabilistic model (2) are absorbed in the vector-form representation [5].

2For a pdf

, with

denoting the Kullback-Leibler divergence, and being a specific

exponential family. As indicated by the indexing, might depend on the

variable node.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:29:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: ITERATIVE RECEIVER DESIGN FOR ISI CHANNELS

1735

The message

is computed from (5) to be

(20)

where

As a consequence, the message (9)
where (10) (11)

reads (21)
(22)

We further have

by (6).

When running the BP-EP algorithm, it can be observed that

the variance parameter in (10) and (11) sometimes takes 4) Equalization–Output

negative values, which results in a bad performance, see also

reads

[7]. To avoid this problem, the variance is replaced by its

absolute value

in both (10) and (11). We will see in the nu-

merical evaluations that this simple “trick” is very efficient and

provides a viable alternative to the damping method proposed with

in [7], see Section I.

2) Equalization–Downward Messages: Assuming that the

message

is known,

the message

is obtained via (4) to be

Messages:

(23) The message
(24)
(25)

(12) (26)

with

Because both messages

and

in (9) are

(13) Gaussian, we obtain from (5)

(14)

(27)

The message where

is calculated from (6) to be

5) Decoding: Decoding is performed by using the BCJR al-

gorithm, which is an instance of BP [10]. After completion of (15) the forward/backward processing the BCJR decoder returns the

messages

, . We remark that any other code that

can be decoded using a BP-based algorithm, e.g. a turbo- or

LDPC code, could be used instead within the proposed BP-EP

framework.

(16) (17)

and

.

3) Equalization–Upward Messages: With the message from

variable node

to factor node

being of the form

, the message

from

to is obtained as

B. Scheduling of the Messages

After initializing

, , the messages

and

, with ranging from 1 to

, are cal-

culated in the downward recursion using (12) and (15) respec-

tively. Likewise,

and

, with ranging

from

to 1, are obtained from (18) and (21), respectively,

in the upward recursion3. Equations (24) and (27) are used to

get the messages

, , which are then passed to the

BCJR decoder. The decoder outputs the messages

,

, and finally

, , are updated via (9).

C. Reduction of Complexity

(18)

Since they are performed in the update of each symbol, the

with

two matrix inversions in (25) and (26) make up a significant part of the computational complexity of the BP-EP-based al-

gorithm. To reduce the complexity, the approach proposed in

[5] can be adopted. We calculate the belief of variable , i.e.

, where

(19)

3Note that these recursions coincide with those of a Kalman smoother [7]. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:29:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(28)

1736

According to the deterministic relationship given in (3), the

messages from factor node

to variable nodes ,

, are obtained as

IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

(29)

where

(30) (31)

Fig. 2. BER performance versus

of the investigated receivers.

with

and

representing the

th element of

vector and respectively, and

denoting the

th

diagonal entry of the matrix . Using this, only two matrix

inversions are needed in the update of each block of symbols

[5]. Replacing the messages in (24) by those in (29) reduces

the complexity order from

to

. The proof of the

equivalence of these messages is provided in Appendix A.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

We evaluate the performance of the communication system

described in Section II by means of Monte Carlo simu-

lations. Two different lengths of information bit vectors

are considered:

(long) and

(short).

The information bits are coded using a 1/2 rate convolu-

tional code

. The vector of channel weights is set to

, which corresponds to a

severe time-dispersive (5-tap) channel [11].

Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 depict the performance of the investigated

algorithms: the proposed algorithm (BP-EP), the algorithm pre-

sented in [5] (GABP), the algorithm implementing MAP equal-

ization (BP) (reproduced from Fig. 5 in [5]), and a receiver op-

erating in an ISI-free channel (AWGN). In Fig. 2, the BER per-

formance after 30 receiver iterations is shown when the SNR

ranges from 4 dB to 6 dB. We observe that BP-EP significantly

outperforms GABP. It also performs close to BP, the loss ex-

pressed in terms of the SNR value where the threshold effect

occurs being about 0.3 dB. In Fig. 3, the BER performance at

5.5 dB SNR of BP-EP and GABP is depicted as a function of the

iteration index. We observe that BP-EP converges much faster

and is less sensitive to shorter codeword lengths than GABP.

Both BP-EP and GABP receivers exhibit the same com-

plexity order per symbol. They differ only in their respective

equalization parts, both having

order of complexity per

symbol. The former algorithm approximates the messages from

to based on the messages passed by both the decoder and

Fig. 3. BER performance versus iteration index of the investigated receivers.

the equalizer, while the latter only makes use of the messages passed by the decoder for doing this. The observed superior performance indicates that the BP-EP approximation is better.

APPENDIX A PROOF OF THE EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN (24) AND (29)

The proof is by induction. Thus, we merely need to show the

equivalence for

and .

For

we have according to (29) (see (32) at the bottom

of the page).

For

we first obtain from the BP rule (4)

(33) Then, using (32) and (33) yields

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:29:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(32)

SUN et al.: ITERATIVE RECEIVER DESIGN FOR ISI CHANNELS

1737

REFERENCES
[1] R. Koetter, A. C. Singer, and M. Tücher, “Turbo equalization,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 21, pp. 67–80, Jan. 2004.
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, (ICC’93), May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[3] R. McEliece, D. MacKay, and J. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s “belief propagation” algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[4] G. Colavolpe and G. Germi, “On the application of factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm to ISI channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 818–825, May 2005.
[5] Q. Guo and L. Ping, “LMMSE turbo equalization based on factor graphs,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 311–319, Feb. 2008.

[6] X. Wang and H. Poor, “Iterative (turbo) soft interference cancellation and decoding for coded CDMA,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 1046–1061, Jul. 1999.
[7] J. Hu, H.-A. Loeliger, J. Dauwels, and F. Kschischang, “A general computation rule for lossy summaries/messages with examples from equalization,” in Proc. 44th Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Sep. 2006, pp. 27–29.
[8] T. Heskes, M. Opper, W. Wiegerinck, O. Winther, and O. Zoeter, “Approximate inference techniques with expectation constraints,” J. Statist. Mechan.–Theory Exper., Sep. 2005.
[9] T. P. Minka, “Expectation propagation for approximate Bayesian inference,” in Proc. Seventeenth Conf. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2001, pp. 362–369.
[10] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[11] J. Proakis, Digital Communications, 4th ed. ed. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, Aug. 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:29:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

