IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 7, AUGUST 2008

1967

A Low-Cost Serial Decoder Architecture for
Low-Density Parity-Check Convolutional Codes
Stephen Bates, Senior Member, IEEE, Zhengang Chen, Student Member, IEEE, Logan Gunthorpe, Ali Emre Pusane, Student Member, IEEE, Kamil Sh. Zigangirov, Fellow, IEEE, and Daniel J. Costello, Jr., Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We propose a low-cost serial decoder architecture for low-density parity-check convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs). It has been shown that LDPC-CCs can achieve comparable performance to LDPC block codes with constraint length much less than the block length. The proposed serial decoder architecture for LDPC-CCs uses a single decoding processor. Terminated data frames are sent through the processor iteratively until correctly decoded or a maximum number of iterations is reached. This architecture saves memory consumption and uses a very small number of logic elements, making it especially suitable for strong LDPC-CCs with large code memory. The proposed architecture is realized for a (2048,3,6) regular LDPC-CC on an Altera Stratix FPGA. With a maximum of 100 iterations, the design achieves up to 9-Mb/s throughput using only a very small portion of the field-programmable gate array resources.
Index Terms—Convolutional codes (CCs), data communication, error correction codes, high-speed integrated circuits.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were first proposed by Gallager in the 1960s [1] and were then rediscovered by, among others, MacKay and Neal in 1996 [2]. Since their rediscovery, LDPC codes have become very popular and have been incorporated into emerging communication standards such as 10GBASE-T, DVB-S2, and IEEE 802.16e. The reason for this is that LDPC codes can perform very close to the Shannon limit under a suboptimal yet computationally feasible message-passing decoding algorithm, called belief propagation (BP) [3], [4]. The BP decoding algorithm is based on a bipartite graph interpretation of the code, called the Tanner graph [5]. Research on LDPC codes has, to date, focused almost exclusively upon LDPC block codes (LDPC-BCs). However, LDPC convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs) [6], [7] may be better suited to certain applications than their block-code
Manuscript received April 11, 2007; revised August 27, 2007. This work was supported in part by the NSERC through a Discovery Grant, the SRC under Grant 1170.001, the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR02-05310 and Grant CCF05-15012, and NASA under Grant NNG05GH736. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, Island of Kos, Greece, May 2006. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor V. Öwall.
S. Bates, Z. Chen, and L. Gunthorpe are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2V4 Canada (e-mail: zgchen@ece.ualberta.ca).
A. E. Pusane, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello Jr. are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2008.918002

counterparts. This is because LDPC-CCs are able to encode and decode arbitrary lengths of data without the need to fragment them into fixed-sized blocks. Many packet switching networks, including those based on the Ethernet frame format, utilize a Protocol Data Unit (PDU) that can vary in size. For example, in the IEEE 802.11 wireless standards, variable-length frames are used.
Although the underlying decoding algorithm for LDPC-CCs is intrinsically the same as for LDPC-BCs, it assumes a very different decoder architecture [6], [8]. For LDPC-BCs, a great deal of effort has been devoted to implementing the iterative decoder using both field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) [9]–[12] and application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) [13]–[16]. Early work focused on a fully parallel architecture [13], where each variable/check node of the Tanner graph is physically realized on the circuit, and the decoding messages are processed at such nodes and passed between them. Despite its high throughput (500-Mb/s information throughput in [13]), the fully parallel architecture does not scale well with code length. Also, as the block length grows, long interconnections between nodes cannot be totally avoided, causing routing congestion. In high-throughput application scenarios, a fully parallel architecture is desirable, and certain implementation optimization measures can be taken to alleviate the routing problem [16]. For applications where the throughput is not critical, larger LDPC-BCs can be implemented by customizing the code design to better fit a partially parallel decoder architecture [9]–[11], [14], [17].
In an LDPC-CC decoder, multiple iterations are translated into multiple processors to deal with belief propagation on an infinite Tanner graph. The statistical messages, in the form of log-likelihood ratios (LLRs), are passed from one processor to the next. The processors are identical, and each of them contains storage elements for LLRs plus some number of variable node units (VNUs) and check node units (CNUs). The concatenated processors form a naturally pipelined architecture [6]. As the inputs arrive from the channel, the LDPC-CC decoder can output decoded bits continuously after an initial delay. Both FPGA and ASIC architectures have been proposed for LDPC-CC decoders [18], [19].
In this paper, we propose a low-cost serial decoder architecture for LDPC-CCs. Instead of mapping multiple decoding iterations into the same number of processors, we use a single processor. The data frames are sent through this processor iteratively until correctly decoded or a maximum iteration number is reached. To make serial decoding possible, encoded data

1549-8328/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:56:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1968

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 7, AUGUST 2008

frames must be terminated before being transmitted through the channel. This serial architecture is proposed based on the following considerations.
• LDPC-CCs demonstrate comparable performance to LDPC-BCs with a much smaller constraint length (a code property defined in Section II) than the block length [6]. The constraint length of LDPC-CCs is directly related to the actual memory consumption of a decoding processor in circuits. So LDPC-CCs potentially use less memory than LDPC-BCs with the same performance. However, using many processors in the LDPC-CC decoder cancels out this advantage. By using a single processor, the memory consumption is minimized; but, as will be discussed later, a frame buffer is required in the serial decoder, which reduces the memory savings.
• An LDPC-CC decoder with a single processor consumes minimal hardware resources. This architecture leads to a low-cost design. As a tradeoff, the decoding throughput is lower.
• The serial architecture is particularly suitable for LDPC-CCs with large code memory (a code property defined in Section II). Such codes demonstrate very good error performance. However, mapping each iteration to a processor for these codes would consume too many hardware resources.
• In real systems, data is usually organized in frames. LDPC-CCs can be applied to a variety of frame lengths when encoder termination is applied. The proposed serial architecture naturally fits such a scenario.
The proposed low-cost serial architecture is implemented for a (2048,3,6) LDPC-CC (see Section II) on an Altera Stratix FPGA. This implementation achieves excellent frame error rate (FER) performance and a moderate throughput using only a fraction of the targeted FPGA resources. Therefore, the architecture is suitable for low-cost, moderate throughput applications where good error correction capabilities are required, such as wireless mobile telephone networks and space and satellite communications.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present a brief overview of LDPC-CCs. In Section III, the performance of these codes is demonstrated via simulation. In Section IV, we discuss the termination of data streams encoded with LDPC-CCs. The architecture of the proposed decoder is discussed in Section V. Synthesis and performance results for the implementation of the (2048,3,6)

LDPC-CC decoder are presented in Section VI. Section VII concludes the paper.

II. LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

An LDPC-CC1 is defined by an infinite but periodically time-

varying parity-check matrix. Suppose the parity-check matrix is

. The code is defined as the null space of , i.e.,

, where is the codeword row vector. The infinite parity-

check matrix of a rate

LDPC-CC can be written

as (in transposed form, also known as the syndrome former)

shown in (1), at the bottom of the page, where the

are periodically time-varying submatrices of bi-

nary values. If the period is , then

for all and . An important parameter of the code is the (syn-

drome-former) memory , which determines the maximum

number of previous bits that are involved in the encoding of the

current bit. The constraint length of the LDPC-CC is defined

as

. For regular LDPC-CCs, both the column

weight and the row weight of are constant,2 and the

code is referred to as an

LDPC-CC. For fixed and

, the code performance improves with increasing . In this

paper, we use the term code memory to represent , which is

a property of the code, different from the term memory usually

used in circuit definitions. Although the parity-check matrix

is infinite, the code memory is finite. LDPC-CCs are appli-

cable to data frames of finite length through encoder presetting

and termination, which will be discussed in Section IV.

The submatrices in (1) are of size

, depending

on the code rate. For instance, the submatrix of a rate 5/6

LDPC-CC (

,

) can be written as

. Let the

coded sequence be written as

,

where is a sub-block of size

. From the definition

, the parity-check constraints can be written as

(2)

This parity-check equation can be directly used to encode

LDPC-CCs. As long as

is full rank, (2) can be solved

1The nomenclature used in this paper is based, in part, upon that presented in
[6].
0 1 2In fact, the column weights for the first (c b) m columns of the syndrome
former can be less than K when it is truncated to be applied to frames of finite
lengths.

...

...

...

...

...

(1)

...

...

...

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:56:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BATES et al.: LOW-COST SERIAL DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

1969

m ; ; Fig. 1. Encoder realization for an ( 3 6) rate 1/2 LDPC-CC.

and the subblock

can be represented as a linear com-

bination of previous subblocks

.

For simplicity, we take rate 1/2 codes as an example, i.e.,

. The constituent submatrices are then

(3)

E =N Fig. 2. Performance of a variety of channel coding schemes. For clarity the

curves are labeled in order of increasing

required to achieve a BER of

10 . Turbo codes used 20 iterations. LDPC codes used up to 100 iterations.

For the LDPC-CCs, the BER was obtained in a streaming fashion without ter-

mination.

where choosing

for all satisfies the full rank condi-

tion and ensures systematic encoding. Now, assuming the sub-

blocks of a codeword are

, where the symbol

corresponds to systematic information bits and corresponds

to parity bits, and combining the above equations, we obtain the

following encoding equation for rate 1/2 systematic LDPC-CCs:

TABLE I KEY PARAMETERS OF THE CODES PRESENTED IN FIG. 2. THE (303,3,17) LDPC-CC AND THE (2048,6,32) LDPC-BC WERE OBTAINED THROUGH
N ALGEBRAIC CONSTRUCTION, WHILE ALL OF THE OTHER LDPC CODES WERE
OBTAINED BY RANDOM CONSTRUCTION. FOR TURBO CODES, REPRESENTS THE INTERLEAVER SIZE

(4)

Letting the input data sequence be

, the coded sequence is then

given by

.

The coefficients

and

in (4) are periodically

time-varying elements in . Each possible combination of

the coefficients represents a parity-check equation (column) in

. Due to the sparsity of , only a few of the coefficients

are nonzero. For example, for a regular LDPC-CC with check

node degree

, only

coefficients are nonzero,

i.e., only five of the previous information and parity bits and

the current information bit are needed to generate the current

parity bit.

A block diagram of the encoder for an

rate 1/2

LDPC-CC is shown in Fig. 1. The encoder can be implemented

using shift registers, multiplexers, and XOR gates. It is a finite

state machine (FSM) whose state bits are the previous in-

formation bits

and the previous

parity bits

. The inputs are the

information bit sequence and the phase select signal , which

is introduced to address the periodicity of the encoder. The co-

efficients

in (4) are time varying with period ,

and the phase signal picks the right combination from the

state bits and the current input information bit.

simulated over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)

channel with binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation.

The LDPC codes were all decoded using the belief propa-

gation algorithm, and the turbo codes were decoded with a

MAP-based iterative decoder. The parameters of the codes are

summarized in Table I. It can be seen that both randomly and

algebraically constructed LDPC-CCs have the ability to out-

perform LDPC-BCs, even when the constraint length is much

smaller than the block code length. The rate 1/2 (2048,3,6)

LDPC-CC (with constraint length

) performs slightly

better than the rate 1/2 (100000,3,6) LDPC-BC and the rate 5/6

(128,3,18) LDPC-CC (with

) performs the same as the

(2048,6,32) LDPC-BC.3 Also, the (512,3,6) LDPC-CC (with

) performs slightly better than the

turbo

code,4 but the (2048,3,6) LDPC-CC (with

) performs

slightly worse than the

turbo code. This is because

III. PERFORMANCE OF LDPC-CCS
In Fig. 2, the bit error rate (BER) performance of a number of regular LDPC-BCs and LDPC-CCs is compared. Two turbo codes are also included for reference. All codes were

0 = 3Note that this LDPC-BC is not full rank and therefore its rate is slightly more
than 1 (6 32). This code has been selected for the IEEE 802.3an standard [16], [20].
4This turbo code is used in the CDMA2000 standard, where the 1/2 code rate is obtained through puncturing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:56:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1970

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 7, AUGUST 2008

m = 2 T = 1 Fig. 3. Rate 1/2 (3,6) LDPC-CC decoder based on its infinite Tanner graph. Each processor deals with one part of the Tanner graph. Round black nodes are

variable nodes and square nodes are check nodes. Note that this is a trivial example of an LDPC-CC with memory

and period

.

only regular LDPC-CCs were considered here. Optimized still small compared to the decoder [33]. However, the termi-

irregular LDPC-BCs [21] and irregular LDPC-CCs [22], [23] nation sequence has an impact on the BER vs Signal-to-Noise

both perform better than turbo codes. Based on Fig. 2, it is Ratio (SNR or

) performance of an LDPC-CC. Since the

evident that LDPC-CCs exhibit very good performance over a termination sequence does not convey information, it reduces

range of code rates.

the overall rate of the code. Therefore, for rate 1/2 codes, if the

data frame to be encoded is of length bits, the effective code

IV. LDPC-CC ENCODER TERMINATION
To apply LDPC-CCs with infinite parity-check matrices to data frames of finite length, the encoder must be properly initialized and terminated. Encoding of a frame can be initialized by assuming all previous bits to be zeros, i.e., the encoder in Fig. 1 starts from the all-zero state. We call this encoder presetting,

rate is given by

.

The rate loss due to termination is directly related to the frame

length . When is small with respect to , the impact of

termination is quite large. However, when

, the im-

pact of termination is minimal. LDPC-CC performance curves

with termination are presented in Section VI.

which is commonly used for convolutional codes. Presetting is trivial and not often mentioned in the literature because it can be

V. DECODER ARCHITECTURE

easily done by setting the encoder to the all-zero state. Similarly, An LDPC-CC decoder is based on the same message-passing

convolutional encoders must be terminated properly at the end algorithm as an LDPC-BC decoder. However, the decoder archi-

of the frame. To terminate a conventional convolutional encoder, tecture is fundamentally different. In the original BP decoding

either a few tail bits are fed into the encoder, or tail-biting is used algorithm for LDPC-BCs, the decoding iterations are executed

[29]. For LDPC-CCs, to be used on frames of finite length, ter- one after another. For a given code block, the next iteration

mination is as necessary as presetting. We use tail bits (called the cannot begin until the current iteration is completed for all of

termination sequence) to terminate an LDPC-CC encoder. For the variable/check nodes. To accelerate the iterations, both hor-

a properly initialized and terminated frame, extending it in both izontal partitioning [15] and vertical partitioning [34] methods

directions with an infinite number of zeros would correspond have been proposed. In the latter case, shuffled iterative de-

to an infinitely long LDPC-CC codeword. We briefly discuss coding was used, where the BP algorithm takes a serial form

termination in this section because it is important in generating to make the check node updating partly utilize the information

finite length frames and decoding them iteratively.

obtained from other nodes in the same round of decoding.

Consider the encoder description in Section II. An LDPC-CC For LDPC-CCs, different decoding iterations can be executed

encoder is an FSM. In this case, a termination sequence is de- at the same time for different nodes. For example, if node

fined as a sequence of information bits that takes the encoder is undergoing iteration , an earlier node

can be

from any given state back to the all-zero state, which is de- undergoing decoding iteration , because these two nodes

fined as the state in which all information bits and parity do not participate in a common parity-check equation. It fol-

bits stored in memory are zero.

lows that LDPC-CCs can be decoded using a sliding window of

It has been shown in [30] that almost all

rate size

, where is the number of decoding iterations to

1/2 regular LDPC-CCs can be terminated with a tail length no be performed. The decoding window contains identical sec-

greater than

. Actually, all of the rate 1/2 LDPC-CCs tions, with each section consisting of

variable nodes

we simulated require a termination sequence of only

and

check nodes, and a separate processor can

information bits

. (The extra bits are needed because be assigned to each section. Fig. 3 shows a rate 1/2 LDPC-CC

sometimes the LDPC-CC cannot be terminated with exactly

decoder with processors. In the original decoding algorithm

bits. For the (2048,3,6) LDPC-CC, experiments show that is proposed in [6], each processor contains a few first-in first-out

less than

.) Generating the termination sequence from (FIFO) delay lines and a few VNUs and CNUs. Decoding statis-

any given encoder state requires a special termination circuit to tics (LLRs) are stored in these FIFOs and updated by the node

be added to the encoder in Fig. 1 (see [31], [32]). The implemen- units. The processors are identical and concatenated in series,

tation complexity of an LDPC-CC encoder with termination is forming a pipelined architecture (as shown in Fig. 3). In this

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:56:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BATES et al.: LOW-COST SERIAL DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

1971

2 Fig. 4. Design of a single memory-based processor for (3,6) regular LDPC-CC decoding. The gray area is clocked using the 3 clock. One CNU and two VNUs
are used for a single processor.

case, the message passing is localized and routing is only required inside one processor. For the same performance, a single LDPC-CC processor is much smaller than an LDPC-BC decoder [8]. It can be seen that in an LDPC-CC decoder, the iterative decoding process in the temporal dimension is “unwrapped” and mapped into processors in the spatial dimension.

TABLE II FPGA RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS OF AN ENTIRE (2048,3,6) LDPC-CC
W = 8 bits DECODER WITH A SINGLE PROCESSOR. THE WORD-LENGTH OF THE LLRS IS . THE FIGURES IN PARENTHESES REFER TO THE PERCENTAGE UTILIZATION OF RESOURCES ON THE TARGETED FPGA

A. Memory-Based Processor Design

The design of a single processor is considered first. The

FIFOs in a processor can be realized with registers [19]. realized with a single-port ROM plus a simple calculation cir-

However, this is not a good choice for FPGA devices be- cuit.

cause it requires too many logic elements. A more balanced Here a modified min-sum approximation for check node pro-

memory-based design is chosen instead because modern cessing in [35] is used. This approximation is an improvement

FPGAs carry on-chip RAMs [18]. The FIFOs in the processor over the min-sum approach and still has a simple hardware im-

are implemented as a circular buffer. The LLRs are stored and plementation, but it entails some loss compared to sum-product

tracked with pointers.

processing, as noted in Section VI-B on decoder performance.

For the rate 1/2 (3,6) regular LDPC-CC discussed in this Fig. 4 shows a diagram of the processor design. We note

paper, each variable node has four edges (one from the channel below a few features of the design.

LLR and three from check nodes) and requires four LLRs to • With a dual-port RAM, we can read and write LLRs in a

be saved in memory. To reduce the number of read and write

single clock cycle.

operations per memory unit, we split the circular buffer into • Each check node update may take up to two clock cy-

eight columnar memory banks. Half of them are for informa-

cles to simultaneously read/write the memory banks com-

tion-bit LLRs and half are for parity-bit LLRs. The height of

posing the circular buffer, and each variable node update

these RAMs should be at least

. The width of these RAMs

(including I/O) takes one clock cycle because the memory

is 8 b for each LLR. Using pointers, the oldest LLR in the buffer

banks are partitioned based on variable node edges. The

is read as the output, and the input LLR can be written into the

circular buffer is over-clocked to 3 the base clock fre-

buffer accordingly. Similarly, the VNUs and CNUs update the

quency [18] (see Table II) so that one round of message

LLRs at their proper addresses in the buffer. The calculation of

exchange between variable nodes and check nodes can be

these addresses is dependent on the parity-check matrix and is

completed within one base clock cycle. To synchronize the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:56:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1972

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 7, AUGUST 2008

Fig. 5. Decoder architecture implemented on an FPGA. This includes the LDPC-CC encoder, decoder, and noise generators. The decoder consists of a frame buffer, a single processor, a decoder controller, and a CRC evaluator.

data transfer between the over-clocked domain and the rest takes a single frame as its input and places it in a frame buffer.5

of the circuit, simple parallel-to-serial and serial-to-parallel The bit LLRs are then updated using the processor and the

conversion circuits are used.

outputs are returned to the frame buffer. After the last bit of

• The modulo

counter and the parity-check offset each frame is processed, the controller can either output the

calculation unit are used to generate the right addresses for data or send it through the processor again, depending on the

LLR updates in the memory banks.

result of a cyclic redundancy check (CRC). The frame buffer

• A simple FSM combined with a few multiplexers coordi- enables the looping of the frame LLRs for serial decoding,

nates the circular buffer operations.

but it also adds an extra memory cost, as will be discussed in

B. Serial Decoding Architecture

Section VI. In our design, we used the Ethernet frame format as the basis

With a single processor designed, it is easy to tile them as needed. To achieve a high throughput, many processors can be pipelined. However, in applications where throughput is not critical, this may not be the best choice because each additional processor consumes more resources. Moreover, for strong LDPC-CCs with large code memory, using many processors can be a very expensive solution.
Take the (2048,3,6) LDPC-CC as an example. For such a

for the finite length data. This is because Ethernet is one of the most prevalent frame formats in data communications. Since our frames are Ethernet-compliant, we use a 4-byte CRC after every loop through the processor. We can therefore determine if the frame has been decoded correctly and use this indicator as a stopping criterion. The frame will loop through the decoder as many times as necessary until it passes the CRC check or the maximum number of iterations is reached.

code, the decoder requires more iterations to converge than smaller codes, especially at low SNRs. If 100 iterations are C. Parallelization and Serialization of LDPC Decoding

required, then 100 processors would be needed to maximize

throughput. The required storage space for the LLRs in de-

coding is then

.

To avoid this expense and to achieve a low-cost design, we

propose a serial decoding architecture. A single processor is

used for the LDPC-CC decoder. Each encoded data frame

passes through this processor multiple times to be decoded.

The data frames are first encoded and terminated. A decoding

iteration is accomplished by using a controller that manages the

flow of frames through the processor (see Fig. 5). The controller

The proposed architecture in this paper indicates that LDPC-CC decoding can have a parallel or serial architecture. This may be easily confused with the often-mentioned parallelization of LDPC-BC decoding. However, they are different. Actually, LDPC-CCs reveal another dimension of parallelization in LDPC decoding.
5The frame buffer is a memory unit reserved for frame data storage and its size should be large enough to accommodate the maximum frame size. It is a
m separate memory unit from the circular buffer in the processor, whose size is
determined by .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:56:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BATES et al.: LOW-COST SERIAL DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

1973

) may not increase the throughput. This is reflected in the

throughput curves in Fig. 6, which exhibit plateaus when .

For instance, when

, the decoding processor array cost is

twice that of the serial decoder

, but the throughput gain

is less than a factor of two, especially at high SNRs.

The decoding latency of this LDPC-CC decoder architec-

ture is also dependent on and , because it is proportional

to the product of and the number of loops used. Therefore,

for two configurations with the same maximum number of iter-

ations , the maximum decoding latency is almost the same,

i.e., using a single processor will not increase the maximum

decoding latency. However, using a single processor decreases

the average decoding latency because

and the average

number of loops is much smaller than 100 at high SNRs, as will

be shown in Section VI-B. Finally, we note that there is a slight

latency penalty in the CRC check, which is negligible compared

to the decoding processor latency.

Fig. 6. Decoding throughput for different decoder configurations. The clock From the above discussion, we see that it is advantageous

frequency is 50 MHz and the frame size is 1280 bytes.

to use a single processor in the decoder for the (2048,3,6)

LDPC-CC. With

, a frame is processed only as many

times as needed to properly decode it, due to the intermediate

For LDPC-BCs, the node updates in the Tanner graph can CRC verification of frames. This improves both the decoding be done at the same time within the same iteration. Therefore, throughput and the average decoding latency at high SNRs LDPC-BC decoding can be parallelized in the node dimension. where most frames take only 2 to 3 iterations to decode. The

The fully parallel and partially parallel architectures mentioned single processor decoder is also very small in terms of area

in Section I are based on node parallelization.

and power consumption. Such a decoder can be integrated

For LDPC-CCs, it is also possible to parallelize decoding in with an Ethernet Media Access Control (MAC) to produce a the node dimension ([36], [37] for time-invariant codes and [38] very low-power data-link layer solution. At low SNRs, mulfor time-varying codes). In addition, the iterations can be per- tiprocessor designs have higher throughputs, but higher cost.

formed in parallel. This is another dimension of parallelization. Making the best choice in this tradeoff is application dependent

The decoding architecture proposed in this paper is serial in and also code dependent. The serial decoder design with a the iteration dimension. But performing iterations fully or par- single processor can be considered as a minimum cost special tially in parallel is also possible for LDPC-CC decoding, i.e., case of a more general partially parallel structure.

using more than one processor and less looping through each

processor.

VI. DECODER IMPLEMENTATION

To investigate this possibility, we approached the design in

such a way that the number of processors and the maximum A. Specifications

number of loops can be chosen as variables during synthesis.

This allows us to test many different configurations. We use

the naming scheme “

” to designate a design using an

LDPC-CC with code memory , processors, and a max-

imum of loops.6 Fig. 6 shows decoding throughputs using

one, two, three, five, and tenprocessor arrays. The cost of the

decoder (not including the frame buffer, the CRC evaluator, and

the looping logic) increases linearly with the number of pro-

cessors used. However, the throughput does not increase in the

same fashion. With

processors in the decoder, the actual

number of decoding iterations performed on a frame can only be

an integer multiple of . This causes some power inefficiency,

since decoding may not stop as early as possible. As the SNR

increases, fewer iterations are required to correctly decode the

frame. However, if there are

processors, a reduction in

the number of iterations (e.g., from to

, or from to

The single processor decoder was implemented for the (2048,3,6) LDPC-CC on an Altera Stratix EP1S80 FPGA. This is a mid-sized FPGA with on-chip RAM and dedicated arithmetic blocks. The architecture of the decoder is as described in Section V-B.
As can be seen from Table II, the decoder occupies only a few percent of the targeted FPGA resources. Therefore, it is expected that an ASIC implementation of the same design would occupy very little area and consume very small amounts of power. The processor memory consumption and the memory for the frame buffer are listed separately to provide a better picture of the cost of the decoder. Firstly, for a partially parallel decoder with processors, both the logic elements and the processor memory size increase linearly with , but the frame buffer size is independent of and depends only on the maximum frame length. In Table II, the frame buffer accounts for

6Here one “loop” means the coded frame going through the processor array
for one round, while “iteration” refers to the actual message passing decoding iteration. For a p-processor array, a maximum number of loops of n means the
= 1 maximum number of iterations is p 1 n. In the discussion of the serial decoder
with p , one loop equals one iteration, and the maximum number of iterations is n.

most of the memory consumption in the decoder because of the large maximum frame length. Secondly, the processor memory serves as an “internal” memory which must be continuously updated, while the frame buffer is a “global” memory used only for buffering.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:56:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1974

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 7, AUGUST 2008

Fig. 7. FER performance of the LDPC-CC decoder for a variety of frame sizes Fig. 8. Average number of processor iterations for a variety of frame sizes. and the BLER performance of several LDPC-BCs.

B. Decoder Performance

The decoder was tested using different frame sizes ranging

from 640 bytes (640B) to 8064 bytes (8064B). This allowed us

to compare the performance for small and large frame sizes. As

noted in Section V, the decoder looped the received data through

the single processor until either the CRC was evaluated correctly

or the maximum number of iterations was reached. For all frame

sizes the FER, the average number of iterations, and the average

throughput were measured.

In Fig. 7, the error correcting capabilities of the LDPC-CC

can be seen. As long as a certain threshold in

is ex-

ceeded, then small increases in signal power lead to large drops

in FER. When the frame size is small, the overhead of termi-

nation has a large impact, since the effective rate of the code is

much less than 1/2. At very large frame sizes such as 8064B,

this overhead is only around 0.1 dB.

Fig. 9. Average throughput for a variety of frame sizes.

The software simulated block error rate (BLER) performance

of three LDPC-BCs is also plotted. Our FPGA decoder outper-

forms the (1000,3,6) LDPC-BC for most frame sizes. For the 9-Mb/s information throughput. The average decoding latency

frame size of 8064B, the FER performance is about 0.1–0.2 is also significantly less at high SNRs for similar reasons. Note

dB worse than the BLER of the (10000,3,6) LDPC-BC, which that as the frame size is reduced, the potential throughput of the

is somewhat degraded compared with the simulated BER per- decoder is also decreased. This is due to the fact that the over-

formance shown in Fig. 2. Besides termination overhead, this head of termination is a fixed number of bits and hence begins

is mainly caused by the parity-check node approximation used to dominate at small frame sizes. For higher rate LDPC-CCs,

in hardware. Despite these factors, the (2048,3,6) LDPC-CC the throughput would be higher.

demonstrates a very steep waterfall region in the FER curves, and no error floor was observed as low as an FER of . Also C. Discussion

note that, in Fig. 7, the LDPC-BC performance curves are for LDPC-CCs explore a new design space for LDPC decoding

different codes with different block lengths and different de- and the proposed serial decoding architecture differs from pre-

coders, whereas the LDPC-CC curves are all for the same code vious designs in that both the iteration and node dimensions are

and the same decoder, but just with different frame sizes.

serial, targeting a low-cost implementation.

Fig. 8 shows that the average number of iterations through the As shown in Section III, the implemented (2048,3,6) regular

single processor in the decoder decreases as

increases. LDPC-CC outperforms regular (3,6) LDPC-BCs of length up

This has a direct impact on the throughput, since we can pro- to 100 000 b. Even with the termination overhead, the FER

ceed to the next frame in a much shorter time. Fig. 9 shows that performance obtained in Section VI-B with large frame sizes is

the maximum throughput occurs when the frame size is large still very good. Fully parallel LDPC-BC decoder implementa-

and the

is high. In this case, we can reach a maximum tions usually use codes of moderate block lengths (1000–3000

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:56:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BATES et al.: LOW-COST SERIAL DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

1975

b) [13], [16]. Implementation of rate 1/2 LDPC-BCs with

REFERENCES

large block lengths ( 10 000 b) appeared in [9] and [14], where information throughputs of about 50 Mb/s on FPGA devices were achieved. A more recent implementation [11] on an FPGA employed an irregular rate 1/2 LDPC-BC of block length 9036, whose BER performance is roughly the same as for the (2048,3,6) regular LDPC-CC. Using this as a comparison will give us a better picture of the cost of the serial LDPC-CC decoder architecture.
The LDPC-BC decoder in [11] was implemented on a Xilinx Virtex-II FPGA device. With the maximum number of iterations set to 60, the irregular 1/2 LDPC-BC achieved a maximum 15-Mb/s information throughput. About 34 000 slices and about 1.8 Mb of on-chip block RAM were used. Because it was a design accommodating three code rates (1/2, 5/8, and 7/8), the actual slice usage of the rate 1/2 code would be somewhat less. Also, because the RAM in [11] is used to store exchanged messages between nodes, the memory is heavily reused across the three code rates, whereas the rate 1/2 code has a larger number of nodes and messages to handle. In our serial LDPC-CC decoder design, the maximum throughput is relatively low: 9 Mb/s with the maximum number of iterations set to 100. However, only a few thousand logic elements are used and the total memory used including the frame buffer is only about 800 Kb. The significant savings in logic gates is due to the fact that the serial decoder only uses a single processor with 1 CNU, 2 VNUs, and some control logic. As for memory consumption, although 800 Kb is a savings compared with 1.8 Mb, the memory savings obtained by using a single processor in a serial decoder is mitigated by having to use a frame buffer. The processor memory itself only requires about 300 Kb. For an ASIC implementation of the serial decoder architecture proposed in this paper, the frame buffer cost can be significantly reduced, because it is not a time critical part of the decoding circuit (using a 1 clock frequency while the processor memory uses a 3 clock frequency) and only serves as a circular or FIFO buffer. For example, a DRAM can be used for the frame buffer to minimize area. In this way, the actual cost per bit for the frame buffer is much less than for the processor memory.
VII. CONCLUSION
We have proposed a memory-based serial decoder architecture for LDPC-CCs, which is suitable for LDPC-CCs with large code memory and for low-cost low-power designs. A (2048,3,6) LDPC-CC decoder was implemented on an Altera FPGA device. Only a small fraction of hardware resources were used. A maximum of 9-Mb/s decoding throughput was achieved with a frame length of 8064 bytes, and the results suggest that, to achieve optimum performance, small frames should be avoided whenever possible.
The FPGA results indicate that an ASIC implementation of such a serial decoder could yield a low-cost design with low power consumption, which is the subject of ongoing work. Future work also includes implementing high rate LDPC-CCs, irregular LDPC-CCs, and parallelizing node operations, all of which will lead to substantial improvements in throughput and/or performance.

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[4] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[5] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[6] A. Jiménez-Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[7] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[8] D. J. Costello, Jr., A. E. Pusane, S. Bates, and K. S. Zigangirov, “A comparison between LDPC block and convolutional codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Applications Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2006.
[9] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “A 54 MBPS (3,6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., San Diego, CA, Oct. 2002, pp. 127–132.
[10] P. Bhagawat, M. Uppal, and G. Choi, “FPGA based implementation of decoder for array low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., Mar. 2005, vol. 5, pp. 29–32.
[11] L. Yang, H. Liu, and C.-J. R. Shi, “Code construction and FPGA implementation of a low-error-floor multi-rate low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Fundam. Theory Appl., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 892–904, Apr. 2006.
[12] L. Sun, H. Song, Kumar, B. V. K. Vijaya, and Z. Keirn, “Field-programmable gate-array-based investigation of the error floor of low-density paritycheck codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 2983–2985, Oct. 2005.
[13] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[14] Y. Chen and D. Hocevar, “A FPGA and ASIC implementation of rate 1/2, 8088-b irregular low density parity check decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., San Francisco, CA, 2003, vol. 1, pp. 113–117.
[15] M. M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[16] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Multi-Gbit/sec low density parity check decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Kobe, Japan, May 2005, pp. 5194–5197.
[17] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.
[18] S. Bates and G. Block, “A memory-based architecture for low-density parity-check convolutional decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Kobe, Japan, May 2005, pp. 336–339.
[19] R. Swamy, S. Bates, and T. L. Brandon, “Architectures for ASIC implementations of low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Kobe, Japan, May 2005, pp. 4513–4516.
[20] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed–Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[21] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[22] A. E. Pusane, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello Jr., “Construction of irregular LDPC convolutional codes with fast encoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 2006, pp. 1160–1165.
[23] G. Richter, M. Kaupper, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Irregular low-density parity-check convolutional codes based on protographs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1633–1637.
[24] C. Schlegel and L. Perez, Trellis and Turbo Coding, 1st ed. New York: IEEE/Wiley, 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:56:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1976

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 7, AUGUST 2008

[25] A. Sridharan and D. J. Costello, Jr., “A new construction method for low density parity check convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Bangalore, India, Oct. 2002, p. 212.
[26] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[27] F. Dowla, Handbook of RF and Wireless Technologies, 1st ed. Boston, MA: Newnes, 2003.
[28] Z. Chen and S. Bates, “Construction of low-density parity-check convolutional codes through progressive edge-growth,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1058–1060, Dec. 2005.
[29] H. H. Ma and J. K. Wolf, “On tail biting convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-34, no. 2, pp. 104–111, Feb. 1986.
[30] A. Sridharan, “Design and analysis of LDPC convolutional codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., Univ. of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, May 2005.
[31] Z. Chen, S. Bates, and X. Dong, “Low-density parity-check convolutional codes applied to packet based communication systems,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., St. Louis, MO, 2005, vol. 3, pp. 1250–1254.
[32] Z. Chen, S. Bates, D. Elliott, and T. Brandon, “Efficient encoding and termination of low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., San Francisco, CA, 2006, pp. 1–5.
[33] S. Bates, D. G. Elliott, and R. Swamy, “Termination sequence generation circuits for low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 1909–1917, Sep. 2006.
[34] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[35] S. Howard, C. Schlegel, and V. Gaudet, “A degree-matched check node approximation for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 1131–1135.
[36] E. Matúsˇ, M. B. Tavares, M. Bimberg, and G. P. Fettweis, “Towards a Gbits/s programmable decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., New Orleans, LA, May 2007, pp. 1657–1660.
[37] M. Bimberg, M. B. Tavares, E. Matúsˇ, and G. P. Fettweis, “A high-throughput programmable decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Application-Specific Syst., Architectures and Processors (ASAP), Montreal, QC, Canada, Jul. 2007, pp. 239–246.
[38] Z. Chen, S. Bates, and W. Krzymien´, “High throughput parallel decoder design for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Circuits Syst. Commun., New Orleans, LA, May 2008, pp. 35–39.
Stephen Bates (S’94–M’03–SM’06) received the Ph.D. degree from Edinburgh University, Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1997.
He then joined Massana, an Irish Fabless Semiconductor company specializing in high-speed Ethernet transceiver design. In 2003, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, as an Assistant Professor. His research interests include circuits and systems for high-speed wireline communication protocols, circuits for advanced forward error correction schemes, and the use of reconfigurable logic to solve problems related to communications and bio-informatics.
Zhengang Chen (S’01) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering at the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
His research interests include error control coding, communication systems, digital application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) design, and pattern recognition. He is currently working on VLSI architectures for advanced channel coding schemes such as lowdensity parity-check codes.

Logan Gunthorpe received the B.Sc. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 2007.
He is currently performing embedded design with Deltatee Enterprises Ltd., Calgary, AB, Canada.
Mr. Gunthorpe is an Engineer in Training (EIT) in APPEGA.
Ali Emre Pusane (S’99) was born in Istanbul, Turkey, in 1978. He received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electronics and communications engineering from Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, in 1999 and 2002, respectively, and the M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering and applied mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, in 2004, 2006, and 2008, respectively.
His research interests include error control coding, coded modulation, and information theory.
Kamil Sh. Zigangirov (M’95–F’01) was born in the U.S.S.R. in 1938. He received the M.S. degree from the Moscow Institute for Physics and Technology, Moscow, U.S.S.R., in 1962 and the Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, Moscow, in 1966
From 1965 to 1991, he held various research positions with the Institute for Problems of Information Transmission, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, Moscow, first as a Junior Scientist and later as a Main Scientist. During this period, he visited several universities in the United States, Sweden, Italy, and Switzerland as a Guest Researcher. He organized several symposia on information theory in the U.S.S.R. In 1994, he received the Chair of Telecommunication Theory at Lund University, Lund, Sweden. In 2003 and 2004, he was a Visiting Professor with the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, and with the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. His scientific interests include information theory, coding theory, detection theory, and mathematical statistics. In addition to papers in these areas, he published a book on sequential decoding of convolutional codes (in Russian) in 1974. With R. Johannesson, he coauthored the textbook Fundamentals of Convolutional Coding (IEEE, 1999). He authored another book, Theory of CDMA Communication (IEEE, 2004).
Daniel J. Costello, Jr. (M’69–F’85) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, in 1969.
He then joined the Illinois Institute of Technology as an Assistant Professor. In 1985, he became a Professor with the University of Notre Dame and later served as Department Chair. In 1999, he received the Humboldt Research Prize from Germany, and in 2000 he was named Bettex Professor of Electrical Engineering at Notre Dame. His research interests are in error control coding and coded modulation. He has authored or coauthored more than 300 technical publications and has coauthored a textbook entitled Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications (Pearson Prentice–Hall, 2004, 2nd ed.). Dr. Costello has been a member of the Information Theory Society Board of Governors since 1983, and in 1986 he served as President. He also served as Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY and as Co-Chair of the ISIT’s in Kobe, Japan (1988), Ulm, Germany (1997), and Chicago, IL (2004). In 2000 he was selected by the IT Society as a recipient of a Third-Millennium Medal.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:56:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

