IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 8, AUGUST 2008

1835

Power Reduction Techniques for LDPC Decoders
Ahmad Darabiha, Student Member, IEEE, Anthony Chan Carusone, Member, IEEE, and Frank R. Kschischang, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—This paper investigates VLSI architectures for lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) decoders amenable to low- voltage and low-power operation. First, a highly-parallel decoder architecture with low routing overhead is described. Second, we propose an efficient method to detect early convergence of the iterative decoder and terminate the computations, thereby reducing dynamic power. We report on a bit-serial fully-parallel LDPC decoder fabricated in a 0.13- m CMOS process and show how the above techniques affect the power consumption. With early termination, the prototype is capable of decoding with 10.4 pJ/bit/iteration, while performing within 3 dB of the Shannon limit at a BER of 10 5 and with 3.3 Gb/s total throughput. If operated from a 0.6 V supply, the energy consumption can be further reduced to 2.7 pJ/bit/iteration while maintaining a total throughput of 648 Mb/s, due to the highly-parallel architecture. To demonstrate the applicability of the proposed architecture for longer codes, we also report on a bit-serial fully-parallel decoder for the (2048, 1723) LDPC code in 10GBase-T standard synthesized with a 90-nm CMOS library.
Index Terms—10 Gigabit Ethernet, channel coding, iterative message passing, low-density parity-check codes, very-large-scale integration.
I. INTRODUCTION
L DPC codes [1] have been adopted for several new digital communication standards due to their excellent error correction performance, freedom from patent protection, and inherently-parallel decoding algorithm [2]–[4]. Most of the research on LDPC decoder design so far has focused on code designs, decoding algorithms, and decoder architectures that improve decoder throughput. Fewer papers have discussed low-power architectures for LDPC decoders. Analog decoders have been proposed for low-power decoding of LDPC [5] and Turbo codes [6]. However, analog decoders have only been demonstrated on codes with block lengths less than 250 bits. Scaling analog decoders to longer block lengths will be complicated by device mismatches and the need to store and buffer hundreds of analog inputs to the decoder. The performance of such short block-length codes is insufficient for the targeted applications, and the throughput of analog decoders is limited to less than 50 Mb/s. In nanoscale CMOS processes, digital LDPC decoders appear to be the best solution for future communication applications that demand performance near the limits of channel capacity.
Manuscript received December 21, 2007; revised February 24, 2008. Published July 23, 2008 (projected). This work was supported by Gennum Corporation, Canada.
The authors are with The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G4, Canada (e-mail: ahmadd@eecg.utoronto.ca; tcc@eecg.utoronto.ca; frank@comm.utoronto.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2008.925402

Fig. 1. LDPC code Tanner graph.

In this paper, we discuss techniques for low-power digital LDPC decoders. In Section II, a highly-parallel decoder architecture with low routing overhead is described. The parallelism permits operation from a low supply voltage, thereby providing low-power consumption. In Section III, we investigate an early termination scheme to reduce power consumption by stopping the decoding iterations as soon as a valid codeword is detected. Section IV-A reports results from a prototype bit-serial fullyparallel LDPC decoder fabricated in a 0.13- m CMOS process.

II. LOW-POWER PARALLEL DECODERS

A. Background

LDPC codes are a subclass of linear error control codes and

can be described as the null space of a sparse {0,1}–valued

parity-check matrix, . They can also be described by a

bipartite graph, or Tanner graph, in which check nodes

represent the rows of and variable nodes

represent the columns. An edge connects the

check node to the variable node if and only if

is

nonzero. A code is called ( , )-regular if every column and

every row of has and ones, respectively. As an ex-

ample, Fig. 1 shows the Tanner graph for a (3, 6)-regular LDPC

code with

variable nodes and

check nodes.

Min-sum decoding [7] is a type of iterative message-passing

decoding that is commonly used in LDPC decoders due to its

simplicity and good BER performance. Each decoding itera-

tion consists of updating and transferring extrinsic messages be-

tween neighboring variable and check nodes. A message is a

belief about the value of corresponding received bit and is ex-

pressed in the form of log-likelihood ratio (LLR). At the be-

ginning of min-sum decoding, the variable nodes pass the LLR

value of the received symbols (i.e., the intrinsic message) to all

the neighboring check nodes. Then each iteration consists of

check update phase followed by variable update phase. During

the check update phase the outgoing message on each edge of

the check node is calculated as a function of the incoming mes-

sages from all the other edges: the magnitude of the output is

the minimum of the input magnitudes and the sign is the parity

0018-9200/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1836

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 8, AUGUST 2008

Fig. 2. Partially-parallel LDPC decoder.

of the signs of the inputs. During the variable update phase the Fig. 3. Increased parallelism allows reduced supply voltage.

outgoing message on each edge of a variable node is calculated

as the sum of all the incoming messages from all other edges

plus the intrinsic message from the channel.

number of VNUs and CNUs equal the total number of variable

A generic LDPC decoder architecture is shown in Fig. 2. It and check node computations required in each iteration. Further

comprises shared variable node update units (VNUs),

increases in or are not straightforwardly possible since

shared check node update units (CNUs), and a shared memory the required input messages are not available in memory. As

fabric used to communicate messages between the VNUs and shown in Fig. 3, unless the targeted throughput is low the supply

CNUs. Inputs to each CNU are the outputs of VNUs fetched voltage will remain significantly higher than the MOS threshold

from memory. After performing some computation (e.g., MIN voltage. Although subthreshold circuits have been shown to be

operation for the magnitude and parity calculation for the signs energy efficient, they are mostly suitable for low-to-mid perfor-

in min-sum decoding), the CNU’s outputs are written back into mance systems [9] with relaxed constraints on throughput. Since

the extrinsic memory. Similarly, inputs to each VNU arrive from many present and future applications of LDPC codes target a

the channel and several CNUs via memory. After performing multi-gigabit-per-second throughput, our analysis will proceed

the message update (e.g., SUM operation in min-sum decoding), assuming a square-law MOS model.

the VNU’s outputs are written back into the extrinsic memory To quantify the power reduction that can be offered by highly-

for use by the CNUs in the next decoding iteration. Decoding parallel LDPC decoding architectures, let us compare two de-

proceeds with all CNUs and VNUs alternately performing their coders: a reference design with VNUs and CNUs; and

computations for a fixed number of iterations, after which the a design with increased parallelism having (

) VNUs and

decoded bits are obtained from one final computation performed (

) CNUs,

. The dynamic power consumption of

by the VNUs.

these decoders, operated at a clock frequency from a supply

By increasing the number of VNUs and CNUs, and , voltage is

, where is the effective capacitance

the decoder performs more computations in parallel. When the of each decoder including an activity factor.

decoder is operated from a fixed supply voltage, such increased The total effective capacitance consists of two parts.

parallelism may be used to achieve higher throughput, with at- First, the effective capacitance due to the computational and

tendant increases in power and area. However, it is well known control logic inside the CNUs and VNUs, . Second, the effec-

that increased parallelism can also permit a digital system to op- tive capacitance due to the memory and storage elements, .

erate from a lower supply voltage with constant throughput re- By increasing the parallelism by , also scales with

sulting in greatly decreased power consumption [8]. In general, because the number of VNUs and CNUs instantiated in hard-

the power advantages offered by parallelism are mitigated by ware is increased by the same factor. The number of required

the overhead associated with multiplexing and demultiplexing storage elements on the other hand is a function of the number

the system’s inputs and outputs amongst several parallel com- of edges in the code graph and is independent of the parallelism

puting units. However, in the case of an LDPC decoder, all of the factor. However, since there are times more processing units

signals required for each iteration are already available in par- in the new decoder, the average number of total memory ac-

allel in the extrinsic memory (Fig. 2). The inherent parallelism cesses per clock cycle scales with . As a result the memory

of LDPC iterative decoding with long block lengths is, there- capacitance activity factor, and hence , also scale with .

fore, well suited to implementation with a low supply voltage. Therefore, the effective capacitance of the parallel design is

Until now, this property has not been fully exploited to design a

.

low-voltage, low-power LDPC decoder.

The parallel decoder can operate at a clock frequency that

B. Analysis

is times lower than the reference design clock frequency, ,

while maintaining the same throughput:

. Since we

The reduced supply voltage obtainable using increased par- are striving for low-power operation, each decoder operates

allelism is described qualitatively in Fig. 3. There is a prac- from the lowest supply voltage that will support its targeted

tical limit to the decoder’s parallelism power savings when the clock frequency. Hence, the parallel design can be operated

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DARABIHA et al.: POWER REDUCTION TECHNIQUES FOR LDPC DECODERS

1837

Fig. 5. Fully-parallel iterative LDPC decoder architecture.

Fig. 4. Power reduction as a result of a parallel architecture.

from a lower supply voltage ( ) than the reference design ( ). Following an analysis similar to [10], we have
, where

(1)

and

. Therefore, the power savings offered by the

parallel design is

(2)

Fig. 4 shows the normalized supply voltage, , required for

different values of to maintain a constant throughput based on

(1) for a typical 0.13- m CMOS process where

V and

V. It also shows the normalized power, , for the

same range of based on (2).

The preceding analysis makes two assumptions that have not

yet been discussed:

a) Power consumption is dominated by dynamic power

dissipation. Our measurements for the decoder presented

in this work suggest that leakage power constitutes less

than 1% of the total power dissipation when operating at

the maximum clock frequency and with typical supply

voltage values. This is also consistent with the power

measurements reported in [11].

b) The overhead associated with the increased parallelism is

negligible. If, for example, interconnect limits the critical

path delay or dominates the power consumption of the

design, the benefits of increased parallelism will be less

than predicted above. Hence, the focus of Section II-C is

to minimize the overhead associated with highly-parallel

decoders.

C. Fully-Parallel Decoder With Bit-Serial Message Passing
Following the power efficiency discussion above, we have adopted a fully-parallel architecture where a separate VNU or

CNU is designated for each variable node or check node in

the code Tanner graph. Another advantage of fully-parallel de-

coder architecture is that unlike most partially-parallel decoders

that are based on a particular code construction (such as the

(3, k)-regular construction in [12], the Architecture-Aware code

construction in [13], or the irregular and quasi-cyclic codes con-

structed in [14] and [15]), the fully-parallel architecture can be

applied to irregular codes with no constraint on the code struc-

ture. This is done simply by instantiating VNUs and CNUs of

the desired degree and connecting them based on the code graph.

The only consideration is that the timing performance of the de-

coder for irregular codes will be typically limited by a critical

path through the nodes with highest degree.

The fully-parallel decoder architecture implies that changing

the underlying LDPC code in general requires resynthesizing

the decoder based on the new parity check matrix. Although this

is acceptable for applications such as 10GBase-T which specify

only one fixed code in the standard, other applications such as

WiMAX need to be able to decode multiple LDPC codes with

different lengths and rates. One possible solution is to imple-

ment the fully-parallel decoder for a Tanner graph that contains

all the individual codes as its subgraphs. In such a decoder,

different nodes and edges need to be activated or deactivated

depending on the specific code. This approach is particularly

applicable to cases such as the WiMAX standard in which all

the codes are punctured and/or shortened versions of one single

rate-1/2 2304-bit code [3]. As a result, a fully-parallel LDPC

decoder compliant with the WiMAX standard can be realized

by implementing this code and adding the control logic to dis-

able some VNUs, CNUs and edges depending on the target

subcodes.

Fig. 5 shows the high-level architecture of the 0.13- m

CMOS bit-serial LDPC decoder implemented in this work.

The decoder is based on a (4, 15)-regular LDPC code with

variable nodes and

check nodes. This code

was constructed using a progressive edge-growth algorithm

[16] that minimizes the number of short cycles in the code’s

Tanner graph. It can be seen that the extrinsic memory block

of Fig. 2 is replaced with the interconnections. This is because

in a fully-parallel architecture each extrinsic message is only

written by one VNU or CNU, so the extrinsic memory can

now be distributed amongst VNUs and CNUs and no address

generation is needed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1838

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 8, AUGUST 2008

Fig. 6. CNU schematic for approximate min-sum decoding.

The major challenge in implementing highly-parallel de-

coders [11] is the large area and the overhead effects such as

the routing complexity that are not modeled in the discussion

in Section II-B. To reduce the effect of routing complexity, we

have used a bit-serial message-passing scheme in this work

where multi-bit messages are communicated between the nodes

over multiple clock cycles [17]. In addition to reducing the

routing complexity, the bit-serial message-passing requires less

logic to perform min-sum LDPC decoding because both the

MIN and SUM operations are inherently bit-serial. As a result,

bit-serial VNUs and CNUs can be efficiently implemented to

generate only partial 1-bit extrinsic messages every clock cycle.

Although bit-serial message-passing reduces the amount of

global wiring, the routing complexity will eventually limit the

maximum length of the LDPC codes that can be implemented in

a bit-serial fully-parallel decoder. However, the important point

is that the bit-serial scheme pushes the practical code length

limit to higher values, making it feasible to implement fully-

parallel decoders for emerging high-speed standards such as

10GBase-T or Mobile WiMAX which specify code lengths of

2048 and 2304, respectively. The decoder in this work performs an approximate min-sum Fig. 7. Timing diagram for block-interlaced bit-serial decoding.

decoding algorithm that reduces the area of the CNUs by more

than 40% compared with conventional min-sum decoding with CNUs. Converting between LSB-first and MSB-first bit-serial

only a 0.1 dB performance penalty at BER

[17]. Fig. 6 communication requires additional registers to store the mes-

shows the CNU schematic where the inputs and outputs are sages. However, these registers are already present in the CNUs

communicated bit-serially in sign-magnitude MSB-first format. and VNUs for the block interleaving as explained below. The

The top section of the schematic is for calculating the output design has a core utilization of 72%, compared with 50% in

magnitudes as in [17] and the lower block in the figure calculates the fully-parallel LDPC decoder reported in [11] that does not

the output sign using an XOR-tree. The VNU logic in min-sum employ bit-serial message passing. The high utilization implies

decoding must take the sum of all its inputs. Unlike the CNUs, that there is little routing overhead associated with the decoder’s

the SUM operations in the VNUs are more efficiently performed parallelism.

for inputs in LSB-first 2’s complement format. So, the message The timing diagram of the decoder is shown in Fig. 7. In this

formats are converted accordingly at the output of VNUs and decoder, 4-bit quantized LLR messages are transferred between

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DARABIHA et al.: POWER REDUCTION TECHNIQUES FOR LDPC DECODERS

1839

VNUs and CNUs bit-serially in four clock cycles. As a result, each decoding iteration takes four clock cycles in the check node and four cycles in the variable node. After every four cycles, the variable and check nodes swap messages, allowing two different frames to be simultaneously decoded in an interleaved fashion.
Section IV-A will report the measured timing and power performance of the implemented decoder. It will show how voltage scaling can be used to trade high throughput for low-power decoding. Even without the techniques described in the next section, voltage scaling results in an energy efficiency of 7.4 pJ/bit/ iter at 648 Mb/s throughput which is lower than the best previously-reported digital and analog iterative decoders [11], [5].

III. LDPC DECODING WITH EARLY TERMINATION

A. Background

LDPC decoders generally correct most bit errors within the

first few decoding iterations. Subsequent iterations provide diminishing incremental improvements in decoder performance. The number of iterations performed by the decoder, , is usu-

Fig. 8. BER versus maximum number of iterations under 4-bit quantized min-sum decoding: (a) Reed-Solomon based (6, 32)-regular 2048-bit code and (b) PEG (4, 15)-regular 660-bit code.

ally determined a priori and hard-coded based on worst-case

simulations. Therefore, the decoder performs iterations even

though it will usually converge to its final output much sooner.

We propose a decoder architecture that automatically detects

when it has converged to its final output and shuts off all VNUs

and CNUs for the remainder of each frame to save power.

Earlier work in this area has focused on identifying particular

bits within each frame that appear likely to have converged [18],

[19]. They have suggested that one can stop updating extrinsic

messages for those reliable bits while other unreliable bits are

still being decoded. The resulting power savings depends on the

specific criteria used to identify the reliable bits. Unfortunately,

these bits are sometimes incorrectly identified, so the decoder’s

performance suffers. In [20], an additional post-processing de-

coder is introduced to mitigate this performance degradation.

Naturally, there is overhead associated with identifying the re-

liable bits and with the post-processing decoder. The overhead

reduces the potential power savings of this approach.

In this work, instead of trying to identify individual bits that appear to have converged early, we monitor the entire frame to determine when the decoder has converged to a valid codeword.

Fig. 9. The fraction of uncorrected frames versus iteration number for (a) a Reed–Solomon based (6, 32)-regular 2048-bit code, and (b) a PEG (4, 15)-regular 660-bit code.

We then deactivate the entire decoder for the remaining itera-

tions to save power. The remainder of this section describes a standard [2], while the code in Fig. 8(b) is the same code

hardware-efficient implementation of this technique with signif- employed in the hardware prototype described in Section II.

icant power savings and no performance degradation.

Each code is simulated with different number of iterations, .

B. Early Termination

These simulations indicate that little performance improvement is observed for either code as the number of iterations is in-

Although EXIT charts can be used to determine the average creased from

to

. Therefore, no more than

number of iterations required for convergence of an LDPC de-

iterations are required for either code.

coder operating on very long block lengths [21], for practical The convergence behavior of the same two codes is shown in

block lengths of 1000 to 10,000 bits the estimates so obtained Fig. 9 which plots the average fraction of uncorrected frames

are inaccurate. Instead, we have used extensive simulations to versus the iteration number. These two figures show that the

investigate the convergence behavior of two practical LDPC vast majority of frames are correctly decoded in the first few

codes.

iterations. For example, for the code in Fig. 9(a), at an

Fig. 8 shows the BER versus input SNR for two different of 5.1 dB more than 99.99% of all frames have been successfully

LDPC codes under 4-bit-quantized min-sum decoding. The decoded during the first five iterations.

code in Fig. 8(a) is the Reed–Solomon based (6, 32)-regular Fig. 10 plots the ratio of the average number of required it-

2048-bit LDPC code as specified for the 10 Gigabit Ethernet erations to , , versus input SNR for the same two codes as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1840

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 8, AUGUST 2008

10 frames both without and with early termination at

ranging from 4 dB to 5.1 dB. The simulations show identical

performance between the two approaches for these codes.

For the two codes discussed in this paper, our method on

average needs one extra iteration to terminate compared with

the conventional syndrome checking method. This difference

reduces the amount of power savings achieved compared to the

conventional syndrome checking. For example, in the 660-bit

decoder presented in Section II-C, conventional syndrome

checking could have improved the percentage of power savings

from 49% to 51% for low-SNR inputs (

dB) and

from 66% to 72% for high-SNR inputs (

dB).

In spite of the reduced power savings, we have adopted this

new termination method for two reasons. First, in contrast to

conventional early termination our termination method does

not increase the number of VNU-to-CNU wires, nor does it

require extra clock cycles per iteration to distribute the hard

Fig. 10. Ratio of active iterations of (a) a Reed–Solomon based (6, 32)-regular 2048-bit code, and (b) a PEG (4, 15)-regular 660-bit code.

decision results to the CNUs. Second, this approach requires minimal hardware overhead since most of the calculations are already part of the normal VNU and CNU operations.

Fig. 11 shows the block diagram of a decoder with early ter-

in Fig. 9. The figure shows the graphs for

4, 8, 12 and

16. For example, based on Fig. 10(b), for the code implemented

in this work with

15, on average less than three itera-

tions are needed per frame at SNR 4.3 dB (corresponding

to BER 10 ). As will be shown in the results section, by

exploiting this behavior and turning off the decoder in the re-

maining unneeded iterations, the total dynamic power is reduced

by 65%.

C. Hardware Implementation

mination logic. It is similar to the one in Fig. 5 with a few added blocks: First, all the parity results are ORed. The output of the OR tree is zero only when all the parities are satisfied. Second, a termination logic block generates the proper disable/enable signals for the VNUs and CNUs depending on the value of the OR tree output. If the output of the OR tree is zero, it keeps the VNUs and CNUs disabled for the remaining iterations. Fig. 12 shows the timing diagrams of the decoder, with and without early termination. It shows that the decoding throughput is the same in both cases since the start time for decoding the frames is

The remaining task is to efficiently implement early termination in hardware. In other words, to detect that the decoder has converged to a correct codeword. A standard approach is to make final decisions in each VNU at the end of each iteration and then check if all parity constraints are satisfied. This is referred to as syndrome checking and one form of it is implemented in [22] for a decoder with a layered mode belief propagation algorithm. Although straightforward, the conventional syndrome checking has a considerable hardware cost in fullyparallel decoders. This is because in every iteration the hard

identical. However, the power consumption is reduced in Fig. 12 because the decoder is turned off as soon as a correct codeword is detected.
The synthesis results show that the added OR tree and the enable/disable functionality required in CNUs and VNUs adds only less than 0.1% and 0.5% to the total decoder gate count, respectively. It should also be noted that no additional logic is required inside the CNUs to generate the XOR-out signals as this value is already available from the sign-calculation block inside the CNUs (Fig. 6).

decision results must be distributed from variable nodes to the destination check nodes where syndrome checking can be per-

IV. RESULTS

formed. This distribution can be done either by dedicating extra hard wires from VNUs to the neighboring CNUs, or by sharing A. A (660, 484) LDPC Decoder

the same wires used for transferring extrinsic messages in a bit- Fig. 13 shows the die photo of the fabricated (660, 484)

serial time multiplexed fashion. But neither of these approaches LDPC decoder. The decoder performs 15 decoding iterations

are efficient because they either increase the routing complexity per frame as it was shown in Fig. 8(b) that performing more than

by adding global wires or decrease decoding throughput by in- 12 iterations results in a negligible BER enhancement. It oc-

creasing the number of clock cycles per iteration.

cupies 7.3 mm core area and operates at maximum frequency

Alternatively, in this work we check the parity of the sign bit of 300 MHz with a 1.2 V core supply voltage, which results

of the normal variable-to-check messages that are already re- in a 3.3 Gb/s total throughput. Since the code rate is 0.74, this

quired by the decoding iterations. If the parity of the sign bit of corresponds to an information throughput of 2.44 Gb/s. The

all these messages are satisfied, we compute the final hard deci- measured BER performance of the decoder matches bit-true

sion at the beginning of next iteration and then turn off the VNUs simulations. The BER curve is practically identical to the BER

and CNUs for the remaining iterations. Although not mathemat- graph in Fig. 8(b) for

.

ically equivalent to the standard syndrome checking, we have The total decoder power consumption is shown in Fig. 14

simulated the two LDPC codes of Fig. 8 with the same set of as a function of input SNR at 300 MHz with 1.2 V supply

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DARABIHA et al.: POWER REDUCTION TECHNIQUES FOR LDPC DECODERS

1841

Fig. 11. Fully-parallel iterative LDPC decoder with early termination functionality.

Fig. 12. Block-interlaced decoding timing diagram (a) without early termination, and (b) with early termination.

Fig. 13. Decoder die photo.

prototype, we have calculated the data points on the dotted

voltage. The solid line in this graph is directly obtained from line from the data points on the solid line using

measurements. It was observed that approximately 20% of the

total power dissipation is due to the clock tree. It was also ob-

served that only less than 1.4 mW (i.e., 0.1% of the total power

consumption) is due to leakage current. The graph in Fig. 14

also shows that in contrast to the fully-parallel LDPC decoder where accounts for the overhead of the early termination logic,

in [11], the power consumption is relatively flat for the SNR is the fraction of dynamic power attributable to the clock tree,

values of interest in this work. This is mostly because of the and is the ratio of active iterations similar to the values plotted

bit-serial message-passing and the block interleaving architec- in Fig. 10(b). This expression accounts for the fact that early ter-

ture which tend to maintain high switching activity independent mination does not decrease the dynamic power in the clock tree.

of the input SNR.

As explained in Section III, for the reported decoder is esti-

The power consumption resulting from early termination as mated to be less than 0.006. As also mentioned, our measure-

proposed in this work is shown by the dotted line in Fig. 14. ments show that is approximately 0.2. The figure shows that

Since early termination logic was not included in the fabricated early termination reduces the power consumption by between

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1842

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 8, AUGUST 2008

Fig. 14. Decoder power consumption versus input SNR.

Fig. 16. Comparison with other works. The effect of early shut-down and supply voltage scaling on power consumption is illustrated.
TABLE I CHARACTERISTICS SUMMARY AND MEASURED RESULTS

Fig. 15. Effect of supply voltage scaling on maximum frequency and power consumption.

58% and 66% in the practical SNR range of interest between

dB and

dB.

Fig. 15 shows the effect of supply-voltage scaling on the mea-

sured maximum frequency and the total power dissipation at that

frequency. The dotted lines are the predicted values based on the

MOS square-law equation with

V. It can be seen that

the measured results closely follow the predicted results both

for maximum frequency and for the power consumption.

number of iterations per frame. For the bit-serial decoder pre-

Table I summarizes the characteristics of the fabricated de- sented in this paper, the iteration number of

is used

coder. In Table II, the results from other LDPC decoders re- when calculating the energy efficiency in all cases (please refer

ported in literature are listed. The decoder architecture in [11] is to Fig. 12).

fully parallel, whereas the decoders in [23] and [24] are partially For comparison purposes, we have also included scaled

parallel. The power and throughput performance comparison values for area, throughput and energy efficiency in Table II

between these works is shown in Fig. 16. To take into account and Fig. 16. The area entries in the brackets in Table II are

the varying number of iterations per frame and the different scaled down quadratically to a 0.13- m CMOS process and

code rates in the different decoders, the throughputs on the ver- also scaled linearly to a block length of 660 bits. The through-

tical axis are the information throughput normalized to

puts and energy efficiencies are scaled linearly and cubically

iterations per frame, which is the value used in our decoder. to 0.13- m CMOS process, respectively ([25, Ch. 16]). The

The horizontal axis is the energy efficiency of the decoders in pJ comparison graph confirms that fully-parallel decoders provide

per bit per iteration. These values are obtained by dividing the better energy efficiency and decoding throughput compared to

decoder power consumption by total decoder throughput and the memory-based partially-parallel decoders.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DARABIHA et al.: POWER REDUCTION TECHNIQUES FOR LDPC DECODERS
TABLE II COMPARISON WITH OTHER WORKS

1843

Fig. 17. Comparison with other works with decoder area also reflected on the vertical axis.

The high energy efficiency in [11] can be attributed to its high costly in practice. The bit-serial fully-parallel scheme demon-

level of parallelism as predicted in this paper. It can also be ex- strated in this work combined with the early termination scheme

plained with the fact that even though the decoder performs 64 reduces routing complexity and area while maintaining the

iterations on each block, the vast majority of blocks converge throughput and energy efficiency advantages of fully-parallel

in the first few iterations, resulting in minimal switching ac- decoders. Compared to conventional fully-parallel decoders,

tivity for the remaining iterations. This is in contrast with the the logic area is reduced in bit-serial fully-parallel decoders

bit-serial block-interlaced decoder presented in our work where because only 1-bit partial results are generated in each clock

the switching activity does not scale down with decoder con- cycle. In addition, the reduced routing congestion allows for

vergence unless an early termination method is applied. Finally, higher area utilization. This can be observed from the 52.5 mm

the average variable node degree in [11] is 3.25 compared to the total area (18.1 mm , if scaled for process and code length) with

average degree of 4 in our decoder. For two decoders with the about 50% area utilization in [11] compared to the 9 mm total

same code length and the same code rate, the decoder with lower area with 72% area utilization in our design. This comparison

average node degree computes less messages in each iteration, is demonstrated in Fig. 17, which is similar to Fig. 16 except

and hence, consumes less power.

for the vertical axis which is normalized with respect to the

One important dimension which is missing from Fig. 16 is decoder area.

the decoder total silicon area and its routing complexity. For With the power reduction achievable by early termination,

example, although the fully-parallel decoder in [11] has good the decoder consumes only 10.4 pJ/bit/iteration from 1.2 V

power and throughput performance, its large area makes it very supply voltage and has a total throughput of 3.3 Gb/s. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1844

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 8, AUGUST 2008

projected lines in the graph show that even further power reductions are achievable if supply voltage scaling is combined with early termination. A minimum of 2.7 pJ/bit/iteration is predicted with a 0.6 V supply voltage operating at 59 MHz and providing 648 Mb/s total throughput. These energy efficiency results even compare favorably with analog decoders which are aimed for energy efficiency. For example, the analog LDPC decoder reported in [5] consumes 0.83 nJ/bit (compared to less than 0.43 nJ/bit in this work) with and has a throughput of only 6 Mb/s.

we also reported on a synthesized decoder for (6, 32)-regular (2048, 1723) LDPC code specified in 10GBase-T standard.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank the editors and reviewers of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VLSI SYSTEMS for their valuable comments in the initial stages of this submission.
REFERENCES

B. A (2048,1723) LDPC Decoder

To demonstrate usability of the proposed bit-serial archi-

tecture for longer codes, we have synthesized a bit-serial

fully-parallel decoder for the (6,32)-regular (2048, 1723)

LDPC code as featured in the 10GBase-T standard. The de-

coder uses

bit quantization for LLR messages and

performs

iterations per frame.

The decoder is synthesized in a 90 nm CMOS library using

Synopsys Design Compiler. It occupies 9.8 mm of logic area

(2.23 M equivalent NAND gates) and has a maximum oper-

ating clock frequency of 250 MHz. This corresponds to a total

decoding throughput of 16 Gb/s which is significantly higher

than that required by the 10GBase-T standard. This throughput

margin can be traded for significantly lower power dissipation

by reducing the supply voltage and/or for better BER perfor-

mance by increasing the word length of the LLR messages.

V. CONCLUSION

We have discussed two techniques to improve the power-effi-

ciency of LDPC decoders. First, we analyzed how the increased

parallelism coupled with a reduced supply voltage is a partic-

ularly effective technique to reduce the power consumption of

LDPC decoders due to their inherent parallelism. Second, we

proposed a scheme to efficiently implement early termination of

the iterative decoding to further reduce the power consumption.

In spite of their superior speed and energy efficiency, it is known

that their large area and complex interconnect network limit the

scalability of conventional fully-parallel LDPC decoders [11].

The bit-serial fully-parallel architecture proposed in this work

addresses these concerns by reducing both interconnect com-

plexity and logic area. Although the needs of applications spec-

ifying long block-length and low-throughput LDPC codes (such

as DVB-S2 [4]) can be met with lower levels of parallelism

(e.g., [24], [26], [23], [22]), a fully parallel decoder is preferable

for applications such as 10GBase-T which use a medium-size

LDPC code (e.g., 2048 bit) and require multi-Gb/s decoding

throughput. We reported on a fabricated 0.13- m CMOS bit-se-

rial fully-parallel LDPC decoder and show the effect of the

proposed techniques. The decoder has a 3.3 Gb/s throughput

with a nominal 1.2 V supply and performs within 3 dB of the

Shannon limit at a BER of 10 . With more than 60% power

saving achieved by early termination, the decoder consumes

10.4 pJ/bit/iteration at

dB. Coupling early termi-

nation with supply voltage scaling results in even lower con-

sumption of 2.7 pJ/bit/iteration with 648 Mb/s total decoding

throughput. Using a similar bit-serial fully-parallel architecture,

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] LAN/MAN CSMA/CD Access Method, IEEE 802.3 Standard [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/802.3.html
[3] Mobile WirelessMAN, IEEE 802.16e Standard, 2005 [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.16e-2005.pdf
[4] Draft, European Telecommunication Standards Inst., EN 302 307 V1.1.1, 2004–2006.
[5] S. Hemati, A. H. Banihashemi, and C. Plett, “A 0.18-m CMOS analog
min-sum iterative decoder for a (32,8) low-density parity-check (LDPC) code,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2531–2540, Nov. 2006.
[6] V. C. Gaudet and P. G. Gulak, “A 13.3-Mb/s 0.35-m CMOS analog
turbo decoder IC with a configurable interleaver,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 2010–2015, Nov. 2003. [7] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linkoping Univ., Linkoping, Sweden, 1996. [8] A. P. Chandrakasan, S. Sheng, and R. W. Brodersen, “Low-power CMOS digital design,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 473–484, Apr. 1992. [9] B. H. Calhoun, A. Wang, and A. Chandrakasan, “Modeling and sizing for minimum energy operation in subthreshold circuits,” IEEE J. SolidState Circuits, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 1778–1786, Sep. 2005. [10] S.-J. Lee, N. R. Shanbhag, and A. C. Singer, “A low-power VLSI architecture for turbo decoding,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Low Power Electronics and Design (ISLPED’03), Aug. 2003, pp. 366–371. [11] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002. [12] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “Joint (3, k)-regular LDPC code and decoder/encoder design,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1065–1079, Apr. 2004. [13] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003. [14] D. E. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC’03), May 2003, vol. 4, pp. 2708–2712. [15] D. E. Hocevar, “Efficient encoding for a family of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf. (GlobeCom’03), Dec. 2003, vol. 7, pp. 3996–4000. [16] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005. [17] A. Darabiha, A. Chan Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A bit-serial approximate min-sum LDPC decoder and FPGA implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS’06), Kos, Greece, May 2006, pp. 149–152. [18] E. Zimmermann, G. Fettweis, P. Pattisapu, and P. K. Bora, “Reduced complexity LDPC decoding using forced convergence,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC’04), Padova, Italy, Sep. 2004, vol. 3, pp. 243–246, WA2-2. [19] L. W. A. Blad and O. Gustafsson, “An early decision decoding algorithm for LDPC codes using dynamic thresholds,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Circuit Theory and Design, Aug. 2005, pp. III/285–III/288. [20] E. Zimmermann, P. Pattisapu, and G. Fettweis, “Bit-flipping post-processing for forced convergence decoding of LDPC codes,” presented at the Eur. Signal Processing Conf., Antalya, Turkey, 2005. [21] S. ten Brink, “Convergence of iterative decoding,” Electron. Lett., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 806–808, May 1999. [22] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DARABIHA et al.: POWER REDUCTION TECHNIQUES FOR LDPC DECODERS

1845

[23] H.-Y. Liu, C.-C. Lin, Y.-W. Lin, C.-C. Chung, K.-L. Lin, W.-C. Chang, L.-H. Chen, H.-C. Chang, and C.-Y. Lee, “A 480Mb/s LDPC-COFDM-based UWB baseband transceiver,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers (ISSCC’05), Feb. 2005, vol. 1, pp. 444, 609.
[24] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[25] B. Razavi, Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
[26] P. Urard, E. Yeo, L. Paumier, P. Georgelin, T. Michel, V. Lebars, E. Lantreibecq, and B. Gupta, “A 135Mb/s DVB-S2 compliant codec based on 64800b LDPC and BCH codes,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC’05) Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2005, pp. 446, 609.

Anthony Chan Carusone (S’96–M’02) received the B.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, in 1997 and 2002 respectively, during which time he received the Governor-General’s Silver Medal.
Since 2001, he has been with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Toronto, where he is currently an Associate Professor.
Dr. Carusone was named an Ontario Distinguished Researcher and Canada Research Chair in Integrated Systems in 2002. He was a co-author of the best paper at the 2005 Compound Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Symposium and best student paper at the 2007 Custom Integrated Circuits Conference. He is a past chair of the Analog Signal Processing Technical Committee for the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society, a member of the technical program committee for the IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits Conference, and Deputy Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, PART II: EXPRESS BRIEFS.

Ahmad Darabiha (S’97) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 1998, and received the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, in 2003 and 2008, respectively.
His main research interests include VLSI implementation of digital communications and digital signal processing algorithms. In particular, he has been working on algorithms, architectures and VLSI implementations for high-throughput and low-power error correction decoders.

Frank R. Kschischang (S’83–M’91–SM’00–F’06) received the B.A.Sc. (Honors) degree from the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, in 1985, and the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, in 1988 and 1991, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
During 1997–1998, he spent a sabbatical year as a Visiting Scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, and in 2005 he was a Guest Professor at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zurich. Currently, he is a Professor and Canada Research Chair in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, where he has been a faculty member since 1991. His research interests include coding techniques, primarily on soft-decision decoding algorithms, trellis structure of codes, codes defined on graphs, and iterative decoders and in the application of coding techniques to wireline, wireless and optical communication systems. Dr. Kschischang served as Associate Editor for Coding Theory of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 1997 to 2000 and also served as the Technical Program Co-Chair for the 2004 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory. He is a recipient of the Ontario Premier’s Research Excellence Award.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

