Reconfigurable Architecture for LDPC and Turbo Decoding: A NoC Case Study
Michelangelo Scarpellino∗, Ashwani Singh∗†, Emmanuel Boutillon†, Guido Masera∗ ∗VLSI Lab, Electronics Department, Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Turin, Italy.
†Universite´ Europe´enne de Bretagne, Lab-STICC, CNRS, UBS, BP 92116 56321 Lorient, France. Email: michelangelo.scarpellino@gmail.com, ashwani.singh@polito.it

Abstract—Trends in wireless communication systems are in the direction of multi-mode systems using different algorithms to implement the baseband processing and the channel decoding. Efficient implementation of such multi-mode support requires flexible hardware. We present design and implementation of a reconfigurable processing element for a multi-processor architecture catering to both turbo and LDPC decoding needs in the context of the WiMaX (IEEE 802.16e) standard for high-throughput applications. As a case study, we evaluate the performance of our Multi Processor System on Chip (MPSoC) architecture for a 2-D Torus/Mesh interconnect topology. Evaluation results are presented based on the communication centric parameters that include network latency, network size and can be extended to any other System on Chip (SoC) interconnect topology without loss of generality.
I. INTRODUCTION
There has been a growing need for devices that have the flexibility to support multiple modes in the emerging wireless standards. For example, the 802.16 standard supports high data rates (up to about 70 Mbps) with a variety of channel coding options. The mandatory scheme is a convolutional code. Convolutional turbo codes, turbo product codes, and in 802.16e, Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes are optional [1]. LDPC codes and turbo codes are among the known near Shannon limit codes that can achieve very low bit error rates for low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) applications [2], [3]. A reconfigurable architecture, which has the flexibility to operate in multiple modes supporting different decoding has obvious advantage over conventional devices in terms of seamless switching across different modes and may also result in smaller area.
In recent years many research activities have emerged proposing multiprocessor implementations in order to achieve flexible and high throughput parallel iterative decoding. In [4] a flexible and high performance Application-Specific Instruction-set Processor (ASIP) model for turbo decoding was proposed which can be configured to support all simple and double binary turbo codes up to eight states and in [5] a highly flexible LDPC decoder architecture capable to process all specified WiMaX LDPC codes was proposed.
Iterative exchange of results between component decoders is essential for the performance of these codes. Both [4] and [5]
”This work was supported by the projects Newcom++ and WiMAGIC, funded by the European Union.”

employ a Network on Chip (NoC) paradigm for such message transfer which offers great flexibility.
In this paper, we present a completely reconfigurable processing element for a multi-processor architecture, which allows to decode all block sizes for different rates defined in the WiMaX standards for both LDPC and turbo decoding [1]. Proposed architecture uses Turbo Decoding Message Passing (TDMP) [7] algorithm for decoding WiMax LDPC codes. TDMP uses the same principle of the algorithm used to decode turbo codes, implying a shared hardware unit for both decoding. To best of our knowledge, such resource sharing, for these two kinds of codes, has not been implemented in current literatures. We also present as a case study the performance evaluation of this Multi Processor System on Chip (MPSoC) architecture for a 2D Torus/Mesh interconnect topology. Such an analysis can be a basis for SoC designer for choosing a network on chip topology for high performance decoders.
This paper is divided into VI sections. After a brief review of WiMaX Convolutional Turbo Code (CTC) and structured block LDPC codes and their decoding in Section II, the general architecture of the MPSoC decoder is discussed in Section III; the proposed VLSI architecture of the Processing Unit is detailed in Section IV and then in Section V a case study using simple 2D Torus/Mesh interconnect topology is presented analyzing the impact of communication-centric parameters on overall decoder performance, while the obtained results are summarized in Section VI.
II. WIMAX TURBO AND LDPC CODES AND DECODING
A. WiMaX Convolutional Turbo Code (CTC)
Turbo WiMaX is a parallel concatenated convolutional code. The encoder uses a double binary Circular Recursive Systematic Convolutional (CRSC) code. The encoder structure illustrated in the Figure 1 is Parallel Convolutional Concatenated Codes (PCCC). Encoder is fed by blocks of N bits or K couples (N = 2× K bits). For all the frame sizes (24 to 2400 for the WiMaX 802.16e), N is a multiple of 8. The bits of the data to be encoded are grouped in couple and send to double entry (A,B). During encoding input data are interleaved between the first encoder C1 and second encoder C2 to minimize the correlation between them resulting in performance gain.
In PCCC decoding, the processing steps are the basic Soft Input Soft Output (SISO) decoders which implements the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a2d2e0d4o-n3/J0u8ne/$2245,2.00026©a2t 0050:859I:E59EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

671

Fig. 1. CTC-Encoding Process.
BCJR algorithm [6]. The decoding of the duo-binary Turbo Codes is performed using the Max-Log-Map version of BCJR algorithm ( see [10] for details). In duo-binary turbo codes, the log-likelihood ratio outputs of the kth symbol are expressed as follows:

is associated to a parity check matrix H. It has M block rows and N block columns. The HBASE is expanded, in order to generate H matrix, by replacing each of its entries Πi,j with a Z-by-Z permutation matrix, where Z is the expansion factor. The permutation matrix can be formed by cyclically shifting right the Z-by-Z identity matrix. The complete H matrix can best be described by a Tanner graph [8], a graphical representation of the associations between code bits and parity checks. Each row of this H matrix correspond to a Check Node (CN) while each column corresponds to a Variable Node (VN) in Tanner graph. The set of shifts in the base matrix are used to determine the shift sizes for all other code lengths of the same code rate.
Standard defines various code rates (eg. R=1/2, R=2/3, R=3/4). The base matrix is defined for the largest code length (N = 2304) of each code rate. Table I collects some details about the different WiMaX LDPC codes.

TABLE I HBASE PARAMETERS FOR DIFFERENT WIMAX LDPC CODES.

(s→ s‘, z) represents the set of transitions between states s to encoder states s‘, leading to generation of symbol z, where z belongs to φ = {00, 01, 10, 11} and α, β, and γ are the forward, backward, and branch metrics respectively. The metrics are calculated using the following expressions:
where Ek−1(s) is the set of states at time k-1 and Ek+1(s) is the set of states at time k+1, uk is the input symbol consisting of two bits, P(uk) is a priori probability of uk and xk and yk are transmitted and received codewords associated with uk respectively. B. WiMaX Low Density Parity Check Code (LDPC)
In this section, we discuss about a class of architectureaware LDPC codes used for WiMaX application, which solves the interconnect, memory overhead, and scalability problems associated with LDPC decoders. The entire H matrix is composed of the same style of blocks with different cyclic shifts, which allow structured decoding and reduces decoder implementation complexity. The HBASE matrix defined as:

Code Rate HBASE matrix
Type Number of block rows [M] Maximun row-column weight

1/2 12 × 24 irregular
12 7−6

2/3 8 × 24 irregular
8 11 − 6

3/4 6 × 24 irregular
6 15 − 4

LDPC codes can be decoded by Gallagers iterative Two Phase Message Passing algorithm (TPMP), which involves CN update and VN update as a two phase schedule. The authors in [7] introduced the concept of Turbo Decoding Message Passing (TDMP, sometimes also called layered decoding) using BCJR for their Architecture-Aware LDPC (AA-LDPC) codes. In TDMP block rows are seen as supercodes. Each constituent supercode of the H matrix is an even parity-check code having support only in positions where there are nonnegative numbers in the corresponding HBASE matrix. The TDMP decoding algorithm decodes a codeword iteratively in a number of sub-iterations which are equal to the number of supercodes, with one sub-iteration per constituent supercode, using a constituent SISO decoder and an interleaver similar to decoding a serially concatenated turbo code. The logical dataflow of the decoding process is shown in Figure 2

⎡

Π0,0

HBASE = ⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢

Π1,0 ...
Πi,0 ...

Π0,1 . . .

Π1,1 . . .

...

...

Πi,1 Πi,j

...

...

⎤

Π0,N

Π1,N ...
Πi,N ...

⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

ΠM,0 ΠM,1 . . . ΠM,N

Fig. 2. WiMaX LDPC logical decoding flow using TDMP algorithm [7].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:59:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

672

The SISO decoder accepts in a sub-iteration, intrinsic input reliability messages (denoted by λ) generated from all other previous sub-iterations. Intrinsic λ-messages pertaining to the supercode under consideration are excluded to minimize cor-
relation between messages from different sub-iterations. The sum of all intrinsic λ-messages in addition to the channel values δ is denoted by γ :

γ =δ+

λ

(5)

super−codes

The SISO generates as output updated extrinsic messages (denoted by Λ) corresponding to the constituent supercode being decoded, as well as updated posterior messages (denoted by Γ). At the end of a sub-iteration, these Λ and Γ-values are stored as λ and γ-values to be used as inputs in the next subiteration.

III. MPSOC ARCHITECTURE OVERVIEW

parity-check matrices H1, . . .,Hc, corresponding to supercodes [7]. This in turn enables us to decompose the interconnection network defined by the overall matrix into smaller networks or interleavers that connect together adjacent supercodes. This step transforms the LDPC decoding problem into a turbo decoding problem, with the supercodes acting as constituent codes, thus facilitating the reuse of a hardware platform meant for turbo decoding in the LDPC case.
In the turbo case, corresponding to each block size K, we activate certain number of processing elements (maximum 16 in our implementation) for decoding. Each block is divided into a number of windows I and the size of each windows is W. Accordingly, the same number of windows are processed by each processing element [9]. In the LDPC case, assuming that each processing element is able to implement in parallel maximum four check-nodes, the number of processing elements activated is based on Z expansion factor of the identity permutation matrix. For big expansion factors (Z greater than 64), given the small number of processing elements we have, two sub-iterations (Itsub) are required for each supercode.

B. Architectural Overview
Figure 4 shows the overall architecture of the reconfigurable processing element. It consists of the SISO-CN Processor, data memories, TURBO/LDPC assignment logic unit, processor control unit and an interleaving and deinterleaving logic connected to a network routing logic. Data is exchanged through the packet based network (see Section V).

Fig. 3. MP-SoC Architecture.

In multi-processor implementations several independent data blocks can be simultaneously decoded on different processors, this approach multiplies the costs (memories, area, and power consumption) along with the throughput. Exploiting the inherent parallelism of the iterative decoding algorithms like turbo and LDPC enables a far more efficient partitioning of the decoding task. The block to decode can be divided into several sub-blocks. Decoding each sub-block on an individual processor significantly reduces latency as a critical parameter in many communication applications, and memory overhead. Figure 3 shows the general structure of MPSoC. Due to the iterative exchange of data between processing elements each processor working on the same data block has to communicate with each other, yielding only limited locality. A communication network has to support the communication demands of the different processing elements without degrading the throughput of the overall system.
IV. RECONFIGURABLE PROCESSING UNIT
A. General Considerations
Before designing the single reconfigurable processing element supporting both turbo and LDPC decoding, general design choices had to be made. In the case of LDPC decoding the parity-check matrix H is seen as a concatenation of c

Fig. 4. Reconfigurable Processing Unit Architecture.
Before processing, the configuration of all sub-blocks is done by the processor control unit (PCU). PCU asserts signals according to block size, first or second half iteration, number assigned to each processor, in addition supercode number for LDPC case, thus taking care of different decoding scenarios to start correctly.
Data memories consists of memory blocks for the storage of extrinsic/VN values, channel llr, α-β values, λ values and hard decoding results in case of turbo decoding. The design choices previously explained make sure sharing of the maximum amount of memories between the LDPC and turbo decoding; this comes at the cost of an increased complexity of interfaces between the processing core (SISO-CN Processor) and the memory blocks.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:59:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

673

Turbo/LDPC assignment logic unit is responsible for the selection of inputs based on the selected decoding. In addition it performs reordering of variable node values for the LDPC case before assigning it to the SISO-CN processor. Reordering of VN is necessitated by the fact that VN values coming from the network are not in the proper sequence.
SISO-CN processor architecture is typical of a turbo decoding SISO as explained in [10] and the blocks are reused for the LDPC decoding case. It computes and updates the extrinsic information for each subiteration in turbo case. Suitable modifications were made to incorporate the LDPC decoding case, as trellis has a different structure than the turbo decoding case [7]. In LDPC case it computes and updates the intrinsic information and variable node values. A more detailed description of this block is given in next subsection.
Interleaving and deinterleaving logic generates destination addresses for the extrinsic information for turbo case according to selected half iteration and permutation law. While for LDPC case, it generates addresses to read from the data memories variable node values involved in the supercode under consideration. The destination addresses are sent with the data to network routing logic, which interfaces processing element with the network. This unit according to the destination address is able to understand if the data should be sent through the network to another processor or should remain in the same processor based on the permutation law or the check node allocation map for turbo and LDPC case respectively.
C. SISO-CN Processor
In Figure 5 the structure of the SISO-CN Processor is described. Branch Metric Unit ( BMU) is the unit responsible for generating γ values (see expression 4) according to the structure of the trellis based on BCJR and TDMP algorithms for turbo and LDPC decoding respectively. Alpha and Beta processors generate new α and β values in forward and backward recursion respectively based on expressions (2) and (3) presented in earlier section. The gamma processor is responsible to generate extrinsic information (see expression (1)) and hard decoding results for turbo case and in LDPC case intrinsic information and the new variable node values.
Unit ALPHA BETA CU receives information like window size and row degree from the unit CU CONFIGURATION and generates signals for enabling reading operations in FIFO and LIFO that store α and β metrics. GAMMA CU unit is activated by the signal coming from the ALPHA BETA CU unit. Its task is to control reading and writing of decoding results in FIFO OUT.
In Figure 5 the alpha processor structure is highlighted consisting of metric computation units. All the other processors like beta and gamma have similar structures. To facilitate the TDMP decoding of LDPC codes, we incorporated assignment networks consisting of multiplexers to support different trellis structure of the two codes (8 state trellis for turbo and 2 state trellis for LDPC decoding).
In Figure 6 the alpha processors metric computation unit is detailed, which implements expression (2) presented in earlier

Fig. 5. SISO/CN Processor.

Fig. 6. Alpha Metric Computation Structure.

section. Its structure allows reusing most part of the processing hardware of a classical turbo SISO [10] for the LDPC case. Mode of decoding is selected using LDPC turbo signal. Some blocks like max-star correction and multiplexers are necessary for the metric computation unit sharing between the two codes. Similar reasoning is applied for beta and gamma processors. Further complexity reductions could be possibly achieved by replacing the separate max and max with correction computations by a common scaled max computation for both codes. If a good scaling value is chosen (e.g., 0.7), then the performance of the LDPC code should not degrade substantially while the performance of the turbo code may actually increase.

D. Implementation Results
Synthesis has been done with tool provided by Synopsys with 0.13μm, 1.2 − V standard cell library technology. SISOCN processor has been synthesized without FIFO and LIFO. Results of our implementation along with existing implementation of LDPC and turbo decoders [7], [10] are presented in Table II .

TABLE II SYNTHESIS RESULT COMPARISON.

Implementation Turbo [10] LDPC [7]
Reconfigurable

Details 160 MHz , 0.13µm 200 MHz , 0.18µm 200 MHz , 0.13µm

Area [mm2] 0.259 0.056 0.256

Area [Gates] 43172
42751

A complete performance and area comparison of the reconfigurable processing unit with the already existing implementation is difficult, because all existing works deal with LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:59:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

674

decoder and TURBO decoder separately. Despite that, one approximated comparison can be done simply by comparing the area of a single SISO used in one architecture for TURBO codes [10] added to a area of a SISO used in an architecture for TDMP decoding of LDPC codes [7] with our architecture. With the joint architecture implemented for LDPC and Turbo, there is an area saving equal to 23 %, compared to having two separate architectures [7], [10].

V. CASE STUDY USING 2D-TORUS/MESH NOC
In order to verify the functionality of our design we used NoC Simulator, NNSE [11]. Pattern of the messages over network for both turbo and LDPC decoding were obtained using MATLAB software. The traffic generator of the simulator was adapted to provide the same traffic pattern obtained from MATLAB software and simulation was performed over the 2D Torus/Mesh infrastructure provided by the simulator. In the simulations all packets are assumed to have a constant length. All resource contention is handled without bias, such that granting of resources to packets is done on a first come, firstserve basis. The routing algorithms employed is X-Y routing for the Torus/Mesh [12].
To quantify network traffic, we first estimate the data rates originating from both interleaving traffic for turbo case as well as from variable node message exchanges across supercodes for the LDPC case with respect to a single processing unit. Given clock frequency (F), number of iterations (It) and SISOCN Processor latency (SISOLAT ), turbo case throughput can be estimated as:

Dturbo

=

I t(K

×

K ×F R + SISOLAT )

(6)

where R is the average number of cycles per calculated data on a node processor. For the LDPC case the throughput can be estimated as:

Dldpc

=

It

(N − M ) × z × F × M × Itsub × (P ELAT )

(7)

where PELAT = SISOLAT + ARCHLAT and ARCHLAT is the latency due to various blocks in the proposed architecture (see Figure 4).

A. Communication-centric parameters
In MPSoC architecture with P processing elements a network is used for shuffling the extrinsic information and the variable node messages across different processing elements.
1) Latency: Each packet sent over the network suffers latency. In Figure 7 we have depicted the average and maximum network latencies, varying the sending period for both the turbo and LDPC case (subiteration 6). We can observe that, reducing the sending period below a certain threshold, the network latency increases.
Impact of network latency on overall decoder throughput for different message sending period can be best described

Fig. 7. Network latency in turbo and LDPC case for different sending period.

Fig. 8. Timing Diagram Model for message exchange across network.

by a timing diagram model of message exchange between processing elements in MPSoC architecture. In Figure 8 such a model for two possible scenarios is depicted. First scenario corresponds to large sending period (R), for which network latency (NL) values are much lesser than R, in such a scenario time to exchange k messages across network would be k × R + N L, while in other case where R is small, resulting in high NL, time to exchange k messages becomes k × N L + R. Combining these two scenarios time to exchange k messages over network can be represented as k×max(R, N L)+ min(R, N L). Assuming L = max(R, N L) and l = min(R, N L), throughput formulas become:

Dturbo

=

It (K

K×F ×P × L + SISOLAT

×P

+ l)

(8)

Dldpc

=

It ×

M

(N − M ) × z × F × Itsub (P ELAT + NMSG

×L+

l)

(9)

In LDPC case NMSG is the number of messages received by each node processor during a sub-iteration from network. From expressions 8 and 9 we can observe that reducing the sending period, the decoder throughput increases. This implies that we have to choose the optimal value of sending period in order to have the best trade-off between throughput and latency.
In the Table III throughput results are presented for turbo and LDPC case with the network, considering F=200 MHz, number of iterations equal to 8 (10 in LDPC case) and sending

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:59:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

675

period=4 for two block sizes K (three block sizes for rate 1/2 in LDPC case). D represents the throughput in the absence of the network, DMAX and DAV G are the obtainable throughput in the presence of a Torus/Mesh network. Worst case throughput is calculated with reference to maximum latency values and average throughput is obtained with reference to the average latency of the network.
TABLE III THROUGHPUT SUMMARY TABLE IN CASE OF TURBO AND LDPC.

Block Size
120 2400 1344 1440 1536

Turbo/LDPC
T urbo T urbo LDP C LDP C LDP C

D
[Mbit/sec] 45.4 322.6 32.9 35.3 37.6

DM AX [Mbit/sec]
16 39 6.76 7.19 8.63

DAV G [Mbit/sec]
19.1 86.5 10, 27 11.06 11.2

Throughput values obtained are lower for LDPC case than turbo case as the reading process of data from memory is much more complex in LDPC decoding than in turbo. As a result the initial latency (ARCHLAT ) associated to each variable node, to be processed, is very high. In turbo case, instead, data are processed immediately after reading from memory. In LDPC case comparing the processor throughput values with the implementation done in [13], we observe that the two solutions offer comparable performance. However the effect of the 2-D Torus/Mesh network is much worse in terms of latency than for the dedicated Benes network used in [13].
2) Network Size: From expressions 8 and 9 shown in previous section we can observe that increasing the number of processing elements increases the obtainable decoding throughput. However such an increase is not linear. With the network simulations it was observed that the network latency increases with increase in the network size (increase in P). In the Figure 9 impact of increase in processing elements at different injection rates on decoder throughput is depicted in three dimensional space.

Fig. 9. Throughput versus Network Size versus Injection Load
It can be inferred that there exists a optimal choice in terms of number of processing units required capable of generating data at a given rate to achieve a certain decoding throughput. The plot is drawn based on maximum latency offered by the

network for turbo code of block length 2400, similar reasoning can be extended for the LDPC codes.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have reported a reconfigurable architecture of a single processing unit for turbo and LDPC decoding compliant to WiMaX 802.16e. It can support all codes mentioned in the standard and all specified block lengths. For high-throughput decoding, we used multi-processor platform (MPSoC) as a natural transition to parallel decoding. As the inter-processor communication becomes the bottleneck for high degrees of parallelization, we presented a case study that analyzes the traffic pattern over a 2-D Torus/Mesh Network on Chip. By a detailed traffic analysis we showed that the overall processing performance is impacted by the networks limited communication bandwidth. In fact throughput values obtained with network insertion are reduced by at least a factor 4 or 5 compared to the without network case due to latency imposed by the network.
Future work will focus on decreasing the message bandwidth over the network for increased performance.
REFERENCES
[1] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Part 16, Air Interface for Fixed broadband wireless access system,IEEE Std 802.16, 2004.
[2] R. G. Gallager, ”Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, pp. 21-28 , Jan. 1962.
[3] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, ”Near Shannon limit errorcorrecting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. ICC93, Geneve, Switzerland, pp. 10641070, May 1993.
[4] Olivier Muller, Amer Baghdadi, Michel Je´ze´quel. ”ASIP-Based Multiprocessor SoC Design for Simple and Double Binary Turbo Decoding”, in Proc. Design, Automation and Test in Europe (DATE ’06), Munich, Germany, pp. 1330-1335, Mar. 2006.
[5] Torben Brack, Matthias Alles, Frank Kienle, Norbert Wehn. ”A Synthesizable IP Core for WIMAX 802.16e LDPC Code Decoding”, 17th Annual IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC06), Helsinki, Finland, pp. 1-5 , September 2006.
[6] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, ”Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284287, Mar. 1974.
[7] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, ”High Throughput LDPC Decoders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976-996, Dec. 2003.
[8] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke. The Renaissance of Gallager’s Low-Density Pariy-Check Codes. IEEE Communications Magazine, 41:126131, August 2003.
[9] T. Blankenship, B. Classon, and V. Deai, ”High-throughput turbo decoding techniques for 4G,” in Proc. Int. Conf. 3G Wireless and Beyond. San Francisco, CA, pp. 137142, June 2005.
[10] Martina, M., Nicola, M., Masera, G. ”A Flexible UMTS-WiMax Turbo Decoder Architecture”, IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 369-373, April 2008.
[11] Zhonghai LU, Rikard Thid, Mikael Millberg, Erland Nilsson, Axel Jantsch, ”NNSE: Nostrum Network-on-Chip Simulation Environment”, in Proc. Of the Swedish System-on-Chip Conference (SSoCC 05), April 2005, Tammsvik, Sweden.
[12] Daeho Seo , Akif Ali , Won-Taek Lim , Nauman Rafique , Mithuna Thottethodi, ”Near-Optimal Worst-Case Throughput Routing for TwoDimensional Mesh Networks, Proceedings of the 32nd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture”, p.432-443, June 04-08, 2005, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
[13] Gunnam, K., Choi, G., Yeary, M.B., and Atiquzzaman, M. ”VLSI architectures for layered decoding for irregular LDPC codes of WiMax”. IEEE Int. Conf. on Communications, (ICC2007), June 2007, Glasgow, UK.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:59:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

676

