IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 8, AUGUST 2008

3763

Eliminating Trapping Sets in Low-Density Parity-Check Codes by Using Tanner Graph Covers
Milos˘ Ivkovic´, Member, IEEE, Shashi Kiran Chilappagari, Student Member, IEEE,
and Bane Vasic´, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—We discuss error floor asympotics and present a method for improving the performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in the high SNR (error floor) region. The method is based on Tanner graph covers that do not have trapping sets from the original code. The advantages of the method are that it is universal, as it can be applied to any LDPC code/channel/decoding algorithm and it improves performance at the expense of increasing the code length, without losing the code regularity, without changing the decoding algorithm, and, under certain conditions, without lowering the code rate. The proposed method can be modified to construct convolutional LDPC codes also. The method is illustrated by modifying Tanner, MacKay and Margulis codes to improve performance on the binary symmetric channel (BSC) under the Gallager B decoding algorithm. Decoding results on AWGN channel are also presented to illustrate that optimizing codes for one channel/decoding algorithm can lead to performance improvement on other channels.
Index Terms—Convolutional low-density parity-codes (LDPC) codes, error floor, Gallager B, low-density parity codes (LDPC) codes, min-sum decoding algorithm, Tanner code, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
The error-floor problem is arguably the most important problem in the theory of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and iterative decoding algorithms. Roughly, error floor is an abrupt change in the frame error rate (FER) performance of an iterative decoder in the high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region (see [9] for more details and [1], [2], [3] for general theory of LDPC codes).
The error floor problem for iterative decoding on the binary erasure channel (BEC) is now well understood, see [7], [8] and the references therein.
In the case of the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, MacKay and Postol in [4] pointed out a weakness in the construction of the Margulis code [22] which led to high error floors. Richardson [9] presented a method to estimate error floors of LDPC codes and presented results on the AWGN channel. He pointed out that the decoder performance is governed by a small number of likely error events related to certain topological structures in the Tanner graph of the code, called trapping sets (or stopping sets on BEC [7]).1 The approach from [9] was further refined by Stepanov et al. in [10]. Zhang et al. [11] presented similar results based on hardware decoder implementation.
Manuscript received August 21, 2007; revised April 25, 2008. This work was supported by grants from INSIC-EHDR and NSF-CCR (Grant 0634969). The material in this correspondence was presented at the 2007 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Nice, France, June 2007.
M. Ivkovic´ is with the Department of Mathematics, University of Arizona Tucson, AZ 85721 USA, (e-mail: milos@math.arizona.edu).
S. K. Chilappagari and B. Vasic´ are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: shashic@ece.arizona.edu; vasic@ece.arizona.edu).
Communicated by H.-A. Loeliger, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of Figures 4–7 are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee. org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2008.926319
1The necessary definitions will be given in the next section.

Vontobel and Koetter [12] established a theoretical framework for finite length analysis of message passing iterative decoding based on graph covers. This approach was used by Smarandache et al. in [13] to analyze the performance of LDPC codes from projective geometries [13] and for LDPC convolutional codes [14].
An early account on the most likely error events on the binary symmetric channel (BSC) for codes which Tanner graphs have cycles is given by Forney et al. in [16]. Some results on LDPC codes over the BSC appear in [13], as well. A significant part of the research on error floor analysis has also focused on methods for lowering the error floor. The two distinct approaches taken to tackle this problem are (1) modifying the decoding algorithm and (2) constructing codes avoiding certain topological structures. Numerous modifications of the sum-product decoding algorithm were proposed, see, for example, [18] and [19], among others.
Among the methods from the second group, there have been novel constructions of codes with high Tanner graph girth [21], [6], as it was observed that codes with low girth tend to have high error floors. While it is true that known trapping sets have short cycles [10], [17], the example of projective geometry codes, that have short cycles, but perform well under (hard decision) iterative decoding, suggests that maximizing the girth is not the optimal procedure. As the understanding of the error floor phenomena and its connection with trapping sets grows, avoiding the trapping sets directly (rather than short cycles) seems to be a more efficient way (in terms of code rate and decoding complexity), to suppress error floors.
Code modification for improving the performance on the binary erasure channel (BEC) was studied by Wang in [20]. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first paper on code modification with maximizing the size of stopping (or trapping) sets as the objective. Edge swapping within the code was suggested as a way to break the stopping sets. The method that we propose is similar. Roughly speaking, it consists of taking two (or more) copies of the same code and swapping edges between the code copies in such a way that the most dominant trapping sets are broken. It is also similar to the code constructions that appear in Smarandache et al. [14], Thorpe [24], Divsalar and Jones [25] and Kelley, Sridhara, and Rosenthal [26].
The advantages of the method are a) it is universal as it can be applied to any code/channel model/decoding algorithm and b) it improves performance at the expense of increasing the code length only, without losing the code regularity, without changing the decoding algorithm, and, under certain conditions, without lowering the code rate. If the length of the code is fixed to n, the method can be applied by taking t copies of a (good) code C of length n=t and eliminating the most dominant trapping sets of C. The method can be slightly modified to construct convolutional LDPC codes as well. The details are given in Section III.
We apply our method and construct codes based on Margulis [22], Tanner [21], and MacKay [23] codes and present results on the BSC when decoded using the Gallager B algorithm [1]. It is worth noting that the error floor on the AWGN channel depends not only on the structure of the code but also on implementation nuances of the decoding algorithm, such as numerical precision of messages [9]. Since the Gallager B algorithm operates by passing binary messages along the edges of a graph, any concern about the numerical precision of messages does not arise.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II we introduce the notion of trapping sets and their relation to the performance

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:55:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3764

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 8, AUGUST 2008

Fig. 1. Trapping sets: (a) (5; 3) and (b) (4; 4).

error initially for the decoder to fail). So, if a code has both (5; 3) and (4; 4) trapping sets, the FER performance is dominated by the (5; 3)
trapping set.
At the end of this example, we note that the (5; 3) trapping set above
is an example of an oscillatory trapping set, i.e., if three variable nodes
on the diagonal are initially in error, after the first iteration those three
nodes will be decoded correctly, but the remaining two will be in error.
In the decoding attempt after the second iteration those two will be
correct, but the initial three will be in error again, and so on.

of the code. We explain the proposed method in Section III. We present numerical results in Section IV and conclude in Section V.

II. BASIC CONCEPTS
G The Tanner graph of an LDPC code, , is a bipartite graph with two

sets of nodes: variable (bit) nodes and check (constraint) nodes. The

nodes connected to a certain node are referred to as its neighbors. The
degree of a node is the number of its neighbors. The girth g is the length
G  of the shortest cycle in . In this paper, represents a variable node,

represents an even degree check node and represents an odd degree

check node.

The notion of trapping sets was first introduced in [4], but here we follow the formalism from [19].

2  Definition 1: For a given m n matrix U = (Ui;j) with 1    i m; 1 j n; the projection of a set of h columns indexed by

ij1; j2m; .;

..
j

; jh is = j1;

an m j2; . .

2 h matrix
. ; jh.

consisting

of

the

elements

ui;j ;

1



Definition 2: Let H be a parity-check matrix of an LDPC code. An (a; b) trapping set is a set of a columns of H with a projection that contains b > 0 odd weight rows.
The definition of the trapping set above is purely topological, that is,

a trapping set can be seen as a subgraph of the Tanner graph. In other
T words, an (a; b) trapping set is a subgraph with a variable nodes and
b odd degree checks. The most probable noise realizations that lead to

decoding failure are related to trapping sets ([9], [10]). A measure of

noise realization probability is referred to as pseudo-weight. Following

the terminology in [10], an instanton can be defined as the most likely noise realization that leads to decoding failure.

The instantons on the BSC consist of the received bit configurations

with minimal number of erroneous bits that lead to decoding failure. Following [17], the notion specific to BSC, analogous to pseudoweight,

can be defined as follows.

Definition 3: The minimal number of variable nodes that have to be
initially in error for the decoder to end up in the trapping set will be
referred to as the critical number k for that trapping set.

Remark: Note that on the BEC the critical number is just the size of the stopping set, see [20].

We now clarify what “the most dominant trapping sets” means and

how these effect code performance.
Let  be the transition probability of the BSC and ck be the number of configurations of received bits for which k channel errors lead to a

codeword (frame) error. The frame error rate (FER) is given by

0 n
FER() = ckk(1

)(n0k)

k=i

where i is the minimal number of channel errors that can lead to a decoding error (size of instantons) and n is the length of the code.
On a semilog scale the FER is given by the expression

log(FER())

0 = log

n
ckk(1

)n0k

(1)

0 k=i
= log(ci) + i log() + log((1

)n0i)

(2)

0 + log

1

+

ci+1 ci

(1

)01 + . . .

+

cn ci

n0i

(1

0

)i0n

(3)

! In the limit  0 we note that

0 ! lim0 log((1 )n0i) = 0

and

0 li!m0 log

1

+

ci+1 ci

(1

)01 . . .

+

cn ci

n0i

(1

0

)i0n

=0

So, the behavior of the FER curve for small  is dominated by

 log(FER()) log(ci) + i log()

Remark: To “end up” in a trapping set means that, after a finite number of iterations, the decoder will be in error, on at least one variable node from , at every iteration. Note that the variable nodes that are initially in error do not have to be within the trapping set.
We illustrate the above concepts with an example.
Example 1: The (5; 3) trapping set in Fig. 1(a). appears (among other codes) in the Tanner (155; 64) code [17] (see also the examples
of irreducible closed walks in the [5, Ch. 6.1]). This trapping set has
critical number k = 3 under the Gallager B decoding algorithm (for

The log(FER) vs log() graph is close to a straight line with slope

equal to i -the minimal critical number or cardinality of the instantons.

Therefore, if two codes C1 and C2 have instanton sizes i1 and i2;

such that i1 < i2; then the code C2 will perform better than C1 for

small enough , independent of the number of instantons, just because

! 01 ! log()

as  0. Note also that the critical number of the

most dominant trapping sets cannot be greater than half the minimum

distance. If it is the case, the performance of the decoder is dominated

by the minimum weight codewords.

the definition of the algorithm see [2]), meaning that, if three variable
nodes, on the diagonal from bottom left to top right, are initially in
error, the decoder will fail to correct the errors.
Fig. 1(b) illustrates a (4; 4) trapping set. This trapping set, although smaller, has critical number k = 4; (all the variable nodes have to be in

III. THE METHOD FOR ELIMINATING TRAPPING SETS
In this section we present a method to construct an LDPC code C(2) of length 2n from a given code C of length n and discuss a modification of the method that gives a convolutional LDPC code based on C.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:55:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 8, AUGUST 2008

3765

Fig. 2. Trapping set elimination.

Fig. 3. Reintroducing trapping set by swapping two edges.

Let H and H(2) represent the parity-check matrices of C and C(2), property that each trapping set has one edge that does not participate

respectively. H(2) is initialized to

in any other minimal trapping set. So, instead of swapping edges at

random, the edges appearing in only one trapping set can be swapped,

H (2) =

H
0

0
H

. Stated simply, H(2) is formed by taking two copies of H say C1 and
2 C2. It can be seen that if H has dimensions m n, then H(2) has 2 G dimensions 2m 2n. Every edge e in the Tanner graph of C is

associated with a nonzero entry H . t;k The operation of changing the

H H H H value of

(2) t;k

and

(2) m+t;n+k

to

“0”,

and

(2) m+t;k

and

(2) m;n+k

to

“1”

is termed as swapping the edge e. Fig. 2 illustrates edge swapping in

two copies of a (5; 3) trapping set. We assume that the most dominant

trapping sets for C are known. The method can be described in the

following steps.

Algorithm:

and such a procedure is guaranteed to eliminate all the minimal trapping sets. Also, there is a possibility not to freeze all the edges from the (former) trapping sets, but only those that would, if swapped, introduce the trapping sets with the same critical number.
Note, however, that any edge swapping schedule can be seen as a particular realization of the random edge swapping. For all the codes that we considered, all trapping sets with minimal critical number were eliminated by the algorithm with random edge swapping.
The following theorem shows how this method affects the code rate.
Theorem 1: If the code C, with parity-check matrix H, and rate r (and length n) is used in the algorithm above, the resulting code C(2)
 will have rate r(2) (and length 2n), such that r(2) r.
Proof: Each edge swapping operation in the algorithm can be
seen as matrix modification. At the end of the algorithm, code C(2)
is determined by

1) Take two copies C1 and C2 of the same code. Since the
codes are identical they have the same trapping sets. Initialize
SwappedEdges = ; F rozenEdges = ;
2) Order the trapping sets by their critical numbers.
3) Choose a trapping set in the Tanner graph of C1; with minimal critical number. Let E denote the set of all edges
in . If (E \ SwappedEdges 6= ) goto 5). Else goto 4). 2 4) Swap an arbitrarily chosen edge e E n F rozenEdges
(if it exists). Set SwappedEdges = SwappedEdges [ e.
5) “Freeze” the edges E from so that they

H (2) =

H0 B

B H0

where

H0

and

B

are

matrices

such

that

H0

+

B

=

H,

and

H0 t;k

(or

B ) t;k can be equal to “1” only if Ht;k = 1.

If the second block row is added to the first in H(2), and then the the

first block column is added to the second, we end up with

H0 B

B H0

!

H B

H H0

!

H B

0
H

:

(4)

cannot be swapped in the following steps. Set
F rozenEdges = F rozenEdges [ E .
6) Repeat steps 2) to 4) until it is possible to remove the trapping sets of the desired size.
Step 5) is needed because swapping additional edges from the (former) trapping sets might introduce trapping sets with a same critical number again. Fig. 3 illustrates such a swapping which corre-

The last matrix in (4) has rank which is greater than or equal to twice
 the rank of H. Therefore, the code C(2) has rate r(2) r where r is
the rate of C.
Note, that r(2) = r if B = CH + HD, for some matrices C and D, so that CH corresponds to linear combinations of rows of H and HD corresponds to linear combinations of columns of H. We also have a
following corollary.

sponds to just interchanging the check nodes. The Tanner graph of the newly made code is a special double cover
of the original code’s Tanner graph, interested readers are referred to [12].
Remark: There are several approaches which may improve the efficiency of the algorithm. First, instead of swapping the edges at random at step 3), edges could be swapped based on the number of trapping sets they participate in, or by using some other schedule that would (potentially) lead to the highest number of trapping sets eliminated. The structure of the code can also be exploited. For example, the Margulis
(2640; 1320) code [22], has 1320(4; 4) minimal trapping sets with the

Corollary 1: If the matrix H has full rank, then r(2) = r. Proof: This follows from the fact that if H has full rank, then the
last matrix in (4) has full rank also.

At the end of this section, we briefly discuss the minimal distance of the modified code.

Theorem 2: If the code C has minimal distance dmin, the modified

 code

C (2) ,

will

have

the

minimal

distance

d(2) min

,

such

that,

d2 min

 d(2) min

dmin .

 Proof:

We

first

prove

that

d(2) min

dmin. Suppose that the min-

imal weight codeword of C(2) is c(2), where c(2) is a column vector

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:55:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 8, AUGUST 2008

consisting

of

two

vectors

c1

and

c2

of

length

n.

Then

(2) (2) Hc

=

0

is

equivalent to

0 H B

B 0
H

c1 c2

=

0
H c1

+

B c2

B c1

+

0
H c2

=0

(5)

 Note that c1 + c2 = c is a column vector of length n, with Hamming
weight wh(c) wh(c(2)), where wh(c(2)) is the Hamming weight of

the

(2) c

.

Now

H c = (H 0 + B)(c1 + c2)

=

0
H c1

+

B c1

+

0
H c2

+

B c2

=

0

(6)

because the last expression in (6) is equal to the sum of entries of the

last column vector in (5). So, c is a codeword of C.

6   If c = 0, from wh(c)

wh (c(2) )

it

follows

that

(2) dmin

dmin. If

c = 0 then c1 = c2, and from (5) follows that Hc1 = 0, so c1 is a

 codeword

of

C

and

again

(2) dmin

dmin .

 The proof that 2dmin

(2) dmin

is

similar.

If

we

assume

that

c1

is

a

minimal weight codeword of C, we have

Fig. 4. Margulis code performance.

0

H

B 0

c1 = 0

(7)

BH

c1

 so 2dmin

(2) dmin

.

We finish this proof by mentioning that it is not difficult to construct

examples

where

2dmin

=

(2) dmin

or

(2) dmin

=

dmin ,

so

the

statement

of

the theorem is “sharp”.

We

described

the

algorithm

in

its

basic

form.

(2) H

can

be

initial-

ized by interleaving the copies C1 and C2 in an arbitrary order, but we

choose concatenation to keep the notation simple. The method, as well

as all the proofs, will hold for any interleaving. It is also possible to

consider more than two copies of the code to further eliminate trapping

sets with higher critical number.

The

splitting

of

parity-check

matrix

H

into

0 H

and

B

can

be

seen

as a way to construct convolutional LDPC codes, that is, as a way to

unwrap the original LDPC code C. For details on unwrapping see [15]

and the references therein. The (infinite) parity-check matrix can be can

be constructed as

Fig. 5. Tanner code performance for a longer range of .

0 H

0 BH

0

Hconv =

BH
B ... :

(8)

...

Note that by construction the resulting convolutional code has pseudocodewords with higher pseudoweights than original LDPC code. In this light, Theorem 2 can be seen as a generalization of [14, Lemma 2.4]. We refer readers interested in convolutional LDPC codes to that paper.

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS

In this section, we illustrate the proposed method by modifying the Fig. 6. MacKay’s codes performance. Margulis [22], Tanner [21] and MacKay [23] codes to eliminate trap-

ping sets under the Gallager B decoding algorithm. We use the trapping

sets reported in [17].

This code has 1320 (4; 4) trapping sets with critical number 4 as the

Example 2 (Margulis (2640; 1320) Code): The parity check of this most dominant ones. The modified (5280; 2640) code has no (4; 4)

matrix has full rank, so the modified code is an (5280; 2640) code, and trapping sets and the performance is governed by (5; 5) trapping sets

has

the

same

rate

as

the

original

code,

i.e.,

(2) r

=

r

=

0:5.

(ten cycles), that have critical number k = 5, Fig. 4.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:55:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 8, AUGUST 2008

3767

Both original 504 and 1008 length codes have two types of trapping
sets with critical number k = 3, (5; 3), and (3; 3) (six cycles). We ran the algorithm so that all (3; 3) trapping sets are eliminated from the newly constructed, but none of the (5; 3) trapping sets. The results are
shown in Fig. 6. It can be seen that, although the FER performance is
improved, the slope of the FER curve is approximately the same.2

Example 5: (AWGN channel) This example illustrates two points.

First is that optimizing code for one decoding algorithm can lead to

performance improvement for other decoding algorithms. The second

point is that the use of an appropriate axis scaling can greatly help in

error floor analysis and code performance prediction.

We present FER results over AWGN channel and min-sum algorithm
after 500 iterations for three codes, the original Tanner (155; 64) code, our modified Tanner (310; 126) from the Example 3 and a random (310; 127) code with column weight 3 and row weight 5.

In the low SNR region, where all kinds of error events are likely, the

length (and rate) of a code govern the performance. In this region codes

of length 310 have similar performance. For high SNRs, however, code

optimization in terms of trapping sets becomes important and random

code performance becomes much worse than performance of the mod-

ified Tanner (310, 126) code. Notice a pronounced error floor for the

random code.

What is even more illustrative is Fig. 7(b) where we plot log(FER)

versus SNR (not in dB) on the x-axis. This is because for high SNRs
/ 0 3 on the AWGN channel, similarly to (3), FER ! exp( in SNR=2),
where din is pseudoweight of the most likely error event. So on the

graph with SNR on the x-axis which is not in decibels, log(FER) curve

0 will approach (from above) a straight line with slope equal to !in=2

! 1 as SNR

. See [5] and [12] for further details. Using these obser-

vations and numerical results obtained by simulations we can estimate

that our modified code has the slope approximately equal to 20, better
 than the original Tanner (155; 64) code with the slope of 14.3 Fur ther more, considering that the slope for the random code is 12,

we can claim that, for SNR values higher than those on the plots, the

Tanner code will perform better than the random code.

V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 7. FER performance under min-sum decoding: (a) log (FER) versus SNR in dB and (b) log(FER) versus SNR as (not in dB).
Example 3 (Tanner (155, 64) Code): This code has (5,3) trapping
sets (Fig. 1(a)) with critical number i = 3 as the most dominant ones.
There are 155 such trapping sets [17], [21]. In this case we used a version of the method in which it is possible to swap edges from the (former) trapping sets, if no trapping set of the same or smaller critical
number is introduced. The result was a (310; 126) code for which the minimal trapping sets are type (4; 4) (eight cycles) with critical number k = 4 (see Fig. 1(b)). This was confirmed by numerical simulations in Fig. 5. The FER curve changes the slope, for higher , where FER con-
tribution from the expression (3) is not negligible. Note that there was a small rate penalty to this procedure. The original Tanner code has rate
0:4129, whereas the modified code has rate 0:4065.

The proposed method allows the construction of codes with good FER performance, but low row/column weight (as opposed to projective geometry codes) and therefore relatively low decoding complexity. Although numerical results for the Gallager B decoder are presented, we reiterate that the method can be used for code optimization based on the trapping sets of an arbitrary decoder. The algorithm can also be used to determine the pseudoweight spectrum of a code as follows. Once the most likely trapping sets (those with the smallest pseudoweight) are determined and eliminated by the method, the numerically obtained decoding performance of a modified code, i.e., the slope of the FER curve with appropriate axis, gives an estimate of the pseudoweight of the next most likely trapping sets—just as it was done in the Example 5 with the Tanner code and the modified Tanner code.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge valuable discussions with Robert Indik, Misha Stepanov, and Clifton Williamson.

Example 4: (MacKay’s (1008, 504) codes) This is an example of how the method can be used to produce better codes of a fixed length.
3 We have taken a 504 length MacKay code and constructed a 1008 (2
504) length code. The new code performs better than MacKay codes of length 1008.

2It is possible that a more sophisticated algorithm would also eliminate the (5; 3) trapping sets. However, our goal with this example was to show the performance when some, but not all, of the trapping sets with minimal critical number are eliminated.
 3The estimate for the Tanner code is in accordance with the pseudoweight of
the single most likely error event of 12:45 reported in [10].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:55:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 8, AUGUST 2008

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[3] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, 2001.
[4] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of margulis and ramanujanmargulis low-density parity check codes,” Electron. Notes Theoret. Comput. Sci., vol. 74, 2003.
[5] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[6] J. K. Moura, J. Lu, and H. Zhang, “Structured LDPC codes with large girth,” IEEE Signal Proc. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 42–55, Jan. 2004.
[7] C. Di et al., “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[8] C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Upper bounding the performance of arbitrary finite ldpc codes on binary erasure channels,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, USA, Jul. 9–14, 2006.
[9] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr. Comput., 2003.
[10] M. Stepanov and M. Chertkov, “Instanton analysis of low-density parity-check codes in the error-floor regime,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Seattle, WA, Jul. 9–14, 2006.
[11] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic´, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Investigation of Error Floors of Structured Low- Density Parity-Check Codes by Hardware Emulation,” presented at the Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Francisco, CA, 2006.
[12] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, Graph-Cover Decoding and Finite-Length Analysis of Message-Passing Iterative Decoding of Ldpc Codes [Online]. Available: http://www.arxiv.org/
[13] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, Pseudo-Codeword Analysis of Tanner Graphs from Projective and Euclidean Planes [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/
[14] R. Smarandache, A. E. Pusane, P. O. Vontobel, D. J. Costello, and Jr., Pseudo-Codeword Performance Analysis for LDPC Convolutional Codes [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/
[15] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello Jr., “On deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from OC LDPC Block Codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 24–29, 2007, pp. 1221–1225.
[16] G. D. Forney, Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer Verlag, 2001, pp. 101–112.
[17] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasic, “Error Floors of LDPC Codes on the Binary Symmetric Channel,” presented at the Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., ICC 2006, Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 2006.
[18] N. Varnica and M. Fossorier, “Improvements in belief-propagation decoding based on averaging information from decoder and correction of clusters of nodes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 846–848, Dec. 2006.
[19] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic´, and J. Huber, “When does one redundant parity-check equation matter?,” presented at the Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Francisco, CA, 2006.
[20] C. Wang, “Code annealing and the suppressing effect of the cyclically lifted LDPC code ensemble,” presented at the 2006 IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Chengdu, China, Oct. 22–26, 2006, unpublished.
[21] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of Group-Structured LDPC codes,” Proc. ISCTA, 2001.
[22] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using ramanujan graphs and ideas from margulis,” in Proc. 38th Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr. Comput., 2000.
[23] D. J. C. MacKay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes [Online]. Available: http://www.interference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
[24] J. Thorpe, Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes Constructed from Protographs JPL INP Progress, Pasadena, CA, Rep. 42–154, Aug. 15, 2003.
[25] D. Divsalar and C. Jones, “Protgraph LDPC Codes with Node Degrees at Least 3,” presented at the Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Francisco, CA, 2006.
[26] C. Kelley, D. Sridhara, and J. Rosenthal, Tree-Based Construction of LDPC Codes Having Good Pseudocodeword Weights [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/

New Families of -Ary Sequences With Low Correlation Constructed From Sidel’nikov Sequences
Young-Sik Kim, Jung-Soo Chung, Jong-Seon No, Member, IEEE, and Habong Chung, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this correspondence, for a positive integer M and a prime
j 0 p such that M p 1, three families of M -ary sequences using the M -ary 0 Sidel’nikov sequences with period p 1 are constructed. Two small famd 0 e 0 0 ilies contain (p 1)=2 + M 2 or p + M 3 M -ary sequences,

and both of their maximum magnitudes of correlation values are upper

p bounded by 2 p + 6. The largest family has its maximum magnitude

p of correlation values upper bounded by 3 p + 5 and the family size is

0 0 0 0 0 0 (M 1) (2

1)+M 1 for p = 2 or (M 1) (p 3)=2+M(M 1)=2

for an odd prime p.

Index Terms—Autocorrelation, cross-correlation, family of M -ary sequences, M -ary sequences, pseudonoise (PN) sequences, Sidel’nikov
sequences.

I. INTRODUCTION

M Especially for the high-speed data transmission, -ary phase-shift

keying (PSK) modulation schemes are frequently adopted as a stan-
M dard. Accordingly, it becomes more important to find -ary codes with M good error correctability as well as the family of -ary sequences with

good correlation property.

p M M jp 0 For a prime and a positive integer such that

1,

M Sidel’nikov [1] introduced the -ary power residue sequences of

p period with the magnitudes of out-of-phase autocorrelation values

p M upper bounded by 5 or 3. For a positive integer such that M jp 0 M n 1, he also constructed -ary sequences (called Sidel’nikov p 0 sequences) of period n 1, the out-of-phase autocorrelation mag-

nitudes of which are upper bounded by 4 [1]. It is known that the
M autocorrelation distribution of -ary Sidel’nikov sequences can be M expressed in terms of the cyclotomic numbers of order [2].

There have been many research results on the families of sequences

with low correlation. Kasami sequence family [3]–[5], Gold sequence

family [6], Trachtenberg [7], Sidel’nikov [8], Helleseth [9], bent se-

quence family [10], No sequence family [11], prime phase sequence

family by Kumar and Moreno [12], family by Moriuchi and Imamura

p p [13], and Helleseth–Gong sequence family [14] are well-known fam-
ilies of -ary sequences with low correlation for a prime . For the

alphabet size of other than prime, Boztas, Hammons, and Kumar [15]

proposed quaternary sequences with near-optimum cross-correlation

properties. Kumar, Helleseth, Calderbank, and Hammons [16] con-

structed the large families of quaternary sequences with low cross cor-
p e relation. For a prime and an integer , Kumar, Helleseth, and Calderp bank [17] introduced the family of e-ary sequences on a Galois ring.

Up to now, the alphabet sizes of the known families of sequences are

restricted to prime power.

Manuscript received October 17, 2006; revised December 17, 2007. This work was supported by the MEST, the MKE, and the MOLAB, Korea, under the fostering project of the Laboratory of Excellency.
Y.-S. Kim is with Samsung Electronics, Co., Ltd., Yongin, Gyeonggi-do 446711, Korea (e-mail: kingsi@ccl.snu.ac.kr).
J.-S. Chung and J.-S. No are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Korea (e-mail: integer@ccl.snu.ac.kr; jsno@snu.ac.kr).
H. Chung is with the School of Electronics and Electrical Engineering, Hong-Ik University, Seoul 121-791, Korea (e-mail: habchung@hongik.ac.kr).
Communicated by G. Gong, Associate Editor for Sequences.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2008.926428

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:55:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

