IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 7, JULY 2010

2639

An Improved Belief-Propagation Decoder for LDPC-Coded Partial-Response Channels
Wu Chang and J. R. Cruz, Fellow, IEEE
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019 USA
The traditional belief-propagation (BP) decoder for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes assumes that the soft input information for each bit is independent of all other bits. However, for partial-response (PR) channels, the log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) generated by the channel detector are correlated. In this paper, we propose an improved BP (IBP) decoder to take into account the dependence among the LLRs produced by channel detectors. The IBP decoder needs not only the LLR for each bit but also the probability distribution of the subblock that contains this bit. Therefore, we revise the Bahl-Cocke-Jelinek-Raviv (BCJR) algorithm accordingly to generate the additional information during channel detection. We apply the proposed decoder to an ideal PR channel and, as a practical example, to equalized perpendicular magnetic recording channels (PMRCs). The IBP decoder significantly outperforms the traditional BP decoder without turbo equalization, but this gain is substantially reduced when we introduce turbo equalization. Furthermore, we extend the IBP decoder to nonbinary LDPC codes, and show that we can achieve additional gains.
Index Terms—Belief-propagation, low-density parity-check codes, partial-response channels, perpendicular magnetic recording.

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE parity-check matrix of a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code [1], [2], can be expressed as a factor graph

[3], and a message passing algorithm, such as the belief-prop-

agation (BP) algorithm, which finds the marginal probabilities

of variable nodes on factor graphs, can be used as an efficient

decoder for LDPC codes. It is well known that BP decoding

is not optimal (or exact) unless two particular conditions

are satisfied. One condition is that the factor graph must be

tree-like, i.e., cycle-free. Unfortunately, finite length LDPC

codes always have cycles on their factor graphs, making the

messages passed on the graphs dependent on each other, after a

few BP iterations. A common approach is to eliminate all short

cycles plus those cycles that may have some harmful properties

during code construction.

The other necessary condition for optimal BP decoding is

that the intrinsic information [4] of variable nodes should be

independent of each other. The intrinsic information is called

the initial information in [5], and is simply the soft information

at the input of the BP decoder, which is continuously used in

all BP iterations. Sometimes this condition is overlooked, and

in some situations it may not be an issue. One such example

is the LDPC coded additive white Gaussian (AWGN) channel,

, with

. It is well known that

the channel messages, in terms of log-likelihood ratios (LLRs),

, are independent of each other. However, this is

not the case for partial-response (PR) channels; the LLRs output

by the channel detector are usually correlated, and this has been

a source of concern for many years. Evidence to that effect is the

optimal subblock-by-subblock detector (OBBD) proposed in

[6]. The OBBD is an extension of the Bahl-Cocke-Jelinek-Raviv

Manuscript received September 16, 2009; revised November 20, 2009; accepted January 19, 2010. First published March 01, 2010; current version published June 23, 2010. Corresponding author: J. R. Cruz (e-mail: jcruz@ou.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2010.2043679

(BCJR) algorithm [7], which generates the probability distributions for subblocks in the channel sequence. Therefore, for an LDPC coded PR channel, the BP decoder is passing correlated messages and becomes suboptimal from the very first iteration, leading to a degradation of its decoding performance.
One would expect to get some coding gains if we exploit the correlations between channel messages during BP decoding. A successful example of such an approach is the use of the OBBD on a nonbinary LDPC coded PR channel [8]. Each code symbol in a nonbinary LDPC codeword corresponds to a subblock of the binary channel sequence. The OBBD provides the probability distributions of code symbols for the nonbinary BP decoding, where bits in the same code symbol are always considered statistically correlated. However, bits in different code symbols are still assumed to be independent, which is not actually true.
In this paper, we introduce an improved BP (IBP) decoder to take into account the correlations between channel messages inspired by the coded modulation BP (CMBP) algorithm proposed in [9]. The CMBP algorithm is designed for an LDPC coded discrete memoryless channel (DMC) with a multilevel modulated signal (MMS). The nature of this channel makes the bits in the LDPC codewords independent, unless they are related to the same modulated channel symbol. One may argue that it would be better to code this channel with a nonbinary LDPC code, whose code symbol has the same size as the modulated channel symbol, but that is not the focus of this work. From our perspective, the most interesting part of the CMBP algorithm is that it modifies the binary BP algorithm to utilize the dependence between channel messages. We find that a similar idea can be used on PR channels where the channel messages are also correlated but not separated by code or modulation symbols.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we give a complete derivation of the IBP decoder as well as a review of the OBBD, which provides soft information to the IBP decoder. In Section III, we apply the IBP decoder to an ideal PR channel, and investigate the relationship between the performance of the IBP decoder and the correlations among channel messages. In Section IV, we consider the application of

0018-9464/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2640

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 7, JULY 2010

the IBP decoder to perpendicular magnetic recording channels (PMRCs). In Section V, we further extend the IBP algorithm to the decoding of nonbinary LDPC codes. In Section VI, we evaluate the performance of the improved nonbinary BP decoding on PMRCs. In Section VII, we investigate the implementation of turbo equalization for the IBP decoder, and we conclude the paper with a discussion of the results in Section VIII.

Fig. 1. Dependence between channel messages (LLRs) is expressed as the joint distribution of p consecutive bits, i.e., the distribution of p-bit subblocks. These
subblocks overlap and become shorter near the channel block boundaries.

II. IMPROVED BP DECODING

Consider a block of bits,

, trans-

mitted through a PR channel and the observed noisy channel

output,

. In order to get the minimum bit

error rate, we use the BCJR algorithm as the channel detector.

At the detector output, we obtain a sequence of soft channel

messages (LLRs),

, corresponding to

the bits in the input block. We assume that any pair of channel

messages has a strong dependence only if they are within a rel-

atively small distance; in other words, the dependence between

channel messages vanishes, as they get far apart. This assump-

tion is intuitively reasonable and will be validated in Section III.

Given that the channel input sequence is LDPC coded, when

the LDPC decoder is handling a channel message , it is ex-

pected to consider the dependence of on the channel mes-

sages before and the ac channel messages after , as shown

in Fig. 1, where stands for the causal length and ac for the

anti-causal length. In other words, when the LDPC decoder is

processing a channel message (except the ones near the block

boundary), there will be

channel messages con-

sidered at the same time. The dependence among the consecu-

tive channel messages will be used in LDPC decoding, in terms

of the joint probability distribution of the corresponding bits

in the transmitted sequence.

A. Improved BP Algorithm for PR Channels

The IBP algorithm is essentially based on the same idea as

the CMBP algorithm in [9], except that we always consider a

channel message correlated with the ones before and after it,

not just in the same modulation symbol. We also provide a de-

tailed analysis and derivation, which clarifies the assumptions

and approximations, used in the algorithm and make the later

extension to the nonbinary BP decoder straightforward.

Let

be the channel input subblock from time

to time , where the corresponding channel messages at

the output of the channel detector are assumed to be dependent

on each other. For convenience, we further use

with

to denote the bits in , and let stand

for all bits in except . We are interested in the a posteriori

probability (APP) for the particular bit

,

where is the parity-check matrix of the LDPC code. However,

it is not easy to compute such APP for any bit conditioned on

the whole parity-check matrix ; actually, BP is a way to get

an approximation on such APP with the assumption that channel

messages are independent. To make things easier but keep the

channel message dependence within , we compute the APP at each BP iteration, where represents all
parity-checks corresponding to the subblock , and denotes the parity-checks related to the bit . Then this APP can be expanded as follows:

(1)

where

is the APP for bit computed in one

BP iteration. Note that

only true for the LDPC codes with tree-like graphs; but it is a

good approximation given that there is no cycle-4 on the sub-

graph corresponding to the subblock . During the derivation

of (1), we made use of the independence between and .

In addition, we assume to be uniformly distributed. Then

the a posteriori LLR message for bit can be expressed as

shown in (2) at the bottom of the next page, where

is the

channel message computed by the channel detector.

, where

(3)

is the information passed from check to bit , and

is the information sent from bit to check . For

, we

have

(4)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG AND CRUZ: IMPROVED BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODER FOR LDPC-CODED PARTIAL-RESPONSE CHANNELS

2641

Note that, for convenience, we are abusing the bit index nota-

tion, i.e., “bit ” represents the same bit as “bit

”.

As in the CMBP algorithm, the check-to-bit information here

is computed in the same way as in the BP algorithm, while

the dependence between channel messages is considered in the

bit-to-check information. Clearly, if all channel messages are in-

dependent of each other, the first term in (2) is equal to zero and

the iterative algorithm defaults to the original BP algorithm.

The factorization in (2) is useful to understand the main idea

of the IBP algorithm, but it is not computationally efficient. We

note that

, where

is in-

dependent of the sum over

. Given that the OBBD pro-

vides the distributions

, the a posteriori LLR message

of (2) can be more efficiently computed as shown in (5) at the

bottom of the page.

Finally, it is necessary to clarify that the distributions

used in (5) are generated by

the channel detector only once (or as many times as the number

of global iterations executed), and are not updated in the IBP

decoder.

probability distributions for separate subblocks; but for IBP, we

want the probability distributions for overlapped subblocks. For

example, for an -bit channel block, probability distributions

for at least

overlapped subblocks will be computed, as

shown in Fig. 1. (We may need additional probability distribu-

tions at block boundaries.) No matter what kind of distribution

we want, for separate subblocks or for overlapped subblocks,

its computation for a particular subblock is the same. For com-

pleteness, we give the set of equations for the OBBD but skip

the derivation details. Also note that we are using in this paper a

notation that is consistent with [8], which may not be the same

as the notation used in [6].

For an input block of bits , the vector

represents the trellis states of the PR channel.

Again, we assume that there is no a priori information available

at the input of the channel detector; the channel input is i.i.d.

Then the probability distribution of a particular subblock is

computed as

B. Review of the OBBD

In order to execute the IBP decoding algorithm, the channel

detector must compute the distributions

. Actually, the

OBBD proposed in [6] does just that. Note that in [8] the OBBD

was used on nonbinary LDPC coded PR channels to generate

(6)

(2)
(5)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2642

where

and

are the forward and backward

state probabilities, respectively, which are calculated in the same

way as in the standard BCJR algorithm. For a PR channel, (6) is

further simplified for two distinct cases:

and , where

is the number of registers in the trellis of the PR channel. For

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 7, JULY 2010

(7)

where

. For

(8)

where

are the latest bits in the trellis registers

at time . These simplified versions of the OBBD expedite the

channel detection significantly. Finally, it is important to note

Fig. 2. Normalized autocorrelation sequences of channel messages for the LDPC coded EPR4 channel.

that the OBBD also needs to generate the LLR for each bit as in the original BCJR algorithm, because the IBP algorithm uses the channel message to initialize the bit-to-check information
.

output, where the implicit assumption is that the blocks of channel messages are wide-sense stationary random sequences. However, we are not interested in proving the validity of the stationarity assumption. Our experiments will show whether the

C. Boundary Management

In the derivation of the IBP algorithm, we assume a channel

message to be correlated with

channel mes-

sages around it. Since the LDPC coded channel block is of

finite length, the channel messages near the block boundaries

autocorrelation sequence is a valid indicator of the dependence

between channel messages.

We consider as an example the EPR4 channel with integer

coefficients

on AWGN. This PR channel

used to be one of the common equalization targets for longi-

tudinal magnetic recording channels. The signal-to-noise ratio

may be dependent on fewer than

other messages, as (SNR) is defined by

, where

are the

shown in Fig. 1. At the left boundary, with

only

depends on

and

. Similarly,

at the right boundary, with

only depends

on

and

. We manage the

OBBD to generate probabilities for superposed subblocks

with lengths from

to at the left boundary and with

lengths from to

at the right boundary. Meanwhile, the

IBP iteration is modified to take fewer channel messages into

account at the block boundaries, during the computation of (2).

The modification is straightforward.

coefficients of the channel response and is the variance of the AWGN. The channel input bits are modulated as non-return-to-zero (NRZ) signals before transmission. For the LDPC coded EPR4 channel, we draw the autocorrelation sequences of the channel messages generated by the BCJR detector in Fig. 2. We can see that the correlation between two channel messages is only significant within a small range; it vanishes with increasing time lag. This fact validates the assumption used in the derivation of the IBP algorithm. In addition, it is intuitive that the correlations are smaller for channel messages observed at higher SNRs; on a noise-free channel, the BCJR detector will give a

III. LDPC CODED PR CHANNEL

white sequence of LLRs which are either negative infinity or infinity.

We design an LDPC code using the progressive-edge growth We apply the IBP decoder with at most fifty iterations to

(PEG) algorithm [10]; the null space of a 456 by 4551 parity- an LDPC coded EPR4 channel with the expectation of getting

check matrix, with a constant column weight of four, gives a better performance from the utilization of the correlations

(4551, 4096) LDPC code. The code rate is around 0.9. The among channel messages. However, it is important to choose

reason for choosing an LDPC code with such a high rate is appropriate values for and in the IBP algorithm. Since

that we are considering applying the IBP decoding to equalized

determines the complexity of both the IBP

PMRCs in the next section; for consistency, we use the same decoder and the OBBD channel detector, we seek good per-

LDPC code on both PR channels and PMRCs. We use a very formance with a relatively small . Therefore, we design an

simple detection and decoding architecture: for each sector, the experiment to test the performance of the IBP decoding with

channel detector runs only once, then the BP or IBP decoders different choices of and . As shown in Fig. 3, the channel

operate on the information sent from the detector; no informa- is simulated at an SNR of 8.6 dB, with varying from 1 to 7

tion is fed back to the channel detector.

and from 0 to . Note that, for , IBP decoding is the

As mentioned in Section I, the channel messages for the original BP algorithm. As expected, we always have a chance

PR channel are not independent. To investigate the depen- to get better performance with larger . Note that for a given

dence among them, we simulate the channel and estimate the the performance curve is symmetric, i.e., IBP decoders with

autocorrelation sequence of the LLRs at the BCJR detector

and

, with

give almost the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG AND CRUZ: IMPROVED BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODER FOR LDPC-CODED PARTIAL-RESPONSE CHANNELS

2643

Fig. 3. Performance test of LDPC coded and IBP decoded EPR4 channel.

Fig. 4. Performance of LDPC coded and IBP decoded EPR4 channel.

same performance, which means that a channel message has

the same correlation with messages at the same distance.

The non-monotonic performance behavior for different

values of with a given is quite interesting, and can be

explained by the autocorrelation sequence of the channel mes-

sages. For example, for , we get much worse performance

with

than with

or

. From Fig. 2, we can

see that at

dB,

, which means that

a channel message has a weaker dependence on its adjacent

messages than on the ones two bit intervals away from it.

Therefore, for the IBP decoders with

, choosing

or

can help the decoding algorithm take into account the

more dependent channel messages, and hence achieve better

performance. Another example is that for

we get

slightly worse performance than for

or

, because

. Performance curves for other values of

can be explained similarly. Furthermore, it is intuitive that, Fig. 5. Normalized autocorrelation sequences of channel messages for the in order to get good performance, it is necessary to let the LDPC coded GPR4 channel.

sliding window of a channel message include the messages

that have the strongest correlations. In Fig. 3, with varying

from 1 to 7, the largest performance improvements occur at

with

or

as well as

with

,

since

for all

and

. Finally, we

plot the performance curves for the best choice for each value

of , in terms of sector (block) error rate (SER) in Fig. 4, and

show that the IBP decoding provides gains as large as 0.7 dB

over the original BP decoding. (In this paper, we measure the

performance gains at the SER of .)

Before we conclude this section, we would like to point out

IV. LDPC CODED PMRCS

In this section, we consider the application of IBP decoding to

equalized PMRCs, coded with the same PEG-designed LDPC

code as in Section III. The PMRC model is shown in Fig. 6,

where

is the recorded data. The read back

signal of an isolated transition is a hyperbolic tangent func-

tion

. The pre-filter

matches the dibit response of the channel.

The position jitter noise is implemented using a first order ap-

proximation. The SNR is defined as

,

that we find the correlations among channel messages to be where

is the average position jitter

closely related to the response of the PR channel. Since equal- noise energy associated with an isolated transition [14] and

ized PMRCs have optimized generalized PR (GPR) targets is the single-sided power spectral density value of the AWGN

[11]–[13] with real coefficients and the magnitudes of the target

. We use a mix of 90% jitter noise power and 10% elec-

responses usually decay with time, we consider another ideal tronics noise power in all simulations. This channel is equalized

GPR4 channel with a response

, to optimized GPR targets. Using (5) and (6) in [10], the equal-

which is assumed to be coded by the same LDPC code used izer and the GPR target are designed at the same time

for the EPR4 channel. We show the normalized autocorrelation by minimizing in the mean-square sense. The user density is

sequences of the channel messages for the GPR4 channel in defined as

, with

being the user bit

Fig. 5. For

, larger values of have weaker correlation, interval, the channel bit interval and the code rate. A low

which means that the best performance of IBP decoding for user density

and a high user density

a given will always occur with

. We will will be considered in this paper.

not present performance results for the GPR4 channel here, In this section, we are still using a simple detection and de-

because similar results are given in the next section.

coding architecture, in which there is no feedback from the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2644

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 7, JULY 2010

Fig. 6. Perpendicular magnetic recording channel model.

D = Fig. 8. Performance test of LDPC coded and IBP decoded PMRCs with

: : 0 8741 SNR = 4 5 , at

dB.

Fig. 7. Normalized autocorrelation sequences of channel messages for LDPC coded PMRCs.

LDPC decoder to the input of the channel detector, and we per-

form at most fifty BP or IBP iterations. As we did in Section III,

the autocorrelation sequences of the channel messages for both

user densities are estimated first and drawn in Fig. 7. At

dB for

and

dB for

the performance of the traditional BP decoding is in the water-

D = Fig. 9. Performance of LDPC coded and IBP decoded PMRCs with 0:8741.

fall region. We will also test the performance results at these

SNRs, later. In the relevant range

of Fig. 7, both auto-

correlation sequences have decaying magnitude, which means

will always be the best choice for a given

. In addition, the channel messages on the channel with lower

user density have relatively weaker correlations. Note that the

PMRCs will never be perfectly equalized; at higher user den-

sity, the larger equalization error and stronger correlated and

We show the performance of IBP decoding with

and

and

and

, and

and

in Fig. 11, and IBP decoding provides gains as large

as 0.6 dB over BP decoding. Our understanding is that high

correlations among channel messages due to higher user density

make it possible for IBP decoding to provide larger gains.

data dependent noise cause more severe intersymbol interfer-

ence (ISI). It is reasonable that higher ISI lead to stronger cor-

relations among channel messages.

We test the performance of the channel with

at

dB and show the results in Fig. 8. Since

with

in Fig. 7 is very small, for

and

and for larger

V. IMPROVED NONBINARY BP DECODING
It is well known that nonbinary LDPC coded channels can outperform binary LDPC coded channels [15], especially for those with severe ISI [8], [16]. We expect to get additional gains by extending the IBP technique to nonbinary BP decoding.

values of we only get marginal performance improvements

and hence

and

is an appropriate choice for good

performance and low complexity. We show the performance of

IBP decoding with

and

and

and , and

and

in Fig. 9, where the largest gain

over BP is about 0.18 dB. Compared with the simulation for the

EPR4 channel, it is clear that IBP decoding cannot provide large

gains with weakly correlated channel messages.

A. Improved Nonbinary BP Algorithm for PR Channels

Consider a binary-input PR channel, where the channel in-

puts are nonbinary LDPC codewords. Given that the nonbinary

LDPC code is over

with

, each code symbol con-

sists of consecutive bits; and each -bit-long codeword con-

tains

code symbols, which are denoted by

, where

. The channel message

For the PMRC with

, we do the performance for the code symbol is represented by , which is a prob-

test at

dB and show the results in Fig. 10, where the ability distribution of . As in the binary case, we assume that

relationship between the autocorrelation of channel messages the channel message for a code symbol is correlated with the

and the performance of IBP decoding is verified once again. messages before it and the messages after it, and hence there

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG AND CRUZ: IMPROVED BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODER FOR LDPC-CODED PARTIAL-RESPONSE CHANNELS

2645

(9)
In this paper, we implement the row step using a fast Fourier transform (FFT) [17], [18].
In the column step, the APP distribution of symbol is computed in a similar way as in (2)

D : : = 1 2238 SNR = 8 8 Fig. 10. Performance test of LDPC coded and IBP decoded PMRCs with

, at

dB.

(10)

where

is always assumed to be uniformly distributed; the

distribution

is calculated as

(11)

Similarly,

is calculated as

(12)

D = Fig. 11. Performance of LDPC coded and IBP decoded PMRCs with 1:2238.

Finally, the probability distribution sent from symbol to check can be computed as

(13)

are

channel messages considered at the same

time. Let

denote the code symbols in the sliding

window for

with

be the

th symbol in , and represent all symbols in except .

We use to represent the th parity-check in the parity-check

matrix and to stand for all parity-checks related to the symbol

Note that, in (11)–(13),

and

are nor-

malization factors. Equation (13) is conceptually correct, but

divided-by-zero errors may occur during the computation

of

. In our implementation, we actually calculate the

distribution

by the following alternate way:

subblock . In addition, denotes the parity-checks related to

the code symbol . In the nonbinary BP algorithm [15],

is the probability distribution sent from check to symbol ,

and

is the probability distribution sent from symbol to

check . Particularly,

and

are the probabilities for

(14)

, with

, in the distributions

and

,

respectively. Since the nonbinary BP algorithm is a generalization of the where the summation part is exactly the same as the one in (10)
binary case, it is sometimes called ary BP (QBP) decoding, and does not need to be recomputed.

which becomes binary BP with

. Similarly, the improved

nonbinary BP decoding can be also called “improved ary BP B. Channel Detector for IQBP

(IQBP) decoding.”

Since the OBBD cannot work with the IQBP decoder, we

In the initialization step of the IQBP decoding, we set need to modify the original OBBD to get a new detector. On

for all . Then the row step is identical to the the one hand, the APP distributions

need to be generated

row step of the QBP algorithm

by the channel detector. We can manage the OBBD in the same

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2646

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 7, JULY 2010

way as in [8], where the probability distributions of non-over-

lapped -bit-long subblocks are computed by the detector. On

the other hand, we also need

in (10), which actually

are the APP distributions of overlapped

-bit-long sub-

blocks, where the sliding window moves forward in -bit (one

code symbol) steps. Meanwhile, the channel detector will not

output the bit LLRs, because they are not needed in the IQBP al-

gorithm. These modifications of the OBBD are straightforward;

for any particular subblock, the probability distribution can still

be computed by (6), (7), and (8).

C. Boundary Management
At block boundaries, we manage the channel detector and IQBP decoder in a similar way as in Section II. The channel detector generates probabilities for superposed subblocks covering from to code symbols on the left boundary, and covering
to code symbols on the right boundary. The IQBP decoder is also modified to take fewer channel messages into account at the block boundaries, during the computation of (10).

D = 0:8741 Fig. 12. Performance of nonbinary LDPC coded and IQBP decoded PMRCs

with

.

VI. NONBINARY LDPC CODED PMRCS

In this section, we evaluate the performance of IQBP de-

coding on nonbinary LDPC coded PMRCs, and compare the

performance of IBP with conventional nonbinary BP decoding,

where we still run the channel detector only once for each sector

and perform at most fifty QBP or IQBP iterations.

We design a nonbinary LDPC code using the PEG construc-

tion method; the null space of a 114 by 1138 parity-check ma-

trix over GF(16), with a constant column weight of three, gives

a (1138, 1024) nonbinary LDPC code. Each nonbinary LDPC

codeword encodes 4096 user bits, as in the binary LDPC code

in Section III, and both codes have similar code rate.

Before we simulate the IQBP decoder on PMRCs, the de-

D : coder parameters

and

need to be carefully determined by

= 1 2238 Fig. 13. Performance of nonbinary LDPC coded and IQBP decoded PMRCs

with

.

analyzing the dependence between channel messages, as we

did in Sections III and IV. However, the channel messages for

IQBP decoding are probability distributions, and their correlations cannot be measured by a simple autocorrelation sequence. Fortunately, the channels investigated in this paper have binary inputs. No matter how the channel is encoded, the bit LLRs can always be utilized to investigate the correlations among channel messages. Keeping in mind that a code symbol corresponds to consecutive bits, if an LLR is strongly dependent on the LLRs immediately before it and the LLRs immediately after it, then a code symbol is also strongly dependent on the LLRs before the symbol and the LLRs after the symbol. Therefore,

the high density channel, the gain over QBP is larger than 0.1 dB, which is a small gain but still significant, because it is very difficult to get gains over nonbinary LDPC coded and QBP decoded PMRCs. In addition, the performance of binary LDPC coded PMRCs with IBP decoders is very close to that of nonbinary LDPC coded and QBP decoded PMRCs. This shows that, for perpendicular magnetic recording, the error correction capability of binary LDPC codes is comparable to that of nonbinary LDPC codes.

is enough for the IQBP decoder to cover all

significantly dependent channel messages.

As in Section IV, we consider two nonbinary LDPC coded

PMRCs with

and

, respectively.

From Fig. 7, we find that

is enough to cover the most sig-

nificant LLRs for both PMRCs. Given that the nonbinary LDPC

code is over GF(16), i.e.,

is sufficient for the

IQBP decoder. Actually, for complexity reasons,

is the

largest value we can use in our simulations. We show the sim-

ulation results in Figs. 12 and 13, and observe additional gains.

Again, it is clear that the small gain for the low density channel

VII. TURBO EQUALIZATION
So far, we have shown that the improved BP decoding outperforms the original BP decoding when the channel detector is used only once. However, it is well known that the decoding performance of LDPC coded channels can be improved by turbo equalization, which performs multiple channel iterations (or turbo iterations) by feeding the extrinsic information generated by the LDPC decoder back to the input of the channel detector. It is interesting to compare the performance of BP and IBP with turbo equalization. In this paper, we will limit the investigation of turbo equalization to binary LDPC coded

is due to the weaker dependence between channel messages. For channels.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG AND CRUZ: IMPROVED BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODER FOR LDPC-CODED PARTIAL-RESPONSE CHANNELS

2647

Fig. 14. Skewed turbo equalizations for IBP decoding. (a) Computation of extrinsic information simply by subtraction in the logarithm domain. (b) Computation of extrinsic information for bits by marginalization.

D = 1:2238 Fig. 15. Performance of turbo equalized BP and IBP decoding on a PMRC

with

. Note that the curves for p5c2-T3IBP50 and p5c2-T5IBP50

almost overlap and are not distinguishable.

For the original BP decoding, the implementation of turbo

equalization is easy. Since the messages transferred between BP decoding, we use ten BP (local) iterations, which is a typical

the BCJR channel detector and BP decoder are LLRs for bits, choice, but we find that more turbo (global) iterations continu-

the extrinsic information is obtained simply by subtracting the ally improve performance. We show the SER for BP decoding

a priori LLRs from the a posteriori LLRs. However, for IBP with at most 6, 8, and 10 turbo iterations in Fig. 15, where we

decoding, it is a bit more complicated. The OBBD channel de- achieve a gain of more than 0.5 dB over BP decoding with at

tector takes in LLRs for bits, but outputs both bit-LLRs and most 50 BP iterations, but without turbo equalization. We ob-

probability distributions for overlapped subblocks. The extrinsic serve that more than ten turbo iterations give further but mar-

bit-LLRs could be computed as usual; but we need to carefully ginal performance improvement. For IBP decoding, the refer-

consider the calculation of the extrinsic information for sub- ence curve is the one for

and

, with fifty IBP

blocks. A straightforward way is subtracting (in the logarithm (local) iterations and without turbo equalization, which we have

domain) the a priori distributions of subblocks from the a poste- shown in Section IV. The performance with at most ten turbo

riori distributions, where the a priori distributions of subblocks iterations and ten local iterations is worse than IBP decoding

could be computed from the LLRs at the input of the OBBD. without turbo equalization, which means that the turbo itera-

We show the diagram of such a turbo equalization method in tions are not as helpful as in standard BP decoding. We then in-

Fig. 14(a).

crease the number of local iterations from ten to fifty, and test the

This equalization method looks good but it has a subtle performance with at most three and five turbo iterations. From

problem. Due to the nature of the detection on the trellis, Fig. 15, we see that these two iterative schemes have almost the

the OBBD generates consistent soft information, i.e., the same performance, and give only a small gain over the refer-

bit probabilities are equal to the probabilities marginalized ence IBP decoder. It is clear that the (skewed) turbo equaliza-

from the distributions of corresponding subblocks. In other tion for IBP works, but it cannot provide significant additional

words, the APPs of the channel detector are always consistent. gains. An interesting observation is that standard BP decoding

However, when we subtract the a priori information from the with turbo equalization achieves a comparable performance to

APPs as in Fig. 14(a), the consistency is broken; the extrinsic IBP decoding.

information for bits is different from that marginalized from We also implement the turbo equalization for a PMRC with

the extrinsic information of subblocks. The theoretical proof

, and present the results in Fig. 16, where the

of this inconsistency is straightforward, and we have a skewed turbo equalization provides a small performance improvement

turbo equalization method.

for both BP and IBP decoding.

One may want to solve the inconsistency problem in such a Given two methods with comparable performance, the choice

way that the extrinsic information for bits is marginalized from will hinge on complexity. However, since soft iterative decoding

the extrinsic information of subblocks, while the bit LLRs given is a dynamic process (the actual number of iterations is random),

by OBBD are discarded, as shown in Fig. 14(b). However, since and different implementations of the same algorithm will give

the subblocks are overlapped, it is easy to prove that soft infor- distinct complexities, we will not provide an operation count for

mation on a given bit, marginalized from different subblocks the algorithms. Instead, we use a simple analysis to highlight the

will not necessarily be the same. Therefore, this turbo equaliza- complexity difference between BP and IBP decoding. The stan-

tion is still a skewed one and more complicated than the turbo dard BCJR algorithm and the OBBD perform the same compu-

equalization in Fig. 14(a) due to the extra marginalization step. tation of the channel metric, forward and backward recursions,

We will use the skewed turbo equalization in Fig. 14(a), even and the output LLRs for bits. But the OBBD needs to calculate

though we cannot measure the impact of the inconsistency.

the probability distributions for overlapped subblocks, whose

A couple of iterative schemes for both BP and IBP decoding complexity increases exponentially with the subblock length

are tested on the PMRC with

. For the standard , in terms of both computational time (time complexity) and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 7, JULY 2010

to IBP decoding, but do not help significantly the IBP decoder. Generally speaking, turbo equalization is a method to iteratively get more information from the channel detector for the benefit of the LDPC decoder. Since, with turbo equalization, IBP and BP decoding exhibit comparable performance, it appears that the role of the turbo iterations might be to extract information about the correlations among channel messages. If this is the case, then the IBP decoder provides an alternative way of harvesting the performance gain, which was previously done by turbo equalization of the standard BP decoder.

REFERENCES

D = 0:8471 Fig. 16. Performance of turbo equalizations of BP and IBP decoding on the

PMRC with

.

memory usage (space complexity). Similarly, the IBP decoding

algorithm does the same check-to-bit step as in BP, but a far

more complicated bit-to-check step, whose time and space com-

plexities also increase exponentially with the subblock length

. For standard BP, additional turbo iterations may increase the

time complexity but it still has an advantage in terms of space

complexity over IBP decoding.

Finally, we would like to give some quick guidance on the

time complexity of BP and IBP decoding. All of our simula-

tions run on the same type of platform. By measuring the run-

ning speed (blocks per second) of BP and IBP on a PMRC with

, we find that, at

dB, the BP de-

coded channel with at most ten turbo iterations (T10BP10) is

35% faster than IBP with

and

, but without turbo

equalization. As another example, note that from Figs. 11 and

15, the performance of IBP decoding with

and

is

slightly better than BP decoding with at most six turbo iterations

(T6BP10). At

dB, we observe that the IBP decoded

channel is 11% faster.

VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose improved BP decoding algorithms for PR channels. Without turbo equalization, IBP decoding exhibits significant performance gains over the standard BP decoding. Our channel detectors are implemented using BCJRbased forward and backward algorithms, but other detectors with lower complexity could be considered, such as the softoutput Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) [19] and the forward maximum a posteriori probability (forward-MAP) algorithms proposed in [20]. The IBP decoders are capable of providing gains over the standard BP decoder even with these simpler channel detectors, given that the channel messages generated by these detectors are always correlated. In addition, the IBP decoding is also expected to work with noise-predictive detectors [21], [22], although we did not include it in this paper. The noise-prediction whitens the noise at the receiver, but the channel messages are still severely correlated. The investigation on the EPR4 channel with AWGN in Section III backs up this assertion.
Furthermore, we investigate the performance of BP and IBP decoding with turbo equalization. Turbo iterations substantially improve the performance of BP decoding making it comparable

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[4] J. L. Fan, Constrained Coding and Soft Iterative Decoding. Boston, MA: Kluwer, 2001.
[5] Z. Wu, Coding and Iterative Detection for Magnetic Recording Channels. Boston, MA: Kluwer, 2000.
[6] P. Hoeher, “Optimal subblock-by-subblock detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 43, no. 2/3/4, pp. 714–717, Feb./Mar./Apr. 1995.
[7] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[8] W. Chang and J. R. Cruz, “Optimal channel detection for nonbinary coded partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1892–1895, Jul. 2009.
[9] Y. Nana, E. Sharon, and S. Litsyn, “Improved decoding of LDPC coded modulations,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 375–377, May 2006.
[10] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[11] J. Moon and W. Zeng, “Equalization for maximum likelihood detector,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 1083–1088, Mar. 1995.
[12] P. Kovintavewat, I. Ozgunes, E. Kurtas, J. R. Barry, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Generalized partial-response targets for perpendicular recording with jitter noise,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2340–2342, Sep. 2002.
[13] W. Tan and J. R. Cruz, “Signal processing for perpendicular recording channels with intertrack interference,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 730–735, Feb. 2005.
[14] X. Yang and E. M. Kurtas, “Coding and signal processing for magnetic recording systems,” in Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording Systems, B. Vasic and E. M. Kurtas, Eds. Boca Raton: CRC, 2005, pp. 6-1–6-20.
[15] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Low-density parity-check codes over GF(q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165–167, Jun. 1998.
[16] W. Chang and J. R. Cruz, “Nonbinary LDPC codes for 4-kB sectors,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 3781–3784, Nov. 2008.
[17] M. C. Davey, “Error-Correction Using Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, U.K., Dec. 1999.
[18] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[19] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Dallas, TX, 1989, pp. 1680–1686.
[20] Y. Li, B. Vucetic, and Y. Sato, “Optimum soft-output detection for channels with intersymbol interference,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 704–713, May 1995.
[21] A. Kavcic and J. M. F. Moura, “Correlation-sensitive adaptive sequence detection,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 763–771, May 1998.
[22] J. Moon and J. Park, “Pattern-dependent noise prediction in signaldependent noise,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 730–743, Apr. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

