2010 2nd International Conference on Signal Processing Systems (ICSPS)
Improved BP-OSD Cascade Decoding Algorithm Using Limited Likelihood Information

Qiao Guolei, Dong Zijian
School of Electronic Engineering Huaihai Institute of Technology
Lianyungang, China

Abstract—In this work, we use restricted likelihood information of belief propagation (BP) algorithm to improve the accuracy of sorting in order statistic decoding (OSD) for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The reliability information delivered from the last BP iteration to OSD algorithm is inaccurate because that the propagation information may be enlarged for the existence of girths, thence limitation on iterative information can been applied to improve the OSD decoding performance. Simulation results show that the proposed method is effective.
Keywords- Low-density parity-check codes; Belief Propagation; Log-likelihood Ratio (LLR)
I. INTRODUCTION
In order to improve the performance of short and medium length LDPC codes, a variety of concatenation decoding algorithms have emerged. Concatenation decoding algorithms can achieve a good tradeoff between computational complexity and decoding performance. The ordered statistics decoding (OSD) [1] concatenated to BP is such a cascade algorithm [2]. For such a BP-OSD reprocessing strategy, if no valid codeword is returned after BP decoding, the reliability information of codeword bits is outputted to OSD.
The reliability information delivered from the last BP iteration may be inaccurate due to the log likelihood ratio (LLR) oscillation phenomenon [3], which may results in a faulty OSD decoding.
In fact, the reason that BP decoding can not reach to the maximum-likelihood decoding (MLD) performance is that the girth of LDPC code is limited. After iterations more than half of girth, the bit decision information may become independent and usually is amplified. For this reason, limitation on iterative information can improve the algorithm performance [4]. This strategy can also be applied to the BPOSD cascade algorithm to further improve the decoding performance.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We begin by discussing the check node update in BP algorithm using the amended log likelihood information. In Section III, the serial concatenation algorithm of normalized BP and OSD for LDPC codes is introduced. Simulation results are presented in section IV, followed by conclusions in Section V.

II. CHECK NODE UPDATE USING AMENDED LOG-
LIKEHOOD RATIO
The belief propagation is composed of three steps: 1. initialization; 2. iterative process; and 3. hard decision. Step 2 includes the check node and bit node updates, which are the core of the algorithm.
The standard check node update in LLR domain can be applied recursively based on the following expression

∏ ( ) ( ) ui, j

t +1

=

2

tan −1

§ ©¨¨

j,∈N (i)\

j

tanh

v j ',i 2

t

· ¸¸¹

(1)

Where v j,i denotes the propagation message from bit node
j to check node i , ui, j denotes the message from bit node i to check node j .
The BP-based (Min-Sum) algorithm uses simplified processing in check node based on

∏ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ui, j t +1 =

sgn v j',i t

j,∈N (i)\ j

g min
j,∈N (i)\ j

v j ',i t

(2)

The bipartite graphs of LDPC codes exist girths, especially for medium-short length LDPC codes, which leads to the correlation among the message of variables, and therefore results in decoding performance degradation. Thence, in order to improve decoding performance, we can reduce the correlation between messages. The usual practice is to introduce a multiplicative factor to reduce the check node output. The check node update in (1) and (2) is modified as following

αui, j (t ) → ui, j (t )

(3)

Where the parameters α ∈ (0,1) , and the best value for
algorithm performance is associated with the signal to noise ratio, the current iteration number, and the degree distribution of code word. This approach also appeared in literature [4], and the corresponding algorithm is called normalized BP algorithm.

978-1-4244-6893-5/$26.00 C 2010 IEEE

V2-23

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2010 2nd International Conference on Signal Processing Systems (ICSPS)

III. SERIAL CONCATENATION OF N-BP AND OSD
To improve decoding performance, OSD algorithm is concatenated to normalized BP. We call that cascade decoding as N-BP-OSD in brief.
Let v = (v0 , v1,..., vn−1 ) be a LDPC codeword,
( ) r = r0 , r1,..., rn−1 be the soft-decision LLR received
( ) sequence at the output of the receiver. z = z0 , z1,..., zn−1
be the hard-decision received sequence obtained from r ,
where zi is determined independently based on the following
hard-decision rule:

­0 zi = ®¯1

for ri < 0 for ri > 0

(4)

Define the following index:

D (v ) = {i : vi ≠ zi 0 ≤ i < n}

(5)

The correlation discrepancy between r and c can be
expressed as:

λ (r,v ) = ¦ rl

(6)

l∈D1 ( c )

Suppose we find an error pattern e' , which minimizes

the correlation discrepancy λ (r,v ) , then v' = e' + z is

the ML codeword with respect to r .

N-BP-OSD- i algorithm is summarized as follows:

1. Perform the amended BP algorithm, where the check

node update is based on (1) and (3).

2. If BP decoding fails, execute 3, otherwise algorithm

ends.
3. Get hard-decision sequence z from the received symbols sequence r ;

4. Obtain the k most reliability independent positions
(MRIPs) by Gaussian elimination, and form the
information sequence z0 ˗ 5. Construct the codeword v0 = z0G for z0 , and
( ) compute the correlation discrepancy λ v0 , r ˗
6. For 0 < j ≤ i , make all possible changes of j in z0 .
For each change, form a new information sequence
z ' and generate its corresponding code word v ' = z 'G . Compute the correlation discrepancy
λ (v ', r ) for each generated codeword.

Record

the

codeword

c ML

that

has

the

least

correlation

discrepancy..

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS The LDPC code selected in this paper is a (504,252,3,6) regular LDPC code given in [5]. The code’s girth is 6. Simulations use the following criteria: AWGN channel, BPSK modulation. Fig.1 and Fig.2 illustrate the performance decoded with N-BP followed by OSD reprocessing. It can be seen that the performance of N-BP-OSD algorithm is better than that of BP-OSD algorithm. Fig.2 illustrates the performance of the (504,252,3,6) LDPC code decoded with BPA , BP-OSD and our proposed BP-OSD algorithm using limited LLR information. These
algorithms are denoted as BP, BP-OSD- i , N-BP-OSD- i respectively in Fig.2, and i is the order of OSD. The
maximum number of iterations is fixed at 50 for BP in all
cases. The parameter α is fixed at 0.9 in N-BP and N-BPOSD- i . Simulations show that the performance of N-BPOSD- i is better than that of BP-OSD- i within the SNR
range of interest.
Fig.1. Impact of α on FER
Fig.2. Performance comparison of several algorithms

V2-24
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2010 2nd International Conference on Signal Processing Systems (ICSPS)
V. CONCLUSION In this paper, a modified BP-OSD algorithm is proposed, which uses the limited LLR as the ordered metric for OSD. This method can degrade the impact of LLR oscillation on decoding performance, and further improve performance. Simulations show that our proposed method is viable and effective.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Fossorier, S. Lin, “Soft decision decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans.Inform.Theory, 1995, 41(5):1379-1396.
[2] M. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE J.Sel.Areas Commun. 2001, 119(5):908917.
[3] S. Gounai and T. Ohtsuki., “Decoding algorithms based on oscillation for low-density parity check codes,” IEICE Trans. Fundam., vol. E88-A, no. 8, pp. 2216–2226, Aug. 2005..
[4] J. Chen, M. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BPBased decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” Communications Letters, IEEE 2002. 6(5): p. 208-210.
[5] Mackay, “Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes,” http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html#l25, cited 10 Mar 2010.
V2-25
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

