IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 7, JULY 2010

3277

A Separation Algorithm for Improved LP-Decoding
of Linear Block Codes
Akin Tanatmis, Stefan Ruzika, Horst W. Hamacher, Mayur Punekar, Student Member, IEEE, Frank Kienle, Member, IEEE, and Norbert Wehn, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Maximum likelihood (ML) decoding is the optimal decoding algorithm for arbitrary linear block codes and can be written as an integer programming (IP) problem. Feldman et al. relaxed this IP problem and presented linear programming (LP) based decoding. In this paper, we propose a new separation algorithm to improve the error-correcting performance of LP decoding for binary linear block codes. We use an IP formulation with indicator variables that help in detecting the violated parity checks. We derive Gomory cuts from the IP and use them in our separation algorithm. An efficient method of finding cuts induced by redundant parity checks (RPC) is also proposed. Under certain circumstances we can guarantee that these RPC cuts are valid and cut off the fractional optimal solutions of LP decoding. It is demonstrated on three LDPC codes and two BCH codes that our separation algorithm performs significantly better than LP decoding and belief propagation (BP) decoding.
Index Terms—Integer programming (IP), linear programming (LP) decoding, maximum likelihood (ML) decoding, separation algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) codes have attracted significant interest in the research community in the last decade. LDPC codes are generally decoded by belief propagation (BP) (or sum-product) algorithm. BP exploits the sparse structure of the parity check matrix of LDPC codes very well and achieves good performance. However, due to the heuristic nature of BP algorithm, it is not possible to guarantee the performance of BP decoders at very low error rates. Moreover, the performance of BP is very poor for arbitrary linear block codes with dense parity check matrices (which means that the corresponding Tanner graph contains short cycles).
Manuscript received December 02, 2008; revised November 24, 2009. Current version published June 16, 2010. This work was supported in part by the Center of Mathematical and Computational Modeling of the University of Kaiserslautern. This paper was presented in part at the 5th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Lausanne, Switzerland, September 1–5, 2008, and at the 2009 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Seoul, Korea, June 28–July 3, 2009.
A. Tanatmis, S. Ruzika, and H. W. Hamacher are with Department of Mathematics, University of Kaiserslautern, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany (e-mail: tanatmis@mathematik.uni-kl.de; ruzika@mathematik.uni-kl.de; hamacher@mathematik.uni-kl.de).
M. Punekar was with the Microelectronic Systems Design Research Group, University of Kaiserslautern, Germany. He is now with the Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin-4, Ireland (e-mail: punekar@eit.uni-kl.de).
F. Kienle and N. Wehn are with Microelectronic Systems Design Research Group, University of Kaiserslautern, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany (e-mail: kienle@eit.uni-kl.de; wehn@eit.uni-kl.de).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2048489

Maximum likelihood (ML) decoding of linear block codes can be modelled as an Integer programming (IP) problem. Since the ML decoding is NP-hard [1], solving this IP problem is computationally tractable only for small instances. Nevertheless considering ML decoding as an IP problem yields a new approach to derive suboptimal algorithms. These algorithms offer some advantages compared to BP decoding. First, these approaches rely on a well-studied mathematical theory which enables analytical statements (e.g., on convergence, complexity, correctness, etc.) with regard to the decoding process and its result [8], [10], [17]. Second, they are not limited to sparse matrices.
In [10] Feldman et al. proposed a new algorithm based on LP to decode binary linear codes. This LP decoding algorithm utilizes a set of constraints which contains all valid codewords of a given code and a linear objective function. Minimizing this objective function over the resulting polytope yields the ML codeword if the optimal solution is integral (known as the ML certificate property [10]). If the optimal solution is not integral then the LP decoder outputs an error.
Recently, LP decoding has been improved towards lower complexity [3], [6], [16], [17], [19], [23], [24]. Analysis of error-correcting performance of LP decoding [7], [11], [21] and the relationship to iterative message passing algorithms [10], [20], [22] have also been studied in the literature.
In this paper, we concentrate on improving the error-correcting performance of LP decoding using a separation algorithm. We elaborate on a compact, nonbinary IP formulation for the decoding problem. Recently, we found that the same formulation was also introduced in [2]. We attempt to find the ML solution by an iterative separation approach: First, we relax the IP formulation and solve the resulting linear program. In case of a nonintegral optimal solution, we derive inequalities which cut off this nonintegral solution, add these inequalities to the LP formulation, and resolve the LP problem. This process continues until an optimal integer solution is found or further cuts cannot be generated.
It should be noted that this general integer programming approach known as the separation problem was first applied to LP decoding by Taghavi and Siegel [17]. They intended to lower the complexity of LP decoding by a separation approach. Furthermore, it is shown that redundant parity checks based on fractional cycles in the Tanner graph improve the error-correcting performance of the decoding algorithm. Improving the LP decoder introduced by Feldman is also considered in the papers [4], [5], [8], [9], [17]. It is common to these approaches that first the LP decoding problem is solved. If the LP decoder fails, each of these approaches is equipped with some technique of

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 7, JULY 2010

manipulating the LP with the goal of finding the ML codeword The ML decoding problem for any binary code

at the cost of increased complexity.

can be written in terms of the mathematical program

In contrast, our approach does not work in this two-phase

fashion. In particular, we do not elaborate on the solution of

the LP decoding problem. Our motivation is to search imme-

(1)

diately for cuts which can be derived from arbitrary dual code-

words. To this aim we change the parity check matrix system-

atically and check conditions under which certain inequalities

define cuts. Specifically, our approach offers the following ad-

vantages which facilitate LP based decoding.

1) The number of constraints in our IP formulation is the same

as the number of rows in the parity check matrix. Each

parity check equation which is originally in

is con-

verted into a linear constraint in by means of an auxil-

iary variable.

2) The auxiliary variables serve as indicators which can be

used for identifying violated parity check constraints.

Under some assumptions, we can prove that we detect vio-

lated inequalities in

where is the maximum

check node degree.

3) We formally show that particular type of inequalities intro-

duced in [10]—referred to as Forbidden Set (FS) inequali-

ties - are a subset of the set of Gomory cuts (see [14]) which

can be deduced from the IP formulation we use.

4) We provide empirical evidence that our new separation

algorithm performs better than LP decoding and BP de-

coding. This is mainly due to generating strong cuts ef-

Here,

is the cost vector obtained by the log-likelihood

ratios

for a given channel output and

denotes the convex hull of , i.e., the codeword poly-

tope. The left-hand side (LHS) of (1) is an integer programming

problem which is known to be NP-hard [1]. Replacing with

leads to a linear programming problem which is stated

on the right-hand side (RHS) of (1). Although linear program-

ming is polynomially solvable in general, computing

is intractable. In other words a concise description of

by means of linear inequalities increases exponentially in the

block length . Thus ML decoding remains a challenging task.

Nevertheless, linear programming decoding can be applied effi-

ciently if good approximations of the codeword polytope can be

found. Recently attempts in this direction have been made (e.g.,

[6], [10], [17], [19], [24]).

Feldman et al. [10] introduced the LP decoder which mini-

mizes over a relaxation of the codeword polytope. The re-

laxation is achieved by using the parity check matrix . Each

row (check node) defines a local code , i.e., local code-

words

are the bit sequences which satisfy the th parity

check constraint. Note that

.

ficiently using alternative representations of the codes at hand. We applied the NEW SEPARATION ALGORITHM to decode random regular (3,4) LDPC codes with block length 100, 200, Tanner’s (155, 64) group structured LDPC code, the (63,39) BCH code, and the (127,99) BCH code. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We introduce notation in Section II and briefly review relevant literature in Section III. In Section IV, we explain the IP formulation, its LP relaxation, and the NEW SEPARATION ALGORITHM. In Section V, we present our numerical results and compare them with BP, LP decoding, and the lower bound resulting from ML decoding. The paper is concluded with some remarks and further research ideas in Section VI.

Lemma 2.1 ([19]): Let

. If

then

.

is generally referred to as the fundamental polytope [8],

[17], [20]. This relaxation has the advantage that the complexity

of describing the convex hull of any local code

and

thus of is much less than the complexity of describing

the codeword polytope

. The LP decoder solves the

problem

.

Several approaches are used in [6], [10], [17], [19], and [24] to

write constraints completely describing . We are going to use

the set of constraints already introduced in [10] and referred to

as FS inequalities in [8]. The index set of variable nodes which

are adjacent to check node is defined as

II. NOTATION AND BACKGROUND

. Using

we assign values to code bits as follows.

Set

for all

, and

for all

. For

A binary linear block code with cardinality and block

can be chosen arbitrarily. These value assignments to

length is a dimensional subspace of the vector space

variables are feasible, i.e., satisfy the parity check constraint, for

defined over the field

. The linear code is given by the local code if is even. If is odd, they are, however,

basis vectors of length which are represented by a

ma- infeasible or forbidden. From this observation, the so-called FS

trix (generator matrix). Equivalently can be described by inequalities are derived. Let

. In [10],

a parity check matrix

where

. We a description of

is given.

thus have

, i.e., is a codeword, if and only if

in

. We denote the th row and th column of by

Proposition 2.2: The FS inequalities

respectively.

in

is defined as the th parity

check constraint. The index set

refer to the rows

(2)

and the index set

refer to the columns of . The

matrix is often represented by a Tanner graph

.

The node set of consists of the two disjoint node sets in-

dexed by and called the check nodes and variable nodes

respectively. An edge

connects node and if and

derived from row

, of a parity check matrix

and the inequalities

, completely describe the convex

hull

of the local codeword polytope .

only if

.

Proof: This is shown in Theorem 4 in [10].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANATMIS et al.: SEPARATION ALGORITHM FOR IMPROVED LP-DECODING

3279

Consequently, the LP decoder solves

cut generation, in [10] it is proposed to use FS inequalities de-

rived from redundant parity checks as potential cuts. We refer to

these inequalities as RPC inequalities. Redundant parity checks

are obtained by adding a subset of rows of the parity check

matrix in

. These checks are redundant in the sense that

they do not alter the code (they may even degrade the perfor-

mance of BP [10]). However they induce RPC inequalities in

the LP formulation which may cut off a particular nonintegral

optimal solution thus tightening the fundamental polytope. The

If LPD has an integral optimal solution then the LP decoder out-

puts the ML codeword. If LPD has a nonintegral optimal solu-

tion then the LP decoder outputs an error. The number of FS

inequalities induced by check node is

where

is the check node degree, i.e., the number of edges

incident to node . The LP decoder can thus be applied success-

fully to low density codes. As the check node degrees increase

the computational load of building and solving the LP model is

however in general prohibitively large. This makes the explicit

description of the fundamental polytope via FS inequalities in-

applicable for high density codes. To overcome this difficulty an

alternative formulation which requires

constraints is pro-

posed in [10]. More recent formulations of [6] and [24] have size

linear in the length and check node degrees. Another approach

applicable to high density codes is to solve the corresponding

separation problem of LPD [17]. The separation problem over

RPC inequalities cutting off the nonintegral optimal solutions are called RPC cuts [17]. Note that redundant parity checks are dual codewords and there exist exponentially many redundant parity checks as well as RPC inequalities. An open problem is to find redundant parity checks efficiently such that the associated RPC inequalities include an RPC cut. This issue will be addressed in the next section.
To the best of the authors’ knowledge three approaches for searching RPC cuts have been studied so far. First, using redundant parity checks which result from adding any two rows of (see [10]). Second, the approach in [17] where the redundant parity checks are found from the fractional cycles in the Tanner graph. In the third approach, introduced in [13], the column index set corresponding to an optimal LP solution is sorted. By rearranging and bringing it to row echelon form, RPC cuts are searched for.

an implicitly given polyhedron is defined as follows.

III. NEW SEPARATION ALGORITHM BASED ON AN

Definition 2.3: Given a bounded rational polyhedron

ALTERNATIVE IP FORMULATION

and a rational vector

, either conclude that

Our separation algorithm is based on the following formula-

or, if not, find a rational vector

such that tion which we refer to as integer programming decoding (IPD)

and

for all

. In the latter case

is called a valid cut. In separation algorithms (see [14])

one iteratively computes families of valid cuts until no further

cuts can be found. In the separation algorithm of [17], which

is called adaptive LP decoding by the authors, FS inequalities

are not added all at once in the beginning as in [10] but iter-

atively. In other words, the separation problem for the funda-

mental polytope is solved by searching violated FS inequalities.

In the initialization step of the LP

is

computed. Let be an optimal solution. It can be checked in

time, if violates any FS inequality where

denotes the maximum check node degree. Recently, it was

shown in [16] that the complexity of this check can be reduced

to

. If some of the FS inequalities are violated then

these inequalities are added to the formulation and the LP is re-

solved including the new inequalities.

IPD is an integer programming problem modeling an ML de-

coder. The auxiliary variable

ensures that the binary

constraint

over

turns into a constraint over the

real number field which is much easier to handle. This for-

mulation has the additional advantage that the number of con-

straints is the same as the number of rows of the parity check

matrix. Our approach is to solve the separation problem by iter-

atively adding new cuts

according to Definition 2.3

and solving the LP relaxation of IPD given by

Adaptive LP decoding stops when the current optimal solu-

tion satisfies all FS inequalities. If is integral then it is the

ML codeword, otherwise an error is returned. Note that putting

the LP decoder in an adaptive setting does not yield an improve-

ment in terms of frame error rate since the same solutions are

found. On the other hand, the adaptive LP decoder converges

with fewer constraints than the LP decoder which has a positive

effect on computation time.

Note that in the initialization step there are no cuts of type

The advantages of LP decoding motivated researchers to find

, i.e.,

. If RIPD has an integral solution

better approximations of the codeword polytope as part of ML

then is the ML codeword. Otherwise we

decoding. One way is to tighten the fundamental polytope with generate cuts of the type

in order to exclude the

new valid inequalities. Among some other generic techniques of nonintegral solution found in the current iteration. We add these

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3280

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 7, JULY 2010

inequalities to the formulation and solve RIPD again. In a nonin- we make use of an observation given in the proof of [8, Propo-

tegral solution of RIPD or (or both) is nonintegral. If

sition 1]. Assume that check node is adjacent to exactly one

and

then we add Gomory cuts (see [14]) which nonintegral variable node. This implies that there are two or

is a generic cut generation technique used in integer program- more extreme points of

which differ in only one bit.

ming. Surprisingly, in this case Gomory cuts can be shown to Extreme points of

differ however, in at least two bits

correspond to FS inequalities.

since they all satisfy parity check which contradicts the as-

Theorem 3.1: Let

be the optimal solution sumption.

of RIPD such that

for some . Then a Gomory A given binary linear code can be represented with some

cut which is violated by

is the FS inequality

alternative, equivalent parity check matrix which we denote by

. Any such alternative parity check matrix for is obtained

(3) by performing elementary row operations on . Proposition 2.2 is valid for any . Likewise, Proposition 3.2 holds as well for

the parity check nodes

of the Tanner graph rep-

where

.

resenting . Note that the rows of may also be interpreted

Proof: The proof of Theorem 3.1 can be found in

Appendix A.

Given an optimal solution of RIPD,

with

for all

and

for at least one

we

can efficiently derive Gomory cuts with the CUT GENERATION

ALGORITHM 1 (CGA1).

as redundant parity checks. Hence, FS inequalities derived from

the rows of an alternative parity check matrix are RPC inequal-

ities.

Our algorithm uses the following two ideas based on the car-

dinality of

. In other

words, is the index set of nonintegral valued components

of the optimal solution

in . We distinguish

Cut Generation Algorithm 1 (CGA1)

the cases where

and

Consider the case where

. . Given a nonintegral op-

Input:

such that integral, nonintegral.

timum of RIPD, in CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 2 we search for a parity check which is adjacent to exactly one non-

Output: Gomory cut(s).

1: for

to do

2: if

is odd then

3: Set configuration

4: Construct constraint (3).

5: end if

6: end for

7: Terminate.

integral valued variable node. If we find such a parity check we

know due to Proposition 3.2 that cannot be in the convex hull

of this particular parity check. Furthermore due to Proposition

2.2 there exists an RPC inequality which cuts off . This ob-

.

servation is elaborated in the following theorem.

Theorem 3.3: Let

be the optimal solution

of the current RIPD formulation such that is nonintegral. Let

be a parity check matrix representing code . Suppose there

exists

such that is nonintegral for exactly one

.

This algorithm has a computational complexity of

Let

. Then, if is odd

because at most values have to be checked until a violated

parity check constraint is identified and

is the com-

plexity of constructing (3). We determine the violated parity

(4)

checks using the indicator variables . Having identified a vio-

lated parity check constraint (if there exists any) we construct

(3) easily by setting the coefficient of for

or, if is even

to , the coefficient of for

to and

. Next we consider the situation that

for some

(5)

. Although it is still possible to derive a Gomory cut, CUT

GENERATION ALGORITHM 1 is not applicable since Theorem 3.1 holds only for integral . For nonintegral we propose the

is a valid inequality which is violated by

.

CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 2. The idea of this algorithm is

Proof: We have to show that:

motivated by Proposition 2.2 and Proposition 3.2.

1) For odd [even], (4) [(5)] is violated by .

Proposition 3.2: Let be a nonintegral optimal solution of

RIPD and

. Then there are at least two indices

such that

and

. In other words

check node cannot be adjacent to only one nonintegral valued

variable node.

2) For odd [even], (4) [(5)] is satisfied for all

.

The th row of the reconstructed matrix is obtained by

performing elementary row operations in

on the rows of

the original matrix. Therefore it holds that

for all

. We show the proof for odd. If is even the

proof is analogous.

Proof: If

then it can be written as a convex 1) Let be an odd number. For , since

the

combination of two or more extreme points of

. Next

LHS of (4) is larger than the RHS, thus violates (4).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANATMIS et al.: SEPARATION ALGORITHM FOR IMPROVED LP-DECODING

3281

2) Suppose is odd and

. Our aim is to show that (4) (7) is valid for (see proof of Theorem 3.3, part 2). The term

is satisfied by . First we define

is less than 1. Thus the sum of the terms on the LHS

of (7) is greater than

and violates (7).

Proposition 3.5: If is even and

,

then

Next we rewrite (4) as

(6)

(8)

We also define the index sets

Case 1

:

Case 2

: At most of indices

where

can be in . Thus there is at least one index

with

in . Consequently

is a valid cut which cuts off .

Proof: The proof of the validity of (8) is analogous to the

proof of Proposition 3.4. Note that the cardinality of the set

is an odd number. It remains to

show that violates (8). Since

the

sum of the terms on the LHS of (8) is greater than and

violates (8).

Searching for all RPC cuts is intractable in general. Hence,

we propose the CONSTRUCT ALGORITHM which facilitates

the search for RPC cuts. We transform matrix into an equiv-

alent matrix by elementary row operations (addition is per-

formed in

). Our aim is to represent code with an al-

ternative parity check matrix , so that in row there exists

exactly one

where is nonintegral. The CONSTRUCT

ALGORITHM tries to convert columns of with

into

unit vectors. Note that at most columns of are converted.

Case 3 then

: If there is at least one index

Construct
with Input:

Algorithm such that

nonintegral

Output: .

1: Set

.

2: for

to do

Otherwise all

with

are in . Then for row

3: if

then

since is odd. This yields

,a

4: if{

then

contradiction.

5: Do elementary row operations until

and

If

, (4) or (5) cuts off the nonintegral optimum. How-

for all

.

ever, it is possible that each row

of has at least two

6: Set

.

and is nonintegral. Next we consider some special

7: end if

cases where

. These cases are specified in Proposition

8: end if

3.4 and Proposition 3.5. Let be nonintegral and denote

9: if

then

the index of the maximum nonintegral component of in ,

10: Terminate.

i.e.,

.

11: end if

Proposition 3.4: If is odd and

, then

12: end for 13: Terminate.

(7) can be obtained in

. The CONSTRUCT

ALGORITHM is useful in the following sense. Suppose

is a valid cut which cuts off .

is a check node adjacent to exactly one variable node such that is nonintegral. If has such a row then due to

Proof: For

is a dual codeword, or re- Theorem 3.3 an RPC cut which cuts off the fractional optimal

dundant parity check. Thus

for all

and solution can be derived. If no such row exists, then we check

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3282

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 7, JULY 2010

Propositions 3.4 and 3.5 to generate RPC cuts. These theoretical findings are implemented in CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 2.

Cut Generation Algorithm 2 (CGA2)

Input:

such that nonintegral, .

Output: New FS inequality or error.

1: for

to do

2: Calculate

.

3: if

then

4: Construct (4) [(5)] for odd [even], Terminate.

5: els if

odd,

then

6: Construct (7), terminate.

7: else if

even,

then

8: Construct (8), terminate.

9: end if

10: end for

11: If no cuts are found, output error.

The complexity of CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 2 is since in the worst case each entry of has to be visited
once.

Proposition 3.6: The complexity of CGA2 is

.

We are now able to formulate our separation algorithm. In

the first iteration, can be found by applying hard decision

decoding, e.g., set to 1 for all

such that

. In all

of the following iterations RIPD does not necessarily have an

optimal solution with integral . If the vector

is inte-

gral then the optimal solution to IPD is found. If is integral

but is nonintegral we apply CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 1

to construct FS inequalities. Although adding any FS inequality

suffices to cut off the nonintegral solution

, we add all

FS inequalities induced by all nonintegral based on the argu-

ment that they may be useful in future iterations. If is non-

integral first the CONSTRUCT ALGORITHM is employed. Then

we check in CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 2 if there exists a

row such that Theorem 3.3, Proposition 3.4, or Proposi-

tion 3.5 holds. In this case there exists an RPC cut which cuts

off . If such a row does not exist, then the CUT GENERATION

ALGORITHM 2 outputs an error. In there may exist several

rows from which we can derive new RPC cuts. If this is true, we

add all new RPC cuts to the formulation RIPD with the same

reasoning as before. The NEW SEPARATION ALGORITHM stops if

either

is integral, which leads to an ML Codeword, or

CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 2 returns an error, which means

no further cuts can be found.

New Separation Algorithm

2: if

integral then

3: Terminate.

4: else

5: if integral then

6: Call CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 1.

7: Add the constraints to formulation, go to 1.

8: else

9: Call CONSTRUCT ALGORITHM.

10: Call CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 2.

11: if A cut is found then

12:

Add the constraints to formulation, go to 1.

13: else

14:

Terminate.

15: end if

16: end if

17: end if

Two strategies which may be used in the implementation of the NEW SEPARATION ALGORITHM are:
1) Add all valid cuts which can be obtained in one iteration. 2) Add only one of the valid cuts which can be obtained in
one iteration. There is a tradeoff between Strategies 1 and 2, since Strategy 1 means fewer iterations with large LP problems and Strategy 2 means more iterations with smaller LP problems. We empirically tested Strategies 1 and 2 on various LDPC and BCH codes. For all codes we tested, Strategy 1 outperformed Strategy 2 in terms of running time and error-correcting performance. The relationship between our approach and other approaches based on RPC cuts (e.g., [10], [17]) can be described as follows. The latter approaches improve LP decoding by first investigating the set of FS inequalities derived from the original parity check matrix. Observe that the polytope which can be obtained from the dual code is tighter than the fundamental polytope. Therefore, in a second step, these approaches try to find candidates for cuts resulting from other dual codewords by some strategies. In the NEW SEPARATION ALGORITHM, we do not elaborate on the satisfaction of all FS inequalities of the original parity check matrix. This has a positive effect on the overall complexity of our improved LP decoding approach. Nevertheless, CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 1 takes into account a subset of these inequalities. With CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 2 we try to derive cuts from dual codewords which are not necessarily limited to the rows of the original parity check matrix. Therefore, we alter the parity check matrix by the algorithm CONSTRUCT and check for fulfillment of the conditions explained above. If some of these conditions are satisfied for some rows of the alternative parity check matrix, then the corresponding inequality is proved to be a cut. Still, there are some similarities between these approaches such as the utilization of the same family of cuts or the efficient generation of RPC cuts.

Input: Cost vector , matrix .

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS

Output: Current optimal solution . 1: Solve RIPD.

The purpose of this section is twofold: first, we compare the error-correcting performance of our separation algorithm with the standard LP decoding [10], BP decoding, and the reference

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANATMIS et al.: SEPARATION ALGORITHM FOR IMPROVED LP-DECODING

3283

Fig. 1. Decoding performance of random (3,4) LDPC code with block length 100.

curve resulting from ML decoding. The latter results from mod- dB. For the regular (3,4) LDPC code of length 200, we were

eling and solving IPD using CPLEX 11.0 [12] as an IP solver. not able to compute the ML curve in reasonable time. The

To enable the comparison of the NEW SEPARATION ALGORITHM performance of the BP and LP decoding is very similar. For

with other improved LP decoding approaches, e.g., [5], [8], all three codes, the error-correcting performance of the NEW

[17], the same or similar codes as considered in the literature SEPARATION ALGORITHM is superior to the BP algorithm.

are used in our experiments. Second, we analyze the complexity To demonstrate that our algorithm also performs well for

and the behavior of our algorithm by collecting statistics of dense codes, we selected the

BCH code and the

the average number of cuts inserted and iterations performed

BCH code for our tests. The results for these codes

for increasing block length. The codes considered are the (3,6) are shown in Figs. 4 and 5. BP decoding does not work for this

random regular LDPC codes with

type of codes due to the dense structure of their parity check

and

BCH codes. For matrix. Our approach is one of the first attempts (see [9]) to

all tests, transmission over the Additive White Gaussian Noise decode dense codes using mathematical programming. The

(AWGN) channel is assumed. The frame error rates are calcu- results obtained by our algorithm are substantially better than

lated by counting 100 erroneous blocks. LP decoding via FS the results obtained by LP decoding and are only slightly worse

inequalities introduced in [10] cannot be used for high density than ML decoding.

codes since the number of constraints is exponential in the The improvement of error-correcting performance comes at

check node degree. This causes a prohibitive usage of memory the cost of increased complexity, i.e., more cuts are inserted and

in the phase of building the LP model. The adaptive approach more and larger LPs have to be solved. To study this trade-off

of [17] overcomes this shortcoming and yet performs as LP between performance gain and increased complexity of the NEW

decoding. Therefore, we used this method in the comparison of SEPARATION ALGORITHM and to relate it to LP decoding, Table I

algorithms.

shows a comparison of these two methods with respect to the

The performance of the four methods mentioned above was average number of iterations (i.e., number of linear programs

measured on the random regular (3,4) LDPC codes with block solved) and the average number of cuts. These average values

length 100, 200, and Tanner’s (155, 64) group structured LDPC are found by solving 500 instances generated for the SNR value

code [18]. The Frame Error Rate (FER) against signal to noise of 1.5 dB. This low SNR value is chosen, since finding the ML

ratio (SNR) measured as

is shown in Figs. 1 and 2. We codeword is more challenging for low SNR values due to the fact

used 100 iterations for BP decoding of regular (3,4) LDPC that the objective function coefficients become less reliable.

codes and Tanner’s (155, 64) LDPC code. For the regular (3,4) Compared to LP decoding, the NEW SEPARATION

LDPC code of length 100 and Tanner’s (155, 64) LDPC code ALGORITHM needs more iterations and cuts to converge to

our algorithm approaches ML decoding performance up to 0.5 an optimal solution. Observe that for codes with shorter block

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3284

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 7, JULY 2010

Fig. 2. Decoding performance of random (3,4) LDPC code with block length 200.

length, only the average number of cuts differs significantly. most of the time. Thus, it can be concluded that the complexity

This can be explained by the CONSTRUCT ALGORITHM of the NEW SEPARATION ALGORITHM is dominated by the

which tries to modify the parity check matrix such that a cut CONSTRUCT ALGORITHM.

can be introduced for each row. As the block length increases

(cf. (200, 100) LDPC and (127,99) BCH in Table I) the search space gets larger. Hence, the average number of cuts inserted

V. CONCLUSION

and LPs solved increases to ten times that of LP decoding. The

decoding performance of our approach is not affected by the

check node degree. In fact, the application of the CONSTRUCT

ALGORITHM to LDPC codes might lead to dense matrices.

An interesting question relates to the generation of cuts of a

certain type in various phases of the decoding process. The dis-

tribution of cuts generated by CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 1

and CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 2, respectively, at different

stages of the NEW SEPARATION ALGORITHM is presented in

Fig. 6. 1000 instances are solved to collect the number of cuts

generated by each of the two cut generation algorithms for the

(63,39) BCH code. Fig. 6 illustrates the distribution at a lower

SNR, i.e.,

dB, and at a higher SNR of 4.0 dB.

The black and gray boxes represent the cumulative number of

cuts generated by CGA1 and CGA2, respectively. The total

number of iterations needed to solve an instance is divided into

3 phases: a starting phase, a middle phase, and an ending phase.

For each of the 3 phases, the cuts generated by CGA1 and

CGA2 are shown. To illustrate this, suppose that an instance

is solved in iterations. Then, the distribution of cuts in

iterations 1 to are shown under “ Phase 1” in the figure. For

both SNR, the CGA1 is applied in the early iterations of the

In this paper we proposed an improved LP decoding method

for binary linear block codes. Instead of solving the optimization

problem, we solved the separation problem.

The indicator variables in IPD yield an immediate recogni-

tion of parity violations and efficient generation of cuts for the

case where the current LP solution is integral in variables. We

used on one hand the FS inequalities of [10] which are a subset

of all possible Gomory cuts. On the other hand we showed

how to generate new cuts based on redundant parity checks ef-

ficiently. It is known that RPC cuts improve LP decoding via

tightening the fundamental polytope. In our approach, once we

ensure that Theorem 3.3, Proposition 3.4, or Proposition 3.5

hold for some row

, we can immediately find the

configuration and thus the RPC cut.

These theoretical improvements are supported with empirical

evidence. Compared to LP and BP decoding our algorithm is

superior in terms of frame error rate for all the codes we have

tested. In contrast to BP, our approach is applicable to codes with

dense parity-check matrix and offers a possibility to decode such

codes.

One future research direction is to find new cut families for

NEW SEPARATION ALGORITHM. At the end of the algorithm which CUT GENERATION ALGORITHM 2 stops. The polyhedral

while converging to the optimal solution the CGA2 is applied structure of the ML decoding will be further investigated. This

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANATMIS et al.: SEPARATION ALGORITHM FOR IMPROVED LP-DECODING

3285

Fig. 3. Decoding performance of Tanner’s (155, 64) LDPC code.

Fig. 4. Decoding performance of the (63,39) BCH code. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3286

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 7, JULY 2010

Fig. 5. Decoding performance of the (127,99) BCH code.
TABLE I AVERAGE NUMBER OF CUTS AND ITERATIONS IN THE ADAPTIVE IMPLEMENTATION OF LP DECODING AND THE NEW SEPARATION ALGORITHM

will yield a branch-and-cut algorithm which we expect to further extend the applicability of our approach.

where

for some

and

. Note that is the

number of constraints added iteratively until the current step,

i.e.,

. The

matrix is the coefficient matrix of the

iteratively added constraints, i.e.,

.

We denote the RHSs of these constraints with the vector .

RIPD in standard form can be written as follows:

(9)

(10)

APPENDIX A

(11)

PROOF OF THEOREM 3.1

(12)

Proof: We apply the general method known as Gomory’s

(13)

cutting plane algorithm (see e.g., [14]) to our special case. Go-

mory cuts are derived from the rows of the simplex tableau1 in where

. For ease of notation

order to cut off nonintegral LP solutions and find the optimal we rewrite (9)–(13) as

solution to the integer linear programming problems. Consider

RIPD at any step:

(14)

1Details on the simplex algorithm can be found in classical books about linear programming, e.g., [15].

(15) (16)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANATMIS et al.: SEPARATION ALGORITHM FOR IMPROVED LP-DECODING

3287

Fig. 6. Distribution of cuts created by CGA1 and CGA2 for the (63,39) BCH code, SNR = 1:5 dB, 4.0 dB.

Note that

The constraint matrix has

rows and

columns. We denote the th row of with where

and th column of with where

. The component in row and column

is denoted by . Additionally, we define the th unit vector

as

. Thus, we rewrite as

The first columns of the constraint matrix are the unit vec-

tors corresponding to the variables

. Likewise, the

last

columns are the unit vectors corresponding to the

slack variables

.

The first linear equations of

are of the form:

Obviously,

. If is even, i.e., an even number of vari-

able nodes are set to 1 in the neighborhood of the check node ,

then

holds. Otherwise, is an odd multiple of . We

then consider the Gomory cut for this row .

For the optimal solution we can partition into a basis

submatrix and a nonbasis submatrix , i.e.,

.

Let and denote the index sets of the columns of be-

longing to and , respectively. An

basis matrix, , corresponding to the optimal solu-

tion can be constructed as follows. First we take the columns

which are the identity vectors corresponding to the

variables

into . Second for

, we

include the column

if

or

if

in

. There exists such columns due to (11) and the fact that is

integral. Finally we take the columns

corresponding to the slack variables which are written for the it-

eratively added constraints. The variables corresponding to the

columns in the basis matrix are called basic variables. The re-

maining columns of form the nonbasis submatrix . The

columns of are the columns

, for which

and the unit vectors

, for which

. The variables corresponding to the columns in are

called nonbasic variables.

The Gomory cut for row of is given by

(17)

Let

be the optimal solution

to (9)–(13). By assumption we have

. For

is given by

, where

where

, and

. Note that

in our case

since only has nonintegral components. In

the following we investigate the structure of

, and .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3288

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 7, JULY 2010

For a fixed , it can easily be verified that the entries

of

are given as

(21)
Since (21) is the FS inequality obtained from the configuration , the proof is concluded.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

(This can be verified by observing the changes on row when The authors would like to thank P. O. Vontobel, D. Schmidt,

we append an

identity matrix to and the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments

and perform the Gauss-Jordan elimination on the appended and suggestions.

matrix in order to get Having found

.) is then computed by

(18)

(19)

(20)

Thus, we showed that is times the number of basic vari-

ables in row . Since is not an integer, the number of basic

variables in row is odd. It follows that in our case the RHS of

the Gomory cut,

, is always .

Next, we compute

for

. The

columns of are the columns of corresponding to nonbasic

components, i.e.,

, and nonbasic components, i.e.,

. If

such that

,

then for a fixed value of , the entries of

are given as

If

such that

, then

is the

unit vector

.

For the case that

where

, the only

position where both

and

may have nonzero

entries is position . For all other positions

and either

or

. This implies

For the case that

where

, position

is the only position where both

and

may

have a nonzero entry. This means,

for all nonbasic variables corresponding to the basic vari-

ables in row . If we denote the nonbasic variables in row

with the index set

and the nonbasic

variables corresponding to the basic variables in row with

the index set

, we can write the Gomory cut

as

REFERENCES
[1] E. Berlekamp, R. McEliece, and H. van Tilborg, “On the inherent intractability of certain coding problems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 384–386, May 1978.
[2] M. Breitbach, M. Bossert, R. Lucas, and C. Kempter, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block codes as optimization problem,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 289–293, May–Jun. 1998.
[3] D. Burshtein, “Iterative approximate linear programming decoding of LDPC codes with linear complexity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 1498–1502.
[4] M. Chertkov and V. Y. Chernyak, “Loop calculus helps to improve belief propagation and linear programming decodings of low-densityparity-check codes,” in Proc. 44th Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Computing, Monticello, IL, Sep. 2006.
[5] M. Chertkov, “Reducing the error floor,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Tahoe City, CA, Sep. 2007, pp. 230–235.
[6] M. Chertkov and M. Stepanov, “Pseudo-codeword landscape,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1546–1550.
[7] C. Daskalakis, A. G. Dimakis, R. M. Karp, and M. J. Wainwright, “Probabilistic analysis of linear programming decoding,” in Proc. 18th Ann. Symp. Discrete Algorithms (SODA), New Orleans, LA, Jan. 2007.
[8] A. G. Dimakis, A. A. Gohari, and M. J. Wainwright, “Guessing facets: Polytope structure and improved LP decoder,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 3479–3487, Aug. 2009.
[9] S. C. Draper, J. S. Yedidia, and Y. Wang, “ML decoding via mixedinteger adaptive linear programming,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1656–1660.
[10] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[11] J. Feldman, T. Malkin, R. A. Servedio, C. Stein, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding corrects a constant fraction of errors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 82–89, Jan. 2007.
[12] ILOG CPLEX 9.0 Users Manual ILOG SA, France, 2003. [13] M. Miwa, T. Wadayama, and I. Takumi, “A cutting-plane method based
on redundant rows for improving fractional distance,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1005–1012, Aug. 2009. [14] G. L. Nemhauser and L. A. Wolsey, “Integer and combinatorial optimization,” in Wiley-Interscience Series in Discrete Mathematics and Optimization. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 1988. [15] A. Schrijver, Theory of Linear and Integer Programming. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 1986. [16] M. H. Taghavi, A. Shokrollahi, and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient implementation of linear programming decoding,” in Proc. 46th Ann. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Computing, Monticello, IL, Sep. 2008. [17] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5396–5410, Dec. 2008. [18] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Technol. Appl., Kharkiv, Ukraine, Jun. 2001. [19] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Towards low-complexity linear-programming decoding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006. [20] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding of finite length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 75–82. [21] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Lower bounds on the minimum pseudoweight of linear codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun.–Jul. 2004, p. 70. [22] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On the relationship between linear programming decoding and min-sum algorithm decoding,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl., Parma, Italy, Oct. 2004, pp. 991–996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANATMIS et al.: SEPARATION ALGORITHM FOR IMPROVED LP-DECODING

3289

[23] K. Yang, J. Feldman, and X. Wang, “Nonlinear programming approaches to decoding low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1603–1613, Aug. 2006.
[24] K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman, “A new linear programming approach to decoding linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1061–1072, Mar. 2008.
Akin Tanatmis received the B.Sc. degree in industrial engineering from Bilkent University in 2002 and the Diploma in Mathematics from University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany, in 2006.
Since 2006, he has been a Ph.D. student with the Optimization Group, Department of Mathematics, University of Kaiserslautern.

2004 the inaugural Julius-von-Haast award of the New Zealand Department of Research and an Honorary Professorship of the University of Auckland.
Mayur Punekar (M’07) was born in Vadodara, India, in 1982. He received the B.E. degree in electronics and communications engineering from DDU, Nadiad, India, in 2003, and the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany, in 2006.
He was a Research Assistant with the Microelectronic Systems Design Research Group, University of Kaiserslautern, from 2006 to 2009. Since January 2010, he has been a Ph.D. student with the Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University College Dublin, Ireland. He is also affiliated with the Claude Shannon Institute for Discrete Mathematics, Coding and Cryptography, Dublin. His research interests are in the area of iterative message passing and linear programming decoding, VLSI implementation of digital signal processing systems, and wireless networks.

Stefan Ruzika received the M.S. degree in mathematics from Clemson University, Clemson, SC, in 2002, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in mathematics from the University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany, in 2003 and 2007, respectively.
Since 2008, he has been an Assistant Professor with the University of Kaiserslautern. His research interests include coding theory, combinatorial optimization, and multiple objective programming.

Frank Kienle (S’01–M’06) received the Diploma in electrical engineering and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany, in 2001 and 2006, respectively.
He held a Postdoctoral position with the Microelectronic Systems Design Research Group, University of Kaiserslautern, from 2006 to 2008. Since 2009, he holds the position Akademischer Rat and is heading the Communications Research Group.

Horst W. Hamacher received the diploma and Ph.D. degree in mathematics and management science from the University of Köln, Germany, in 1977 and 1980, respectively.
Between 1980 and 1988, he was Assistant/Associate Professor with the University of Florida, Gainesville, and founder and director of the Center for Optimization and Combinatorics (COCO). In 1987, he became a Professor with the Department of Mathematics, University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany, where he currently holds a chair in Management Mathematics. Between 1994 and 1997, he was Vice-President of this university. His main interest is in the modeling of problems in industry and society using mathematical optimization, which is funded by numerous research grants and published in 20 books and some 100 papers in international research journals.
Dr. Hamacher is the current president of the German Operations Research Society (GOR). For his models on cancer radiation planning, he received in

Norbert Wehn (M’98–SM’10) received the diploma in electrical engineering and the Ph.D. degree from the TU Darmstadt, Germany, in 1984 and 1989, respectively.
From 1991 to 1997, he was with Siemens AG at various positions. In 1997, he was appointed as a Professor with the University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany, and Chairs the Microelectronic System Design Research Group. He has more than 200 publications and holds several patents. His special research interests are VLSI-architectures for mobile communication, forward error correction techniques, low-power, advanced System-on-Chip architectures and reliability issues in System-on-Chip.
Dr. Wehn is Chairman of the European Design Automation Association. In 2003, he served as Program Chair for DATE Conference in 2003 and as General Chair for DATE Conference 2005, respectively. He is an IEEE Golden Core member.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:50:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

