664
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 14, NO. 7, JULY 2010
Adaptive Mixed Scheduling for Correcting Errors in
Trapping Sets of LDPC Codes
Saejoon Kim, Member, IEEE, Seunghyuk Lee, Jun Heo, Member, IEEE, and Chong S. Rim
Abstract—Trapping sets of low-density parity-check codes
are the problematic substructures that contribute to the error
floor behavior under iterative decoding. Adoption of mixed
scheduling for belief propagation decoding has shown to be
very effective in solving some of the trapping sets. In this letter,
we propose an adaptive mixed scheduling scheme that provides
significantly improved code performance compared to existing
mixed scheduling schemes.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, trapping sets, mixed scheduling.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE error floor behavior of finite-length low-density
parity-check (LDPC) codes over the additive white Gaus-
sian noise (AWGN) channel under iterative decoding is at-
tributed to the bad substructures known as trapping sets [7]
present in the code. It was recently shown that a way to
correct the errors present in the trapping sets is through
modifying the decoder’s scheduling scheme [1] [2]. In a
related work, [1] [6] and references therein have shown that
sending messages in a sequence from subsets of variable and
check nodes, broadly called the sequential scheduling scheme,
can improve the convergence speed and the asymptotic code
performance compared to the flooding scheme. In particular,
a class of sequential decoding schemes known as informed
dynamic scheduling (IDS) [1] [2] has shown to yield excellent
code performance partially by correcting errors contained in
trapping sets.
While IDS schemes are able to correct errors contained in
trapping sets of LDPC codes, these scheduling strategies incur
non-trapping set errors due to their greedy nature. Specifically,
these non-trapping set errors do not arise when decoded by the
flooding or a non-greedy sequential scheduling scheme. To this
end, to correct errors present in trapping sets while avoiding
non-trapping set errors as well, Casado et al. [2] proposed a
mixed scheduling scheme in which a non-greedy sequential
scheduling scheme is performed first to take care of the non-
trapping set errors and afterward an IDS scheme is performed
to solve errors in trapping sets. This mixed scheduling scheme
yielded improved performance for some codes compared to an
Manuscript received December 16, 2009. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this letter and approving it for publication was V. Stankovic.
S. Kim, S. Lee, and C. S. Rim are with the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul, Korea (e-mail: sae-
joon@sogang.ac.kr).
J. Heo is with the School of Electrical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul,
Korea.
The work of S. Kim was supported by the Basic Science Research Program
through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2009-0074611), and by the
Special Research Grant of Sogang University 200911057.01. The work of J.
Heo was supported by a Korea University Grant 2007.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2010.07.092417
IDS scheme processed alone. However the condition for the
switch from a non-greedy sequential scheduling scheme to an
IDS scheme remained as a topic for further investigation.
We address the issue of the switch condition from the first
to the second scheduling schemes in this letter. We propose an
adaptive switch condition where the switch iteration dynami-
cally changes as decoding progresses and it will be shown that
our proposed scheme significantly improves on the previous
mixed scheduling schemes by nearly an order of magnitude
in terms of word-error-rate (WER) for some signal-to-noise
ratios (SNRs).
II. MIXED SCHEDULING SCHEMES
Sequential belief propagation decoding refers to updating
messages in a sequential order where the order can either be
predetermined or change dynamically according to the mes-
sages generated during the decoding process. Layered belief
propagation (LBP) decoding [4] belongs to the former type
of sequential decoding in which subsets of check-to-variable
node messages and the corresponding variable-to-check node
messages are sequentially updated in a predetermined order.
LBP decoding is known to converge faster than and yield code
performance that is superior to flooding.
Nodewise residual belief propagation (NWRBP) [1] is an
IDS scheme that belongs to the latter type of sequential decod-
ing. It schedules the message updates according to the value
of the residual of the message [3]. In NWRBP, only the check-
to-variable node messages associated with the largest residual
and the corresponding variable-to-check node messages are
selected for each update. Thus, the current state of messages
in the graph is used to dynamically update only parts of
the graph at a time to increase the decoding convergence
speed. As mentioned before, this dynamical updating structure
also contributes to correcting errors contained in trapping sets
which become dominant as SNR increases. For these reasons,
NWRBP offer both better convergence speed and asymptotic
performance than the flooding scheme.
On the other hand, while the greedy nature of NWRBP
scheme enables correcting errors contained in trapping sets, it
comes at a cost of incurring non-trapping set errors that do not
arise when decoded by the flooding or a non-greedy sequential
scheduling scheme. To remedy this drawback of NWRBP, i.e.,
correct errors present in trapping sets while avoiding non-
trapping set errors as well, Casado et al. [2] have proposed
a mixed scheduling scheme in which a non-greedy sequential
scheduling scheme is first processed to take care of the non-
trapping set errors while NWRBP is processed afterwards
to solve errors contained in trapping sets in the error-floor
region. In [2], LBP was used as the non-greedy sequential
1089-7798/10$25.00 c⃝2010 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KIM et al.: ADAPTIVE MIXED SCHEDULING FOR CORRECTING ERRORS IN TRAPPING SETS OF LDPC CODES
665
scheduling scheme and various switch conditions from the
first to the second scheduling schemes were proposed that
provided improved asymptotic code performance for codes
that do contain non-trapping set errors. Switch conditions can
be categorized into fixed and adaptive where in the former,
switch occurs after a predetermined number of decoding
iterations, and in the latter, it occurs when a given condition
is satisfied. Since the fixed type needs to be modified for
better performance according to the type of code used and
the SNR environments, we focus here on the adaptive type
that generalize better.
III. PROPOSED ADAPTIVE MIXED SCHEDULING SCHEME
Our proposed scheduling scheme is a version of the mixed
scheduling scheme of [2] in which the switch iteration from
LBP to NWRBP adaptively changes. The only previously
known adaptive switch condition has been presented in [2]
and has used the number of unsatisfied check nodes as the
threshold measure. The number of unsatisfied check nodes,
which we denote by ¯𝑆, is the number of check nodes whose
neighbors (after hard-decision decoding) do not sum to 0
modulo 2. Specifically, in [2] the switch from the first to
the second scheduling scheme is activated if ¯𝑆is below
a predetermined threshold or if the iteration number hits
30 whichever comes earlier. The use of ¯𝑆as the threshold
is appropriate since it is known that the most problematic
trapping sets have small values of ¯𝑆[7].
On the other hand, experiments have indicated that the
minimum value of ¯𝑆can vary significantly for different
SNRs and simulation runs, and the value of ¯𝑆can fluctuate
frequently with respect to the number of iterations in a given
simulation run. Therefore, it is difficult to set a fixed number as
the threshold below which a switch should occur. Furthermore,
as will be shown in the next section, while appropriate the use
of the minimum value of ¯𝑆for the switch is not optimal in
terms of minimizing the WER.
As a related measure to ¯𝑆, consider the following
𝐿∗= 1
𝑛
𝑛
∑
𝑖=1
∣LLR(𝑖)∣
deg(𝑖)
where LLR(𝑖) and deg(𝑖) are the LLR value and the degree
of the variable node 𝑖, respectively, ∣⋅∣is the absolute value
sign, and 𝑛is the number of variable nodes. This expression is
designed to represent an average reliability of variable nodes
since LLR values of correctly decoded variable nodes, in
general, tend to be larger than those of incorrectly decoded
ones. The degree of the variable node factor was included for
fair weighing of each variable node’s LLR value. Thus, the
larger the value of 𝐿∗is, the higher the average reliability
of variable nodes is. In particular, as ¯𝑆is an approximate
measure of the amount of incorrectly decoded variable nodes,
the values of ¯𝑆and 𝐿∗possess trend that are approximately
inversely proportional as decoding progresses. A positive
example of this trend will be demonstrated in the next section.
Attractive feature of 𝐿∗which suits for our purpose is that
its value changes more gradually with respect to decoding
iterations than ¯𝑆. Specifically, in a given window of iterations,
while ¯𝑆can have multiple local minima that take on a wide
Fig. 1.
Values of 𝐿∗(left 𝑦-axis) and ¯𝑆(right 𝑦-axis) during LBP decoding.
range of values, 𝐿∗normally has only a few of local maxima
probably since it is the average LLR value over all variable
nodes. Thus, it is more computationally feasible to move to
the decoding iteration that achieves a large value of 𝐿∗, by
going one decoding iteration backwards, than that achieves a
small value of ¯𝑆as decoding progresses.
In our proposed adaptive mixed scheduling, the switch from
LBP to NWRBP is activated at the decoding iteration that
achieves the first or the second local maximum of 𝐿∗or if
the iteration number hits a given number, e.g., 30, whichever
comes earlier. Decoding finishes whenever ¯𝑆= 0, and if
the switch is made, NWRBP is processed with the messages
inherited from LBP. Simulation results indicate that switch at
the first local maximum yielded the best performance for a
moderate number of iterations while that at the second local
maximum yielded the best asymptotic performance. We can
deduce that in the former case, the switch is made prematurely
before LBP’s capability to correct non-trapping set errors is
fully executed. Switch at later local maxima did not perform
as well, and we believe LLRs of some of variable nodes in
error that were generated from LBP became too large to be
corrected by NWRBP in this case.
Computational cost of our scheme in comparison to LBP
or NWRBP is the additional need, until the switch is made,
to calculate for 𝐿∗after each decoding iteration which takes
only a linear amount of time and to store the values of check-
to-variable node messages of the previous decoding iteration
for use by NWRBP in case the switch is made.
IV. RESULTS
In this section, we show simulation results of various belief
propagation decoding algorithms of LDPC codes used over the
AWGN channel. In all simulations, we used a rate- 1
2, length
500 code that was generated from the progressive-edge growth
(PEG) algorithm [5] using an optimal degree distribution.
Figure 1 shows a typical example of 𝐿∗(left 𝑦-axis) and
¯𝑆(right 𝑦-axis) curves with respect to decoding iterations
(𝑥-axis) when LBP decoding is processed. The two curves
are approximately inversely proportional to each other as
described before, and clearly, it is much easier to identify
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
666
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 14, NO. 7, JULY 2010
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Iterations
WER
N=500, R=1/2, SNR=3.0dB
 
 
Flooding
LBP
Adaptive*
Min(S)
L*(1)
L*(2)
Fig. 2.
WER performance of belief propagation decoding algorithms for
𝑁= 500, 𝑅= 1
2 PEG algorithm-generated LDPC code at 3.0dB.
2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
Eb/No
WER
N=500, R=1/2, Iterations=50
 
 
Flooding
LBP
Adaptive*
Min(S)
L*(1)
L*(2)
Fig. 3.
WER performance of belief propagation decoding algorithms for
𝑁= 500, 𝑅= 1
2 PEG algorithm-generated LDPC code after 50 iterations.
the maximum of 𝐿∗curve than to identify the minimum of
¯𝑆curve in a window of decoding iterations. We note that we
follow the changes of 𝐿∗to select the iteration for switch and
not its absolute values which can vary significantly from one
simulation run to another.
Figure 2 shows the WER performance of the flooding
(“Flooding”), LBP (“LBP”), adaptive mixed scheduling of [2]
(“Adaptive∗”), an optimal mixed scheduling scheme using ¯𝑆
as the switch condition (“Min( ¯𝑆)”), and our proposed mixed
scheduling schemes (“𝐿∗(1)” and “𝐿∗(2)”) with respect to
decoding iterations at 3.0 dB. Threshold value used for
“Adaptive∗” was 11 which was optimized through exhaustive
search from 5 to 20. “𝐿∗(1)” and “𝐿∗(2)” represent our
proposed scheduling schemes using the first and the second
local maxima as the switch condition, respectively.
Optimal mixed scheduling when ¯𝑆is used as the switch
condition represents the scheduling scheme that processes the
switch when ¯𝑆(> 0) is the minimum. We have included
this practically unrealistic scheme to illustrate the limit up to
which code performance using ¯𝑆as the threshold measure
can achieve. In our example, ¯𝑆value of the first 30 decoding
iterations were observed to select the switch iteration.
The figure clearly illustrates that all sequential and mixed
scheduling schemes perform noticeably better than the flood-
ing scheme. In particular, it shows that our proposed schemes
significantly outperform “Adaptive∗.” Furthermore, “𝐿∗(1)”
outperforms “Min( ¯𝑆)” for a moderate number of decod-
ing iterations, and “𝐿∗(2)” outperforms all other scheduling
schemes asymptotically. Note “Min( ¯𝑆)” performs much better
than “Adaptive∗” due to the previously mentioned fact that
the minimum value of ¯𝑆can vary significantly for different
simulation runs.
Figure 3 shows the WER performance of the six scheduling
schemes shown in Fig. 2 with respect to SNR after 50
decoding iterations. For the range of SNRs shown in the figure,
“𝐿∗(2)” performs the best and “𝐿∗(1)” performs almost
identical to “Min( ¯𝑆)” which represents the performance of
using the minimum value of ¯𝑆for the switch. This sheds us
with the information that 𝐿∗can serve as a better threshold
for the switch than ¯𝑆in a mixed scheduling scheme. Note
that our proposed schemes perform increasingly better than
“LBP” as SNR increases or trapping set errors become more
dominant in determining code performance.
V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we have proposed a novel adaptive mixed
scheduling scheme that can correct errors contained in trap-
ping sets of LDPC codes without incurring many non-trapping
set errors. In particular, the proposed scheme improved on the
previous mixed scheduling scheme of [2] by nearly an order
of magnitude in terms of WER. Simulation results have shown
us that the average magnitude of LLRs of variable nodes
normalized by their respective degrees can serve as a better
threshold for the switch from a non-greedy scheduling scheme
to an IDS scheme than the number of unsatisfied check nodes.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling
for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE International
Conference on Communications, 2007.
[2] A. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “Improving LDPC decoders
via informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Information Theory Workshop,
2007.
[3] G. Elidan, I. McGraw, and D. Koller, “Residual belief propagation:
informed scheduling for asynchronous message passing,” in Proc. Con-
ference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, MIT, USA, July 2006.
[4] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered
decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Signal Processing Systems 2004, pp.
107-112, Oct. 2004.
[5] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular
progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.
51, no. 1, pp. 386-398, Jan. 2005.
[6] H. Kfir and I. Kanter, “Parallel versus sequential updating for belief
propagation decoding,” Physica A, vol. 330, pp. 259-270, Sep. 2003.
[7] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. on
Communication, Control, and Computing, 2003.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
