Design of Machine learning based Decoding Algorithms for Codes on Graph
*

Joyal Sunny Dept of ECE Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Technology Kottayam,Kerala,India 20ml1735@rit.ac.in

Ameenudeen P E Dept of ECE
College of Engineering Trivandrum,Kerala,India
ameen@cet.ac.in

Renjith H Kumar Dept of ECE
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Technology Kottayam,Kerala,India renjithhk@rit.ac.in

2022 IEEE Silchar Subsection Conference (SILCON) | 978-1-6654-7100-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/SILCON55242.2022.10028934

Abstract—In a communication system, it is more challenging to receive a signal at the receiver than it is to transmit one. The receiver’s task and complexity are larger than the transmitter’s because the received signal must travel over a channel where it will be attenuated and distorted. Communication over unstable noisy channels is made possible by channel coding. Channel encoding is done at the transmitter in the baseband domain and at the receiver, it can be effectively retrieved by using a variety of techniques. This study discusses Belief Propagation (BP) and the Min sum technique for decoding the LDPC encoded codewords using Tanner graphs. We also examine a method to decode the encoded data in a communication system, where the decoding algorithm at the receiver is recast as a machine learning process. So a receiver designed using deep learning techniques can always adapt to the changes in the channel optimization techniques and thus reduce the overall computational complexity.
Index Terms—Low density parity check(LDPC),Belief Propagation(BP),Sum Product Algorithm(SPA),Tanner Graphs,MinSum Algorithm, Bit Error Rate(BER)
I. INTRODUCTION
The proliferation of different communication technologies is playing a key role in developing human lifestyles. Wireless communication technologies have made a great impact on the world by enhancing connectivity and transforming it into a globally connected network. When transmitting information, it will encounter noise, which will deteriorate the signal. Recent advancements in the design of communication receivers mainly aim to improve the fidelity of the reception of information [5]. To reproduce the exact information from the noisy data, channel coding schemes such as hamming codes and Low Density Parity Check(LDPC) codes were introduced, in which some extra bits will be added to the information bits to recover the data efficiently [2]. It has been proved that a neural network-based decoder gives a better error-correcting performance compared to conventional decoding techniques [3].
For a wide variety of communication channels, the channel capacity is defined by the noisy-channel coding theorem of information theory and the theory proves that for any given
978-1-6654-7100-8/22/$31.00 © 2022 IEEE

degree of noise contamination of a communication channel, it is possible to communicate discrete data nearly error-free up to a determinable maximum data rate through the channel. Thus we can have a zero error probabilistic decoding of data.
The LDPC codes mainly depend on a parity check matrix which is a sparse matrix in which the matrix has a low density of the number of ones present in the matrix. The regular LDPC is represented by (n, Wc, Wr) where n is the block length, Wc is the number of ones present in the columns of the matrix, Wr is the number of ones in each row of the parity check matrix [1]. In a regular LDPC parity check matrix, the number of ones in each row is the same.
The channel decoders can be classified based on hard and soft decoding methods. In the case of hard decision decoding, a block of bits after the threshold stage of the receiver is considered. The voltage obtained after sampling the received signal is compared to a preset threshold value. If this value is greater than the threshold, the bit is decoded as a 1 otherwise it is decoded as a 0. This decoding is done irrespective of how close the voltage is to the threshold value of the receiver [2]. In the case of soft decoding, the algorithm will take a block of bits and decodes the data by considering a range of possible values that may correct the received data. This method makes some inferences on data as part of probabilistic estimation with the channel noise variations. Soft decoding provides a better error correction capability[10].
In soft decoding, there are many algorithms that were used to decode the LDPC encoded code words efficiently such as the Bit flipping Algorithm, Belief Propagation (BP) Algorithm, and Min Sum Algorithm. These techniques are complex message-passing-based algorithms [9]. In this paper we rely on soft decoding techniques to decode the data, where the BP and Min Sum algorithms are realized using neural networks with the aid of Tanner Graphs. So by embedding these algorithms with neural networks, the receiver can learn from the data sets and acquire the data that have a better match and these types of receivers can also deal with Co-channel interference or jamming [5].
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we first

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

describe the LDPC Codes. Later, in Section III, the BP decoder and Min sum decoder will be introduced. Then the proposed system model is introduced, and the neural BP and neural Min Sum decoders will be compared in Section IV. Section V deals with experiments and the results formulated with the aid of simulation software. Section VI discuses the inference and future scopes of this work. Finally, we conclude this work in Section VII.

II. LOW DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODES

LDPC codes are one of the channel coding techniques which was introduced by Gallager in 1981 [1]. These codes are represented by a sparse matrix known as a parity check matrix. These matrices can be realized using Tanner graphs for decoding the data from received noisy bits with the aid of the BP algorithm. Many algorithms have been proposed for decoding LDPC codes and the BP algorithm gives the best performance. The better performance is achieved by decreasing the error rate of the decoded received data for a given channel [4]. So to decode the data we need a parity check matrix which is shown in equation (1) and its corresponding Tanner graph is shown in figure 1.

0 1 0 1 1 0 0 1

1 1 1 0 0 1 0 0

 

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

 

(1)

10011010

A Tanner graph is a pictorial representation of the parity check matrix which constitutes variable nodes represented by circles and check nodes represented by squares as shown in figure 1. The columns of the matrix are mapped as variable nodes that indicate the received bits from the channel and the rows of the matrix are mapped as check nodes that indicate the parity check equations that have been involved in encoding the data [9]. A non-zero element in the matrix forms the connecting edge between the variable nodes and check nodes. This denotes that the data at the variable nodes get participated in the parity check equations that are specified by the check nodes in the Tanner graph [9].

The orange color edges in Figure 1 show a cycle in the Tanner graph which is a closed path that starts from a variable node and returns to the same node. The number of edges of a closed path determines the length of the cycle. A cycle of length 4 is shown in Figure 1.

III. SOFT DECODING TECHNIQUES
A. BP algorithm
Most of the soft decoding algorithms for LDPC codes are derived from the BP algorithm. It is a message-passing algorithm that uses graphical models to come up with a conclusion. The BP algorithm is also known as the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA). Here the algorithm performs a probabilistic decoding on the Tanner graphs by passing messages from the variable nodes(VN) to the check nodes(CN) and from the check nodes back to the variable nodes. The algorithm considers the posterior probabilities of the received bits in terms of channel noise observations [10]. As the requisite probability of the original encoded data is met at the decoder, the messages will iterate through the edges of the Tanner graph.
In an iterative message-passing algorithm the bit LogLikelihood Ratio (LLR) of the received code word is calculated. The data bits M = (m1...mn) is encoded as X =(x1....xn) by multiplying the data bits M with a generator matrix and then the encoded data X is modulated using binary phase shift keying and transmitted over an AWGN channel [4]. The received signal Y = (y1...yn) is the vector Y corresponding to a transmitted codeword X and the LLR of the vth bit in X is defined as

ℓv

=

ln

Pr Pr

(yv (yv

| |

xv xv

= =

0) 1)

(2)

where the P r (yv —xv) denotes the transition probability from xv to yv.
The decoding of LDPC codes using BP can be described as iterative message exchanges between variable nodes and check nodes. During an iteration i, the message from a variable node to a check node is denoted by equation (3).

ℓv(in)→cn = ℓvn +

ℓ(cin−′ →1)v n

(3)

cn′∈N (v)\cn

where N (v) denotes the neighboring node-set of v, consisting of check nodes that are adjacent to the variable nodes, and N (v)/c denotes the neighboring node-set except the check nodes.
The message passing from a check node to a variable node is represented by the following equation.

Fig. 1. Corresponding Tanner graph of Parity check matrix given in (1).



ℓ(cin)→vn = 2 tanh−1 

tanh

vn′∈N (c)\vn

ℓv(in)′ →cn 2

  (4)

where N (c) denotes the neighboring node-set of check nodes consisting of variable nodes which are adjacent to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

check node, and N (c) \vn denotes the neighboring node-set except the variable nodes. At the first iteration,cn → vn is initialized to 0 in (3).
After i iterations, the soft estimation sv about the LLR for the code bit (xv) is written as

sv = ℓvn +

ℓ(cin)′ →v n

(5)

cn′∈N (v)

The decision is made by

xˆv

=

1−

sgn (sv) 2

(6)

where the function sgn (sv) denotes the sign of sv. The above mentioned equations from (2) to (6) and corre-

sponding steps describe the procedure of iterative decoding of

received code words and probabilistic decision-making with

BP.

Fig. 2. Block diagram of proposed system.

B. Min-Sum Algorithm

A. Neural Network Based Decoder

In case of the BP algorithm, performance of the decoder is far better but the computational complexity makes the algorithm not feasible for larger block length codes. To implement equation (4) the BP decoder needs hyperbolic tangent functions and many multiplications. These procedures take more time dependencies on codes that have large length [4]. So to reduce the computational complexity, the Min-Sum (MS) algorithm is used where equation (4) is approximated as

The neural network based decoder is designed using soft decoding algorithms which were mentioned in section III. These soft decoding algorithms are taken into neural network based decoders with the help of a Tanner graph through which the messages are passed by adding weights to the edges of the Tanner graphs. Figure 3 shows a block diagram of the decoder with trained weights assigned to the nodes of the Tanner graph. These weights will be trained using stochastic

gradient descent which is one of the standard methods for





training neural networks [13]. To achieve the minimum error

ℓc(in)→vn = 

sgn

ℓv(in)′ →cn

× min vn′∈N (cn)\vn

ℓ(vin)′ →cn

while decoding, the neural model undergoes multiple iterations

vn′∈N (cn)\vn

(7) by passing the message between the nodes of the graph. By

As the decoding starts, the log-likelihood ratio of the signals this approach, optimal weights can be assigned to the nodes

obtained from the channel is computed and then it gets passed of graph which results in good BER performance.In a neural

from the variable nodes to check nodes.

based decoder the equations (3), (4) and (5) are replaced by

This message passing (using equation (3)) between the nodes happens repeatedly as the number of iterations progress. After the parity calculation of the received coded bits, it will be corrected by passing the messages from the check nodes to the variable nodes by equation (7). So by considering (7)





1

xi,e=(vn,cn) = tanh  2 wi,vlv +

wi,e,e′ xi−1,e′ 

e′ =(v,c′ ),c′ ̸=c

(8)

for odd i,

and (4) we can realize that the computational complexity has





reduced with slight performance loss in Min-Sum decoding when compared to BP. There were different modifications like

xi,e=(vn,cn) = 2 tanh−1 

xi−1,e′  (9)

e′=(v′,c),v′≠ v

normalized Min-Sum decoding and offset Min-Sum decoding suggested by scaling the Min-Sum algorithm by which the for even i, and

performance loss that occurred could be compensated.





IV. PROPOSED SYSTEM DESIGN
In recent years neural networks have made a great impact on different signal processing and communication systems.

ov = σ w2L+1,vlv +

w 2L+1,v,ee′ x2L,e′ )

e′ =(v ,c′ )

(10)

where σ(x) ≡ (1 + e−x)−1 is a sigmoid function. The

These networks are capable of having their own intelligence sigmoid is added so that the final network output is in the

to process the data according to the desired outputs. So here range [0,1]. This makes it possible to train the network using

we go through a communication system in which the data a cross entropy loss function. Apart from the addition of the

has been channel coded using LDPC and then modulated sigmoid function at the outputs of the network, one can see that

using digital communication techniques. At the receiver, the by setting all the weights to one, Equations (8)-(10) degenerate

modulated signals are decoded with the aid of trained neural to (3)-(5). Hence by optimal training of the parameters of the

decoders. Figure 2 shows the proposed system block diagram. neural network, its performance cannot be inferior to plain

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BP. Therefore to train the network we need a data set which symbolizes the noisy versions of the small codewords.The goal is to train the parameters {wi,v, wi,e,e′ , wi,v,e′ } to achieve an N dimensional output codeword which is as close as possible to the transmitted codeword. By training the neural networks, the weights to be added at the edges of the Tanner graph will get optimized and are evaluated under different constraints[3].

simple BP decoder was implemented using Matlab. Figure 4 shows the results of BP decoder where a message consisting of five bits is encoded into a codeword of ten bits. Then the data is transmitted over an AWGN channel and the received codeword is decoded with conditional probabilistic algorithms. Figure

Fig. 4. The BER v/s SNR graph of low density parity check decoder using BP algorithm.

Fig. 3. Block diagram of a neural based channel decoder with trained weights assigned to the nodes of Tanner graph.
As the neural BP has more computational complexity, the neural network based algorithm requires an extra multiplication for each input message. Both have the same number of layers and the same number of non-zero weights in the Tanner graph. So this problem can be optimized using a neural Min-Sum decoder. In case of implementation of the neural BP decoder, it faces severe challenges due to the repeated multiplications and hyperbolic functions used to compute the check node function. So to overcome these challenges Min-Sum approximation is often used in the practical neural decoder implementations [3]. In Min-Sum decoding the equations (3) and (5) are unchanged and equation(4) is replaced with equation (11).

4 shows how the channel coding can increase the message fidelity while transmitting data at a lesser signal power.
The neural network based channel decoder was implemented using TensorFlow platform, with the help of an opensource library sionna for digital communication. Firstly, we have done the training of a BP based neural network by making a neural model for the soft decoding algorithm. Then the model is trained using different data sets to obtain the values of the weights to match the decoding results of the desired output. Figure 5 shows the distribution of the weights after training the model.

xi,e=(vn,cn) =

min

|xi−1,e′ |

sign (xi−1,e′ )

e′=(v′,c),v′≠ v

e′=(v′,c),v′≠ v

(11)

The Min-Sum approximations have slight degradation in de-

coding errors, but the complexity of the decoder is normalized

to achieve better functioning of the decoder. In case of neural

networks, this slight performance loss can be eliminated by

further modifying the Min-Sum Algorithm.

V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
In this work, we have implemented a simple encoder and decoder for a (7, 4) Hamming code using python. Then a

Fig. 5. Decoder weight distribution after training.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

When the block length is large, the weights created after training require a lot of memory to store the data. Hence the neural model should load the weights to the nodes, so that they can be normalized to a single weight value with the same performance as that of the trained BP model.

Fig. 8. Plot of BER v/s Eb/N0 results of neural network based Min-Sum decoding for LDPC(800,400,400) code.

Fig. 6. Plot of BER v/s Eb/N0 results of trained decoder model with scaled weights.

Figure 6 shows the comparison of the trained and untrained models with the weights scaled, where the x-axis denotes Eb/N0 denotes the ratio of energy per bit to the noise spectral density and the y-axis denotes Bit Error Rate. From the figure, we can observe that the scaled weights and the trained outputs overlap each other. After training, the model testing is done using LDP C(800, 400, 400) code. Figure 7 shows the trained and untrained results for the tested data where the model is trained multiple times and the performance is approximated for the received code words.
Fig. 7. Plot of BER v/s Eb/N0 results of neural network based BP decoding for LDP C(800, 400, 400) code.
Now the above procedure is repeated for the neural MinSum decoder, where the same data set is used for training and LDP C(800, 400, 400) is used for testing the trained model. Figure 8 shows the results of trained and untrained LDPC neural decoders using Min-Sum algorithm. When we look at the comparison between the neural BP decoder and the neural

Fig. 9. Comparison of Neural Belief Propagation vs Min-Sum decoding on LDPC(800,400,400).
Min-Sum decoder shown in figure 9, the min sum decoder has a slight performance loss.
This performance loss can be compensated using advanced optimizations of Min-Sum algorithms that give the same performance as the BP decoder. Regarding the run time needed to test the given LDPC code, the Min-Sum algorithm gives faster decoding for the transmitted block data when compared to the BP algorithm which is shown in figure 10. Hence we can conclude that the computational complexity of the BP decoding can be reduced using Min-Sum decoding optimizations.
So designing a neural based channel decoder is more complex than a conventional one but the performance of neural based decoder has good response as that of the existing algorithms. In case of neural based decoding, the decoder can be modified using new optimizations easily to achieve good performance in machine learning based channel decoding techniques.
VI. INFERENCE AND FUTURE SCOPE
In this work, neural based decoders are realized using the Tanner graph which is used to state constraints or equations which denotes error correcting codes. In this case an LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

performance. Then a neural based BP and Min-Sum algorithm were implemented and its performance and complexity were also evaluated. The implementation of neural based decoder is complex task, the unavailability of different data sets for training the neural model can degrade the performance of decoder. In wireless communication due to the multi-path fading of signals, these type of decoders experiences huge loss in data at the destination and the results in poor fidelity. Thus using a machine learning based decoder and by training the neural models with different data sets, we can enhance the decoding efficiency of the designed decoder.

Fig. 10. Run time comparison of Neural Belief Propagation and Min-Sum decoding.
code is taken and the corresponding parity check matrix is represented using a Tanner graph. The neural network based LDPC decoder model is designed in correspondence with the Tanner graph constraints. This model uses channel coding data sets and the channel parameters depend on simulated channel models. Here we have used AWGN channel for our simulation works.
Soft decoding algorithms are realized in this work and the decoders work on probabilistic decoding mechanisms. While designing a communication system the receiver will be aware of what type of data that it can retrieve but due to noises the received signals may change. By considering the channel parameters, the decoder can make the probabilistic ratios on the desired values. The decoding mechanisms are recast as a neural based system.
For probabilistic decoding, the belief propagation based neural decoder model was implemented. After testing it with the LDPC data sets, the belief propagation based decoder gave better performance but it has a huge computational complexity. Hence an advanced version of belief propagation which is termed as Min-Sum algorithm was implemented. In this decoder, the computational complexity is reduced but it suffers from performance loses.
We have discussed a communication system that can learn from the received signals so that it can adapt to the desired output. Artificial Intelligence based decoders are capable of making a communication system more advanced and can be used for more specific applications in the future.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this work, we have implemented and compared different soft channel decoding techniques. The application of neural networks in channel decoding has been realized on the basis of BP algorithm. Though BP algorithm has good decoding abilities, it degrades the overall performance due to the computational complexity of the algorithm. Different modifications to the BP algorithm have been tested to optimize the neural decoder for better performance. One such modification namely, the Min-Sum algorithm, showed a better

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, ”Low-density parity-check codes,” in IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, January 1962.
[2] R. W. Hamming, ”Error detecting and error correcting codes,” in The Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 147-160, April 1950.
[3] E. Nachmani, Y. Beery and D. Burshtein, “Learning to Decode Linear Codes Using Deep Learning,” IEEE Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), pp. 341-346., 2016.
[4] J. Dai et al., ”Learning to Decode Protograph LDPC Codes,” in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 19831999, July 2021.
[5] S. Zheng, S. Chen and X. Yang, ”DeepReceiver: A Deep LearningBased Intelligent Receiver for Wireless Communications in the Physical Layer,” in IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 5-20, March 2021.
[6] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein and Y. Be’ery, ”Deep Learning Methods for Improved Decoding of Linear Codes,” in IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119-131, Feb. 2018.
[7] Q. Wang, S. Wang, H. Fang, L. Chen, L. Chen and Y. Guo, ”A Model-Driven Deep Learning Method for Normalized Min-Sum LDPC Decoding,” 2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), 2020, pp. 1-6.
[8] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman and Y. Weiss, ”Constructing free-energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms,” in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2282-2312, July 2005.
[9] L. R. Medova, P. S. Rybin and I. V. Filatov, ”On the performance analysis of short LDPC codes,” 2019 XVI International Symposium ”Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems” (REDUNDANCY), 2019, pp. 18-22.
[10] M. Arvinte, A. H. Tewfik and S. Vishwanath, ”Deep Log-Likelihood Ratio Quantization,” 2019 27th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), 2019, pp. 1-5.
[11] A. R. Karami, M. Ahmadian Attari and H. Tavakoli, ”Multi Layer Perceptron Neural Networks Decoder for LDPC Codes,” 2009 5th International Conference on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing, 2009, pp. 1-4.
[12] L. Lugosch and W. J. Gross, ”Neural offset min-sum decoding,” 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), 2017, pp. 1361-1365.
[13] Upadhyaya, Pulakesh Jiang, Anxiao. (2019). Machine Learning for Error Correction with Natural Redundancy.
[14] L. Chu, H. He, L. Pei and R. C. Qiu, ”NOLD: A neural-network optimized low-resolution decoder for LDPC codes,” in Journal of Communications and Networks, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 159-170, June 2021.
[15] H. He, L. Chu and R. C. Qiu, ”A New Low-Resolution Min-Sum Decoder Based on Dynamic Clipping for LDPC Codes,” 2019 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC), 2019, pp. 636-640.
[16] Q. Wang, S. Wang, H. Fang, L. Chen, L. Chen and Y. Guo, ”A Model-Driven Deep Learning Method for Normalized Min-Sum LDPC Decoding,” 2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), 2020, pp. 1-6.
[17] D. Kumar, A. Agrawal and G. S. Phartiyal, ”Non iterative LDPC decoding by syndrome generation using Artificial Neural Network,” 2015 National Conference on Recent Advances in Electronics Computer Engineering (RAECE), 2015, pp. 22-25.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[18] Y. Liu, X. Liu, Z. Ding, Y. Hu and L. Zhao, ”A new LDPC decoding scheme based on BP and Gated Neural Network,” 2020 5th International Conference on Information Science, Computer Technology and Transportation (ISCTT), 2020, pp. 346-349.
[19] Y. Tang, L. Zhou, S. Zhang, C. Chen and L. Wang, ”Normalized Neural Network for Belief Propagation LDPC Decoding,” 2021 IEEE International Conference on Networking, Sensing and Control (ICNSC), 2021, pp. 1-5.
[20] A. Anastasopoulos, ”A comparison between the sum-product and the min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” GLOBECOM’01. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (Cat. No.01CH37270), 2001, pp. 1021-1025 vol.2.
[21] S. Jayasooriya, S. J. Johnson, L. Ong and R. Berretta, ”Optimization of graph based codes for belief propagation decoding,” 2014 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW 2014), 2014, pp. 456-460.
[22] M. Lian, C. Ha¨ger, and H. Pfister, “What can machine learning teach us about communications?” IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), pp. 1-5. 2018.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

