2022 IEEE North Karnataka Subsection Flagship International Conference (NKCon) | 978-1-6654-5342-4/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/NKCON56289.2022.10126844

2022 IEEE North Karnataka Subsection Flagship International Conference (NKCon)

Intuitive Probabilistic Conditional Approach in LDPC for Memory Corrections

Pechetti Girish Research Scholar,Department of ECE Sathyabama Institute of Science and Technology
(Deemed to be University) Chennai - 600 119. Tamilnadu, India
girishpechetti@gmail.com

Bernatin T Department of ECE Sathyabama Institute of Science and Technology (Deemed to be University) Chennai - 600 119. Tamilnadu, India bernatin.etc@sathyabama.ac.in

Abstract:-The implication of power, area and delay have been the critical aspects of the design elements on any application chosen. With different application interests in the design features with NOC, CNN other machine learning features have created a revolutionary model on AI features of Chips which inculcate the Algorithms with Less power capabilities. Though these implementations have been the prominent design still faces memory errors and data redundancy. One such features of design on low power consumption with parity check models are implemented on LDPC and Turbo codes for wireless systems. The proposed BCS model with improved probabilistic cumulative approach with machine learning feature have improvised the different possible changes in power relative on input requirement and output dissipation. The proposed model with low power feature and analysis on Machine learning algorithms approach with clock gating model have effective reduced the power from 3.2Watts to 0.145W. The tabulated values for power on input features and output dissipated are represented with existing LDPC’s.
Keywords: -binary compressed sensing (BCS), low density parity codes LDPC, convolutional neural net, artificial intelligence, network on chip.
I. INTRODUCTION
Communication's dependability and efficiency depend on FEC codes' capacity to remedy forward errors. [1–2] and [3] reveal that non-binary long-term prediction codes (LDPCs) exhibit remarkable bit error rate (BER) performance compared to binary LDPC codes. Short and medium length codes are among the most important aspects of NB LDPCs [4, 5]. LDPC codes' performance is largely dictated by the decoders used to read them. One of the best choices is the QSPA decoder, which provides a q probability signal vector along each Tanner graph edge, indicating the likelihood of all q GF members (q). A major drawback to using the QSPA decoder in real-world applications is the high computational cost of its check node computations. Most of the research since the discovery of NB LDPC codes [1] has focused on finding methods to reduce the computational complexity of check node processing. A Fast

Fourier transform based SPA (FFT-SPA) method was introduced in [5] to reduce the complexity of QSPA. A computationally expensive check node may now be updated at a rate that is closer to O(qlogq) rather than O(q2) thanks to this method. Extensive minimum sum (EMS) [6, EMS trellis[8, bubble check[9], and min-max algorithms] have all been developed, however their performance has been shown to be inferior to that of QSPA. Furthermore, none of these solutions can be implemented on a hardware level due to their enormous computational costs. The computational speed and simplicity of NB LDPC codes, on the other hand, are superior when compared to more complex, reliabilitybased message forwarding algorithms and symbol flipping algorithms. [12] Better message passing decoding techniques are presented, resulting in lower complexity and increased performance. BRB algorithms are referred to as bit reliability based (BRB) because they are focused on the dependability of bits rather than symbols. With just integer and Galois field operations required, the BRB technique is less computationally demanding than other approaches. To improve the effectiveness of the BRB technique, Hamming distance-based weighted coefficients double the extrinsic information-sum, increasing the quantity of information accessible to the algorithm." WBRB surpasses the other two BRB and ISRB algorithms in terms of performance, and it does not suffer from an error floor when dealing with small column weights. Complete bit-reliability-based decoding [15] is a binary variant of weighted BRB since this approach takes use of binary representations for non-zero members of the parity check matrix.
Hybrid probabilistic shaping, or HPS, is recommended instead of classic probabilistic shaping for non-binary LDPC codes. LDPC binary and LDPC nonbinary codes are decoded using the standard probabilistic shaping (CPS) demodulator using bit-metric decoding (BMD). Because bit mapping is preserved between symbols when using SMD on the AWGN channel, this method is superior than binary LDPC codes while decoding NB LDPC codes. There are two methods for creating QAM symbols with roughly equal probability distributions: one is to use consistent formation transfer matcher (CCDM) for data symbols and the other is to utilize the same code for both parity symbols and data symbols when working with NB LDPC codes. Demodulation complexity of the proposed NB-LDPC-coded TS HPS scheme is lower than the NB-LDPC-coded CPS scheme, which is a major

978-1-6654-5342-4/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE

1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:50:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

benefit. With regard to 8QAM and 32QAM performance, the proposed NB-LDPC-coded TS HPS scheme beats both the NB-LDPC-coded CPS scheme and the TS HPS system in an information-theoretical comparison.
Presently, memory design with Machine learning and deep learning have becoming an intuitive aspect of the current trends. On this perspective, the development of the design on the different novel algorithm via machine learning have implicated with analysing the intricacies of memory problems via corrections and additional speed via data transactions. Mobile chipsets have become more intuitive and working AI features in CPU and Camera’s. While the integrated RAM and ROM are still yet to create possible solution via AI that would effectively tune the error and memory optimization problems. Our proposed design implicates one such possibilities via LDPC algorithm with IPCA feature. Contributions:
• An effective solution model for memory units design and its error compounding models.
• Implicate the location of error positions for all iterations
• Memory circuit design with type of size chosen with correct size of the polynomial structure using IPCA
• Compare the performance features with BCS models on different sizes.
• Tabulate the results with area, power, delay. In this paper, the proposed design aims to provide a memory correction circuit using IPCA-LDPC model with 1-bit, 2-bit and 3-bit corrections via logistically. The IPCA algorithm is compared with BCS algorithm implicating the different aspect of the encoding and decoding structures. A typical polynomial structure is utilized to improvise an encoder as mentioned in section IV. The IPCA effectively solves the 1 bit, 2-bit errors effectively while the other bit errors will be implicated with either 1-bit or 2-bit error with decoding unit.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
The network-on-chip (NoC) linkages start to compete with the other components of the corresponding ion subsystem, notably the routers and network interfaces, in terms of power dissipation (NIs). Data encoding techniques that reduce the amount of power consumed by NoC connections are shown here. Data encoding strategies developed in this study are used to lower the power consumption of LowDensity Parity Check Techniques (LDPC) encoders. Memory on a die may be corrupted by environmental elements such as cosmic radiation, alpha, neutron particles, or the maximum temperature in space, which is a result of technological scaling. Using ECC methods, erroneous data may be detected and corrected across the communication channel. It is suggested in this research to weaken radiationinduced MCUs in memory for space applications by using a 2-dimensional advanced error correcting code based on the divide-symbol. To encode data bits, XOR operations were used to examine diagonal bits, parity bits, and check bits. In

order to retrieve the data, an XOR operation was conducted once again between the encoded bits and the recalculated encoded bits. It is only after a thorough analysis that the selection and correcting procedure begins. NoC connections start to compete with the extra components of the associated ion subsystem, such as routers and network interface cards (NICs), in terms of the power they waste (NIs). We provide a variety of data encoding strategies to reduce the power lost over a NoC's connections. In order to improve the power consumption of Low-Density Parity Check Techniques, we replace the encoder in this study with our data encoding strategies. NOCs, notably routers and network interfaces, compete with the power consumption of other network communication subsystems in terms of power consumption. In order to reduce the power consumption of NoC connections, this work presents a set of data coding algorithms. The NoC fabric is not a constraint on the approaches suggested (i.e. no changes to routers or connection design). Using both simulated and real-world traffic, experiments have shown that the recommended solutions may cut power dissipation by more than 50% and energy consumption by less than 15% without affecting performance by reducing the percentage area overhead in network interfaces. In one-dimensional (1-D) wavelet-based quality-assured electrocardiograph (ECG) compression systems for mobile health (mHealth), a real-time cost and power-efficient (CPE) set partitioning in hierarchical trees (SPIHT) decoder architecture is described. In contrast, the current SPIHT coding structures are built to interpret images and videos. Compressed sensing is a cutting-edge approach that can compress more data in a smaller amount of space. The transmission of compressed signals is susceptible to mistakes due to channel mishandling; hence protective measures may be implemented prior to transmission. For the security of compressed sensing coefficients across binary symmetric channels, use the Polar codes. A substantial amount of memory and complex sorting algorithms are required for these systems, which are both time-consuming and impractical for mobile ECG applications. Our modified SPIHT coding work, which employed flags and check bits to minimize memory needs and coding complexity by consolidating three search operations into one step, is the basis for this new version of the code. It is possible to sample the signal below the Nyquist rate using Compressed Sensing (CS), which depends on the concepts of sparsity and incoherence for both the signals of interest as well as the sensing modality. A successful M-sequence matrix has been developed RIP property In this research, first provide a hardware-oriented SPIHT decoding algorithm suited for decoding the previously disclosed SPIHT coding work in order to accomplish the real-time design aim for mobile ECG applications. Since we want to use the SPIHT VLSI design for our proposed decoder algorithm in mobile ECG applications, we've created a low-power hardware architecture to support it. The final simulation and VLSI implementation results show that the proposed CPE SPIHT decoder design outperforms

2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:50:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the state-of-the-art designs in terms of average decoding time, decoding quality, VLSI speed, and power consumption using the distinct ECG signals in the MITBIH arrhythmia database (sampling rate of 360 Hz).
III. EXISTING MODEL
Compressed sensing has garnered a lot of attention in the last several years. This paper developed techniques for extracting sparse signals from a small number of data points. An at most K N nonzero signal, known as the K N sparse signal, is described by the following equation: Let A RMN be a measurement matrix that turns x into a smaller measurement vector y RM, as follows: y = Ax. Identifying x with the least l0-norm, which is an NP-hard method [2], [3], is one way to retrieve x from y. Finding the x with the lowest l1-norm is an alternative strategy to consider. Basis pursuit (BP) [4], [5] outperforms the CS-l1-norm minimization based on linear programming (LP) in recovering sparse signals. When the matrix dimension is increased, the huge complexity of BP makes it unusable. CoSaMP, orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP), and iterative hard thresholding (IHT) are greedy techniques that build an approximation of the original signal over and over again. Many OMP hardware implementations have been reported in the literature, showing a tradeoff between complexity and precision in the design of these systems. Message passing methods, whose origins may be traced back to channel coding, are an alternative to BP. List decoding, multiple-based belief propagation, and belief propagation are all methods that may be found in the literature. It was designed by [10] and is a message-passing technique. [11]. When it comes to decoding, parallel bit-flipping is key. A lot of attention has been paid to CS and low-density parity check (LDPC) codes recently. In their publications [12, 13], they discovered that LDPC parity check matrices may be reliable markers of computational stability (CS). The use of CS in signal-specific applications has recently grown in popularity. Many practical applications exist for binary sparse signals, such as defect detection, single-pixel image reconstruction, wireless sensor networks, group assessment, and spectrum hole discovery for cognitive radio networks [14, 15], [16], [17]. All of the following are included in these apps. Binary Coded Signals (BCS) is the technical term for this kind of signal processing (BCS).
Figure 1 depicts the IPA's overall structure. To connect both of these networks, there are two connection networks, and each of them is connected to the other through two connection networks. VNUs and MNUs communicate through connection network 1, whereas MNUs and VNUs communicate via connection network 2. Using the 1s in the measurement matrix, it is possible to establish the location of the cables that connect the networks. Using the relevant equations, the values of L and U are set, and the y values are fed into the registers throughout this phase. VNU is governed by laws (4) and (5). (5). There are no initialization values provided to the VNUs, so register y is set to 0. There are two types of limit finders, one for the lower limit and one for the upper limit, which are used to enter their findings in the relevant

registers. In the collection, for each pair of values, the highest (or lowest) value is determined. As a minimum (or maximum) finder, this is a fundamental approach. Before going on to the next set of calculated maxima (or lowest) values, it is necessary to compare the findings of the preceding batch. After acquiring a single maximum (or lowest) value, the process is repeated until the desired result is attained. The function Max2 retrieves the greater of two values using a comparator and a multiplexer. In order to keep MNU running well, the following rules apply: (2). These two sums must be calculated by each MNU summation unit (2). Divide each of the surrounding VNUs by the appropriate variable values to get an upper limit for a close-by VNU. Subtracting sums from the corresponding y j value and then comparing the result to zero yields a positive number. For negative results, zero is substituted; for positive results, they are sent to a multiplexer for further processing. The iterative procedure is complete when the maximum number of iterations has been achieved or when the value of VNU L matches the value of U in each VNU. Figures 1–2 show a six-number maximum finder and the architectures of MNU and VNU.

Figure 1: Representing IPA AND MIPA Block unit’s diagram.

In the graphical depiction of the measurement matrix H =

hij, the set of VNs and measurement nodes (MNs),

respectively, are referred to as V and C, respectively. Vi's

neighbours are the MNs in N (vi), while cj's neighbours are

the VNs in N (c j). The upper and lower bounds of the

estimated VN are represented in IPA by the messages that

flow along the Tanner graph's edges, U and L, respectively.

The messages sent from VN v j to MN ci at each repetition

I are provided by

→=

∈

→≜

(1)

→=

∈

→≜

(2)

=

{0, ∑ ∈ # \{ %

!" }(3)

= ' − {∑ ∈ # \{ %

!" } (4)

ALGORITHM 1 IPA: Input: Lower limits L and Upper Limits U such that y = H x Output: X estimate the x Initialize: )' ∈ *, + ∈ ℕ )' Iterate for till I_max For + ∈ While equation (1) & (2) is true. End For)' ∈ *

3
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:50:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

For + ∈ While True for Equation (3) & (4). End End End At the end of the first iteration, the borders of separate nodes were established. If the algorithm fails to achieve convergence or reaches its maximum number of iterations, the operation continues forever. Figure 1 shows two iterations of the various nodes. In this case, assume that the algorithm has come to an end since the lower and upper bounds of the third VN and its linked MNs are equal. The performance of IPA and OMP must be compared. A 5041008-cell Gallager random LDPC matrix and a 256-bit 1024-cell (deterministic) LDPC matrix are all used as measurement matrices [5–7]. At least 100 random sparse binary signals and 50 reconstruction iterations for each sparsity are required to provide a valid result. Figures 3–5 represent the percentage of correct reconstruction results produced using the IPA and OMP approaches. For a random sparse binary vector whose samples have an error of less than 106, the vector is deemed to have been recovered. In terms of overall performance, the IPA seems to outperform or be on par with the OMP.Table 1 showsexisting BCS LDPC. ALGORITHM2: MIPA: Input: Lower limits L and Upper Limits U such that y = H x Output: X estimate the x Initialize: )' ∈ *, + ∈ ℕ )' Iterate for till I_max For + ∈ While + = 0 Y = equation (1) Else Y = equation (2). End For)' ∈ * For + ∈ While + = 0 Y = equation (3) Else Y = equation (4). End End End
Table 1: Representing Existing BCS LDPC
BCS LDPC

PARAMETERS

N=8

N=16

N=32

AREA

6.7% 13.58% 27.88%

POWER DELAY

3.45W 49.34ns

3.1W 52.45ns

2.90W 58.92ns

IV PROPOSED MODEL ON LDPC WITH IPCA

Our design implements on the functional features for LDPC on the conditional changes via different sequences of the input. We proposed an IPCA algorithm with probabilistic approach to reduce the power consumption capabilities, via cumulative approach of different signal generated via encoding and decoding scheme.

Block Diagram Description The proposed design aims to improvise the different features implicating the generation matrix of the sub modules block, Q matrix polynomial generation with IPCA improvements for data encapsulation. The figure 2describes about the generation matrix inculcated to provide an encoding feature using AOI logic for less comparative solutions. Since XOR is simplest form of digital comparator enabling it would effectively increase the complexity and power requirements
BLOCK DIAGRAM FOR PROPSOED LDPC:

Figure 2: Representing the Block diagram for Encoder and Decoder structure for IPCA-LDPC

. So, to reduce the combinational feature for every

comparison we have developed IPCA model to inculcate

the AOI circuitry with G-Q matrix. The formulations and

its algorithm features are depicted for every iteration of

the block considered. From the above figure, the design

instantiates the feature of Q matrix, G-IG matrix

represented using the formulations as mentioned below

while IPCA is utilized to provide the conditional BUS

transfer protocol established while activating encoder and

decoder.

Let . , ./, .0 … .2 be the input sequences for which encoding feature is applied based on QMP. The Q matrix

is formulated below:

Let there be 3 , 4 two random samples for which the

overall Q matrix is stated for each CDF is the property

for which iterative values for M and N are subsequently

in power 2n.

CDF(M) = ∑9:

5 6

∗ 29

(5)

CDF(N) = ∑9: 5 ∗ 2

(6)

The conditional feature for which each of the variables

are shift with factors of powers of 2 while input is scaled

with M and N will determine the Q matrix. The term R is

defined with threshold condition of the Input sequence

that is generated via Q as

; = <=>? ∗ 2 @

(7a)

>=

A*B*CBC34

DE F G ; D DE F H 0

I

(7b)

Generation & Inverse Matrix:

The generation matrix is defined with the constraints

utilized to implicate the encoding and decoding feature

via transformation approach. Our design improvises the

feature of the transform for which the design model with

Q matrix generates specific conditions which are

4

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:50:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

mentioned in section 4.1 as mentioned above. The

formulation of Generation matrix as mentioned below:

Let G, defines the generated matrix with code word “cw”

X being the input G being the generation matrix for the

linear code[n,k,d] with format of J K.

The overall form for the G matrix is given by:

M = =N@? ∗ >

(8)

Where N@ is the J.J identity matrix and Q being the

condition matrix as mentioned above.

Let O represents the parities the overall feature for G, let

H represents the Inversion of G as

P = =N2 @? ∗ =>Q?

(9)

IPCA:

Since the generation matrix is determined with

formulation on estimating conditional probabilities while

the IPCA feature is enhance the featured code word with

4-D matrix as mentioned below.

Let 3R, 3S be the gradients observed with random variable for CDF generation from equations 5 and 6 in

section-IV. Now 3R and 3S are estimated with the algorithm mentioned below:

ALGORITHM IPCA:

NKOTU = 3R KV 3S WTUOTU = XY where P ← 3R ∗ . + 3S ∗ X

Initiate >

=

A*B*CBC34

DE F G ; D DE F H 0

I

C\] D = 1 G 4

E\] _ G J

N`*a D, _, J, 3R = ∑ :2 @ > ∗ . + >2 @ ∗ 3R

N`*a#D, _, J, 3Sb = c > ∗ X + >2 @ ∗ 3S
:2 @
End End
NE D H J && D G K − J

N`*a D, _, J, 3R = c > ∗ . + >2 @ ∗ 3R
:@

N`*a#D, _, J, 3Sb = c > ∗ X + >2 @ ∗ 3S
:@
End
The above algorithm describes the functionally feature for 4-D matrix for memory reduction six phases as below: Define a matrix of MXM with memory feature. On this perspective we have implicated the memory feature using Verilog coding with register coding structure as a packed or unpacked dimensions. The language structure for MXM matrix is represented as:

=0: 3?a]]=0: 3?

(11)

ForN`*a D, _, J, 3R = =0: D − 1?=0: _ − 1?=0: J −

1?N`*a=0: 3R − 1?

(12)

Hence, resulting a 4-D vectors for implementation of different types of code word for each iterations chosen.

For each such MXM memories on a parallel combination

of NXN matrix with memories.

The parallel combination of the MXM and NXN is

effective solved with conditional values and threshold

features of the different ones obtained at every iteration.

As sequence for 3 bits (000-111) as:

Table 2: Representing the Encoding Structure values with AOI logic

Encoding Scheme

Values Encoded (AOI Logic)

000

. = f& + ~ /

001

./ = + / + ~ f

010

.0 = f& / + ~

011

.h = f& + ~ /

100

.i = /& ~ + /

101

.j = f + ~ + ~ /

110

.k = f& & ~ /

111

.l = ~ f& + ~ /

The Overall combinational values obtained via AOI logic

as:

. = {.1&.2, .2 + .3 + .4, ~.5 + .6&.7 + .8 }

(13)

Similarly for all the input feature the combination

structure with AOI logics are implemented to effectively

reduce the power.Table 2Representing the Encoding

Structure values with AOI logic.

Power Analysis

The factors that are determined for power estimation and

are used in the software tools for calculating the

measurement of power via static and dynamic features.

The programme will make use of default settings given

that information on the device's power utilization,

configurations, and operation is ambiguous at the

beginning of the design phase cycle. Even as construction

of the system continues, further data will be sent to the

system, which in turn will result in an improvement in the

level of precision of the power predictions.Table

3representing the IPCA-LDPC proposed model results

with Area, Power and Delay parameters.Table

4representing the overall comparison values for existing

and proposed LDPC

Table 3: Representing the IPCA-LDPC proposed model results with Area, Power and Delay parameters

IPCA LDPC

PARAMETERS N=8 N=16 N=32

AREA

3.28% 8.85% 17.41%

POWER DELAY

.845W 1.973W 1.480W 27.5ns 34.5ns 42.2ns

Table 4: Representing the overall comparison values for existing and proposed LDPC

BCS LDPC PARAMETE RS AREA

N=8 6.7%

POWER DELAY

3.45 W 49.34 ns

N=16
13.58 % 3.1W
52.45 ns

N=32
27.88 % 2.90 W 58.92 ns

IPCA LDPC N=8 N=16 N=32

3.28 8.85% 17.41

%

%

.845 1.973 1.480

W

W

W

27.5 34.5ns 42.2ns

ns

5
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:50:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

With the simulation design on the proposed IPCA-LDPC we have confined the design parameters to be most effective than the BCS. The factors are Area, Power and Delay are chosen for comparison of different bits from 832. Since most of the design with higher version of bits are implemented with either 8,16 and 32. So, from the table2-3 we have observed significant changes in the all the three parameters as stated. As per Area, for 8 bits nearly 50% reduction of the hardware units are observed as AOI logic would effectively create less area when compared to XOR gate. Similarly for 16-32 bits are about 30% improvement is observed with Area. Similarly for Power and Delay more than 35% improvement for all the bits are implemented and observed in table3.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 3: Representing the simulation results for IPCA-LDPC
Figure 4: Representing the IPCA-LDPC simulation result for correct response with error of 2 bits.
The simulations of the proposed design implemented in Model sim 10.0c software, with HDL designer series. The simulation feature for the bit error correction and detection is improvised in figure 4 while figure 3 represents the overall simulation output. The corrected values for every outcome are verified with testbench circuit implicating the different test criteria. If the randomized test values are provided using LFSR while sequences are implemented via counter. For the input (00110011) we have observed (11010010) which is a 4bit error. For the next iteration we have corrected to 2-bit sequence error. (00110000) and (00011110). The overall error values are observed at last phase of the different input varying from 00000000-11110000. The above figure represents the overall simulation diagram for the RTL schematic shown below.

Figure 5: Represents the RTL schematic in HDL designer series.
This diagram describes the major functionality of how the data can be secured with IPCA algorithm improvising a 2-bit error rate for proportionate delay of the simulation output. The overall delay with the design feature is estimated on tabulations mentioned above.Figure 5 represents the RTL schematic in HDL designer series.

V. CONCLUSIONS

Our design with IPCA -LDPC formulation with both encoding and decoding structure have been implemented with the different features of conditional probability and probabilistic feature that would effectively substantiate with performance factors. The overall power, area, and delay have been effectively improved from the existing LDPC algorithms. To improve the automotive approach multiple intuitive approaches with machine learning with multiple bits and sizes of the encoder and decoder blocks have to be implemented for real time scenarios such as in memories, controllers etc. An effective error correction algorithm via IPCA for removal of single and double bits are to be implemented.

REFERENCES

[1] F. ong, L. Li, H. Peng, and Y. Yang, “Flexible construction of

compressed sensing matrices with low storage space and low

coherence,” Signal Processing, vol. 182, 2021, doi:

10.1016/j.sigpro.2020.107951.

[2] H. Jiefei, L. Bobo, and S. Liying, “Adaptive construction

method for binary measurement matrix based on deep

learning,” Laser and Optoelectronics Progress, vol. 58, no. 22,

2021, doi: 10.3788/LOP202158.2220001.

[3] Y. Huang, X. Sun, Y. Yao, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, and Y. He,

“Compressed Sensing Algorithm-Based Magnetic Resonance

Imaging Guided for Prognosis of Early Neurological

Deterioration after Intravenous Thrombolysis in Ischemic

Stroke Patients,” Scientific Programming, vol. 2021, 2021, doi:

10.1155/2021/9568856.

[4] C. Li, G. Li, and P. K. Varshney, “Communication-Efficient

Federated Learning Based on Compressed Sensing,” IEEE

Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 20, 2021, doi:

10.1109/JIOT.2021.3073112.

[5] M. M. Alajmi and K. A. Awedat, “Novel Robust Augmentation

Approach Based on Sensing Features for Data Classification,”

IEEE

Access,

vol.

9,

2021,

doi:

10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3111980.

[6] S. Nirmalraj and G. Nagarajan, “Biomedical image

compression using fuzzy transform and deterministic binary

compressive sensing matrix,” Journal of Ambient Intelligence

and Humanized Computing, vol. 12, no. 6, 2021, doi:

10.1007/s12652-020-02103-x.

[7] F. Tong, L. Li, H. Peng, and Y. Yang, “Deterministic

Constructions of Compressed Sensing Matrices from Unitary

6
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:50:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Geometry,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 67,

no. 8, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TIT.2021.3088090.

[8] M. Dabbicco, A. Lupo, and P. S. Labini, “Scanless optical

feedback imaging principle by single-pixel compressed

sensing,” Applied Optics, vol. 60, no. 10, 2021, doi:

10.1364/ao.415099.

[9] L. Thesing and A. C. Hansen, “Non-uniform Recovery

Guarantees for Binary Measurements and Infinite-Dimensional

Compressed Sensing,” Journal of Fourier Analysis and

Applications, vol. 27, no. 2, 2021, doi: 10.1007/s00041-021-

09813-6.

[10] B. Adcock, V. Antun, and A. C. Hansen, “Uniform recovery in

infinite-dimensional compressed sensing and applications to

structured binary sampling,” Applied and Computational

Harmonic Analysis, vol. 55, 2021, doi:

10.1016/j.acha.2021.04.001.

[11] K. Luo et al., “Redundant Gaussian dictionary in compressed

sensing for ambulatory photoplethysmography monitoring,”

Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, vol. 66, 2021, doi:

10.1016/j.bspc.2021.102479.

[12] Santhiya. A, “Low Latency Corrective Feedback Algorithm for

Binary Compressed Sensing,” International Journal for

Research in Applied Science and Engineering Technology, vol.

9, no. 4, 2021, doi: 10.22214/ijraset.2021.33857.

[13] E. Romanov and O. Ordentlich, “On compressed sensing of

binary signals for the unsourced random-access channel,”

Entropy, vol. 23, no. 5, 2021, doi: 10.3390/e23050605.

[14] F. Zonzini, A. Carbone, F. Romano, M. Zauli, and L. de

Marchi, “Machine Learning Meets Compressed Sensing in

Vibration-Based Monitoring,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 6, 2022,

doi: 10.3390/s22062229.

[15] R. Monika, S. Dhanalakshmi, R. Kumar, and R.

Narayanamoorthi, “Coefficient Permuted Adaptive Block

Compressed Sensing for Camera Enabled Underwater Wireless

Sensor Nodes,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 22, no. 1, 2022,

doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2021.3130947.

[16] T. S., L. N. R., S. S., and M. B. S., “Sparsity Order Estimation

for Compressed Sensing System Using Sparse Binary Sensing

Matrix,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, 2022, doi:

10.1109/access.2022.3161523.

[17] Q. Sun, L. Dai, K. Ying, and C. Ni, “Application of binary

search and compressive sensing for rapid detection of defects

inside

laser

ultrasound,”

HongwaiyuJiguangGongcheng/Infrared

and

Laser

Engineering, vol. 51, no. 2, 2022, doi:

10.3788/IRLA20210810.

7
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:50:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

