2022 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW) | 978-1-6654-8341-4/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ITW54588.2022.9965857

2022 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

Randomized Scheduling of ADMM-LP Decoding Based on Geometric Priors
Amirreza Asadzadeh∗, Masoud Barakatain†, Jeebak Mitra†, Frank R. Kschischang∗, and Stark. C. Draper∗ ∗Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, Email: amirreza.asadzadeh@mail.utoronto.ca, stark.draper@utoronto.ca, frank@ece.utoronto.ca
†Huawei Technologies, Ottawa, ON, Canada, Email: masoud.barakatain@huawei.com, jeebak.mitra@huawei.com

Abstract—We present a randomized schedule for alternating direction method of multipliers with linear programming (ADMM-LP) decoding of low-density parity check (LDPC) codes. The randomized schedule is based on horizontal layered decoding, where nodes are updated sequentially. Unlike existing layered decoding frameworks where all check nodes are updated exactly once per iteration, we propose a randomized schedule where more problematic nodes are updated more frequently. To do so, we sample from a probability mass function (PMF) over all check nodes and the check with sampled index is updated. The probability of each check to be updated is determined by its state. The PMF is constructed based on the distribution of replica (check) vectors inside or on the parity polytope. The randomized decoder usually converges faster than both standard and horizontal layered decoders, making it suitable for limitediteration decoding in high-throughput applications.
Index Terms—Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM), Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes, Layered Decoding, Randomized Decoding
I. INTRODUCTION
An alternative to message-passing decoding of low-density parity check (LDPC) codes is linear-programming (LP) decoding, proposed by Feldman et al. [1]. Since LP decoding using generic solvers is complex and incurs significant delay, Barman et al. [2] proposed a tractable framework using the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) [3]. The resulting ADMM-LP decoder achieves the decoding performance of belief-propagation (BP) decoders when augmented with a concave penalty term in the objective [4].
Although the decoding performance of ADMM-LP decoders is excellent, their decoding complexity is much higher to that of BP decoders. There exist several works which aim at decreasing the complexity of ADMM-LP decoding. Most of them are focused on reducing per-iteration complexity by simplifying the most complex operation in ADMM-LP decoding, namely the parity polytope projection. These attempts include proposing simpler projection algorithms [5]–[12], or developing approximate projection algorithms [13]–[16]. In parallel, other works are aimed at reducing the number of decoding iterations. Among these works, layered ADMMLP decoding [17]–[19] with node-wise scheduling [20], [21] gained success in reducing the required number of decoding iterations by changing the schedule of updates in the decoding routine. While in standard ADMM-LP decoding, all of the check/variable nodes get updated at the same time, in layered ADMM-LP decoding, each node (as well as its neighboring

nodes) is chosen to be updated in a specific order based on a sequential schedule. Moreover, node-wise scheduling adjusts the order of node updates in a layered decoding framework by tracking the difference of messages in consecutive iterations. The scheduling in the all mentioned methods is deterministic and covers each check node exactly once in every decoding iteration.
Inspired by the existing works on layered ADMM-LP decoding and considering the fact that some nodes are more problematic than the others and require more frequent updates in the decoding process, we propose a randomized schedule for layered ADMM-LP decoding. In this scheme, we consider a probability mass function (PMF) π over all check nodes, in which more satisfied check nodes are weighted less. The state of each check node is determined by the geometry of the problem. More precisely, the probability of choosing each check is derived from the location of its respective replica vector inside or on the parity polytope. In every decoding round of the randomized scheme, an index is sampled from the PMF π, and the check node with that index (as well as its neighboring variable nodes) gets updated. We show through numerical simulations that the randomized schedule outperforms the existing schemes in terms of iteration-count reduction. Hence, this schedule is the most suitable in lowiteration decoders, which are mostly used in low-delay, highthroughput applications such as optical communications.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II we provide a brief summary of standard ADMM-LP decoding and its alternative layered framework. In Section III we propose the structure of the randomized schedule, as well as how the PMF π is constructed. In Section IV, we first propose a method for tuning the meta-parameter of PMF π, and then provide both complexity and performance comparisons between the randomized schedule and the existing schemes. In Section V we summarize the key results, and propose some possible directions to improve the proposed schedule.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. LP Decoding
Consider the problem of decoding an LDPC code of length N . The parity check matrix H = [Hj,i] of such a code is of size M × N , where M is the number of parity checks (constraints). Let us denote respectively the index set of variable nodes and check nodes as I = {1, 2, · · · , N }, and

978-1-6654-834A1u-th4o/r2iz2e/d$l3ic1en.0se0d ©us2e 0lim2i2tedIEtoE:EYonsei Univ. Downloaded on 1Ju1ne924,2026 at 13:50:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2022 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

J = {1, 2, · · · , M }. Let us define the set of all connected

variables nodes to a check node j ∈ M as the neighborhood of

check j, written formally as Nc(j) = {i|Hj,i = 1}. Similarly, we can define the neighborhood of variable node i ∈ N

as Nv(i) = {j|Hj,i = 1}. The degree of check node j is
dj = |Nc(j)|, where |·| denotes cardinality. A binary sequence x ∈ {0, 1}N is a valid codeword of such an LDPC code if and

only if i∈Nc(j) xi is equal to zero modulo 2 for all checks j ∈J.

To transmit the codewords of an LDPC code C, we consider

a binary-input memoryless channel W . Let x˜ be the noisy

output of the channel. The maximum likelihood (ML) decod-

ing is equivalent to solve the following optimization problem:

x∗ = arg minx{γ T x : x ∈ C}, where γ is the negative

log-likelihood ratio vector, the elements of which are defined

as γi = log

W (x˜i|0) W (x˜i|1)

. By relaxing this intractable integer-

programming problem, the following linear programming re-

sults: x∗ = arg minx{γ T x : xNc(j) ∈ PPdj , ∀j ∈ J }, where

xNc(j) is a length-dj sub-vector of x, containing only elements

with indices in Nc(j) and where PPdj is the parity polytope

of dimension dj, defined as the convex hull of all valid local

codewords for the j-th check constraint,

PPdj = conv e ∈ {0, 1}dj : 1dj eT = 0 (mod 2) . (1)

B. Standard ADMM-LP Decoding
The standard penalized decoding algorithm is described in Algorithm 1. The parameters in the algorithm are initialized as follows: x = 0.51N , zj = 0.51dj , and λj = 0dj , for all j ∈ J , where 0L and 1L are the all-zeros and all-ones vectors of length L, respectively. The zj vectors are called “replica vectors”, as they should originally be a copy of the values of xNc(j) in ADMM framework. Detailed update rules and stopping criteria can be found in [4]. Over-relaxation with parameter ρ ∈ (1, 2) is used as an acceleration technique [3]. Syndrome checking at the end of each iteration can be regarded as an early termination technique.

Algorithm 1 Flooding Schedule ADMM-LP Decoding
1: Initialization 2: while Stopping criterion is not satisfied do 3: for i ∈ I do Update xi 4: for j ∈ J do Update zj and then update λj 5: Syndrome checking (early termination) 6: return x

It is worthwhile to note that the order of the updates in Algorithm 1 is implied by the standard ADMM framework, and the resulting message-passing algorithm follows the “flooding schedule”. In other words, in a given iteration all variables nodes are updated simultaneously (lines 3-5, Algorithm 1), and after that, all check nodes update their values as well as their corresponding Lagrange multiplier in parallel (lines 6-9, Algorithm 1).

C. Layered ADMM-LP Decoding
Layered decoding is a well-established method for decoding LDPC codes using Belief Propagation (BP) algorithms, such as min-sum message passing. Unlike the flooding schedule in which all variable/check nodes are updated at the same time, layered decoding uses a sequential order for updating the nodes in the Tanner graph. Horizontal layered decoding is a check-node-centric framework, as it updates check nodes and their connected variable nodes in a sequential manner. In contrast, vertical layered decoding is variable-node-centric, updating a variable node and its neighboring check nodes one at a time. In these two different scheduling frameworks, when a node and its neighborhood are updated, all other nodes in the Tanner graph remain unchanged. Hence, the delay of the mentioned layered decoding schemes is higher than that of the flooding schedule. However, their superior error-correcting performance can compensate for the increased latency.
Debbabi et al. verified the applicability of such layered decoding frameworks to ADMM-LP decoders in [17], [18]. Based on their experiments, both of these scheduling frameworks outperform conventional ADMM-LP decoding under flooding schedule. However, horizontal scheduling is more suitable for ADMM-LP decoding due to the following. Firstly, the parity polytope projection, which is the most complex operation in each decoding iteration, appears more frequently in vertical layered scheduling. Secondly, variable nodes updates can be decomposed to scalar level, i.e. xi updates. In contrast, parity polytope projection, which is associated with check nodes updates, is a vector-input vector-output transformation, and it cannot be performed in each dimension independently. For these reasons, we focus on horizontal layered scheduling (described in Algorithm 2) in the remainder of this paper as the layered decoding baseline for our algorithm.

Algorithm 2 Horizontal Layered ADMM-LP Decoding

1: Initialization 2: while Stopping criterion is not satisfied do

3: for j ∈ J do

4:

for i ∈ Nc(j) do Update xi

5:

Update zj and then update λj

6: Syndrome checking (early termination)

7: return x

III. RANDOMIZED DECODING
A. General Randomized ADMM-LP Decoder
In both the flooding schedule (FS) and horizontal layered (HL) decoding, all the nodes of the Tanner graph are visited at least once in each decoding iteration. However, in moderate or late decoding phases, some check nodes are already satisfied, so their updates can be skipped without affecting the convergence [8]. Inspired by this, we develop a randomized layered decoding scheme in which unsatisfied check nodes are updated more frequently than satisfied ones. More precisely, We define a probability mass function on J , denoted by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 1Ju2ne024,2026 at 13:50:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2022 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

π = [π1, π2, · · · , πM ], where πj is the probability that check j and its neighboring variable nodes are chosen to be updated. The probability that each check is updated should depend on how “far” each check is from being completely satisfied. We will explain how we define “far” and the probability distribution π is constructed in detail in Subsection III-B.
The randomized layered (RL) decoding scheme is described in Algorithm 3. This algorithm begins with a standard iteration of HL decoding (lines 3-10, Algorithm 2). After this first iteration, the decoding shifts to the randomized phase in which we do not update all the nodes in a sequential manner in one standard decoding “iteration”. Instead, in each decoding “round”, we sample a check index from π, and update that check node as well as its connecting variable nodes. At the end of this round, the probability mass function π is slightly modified, as the state of the updated check will (most likely) have changed. In each round of RL decoding, only one check gets updated, while in a single iteration of HL decoding, all M checks get updated. Thus, we consider M rounds of RL decoding as one “effective iteration”. By doing so, we develop a fair comparison between the HL and RL decoding schedules. After each effective iteration (equivalently M decoding rounds of RL decoding) syndrome checking is performed as an early stopping criterion (lines 12-14, Algorithm 3). It is important to note that the maximum number of decoding iterations will be translated to the maximum number of allowed effective iterations for RL decoding.
Algorithm 3 Randomized ADMM-LP Decoding 1: Initialization, t ← 0 2: One iteration of horizontal layered ADMM-LP decoding (lines 3-10, Alg. 2) 3: while Stopping criterion is not satisfied do 4: Sample j∗ from π(t) 5: for i ∈ Nc j∗ do Update xi 6: Update zj∗ and then update λj∗ 7: t ← t + 1 8: Update π(t) 9: if t = 0 (mod M ) then do Syndrome checking 10: return x
B. Constructing the Probability Mass Function π
Inspired by the experiments in [22], it appears that the most problematic check nodes should be prioritized over the remaining nodes in the updating process. The basic idea is to propagate more reliable information in the Tanner graph. This can be accomplished by updating/correcting more problematic nodes first and more frequently, since updating already satisfied/converged check/variable nodes does not help significantly.
Following this line of thought, we assign a score to each check node to identify more problematic nodes. Each replica vector, e.g., zj for check j is initialized at the center of the polytope (0.51dj ) while it should eventually lie on one of the vertices of the polytope (valid local codewords). Due to the

symmetry of the polytope, the vertices are all at the same (maximal) distance from the center. Thus, we define the distance of the j-th replica vector (zj) to the center of its polytope as the score of the j-th check, i.e. sj = ∥zj − 0.51dj ∥2. Note that other ℓp-norm distance metrics proved to work equally well in our simulations. Moreover, it is advised for hardware-implementation to consider sj = ∥zj − 0.51dj ∥22 to avoid taking the square root. However, we proceed with the previously defined score (non-squared ℓ2 norm) for clearer analysis.
While satisfied checks have the highest possible scores, i.e. 0.5 dj, the most problematic checks have relatively small scores. Therefore, based on the earlier discussions, the probability of choosing a particular check node to update should be inversely proportional to its score. Based on earlier works at the intersection of statistical physics and messagepassing algorithms [23] and inspired by Boltzmann (Gibbs) distribution [24], we propose a probability mass function π in which probability of choosing the j-th check node is equal to

πj

=

exp (−ϕsj) Z

=

exp (−ϕ∥zj − 0.51dj ∥2) , Z

(2)

where Z and ϕ are normalization and tuning parameters of the model, respectively. It is worthwhile to note that the proposed probability distribution in Eq. (2) is similar to the soft-max operation used extensively in training deep neural networks [25]. By varying the parameter ϕ, one can tune the smoothness of the soft-max operation. In the limit of ϕ → ∞, the probability would converge to πj = δ[j − j∗], where δ[.] and j∗ are, respectively, the Kronecker delta function and index of the check with the lowest score. At the other extreme, if ϕ → 0, the probability distribution π would converge to the uniform distribution. The optimal value for the meta-parameter ϕ is both code- and operating-SNR-dependent, and finding the best choice is discussed in Subsection IV-A.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we present simulation results illustrating the

advantages of RL decoding over both HL and FS schemes. In

all the experiments, the ℓ2-penalized ADMM-LP decoder is used with parameters α = 0.8, µ = 3, ϵ = 10−5, and ρ = 1.9,

as is suggested by prior work [4] and [26]. We use binary

phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation over an additive white

Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel. Results are presented for

two LDPC codes: the regular [2640,1320] rate-1/2 Margulis

code (C1) with check degree 6, and the irregular [576,288]

rate-1/2 LDPC code from IEEE 802.16e standard [27] with

check-degree

distribution

R(x)

=

2 3

x6

+

1 3

x7.

Only

the

plots

for code C1 are shown due to lack of space. Results for code

C2 are reported only briefly.

A. Optimizing the Randomized Decoding Parameter (ϕ)
In this subsection, we present an empirical optimization process to tune the parameter ϕ to yield the best decoding performance. Decoding performance of finite-iteration ADMMLP decoders is directly related to the convergence speed, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 1Ju2ne124,2026 at 13:50:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2022 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

Fig. 1. The average number of effective iterations of RL decoding vs. ϕ for code C1 in different operating SNRs. The minimum of each plot is indicated with a larger marker.

the best choice of ϕ should result in the fewest effective iterations in RL decoding. In our optimization process, we capture the average number of effective iterations for correct decoding samples of a specific LDPC code at a particular operating SNR, and minimize this as a function of ϕ. In Fig.1, the results of such an experiment is illustrated for code C1. To generate these curves, at least 1000 successful decoding samples are used at each point.
The U-shaped curves in Fig. 1 indicate that lower values of ϕ lead to faster convergence in low-SNR regime, while in higher-SNR cases, larger values of ϕ are required to achieve the best convergence. In addition, the sensitivity of the tuning is lower at higher operating SNRs, as the respective curves for SNR ≥ 3.5dB are flatter around the minima. A similar behavior for the optimal ϕ vs. SNR is observed for code C2.
To interpret this observation, we analyze the evolution of replica vectors for all M checks in the HL decoding process at different operating SNRs. More precisely, we calculate the empirical cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the normalized distance of replica vectors to the center of the parity polytope for all check nodes at different iterations. Such “normalized distance” for the j-th check is defined as ∥zj − 0.51dj ∥2/ dj. The normalization cancels out the effect of the dimension of the polytope. The results of this empirical analysis for code C1 at SNRs 1.5dB and 5.0dB are presented in the two plots of Fig. 2. The data of each is obtained by averaging over 1000 successful decoding samples at the respective SNR.
These plots suggest that in the high-SNR regime, the distribution of replica vectors is densely concentrated around the vertices of the polytope (where normalized distance is equal to 0.5), and the probability of a replica vector remaining inside the polytope vanishes quickly in just a few iterations. However, in the low-SNR regime, the distribution of replica vectors is more akin to the uniform distribution in early iterations, and the probability of a check vector being inside the polytope decreases gradually as iterations progress. The aggregation of

Fig. 2. The empirical cumulative distribution function of the normalized distance of the replica vectors to the center of the parity polytope in different phases of the horizontal layered (HL) decoding process of code C1 at Eb/N0 = 1.5dB (top), and Eb/N0 = 5.0dB (bottom).

these observations suggests that smaller values of ϕ are better

choices for low-SNR cases, as many checks are unsatisfied

and need to be taken care of. Hence, imposing a more uniform

(flatter) distribution is more advised. In contrast, in high-SNR

cases, only a tiny portion of checks are unsatisfied immediately

after the first iteration, so focusing on more problematic checks

by forcing a sharp (high-ϕ) distribution is the best strategy.

It is worthwhile to note that there exists a significant jump at

normalized distance 0.33 (indicated by the black dotted line)

especially for early iterations. We also note that the tail of the

probability distribution vanishes at this specific point for later

iterations. This particular point corresponds to the normalized

distance of the closest point on the boundary of the parity

polytope to its center. Such a point lies on the center of a

facet of the polytope (all such facets are equally distant to the

center due to the symmetry of the polytope). The normalized

distance

of

such

a

point

to

the

center

of

the

polytope

is

d−2 2d

,

where d is the dimension of the polytope. Such a point can

be derived by taking a uniform convex combination of any set

of d neighboring local codewords, i.e. even-weight vertices of

the parity polytope that share a common facet.

B. Convergence Speed Comparison
The convergence speed of a general ADMM-LP decoding scheme can be quantified by the required number of (effective) iterations for successful decoding. In Fig. 3, the average number of effective iterations (as well as its variance shown in highlighted area) vs. SNR for code C1 is plotted for the FS, HL, and RL decoding schemes. The data are obtained from at least 1000 correct decoding samples per point. Based on Fig.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 1Ju2ne224,2026 at 13:50:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2022 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

Fig. 3. Average number of effective iterations vs. SNR for decoding C1 with FS, HL, and RL decoding schedules.

Fig. 4. Frame error rate of FS, HL, and RL schedules for ADMM-LP decoding compared with Sum-Product (SP) decoding for code C1 with different limits for the number of iterations.

3, while RL converges slightly more slowly than HL in the low-SNR regime, RL outperforms HL in moderate to highSNR cases in terms of convergence speed. The exact same behavior is observed for code C2.
Since the most complex operation in each decoding iteration is projection onto the parity polytope, the overall per-iteration complexity of each of these schemes is dominated by M times the per-projection complexity, e.g., O(M d log d). Thus, RL decoding reduces the overall complexity in moderate to highSNR regime, by about a factor of 1.5 and 2.5, respectively, when compared to the HL and FS decoding schedules.

outperforms HL when the maximum number of iterations is 20. Note that in Fig. 4, RL schedule performs slightly worse than HL in high-FER regime even when the maximum number of iterations is set to 10, but it outperforms HL in the lowerFER regime. Following this pattern, we conjecture that RL might outperform both the HL and FS schedules with highiteration decoders in very low error rate regime. It is quite worthwhile to note that RL-scheduled ADMM-LP decoder also outperforms the well-known Sum-Product decoder in low error rates.

C. Error Rate Analysis
Inspired by the observations in Subsection IV-B, we expect that RL decoding should outperform both FS and HL schemes when either the maximum number of iteration is very limited, or when the decoder operates in the high-SNR regime. To evaluate this statement, we analyze the error-correcting performance of RL decoding and develop a comparison with the FS and HL schemes in terms of frame error rate. The different values used for the maximum number of iterations in our experiments are 6, 10, and 50. The results of this experiment for code C1 are projected in Fig. 4. In addition, the frame error rate results for Sum-Product decoder [28] with the maximum number of 10 and 50 iterations are included for reference. The data of this plot are obtained by collecting at least 100 erroneous frames at each point.
Based on the curves in Fig. 4, the FER performance of RL decoding is significantly better than both FS and HL for decoders with the maximum number of iterations ≤ 10. This matches our expectations from Subsection IV-B. However, as the maximum number of iterations increases to be greater than 10, the performance of RL schedule deteriorates, when compared to the other schemes. The same behavior is observed for code C2, only with the difference that RL decoding still

V. CONCLUSION
We proposed a randomized schedule for layered ADMMLP decoding. In this approach, the probability of choosing a check node to update (as well as its neighboring variable nodes) at each decoding round depends on the state of the check constraint. The probability is determined by the location of the respective replica vector inside the parity polytope. We showed empirically that randomized ADMM-LP decoding improves upon deterministic schedules either when low-iteration decoders are used, or in the moderate to high-SNR operating regime.
There are some potential directions to improve the proposed scheme. Based on the experimental results shown in Fig. 2, the distribution of replica vectors does not change rapidly in consecutive decoding rounds. This makes it possible to sample multiple check indices simultaneously and apply randomized group-layered ADMM-LP decoding in a way similar to [19]. Moreover, the probability distribution of the location of replica vectors in late phases of low-SNR decoding resembles that of the replica vectors in early phases of high-SNR cases. Thus, the performance of randomized layered decoding in low-SNR regime might be improved by utilising a dynamic/adaptive ϕ which increases as decoding iterations progress.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 1Ju2ne324,2026 at 13:50:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2022 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, 2005.
[2] S. Barman, X. Liu, S. C. Draper, and B. Recht, “Decomposition methods for large scale LP decoding,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Comm. Control Computing, (Monticello, IL), Sept. 2011.
[3] S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, J. Eckstein, et al., “Distributed optimization and statistical learning via the alternating direction method of multipliers,” Foundations and Trends® in Machine learning, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–122, 2011.
[4] X. Liu and S. C. Draper, “The ADMM penalized decoder for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 2966–2984, 2016.
[5] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient iterative LP decoding of LDPC codes with alternating direction method of multipliers,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, (Istanbul, Turkey), pp. 1501–1505, July 2013.
[6] M. Wasson, M. Milicevic, S. C. Draper, and G. Gulak, “Hardware-based linear programming decoding with the alternating direction method of multipliers,” IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, vol. 67, pp. 4976–4991, Oct. 2019.
[7] Y. Lin, Q. Xia, W. He, and Q. Zhang, “A fast iterative check polytope projection algorithm for ADMM decoding of LDPC codes by bisection method,” IEICE Trans. on Fund. of Elec. Comm. and Comp. Sciences, vol. 102, no. 10, pp. 1406–1410, 2019.
[8] H. Wei, X. Jiao, and J. Mu, “Reduced-complexity linear programming decoding based on ADMM for LDPC codes,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 909–912, 2015.
[9] X. Jiao, J. Mu, Y. He, and C. Chen, “Efficient ADMM decoding of LDPC codes using lookup tables,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 65, pp. 1425– 1437, Apr. 2017.
[10] H. Wei and A. H. Banihashemi, “An iterative check polytope projection algorithm for ADMM-based LP decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 22, pp. 29–32, Jan. 2018.
[11] O. Samhan and S. Draper, “Reduced message-passing bitwidth for hardware implementation of admm-lp decoding,” in 2018 29th Biennial Symposium on Communications (BSC), pp. 1–5, IEEE, Jun. 2018.
[12] F. Gensheimer, T. Dietz, K. Kraft, S. Ruzika, and N. Wehn, “A reducedcomplexity projection algorithm for ADMM-based LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 66, pp. 4819–4833, Mar. 2020.
[13] Q. Xia, Y. Lin, S. Tang, and Q. Zhang, “A fast approximate check polytope projection algorithm for ADMM decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1520–1523, 2019.
[14] Q. Xia, X. Wang, H. Liu, and Q. L. Zhang, “A hybrid check polytope projection algorithm for ADMM decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 108–112, 2020.
[15] Y. Zheng, Y. Lin, Z. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and Q. Xia, “An enhanced HDPCEVA decoder based on ADMM,” IEICE Trans. Fund. of Elec. Comm. and Comp. Sciences, vol. 104, no. 10, pp. 1425–1429, 2021.
[16] A. Asadzadeh, M. Barakatain, S. C. Draper, and J. Mitra, “SAPA: sparse affine projection algorithm in ADMM-LP decoding of LDPC codes,” in 2022 17th Canadian Workshop on Information Theory (CWIT), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2022.
[17] I. Debbabi, B. Le Gal, N. Khouja, F. Tlili, and C. Jego, “Fast converging ADMM-penalized algorithm for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 648–651, 2016.
[18] I. Debbabi, B. Le Gal, N. Khouja, F. Tlili, and C. Jego, “Comparison of different schedulings for the ADMM based LDPC decoding,” in 2016 9th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC), pp. 51–55, IEEE, 2016.
[19] X.-L. Zhang, M. Niu, L.-H. Su, and K.-P. Song, “Group-based layered scheduling of ADMM decoding for LDPC codes,” in International Conference on Communicatins and Networking in China, pp. 207–214, Springer, 2017.
[20] H. B. Thameur, B. Le Gal, N. Khouja, F. Tlili, and C. Jego, “Low complexity ADMM-LP based decoding strategy for LDPC convolutional codes,” in 2017 25th International Conference on Software, Telecommunications and Computer Networks (SoftCOM), pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2017.
[21] Q. Xia, P. He, X. Wang, H. Liu, and Q. Zhang, “Node-wise scheduling algorithm of ADMM decoding based on line segment projection,” IEEE Comm. Lett., Jan. 2022.
[22] Q. Xia, P. He, X. Wang, H. Liu, and Q. Zhang, “Node-wise scheduling algorithm of ADMM decoding based on line segment projection,” IEEE Comm. Lett., 2022.

[23] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[24] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics: Volume 5. Elsevier, 2013.
[25] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT press, 2016.
[26] S. Barman, X. Liu, S. C. Draper, and B. Recht, “Decomposition methods for large scale LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 59, pp. 7870–7886, Sep. 2013.
[27] B. Classon, Y. Blankenship, K. Chung, et al., “LDPC coding for OFDMA PHY,” IEEE C802. 16e-05/066r3, pp. 1–27, 2005.
[28] W. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel codes: classical and modern. Cambridge university press, 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 1Ju2ne424,2026 at 13:50:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

