IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2022

4797

Optimal Program-Read Schemes Toward Highly Reliable Open Block Operations in 3-D Charge-Trap NAND Flash Memory
Menghua Jia, Yachen Kong , Xuepeng Zhan , Meng Zhang , Fei Wu , and Jiezhi Chen , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—3-D NAND flash memory with vertically stacked layers has been widely applied benefiting from its large capacities and high performances. Recently, a novel open block operation scheme was proposed for further improvements of the utilization efficiency in large capacity blocks. In this article, reliability issues of the open block operation in 3-D charge-trap (CT) NAND flash memory are studied by focusing on the high raw bit error rates (RBERs) in the last programmed word-line (WL), which is named as the edge WL (EWL). By systematical characterizations, it is concluded that high RBER in the EWL originates from lateral charge migration (LCM) due to the special structure of 3-D CT NAND flash. To suppress the RBER in EWL, we propose the extra read (ER) and extra program (EP) schemes to compensate for the charge loss from LCM. The experimental results show that the RBER of EWL can be reduced by an average of 59.8% and 86.5% after adopting ER and EP schemes, respectively. Furthermore, for the highly reliable open block, we design a targeted low-density parity-check (LDPC) operation process to enhance the correction capability. By using these two methods, experimental results show that the error correction capabilities of the LDPC hard decoding are increased by 1.92 and 4.76 times, respectively.
Index Terms—3-D NAND flash, extra program (EP), extra read (ER), low-density parity-check (LDPC), open block.
Manuscript received 22 July 2021; revised 12 October 2021; accepted 28 November 2021. Date of publication 13 December 2021; date of current version 24 October 2022. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62034006, Grant 91964105, and Grant 61874068; in part by the China Key Research and Development Program under Grant 2016YFA0201802; in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province under Grant ZR2020JQ28; in part by the Joint Fund for Intelligent Computing of Shandong Natural Science Foundation under Grant ZR2019LZH009; in part by the Fundamental Research Funds of Shandong University; in part by the Postdoctoral Innovative Talents Support Program under Grant BX20190128; in part by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant 2019M66262; and in part by the Excellent Projects for Postdoctoral Science and Technology Activities in Hubei Province. This article was recommended by Associate Editor Z. Shao. (Menghua Jia and Yachen Kong contributed equally to this work). (Corresponding authors: Jiezhi Chen; Meng Zhang.)
Menghua Jia, Yachen Kong, and Jiezhi Chen are with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, China (e-mail: chen.jiezhi@sdu.edu.cn).
Xuepeng Zhan is with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, China, and also with theis Testing and Evaluation Research Department, State Key Laboratory of High-End Server & Storage Technology, Jinan 250101, China (e-mail: zhanxuepeng@sdu.edu.cn).
Meng Zhang and Fei Wu are with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: zgmeng@hust.edu.cn; wufei@hust.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2021.3134900

I. INTRODUCTION
I N THE past decades, the nonvolatile storage market has been growing drastically and NAND flash memory accounts for the lions share because of its excellent performance and low bit cost [1], [2]. After several generations of development, 3-D NAND flash memory turns to be the mainstream of largecapacity nonvolatile storages nowadays [3]. Different from its 2-D planar counterpart, storage layers are vertically stacked in the 3-D NAND flash memory and thus, the storage density can be greatly improved [4], [5]. 3-D NAND flash memory has two typical structures, one is the floating-gate (FG) structure and the other is the charge-trap (CT) structure, wherein the main difference exists in the storage layer. FG NAND flash memory uses polysilicon as the FG layer (FGL), while CT NAND flash memory uses silicon-nitride (SiN) as the CT layer (CTL) [6]. Although both types have their own advantages and disadvantages in terms of program/erase (P/E) performance, reliability, and integration complexity, CT NAND flash is believed to be more promising toward the vertical integration of more storage layers and multibit operation like 5-bit-per-cell (Pentalevel-cell, PLC). Recently, to meet the continually increasing demand for larger capacity and lower bit cost, 3-D CT NAND flash with 17× stacking layers has been developed successfully [7], [8]. Especially, the block size is over 100 MB with an increasing number of stacked layers in 3-D NAND flash. However, taking the practical use into account, such large capacity blocks do not always need to be fully programmed, and thus, the open block operation scheme was proposed to improve the utilization efficiency [9]. In an open block, only a part of word-lines (WLs) will be programmed, the last programmed WL is called edge WL (EWL), and the next WL of the EWL is called a dummy WL (DWL). Different from the fully programmed block, the reliability of the open block is still a serious concern, such as the high raw bit error rates (RBERs) of EWL.
In this article, the reliability of the open block operation is characterized comprehensively in 3-D CT triple-level-cell (TLC) NAND flash memory. The underlying mechanisms of the EWL’s degradation during retention are discussed and the targeted solutions are proposed. Based on our systematical measurement data, it is concluded that the lateral charge migration (LCM) in CTL is the dominant reason for the degradation of the reliability in the EWL [10]. Accordingly, to improve

1937-4151 c 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4798

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2022

The EWL’s reliability, we first propose the extra read (ER) characterized the high RBER phenomenon and the thresh-

and extra program (EP) schemes to compensate for the charge old voltage offset when the block of NAND was not fully

loss during the retention, and our experimental results validate programmed. Papandreou et al. [9] studied the open block

the effectiveness of these two schemes. Then, aiming at fur- characterization and read voltage calibration results of state-

ther enhancements of the robust reliability in the open block of-the-art 3-D QLC NAND. Jia et al. [15] characterized the

operation, optimizations of the low-density parity-check-code impact of cycling induced intercell trapped charge on two pri-

(LDPC) codes are studied to prolong the lifetime of 3-D NAND mary charge loss mechanisms (vertical and lateral charge loss).

flash.

Shihab et al. [16] proposed the concept of ReveNAND-fast-

The main contributions of this article are as follows.

drift-aware 3-D NAND design and presented the ERR scheme

1) The underlying mechanisms for the poor reliability of to reduce such errors and the iRefill scheme to counter the

the open block operation are first provided, which can impact of fast-drift with minimum performance and hardware

be well explained by the special physical structure of overhead. Wu et al. [17] researched the impacts of lateral

3-D CT NAND flash. Due to the LCM, the RBER of charge diffusion on the retention characteristics of charge-

EWL in open block can be higher, especially during trapping (CT) 3-D NAND flash memory. Kong et al. [6]

the data retention (DR). Then, two targeted solutions proposed PCSL and TSSL schemes to improve the RCRD

are proposed to improve the reliability of EWL and the problem caused by lateral charge diffusion in 3-D NAND

working mechanisms are explained in detail.

flash memory. Choi et al. [18] thoroughly investigated the

2) The ER and EP schemes are proposed to compensate early retention characteristics from microseconds to seconds

for the charge loss caused by LCM in the vertical NAND in 3-D NAND flash memory using a fast-response pulse I-V

string, which is the key to reduce the RBER of EWL system. Yamazaki et al. [19] researched the design of coding

in the open block operation. By exploiting ER and EP approaches to enhance the reliability of 3-D NAND flash-based

schemes, a large reduction of RBER can be obtained, storages with correlated data patterns. Mizoguchi et al. [20]

and the experimental results show that the RBER of proposed the Vth Nearing to suppress the LCM and improve EWL can be reduced by 59.8% and 86.5% on average the reliability of 3-D TLC NAND flash. Nakamura et al. [21]

by ER and EP schemes, respectively.

proposed adaptive artificial neural network coupled (ANN)

3) LDPC codes are studied to improve the decoding LDPC ECC (ANN-LDPC ECC) to increase acceptable errors

performance on the basis of the proposed two schemes. by 9.1-times and to extend the data-retention lifetime by

LDPC codes are widely adopted in 3-D NAND flash- 76-times for CT and FG 3D-NAND flash memories. Kim and

based storage systems, and improving the performance Sung [22] presented a rate-0.96 (68 254, 65 536) shortened

of LDPC codes is a direct and effective approach to Euclidean geometry LDPC codes and its VLSI implemen-

design memory systems with robust reliability. By using tation for high-throughput NAND Flash memory systems.

the ER and EP schemes proposed in this article, the error Zambelli et al. [23] researched the application of machine

correction capability of LDPC codes can be increased to learning algorithms such as data clustering on a large char-

1.92 and 4.76 times, respectively.

acterization data set of TLC 3-D-NAND Flash devices, which

The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Related can help the designers in optimizing the countermeasures for

works are given in Section II. Section III introduces the back- improving memory reliability. Aslasm et al. [24] studied the

ground of the open block in 3-D CT NAND flash memory, threshold voltage distribution of DR and proposed RA-BP

LDPC codes, and motivation. Section IV presents the proposed decoding scheme. Li et al. [25] proposed a smart sensing level

ER and EP schemes and the optimization of the LDPC decod- placement scheme to reduce the LDPC decoding latency.

ing process in detail. The flow of experiments and the effect By analyzing these works, it is found that there is rela-

of these two methods are described in Section V. Finally, tively little work focusing on the DR characteristics of open

Section VI concludes this article.

blocks in NAND flash memory, and most of the works focus

on LDPC and log-likelihood ratio (LLR) optimization, which

II. RELATED WORK

belongs to the system level. To the best of our knowledge, this article is the first work that experimentally and compre-

There exist some previous works studying the character- hensively analyzes the DR characteristics of the open blocks

istics of 2-D and 3-D NAND flash memory, including read in 3-D CT NAND flash memory and proposes ER and EP

disturb (RD), DR, P/E endurance, etc., and many meth- schemes to improve the performance of LDPC codes, and our

ods were proposed to improve the reliability of NAND flash research is based on the device level, the performance analy-

memory [11], [12].

sis of LDPC codes is based on the data obtained from actual

Nowadays, with the large enhancement of storage capacity testing of the chip. The proposed ER and EP schemes can sig-

and low bit cost, vertically stacked 3-D NAND flash memory nificantly reduce bit errors rates and enhance LDPC decoding

has been widely applied in data centers and mobiles. The posi- performance.

tion of 3-D NAND flash memory in nonvolatile memory is

becoming more and more important, and the research on the performance, usage scenarios, and optimization methods of

III. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION

NAND flash memory has become more and more extensive. In this section, the background about the open block in

Papandreou et al. [13] evaluated the effect of RD on par- 3-D CT NAND flash memory is first introduced, including

tially programmed blocks of MLC NAND. Zhang et al. [14] the concept of the open block and the existing problems

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIA et al.: OPTIMAL PROGRAM-READ SCHEMES TOWARD HIGHLY RELIABLE OPEN BLOCK OPERATIONS

4799

EWL, which is called DWL, as shown in Fig. 2(b). Besides, the WLs to be programmed except for the EWL are collectively referred to as inner WLs. Now, the open block is a common usage scenario in 3-D CT NAND flash memory [28]. On the contrary, if the block is fully programmed, it is called a close block.

Fig. 1. Schematic of 2-D and 3-D NAND flash memory.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. (a) shows the structure and difference between open block and close block. (b) shows the definition of different WLs in the open block.

of the open block in 3-D CT NAND flash, and then LDPC codes are described. Finally, the motivation for proposing these optimization schemes is given.
A. Open Block in 3-D CT NAND Flash
With the continuous development of the NAND flash memory market, 2-D NAND flash adopts downsizing and increasing the number of bits stored in each memory cell to improve the storage density [26]. However, 2-D NAND flash faces its scaling limitations, such as the cell-to-cell interference, which becomes more serious because of the scaled space region [1]. To overcome this bottleneck, the concept of 3-D NAND flash memory has been proposed [27]. 3-D NAND flash memory adopts the form of stacking storage layers in the vertical direction, which breaks through the limitation of 2-D NAND flash memory and effectively promotes the further development of NAND flash memory, as shown in Fig. 1. As the number of stacked layers in 3-D NAND flash memory gradually increases, the storage density of NAND flash memory also increases. But under a noncontinuous writing workload, each block cannot always be fully programmed. We call this type of block as an open block. Fig. 2(a) shows the structure of the open block, and the open block contains both the programmed WL and the unprogrammed WL. Among these WLs, there are two special WLs, one is the last WL to be programmed, which is called the EWL in this work; the other is the next WL of

B. Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Early NAND flash memory’s storage arrays were small and the RBER was low; therefore, Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) codes have been used as ECC [29]. With the growth of storage capacity, NAND flash memory is more susceptible to different types of noise interference, and the corresponding RBER is also getting higher and higher. The error correction capability of traditional BCH codes can no longer meet the requirements [30]. LDPC codes have stronger error correction capability than BCH codes, and they have replaced BCH codes as ECC in current NAND flash memory controllers [31], [32]. After long-term development, LDPC codes have derived a number of decoding algorithms: bit-reversal decoding and weighted bit-reversal decoding algorithms at the hard decision level; the sum-product algorithm (SPA), Min-Sum algorithm, etc., that consider both hard and soft decisions. Considering the decoding performance and the complexity of circuit implementation, the Min-Sum algorithm is generally used as the decoding algorithm in the current work [33], and this algorithm is also used in this article. The input of the Min-Sum decoding algorithm is not bit data, but the value of the LLR corresponding to the bit. The calculation formula of LLR is as follows: LLR(y) = ([P(x = 0|y)]/[P(x = 1|y)]). It is easy to see from the formula that the LLR value contains certain probability information, which represents the reliability of the received bits. The greater the absolute value of the LLR, the higher the credibility of the received data.
In the 3-D NAND flash memory controller, the Min-Sum algorithm has two decoding methods: 1) hard decoding and 2) soft decoding. Both decoding methods have their own advantages and disadvantages: in the case of hard decoding, only one read voltage (Vread) is required to perform one-shot read operation; while in the case of soft decoding, additional read operations are required by setting multiple soft Vread with fine-grained offsets besides the hard Vread. Therefore, in the viewpoint of the read latency, hard decoding is much better by one-shot read operation; while for stronger correction capability, soft decoding is much better because it includes more accurate LLR values. Fig. 3 shows the process of obtaining the LLR values of hard decoding and soft decoding during the read operation, and this process is combined with the threshold voltage (Vth) distribution of the NAND flash memory. Here, we stipulate that the maximum of absolute value of the LLR is 7 [25]. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the data read from the storage cell in the left area of the hard Vread is “1,” which is mapped to LLR as −7; the data read on the right is “0,” which is mapped to +7. It can be seen from the figure that there is a part of the overlapped area where the original data written to the storage cell may be read as “1” or “0” when performing the read operation, but hard decoding does not make a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4800

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2022

(a)
(b)
Fig. 3. (a) Shows the principle of obtaining the LLR value during hard decoding; (b) Shows the principle of obtaining the LLR value during soft decoding.
more detailed distinction between the LLR values of this part of data, resulting in inaccurate LLR values, which affects the decoding ability of Min-Sum decoding. Fig. 3(b) shows the process of obtaining the LLR value through soft decoding with two additional reading voltages. As Fig. 3(b) shown, soft decoding with two extra sensing levels includes three read operations, that is, one hard read voltage and two soft read voltages, which locate on both sides of the hard voltage, and the voltage offset between the two soft read operations and the hard read operation is the same. These three voltages divide the Vth of the NAND flash memory cell into four regions. In order to acquire the mapped data obtained in the soft decoding process, it is necessary to perform an XOR on the different data read through the two soft decoding voltages. The mapped data obtained in the soft decoding and in the hard decoding can be combined into a set of Gray codes, corresponding to the LLR values of different Vth regions. Since a more accurate LLR value can be obtained in the soft decoding process, the error correction capability of soft decoding is more robust.
C. Motivation With the increasing demand for data storage, the num-
ber of stacked layers of 3-D NAND flash memory is also

Fig. 4. Comparison of the performance of different WLs in the open block and the close block. The reliability of the EWL in the open block is significantly poor.
increasing. Now, 17× layers stacked NAND flash memory has been realized [7], and the development plan of 2XX-layer and 3XX-layer has also been proposed. At the same time, the degradation of NAND flash’s reliability has become increasingly apparent, so it is more and more important to improve the reliability of NAND flash memory under various working scenarios [34]. To explore the reliability of the open block, we design the following experiment: first, several NAND blocks are divided into two groups. One group of blocks is fully programmed, while the other group is partly programmed (0–56 WLs in each block). Finally, the read operation as well as the data analysis are done right after data programming and after 12-h DR, respectively. The experimental results show that the reliability of different WLs in the open block has great differences. Fig. 4 shows the difference in RBER of WL56 in the open block and the close block, where the WL56 is in the position of the EWL in the open block. It can be seen that whether it is to read immediately after programming or read after retention for 12 h, the RBER of WL56 in the open block is 2.6 and 4.0 times higher than it in the close block, as shown in the left figure of Fig. 4. The picture on the right shows the comparison of the average RBER of WL0 to WL55 between the open block and the close block, and there is no significant difference in the average RBER of this part of WLs. This means that the main cause of reliability degradation in the open block is the decrease of EWL’s reliability. Moreover, there will always be an EWL and data will always be programmed to the EWL when the NAND flash memory works in the open block scenario, so improving reliability of EWL is very necessary.
The specific reason is explained as follows: although the invention of 3-D CT NAND flash memory is extremely innovative, it still has some problems. One of the most serious problems is the LCM of stored charges in the CTL, which is because, in 3-D CT NAND flash memory, the storage layer on the same string is shared. When the electrons enter the storage layer, they will move to the space region between adjacent WLs [2], [18], especially when storing the cold data, as shown in Fig. 5. Besides, the degree of LCM is related to the number of electrons stored in the storage layer of the adjacent WLs [35]. When the difference in the number of electrons stored in adjacent storage layers is larger, that is, when the Vth difference between adjacent WLs is larger, the possibility

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIA et al.: OPTIMAL PROGRAM-READ SCHEMES TOWARD HIGHLY RELIABLE OPEN BLOCK OPERATIONS

4801

Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of LCM in CT 3-D NAND flash memory.
of LCM will increase [36]. In the open block, the EWL is programmed, but the DWL is not programmed, which has the lowest Vth. This means the Vth difference between EWL and DWL is relatively high, and more electrons stored in the EWL will enter the space region between these two WLs, even enter the memory cells of the DWL during retention. Moreover, there is a fast initial charge loss (within 1 s) in the CT NAND device [37]. This fast loss of electrons means that as soon as electrons are injected into the memory cell, some of them will be lost, which is the main reason for the high RBER of EWL when reading data immediately after programming.
In this article, we pay attention to the reliability of the EWL in the open block and propose two optimization schemes to extend the lifetime of the NAND flash memory when it works in the open block mode.
IV. PROPOSED SCHEMES AND OPTIMIZATION OF LDPC DECODING PROCESS
In this section, the ER and EP schemes are first discussed, including the working mechanism and the specific processes, and then the optimization of the LDPC decoding process based on proposed schemes is introduced.
A. ER Scheme
In order to improve the reliability of NAND flash memory when working in the open block scenario, this article proposes the ER scheme, which only needs to perform one ER operation on the EWL in the open block that has undergone DR, and it can effectively reduce the RBER of the EWL in the open block without causing a large read delay. The great advantage of this scheme is that it does not sacrifice the storage space of NAND flash memory.
The specific operation steps of this scheme are as follows: when reading the cold data stored in the EWL of the NAND flash memory working in the open block scenario, it is necessary to perform two consecutive read operations on the EWL in the open block. Then, save the data obtained during the second read operation and use the data for subsequent error correction. Through subsequent experiments, we verify the effectiveness of this scheme. Although this solution adds a read operation and will cause a certain read delay, its efficiency in reducing the RBER far exceeds the increase in operation delay, and it does not sacrifice extra storage space for NAND flash memory. In addition, by using this scheme, the working efficiency of LDPC codes can also be improved.

The reasons for this scheme to reduce the RBER are as follows: after the read command is issued, Vread needs to be applied to the control gate (CG) of the corresponding WL, and the pass voltage (Vpass) needs to be applied to the other unaddressed WLs, that is, Vread is applied to the EWL while Vpass is applied to the DWL when reading the EWL. In this way, the part of the electrons that enter the space region between these two WLs during retention due to LCM will reenter the memory cells on the EWL. This operation can also make a small number of electrons tunnel into the memory cell when Vread is applied to the EWL. Therefore, electrons lost due to DR can be partially compensated, and the RBER can also be reduced.
B. EP Scheme
Through the analysis of the working mechanism of the ER scheme, we know that the voltage applied to the EWL during the read operation helps to recover the errors generated during the DR. At the same time, considering that in the basic operation of the NAND flash memory, in addition to the read operation applying a positive voltage to the CG, the program operation also needs to apply a positive voltage to the CG. The specific voltages applied during programming are as follows: one is the program voltage (Vprog) applied to the WL where the addressed cell is located, and the other is Vpass applied to the other WLs. It should be noted that Vpass here is not the same as Vpass in the ER scheme, and there is a certain difference in the value between these two voltages.
It can be seen that the program operation also has a repair effect on the NAND flash memory when reading the cold data. However, this programming operation cannot be performed on the EWL, because the use of NAND flash memory must follow the principle of erasing first and then programming. If the block of NAND flash memory is not erased before the program operation, it will cause a large area of stored data wrong, so the EP operation proposed in this article is performed on the DWL in the open block.
When programming the DWL located in the open block, it is necessary to apply Vprog to the DWL while applying Vpass to the EWL and other WLs, and Vpass applied to EWL during the program operation is greater than Vpass applied during the read operation. Higher voltage helps to achieve better recovery effects, but it can cause worse RDs to other unselected but programmed WLs. Considering that operation voltages cannot be modulated freely, we can simply adopt the program operation to achieve better recovery effects and avoid sophisticated parameters’ trimming. In a word, the specific method of the EP scheme is to perform a programming operation on the DWL of the open block after DR, and then read the data stored in the EWL.
C. Optimization of LDPC Decoding
In order to improve the reliability of storage systems, ECCs have been maturely used in NAND flash memory controllers, and LDPC codes are now more and more widely used, it is very important to optimize the error correction process of NAND flash memory. Based on these two optimization

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4802

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2022

(a)

(b)
Fig. 6. (a) LDPC decoding flowchart optimized based on the ER scheme. (b) Overall LDPC decoding flowchart after optimization based on the ER and EP schemes.

schemes above, we optimize the LDPC decoding process. Fig. 6(a) illustrates the LDPC decoding process based on the ER scheme. If the data read by the system are stored in the EWL of the open block, the ER scheme is applied to the EWL. That is, first, two read operations are applied to the EWL, and then perform the LDPC decoing process using the data read at the second time. By adopting the ER scheme, the ER operation will increase the read latency, but it can largely benefit the performance of the LDPC decoding process. While for the EP scheme, the EP operation will increase the read latency and also cause an additional 0.22-MB overhead, but it is extremely efficient to suppress error bits and improve LDPC decoding efficiency. Therefore, to fully utilize the error correction capability of the EP scheme, it can be utilized as a data recovery approach in the decoding process. In summary, this work optimizes the LDPC decoding flow of the EWL in the open blocks as a whole, and the specific process is shown in Fig. 6(b). The specific steps of this method are mainly divided into five steps as follows.
Step 1: Perform the ER scheme on the EWL of the open block once.
Step 2: Use the data read after executing the ER scheme to execute the LDPC decoding process. During the decoding process, the data are hard decoded first, and if the hard

decoding fails, soft decoding is performed. If the soft decoding still fails, exit the decoding process.
Step 3: Execute an EP scheme. Step 4: Read the data stored in the EWL and execute the LDPC decoding process. Step 5: Use the same method as the second step to perform LDPC decoding on the read data.
V. EXPERIMENT METHODOLOGY AND RESULT ANALYSIS
In this section, this article first introduces the experiment methodology and then analyzes the results of these two methods. The analysis of the results includes two parts: 1) RBER and 2) LDPC decoding performance.
A. Experiment Methodology
Measurement results in this article are derived from the actual hardware platform, and the chip tested is a raw 3-D CT TLC NAND flash chip, that is, it does not contain any peripheral control circuits. In order to achieve normal access and operation of the test chip, we use a customized FPGA flash memory tester. The tester is mainly composed of the control circuit and a fixed base of the 3-D NAND flash memory chip. The corresponding firmware program has been burned into the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIA et al.: OPTIMAL PROGRAM-READ SCHEMES TOWARD HIGHLY RELIABLE OPEN BLOCK OPERATIONS

4803

Fig. 8. TLC NAND flash memory cell has eight states and each state represents one threshold voltage level of the memory cell.
TABLE I EXPERIMENT PARAMETERS
(a)

(b)
Fig. 7. (a) shows the test equipment built in this work. (b) shows the experimental flowchart.
control circuit of the NAND flash memory tester, and the NAND flash tester communicates with the PC with the Linux kernel through the PCIe interface. Fig. 7(a) shows the structure of test system built according to the needs of the experiment. The data used for testing are all random numbers that are generated by external programming. The return, analysis, and processing of the test data require the help of some operating software. The experimental processes described briefly as follows are mainly divided into two stages, including data programmed to the NAND flash and read the data to obtain the RBER, as shown in Fig. 7(b).
1) Data Program: By the “Block Program” and “Block Erase” script, data are written into the 3-D NAND flash memory in the page order and erased in blocks.
2) Read the Data to Analyze RBER: Through the “Block Read Dump” operation, raw data stored in the TLC NAND flash memory are read and downloaded to the

specified text file. Then, analyze the error information through the data processing program. The NAND flash memory tested in this experiment is a 3-D CT TLC NAND flash chip with 64 stacking storage layers, 2956 blocks. In this NAND flash memory, the block is the basic unit of erasing and each block contains 768 logical pages uniformly distributed at 64 stacking layers [38]. The page is the basic unit for programming and reading, which can store 16 kB of user data. TLC NAND flash memory contains three pages in a WL logically, which are the least significant bit (LSB) page, the central significant bit (CSB) page, and the most significant bit (MSB) page [39], and the stored data can be divided into eight states according to the Vth of the storage cell. Fig. 8 shows the distribution diagram of the Vth obtained from the actual test and the gray codes corresponding to different distributions. Ideally, Vth between adjacent states has a wide read margin, but the Vth of adjacent states has overlapping regions in practice, and these overlapping regions are the source of error bits. This article evaluates the LDPC decoding performance based on proposed ER and EP schemes by the MATLAB program. The decoding algorithm of LDPC codes used in this experiment is the Min-Sum algorithm, with a code rate (CR) of 0.78. The scheme selected as the baseline for comparison is the classical LDPC hard decoding (i.e., min-sum algorithms [40]–[42], widely used in NAND flash memory). As shown in Table I, the LDPC code size is the number of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4804

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2022

(a)

Fig. 10. Comparison of LDPC decode failure probability under different schemes.

(b)
Fig. 9. (a) RBER obtained during the experiment. (b) Improvement of EP scheme compared to ER scheme.
columns in the LDPC check matrix. To reduce the FPGA complexity of the LDPC check matrix, the LDPC code size is smaller than the page size. Therefore, the readout data of one page will be divided into several LDPC codes when decoding. In our work, the size of one page is equal to the size of sixteen LDPC codes. Referring to the description in [43], we set the latency of per iteration cycle of one LDPC code in our decoding simulation experiment as 1 µs; hence, the latency of per iteration cycle of one page is 16 µs. During the experiment, LDPC decoding iterations and latency are recorded, and the decoding performance is assessed.
B. Result Analysis
Fig. 9(a) shows the change of RBER during the whole experiment. After a certain period of DR, the RBER of the EWL is significantly high at the first read, reaching 0.013 when the retention time is 1080 h at room temperature. For various conditions tested in the experiment, the average RBER reduction is 59.8% after the second read operation. After performing the third read operation, the RBER will not drop again but will increase slightly.
By analyzing the data read after programming the DWL, it is found that the RBER decreases again. Based on the operations above, the RBER of EWL can be reduced by an average of 66.4% compared with the data read at the second time,

especially the RBER can be reduced to less than one-tenth of the initial RBER after retention 1080 h. We further sort and analyze the RBER under these two schemes. Taking the data readout without any schemes as the baseline, the normalized BER of these two repair schemes with the DR is shown in Fig. 9(b).
Then, we focus on the improvement of LDPC decoding performance under these two schemes. Fig. 10 is a graph of the error correction capability of different decoding schemes based on the Min-Sum algorithm. The abscissa is the RBER, and the ordinate reflects the probability of decoding failure. No matter which scheme is adopted to read the NAND flash memory, the read data are always hard-decoded first and then soft-decoded. It can be seen from Fig. 10 that the error correction ability of LDPC hard decoding after adopting the EP scheme is the strongest, and the error correction ability of hard decoding under the ER scheme is comparable to the soft decoding without any reliability restoration scheme. It should be noted that the error correction capability of soft decoding is definitely better than hard decoding. By applying the ER scheme, the error correction capability of LDPC hard decoding can be improved to be the same as that of soft decoding with two extra sensing levels.
Fig. 11(a) is a comparison of the average number of decoding iterations using the first read data and the second read data of the EWL in the open blocks. The results show that when using the data read at the first time for 50 iterations, the average number of iterations using the data read at the second time is only 4.334, which means that the number of iterations required for decoding based on the ER scheme can be reduced by 91.33%. Fig. 11(b) illustrates the variation of the latency with the RBER under the one-time read and ER schemes. Taking the maximum read delay of 79 µs corresponding to the MSB page in TLC NAND flash memory as an example, it can be seen that the latency caused by using and not using the ER scheme has a crossover point near the error rate of 0.01: before the crossover point, the ER scheme consumes an extra 57 µs of delay overhead on average; but after the crossover point, the ER scheme saves an average of 360 µs of delay overhead. This fully shows that the efficiency that adopts the ER scheme in the decoding process is higher.
Finally, we make a comprehensive comparison of the performance parameters of various LDPC decoding situations,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIA et al.: OPTIMAL PROGRAM-READ SCHEMES TOWARD HIGHLY RELIABLE OPEN BLOCK OPERATIONS
TABLE II COMPARISON OF DECODING PERFORMANCE UNDER DIFFERENT SCHEMES

4805

decoding based on the ER scheme is about the same, which are 1.85 and 1.92 times that of the baseline, respectively. The error correction capability of LDPC hard decoding based on the EP scheme is the largest, which can reach 4.76 times the baseline. Furthermore, we also compared additional energy consumptions of different schemes. In detail, the energy consumption of LDPC hard decoding with the ER scheme is the smallest (0.023 mJ), followed by that of LDPC soft decoding with two extra sensing levels (0.046 mJ), while that of LDPC hard decoding with the EP scheme is the largest (0.083 mJ).

(a)
(b)
Fig. 11. (a) Comparison of the average number of decoding iterations using the first read data and the second read data of the EWL in the open block. (b) Delay caused by the one-time read and ER schemes varies with the RBER.
as shown in Table II. As mentioned above, the error correction capability of hard decoding based on the ER scheme is the same as that of soft decoding, so we compare the delays of these two decoding schemes above and hard decoding based on the EP scheme. It can be found that the latency of LDPC hard decoding based on the ER scheme is 67 µs, the latency of LDPC soft decoding with two extra sensing levels is 135 µs, and the latency of LDPC hard decoding based on the EP scheme is 2000 µs, so the delay of the LDPC hard decoding based on the ER scheme is the smallest. In addition, taking the error correction capability of traditional LDPC hard decoding as the baseline, which is corresponding to the RBER when decode failure probability is 1, the error correction capability of soft decoding with two extra sensing levels and hard

VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, the problem of open blocks in 3-D CT NAND flash memory is first explained. In the open block operation mode, the reliability of the EWL will become very poor. The main reason for this phenomenon is the LCM in the storage layer of 3-D CT NAND flash memory. Then, we proposed ER and EP schemes to solve the high RBER of the EWL in open blocks. The experimental results show that using ER and EP schemes, the RBER can be reduced by an average of 59.8% and 86.5%, respectively. Carrying out LDPC hard decoding based on ER and EP schemes, the error correction capability can be increased by 1.92 and 4.76 times, exceeding the error correction capability of soft decoding with two extra sensing levels. Considering the latency overhead and storage overhead of these two schemes, we optimize the LDPC decoding process. When reading data stored in EWL of the open blocks, first perform the ER operation, then decode the data under the ER scheme, and finally, adopt the LDPC decoding based on the EP scheme when the decoding based on the ER scheme fails.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Kim, S. Ahn, Y. G. Shin, K. Lee, and E. Jung, “Evolution of nand flash memory: From 2D to 3D as a storage market leader,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), 2017, pp. 1–4.
[2] C. Kang et al., “Effects of lateral charge spreading on the reliability of TANOS (TAN/ALO/SIN/Oxide/SI) nand flash memory,” in Proc. 45th Annu. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp. , 2007, pp. 167–170.
[3] R. Shirota, “Developments in 3D-NAND flash technology,” in Advances in Non-Volatile Memory and Storage Technology. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2014, pp. 27–74.
[4] C. Lu, “Future prospects of nand flash memory technology–The evolution from floating gate to charge trapping to 3D stacking,” J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 7604–7618, 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 41, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2022

[5] M. Kang and Y. Kim, “Natural local self-boosting effect in 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 38, no. 9, pp. 1236–1239, Sep. 2017.
[6] Y. Kong, M. Zhang, X. Zhan, R. Cao, and J. Chen, “Retention correlated read disturb errors in 3-D charge trap nand flash memory: Observations, analysis, and solutions,” IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 4042–4051, Nov. 2020.
[7] J.-W. Park et al., “30.1 a 176-stacked 512Gb 3b/cell 3D-NAND flash with 10.8Gb/mm2 density with a peripheral circuit under cell array architecture,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid- State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), vol. 64, 2021, pp. 422–423.
[8] H. Huh et al., “13.2 a 1Tb 4b/cell 96-stacked-WL 3D NAND flash memory with 30MB/s program throughput using peripheral circuit under memory cell array technique,” in Proc. IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference-(ISSCC)., 2020, pp. 220–221.
[9] N. Papandreou et al., “Open block characterization and read voltage calibration of 3D QLC NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[10] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, S. Ghose, and O. Mutlu, “Read disturb errors in mlc nand flash memory: Characterization, mitigation, and recovery,” in Proc. 45th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Depend. Syst. Netw., 2015, pp. 438–449.
[11] N. Mielke et al., “Bit error rate in NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp., 2008, pp. 9–19.
[12] Y. Cai, O. Mutlu, E. F. Haratsch, and K. Mai, “Program interference in mlc nand flash memory: Characterization, modeling, and mitigation,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Int. Conf. Comput. Design (ICCD), 2013, pp. 123–130.
[13] N. Papandreou et al., “Effect of read disturb on incomplete blocks in MLC NAND flash arrays,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), 2016, pp. 1–4.
[14] M. Zhang, F. Wu, Y. Du, W. Liu, and C. Xie, “Pair-bit errors aware LDPC decoding in MLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 2312–2320, Dec. 2019.
[15] X. Jia et al., “Impact of cycling induced intercell trapped charge on retention charge loss in 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE J. Electron Devices Soc., vol. 8, pp. 62–66, Jan. 2020.
[16] M. M. Shihab, J. Zhang, M. Jung, and M. Kandemir, “ReveNAND: A fast-drift-aware resilient 3D NAND flash design,” ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1–26, May 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3184744
[17] J. Wu, J. Chen, and X. Jiang, “Atomistic study of lateral charge diffusion degradation during program/erase cycling in 3-d nand flash memory,” IEEE J. Electron Devices Soc., vol. 7, pp. 626–631, May 2019.
[18] B. Choi et al., “Comprehensive evaluation of early retention (fast charge loss within a few seconds) characteristics in tube-type 3-D nand flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. VLSI Technol., 2016, pp. 1–2.
[19] S. Yamazaki, S. Tanakamaru, S. Suzuki, T. O. Iwasaki, S. Hachiya, and K. Takeuchi, “Reliability enhancement of 1Xnm TLC for cold flash and millennium memories,” in Proc. Symp. VLSI Circuits (VLSI Circuits), 2015, pp. T112–T113.
[20] K. Mizoguchi, S. Kotaki, Y. Deguchi, and K. Takeuchi, “Lateral charge migration suppression of 3D-NAND flash by Vth nearing for near data computing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2017, p. 19.
[21] T. Nakamura, Y. Deguchi, and K. Takeuchi, “9.1x error acceptable adaptive artificial neural network coupled LDPC ECC for charge-trap and floating-gate 3D-NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integr. Circuits Conf. (CICC), 2018, pp. 1–4.
[22] J. Kim and W. Sung, “Rate-0.96 LDPC decoding VLSI for soft-decision error correction of NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 1004–1015, May 2014.
[23] C. Zambelli et al., “Characterization of TLC 3D-NAND flash endurance through machine learning for LDPC code rate optimization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), 2017, pp. 1–4.
[24] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Retention-aware beliefpropagation decoding for NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 725–729, Jun. 2017.
[25] Q. Li, L. Shi, C. J. Xue, Q. Zhuge, and E. H. Sha, “Improving LDPC performance via asymmetric sensing level placement on flash memory,” in Proc. 22nd Asia South Pac. Design Autom. Conf. (ASP-DAC), 2017, pp. 560–565.
[26] A. Fayrushin, K. Seol, J. Na, S. Hur, J. Choi, and K. Kim, “The new program/erase cycling degradation mechanism of NAND flash memory devices,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2009, pp. 1–4.
[27] K. Parat and A. Goda, “Scaling trends in NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2018, p. 2.

[28] X. Zhang, D. Ma, W. Lin, and Z. Cheng, “Study of a phenomenon of high error WL in mixed read and program operations in 3-D NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Electron Devices Solid-State Circuits (EDSSC), 2019, pp. 1–3.
[29] H. Choi, W. Liu, and W. Sung, “VLSI implementation of BCH error correction for multilevel cell NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 843–847, May 2010.
[30] A. Marelli and R. Micheloni, “BCH and LDPC error correction codes for NAND flash memories,” in 3D Flash Memories. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer, 2016, pp. 281–320.
[31] J. Jung and I. Park, “Multi-bit flipping decoding of LDPC codes for NAND storage systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 979–982, May 2017.
[32] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[33] H. Sun, W. Zhao, M. Lv, G. Dong, N. Zheng, and T. Zhang, “Exploiting intracell bit-error characteristics to improve min-sum LDPC decoding for MLC NAND flash-based storage in mobile device,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 2654–2664, Aug. 2016.
[34] J. Lee, J. Jang, J. Lim, Y. G. Shin, K. Lee, and E. Jung, “A new ruler on the storage market: 3D-NAND flash for high-density memory and its technology evolutions and challenges on the future,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2016, p. 11.
[35] Y. Kong et al., “Comprehensive investigations on data pattern dependences in charge-trap (CT) 3D NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE 15th Int. Conf. Solid-State Integr. Circuit Technol. (ICSICT), 2020, pp. 1–3.
[36] F. Wang et al., “Lateral charge migration induced abnormal read disturb in 3D charge-trapping nand flash memory,” Appl. Phys. Exp., vol. 13, no. 5, 2020, Art. no. 054002.
[37] C. Chen, . Lue, C. Hsieh, K. Chang, K. Hsieh, and C. Lu, “Study of fast initial charge loss and it’s impact on the programmed states vt distribution of charge-trapping NAND flash,” in Proc. Int. Electron Devices Meeting, 2010, pp. 5–6.
[38] R. Yamashita et al., “11.1 a 512Gb 3b/cell flash memory on 64-wordline-layer bics technology,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), 2017, pp. 196–197.
[39] R. Cao, J. Wu, W. Yang, Y. Li, and J. Chen, “Error bit distributions in triple-level cell three-dimensional (3D) NAND flash memory,” in Proc. 14th IEEE Int. Conf. Solid-State Integr. Circuit Technol. (ICSICT), 2018, pp. 1–3.
[40] G. Dong, S. Li, and T. Zhang, “Using data postcompensation and predistortion to tolerate cell-to-cell interference in MLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2718–2728, Oct. 2010.
[41] G. W. Burr, B. N. Kurdi, J. C. Scott, C. H. Lam, K. Gopalakrishnan, and R. S. Shenoy, “Overview of candidate device technologies for storageclass memory,” IBM J. Res. Develop., vol. 52, no. 4.5, pp. 449–464, Jul. 2008.
[42] R. Katsumata et al., “Pipe-shaped bics flash memory with 16 stacked layers and multi-level-cell operation for ultra high density storage devices,” in Proc. Symp. VLSI Technol., 2009, pp. 136–137.
[43] R.-S. Liu, M.-Y. Chuang, C.-L. Yang, C.-H. Li, K.-C. Ho, and H.-P. Li, “EC-Cache: Exploiting error locality to optimize LDPC in nand flashbased SSDs,” in Proc. 51st ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), 2014, pp. 1–6.
Menghua Jia received the master’s degree from the School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Qingdao, China, in 2020.
His current research interests include nonvolatile memory (NVM) reliability, NVM storage systems, and error correction codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIA et al.: OPTIMAL PROGRAM-READ SCHEMES TOWARD HIGHLY RELIABLE OPEN BLOCK OPERATIONS

4807

Yachen Kong is currently pursuing the master’s degree with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Qingdao, China.
Her current research interests include nonvolatile memory (NVM) reliability and NVM storage systems.

Fei Wu received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical automation from the Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China, in 1997 and 2000, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, in 2005.
She is currently a Professor with the Information Storage Lab, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, HUST. Her research interests include computer architecture, nonvolatile storage, embedded system, and intelligent storage.

Xuepeng Zhan received the bachelor’s and Ph.D. degrees in micro-electronics and solid-state electronics from the College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun, China, in 2012 and 2017, respectively.
As a Postdoctoral Fellow, he worked with Shandong University, Jinan, China, and Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, U.K. He is currently working as an Associate Research Fellow with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University. He is also with the State Key Laboratory of High-End Server & Storage Technology, Testing and Evaluation Research Department. His research interests focus on femtosecond laser processing and microelectronic device characterization.
Meng Zhang received the Ph.D. degree from the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics (WNLO), Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2019.
He is working with WNLO, Huazhong University of Science and Technology as a Postdoctoral Researcher. His current research interests include error correction codes, nonvolatile storage systems, and reliability.

Jiezhi Chen (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Informatics and Electronics, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2009.
He joined the Research and Development Center, Toshiba Corporation, Tokyo, in 2010. He is currently a Professor with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, China. He has published many articles in journals and conference proceedings. His work on nanoscale devices and device reliabilities has been the leading author or the corresponding author for more than ten times in VLSI Symposium and IEEE International Electron Device Meeting (IEEE IEDM) since 2008. His research interests include the characterization and process engineering of nano-scale transistors and nonvolatile memories, with main focus on reliability physics. Prof. Chen serves as a Technical Program Committee Member for IEDM in 2016 and 2017, the IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium since 2019, and the IEEE International Memory Workshop since 2020. He acted as a reviewer of several international journals.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

