2022 Asia Communications and Photonics Conference (ACP) | 978-1-6654-8155-7/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ACP55869.2022.10088618

2022 Asia Communications and Photonics Conference (ACP) and International Conference on Information Photonics and Optical Communications (IPOC)
FPGA-Based Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Encoding Algorithm

Zhuo Ding, Liqian Wang*, Shanyong Cai, Miao Zhu, Yunfan Chang, Zhiguo Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Information Photonics and Optical Communication Beijing University of Posts and telecommunications(BUPT) Beijing, China
e-mail: dingzhuo2020@bupt.edu.cn, *lqwangwang@bupt.edu.cn, caishanyong@bupt.edu.cn, zmiao142857@bupt.edu.cn, changyunfan@bupt.edu.cn, zhangzhiguo@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract—In this paper, an algorithm for quasi-cyclic lowdensity parity-check code (QC-LDPC) encoding is proposed. The correctness of the algorithm is validated on the FPGA evaluation board. Experimental results show that the encoding delay can be reduced by 3.3 times compared to the conventional encoding algorithm based on generator matrix. In addition, the algorithm also reduces the complexity of hardware implementation.
Keywords-encoding algorithm; hardware architecture; QCLDPC codes; FPGA
I. INTRODUCTION
Channel coding is one of the key technologies of wireless optical communication, which can improve the reliability of communication [1-2]. Low-density parity-code (LDPC) has the advantages of high encoding gain and strong antiinterference ability. The key problems it faces are the high encoding complexity and encoding delay. QC-LDPC code is a special class of linear block code, which allows for efficient hardware implementations of encoding and decoding algorithms by utilizing the structure of the corresponding Parity Check Matrix (PCM) composed of the circulant permutation matrices [3]. Its excellent performance and parallel decoding structure also make it appropriate for many communication standards [4-5]. Among these standards, we can encode directly by constructing parity-check matrices with special structures. The most prominent encoding algorithm is the Richardson-Urbanke(RU) algorithm based on the approximate lower triangular matrix structure [6]. However, for most QC-LDPC codes, their parity-check matrices do not have these special structures and cannot be encoded by using the parity-check matrix directly. Therefore, studying a universal encoding algorithm and its performance has practical significance for its application in wireless optical communication.
Conventional encoding algorithm employ the generator matrix to encode the message. A FPGA-based encoding method, the second-type shift-register-adder-accumulator (SRAA-2) method, was proposed in [7]. It is found that the SRAA-2 method has two disadvantages. One is that the time required for encoding calculations is too long. The other is that the encoding process for hardware implementation is too complex. Based on the characteristics of SRAA-2 method and FPGA parallel computing, a low-delay SRAA(LD-SRAA) encoding algorithm is proposed in this paper. The LD-SRAA

algorithm has no special requirements for the structure of the parity-check matrix, and it can choose different computational parallelisms according to the size of the LDPC code, so it is suitable for most QC-LDPC codes. Based on the LD-SRAA algorithm, an improved circuit structure is proposed. It can simplify the encoding process, thus reducing the encoding complexity of hardware implementation.
II. PRINCIPLE OF THE ALGORITHM
A. Basic Encoding Principle
Before comprehensively describing the LD-SRAA encoding algorithm, the basic encoding principle for QCLDPC codes is introduced. The parity-check matrix H of QCLDPC code is composed of many equal cyclic submatrices, each of which is an all-zero matrix or a permutation matrix. The permutation matrix is a square matrix in which each row is the cyclic shift(one place to the right) of the row above it and the first row is the cyclic shift of the last row. The paritycheck matrix of QC-LDPC is expressed as:

Hqc

=

   

A1,1 A2 ,1

A1,2 A2 ,2

 

A1,n A2 ,n

   

,

(1)

   

 Am,1 Am,2  Am,n 

where Ai, j(1 ≤ i ≤ m;1 ≤ j ≤ n) represents a cyclic submatrix

of b × b . The b is the extension factor. Since the inverse matrix of the quasi-cyclic matrix is also quasi-cyclic, then the generation matrix of the QC-LDPC code has a quasi-cyclic form.
Fig. 1 is the generator matrix of the QC-LDCP code,
which consists of two parts: GI and GP . The left section GI
is the identity matrix, which generates the information sequence S ; and the right section GP generates the paritycheck sequence P .

Figure 1. Generation Matrix of a QC-LDPC Code.

978-1-6654-8155-7/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei

Univ.

Downloaded

on

J5u2n1e

24,2026

at

13:47:32

UTC

from

IEEE

Xplore.

Restrictions apply.

Assume that the information sequence S and paritycheck sequence P can be expressed as:

S = (s1, s2,s(n − m) × b)

(2)

P = ( p1, p2, pm × b)

(3)

Due to the structure of the QC-LDPC code, the information sequence and the parity-check sequence can be further divided into n − m and m sections of equal length:

S = (S1, S 2,Sn − m)

(4)

P = (P1, P2, Pm)

(5)

According to the relationship between the information
sequence and the generation matrix, the encoding result C
can be obtained:

C= S ⋅ Gqc

(6)

( ) C = S1 S 2  Sn − m P1 P2  Pm (7)

n−m

∑ =Pj

Si × Gi, j

(8)

i =1

where Pj(1 ≤ j ≤ m) is the parity-check sequence. In this

paper, because each submatrix in the generator matrix can be characterized by its first row, it is called the generation factors of the submatrix.

B. LD-SRAA Encoding Algorithm
According to the analysis in the previous section, the key
point of the encoding is to calculate Si × Gi, j . Since Gi, j is of size b × b , and each row of the matrix is obtained by a
cyclic shift of the first row, we can split it into an accumulation of the permutation matrix:

b

∑ Gi, j = gi, j(m)

(9)

m=1

In (9), gi, j(m) is either a zero matrix or a circulant
permutation matrix. In this paper, the circulant permutation matrix is used to refer to a shifted identity matrix. According
to the rule of matrix multiplication, the result of Si × Gi, j can
be calculated as follows:

b

b

∑ ∑ = Si × Gi, j Si × ( = gi, j(m))

Si ×gi, j(m) (10)

=m 1=m 1

The result of Si × gi, j(m) is assumed to be U . In this

way, when gi, j(m) is a zero matrix, U is a zero vector, and

when gi, j(m) is a circulant permutation matrix, U equals to

the cyclic shift of Si . According to the above derivation, the operation process of Si × Gi, j can be regarded as the shift
accumulation of Si . For 1 ≤ j ≤ b , let g( j) be the jth bit

of the generation factor

g . The

S (l) i

is the

lth

cyclic shift of

information

sequence

Si , with

S=( 0 ) i

S=( b ) i

Si . The result

of Si × Gi, j can also be calculated as follows:

Si ×= Gi, j

g (1) Si (0)

+

g (2) Si (1)

++ 

g

(b)

S (b−1) i

(11)

Contrary to the SRAA-2 method, the information sequences are stored in the shift registers and the generation factors are stored in the ROM. We can judge whether the shift
of Si is valid according to the value of the generation factor.

III. ALGORITHM IMPLEMENTATION AND RESULTS ANALYSIS

A. Hardware Implementation of the Algorithm
A QC-LDPC code with a code length of 16,000 and a code rate of 0.5 was used in our experimental implementation, with its extension factor of 800. Considering that the operation is performed over GF (2), the multiplier is implemented with AND gate, and the adder is implemented with XOR gate. Therefore, it is determined that the basic encoding unit of the encoder can be implemented through shift registers, ADN gate and XOR gate.
The SRAA-2 method uses shift register to realize matrix multiplication, so its operation delay is limited by the length of shift register. To reduce the length of the shift register, the information sequence needs to be divided into multiple sections. The specific steps are as follows:
First, the information sequence is divided into 10 sections of equal length:

S = (S1, S 2,S10)

(12)

Then, as shown in Fig. 2, each of these sections is divided into 4 sequences of equal length. Of course, the shift register can be divided into different lengths according to the rules of Fig. 2. This depends on the extension factor of the QC-LDPC code as well as the resources of the FPGA.

Figure 2. The Split of Shift Register.
In Fig. 2, the four 200-length shift registers shift once per clock cycle, equivalent to four shifts of the 800-length shift register. Based on the above analysis, the shift register array is used to complete the calculation of each clock cycle.
First, as shown in Fig. 3, four shift registers of length 800 are divided. Each shift register is a shift of its previous shift register. For example, the second shift register is the shift of the first shift register. Then, a shift register group can consist of four shift registers of 200 lengths. Finally, these four groups of shift registers constitute the shift register array.

522 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:47:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 3. The Array of Shift Registers.
Figure 4. Basic Encoding Unit of The LD-SRAA Algorithm.
In this paper, the circuit structure shown in Fig. 4 is called the basic encoding unit. It consists of the array of shift registers, and each row of it represents a shift register group. Its encoding process is as follows:
Step1, the register state is initialized. The values of all the registers are set to zero.
Step2, the information sequence goes into the shift register. Step3, the generation factors of the submatrix enter the basic encoding unit. For each clock period, input generation factors g(i) , g(i+1) , g(i+2) and g(i+3) . Each generation factor is multiplied by the information sequence.
After 200 clock cycles, the result of S1× G1,1 is obtained. It
is worth mentioning that the value in the shift register returns to the initial state of step 2 and begins to calculate the value of
S1 × G1, 2 . This can simplify the encoding process. This step
is repeated until all the generation factors are entered.

Figure 5. LD-SRAA Array.
Fig. 5 is the LD-SRAA array. It is composed of the basic encoding unit. In this paper, the number of the basic coding unit is 10 according on the encoding process and the size of the generation matrix. Its encoding processes are as follows:
First, the information bits are entered in parallel, and they enter the shift registers following the rules shown in Fig. 3. This stage requires different clock cycles depending on the degree of parallelism.
Then, the generation factors enter the array in parallel.
After 200 clock cycles, the first parity-check section P1 can
be obtained. A total of 2,000 clock cycles are spent at this stage.
Finally, the encoding ends when all the generation factors are input.
B. Experiment Results The following part of this paper moves on to describe in
greater detail the feasibility and advantages of LD-SRAA algorithm. In this experiment, the FPGA evaluation board used was the XILINX Kintex-7 xc7k325t. The QC-LDPC code used had a code length of 16,000 and a code rate of 0.5. First, an encoder of a QC-LDPC code was implemented to validate the algorithm feasibility. Then, the superiorities of the algorithm were illustrated by simulation and theoretical analysis.
Figure 6. QC-LDPC encoding verification system block diagram.
Fig. 6 depicts the verification scheme of the encoder. The bit error rate tester (BERT) generates a 20 Mbps pseudorandom binary sequence(PRBS) as the data source, and the FPGA outputs a 20 Mhz clock signal as the external clock of the BERT to control the data transmission rate. After the QCLDPC encoder, half of the data are information sequences and the other half are parity-check sequences. The offline test method is applied to determine whether the encoder can work correctly. First, the information sequences and parity-check sequences are collected by the integrated logic analyzer and stored in the PC. Then, the software is used to encode the information sequences. Finally, two sequences from the

523 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:47:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FPGA and software are added together to get the new sequences. The encoding error rate is obtained by dividing the number of 1 in the new sequences by the length of that sequences.

TABLE I.

COMPARISON OF ENCODED SEQUENCES

The sequences from the FPGA
The sequences from the software

The length of the sequences(bit)
3.2 ×106
3.2 ×106

The encoding error rate
0

As shown in Table Ⅰ, the sequences of 3.2 ×106 bits are
compared and encoding error rate is 0. The result shows that the encoder can encode the message correctly.
The timing simulation as shown in Fig. 7 is performed to reflect the encoding periods of the encoder. The signals in the diagram are illustrated in Table Ⅱ.

Figure 7. Timing diagram of the basic encoding unit simulation.

The encoding is divided into two stages. The first stage is the input of the information sequences. Because each basic encoding unit requires an 800-bit information sequences, this stage requires 400 clock cycles. The time spent will decrease when increasing the parallelism of the information sequences input. The second stage is the input of the generation factors to calculate the parity-check sequences. This stage takes 2000 clock cycles because of the 8000 bits generation factors input.

TABLE II.

INTERFACE SIGNALS OF THE BASIC ENCODING UNIT

Port name I/O Width

clk

in

1

Description Clock

din

in

2

valid_in

in

1

offset

in

4

en

in

1

dout

out

4

valid_out out

1

Information sequences
The valid signal of information sequences
The generation factors
The valid signal of the generation factors
Parity-check sequences
The valid signal of the parity-check sequences

TABLE III.

COMPARISON OF SRAA-2 AND LD-SRAA ENCODING SCHEME

Encoding speed (Clock cycles)
Flip-Flops
Two-input XOR-gates Two-inout AND-gates

The SRAA-2 scheme b× m
(m − n)b (m − n)b −1
(m − n)b

The LD-SRAA scheme b×m+ b d1 d2 (m − n)bd1
(m − n)bd1 −1
(m − n)bd1

As shown in Table Ⅲ, the LD-SRAA scheme and the SRAA-2 scheme are compared. The gate circuits are treated equivalent for comparative fairness. For example, a five-input XOR-gate is equivalent to four two-input XOR-gates. The m and n are the numbers of rows and columns of parity-check matrix given by (1). The b is the size of a circular permutation
matrix, equal to the extension factor. The d1 and d 2 are the
parallelism of the generation factors and the information sequences, respectively. In this paper, considering the size of
the QC-LDPC code implemented, d1 and d 2 are taken as 4
and 2, respectively. Coupled with the transmission delay of the control signals, it takes 2405 clock cycles for the encoder to complete one encoding. The algorithm in this paper reduces the encoding delay of the conventional SRAA-2 method from the original 8000 clock cycles to 2405 clock cycles. Thus, the encoding delay can be reduced by 3.3 times. In addition, the algorithm also simplifies the step of updating the shift register values when performing different submatrix multiplication, which reduces the complexity of hardware implementation.

IV. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents a low-delay QC-LDPC encoding algorithm based on FPGA. The proposed algorithm has high versatility and can encode the message using different parallelism according to the size of the parity-check matrix. The correctness and advantages of the algorithm are verified by experiments and analysis. The results show that the proposed algorithm can not only reduce the encoding complexity of the hardware implementation but also reduce the encoding delay.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Wu, D. Han, X. Zhang, F. Zhang, M. Zhang, and G. Yue, "Experimental research and comparison of LDPC and RS channel coding in ultraviolet communication systems," Opt. Express 22, 54225430 (2014).
[2] X. Sun, D. Zou, Z. Qu, and I. Djordjevic, "Run-time reconfigurable adaptive LDPC coding for optical channels," Opt. Express 26, 2931929329 (2018).
[3] A. Mahdi and V. Paliouras, "A Low Complexity-High Throughput QCLDPC Encoder," in IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 2696-2708, May15, 2014.
[4] J. C. Nidagundi and S. R. Patil, "Flexible hardware architecture for LDPC encoder," 2016 Online International Conference on Green Engineering and Technologies (IC-GET), 2016, pp. 1-4.
[5] H. Wu and H. Wang, "A High Throughput Implementation of QCLDPC Codes for 5G NR," in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 185373-185384, 2019.
[6] T. Liang, P. Zhang, C. Liu and J. Liu, "Efficient Encoding of QuasiCyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," 2018 IEEE 3rd Advanced

524 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:47:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Information Technology, Electronic and Automation Control Conference (IAEAC), 2018, pp. 1189-1193.
[7] Zongwang Li, Lei Chen, Lingqi Zeng, S. Lin and W. H. Fong, "Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,"

in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71-81, Jan. 2006.

525 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:47:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

