Hybrid Decoding of BP and ADMM for LDPC Codes 
 
Dong Wang 
National Key Laboratory of Science and 
Technology on 
Communications(NKLSTC)  
University of Electronic Science and 
Technology of China(UESTC), Chengdu, 
China 
UESTC, China 
202021220525@std.uestc.edu.cn 
 
Zhiping Shi* 
NKLSTC, UESTC, Chengdu, China 
Yangtze Delta Region Institute(Huzhou)  
UESTC, Huzhou, China 
szp@uestc.edu.cn 
 
 
 
 
 
Li Deng 
NKLSTC 
UESTC, Chengdu, China 
Guilin University of Aerospace 
Technology, Guilin, China 
dengli@std.uestc.edu.cn 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—The alternating direction method of multipliers 
(ADMM) algorithm has been used in the linear programming 
decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in recent 
years. The ADMM has similar complexity with the belief 
propagation (BP) algorithm and better performance under some 
conditions. In this paper, we propose a hybrid decoder based on 
BP and ADMM-penalized decoder, which is called BP-ADMM 
decoder. In order to reduce the undetectable error of probability 
(UEP) after BP decoding as much as possible, we add cyclic 
redundancy check (CRC) before LDPC encoding. Before the 
output of the hybrid decoder, we add a Hamming distance 
comparison decision, and select the codeword with a smaller 
Hamming distance from the initial hard decision as the output.  
Keywords—LDPC, BP, ADMM, CRC, hybrid decoding  
I. INTRODUCTION 
As a traditional decoding algorithm of low-density parity-
check (LDPC) codes, the belief propagation (BP) decoding has 
the advantages of low complexity and good performance. 
However, there is an error floor phenomenon in the high 
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region. The linear Programming 
(LP) decoding of binary linear codes was proposed and 
improved by Feldman et al. [2], [8]. Their research showed that 
the maximum likelihood (ML) decoding for binary linear codes 
can be stated as a linear program. Due to its advantage of 
facilitating theoretical analysis, the LP decoder has been 
studied by many researchers, especially for LDPC codes. 
However, the traditional optimization methods, such as the 
interior point method, and the simplex method etc., are too 
complicated for LP problem.  
In order to reduce the complexity of solving the above 
problem, the alternating direction method of multipliers 
(ADMM) was proposed to solve the LP problem [1], [3], [7]. 
In order to converge as much as possible to an integer solution, 
some scholars proposed to add a penalty term to the objective 
function, which is called ADMM-penalized decoder (ADMM-
PD) [4], and it can make the pseudo-codewords have a higher 
cost at the objective function than integer codewords. ADMM-
PD has a decoding speed similar to BP decoder. Moreover, it 
has been observed that the ADMM-PD has lower error rates at 
high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region compared to BP 
decoding for some parity-check matrices.  
In this paper, we propose a hybrid decoding algorithm 
combined with the BP decoder and the ADMM-penalized 
decoder for LDPC codes, which is called as BP-ADMM 
decoder. The basic idea of proposed BP-ADMM decoder is 
that the BP decoder is adopted as the first-level decoder, and 
the ADMM-PD is the second-level decoder. If there are 
residual errors after BP decoding, then the received 
information is sent to the ADMM-PD. On the other hand, the 
cyclic redundancy check (CRC) is added before the LDPC 
encoding 
called 
CRC-LDPC, 
which 
can 
reduce 
the 
undetectable error of probability (UEP). Moreover, we add the 
Hamming distance comparison to the output of the hybrid 
decoder, which can improve the performance of the hybrid 
decoder as much as possible. Simulation results shows that the 
performance of the proposed hybrid decoding is better than 
both the BP decoding and the ADMM-PD. 
II. PRELIMINARIES 
A. BP Decoding of LDPC codes 
We consider a binary linear LDPC codes   of length  , 
and its corresponding check matrix is  . We define check 
nodes set as              and variables nodes as   
         . Respectively, the neighborhood of a check node   
is denoted by      , and the neighborhood of a variable node   
is denoted by      . The following formula is defined as the 
Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR): 
𝛾𝑖= log (
𝑃𝑟 𝑟𝑖|0 
𝑃𝑟 𝑟𝑖|1 ), 
where  𝑖 denote the   bit of the received vector  . The BP 
decoding algorithm can be described as follows: 
Algorithm 1  BP decoding 
1.Initialization: Calculate the initial LLR of the variable 
node   according to the received sequence and the channel 
noise, and set  𝑖  =  𝑖= 𝛾𝑖     𝑖=   . 
2.Update of the external information of the check nodes: 
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan 
under Grant 2022NSFSC0488. 
*Corresponding author: Zhiping Shi (E-mail: szp@uestc.edu.cn) 
60
2022 IEEE 22nd International Conference on Communication Technology
978-1-6654-7067-4/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
2022 IEEE 22nd International Conference on Communication Technology (ICCT) | 978-1-6654-7067-4/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICCT56141.2022.10073262
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:47:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
   𝑖=    n  1 
∏
  n    
  𝑖    
𝑖        𝑖 
  
3.Update of the external information of the variable nodes: 
 𝑖  =  𝑖 
∑
    𝑖
     𝑖     
 
4.Update LLR:  𝑖
     =  𝑖 ∑
   𝑖
    𝑖 
 
5.Hard Decision:  ̂𝑖= {          𝑖
       
         o         
If   ̂ =   or reach the maximum number of iterations, 
end iteration, otherwise, return 2. 
B. LP Decoding of LDPC Codes 
Given the parity-check matrix H, the ML decoding 
problem can be written in the following form (1). 
   m n𝒙𝜸 𝒙                                  (1a) 
 
  s. t.    [∑
 𝑖 𝑥 
 
 =1
]2 =     𝑥                      (1b) 
where [ ]2 represents the modular-2 operation. It can be seen 
that the difficulty of the problem 1 is that the constraints are 
defined in the binary field. Next, we will use some inequalities 
defined in the real number field to equivalently represent the 
binary check equation. 
Now we consider a check node of degree 3:𝑥1  𝑥2  𝑥3 =
 , which can be easily verified to be equivalent to the 
following set of inequalities [5], [6]. 
𝑥1 −𝑥2 −𝑥3 ≤   −𝑥1  𝑥2 −𝑥3 ≤     
−𝑥1 −𝑥2  𝑥3 ≤   𝑥1  𝑥2  𝑥3 ≤   𝑥𝑖       
We can write the above inequalities in the matrix as :  𝒙≤
   𝒙      3, where 
𝒙= [𝑥1 𝑥2 𝑥3]    = [       ]    = [
 
− 
− 
− 
 
− 
− 
− 
 
 
 
 
] 
For the high-degree check nodes, we can decompose them 
into several 3-degree check nodes by introducing auxiliary 
variable nodes. For the check node with degree   , it can be 
decomposed into   −  3-degree check nodes by introducing 
  −  auxiliary variable nodes. From this extension to the 
parity-check matrix  , the total number of auxiliary variable 
nodes to be introduced is   = ∑
   −  
 
 =1
 , and the total 
number of 3-degree check nodes is    = ∑   −  
 
 
. To sum 
up, the ML decoding problem in Problem 1 can be expressed 
as 
   
 
 m n     
                     (2a) 
s. t.  
    ≤                  1                (2b) 
where 
 = [          ]        4         
, 
 =
    1   ， = [𝜸     1]  ,and   represents Kronecker 
product. For convenience, we let  1 =      , and   1 =
    ,  which will also be used in the next section. 
C. ADMM-PD 
In order to apply the ADMM algorithm framework, we 
relax the variable v to the [0,1] interval, and add the auxiliary 
variable  to convert the above inequality constraints into 
equality constraints. Furthermore, to make the problem as close 
to an integer solution as possible and prevent convergence to 
pseudo-codewords, we added a penalty function to the 
objective function, which can make the objective function 
more costly at pseudo-codewords, so problem 2 can be written 
in the following form: 
               m n     ∑𝑔 𝑣𝑖 
𝒊
                              (3a) 
s. t.      =       [   ]       1          
4   1(3b) 
The augmented lagrangian function for problem 3 is: 
         =            −    
 ||    − ||
2 
 
 
 
 
 
                      (4) 
The iteration rules of ADMM solve the above problem are 
   1 =   𝑔                                          (5a) 
    =   𝑔   𝒛      1                             (5b) 
   1 =          1     1 −                  (5c) 
Let the penalty function be equal to 𝑔 𝑣 = −
 
2  𝑣𝑖−
    2, and the specific iterative process of ADMM-PD is as 
follows: 
Algorithm 2 ADMM-PD 
Given parameter      and      as the maximum number of 
iterations. Calculate 𝜸  , .  
1.Initialize   and 𝒚 as all zeros vector, and initialize  =  . 
2.Update     𝒚 
for all           1  
𝑣𝑖
  1  ∏   𝑖
 ( −  −  
 ) − 
 − 𝑖  
 
  𝑖−  
[0 1]
 
end for 
for all           1  
  
  1  ∏  −  
    1 −
  
 
 
[0     
 
end for 
update    1           1     1 −   
3.       
4.Until ||    1     1 −  ||2
2 ≤  and ||   1 −   ||2
2 ≤  
or  =     , return  , else, return 2. 
In Algorithm 2,   𝑖 represents the  th column vector of   , 
and    represents the  th row vector of  ,  𝑖=  𝑖
  𝑖. The 
operation ∏
   
[0 1]
  denotes a projection to the interval of [   ]. 
61
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:47:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Similarly, the operation ∏
   
[0   ]
 denotes a projection to the 
interval of [     . 
III. BP-ADMM HYBRID DECODING BASED ON CRC 
The proposed BP-ADMM hybrid decoding mainly includes 
two parts, one is the cascade of the BP decoder and the 
ADMM decoder, the BP decoder is used as the first-level 
decoder, and the ADMM-PD is used as the second-level 
decoder. If there still exist errors after BP decoding, the LLR 
corresponding to the error sequence is sent to the ADMM-PD 
for further correction. In order to detect the error after BP 
decoding as much as possible, the second part is to implement 
CRC and the parity joint checking at the receiving end by 
adding CRC check bits before the LDPC encoding. 
A. CRC-LDPC 
The proposed CRC-LDPC is to perform CRC encoding 
before LDPC encoding. The specific implementation process 
of CRC-LDPC is as follows. Consider a polynomial of degree 
  and an LDPC code with rate    , and truncate k bits of 
information into  −  bits before LDPC encoding, then 
calculate the CRC check bits based on the information bits and 
CRC polynomial. After that,  −  information bits and   
CRC bits together form K bits, and encode the   bits according 
to the LDPC parity-check matrix. Fig.1 shows a comparison of 
the LDPC code frame structure without CRC and the proposed 
CRC-LDPC code. For a given row full rank matrix  , the 
encoding process of the proposed CRC-LDPC is as follows: 
 1 =  1  2 = [   |   ], 
where the   1 represents the elementary row transformation 
matrix, and the  2   represents the elementary column 
transformation matrix, and the    represents the M-
dimensional identity matrix. Then we can get the generator 
matrix  1 corresponding to  1 is  1 = [  |  
 ]. 
We assume that the message sequence is  1, where  1 is 
 − -dimensional column vector. Then we can get the  -
dimensional column vector   after CRC. Obviously, the 
codeword    can be calculated by the formula  =  2 1
  1. 
In the next section, we will analyze the role of CRC in the 
hybrid decoding structure. 
Information Bits
CRC
Parity Bits
Information Bits
Parity Bits
K
Frame structure without CRC
Frame structure with CRC added
 
Fig. 1. The structure of CRC-LDPC. 
B.  CRC Based BP-ADMM Hybrid Decoding  
In the proposed hybrid decoding, BP decoder is used as the 
first-level decoder, and the ADMM decoder is used as the 
second-level decoder. When BP decoding is not fully 
successful, the LLR corresponding to the decoding sequence is 
sent to the ADMM decoder. There are two cases of BP 
decoding errors. The first case is that the BP decoder does not 
converge to a feasible codeword. The second case is that the 
BP decoder converges to other non-correct feasible codewords. 
If CRC is not used before encoding, the receiver can easily 
detect this error and send the LLR corresponding to the error 
sequence to the ADMM decoder, but for the second case, when 
the output sequence of the BP decoder is a feasible codeword 
but an incorrect codeword, the parity check cannot detect this 
error, and the LLR corresponding to the error information 
cannot be sent to the ADMM decoder. 
The existence of the above-mentioned second case would 
greatly limit the performance of the hybrid decoder. The reason 
is that the undetectable error probability (UEP) exists after the 
BP decoding. UEP is reduced by adding CRC before the LDPC 
encoding in this paper. Furthermore, a Hamming distance 
comparison is added before the output of the hybrid decoder to 
ensure that output is the minimum distance codeword as much 
as possible. 
The procedure of the proposed hybrid decoding: 
1.Initialization. Calculate the initial likelihood ratio (LLR), 
and obtain the initial hard-decision codeword     according to 
the initial LLR. 
2.Send the LLR to the BP decoder. If the BP decoded 
codeword does not satisfy the parity check or CRC, go to 3; 
otherwise, use the BP decoded codeword as the output 
codeword of the hybrid decoder, and end the iteration. 
3.Send the LLR to the ADMM-PD. Parity check and CRC 
are performed on the output code words of ADMM-PD. If both 
parity check and CRC are successful, the decoding result of the 
ADMM-PD is the output of the hybrid decoder. If the ADMM-
PD output fails to pass the parity check or CRC, go to 4. 
4.Calculate the Hamming distance between codeword and 
    after ADMM-PD and BP decoder, and the codeword 
corresponding to the smallest output distance is the output of 
the hybrid decoder.  
CRC 
encoding
LDPC 
encoding
Channel
BP 
decoder
ADMM 
decoder
Parity-
check
CRC 
Combined 
check
NOT PASS
PASS
noise
output
Message
 
Fig. 2. CRC based hybrid decoding structure diagram. 
ADMM-PD
NOT  PASS
PASS
        
Output BP 
decoded 
codeword
PASS
Output the decoded codeword 
corresponding to the smaller 
Hamming distance
NOT PASS
NOT PASS
PASS
NOT PASS
CRC
PASS
NOT PASS
PASS
BP Decoder
CRC
Hamming Distance 
Comparison
Parity Check
ADMM-PD
Output ADMM 
decoded codeword
Output the sequence 
corresponding to the 
smaller Hamming 
distance
Parity Check
Parity Check
Output ADMM 
decoded codeword
 
Fig. 3. CRC based Hybrid decoding flow chart. 
62
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:47:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
IV. SIMULATION RESULT 
In this section, computer simulations are carried out to 
evaluate the performance of the proposed BP-ADMM. In the 
simulation, we set the channel to be the additive white 
Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with binary phase shift 
keying (BPSK). The consider binary linear codes are [96,48] 
MacKay 96.33.964 LDPC codes  1[9] and [576,288] IEEE 
802.16 LDPC codes  2[10]. For  1, we end the simulation by 
collecting 100 frame errors at all SNR points. For  2, we end 
the simulation by collecting 100 frame errors at the first three 
SNR points, and collect 40 frame errors at the last two SNR 
points. We set the maximum number of iterations for BP to be 
100, and set the maximum number of iterations for ADMM-PD 
to be 1000. Set   to be 1.9 and the penalty function term 
coefficient to be 0.5. 
The Fig.4 and Fig.6 indicate the block error rate (BLER) of 
different decoders. It can be seen from the simulation results 
that performance of the BP-ADMM hybrid decoder is 
improved compared with that of the BP decoder and ADMM-
PD. Moreover, we can easily see that the performance of the 
ADMM decoder and the proposed hybrid decoder are better 
than BP decoder. For  1 and  2, the performance of the hybrid 
decoder is about 0.1-0.25 dB better than BP decoder. By 
adding the Hamming distance comparison, in the case of 
hybrid decoder failure, select the sequence corresponding to 
the smaller Hamming distance as the output of the hybrid 
decoder, so as to reduce the bit error rate of the hybrid decoder 
as low as possible.  
The Fig.5 and Fig.7 indicate the average iteration of 
different decodes. In Fig.5, we can see the number of iterations 
of BP-ADMM-PD in low SNR region is higher than that of BP 
decoder and ADMM-PD. In Fig.7, it can be seen that the 
number of iterations of BP-ADMM-PD is lower than ADMM 
decoder but higher than BP decoder. Combing Fig.5 and Fig.7, 
the overall number of iterations of the decoding of  1 is more 
than that of  2, this shows the number of decoding iterations is 
related to the structure of the parity-check matrix.  
 
Fig. 4. BLER of the [96,48] “Mackay” LDPC code used on the AWGN 
channel plotted as a function of SNR. 
 
Fig. 5. Average iteration of the [96,48] “Mackay” LDPC code used on the 
AWGN channel as a function of SNR. 
 
Fig. 6. BLER of the [576,288] “IEEE 802.16” LDPC code used on the 
AWGN channel plotted as a function of SNR. 
 
Fig. 7. Average iteration of the [576,288] “IEEE 802.16” LDPC code used on 
the AWGN channel plotted as a function of SNR. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we can see that the performance of the hybrid 
decoder is better than that of the BP and ADMM-PD alone, 
because the hybrid decoder combines the respective advantages 
of BP decoder and ADMM-PD. When the parity-check fails on 
63
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:47:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
the receiver side, the LLR corresponding to the error sequence 
will be sent to the ADMM-PD. On the other hand, if CRC fails 
but parity-check succeeds, it also means that there must be 
some errors in the decoding sequence, the LLR corresponding 
to the error sequence will also be sent to the ADMM-PD.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Boyd, “Distributed optimization and statistical learning via the 
alternating direction method of multipliers,” Found. Trends Mach. 
Learn., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1-122, 2010. 
[2] 
J. Feldman,M. J. Wainwright , and D. Karger, “Using linear 
programming to decoding binary linear codes, ” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 
vol.51,no. 3, pp. 954-972, Mar. 2005. 
[3] 
S. Barman, X. Liu, S. C. Draper, and B. Recht, “Decomposition 
methods for large scale LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, 
no. 12, pp. 7386-7402, Nov. 2011. 
[4] 
X. Liu, S. C. Draper, “The ADMM Penalized Decoder for LDPC Codes,” 
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 2966-2984, June. 2016. 
[5] 
K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman. “A new linear programming 
approach to decoding linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 
54, no .3, pp. 1061-1072, Mar. 2008. 
[6] 
Jing 
Bai,Yong 
chao 
Wang.“Minimum-Polytope-Based 
Linear 
Programming Decoder for LDPC Codes via ADMM Approach,” IEEE 
Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1032-1035, 
Aug.2019. 
[7] 
X. Zhang and P.H. Siegel, “Efficient iterative LP decoding of LDPC 
codes with alternating direction method of multipliers,” in Proc. IEEE 
Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Istanbul, Turkey, Jul. 2013, pp. 1504-1505. 
[8] 
M.H.Taghavi and P.H. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear 
programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no .3, 
pp.1061-1072, Mar.2008. 
[9] 
D. J. C. MacKay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. [Online]. 
Available: http://www/inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html. 
[10] LDPC Coding for OFDMA PHY, IEEE Standard C802.16e-05/0066R3, 
Jan.2005. 
 
 
 
64
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:47:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
