IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019

1017

Characterization and Efficient Search of Non-Elementary Trapping Sets of LDPC Codes With Applications to Stopping Sets

Yoones Hashemi, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— In this paper, we propose a characterization for nonelementary trapping sets (NETSs) of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The characterization is based on viewing an NETS as a hierarchy of embedded graphs starting from an ETS. The characterization corresponds to an efficient search algorithm that under certain conditions is exhaustive. As an application of the proposed characterization/search, we obtain lower and upper bounds on the stopping distance smin of LDPC codes. We examine a large number of regular and irregular LDPC codes and demonstrate the efficiency and versatility of our technique in finding lower and upper bounds on, and in many cases the exact value of, smin. Finding smin, or establishing search-based lower or upper bounds, for many of the examined codes are out of the reach of any existing algorithm. For a constant degree distribution and range of search, the worst case computational complexity of the proposed search algorithms for finding NETSs and stopping sets is linear in the code’s block length n. The average search complexity for stopping sets, however, is constant in n, if the simple cycles required as input to the search algorithm are available.
Index Terms— Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, trapping sets (TS), elementary trapping sets (ETS), non-elementary trapping sets (NETS), exhaustive search of trapping sets, stopping sets, trapping set characterization, stopping distance, bounds on stopping distance, search algorithms, error floor.
I. INTRODUCTION
F INITE-LENGTH LDPC codes under iterative decoding algorithms suffer from the error floor phenomenon. It is well-known that the error floor performance of LDPC codes is related to the presence of certain problematic graphical structures in the Tanner graph of the code, commonly referred to as trapping sets (TS) [17]. Empirical results demonstrate that over the binary symmetric channel (BSC) and the additive white Gaussian noise channel (AWGNC), the majority of error-prone structures are elementary TSs (ETS) [6], [7], [13]. These are TSs whose induced subgraphs contain only degree-1 and degree-2 check nodes. In particular, the leafless ETSs (LETSs),
Manuscript received August 8, 2017; revised May 14, 2018; accepted July 17, 2018. Date of publication August 13, 2018; date of current version January 18, 2019. This work was supported by NSERC Discovery under Grant 217239-2013-RGPIN. This paper was presented in part at the 2018 ISIT.
Y. Hashemi was with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada. He is now with Huawei Canada, Ottawa, ON K2K 3J1, Canada.
A. H. Banihashemi is with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Communicated by M. Lentmaier, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2018.2865385

in which each variable node is connected to at least two evendegree (satisfied) check nodes, are recognized as the main culprit in the error floor of variable-regular LDPC codes [6]. Most recently, in [8], for variable-regular LDPC codes, lower bounds on the size of the smallest ETSs and TSs that are non-elementary (NETS) were established. It was shown in [8] that NETSs are generally larger than ETSs with the same number of odd-degree (unsatisfied) check nodes. This provided a theoretical justification, though not quite conclusive, for why ETSs often happen to be more harmful than NETSs. From a practical viewpoint, the “elementary” property simplifies the analysis and search of ETSs compared to NETSs, see, [6], [7], [13], and the references therein. In particular, ETSs lend themselves to an alternate graphical representation, dubbed normal graph [13], that is simpler than the commonly used bipartite graph representation. Normal graphs have been used to develop the most efficient search algorithms for ETSs [6], [7], [13].
While empirical results have shown that the majority of harmful TSs over BSC and AWGNC are elementary, there are still some smaller NETSs that can trap iterative decoders over these channels in the error floor region. To the best of our knowledge, the branch-&-bound algorithm of [28] is the only exhaustive search algorithm in the literature capable of finding both ETSs and NETSs of LDPC codes. The branch&-bound technique is a systematic enumeration of candidate solutions that is commonly used to solve NP-hard optimization problems. Being a branch-&-bound algorithm, the algorithm of [28] is thus only capable of finding relatively small TSs with relatively small number of unsatisfied check nodes, and is only applicable to codes with short block lengths (the block lengths of all the reported codes are less than 1008). In this work, we propose an efficient1 search algorithm for finding NETSs of LDPC codes that has a much wider reach than branch-&-bound-type algorithms in terms of both the code’s block length and the size of TSs. The proposed search algorithm is graph-based, and relies on the characterization of an NETS as an embedded sequence of graphs that starts from an ETS, and expands one variable node at a time to reach the NETS. Assuming a constant degree distribution and
1In this paper, we use the term “efficient,” as related to the computational complexity of algorithms, rather broadly. In particular, we do not take this term to necessarily mean that an algorithm is polynomial-time in the input size.

0018-9448 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1018

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019

range of search, the computational complexity of the proposed search algorithm is at most linear in the code’s block length n. The relatively low computational complexity of the proposed algorithm is a result of the simplicity of the expansions, and the fact that efficient algorithms already exist for finding ETSs [6], [7]. One of the main contributions of this paper is to determine theoretically the range in which the proposed algorithm finds an exhaustive list of NETSs.
As an important application of the proposed characterization/search of NETSs, we derive lower and upper bounds on the stopping distance, smin, of LDPC codes. Stopping sets (SS) are known to be the error-prone structures of LDPC codes over the binary erasure channel (BEC) under the belief propagation algorithm [3], and stopping distance is the size of the smallest stopping set(s). It is well-known that, in general, finding smin of an arbitrary LDPC code is an NP-hard problem [12]. Nevertheless, much research has been devoted to estimating/finding smin, and to obtaining a list of small stopping sets, for LDPC codes [1], [4], [9], [10], [18], [20]–[22], [29]. These results are mostly limited to codes with short to moderate block lengths and/or low to moderate rates and/or small variable degrees. In [29], the authors proposed a branch-&-bound search algorithm to find small stopping sets. The proposed algorithm, however, becomes quickly infeasible to use as the block length, n, and smin are increased. All the three LDPC codes studied in [29] are structured regular codes with variable degree 3 and rate less than or equal to 0.5. Using the Stern’s probabilistic algorithm [23], the authors in [9] and [10] proposed search algorithms for computing smin of LDPC codes. Their search algorithms, however, are also applicable only to short block length random codes or medium block length structured codes. Moreover, all the LDPC codes studied in [9] and [10] have variable degree 3 and rate less than or equal to 0.5. Authors in [20] and [21] proposed branch-&-bound algorithms to find the stopping sets of LDPC codes. To the best of our knowledge, this is the most efficient exhaustive search of stopping sets available in the literature. Similar to all the other branch-&-bound algorithms, however, the computational complexity of these algorithms increases very rapidly with block length and thus the approach is only limited to short block lengths. In particular, except for two random regular codes with rate 0.5 and block length of 504, all the codes studied in [20] and [21] are structured codes2 with length less than or equal to 4896. Also, all the regular codes studied in [20] and [21] have variable degree 3 and rate 0.5.
In this paper, we use the graphical structure of stopping sets within the Tanner graph of an LDPC code to devise our search algorithm, and to derive bounds on smin. The subgraph induced by a stopping set in the Tanner graph of an LDPC code contains only check nodes with degree two or larger. We consider two categories of stopping sets depending on the check node degrees in their subgraph. If all the check nodes have degree two, we call the stopping set elementary (ESS). Otherwise, the stopping set is referred to as non-elementary (NESS). Considering that an ESS is an
2The structural properties of the codes were used in [20] and [21] to speed up the search.

LETS with no unsatisfied check node, we use the highly efficient algorithms of [6] and [7], to search for ESSs. NESSs, on the other hand, are a subset of NETSs. To search for NESSs, we thus use the proposed search algorithm for NETSs. Despite the fact that the proposed algorithms here are highly efficient, the exhaustive search of stopping sets of large size for longer LDPC codes may still happen to be too complex to perform. For a manageable complexity, we thus derive a bound L on the size of stopping sets that can be searched exhaustively. If the exhaustive search within this range results in finding at least one stopping set, then the smallest size of such stopping sets is smin. Otherwise, we establish the lower bound of L on smin. In this case, we modify our search algorithms to further reduce their complexity but at the expense of sacrificing the exhaustiveness. We then use the modified algorithms to search for stopping sets of size larger than L. The smallest size of such stopping sets is used as an upper bound on smin. In general, if we succeed in finding the exact stopping distance of an LDPC code, we do so in much higher speed than existing algorithms. If we fail, and establish the lower bound of L ≤ smin, our algorithm for finding an upper bound is often much faster than the existing algorithms, for example, those in [9], [10], [18], and [29]. We provide extensive numerical results that demonstrate the application of our technique to a variety of regular and irregular LDPC codes with block lengths as large as more than 16, 000. In fact, one of the main advantages of our search algorithms is that, unlike the existing algorithms in the literature such as [9], [10], and [20], the complexity does not change much by increasing the block length. Assuming a fixed degree distribution and search range, while the worst-case computational complexity of the proposed search algorithms for stopping sets increases linearly with n, the average complexity is constant in n.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Basic definitions and notations are provided in Section II. We also briefly explain the search algorithms of [6] and [7] for finding LETSs/ETSs in this section. Section II ends with revisiting the lower bounds derived in [8] on the smallest size of ETSs and NETSs. In Section III, we present the characterization of NETS structures and propose an efficient exhaustive/nonexhaustive search of NETSs for regular and irregular LDPC codes. This section ends with discussions on the computational complexity of the proposed search algorithms. In Section IV, we discuss the derivation of lower and upper bounds on the stopping distance of LDPC codes, and discuss the computational complexity of the search algorithms involved in the derivations. Finally, numerical results are provided in Section V, followed by concluding remarks in Section VI.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Definitions and Notations
Consider an undirected graph G = (F, E), where the two sets F = { f1, . . . , fK } and E = {e1, . . . , eM }, are the sets of nodes and edges of G, respectively. We say that an edge e is incident to a node f if e is connected to f . If there exists an edge ek which is incident to two distinct nodes fi and f j , we represent ek by fi f j or f j fi . The degree of a node f is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT SEARCH OF NETSs OF LDPC CODES

1019

denoted by d f , and is defined as the number of edges incident to f . The minimum degree of a graph G, denoted by δ(G),

is defined to be the minimum degree of its nodes. A node f

is called leaf if d f = 1. A leafless graph G is a graph with δ(G) ≥ 2.

Given an undirected graph G = (F, E), a walk between

two nodes f1 and fk+1 is a sequence of nodes and edges f1, e1, f2, e2, . . . , fk , ek , fk+1, where ei = fi fi+1, ∀i ∈ [1, k].

A path is a walk with no repeated nodes or edges, except

the first and the last nodes that can be the same. If the first

and the last nodes are distinct, we call the path an open path.

Otherwise, we call the path a cycle. The length of a walk,

a path, or a cycle is the number of its edges. A lollipop walk

is a walk f1, e1, f2, e2, . . . , fk , ek , fk+1, such that all the edges and all the nodes are distinct, except that fk+1 = fm , for some m ∈ (1, k). A chord of a cycle is an edge which is

not part of the cycle but is incident to two distinct nodes in

the cycle. A chordless or simple cycle is a cycle which does

not have any chord. The length of the shortest cycle(s) in a

graph is called girth, and is denoted by g. A graph is called

connected when there is a path between every pair of nodes in

the graph. A tree is a connected graph that contains no cycles.

A rooted tree is a tree in which one specific node is assigned

as the root. The depth of a node in a rooted tree is the length

of the path from the node to the root. The depth of a tree is

the maximum depth of any node in the tree. Depth-one tree

(dot) is a tree with depth one.

Any m × n parity check matrix H of a binary LDPC

code C can be represented by its bipartite Tanner graph G =

(V ∪ C, E), where V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} is the set of variable nodes and C = {c1, c2, . . . , cm } is the set of check nodes. If there is an edge e ∈ E between the nodes vi and c j in

the Tanner graph, then, correspondingly, there is a “1” in the

( j, i )-th entry of matrix H . A Tanner graph is called variable-

regular with variable degree dv if dvi = dv, ∀ vi ∈ V . A Tanner graph is called irregular if it has multiple variable and check

node degrees. An irregular LDPC code is usually described

by its variable and check node degree distributions, λ(x) =

dvmax λi x i−1 and ρ(x ) = dcmax ρi x i−1, respectively, where

i =dvmin

i =dcmin

λi and ρi are the fractions of edges in the Tanner graph that

are incident to degree-i variable and check nodes, respectively.

The terms dvmax , dvmin (dcmax , dcmin ) are the maximum and minimum degrees of variable nodes (check nodes), respectively.

For variable-regular Tanner graphs, we have dv ≥ 2, and for irregular ones, we assume dvmin ≥ 2. The girth of a Tanner graph is an even number and in this work, we study Tanner

graphs that are free of 4-cycles (g > 4).

For a subset S of V , the subset (S) of C denotes the set of

neighbors of S in G. The induced subgraph of S in G, denoted

by G(S), is the graph with the set of nodes S ∪ (S) and the

set of edges { fi f j ∈ E : fi ∈ S, f j ∈ (S)}. The set of check nodes with odd and even degrees in G(S) are denoted

by o(S) and e(S), respectively. In this paper, the terms

unsatisfied check nodes and satisfied check nodes are used to

refer to the check nodes in o(S) and e(S), respectively. The size of an induced subgraph G(S) is defined to be the number

of its variable nodes. We assume that an induced subgraph is

connected. Disconnected subgraphs can be considered as the union of connected ones.
Given a Tanner graph G, a set S ⊂ V is called an (a, b) trapping set (TS) if |S| = a and | o(S)| = b. Alternatively, S is said to belong to the class of (a, b) TSs. Parameter a is referred to as the size of the TS. An elementary trapping set (ETS) is a trapping set for which all the check nodes in G(S) have degree 1 or 2. To simplify the representation of ETSs, similar to [5], [6], and [13], we use an alternate graph representation of ETSs, called normal graph, in variableregular graphs. The normal graph of an ETS S is obtained from G(S) by removing all the check nodes of degree one and their incident edges, and by replacing all the degree2 check nodes and their two incident edges by a single edge. We call a set S ⊂ V an (a, b) leafless ETS (LETS) if S is an (a, b) ETS and if the normal graph of S is leafless. Otherwise, the set S is called an ETS with leaf (ETSL). A non-elementary trapping set (NETS) is a trapping set which is not elementary. A stopping set (SS) is a trapping set for which G(S) has no check node of degree one. In general, similar to the TSs, SSs can be partitioned into two categories of elementary SSs (ESSs) and non-elementary SSs (NESSs).
The following lemma shows that for variable-regular LDPC codes, depending on dv being odd or even, some classes of trapping sets cannot exist.
Lemma 1 [8]: In a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable degree dv, (i) if dv is odd, then there does not exist any (a, b) TS with odd a and even b, or with even a and odd b; and (ii) if dv is even, then there does not exist any (a, b) TS with odd b.
B. Exhaustive Search of ETSs
In [6], a hierarchical graph-based expansion approach was proposed to characterize LETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes. It was proved in [6] that any LETS structure of variableregular Tanner graphs for any variable degree dv, and in any (a, b) class, can be generated by applying a combination of depth-one tree (dot), path and lollipop expansions to simple cycles. Figs. 1 (a)-(c) show the three expansions in the space of normal graphs. (Notations pamo and pamc are used for open and closed paths of length m + 1, respectively. The notation lomc is used for a lollipop walk of length m + 1 that consists of a cycle of length c.) The characterization, dubbed as d pl, was then used as a road map to devise search algorithms that are provably efficient in finding all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, for any choice of amax and bmax, in a guaranteed fashion. The d pl search algorithm starts by enumerating short simple cycles in the graph and then searches for the children (descendants) of those cycles through the three expansion techniques recursively, until it reaches the targeted structure.
In [7], LETSs and ETSLs were studied in irregular Tanner graphs. It was shown that these structures in irregular graphs can also be characterized and searched using a d pl-based technique in any interest range, efficiently and exhaustively. In the d pl characterization/search algorithm of [6] and [7], to exhaustively cover all the (a, b) LETS structures in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, the algorithm

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019

Fig. 2. A tree-like expansion of a TS rooted at a check node of degree k.

Fig. 1. Expansion of the LETS structure S with (a) a depth-one tree with

m edges, dotm , respectively, (c)

(b) an open and closed a lollipop walk of length

path m+

of length 1 = d + c,

m+ lomc .

1,

pamo

,

pamc ,

sometimes needs to also cover auxiliary structures with their b values larger than bmax, and up to bmax > bmax.
To the best of our knowledge, the d pl-based algorithms of [6] and [7] are the most efficient exhaustive search algorithms available for finding ETSs of LDPC codes.
C. Lower Bounds on the Size of TSs
Theorem 1 [8]: Consider a variable-regular Tanner graph G with variable degree dv and girth g. A lower bound on the size a of an (a, b) trapping set in G, whose induced subgraph contains a check node of degree k (≥ 2) is given in (1), as shown at the bottom of this page, where b = b − (k mod 2), T = k(dv − 1) − b , and b is assumed to satisfy b < k(dv − 1) + (k mod 2). (Notation mod is for modulo operation.)
The proof of the above result, presented in [8], is based on considering the tree-like expansion of the induced subgraph of the TS starting from the degree-k check node w as the root with g/2 layers (depth g/2 − 1). Fig. 2 shows such an expansion. (Variable nodes, satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes are represented by circles, empty and full squares, respectively.) In this tree, node w, in layer one (L1), is connected to k variable nodes in layer two (L2), and each variable node in L2 is connected to dv−1 check nodes in L3. Also, to minimize the size of TSs, it is assumed that the degree of all the other check nodes in the subgraph is either 2 or 1. From Theorem 1, one can see that for any given values of b, g and dv, by increasing k, the lower bound on the size of the smallest TS is increased.
Remark 1: Based on Lemma 1, for odd values of dv, there is no TS in the (a, 0) class with an odd value of a. In such cases,

therefore, the lower bound of Theorem 1 can be improved, if the value in (1) happens to be an odd number.
Corollary 1 [8]: Theorem 1 with k = 3 (k = 4) provides a lower bound on the size of the smallest possible NETSs with b > 0 (b = 0).
It was shown in [8] that the lower bounds of Corollary 1 are often tight. The size of the smallest ETSs was also compared in [8] with the lower bounds of Corollary 1. The following result follows from Table I of [8].
Remark 2: For any given b ≤ 5, dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, and g = 6, 8, 10, the smallest possible TSs with cycles are LETSs.
The following lemma is easy to prove based on an approach similar to the one used to prove Theorem 1.
Lemma 2: The lower bound of Theorem 1 also applies to the size a of an (a, b) NETS whose induced subgraph contains at least one check node of degree k (≥ 3).
III. CHARACTERIZATION/SEARCH OF NON-ELEMENTARY TSS (NETSS) IN LDPC CODES
A. Characterization and Exhaustive Search of NETSs in Variable-Regular LDPC Codes
The characterization of ETSs (LETSs and ETSLs) for variable-regular graphs, provided in [6] and [7], is based on normal graph representation of structures. This approach, however, is not applicable to NETSs. In this work, to develop the characterization of NETSs, we investigate the parent-child relationships between ETSs and NETSs. As natural candidates for the expansion of ETSs to reach NETSs, we consider dot, path and lolli pop expansions. One can see that the application of path and lolli pop expansions to a TS increases the b value of the structure rather rapidly. For NETSs with relatively small b values, we thus limit the expansions to dot in the rest of the paper. Due to the low computational complexity of dot expansion [6], this results in an efficient NETS search algorithm starting from ETSs. Using only the dot expansion limits the variety of NETS structures that can be generated starting from ETS structures. In the following, we first discuss the (successive) application(s) of dot expansions to ETS

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨k + T

g/4−2
(dv − 1)i ,

for g/2 even,

a ≥ ⎪⎩⎪⎪⎪⎪k + T

i =0 g/4−2
(dv − 1)i + max{ (T (dv − 1) g/4−1 )/dv , (dv − 1 −

b /k )(dv − 1) g/4−1 },

for g/2 odd,

(1)

i =0

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT SEARCH OF NETSs OF LDPC CODES

1021

structures and then describe the NETS structures that are out
of reach. Suppose that S is an (a, b) TS structure of variable-regular
Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, where b ≥ 1. The notation dotm is used for a dot expansion with m edges, connecting a new variable node to m check nodes of S. Similar to [6], we assume that the new variable node in dotm is connected to at least two check nodes of S, i.e., 2 ≤ m ≤ dv. However, unlike the dotm used in [6], the m edges can be connected to both satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes of S. The following result is simple to prove.
Lemma 3: Suppose that S is an (a, b) TS structure of variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, where b ≥ 1. Expansion of S using dotm, 2 ≤ m ≤ dv, will result in NETS structure(s) in the (a + 1, b + dv − 2q) class, where m = p + q and p ≥ 0 and q ≥ 0 are the number of edges connecting the new variable node to the satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes of S, respectively.
Remark 3: One should note that in Lemma 3, if S is an ETS, then p > 0.
Lemma 4: Consider the induced subgraph G(S) of an NETS S in a variable-regular Tanner graph G with variable degree dv. Further, consider the expansions of this subgraph in a layered tree-like fashion starting from one of the check nodes w with degree k, where k ≥ 3. If any such expansion can be partitioned into k subgraphs, where the only connection of the subgraphs is through w, as shown in Fig. 3, then the NETS structure S cannot be generated by (successive) application(s) of dotm expansions, 2 ≤ m ≤ dv, to any ETS structure.
Proof: Consider an NETS structure S whose subgraph satisfies the condition of the lemma, i.e., there is a tree-like expansion of G(S) rooted at a degree-k check node (k ≥ 3) with k disconnected subgraphs S1, . . . , Sk, as shown in Fig. 3. In Fig. 3, the degree-k check node at the root (first layer
L1) is connected to k variable nodes at layer L2. Those variable nodes are each connected to dv − 1 other check nodes at L3 and so on. It is straightforward to see that a structure with the subgraph of Fig. 3 cannot be generated through successive applications of dotm, m ≥ 2, to an ETS structure S . The reason is that to create the check node w (with degree k ≥ 3) in the process of expansion, there are two possibilities: (i ) Node w belongs to S , or (ii ) it is added in the expansion process. In Case (i ), the degree of w in S is either one or two. For the degree of w to be increased to k in the expansion process, through one or more
dotm expansions, one or more variable nodes will have to be added to the subgraph, each with one connection to w and with one or more connection(s) to the other check nodes
of the existing (connected) subgraph. This is in contradiction
with the structure in Fig 3, where otherwise disconnected subgraphs S1, . . . , Sk are only connected through w. The proof for Case (ii ) is similar.
In the following lemma, we investigate the smallest size of
NETS structures with induced subgraphs of the form discussed
in Lemma 4 and presented in Fig. 3, for different values of dv, g, and b ≤ 4. Similar results may be derived for other variable degrees, girths and b values.

Fig. 3. An NETS with k disconnected subgraphs.

Lemma 5: For variable-regular graphs with dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, g = 6, 8, 10, and for b ≤ 4, the size a of the smallest possible
NETS in the (a, b) class containing disconnected subgraphs
(as shown in Fig. 3) is listed in Table I. Proof: Suppose that S∗ is the smallest NETS structure
with disconnected subgraphs. Based on Corollary 1, the structure S∗ contains a degree-3 check node at L1. Consider each subgraph S1, S2 and S3 as a TS containing the degree-3 check
node at L1 as a degree-1 (unsatisfied) check node (Fig. 3). Let
aSi and bSi be the size and the number of unsatisfied check nodes of Si , respectively. Clearly, bSi > 0. We also have

bS1 + bS2 + bS3 = b + 2,

(2)

For S∗ to have the smallest size, we look for Si s with smallest aSi whose bSi values satisfy bSi > 0, and the constraint (2). It is easy to see that the most favorable
candidate for TSs Si s is an ETSL with no cycle. These structures are denoted by ETSL2 in [7], and exist only in the (a, b = a(dv − 2) + 2) class. If an ETSL2 structure is
not possible (due to the specific choice of bSi ), then based on Remark 2, an LETS structure is the next favorable choice. To find the size of S∗, therefore, one needs to consider all the
possible combinations of positive integers bS1 , bS2 and bS3 that satisfy (2), and for each combination finds the smallest
values of aSi s using the aforementioned guidelines. In the following, we prove the result for the case of dv = 3, g = 8 and b = 2, 3. The proof for the other cases listed in Table I
is similar.
For b = 2, using (2), we have bS1 +bS2 +bS3 = 4. The only positive integers satisfying this equality are {1, 1, 2}. Since, for
dv = 3, there does not exist any ETSL2 with b < 3, then we look for LETS structures of minimum size with these b values.
From [8, Table I], the size of the smallest LETSs with bSi = 1 and bSi = 2 is 7 and 6, respectively. We thus conclude that the size of S∗ is 7 + 7 + 6 = 20.
For b = 3, we have bS1 + bS2 + bS3 = 5. The only solutions to this equation are {1, 2, 2} and {1, 1, 3}. Again for the first
set, no ETSL2 structure exists, and based on LETS structures of minimum size, we obtain 7 + 6 + 6 = 19 as the size of
the corresponding NETS structure. For the second set of bSi values, we select an ETSL2 structure for the bSi value 3. This corresponds to aSi = 1. For the other two TSs, the minimum size LETS structures have size 7, and thus the size of the
corresponding NETS structure in this case is 1 + 7 + 7 = 15.
Since 15 is the smaller value between 19 and 15, it is in fact the size of S∗.
To obtain the entries in Table I for even values of dv, one should note that based on Lemma 1, it is not possible to have
a TS with even dv and odd b. Therefore, for even values of dv,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1022

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019
TABLE I THE SMALLEST SIZE a OF NETSs IN THE (a, b) CLASS (b ≤ 4) WITH DISCONNECTED SUBGRAPHS
FOR TANNER GRAPHS WITH dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, g = 6, 8, 10

the minimum value of bSi is 2, and in (2), the smallest value of b for NETS structures under consideration is strictly larger
than 3.
In the following, we investigate the parent-child relation-
ships between ETSs and NETSs based on dotm expansions. Since the NETS structures discussed in Lemmas 4 and 5 are
excluded, in the rest of the paper, we use the expression “interest range of a and b” or “(a, b) class of interest” to mean the b values that satisfy b ≤ 4, and for a given b value in this range, the value of a being strictly less than the entry
provided in Table I. Proposition 1: Any NETS structure S of variable-regular
graphs with variable degree dv in an (a, b) class of interest, containing only one degree-3 check node (the rest of the
check nodes have degree 2 or 1) can be characterized by the application of a dotm expansion (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) to an ETS substructure, S , in the (a − 1, b + 2m − 2 − dv) class, where m is the number of edges connecting the variable node in S/S to one degree-2 and m − 1 degree-1 check nodes of S .
Proof: The structure S contains only one check node w of degree 3. We consider the tree-like expansion of S from w
as the root at L1. Based on the knowledge that this expansion of S does not consist of disconnected subgraphs as shown in Fig. 3, there must exist two variable nodes, say v1 and v2 at L2 that are connected through a path that does not pass through w. Now, consider removing one of these two variable nodes, say v1, and all its incident edges from S. The remaining graph S is still connected and has no check node with degree larger than 2, i.e., S is an ETS. It is easy to see that S can be obtained by expanding S by v1 through a dotm (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) expansion. The class of S can be obtained by using Lemma 3, assuming p = 1.
The following corollary describes the exhaustive search of
NETSs with only one degree-3 check node.
Corollary 2: In variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, all the (a, b) NETSs containing only one degree-3 check node in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax (amax less than the value in Table I and bmax ≤ 4) can be found by applying dotm expansions to all the ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ bmax = bmax + dv − 2.
Proposition 2: Any NETS structure S in an interest class of (a, b) for variable-regular graphs with variable degree dv, that contains two degree-3 check nodes (the rest are degree-2 or -1) can be characterized by a dotm expansion (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) applied to one of the two following substructures S : (i) an ETS in the (a − 1, b + 2m − 4 − dv) class, where from m edges connecting the variable node in S/S to S , two and

m − 2 are connected to degree-2 and degree-1 check nodes of S , respectively; or (ii) an NETS containing one degree-3 check node in the (a − 1, b + 2m − 2 − dv) class, where from m edges connecting the variable node in S/S to S , one and m − 1 are connected to degree-2 and degree-1 check nodes of S , respectively.
Proof: Consider the expansion of the NETS structure starting from one of the degree-3 check nodes w at L1. In the expansion, the other degree-3 check node is located either at L3 or at L2i+1, where i > 1. With an argument similar to the one presented in the proof of Proposition 1, there exist two variable nodes v1 and v2 at L2 such that there is a path between them that does not pass through w. Therefore, by removing one of these two variable nodes, say, v1, and all its incident edges from S, the resulted subgraph S remains
connected. Now if the second degree-3 check node was at L3 and connected to v1, then there remains no check node with degree larger than 2 after the removal of v1, i.e., the subgraph S is an ETS. On the other hand, if the other degree3 check node was at L3 but not connected to v1 or it was at L2i+1 with i > 1, then the resulted subgraph S is an NETS containing one degree-3 check node. In either case, structure S can be obtained by applying a dotm expansion (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) to S . The class of S can be determined in each case by using Lemma 3, assuming p = 2 and p = 1, respectively.
The following result is a generalization of Proposition 2. Proposition 3: Any NETS structure S in an interest class of (a, b) for variable-regular graphs with variable degree dv, that contains f ≥ 2 degree-3 check nodes (the rest are degree-2 or -1) can be characterized by a dotm expansion (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) applied to one of the η = min{m, f } following substructures S : For any value of p in the range 1 ≤ p ≤ η, substructure S is in the (a − 1, b + 2(m − p) − dv) class, where from m edges connecting the variable node in S/S to S , p and m − p are connected to degree-2 and degree-1 check nodes of S , respectively.
Based on the above results, it is easy to see that an NETS
structure with f degree-3 check nodes can be generated
through successive applications of dotm expansions to ETS structures. For this to correspond to an exhaustive search of
such NETSs, the following corollary, that generalizes Corol-
lary 2, provides the range of ETSs that need to be included.
Corollary 3: In variable-regular Tanner graphs with vari-
able degree dv, all the NETSs containing f degree-3 check nodes (the rest are degree-2 or -1) in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax (amax less than the value in Table I and bmax ≤ 4) can be found by f successive applications of dotm

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT SEARCH OF NETSs OF LDPC CODES

1023

expansions to all the ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − f /dv and b ≤ bmax = bmax + f (dv − 2).
The following results can all be proved similar to the cases
involving NETSs with only degree-3 check nodes. The proofs
are thus omitted to avoid redundancy. Proposition 4: Any NETS structure S in an interest class of
(a, b) for variable-regular graphs with variable degree dv, that contains only one degree-4 check node (the rest are degree2 or -1) can be characterized by a dotm expansion (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) applied to an NETS substructure S containing only one degree-3 check node in the (a − 1, b + 2m − dv) class. From m edges connecting the variable node in S/S to S , one and m − 1 are connected to degree-3 and degree-1 check nodes of S , respectively.
Corollary 4: In variable-regular Tanner graphs with vari-
able degree dv, all the NETSs containing only one degree-4 check node (the rest are degree-2 or -1) in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax (amax less than the value in Table I and bmax ≤ 4) can be found by two successive applications of dotm expansions to all the ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 2 and b ≤ bmax = bmax + 2dv − 2.
Proposition 5: Any NETS structure S in the interest class of (a, b) for variable-regular graphs with variable degree dv, that contains one degree-4 and one degree-3 check nodes (the rest
are degree-2 or -1) can be characterized by a dotm expansion (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) applied to one of the following substructures S : (i) an NETS substructure, containing only one degree-3 check node, in the (a − 1, b + 2m − 2 − dv) class, where out of m ≥ 2 edges connecting the variable node in S/S to S , one is connected to a degree-3 check node, one to a degree-2 check node and m − 2 to degree-1 check nodes of S . (ii) an NETS substructure, containing two degree-3 check nodes, in the (a − 1, b + 2m − dv) class, where out of m ≥ 2 edges connecting the variable node in S/S to S , one and m − 1 are connected to degree-3 and degree-1 check nodes of S , respectively.
Corollary 5: In variable-regular Tanner graphs with vari-
able degree dv, all the NETSs containing one degree-4 and one degree-3 check nodes (the rest are degree-2 or -1) in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax (amax less than the value in Table I and bmax ≤ 4) can be found by three successive applications of dotm expansions to all the ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 2 and b ≤ bmax = bmax + 3dv − 4.
Remark 4: Note that in all cases discussed in Corollaries 2-
5, successive applications of dotm expansions to the ETSs can result in finding structures in addition to the ones that are of
interest in these corollaries.
Corollaries 2-5 demonstrate that by increasing the multiplic-
ity of check nodes with degrees larger than 2 and the degrees
of such check nodes, the range of b values for ETSs that
are needed to provide an exhaustive search of such NETSs is
increased. To have an efficient NETS search algorithm based
on successive dotm expansions of ETSs, we limit the multiplicity and the degrees of such check nodes to the following
cases in the rest of this paper: NETSs containing at most
four degree-3 check nodes, or containing only one degree-
4 and at most one degree-3 check nodes. We use notations N3, N3,3, N3,3,3, and N3,3,3,3, to denote NETS structures with

only one up to four check nodes of degree 3. Notations N4 and N4,3 are used for NETS structures that contain only one degree-4 check node and those with only one degree-4 and
one degree-3 check nodes, respectively.
Corollary 6: In variable-regular Tanner graphs with vari-
able degree dv, all the N3, N3,3, N3,3,3, N3,3,3,3, N4, and N4,3 in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax (amax less than the value in Table I and bmax ≤ 4) can be found by up to four successive applications of dotm expansions to all the ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ bmax = bmax + max{(3dv − 4), (4dv − 8)}.
By restricting the NETS structures to those discussed above,
we limit the maximum size amax of NETSs that can be exhaustively covered. The following theorem provides the
value of amax for Tanner graphs with different dv and g values. Theorem 2: For a variable-regular Tanner graph with
variable-degree dv and girth g, consider the union of sets N3, N3,3, N3,3,3, N3,3,3,3, N4, and N4,3, obtained by successive applications of dotm expansions (m ≥ 2) to ETSs within the range indicated in Corollary 6. For dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, and g = 6, 8, 10, Table II provides the value of amax such that such a union gives an exhaustive list of NETSs of the Tanner graph within the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax = 4.
Proof: Based on the sets of NETSs that are covered, it is
easy to see that the exhaustive search is limited by the size of
the smallest structure in sets N3,3,3,3,3, N4,3,3, N4,4 and N5. The structures in N3,3,3,3,3, however, have b ≥ 5, and thus not in the range of interest of the theorem. We thus find the size a4∗,3,3, a4∗,4 and a5∗ (or a lower bound on the size) of the smallest structure in sets N4,3,3, N4,4 and N5, respectively, and list amax = a∗−1 in Table II, where a∗ = min{a4∗,3,3, a4∗,4, a5∗}.
For structures in N5, we use Theorem 1 with different values of b ≤ 4, and choose the smallest lower bound as a5∗. For structures in N4,3,3 and N4,4, we use the tree-like expansion of the NETS structure as in Fig. 2, starting from a degree-4 check
node at the root in L1. The tree thus has four variable nodes in L2. The idea is to grow this tree into an NETS structure of smallest size with no cycle of length smaller than g and with
the given b value, where out of b unsatisfied check nodes in
the case of N4,3,3, two of them have degree 3. To minimize the size, one needs to select the check nodes to have the minimum
degree within the above constraints. For structures in N4,3,3, this means selecting all the satisfied check nodes (other than the root) to have degree 2 and all the b − 2 unsatisfied check
nodes to have degree 1. For structures in N4,4, it means that all the satisfied check nodes, except for the root and one other
check node with degree 4, the rest must have degree 2. The
b unsatisfied check nodes in this case all have degree 1. To
satisfy the girth constraint, all the variable and check nodes in the first g/2 layers of the tree must be distinct (i.e., no cycle
should appear in the subgraph). Moreover, in the tree, there
are four subgraphs, each starting from one variable node at
L2. To avoid having cycles shorter than g in these subgraphs, any new variable (check) node at Lg/2+1, for g/2 odd (even), can only be connected to the check (variable) nodes of each such subgraph at most once. Therefore, for odd values of g/2, at Lg/2+1, we need, at least, as many variable nodes as the number of edges emanating from the check nodes at Lg/2 of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1024

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019

each subgraph to Lg/2+1. Also, for even values of g/2, if the number of variable nodes in a subgraph at Lg/2 times dv − 1 is larger than the number of the rest of variable nodes at Lg/2 (in the other k −1 subgraphs), more variable nodes are needed
to be added at Lg/2+2 to complete the connections required for check nodes at Lg/2+1.
Considering the above constraints, for both cases of struc-
tures in N4,3,3 and N4,4, and for each value of b, we find the structure with the smallest number of variable nodes. The values a4∗,3,3 and a4∗,4 are then obtained by taking the minimum among the smallest sizes corresponding to five different values of b = 0, . . . , 4. In the following, we discuss in more details,
the proof for one entry of Table II. Proofs for other entries are
similar. Consider Tanner graphs with dv = 3, g = 8 and NETSs
with bmax = 4. Based on Theorem 1, we have a5∗ = 12. For N4,3,3, to minimize the size of an NETS, the two
degree-3 check nodes must be located at L3 and be connected to two different variable nodes at L2. This minimizes the number of variable nodes needed in the higher layers of the
tree while satisfying the girth constraint. All the remaining b − 2 unsatisfied check nodes with degree 1 must also be located at L3. The remaining check nodes at L3 are thus 8 − b degree-2 check nodes. This means there must be 4 + (8 − b) variable nodes at L4, and 4 + 4 + 8 − b = 16 − b variable nodes in the whole structure up to L4. It appears that by proper addition of check nodes in L5, no more variable node is needed in L6. The smallest size of structures in N3,3,4 for different values of b ≤ 4 is thus obtained by b = 4, and we have a4∗,3,3 = 12. As two examples, the smallest NETS structures for b = 3 and b = 4 are given in Figs. 4(a) and (b),
respectively.
For N4,4, to minimize the size of NETS, the second degree-4 check node must be located at L3. All the b degree-1 check nodes must also be at L3. Out of 4(dv − 1) = 8 check nodes in L3, one is degree-4, b are degree-1 and 7 − b are degree-2. This means there are 3 + (7 − b) variable nodes at L4. If b ≥ 1, to satisfy the girth constraint with minimum number of
variable nodes, one degree-1 check node in L3 is connected to the same variable node in L2 that has also a connection to the degree-4 check node in L3. If b > 1, the rest of degree-1 check node(s) are each connected to another (different) variable node in L3. Now, for b > 1, consider a variable node v1 in L2 that is connected to one degree-4 and one degree-1 check node in L3 and call the subtree rooted at v1 as subtree 1. This subtree has 3 variable nodes at L4 that must be connected to 3(dv − 1) = 6 distinct check nodes at L5. To complete the connections of these check nodes, at least six variable nodes should exist at
L4 of the rest of the subtrees (excluding subtree 1), otherwise, more variable nodes are needed at L6. By considering all the cases of b ≤ 4, we conclude that a4∗,4 = 13. As two examples, the smallest NETS structures for b = 1 and b = 4 are shown
in Figs. 4(c) and (d), respectively. Based on the above, for dv = 3, g = 8, we have amax =
min{12, 12, 13} − 1 = 11.
Using Corollary 6, one can find the bmax value which indicates the range of b values for ETSs that are required
for the exhaustive search of the desired NETSs. The bmax

Fig. 4. Four examples of smallest possible NETS structures in N4,3,3 and N4,4 for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3, g = 8, in the range b ≤ 4.
values for graphs with different dv values are also provided in Table II. In Table II, we have also included the lower bound on the size of the smallest possible NETS with b ≤ 4 in brackets. As an example, the entries corresponding to dv = 3, and g = 8 in Table II show that, for such variableregular graphs, we can exhaustively search all the NETSs with a = 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and b ≤ 4.
The pseudo code of the proposed search algorithm is given in Algorithm 1. In the proposed dot-based NETS search algorithm, the input is the exhaustive list of ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ bmax. In the search process, dot expansion is applied to any instance of TSs (ETSs and NETSs) in the interest range of a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ bmax. The sets ITa S and IEa T S are the sets of all the instances of TSs and ETSs in the (a, b) classes with b ≤ bmax, respectively. The set INa ET S is the set of all the instances of NETSs in the (a, b) classes with b ≤ bmax.
Remark 5: We note that if in Algorithm 1, we increase the value of amax beyond that of Table II (but less than the one in Table I), by exhaustive search of ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, we can still find all the N3, N3,3, N3,3,3, N3,3,3,3, N4, N4,3 structures in the new range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ 4, but there is no guarantee to find the other NETS structures in the new range exhaustively.
B. Non-Exhaustive Search of NETSs in Variable-Regular LDPC Codes
The exhaustive search of NETSs proposed in Subsection IIIA has two limitations. First, the value of bmax obtained in Subsection III-A, is rather large which implies a high complexity for the exhaustive search of ETSs. Moreover, for the given values of dv, g and bmax, the value of amax is relatively small. For these two reasons, we propose a nonexhaustive search of NETSs in a wider range of a and b values based on setting bmax = bmax + t, where t ≥ 1, instead of the value indicated in Table II. Our experimental results show that by increasing bmax beyond bmax+2, the number of new NETSs that can be found in the interest range is negligible.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT SEARCH OF NETSs OF LDPC CODES

1025

TABLE II
THE MAXIMUM SIZE amax OF (a, b) NETSs THAT CAN BE SEARCHED EXHAUSTIVELY WITHIN THE RANGE b ≤ bmax = 4 BY SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS OF dotm EXPANSIONS TO (a , b ) ETSs WITH SIZE UP TO amax − 1 AND b ≤ bmax . (THE LOWER BOUND ON THE SIZE OF SMALLEST POSSIBLE NETS WITH b ≤ 4 IS GIVEN IN BRACKETS.)

Algorithm 1 (NETS Search) Finds List of the Instances of

(a, b) NETS Structures of a Variable-Regular Tanner Graph

G = (V , E) With Girth g and Variable Degree dv, for

a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax (amax Is Obtained From Table II

for bmax = 4). The Input Is All the Instances of (a, b) ETS

Structures, in the Range a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ bmax, IET S
(bmax Is Obtained From Table II). The Output Is the Set IN ET S, Which Contains the Instances of NETSs in the Interest

Range. IN ET S = NetsSrch(IET S, amax, bmax)

1: Inputs: G, g, dv, IET S (amax, bmax = 4).

2: Initializations: INa ET S ← ∅; ITa S = IEa T S, ∀ a ≤ amax;

bmax is obtained from Table II.

3: for a = g/2, . . . , amax − 1 do

4: for any structure S ∈ ITa S do

5:

Consider V to be the set of variable nodes in V \

S which have at least two connections to the check

nodes in (S).

6:

for each variable node v ∈ V do

7:

S = {S ∪ v} \ ITa+S 1.

8:

b = | o(S )|.

9: 10:

if bIT≤a+S 1bm=axItTah+Se1n∪ S .

11:

if b ≤ bmax then

12:

INa+E1T S = INa+E1T S ∪ S .

13:

end if

14:

end if

15:

end for

16: end for

17: end for 18: Output: IN ET S = {INa ET S, ∀ a ≤ amax}.

The NETS search algorithm proposed in Algorithm 1 can also be used for the non-exhaustive search of NETSs. As the input, in this case, one should find and provide all the ETSs in the range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. However, since the bmax is less than the value given in Table II, the list of NETSs, IN ET S, would be non-exhaustive. One should also note that since the algorithm imposes no restriction on the degree of check nodes of searched NETSs, by increasing amax, some other NETSs with combination of different check node degrees can be found as well.
C. Search Algorithm to Find NETSs in Irregular LDPC Codes
Due to the variety of variable degrees in variable-irregular LDPC codes, we are not able to provide results similar to

those in Subsection III-A in relation to exhaustive search of NETSs in irregular codes. Algorithm 1 can, however, be still used for the non-exhaustive search of NETSs in irregular graphs. To obtain an exhaustive list of ETSs as the input to Algorithm 1 in this case, one can use the search algorithms of [7].
D. Computational Complexity of NETS Search Algorithms
In this subsection, we discuss the computational complexity of the NETS search algorithms discussed in previous subsections. In particular, we are interested in knowing how the complexity scales with increasing the code’s block length n. In practical applications, we are often interested in scenarios where the rate and degree distributions of the code are constant in n. Moreover, we consider the cases in which the range of a and b values for the NETS classes, as well as the girth are fixed with n. Under such circumstances, it was shown in [7], that the worst-case complexity of exhaustively finding (a, b) LETSs using the dpl search algorithm is linear in n. Based on the results of [2] on the average multiplicity of cycles of different lengths, it was further shown in [7] that if one ignores the complexity of finding the input simple cycles, the average complexity of search is constant in n. This is the main reason that dpl search algorithms are so effective at larger block lengths. Incidentally, these cases (codes with larger block length, say n > 1000) are those for which algorithms such as branch-&-bound are impractical.
The exhaustive search of Algorithm 1 requires a list of all the instances of (a, b) ETS structures with a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ bmax, where bmax is a linear function of dv (see, Corollary 6), as the input. To obtain this list, in addition to the instances of LETS structures, just discussed, one also needs to obtain the list of all the ETSLs. Following the terminology of [7], the set of ETSLs can be partitioned into two subsets, ETSL1 and ETSL2. The first subset are those ETSLs that have at least one LETS as their substructure. The instances of (a, b) ETSL1 structures in a given range of a and b values can be obtained exhaustively by successive applications of dot1 expansions to LETS structures within that range [7]. For a fixed range of a and b values and fixed degree distributions, considering that the multiplicity of LETS structures within the range increases at most linearly with n, and that the number of successive applications of dot expansions to each instance of an LETS structure is constant, one can conclude that the worst-case complexity of finding the exhaustive list of ETSL1s, as well as the multiplicity of these structures, is also linear in n. The average complexity of the search (ignoring the complexity of finding the input simple cycles), and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1026

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019

average multiplicity of the structures, are, however, constant. Moreover, all the instances of (a, b) ETSL2 structures in the range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax can be obtained exhaustively by successive applications of dot1 expansions to variable nodes of degree at most bmax [7]. For a fixed degree distribution and range, the multiplicity of such variable nodes, and thus the computational complexity of exhaustively finding ETSL2 structures, and their multiplicity increase at most linearly with n.
Finally, we note that although the worst-case computational complexity of finding ETSLs is the same as that of LETSs (both linear in n), in practice, the former search, assuming that the required LETSs are already available, is much faster than the latter [7].
Based on the above discussions, it is clear that in the worst case, the computational complexity of obtaining the input ETSs of Algorithm 1 is linear in n. The multiplicity of the input ETSs also increases linearly with n. From the results of Corollary 6 and Theorem 2, it follows that, in the process of finding NETSs, the number of successive applications of dotm expansions to each input ETS is limited to a constant. This together with the fact that the complexity of the application of dotm expansions to an (a, b) ETS is O(b2dc2max ) [7] result in the total computational complexity of at most linear in n for the NETS search algorithm (note that b ≤ bmax and both bmax and dcmax are constant in n).
IV. BOUNDS ON THE STOPPING DISTANCE OF LDPC CODES
Stopping sets can be viewed as a subset of TSs, where any check node has a degree of at least two. Elementary SSs (ESSs) and non-elementary SSs (NESSs) are thus subsets of ETSs and NETSs, respectively. In the following, we tailor/modify the results established for ETSs and NETSs for ESSs and NESSs, respectively.
A. Lower Bound on the Stopping Distance of Variable-Regular LDPC Codes
By definition, an ESS is a TS for which the degree of all the check nodes is 2. Any ESS thus corresponds to an LETS with b = 0. The following lower bound on stopping distance is simple to prove.
Proposition 6: The result of Theorem 1 with k = 2 and b = 0 provides a lower bound, L SS1, on smin for variableregular LDPC codes.
Remark 6: We note that the result of Proposition 6 is essentially the same as the lower bound obtained in [16] on the stopping distance of variable-regular LDPC codes.
To potentially improve the lower bound of Proposition 6, L SS1, we use the fact that ESSs, as a special case of LETSs, have a graphical structure that lends itself well to the efficient exhaustive dpl search algorithm of [6]. Using the d pl search algorithm with bmax = 0, we can efficiently and exhaustively find all the ESSs of a variable-regular LDPC code with a maximum given size amax. In the following, we establish a lower bound, L SS2 (L SS2 > L SS1), on the size of smallest NESSs. We then perform an exhaustive d pl-based search of

ESSs of maximum size amax = L SS2 − 1. If this search does not find any ESS, then we establish L SS2 ≤ smin. Otherwise, the smallest size of found ESSs is the exact value of smin.
Proposition 7: The result of Theorem 1 with k = 3 and b = 1 provides a lower bound, L SS2, on the size of NESSs.
To further improve the lower bound of Proposition 7 on
smin, if possible, we need to perform an exhaustive search of NESSs. This can be performed, by using the NETS search algorithm of Section III with some modifications as described
below. We first note that, compared to Subsection III-A, here,
we are not interested in NETSs with unsatisfied check nodes
of degree-1. This implies that the range of exhaustive search for NESSs, as a subset of NETSs, can be potentially increased.
We use notations SS3, SS3,3, SS3,3,3, SS3,3,3,3, to denote NESSs with only one up to four check nodes of degree 3, respectively. Notations SS4 and SS4,3 are used for NESSs that contain only one degree-4 check node and only one degree-4 and one degree-3 check nodes, respectively. Sim-
ilar to Subsection III-A, we limit the search of NESSs to
the following configurations: SS3, SS3,3, SS3,3,3, SS3,3,3,3, SS4, and SS4,3. The following result is in parallel with Corollary 6.
Corollary 7: In variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, all the SS3, SS3,3, SS3,3,3, SS3,3,3,3, SS4, and SS4,3 in the interest range of a ≤ amax (amax less than the value in Table I) can be found by up to four successive
applications of dotm expansions to all the LETSs in the range of a ≤ amax −1 and b ≤ bmax = 4+max{(3dv −4), (4dv −8)}.
The following result (parallel to Theorem 2) provides the
range in which the NESS search is exhaustive.
Theorem 3: For a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable-degree dv and girth g, consider the union of sets SS3, SS3,3, SS3,3,3, SS3,3,3,3, SS4, and SS4,3, obtained by successive applications of dotm expansions (m ≥ 2) to LETSs within the range indicated in Corollary 7. For dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, and g = 6, 8, 10, Table III provides the value of amax such that such a union gives an exhaustive list of NESSs of the Tanner graph within the range of a ≤ amax.
Proof: The proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 2 with the following differences: (i ) Despite the case of Theorem 2, where NETSs with only b ≤ 4 were studied, here, for NESSs, there is no such limitation, and we are interested in NESSs with any value of b (including those with b > 4), (ii ) Since there exists no degree-1 check node in a SS, the degree of all the unsatisfied check nodes of NESSs should be odd values
greater than or equal to 3, (iii ) Due to (i ), in addition to
minimum-size structures in SS4,3,3, SS4,4, SS5, one needs to also consider the minimum-size structures in SS3,3,3,3,3 as potentially limiting the range of exhaustive search, (i v) In the tree-like expansion of the subgraph, to minimize the size of the NESS and due to the non-existence of degree-1 check
nodes, one needs to assume that except the few check nodes with degree larger than 2, all the rest of check nodes have
degree-2.
Fig. 5 shows four examples of smallest NESS structures of SS4,3,3, SS4,4, SS5 and SS3,3,3,3,3 for graphs with dv = 3 and g = 8.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT SEARCH OF NETSs OF LDPC CODES

1027

TABLE III
THE MAXIMUM SIZE amax OF SSs THAT CAN BE SEARCHED EXHAUSTIVELY BY SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS OF dotm EXPANSIONS TO (a , b ) LETSs WITH SIZE UP TO amax − 1 AND b ≤ bmax

for sm(l)in. (Since the search of NETSs is hierarchical, if any NESS is found in Line 13, it is the smallest one in the range
of interest.)

Fig. 5. Four examples of smallest NESS structures in variable-regular graphs with dv = 3, g = 8.
Remark 7: Note that the values of amax in Table III are generally larger than those in Table II. For example, while the range of exhaustive search of NESSs for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 8 is 13, this value for the exhaustive search of NETSs is 11.
If the exhaustive search of SSs (ESSs and NESSs) up to size amax listed in Table III fails to find any SS, then L SS3 = amax + 1 is a lower bound on smin. Otherwise, the smallest size of found SSs gives the exact value of smin.
In Table IV, we have listed L SS3, as well as the values of L SS1 and L SS2, obtained from Propositions 6 and 7, for Tanner graphs with different values of dv and g.
Example 1: In variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 8, while the size of smallest possible ESSs (from Proposition 6) is 6, by the exhaustive search of ESSs, one can potentially improve the lower bound on smin to 9. Moreover, by considering NESSs, the bound can be potentially improved further to 14.
The pseudo code for obtaining a lower bound sm(li)n on smin is presented in Algorithm 2. The algorithm starts by exhaustively searching for ESSs of size at most L SS3 − 1 in Lines 5-9. During the search of ESSs, if any ESS is found, the size of that ESS is assigned as the temporary value for sm(li)n. (Since the search of LETSs is hierarchical, if any SS is found in Line 6, it is the smallest one in the range of interest.) If this temporary sm(l)in is larger than L SS2, then the NETS search algorithm of Subsection III-A (Algorithm 1) is used to find NESSs with size less than this temporary sm(l)in. If such an NESS is found, the size of that NESS is assigned as the new and final value

Algorithm 2 Finding a Lower Bound sm(li)n on the Stopping Distance of a Variable-Regular Tanner Graph G With Variable

Degree dv and Girth g

1: Inputs: G, g, dv.
2: Initializations: Set amax = L SS3, and select bmax from Table III.
3: sm(li)n = amax. 4: Run the exhaustive LETS search algorithm in the range of

a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ bmax. 5: while the d pl search is running do

6: if an LETS in an (a, 0) class is found then

7:

Stop the search, and set sm(l)in = a, amax = a.

8: end if

9: end while 10: if sm(l)in > L S S2 then 11: IN ET S = NetsSrch(IL ET S , amax, bmax = 4)

12: while the NETS search is running do

13: 14:

if

an NESS Stop the

of size a is found, where search, and set sm(li)n = a.

a

<

amax,

then

15:

end if

16: end while

17: end if 18: Output: sm(li)n.

Remark 8: In Subsection III-A, the input of Algorithm 1 for the search of NETSs in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ 4 was the list of all ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ bmax. However, NESSs are leafless, i.e., each variable node is connected to at least two check nodes. Therefore, for
finding the NESSs in Line 13 of Algorithm 2, the input is just the list of LETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ bmax, that has already been found in Line 4.
Remark 9: We note that by removing the conditions that
stop the algorithm when an ESS or an NESS is found, one can
find the list of all stopping sets with size less than or equal to amax = L SS3 − 1 exhaustively.

B. Upper Bound on the Stopping Distance of LDPC Codes
If we fail to find the exact stopping distance of an LDPC code (variable-regular) based on the approach described in Subsection IV-A, then, we have established that smin ≥ L SS3. For such cases, in this subsection, we also find an upper bound on smin. To obtain this upper bound, we find a stopping set

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1028

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019
TABLE IV VALUES L SS3 , L SS2 AND L SS1 (AS POTENTIAL LOWER BOUNDS ON smin ) FOR CODES WITH dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, AND g = 6, 8, 10

with size larger than or equal to L SS3. We do this by devising a non-exhaustive search algorithm for SSs with a range that can

go well beyond L SS3. This search algorithm is also applicable to irregular LDPC codes and can provide an upper bound on

smin for such codes.

The new algorithm also searches for both ESSs and NESSs,

and to search for both categories, it requires to search for

LETSs. The LETS search can be performed through the

exhaustive d pl searches of [6] and [7], for regular and irreg-

ular graphs, respectively. The problem, however, is that the

complexity of such a search increases rather rapidly, if the

range of search, indicated by the value of amax, is increased much beyond the value of L SS3. To overcome the problem of high complexity of the exhaustive d pl search, in cases

where the smallest size of stopping sets is well above L SS3, we modify the search such that it can handle larger values

of amax. This however, comes at the expense of losing the exhaustiveness of the search, and thus we are not guaranteed to

find the stopping sets with the lowest weight in our search. In

this part of the work, rather than selecting the bmax as in the original d pl characterization/search, we choose it to be

a smaller value. To compensate for the detrimental effect that

this new choice will have on the exhaustiveness of the d pl

search, rather than using the specific expansion techniques that

the original d pl characterization determines for each LETS

class, we apply all the possible expansions from the set of

dot, path and lolli pop expansions to LETS structures in each

class in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. The only constraint for the application of a certain expansion technique

to LETS structures within a specific class is that the expanded

structure must still remain within the range a ≤ amax and
b ≤ bmax. Given the values amax and bmax, Routine 1 provides a pseudo code for finding the list of expansion techniques that

are required to be applied to all the LETSs in each (a, b) class.

These expansions are stored in the (a, b) entry of table EX ,

EX (a,b). The expansion dot is applied to all the (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax − 1. Also, pamo , pamc and lomc are applied to all the (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax − m. The only constraint

for using an expansion technique is that the b value(s) of the

new LETS structure(s) need to remain in the range identified

by bmax. A pseudo

code

for

obtaining

an

upper

bound

sm(ui)n

on

stopping distance is presented in Algorithm 3. To start the

algorithm, one can select amax to be initially a rather large

value a0, say three or four times L SS3. The procedures of searching for ESSs and NESSs are generally similar to those

in Section IV-A, with some differences explained in the

following. In Algorithm 2, for the exhaustive search of LETSs

(Line 4), the set of expansions EX , and bmax are obtained by

Routine 1 (Expansions) Finds All the Possible Expansions

EX (a,b) for the (a, b) Classes of LETS Structures, g/2 ≤
a < amax, 1 ≤ b ≤ bmax, for a Tanner Graph With Girth g and Variable Degree dv (for Irregular Graphs, dv = dvmin ). EX = Expansions (amax, bmax, g, dv)

1: Initialization: a = amax − 1. 2: while a ≥ g/2 do

3: EX (a,b) ← dot, ∀ b ≤ bmax.

4: for b = 1, . . . , bmax do

5:

m = 2.

6:

while a + m ≤ amax do

7:

if b ≤ bmax − 2 + m(dv − 2) then

8:

EX (a,b) ← pamo , pamc , lomc .

9:

end if

10:

m = m + 1.

11:

end while

12: end for

13: a = a − 1.

14: end while

15: Output: EX .

the characterization algorithm of [6]. Also, in Algorithm 2, for

the exhaustive search of NETSs in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ 4 (Line 11), the value of bmax for the exhaustive search of LETSs is obtained from Table III. In Algorithm 3, however,

for both non-exhaustive searches of LETSs and NETSs, bmax is chosen to be a rather small value. This value for variable-

regular codes is set at bmax = g/2(dv − 2), in Algorithm 3. This covers the class of shortest simple cycles of the graph.

Also, for the search of NETSs (NESSs) in Algorithm 1,

bmax = bmax. For irregular graphs, the value is chosen as bmax = 4 in Algorithm 3. Also, when the values of amax and bmax are set, the expansions EX needed for all the
relevant classes of LETS structures are determined through

Routine 1.

If an ESS of size a is found, then a is a temporary upper

bound for the stopping distance of the code. Then the NETS

search is used to find any possible NESS with size less than

the size of the smallest ESS. If such an NESS is found, then

its size is an upper bound on the stopping distance of the

code. If the search terminated without finding any stopping

set, or if one is interested in tightening the upper bound, one

can increase the value of bmax in a new search, to allow for

covering more structures. In the latter case, where a stopping

set of weight amax = sm(ui)n −

sm(ui)n has 1, for the

already been new search.

found,

one

should

set

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT SEARCH OF NETSs OF LDPC CODES

1029

Algorithm 3 Finding an Upper Bound sm(ui)n on the Stopping Distance of a Tanner Graph G With Variable Degree dv and
Girth g

1: Inputs: G, g, dv.

2: Initializations: Set amax = a0, bmax = g/2(dv − 2) for

avnardiasbm(luie)n-r=eg∞ula.r(Fcoordeirsr,egour labrmcaxod=es,

4 for dv =

irregular dvmin .)

codes,

3: EX =Expansions(amax, bmax, g, dv) (Routine 1).

4: Run the LETS search algorithm ( [6], [7]) based on the

expansions in EX .

5: while the LETS search is running do

6: if the run-time exceeds T , then

7:

Stop the LETS search, and go to Step 25.

8: end if

9: if an LETS in an (a, 0) class is found, where a < sm(ui)n,

then

10:

Stop the LETS search, set sm(ui)n = a, amax = a.

11: end if

12: end while

13: IN ET S= NetsSrch(IL ET S , amax, bmax)

14: while the NETS search is running do

15: 16:

if

an NESS of size a is found, where a Stop the NETS search, set sm(ui)n = a.

<

sm(ui)n ,

then

17: end if

18: end while

19: if sm(ui)n = ∞, then

20: bmax = bmax + 1, and go to Step 3.

21: end if

22: 23:

if

sm(ui)n < ∞, but looking bmax = bmax + 1, amax

for a tighter bound, then = sm(ui)n − 1, and go to Step

3.

24: end if

25: Output: sm(ui)n.

C. Computational Complexity of Search Algorithms for Stopping Sets
We first start by studying the complexity of the search algorithm for ESSs with maximum size amax (used for establishing the lower bound L SS2). Since this search is basically a d pl search for finding LETSs with b = 0, its computational complexity, assuming constant degree distributions and girth, is at most linear in block length n (note that amax = L SS2 − 1, and L SS2 are constant in n based on Proposition 7) [7]. The average complexity of the search, assuming that the input simple cycles for the d pl search are available, is however only constant in n.
Next, we consider the exhaustive search of Algorithm 2 for finding ESSs and NESSs with size up to a constant amax (used to obtain the lower bound sm(l)in on smin). As the initial step of this algorithm, a list of (a, b) LETSs within a constant range for a and b values are to be obtained using the d pl search. Both the complexity of obtaining this list and the multiplicity of structures in the list are at most linear in n [7]. The average complexity and multiplicity, assuming the input simple cycles are available, are both constant in n. In the process of finding the (a, b) LETSs, if at least one has b = 0, then sm(li)n is set to

be the size of the smallest such LETSs (ESSs). If this value of sm(li)n satisfies sm(li)n ≤ L SS2, then the algorithm stops. In this case, the complexity of the algorithm is in the worst case linear in n, and on average, constant in n. On the other hand, if Algorithm 2 proceeds to find NESSs using Algorithm 1 (i.e., if sm(l)in > L SS2 on Line 10), since the multiplicity of the input LETS structures to Algorithm 1 are at most linear in n, then the complexity of this search will also be at most linear in n (see, Subsection III-D). The average complexity of the NESS search, and thus the average complexity of Algorithm 2, as a whole, will be constant in n, if the input simple cycles to the d pl search are available.
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
We have applied our technique to find lower and upper bounds on the stopping distance of a large number of variableregular and irregular LDPC codes. These include both random and structured codes with a wide range of rates and block lengths. Here, we present the results for 20 variable-regular and 8 irregular codes. These codes and their parameters can be seen in Tables V and VI, respectively. For all the runtimes reported in this paper, a desktop computer with 2.4-GHz CPU and 8-GB RAM is used, and the search algorithms are implemented in MATLAB. In Tables V and VI, for the cases where the exact smin is found, this value is reported in the column corresponding to the lower bound, and we have “-” in the upper bound column. Otherwise, the value L SS3 is reported as the lower bound, and the upper bound is obtained using the non-exhaustive d pl search algorithm. In such cases, the value bmax that has been used to provide the upper bound is reported in the last column of the table. For all cases, the run-time to obtain the lower and upper bounds are also reported. For structured codes, their structural properties are used to simplify the search. These codes are C10, C13 − C20 in Table V, and C21 − C26, in Table VI. Also, for all cases, the letter e or n is reported in brackets to indicate whether the smallest SS found in the search algorithm is elementary or non-elementary, respectively.
We note that the lower bounds (or the exact stopping distances) are all obtained in times that are at most about 16 minutes, and in many cases, only in a few seconds. The upper bounds are obtained in at most about 35 minutes, and in many cases, less than 4 minutes. Using a computer with Core 2 Duo E6700 2.67GHz CPU and 2 GB of RAM, it took the search algorithm of [9], about 600 and 3085 hours to provide an upper bound on the stopping distance of C1 and C3, respectively. In comparison, it has taken the non-exhaustive d pl search algorithm of this paper only 5 and 34 minutes to find the same upper bounds for C1 and C3, respectively. Also, the exact stopping distance of C1 has been reported in [20], which is matched with the bound reported here (the run-time has not been reported in [20]).
To the best of our knowledge, the upper bound for random codes C2 and C4 has not been reported in the literature. It takes our algorithm only 43 seconds to find the exact stopping distance of C4, a random high rate code with block length 1057.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1030

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019

TABLE V STOPPING DISTANCE OR BOUNDS ON THE STOPPING DISTANCE OF
SOME VARIABLE-REGULAR LDPC CODES
TABLE VI UPPER BOUNDS ON THE STOPPING DISTANCE OF
SOME IRREGULAR LDPC CODES
We believe that the run-times reported here would be much less than those of any existing search algorithm. In fact, in our opinion, no existing algorithm would be able to handle C9, which is a code of rate 0.87 and block length 16383. It takes our algorithm only about 2 and 3 minutes to provide the lower and upper bounds of 7 and 9 on the smin of this code, respectively.

Codes C5–C8 are four high-rate random codes with variable degree 3 and girth 6 constructed by the program of [15].3 These random high-rate codes with large block lengths are challenging codes for all the existing approaches in the literature. One can see that the exact stopping distance or the lower and upper bounds of these codes have been found by the proposed algorithms in most cases in a few seconds. To the best of our knowledge, except a few structured medium length codes with rate 0.5, no result has been reported in the literature for codes with relatively large block length and high rate.
Also, an upper bound of 18 on the stopping distance of C10 (Tanner (155, 64)) has been found in just 45 seconds. The obtained upper bound matches the exact value of smin reported in [20]. Among seven variable-regular LDPC codes reported in [20], the run-time for finding the stopping distance of only two structured small block length codes, including C10, has been reported. The stopping distance of C10 has been found in about 1 minute on a standard desktop computer [20].
Codes C11 and C12 are two variable-regular codes constructed by PEG algorithm [11] (available in [14]). It takes 10 and 35 minutes to find upper bounds of 19 and 37 on the stopping distance of C11 and C12, respectively. For the purpose of comparing the run-times, we note that, it took the algorithm of [9], about 25 hours to find the same upper bound for C11. This bound also matches the exact stopping distance reported in [20]. Also, to the best of our knowledge, the upper bound of 37 on the smin of C12 has not been reported in the literature so far.
Moreover, the exact stopping distance of C14, a high-rate structured code with block length 5219 has been found in just 913 seconds.
In [26], the authors constructed QC-LDPC codes that are cyclic liftings of fully-connected 3 × n protographs, and have the shortest block length for a given girth. Code C15 is the shortest cyclic lifting of the 3 × 6 fully-connected base graph with girth 10, reported in [26]. We find smin of this code to be 14 in 28 seconds. Code C16 is the Ramanujan (4896, 2448) code with g = 12. For this code, we find the exact value of smin to be 24, in about 12 minutes. For the purpose of comparing the run-times, we note that, it took the algorithm of [9], about 162 hours to find the same upper bound for C16.
Recently, QC-LDPC codes with girth 8, whose parity-check matrices have some symmetries, and are in many cases shorter than previously existing girth-8 QC-LDPC codes, were constructed in [27]. We tested the codes of [27], and observed that our proposed algorithm can find the exact smin, or obtain lower and upper bounds on smin, for many of them in a matter of seconds or minutes. For example, we have found the stopping distances of all 18 codes with dv = 3, g = 8, R ≤ 0.88 and n ≤ 4000 ([27, Table I]), each in less than or about one minute. The last code in that table is C13 in Table V.
While most of the variable-regular codes studied in the literature, see, e.g., [20], have dv = 3, the algorithms proposed here can find the exact stopping distance, or provide lower and upper bounds on stopping distance of variable-regular
3Using code6.c with seed = 380 in [15].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT SEARCH OF NETSs OF LDPC CODES

1031

TABLE VII
MULTIPLICITIES OF (a, b) TSs CONSISTING OF LETSs, ETSLs AND NETSs OF C10 WITHIN THE RANGE OF a ≤ 13 AND b ≤ 4

within the range a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5 has been used. In [28], authors used the branch-&-bound approach to propose an exhaustive search algorithm for finding TSs. However, similar to the other branch-&-bound algorithms, this approach is only applicable to codes with short block lengths. The multiplicity of TSs in different classes found by our algorithm for Tanner (155,64) code is matched with the one reported in [28], except for the (12, 4) class. While our search algorithm has found 363630 TSs in the (12, 4) class, only 36280 TSs have been reported in [28].4 The run-time of the algorithm of [28] to find the exhaustive list of TSs is not reported. However, while it took the algorithm of [28] 59 minutes5 to find the TSs of a PEG code in the range of a ≤ 5 and b ≤ 5, our d pl search algorithm finds the same set of TSs in less than 20 seconds.

codes with dv > 3. As an example, we are able to provide lower bounds on, or obtain the exact value of, smin for all the variable-regular LDPC codes provided in [27, Tables II and III], in just a few minutes. These are codes with variable degrees 4 and 5, respectively, and with R ≤ 0.84 and n ≤ 14750. In many cases, also, we find upper bounds on smin for these codes. Four examples of the codes in [27, Tables II and III] are listed as the last entries of Table V.
Based on the value of stopping distance, block length, rate and degree distribution of the reported codes in the literature [9], [10], [18], [20], we believe finding the exact (or bounds on the) stopping distance of codes such as C3, C8, C9, C12, C14, C18 and C20 are out of the reach of their algorithms or the run-times will be significantly larger than ours.
We have used Algorithm 3 to provide an upper bound on the stopping distance of eight irregular codes listed in Table VI. Codes C21−C26 have been adopted in standards, and Codes C27 and C28 are random codes constructed by the PEG algorithm. In [21], the exact stopping distance of all the IEEE 802.16e LDPC codes [31] was reported. Our upper bound search algorithm can also find the same stopping distance in each case, most of the time in just a few seconds (no run-time for obtaining these results was reported in [21]).
In this paper, we propose an efficient search algorithm to provide an exhaustive/non-exhaustive list of NETSs. The results obtained from this search algorithm along with the theoretical results in [8] support the assertion that in the harmful classes of TSs, there is no NETS (otherwise, they could potentially be harmful). For example, Table VII shows the list of TSs of Tanner (155,64) code [24] (dv = 3, g = 8) in the wide range of a ≤ 13 and b ≤ 4. The multiplicities of LETS, ETSL and NETS structures are also shown separately in the table. One can compare the number of LETS, ETSL and NETS in this code to see that in the classes believed to be most harmful (with relatively small a and b values), the only TSs are LETSs. Based on the value amax = 11 from Table II, the results of NETSs presented in Table VII for the classes with a ≤ 11 and b ≤ 4 are exhaustive. For finding NETSs beyond this range, in Algorithm 1, the exhaustive list of ETSs

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a hierarchical graph-based expansion approach to characterize non-elementary trapping sets (NETS) of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The proposed characterization is based on depth-one tree (dot) expansion technique. Each NETS structure S is characterized as a sequence of embedded NETS structures that starts from an ETS, and grows in each step by using a dot expansion, until it reaches S. The characterization allowed us to devise efficient search algorithms for finding all the instances of (a, b) NETS structures with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, in a guaranteed fashion. The exhaustive search of NETSs along with the theoretical results provided in [8] support the assertion that in the harmful classes of TSs, there is no NETS (otherwise, they could potentially be harmful). We also devised a low-complexity non-exhaustive search algorithm for finding NETSs within a much wider range compared to the range for the exhaustive search.
Moreover, in this paper, we derived tight lower and upper bounds on the stopping distance smin of LDPC codes. The bounds, which were established using a combination of analytical results and search techniques, are applicable to LDPC codes with a wide range of rates and block lengths. To derive the bounds, we partitioned the stopping sets into two categories of elementary and non-elementary. We noted that elementary stopping sets (ESSs) and non-elementary stopping sets (NESSs) are subset of leafless ETSs (LETSs) and NETSs, respectively. Using exhaustive LETS and NETS search algorithms, we searched for the stopping sets of size less than L. If the search happened to find a stopping set, then the smallest size of such a stopping set was smin. Otherwise, if the search failed, then a lower bound of L ≤ smin was established on smin . For the upper bound, the LETS and NETS search algorithms were modified to increase the range of search for stopping sets with larger size at the expense of losing the exhaustiveness of the search. The proposed technique was applied to a large number of LDPC codes, and lower and upper bounds on smin, and in many cases the exact value of smin, were obtained in a matter of seconds or minutes. Many of such codes are
4We believe that the result reported in [28] should be a typographical error. 5This is the only run-time reported in [28]. The run-time is for a standard desktop computer with a 2.67-GHz processor.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1032

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019

out of the reach of the existing search-based algorithms that often have practical constraints on the block length, rate or the degree distribution of the codes that they can handle.
In general, for a fixed degree distribution and range of search, the worst-case computational complexity of the proposed search algorithms for finding NETSs and stopping sets is linear in the code’s block length n. The average complexity of finding stopping sets, however, is constant in n, if the simple cycles required as the input for the search algorithm are available.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the Associate Editor and the reviewers for their constructive comments which improved the presentation of the paper.
REFERENCES
[1] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “Bounds on the minimum distance of punctured quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 4584–4597, Jul. 2013.
[2] A. Dehghan and A. H. Banihashemi, “On the Tanner graph cycle distribution of random LDPC, random protograph-based LDPC, and random quasi-cyclic LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 4438–4451, Jun. 2018.
[3] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[4] M. Esmaeili and M. J. Amoshahy, “On the stopping distance of array code parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 3488–3493, Aug. 2009.
[5] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization and efficient exhaustive search of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 323–326, Mar. 2015.
[6] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for leafless elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6713–6736, Dec. 2016.
[7] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Characterization of elementary trapping sets in irregular LDPC codes and the corresponding efficient exhaustive search algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 3411–3430, May 2018.
[8] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Lower bounds on the size of smallest elementary and non-elementary trapping sets in variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1905–1908, Sep. 2017.
[9] M. Hirotomo, Y. Konishi, and M. Morii, “On the probabilistic computation algorithm for the minimum-size stopping sets of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 295–299.
[10] X.-Y. Hu and E. Eleftheriou, “A probabilistic subspace approach to the minimal stopping set problem,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Rel. Topics and 6th Int. ITG-Conf. Source Channel Coding, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006, pp. 1–6.
[11] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[12] M. K. Krishnan and P. Shankar, “Computing the stopping distance of a Tanner graph is NP-hard,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 2278–2280, Jun. 2007.
[13] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5188–5203, Sep. 2014.
[14] D. Mackay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. Accessed: Aug. 20, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/ mackay/codes/data.html
[15] D. Mackay and D. Mackay’s. Gallager Code Resources. Accessed: Aug. 20, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/ mackay/codes

[16] A. Orlitsky, R. Urbanke, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping sets and the girth of Tanner graphs,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun./Jul. 2002, p. 2.
[17] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[18] G. Richter, “Finding small stopping sets in the Tanner graphs of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Rel. Topics, 6th Int. ITGConf. Source Channel Coding, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006, pp. 1–5.
[19] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2000, pp. 248–257.
[20] E. Rosnes and Ø. Ytrehus, “An efficient algorithm to find all small-size stopping sets of low-density parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4167–4178, Sep. 2009.
[21] E. Rosnes, O. Ytrehus, M. A. Ambroze, and M. Tomlinson, “Addendum to ‘an efficient algorithm to find all small-size stopping sets of lowdensity parity-check matrices,”’ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 164–171, Jan. 2012.
[22] E. Rosnes, M. A. Ambroze, and M. Tomlinson, “On the minimum/stopping distance of array low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5204–5214, Sep. 2014.
[23] J. Stern, “A method for finding codewords of small weight,” in Coding Theory and Applications, G. Cohen and J. Wolfmann, Eds. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 1989, pp. 106–113.
[24] R. M. Tanner, T. D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Commun. Theory Appl., Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001, pp. 365–370.
[25] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[26] A. Tasdighi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. R. Sadeghi, “Efficient search of girth-optimal QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1552–1564, Apr. 2016.
[27] A. Tasdighi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M.-R. Sadeghi, “Symmetrical constructions for regular girth-8 QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 14–22, Jan. 2017.
[28] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient algorithms to find all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf., Houston, TX, USA, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[29] C. C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Finding all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1976–1999, May 2009.
[30] IEEE Standard for Information Technology–Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Specific Requirements—Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications Amendment 5: Enhancements for Higher Throughput, IEEE Standard 802.11n-2009, Oct. 2009.
[31] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems–Amendment for Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands, IEEE Standard 802.16e-2005 and 802.16-2004/Cor 1-2005, Feb. 2006.
[32] TM Synchronization and Channel Coding, Standard Rec. 131.0-B-2, Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems, Reston, VA, USA, Aug. 2011. [Online]. Available: http://public.ccsds.org/publications/ archive/131x0b2ec1.pdf
Yoones Hashemi (S’14) received the B.Sc. degree from Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran, in 2010, and the M.A.Sc. degree from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 2013, and the Ph.D. degree from Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 2017, all in electrical engineering. He is the recipient of the Senate Medal for outstanding academic achievement at Carleton University. He is currently working at Huawei Canada, Ottawa. His research interests include graph theory, coding theory and wireless communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT SEARCH OF NETSs OF LDPC CODES

1033

Amir H. Banihashemi (S’90–A’98–M’03–SM’04) received the B.A.Sc. degree (Hons.) in electrical engineering from the Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 1988, the M.A.Sc. degree (Hons.) in communications engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 1997. From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, where he was a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada Post-Doctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering, Carleton University, in 1998, where he is currently a Professor with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include coding and information theory, digital and wireless communications, network coding, theory and

implementation of communication algorithms, and compressed sensing and sampling.
He was the Director of the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems Center, Carleton University, from 2005 to 2013. He has been involved in many international conferences as the chair, a member of Technical Program Committee, and a member of organizing committee. He served as the Co-Chair of the Communication Theory Symposium of Globecom07, the TPC Co-Chair of the Information Theory Workshop 2007, a member of the organizing committee for the International Symposium on Information Theory 2008, and the Co-Chair of the Canadian Workshop on Information Theory 2009. He was a member of NSERC’s Electrical and Computer Engineering Evaluation Group from 2013 to 2016, the last two years as a Section Chair. He was also a two-time recipient of NSERC Discovery Accelerator Supplement in 2008 and 2013. He served as an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2003 to 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:43:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

