 
 
  
Abstract— This paper presents a partially parallel low-density 
parity-check (LDPC) decoder designed for the 5G New Radio 
(NR) standard. The design is using a multi-block parallel 
architecture with a flooding schedule. The decoder can support 
any code rates and code lengths up to the lifting size Zmax= 96. To 
compensate for the dropped throughput associated with the 
smaller Z values, the design can double and quadruple its 
parallelism when lifting sizes Z≤ 48 and Z≤ 24 are selected 
respectively. Therefore, the decoder can process up to eight frames 
and restore the throughput to the maximum. To facilitate the 
design’s architecture, a new variable node for decoding the 
extended parity bits existing in the lower code rates is proposed. 
The FPGA implementation of the decoder results in a throughput 
of 2.1 Gbps decoding the 11/12 code rate. Additionally, the 
synthesized decoder using the 28 nm TSMC technology, achieves 
a maximum clock frequency of 526 MHz and a throughput of 13.46 
Gbps. The core decoder occupies 1.03 mm2, and the power 
consumption is 229 mW. 
 
Index Terms—LDPC decoder, 5G, multi-block parallel, shift 
network, lifting size, throughput 
I. INTRODUCTION 
With the introduction of 5G and its wide range of supported 
code rates and lifting values, having a reasonable size and 
flexible decoder is demanding. Two types of forward error 
correction codes are deployed in 5G [1]. Polar codes are used 
for decoding the control channel, and low-density parity check 
(LDPC) codes [2] are used for decoding the data channel. 
Compared to the previously defined standards, such as IEEE 
802.16e and IEEE 802.11ad, where each code rate has its own 
parity matrix, the base graph in 5G can be used to implement 
different code rates. There are two base graphs (BG) defined for 
5G, BG1, and BG2 [3]. BG1 is a 46×68 matrix where the 
mother code is an embedded 4×26 sub-matrix. The first 22 
columns in BG1 include the information part of the base parity 
matrix. The lifting size Z can be selected from sets of values 
defined by the standard with the minimum of Z=2 and 
maximum of Z=384 [4]. On the encoder side, the first 2×Z 
columns containing the information part are always punctured, 
and the rest of the data is transmitted. The mother code in BG1 
yields the highest code rate of 11/12. The extended section of 
the matrix provides additional parity bits to improve the 
decoding performance in higher channel signal-to-noise ratio 
(SNR) conditions while yielding a lower code rate. The lower 
limit code rate for BG1 is 1/3. On the other hand, BG2 is a 
42×52 matrix in which the information part is included in the  
 
 
 
first ten columns. BG2’s code rate can vary between 1/5 and 
2/3. The decoding strategy in this work is implemented on the 
BG1. However, because of similarities between BG1 and BG2, 
the same approach can be applied for decoding BG2.  
Flooding and layered decoding are the most common 
schedules used in LDPC decoders [5]. In BG1, since the first 
four layers contain the information, they always need to be 
decoded. Compared to other layers, the first four layers have 
more common nodes, and thus data dependency between them 
is more evident. Consequently, in a multi-block parallel 
architecture, increasing the parallelism of the blocks makes the 
layered decoding more challenging to implement. This occurs 
because managing memory access times becomes a difficult 
task, and if not properly scheduled, it can lead to an increased 
number of stalls. For this reason, in this work, flooding is 
favored over layered decoding.  
In a partially parallel architecture, the shift network is 
responsible for connecting the variable nodes (VN) to the check 
nodes (CN) in the correct order. The shift network has a key 
role in defining the reconfigurability, parallelism, area, and 
routing delay of a decoder. Although introducing flexibility to 
a decoder for supporting different code lengths is desirable, it 
also increases the shift network’s area and requires a more 
complex control unit for generating shift signals. In such 
designs, regardless of the Z value, the same number of clock 
cycles per iteration is required. Since throughput has a direct 
relation with the lifting size, selecting a smaller Z value will 
drop the decoder’s throughput. Moreover, since the number of 
2×2 switches is initially defined to support a Zmax × Zmax input, 
Z values smaller than Zmax will face the same number of 
switching stages. This results in a longer routing network 
compared to a design that is purposefully tailored to support a 
single smaller Z value.  5G code length is larger than the 
previously defined wireless standards and supports a wider 
range of code rates and code lengths. So, we need to keep a 
reasonable balance between the hardware area, throughput, 
power consumption, and the flexibility of the decoder. 
In this paper, a multi-block parallel decoder specific to the 
5G parity matrix is proposed. For lifting values smaller than 
Zmax/2 the decoder provides two decoding strategies. In the first 
option, similar to the conventional decoders, the unused CNs 
and VNs are disabled to save power. This will also result in a 
lower throughput compared to when Z=Zmax. In the second 
option, depending on the code length, the decoder can increase 
its parallelism and reuse the remaining CNs and VNs to process 
additional frames and maintain the throughput at maximum. 
Sina Pourjabar, Gwan S. Choi 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 
Email: {pourjabar, gwanchoi}@tamu.edu 
A High-Throughput Multi-Mode LDPC Decoder for 
5G NR 
 
 
The design also introduces a smaller variable node unit specific 
to processing the diagonal parity extension for lower code rates 
in 5G.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
explains the decoding strategy based on the BG1 parity matrix. 
It also describes the CN and VN architectures. A simplified 
architecture for decoding the extended VNs is also proposed. 
Section III explains the shift network architecture supporting 
any shift value and any Z size up to Zmax=96. Additionally, it 
explains how the shift network can help increase the design’s 
parallelism and compensate for the low throughput when 
smaller Z values are selected. Section IV discusses the top-level 
decoder and the FPGA implementation using Virtex 7 and post-
synthesis using the 28 nm technology. The design is also 
compared with other works. Finally, section V concludes the 
paper. 
II. ARCHITECTURE 
A. Check Node  
The CN supports up to 16 inputs and is optimized for the BG1 
parity matrix. Evaluating the connection graph in Fig. 2 shows 
that the first 26 columns always participate in decoding. 
Compared to IEEE 802.16e and IEEE 802.11ad, the base parity 
matrix size in 5G is large. Therefore, doing a fully parallel VN 
implementation in a row-centric structure will be inefficient in 
terms of hardware utilization. Hence, at each clock cycle, 13×Z 
VN messages equal to a half layer are loaded into the CNs. 
Also, decoding the extended parity bits requires additional Z 
VN messages to be loaded into the CNs. 
The decoder is implemented in a multi-block parallel fashion. 
In Fig. 1, a CN receives each layer’s messages from the VNs in 
two clock cycles. The input memory holds the previous 
iteration messages sent from a CN to a VN. Before the 
subtraction of new data from the old data, the hard decision 
result is checked for error detection and the possibility of the 
early decoding termination if no errors were found. If there are 
errors in the data and the maximum number of iterations have 
not been reached, the decoding will continue. The 16-input 
comparator is implemented using the tree structure algorithm 
[6] and works in a serial manner. Initially, it receives the first 
half layer data to find the first and second minimum values as 
well as the index for the first minimum value. Afterward, the 
results are sent back into the comparator input to be included in 
the second half layer comparison. The final minimum values 
for each layer are stored in the minimum values registers and 
the index register. After storing the minimum values for all 
layers, the second stage of the CN starts to apply offset and 
compensate for the overestimation of the Min-Sum algorithm. 
Subsequently, the updated values are directed to the VNs as 
well as the input memory in the CN. As shown in Fig. 1, to 
avoid stalls inside the CN, two frames are processed at a time. 
While the incoming frame's minimum values are being 
processed, the outgoing frame values are sign multiplied and 
sent to the VNs.   
B. 
Variable Node 
Two types of VNs are deployed for the 5G decoder. The 
primary VNs shown in Fig. 3(a) have two registers. At the 
beginning of each iteration, the intrinsic channel information 
and the updated messages from the CNs are added together. In 
case of an overflow, the output will saturate to a pre-defined 
Fig. 2. 5G parity matrix structure for the base graph 1. 
Fig. 1. Check node architecture with early decoding termination.  
 
 
value. The summation result is stored in the incoming frame 
register. A feedback loop helps to add each layer’s data with the 
next layers accordingly. Once the required number of layers are 
processed, the accumulation results are forwarded into the 
outgoing frame register to be loaded into the CNs in the next 
clock cycles.  
The second type of VN novel in this work is depicted in Fig. 
3(b). The extended VNs (EVN) are utilized for decoding 
columns 27 through 68 required for lower code rates. The 
extended section of the parity matrix in 5G shows that each 
EVN has only one CN connection, and therefore, there is no 
need for the accumulation register or the feedback loop. This 
will also result in a more straightforward controller unit for the 
EVN. The EVN’s architecture can be simplified to an adder and 
a single memory unit with the depth of 42 to hold messages 
from columns 27 to 68. Therefore, there is a simultaneous read 
and write from the memory for two different frames. Z EVNs 
process one column at each clock cycle. A single EVN utilizes 
16 LUTs and six flip-flops in an FPGA implementation, while 
a VN utilizes 38 LUTs and 36 flip-flops. This VN simplification 
is unique to 5G. Because unlike 5G, IEEE802.11n and IEEE 
802.11ad have different base parity matrices for each code rate, 
and therefore a comprehensive simplification of parity VN 
applicable to all code rates is not possible. The inclusion of a 
single diagonal extension in the 5G parity matrix shown in Fig. 
2 helps create a unified parity matrix that supports all code rates. 
This inherent compatibility also benefits the decoding process 
in terms of reducing the initial decoding latency [7]. The 
decoder can start decoding as soon as it receives the mother 
code, which is the shortest code length. 
C. 
Shift Network 
Selecting an appropriate shift network has a significant role 
in reducing the path delay between the CNs and VNs. It can also 
help promote the flexibility of the decoder. Benes [8], Banyan 
and QSN [9] are the common networks used for shifting the 
messages cyclically. The Benes network has a non-blocking 
property, meaning N inputs can be mapped to any of the N 
different outputs. The network consists of 2×2 switches where 
each switch is made of two multiplexers in parallel. An N×N 
Benes network contains 2𝑁× log2(𝑁) −𝑁 multiplexers in 
which  2 × log2(𝑁) −1  of the multiplexers make up the 
blocking property. This means that in some of the arbitrary 
mappings, some inputs may need to access the same switch 
output in their path from input to the final output. However, in 
a cyclically shifting scheme, blocking does not occur for the 
Banyan network. Compared to the Benes network, the Banyan 
network has a shorter critical path consisting of log2(𝑁)  stages 
and can be implemented using 𝑁× log2 𝑁 multiplexers.  
QSN network is another type of shifting network in which the 
shift network itself is divided into a left shift, a right shift and a 
merge network. QSN also has a shorter critical path made of 
log2(𝑁) + 1 stages compared to the Benes network. An N×N 
Banyan network with Z enabled input, can perform cyclic shift 
only if all inputs are utilized (Z=N). Whereas an N×N QSN 
network can still perform cyclic shifts when Z≤ N and shift 
value (SV) ≤ Z.   
If a decoder is targeted for one code length, because of 
having a smaller footprint and less complexity, the Banyan 
network is the preferable option compared to QSN. However, 
for 
supporting 
multiple 
code 
lengths 
and 
further 
reconfigurability, QSN network is required. [10] introduced a 
variant of the Banyan network, that similar to the QSN network 
can support cyclical shifts for Z ≤N.  As shown in Fig. 4, in this 
network, a duplicate of the original Banyan network and an 
additional multiplexer stage are added to the design. For an 
N×N switch with Z active inputs and shift value SV, the 
original network shifts inputs by SV, whereas the duplicate 
network shifts by SV+ (N-Z). Basically, each network can shift 
a portion of the active inputs correctly, and in the last stage, the 
multiplexers select the correct shift results between the two 
networks. 
Fig. 3. (a) Primary variable node architecture for decoding the mother code. 
(b) Secondary variable node for decoding the extended parity bits. 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 4. N×N Banyan variant network. Shift value (SV) ≤ active inputs (Z)≤ N 
[10]. 
 
 
 
 
Network structures proposed in [9] and [10] can support any 
expansion factor Z≤ N=Zmax and have a similar critical path.  
The QSN network uses fewer multiplexers than the Banyan 
variant. However, because of their additional reconfigurability,  
both networks still have large footprints. The Banyan variant 
network has an additional benefit that makes it suitable for 
designs requiring high throughput. In a block parallel decoder 
supporting different code lengths, selecting a lifting size smaller 
than Zmax translates into not using part of the shift network and 
disabling (Zmax-Z) CNs. This will also affect the decoder’s 
throughput. A decoder’s throughput, regardless of its 
architecture, is defined by:  
 
Throughput= Decoded frames per second× Base matrix size× Z.     (1) 
 
As equation (1) shows, smaller Z values reduce the 
throughput of the decoder. An advantage of the Banyan variant 
over the QSN is that the shift network in the Banyan variant can 
be reconfigured to work as multiple independent smaller 
networks. This way, if Zmax/4 < Z ≤ Zmax/2, each Zmax × Zmax 
network can perform as two smaller Zmax/2 × Zmax/2 shift 
 
 
networks. Therefore, each smaller network can process a 
different frame, and the total throughput is doubled. As Fig. 5 
illustrates, for a shift network of Zmax=96, two Z=48 can output 
the equal amount of throughput.  Likewise, any Z between 25 
and 48 can use two independent decoders, each decoding a 
different frame. Applying the same approach, for Z≤ Zmax/4, 
four smaller networks can be utilized.  
In our proposed decoder, this switching technique is 
incorporated to increase the parallelism and reuse the unused 
part of the shift network and the disabled CNs and VNs to 
restore the decoding throughput to the maximum. 
III.  DECODER IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS 
As shown in Fig. 6, there are two types of VNs in the design. 
The majority of the VNs have the architecture shown in Fig. 
3(a) and are connected to the CNs via a shift network. Decoding 
lower code rates requires extended Log-likelihood ratios 
(LLRs) to be loaded into the EVNs. Each EVN has only one 
connection to a CN. The 5G parity shift sets show that the cyclic 
shift value between the EVNs and the CNs is equal to zero. 
Therefore, EVNs can connect to CNs without the need for a  
 
Proposed 
[11] 
[12] 
[13] 
Code Length 
2496-6528 
2304 
648-1944  
26112 
Standard 
5G NR 
IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX) 
IEEE802.11n (Wi-Fi) 
5G NR 
Decoding Algorithm 
Offset Min-Sum 
Min-Sum 
Offset Min-Sum 
Offset Min-Sum 
Architecture  
Partially Parallel 
Partially Parallel 
Partially Parallel 
Fully Parallel 
Frequency (MHz) 
82 
260 
116 
102 
Quantization (Bits) 
5 
6 
6 
7 
Maximum Iterations 
10 
20 
10 
10 
Throughput (Mbps) 
490.3-2168 
290 
617-1808 
2900 
LUT 
225191 
- 
67204 
1448762 
Block RAM 
96 
38 
- 
- 
Decoding Schedule 
Flooding 
Flooding 
Layered 
Layered 
FPGA 
Virtex 7- XC7VX690T 
Virtex 7-VX485T 
Virtex4- XC4vlx160 
Virtex Ultrascale+ 
Fig. 5. A 96×96 shift network. When required each sub network can work as 
an independent shift network. 
Fig. 6. Partially parallel architecture of the proposed 5G decoder.  
TABLE I 
FPGA RESULTS COMPARISON 
 
 
 
 
shift network. These VNs are only enabled for decoding a lower 
rate code. When there is no connection between a CN and a VN, 
the CN comparator's input will be saturated. Subsequently, the 
unconnected VN will be disabled for reading and writing. 
The proposed architecture is implemented in Xilinx Virtex 7  
FPGA. Messages throughout the VN, CN, and the shift network 
are quantized to 5 bits. The shift network path consists of seven 
stages, and to further increase the throughput of the decoder, the 
output of the network is pipelined. The critical path of design is 
between the first memory unit in the CN and the output of the 
comparator unit. In our FPGA simulation, this memory is 
implemented using block RAMs, which helps reduce the 
number of LUTs used as memory. Table I compares the 
proposed work with the other reported architectures. Decoding 
the code rate 11/12 requires 18 clock cycles for each iteration.  
With the maximum number of iterations set to 10 and a clock 
frequency of 82 MHz, a throughput of 2.1 Gbps is achievable. 
Fig. 7, compares the bit error rate (BER) performance of 
multiple code rates assuming binary phase-shift keying (BPSK)  
 
 
 
modulation over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) 
channel. To provide a better estimate of the area and the power 
consumption, the decoder is also synthesized using the 
available TSMC 28 nm technology. A comparison of the result 
is presented in Table II.  
In this section, the parallelism and the flexibility of our 
decoder are compared to other works. The decoder in [11] uses 
a barrel shifter that only supports Z=96 and half-rate WiMAX 
(1152, 2304). In [12], each sub-block in the parity matrix of 
IEEE 802.11n is shifted using a barrel shifter and a RAM. The 
Barrel shifter input size is equal to the minimum supported 
lifting value (Zmin=27) to help minimize the shift network area. 
When Z=Zmin, cyclic shifts happen in one clock cycle. For Z=54 
and Z=Zmax=81, the shift network uses a RAM to store the 
shifted values. Later, an address generator helps read the 
messages in the correct order from the RAM. As mentioned in 
[12], this process creates latencies of two and three clock cycles 
in the shift network for Z=54 and Z=81, respectively. In [14] 
and [15], the parity matrix of IEEE 802.11ad only supports 
Z=42 and the code length of 672 bits. This is an inherent 
advantage of the parity matrix. As a result, the decoder requires 
a smaller and less complex shift network. Consequently, a 
shorter critical path and a higher throughput can be achieved. 
The decoder in [16] supports all three lifting values and four 
code rates defined in the IEEE802.11n standard. In this design 
for transferring messages from VN to CN and from CN to VN, 
only one shift network is used. This results in a smaller shift 
network area. However, since CN and VN can’t access the shift 
network simultaneously, additional stalls are introduced into 
the design when decoding multiple frames concurrently. 
Decoding codes with smaller Z values will also reduce the total 
throughput since the shift network doesn’t support multi-frame 
parallelism. 
Compared to the other works, our proposed 5G decoder can 
act as multiple separate decoders when Z<=Zmax/2 and make the 
overall throughput less dependent on the lifting value.  
IV. CONCLUSION  
This paper proposed a five-stage pipelined multi-mode LDPC 
decoder for the 5G NR standard. The design is capable of 
 
Proposed  
[14] 
[15] 
[16] 
Technology(nm) 
28 
28 
40 
90 
Standard 
5G NR 
IEEE 802.11ad 
IEEE 802.11ad 
IEEE 802.11n/ac 
Maximum Code Length 
6528 
672 
672 
1944 
Supported Lifting Values (Z) 
Z≤ 96 
Z=42 
Z=42 
Z=27, 54, 81 
Decoding Schedule 
Flooding 
Flooding 
Flooding 
Layered 
Quantization (Bits) 
5 
5 
5 
4 
Maximum Iterations 
10 
10 
7 
10 
Pipeline Stages 
4 
8 
3 
5 
Frequency (MHz) 
526 
202 
220 
555 
Throughput (Gbps) 
13.46 
6.78 
6.16 
4.5 
Core Area (mm2) 
1.03 
1.99 
0.8 
4.88 
Voltage (V) 
1 
0.9 
1.1 
- 
Power (mW) 
229 
104 
203 
523 
Energy Efficiency (pJ/bit) 
17.01 
15.34 
32.95 
116 
Implementation 
Synthesis 
Fabricated 
Fabricated 
Place and route 
Decoding Algorithm 
Offset Min-Sum 
Min-Sum 
Min-Sum 
Modified Min-Sum 
TABLE II 
SYNTHESIS RESULTS AND PERFORMANCE SUMMARY 
Fig. 7. BER comparison for Z=96 and selected rates 11/12, 1/2 and 1/3. 
Decoding performed using Offset Min-Sum algorithm with the offset 
value=0.5, 5- bit quantization and 10 iterations. 
 
 
decoding all the code rates supported by the standard and any 
lifting values up to Zmax=96. Deploying the flooding schedule, 
a simplified VN for decoding the extended parity bits for the 
lower code rates is introduced. Additionally, the proposed 
decoder helps minimize the effect of selecting smaller Z values 
on reducing the throughput. For Z ≤ Zmax/2 and Z ≤ Zmax/4, the 
decoder can reconfigure the shift network and reuse the 
unutilized resources to increase the number of processed frames 
and improve the total throughput. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  F. Hamidi-Sepehr, A. Nimbalker, and G. Ermolaev, "Analysis of 5G 
LDPC codes rate-matching design," in 2018 IEEE 87th Vehicular 
Technology Conference (VTC Spring), 2018: IEEE, pp. 1-5.  
[2] R. Gallager, "Low-density parity-check codes," IRE Transactions on 
information theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, 1962. 
[3] J. H. Bae, A. Abotabl, H.-P. Lin, K.-B. Song, and J. Lee, "An overview of 
channel coding for 5G NR cellular communications," APSIPA 
Transactions on Signal and Information Processing, vol. 8, 2019. 
[4] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, "Design of low-density parity check codes 
for 5G new radio," IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28-
34, 2018. 
[5] P. Hailes, L. Xu, R. G. Maunder, B. M. Al-Hashimi, and L. Hanzo, "A 
survey of FPGA-based LDPC decoders," IEEE Communications Surveys 
& Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1098-1122, 2015. 
[6] C.-L. Wey, M.-D. Shieh, and S.-Y. Lin, "Algorithms of finding the first 
two minimum values and their hardware implementation," IEEE 
Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, 
pp. 3430-3437, 2008. 
[7] S. Pourjabar and G. S. Choi, "CVR: A Continuously Variable Rate LDPC 
Decoder Using Parity Check Extension for Minimum Latency," Journal of 
Signal Processing Systems, pp. 1-8, 2020. 
[8] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, "Low-complexity switch network for 
reconfigurable LDPC decoders," IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale 
Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 85-94, 2009. 
[9] X. Chen, S. Lin, and V. Akella, "QSN—A simple circular-shift network 
for reconfigurable quasi-cyclic LDPC decoders," IEEE Transactions on 
Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 782-786, 2010. 
[10]  X. Peng, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, F. Maehara, and S. Goto, "High parallel 
variation banyan network based permutation network for reconfigurable 
LDPC decoder," in ASAP 2010-21st IEEE International Conference on 
Application-specific Systems, Architectures and Processors, 2010: IEEE, 
pp. 233-238.  
[11]  A. Amaricai, O. Boncalo, and I. Mot, "Memory efficient FPGA 
implementation 
for 
flooded 
LDPC 
decoder," 
in 
2015 
23rd 
Telecommunications Forum Telfor (TELFOR), 2015: IEEE, pp. 500-503.  
[12]  S. Kumawat, R. Shrestha, N. Daga, and R. Paily, "High-throughput LDPC-
decoder architecture using efficient comparison techniques & dynamic 
multi-frame processing schedule," IEEE Transactions on Circuits and 
Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1421-1430, 2015. 
[13]  A. Verma and R. Shrestha, "A New VLSI Architecture of Next-Generation 
QC-LDPC Decoder for 5G New-Radio Wireless-Communication 
Standard," in 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems 
(ISCAS), 2020: IEEE, pp. 1-5.  
[14]  M. Milicevic and P. G. Gulak, "A multi-Gb/s frame-interleaved LDPC 
decoder with path-unrolled message passing in 28-nm CMOS," IEEE 
Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 26, no. 
10, pp. 1908-1921, 2018. 
[15]  H. Motozuka, N. Yosoku, T. Sakamoto, T. Tsukizawa, N. Shirakata, and 
K. Takinami, "A 6.16 Gb/s 4.7 pJ/bit/iteration LDPC decoder for IEEE 
802.11 ad standard in 40nm LP-CMOS," in 2015 IEEE Global Conference 
on Signal and Information Processing (GlobalSIP), 2015: IEEE, pp. 1289-
1292.  
[16]  I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras, "A reconfigurable LDPC decoder 
optimized for 802.11 n/ac applications," IEEE Transactions on Very Large 
Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 182-195, 2017. 
 
