P r o c e e d i n g s o f International Conference on Optical Imaging Sensor and Security , C o i m b a t o r e , T a m i l

VLSI Techniques for Fault secure Encoder and Decoder in Nano Memory Applications

Dr.M.Chandrasekar.
Principal VKS College of Engineering & Technology, Desiyamangalam, Tamilnadu, India, Email ID: chandramu2000@yahoo.co.in
Abstract—Memory are largely affected by soft errors and do so the the encoder and decoder circuitry around the memory. In this paper we address the issue by going for a newly designed FSD with a new class of error correcting codes named EG-LDPC. The mechanism by which the codes detect faults is clearly demonstrated.Larger codes have been used in nano scale and brings about more reliability and low area overhead.
INTRODUCTION Nanotechnology provides smaller, faster, and
lower energy devices which allow more powerful and com-pact circuitry; however, these benefits come with a cost—the nanoscale devices may be less reliable. Thermal- and shot-noise estimations alone suggest that the transient fault rate of an individual nanoscale device (e.g., transistor or nanowire) may be orders of magnitude higher than today’s devices. As a result, we can expect combinational logic to be susceptible to transient faults in addition to storage cells and communication channels. Therefore, the paradigm of protecting only memory cells and assuming the surrounding circuitries (i.e., encoder and decoder) will never introduce errors is no longer valid.
In this paper, we introduce a fault-tolerant nanoscale memory architecture which tolerates transient faults both in the slly affected by torage unit and in the supporting logic (i.e., encoder, decoder (cor-rector), and detector circuitries).
Particularly, we identify a class of error-correcting codes (ECCs) that guarantees the existence of a simple fault-tolerant detector design. This class satisfies a new, restricted definition for ECCs which guarantees that the ECC codeword has an appropriate redundancy structure such that it can detect multiple errors occurring in both the stored codeword in memory and the surrounding circuitries. We call this type of error-correcting codes, fault-secure

P.Dhinakar
Assistant Professor/EEE Chettinad College of Engineering& Technology Karur, Tamilnadu, India, Email ID: dhinakarpalani@yahoo.co.in
detector capable ECCs (FSD-ECC). The paritycheck Matrix of an FSD-ECC has a particular structure that the decoder circuit, generated from the parity-check Ma-trix, is Fault-Secure. The ECCs we identify in this class are close to optimal in rate and distance, suggesting we can achieve this property without sacrificing traditional ECC metrics.
We use the fault-secure detection unit to design a fault-tol-erant encoder and corrector by monitoring their outputs. If a de-tector detects an error in either of these units, that unit must re-peat the operation to generate the correct output vector. Using this retry technique, we can correct potential transient errors in the encoder and corrector outputs and provide a fully fault-tol-erant memory system. The novel contributions of this paper include the following: 1) a mathematical definition of ECCs which have
simple FSD which do not requiring the addition of further redun-dancies in order to achieve the fault-secure property (see Section IV);
2) identification and proof that an existing LDPC code (EG-LDPC) has the FSD property
3) a detailed ECC encoder, decoder, and corrector design that can be built out of fault-prone circuits when protected by this fault-secure detector also implemented in fault-prone circuits and guarded with a simple OR gate built out of reliable circuitry
To further show the practical viability of these codes, we work through the engineering design of a nanoscale memory system based on these encoders and decoders including the following:
• memory banking strategies and scrubbing • reliability analysis
• unified ECC scheme for both permanent memory bit de-fects and transient upsets

#31921©2A0u1th3oriIzEedElEicensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This allows us to report the area, performance, and reliability achieved for systems based on these encoders and decoders . We start by reviewing the related work to put this development in context.
Traditionally, memory cells were the only circuitry susceptible to transient faults, and all the supporting circuitries around the memory (i.e., encoders and decoders) were assumed to be fault-free. As a result most of prior work designs for fault-tolerant memory systems focused on protecting only the memory cells. One approach to avoid the reliability problem in the surrounding circuitries is to implement these units with more reliable devices (e.g., more reliable CMOS technologies . However, from an area, performance, and power consumption point of view it is beneficial to implement encoders and decoders with scaled feature size or nanotechnology devices. Consequently, it is important to remove the reliability barrier for these logic circuits so they can be implemented with scaled feature size or nanotechnology devices. Almost all of the proposed fault tolerant encoders and de coders so far, use the conventional fault tolerant scheme (e.g.logic replication or concurrent parity prediction) to protect the encoder and corrector circuitry. That is, they add additional logic to check the correctness of the circuit calculation. In contrast, the technique introduced in this work exploits the existing structure of the ECC to guarantee the fault-secure property of the detector unit without adding redundant computations.
. In contrast, our design detects multiple errors in the encoder and corrector units. Furthermore, the faultsecure detector and checking logic for our FSD-ECC codes can be automatically
Generated from the already known parity-check matrix. This fault secure detector delivers protection without requiring additional fault-tolerance circuitry. In this section, we outline our memory system design that can tolerate errors in any part of the system, including the storage unit and encoder and corrector circuits using the fault-secure detector. For a particular ECC used for memory protection, let be the maximum number of error bits that the code can correct and be the maximum number of error bits that it can detect.
System overview
. This design is feasible when the following two fundamental properties are satisfied: 1)any single error in the encoder or corrector circuitry can atmost corrupt a single codeword bit

(i.e., no single error can propagate to multiple

codeword bits);

2) there is a fault secure detector that can detect any

combination of errors in the received codeword along

with errors

in the detector circuit. This fault-

secure detector can verify

the correctness of the encoder and corrector

operation.The first property is easily satisfied by

preventing logic sharing between the circuits

producing each codeword bit or information bit in the

encoder and the corrector respectively. we define the

requirements for a code to satisfy the second

property.

An overview of our proposed reliable memory

system is shown in Fig. and is described in the

following. The information bits are fed into the

encoder to encode the information vector, and the

fault secure detector of the encoder verifies the

validity of the encoded vector. If the detector detects

any error, the encoding operation must be redone to

generate the correct codeword. The codeword is then

stored in the memory. During memory access

operation, the stored codewords will be accessed

from the memory unit. Codewords are susceptible to

transient faults while they are stored in the memory;

therefore a corrector unit is designed to correct

potential errors in the

retrieved codewords. In our design all the memory

words pass through the corrector and any potential

error in the memory words will be corrected. Similar

to the encoder unit, a fault-secure detector monitors

the operation of the corrector unit. All the units are

implemented in fault-prone, nanoscale circuitry; the

only component which must be implemented in

reliable circuitry are two OR gates that accumulate

the syndrome bits for the detectors

ECCS WITH FAULT SECURE DETECTOR

In this section, we present our novel, restricted ECC defini-tion for our fault-secure detector capable codes. Before starting the details of our new definition we briefly review basic linear ECCs.

Let

be the -bit information vector that

will be encoded into an -bit codeword,

.

For linear codes, the encoding operation essentially

performs the following vector-matrix multiplication:

where is a generator matrix. The validity of a

received encoded vector can be checked with the

Parity-Check matrix, which is an

binary

matrix named . The checking or detecting

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FIG:1

operation is basically summarized as the following vector-matrix multiplication:

-bit vector is called the syndrome vector. A syndrome vector is zero if is a valid codeword, and nonzero if is an erroneous codeword. Each code is uniquely specified by its generator matrix or paritycheck matrix.
G = [I: X]

A code is a systematic code if every codeword

consists of the original -bit information vector followed by parity bits .where is a identity

matrix and is a

matrix that generates the

parity-bits. The advantage of using systematic codes is that there is no need for a decoder circuit to extract

the information bits. The information bits are simply
avail able in the first bits of any encoded vector. A code is said to be a cyclic code if for any
codeword , all the cyclic shifts of the codeword are still valid codewords. A code is cyclic iff the rows of

its parity-check matrix and generator matrix are the cyclic shifts of their first rows.
The minimum distance of an ECC, , is the

minimum number of code bits that are different

between any two codewords. The maximum number

of errors that an ECC can detect is , and the

maximum number that it corrects is d/2. Any ECC is

represented with a triple

, representing code

length, information bit length, and minimum

distance, respectively.

The core of the detector operation is to generate the syn-drome vector, which is basically

implementing the following vector-matrix multiplication on the received encoded vector and parity-check matrix :

Efficiency of EG-LDPC
It is important to compare the rate of the EGLDPC code with other codes to understand if the interesting properties of low-density and FSD-ECC come at the expense of lower code rates. We compare the code rates of the EG-LDPC codes that we use here with an achievable code rate upper bound (Gilbert-Var-shamov bound) and a lower bound (Hamming bound). Table I shows the upper and lower bounds on the code overhead, for each of the used EG-LDPC. The EG-LDPC codes are no larger than the achievable Gilbert bound for the same and
value, and they are not much larger than the Hamming bounds. Conse-quently, we see that we achieve the FSD property without sac-rificing code compactness.
DESIGN STRUCTURE
In this section, we provide the design structure of the en-coder, corrector, and detector units of our proposed fault-tol-erant memory system. We also present the implementation of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

these units on a sub-lithographic, nanowire-based substrate. Be-fore going into the design structure details we start with a brief overview of the sub-lithographic memory architecture model.

• Increasing

reduces the number of spare

memory rows (e.g., nanowires) required .

• Since

defines where we partition the

redundancy in the error correcting code between

defect tolerance and fault tolerance, larger

means that the code has weaker residual

capability for tolerating transient faults and

therefore has lower system reliability.

• The decrease in reliability which comes

from increasing

also increases overhead cost

for error correction. For fixed ECC, when we reduce

the number of bits available for tolerating transient

faults, we must scrub more frequently to prevent error

accumulation to tolerate the same transient fault rate.

However scrubbing more frequently can reduce

performance. To reduce the impact on the system

perfor-mance, we may need to increase the

parallelism in the scrub-bing operation by increasing

AREA AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

the number of corrector unit, which in turn increases the overall area overhead.

There are three design aspects that are important when designing fault-tolerant designs: system reliability, area overhead, and performance. It is important to see how

these three factors interact and generate various design oints. There are multiple design parameters that determines the

REFERENCES

balance be-tween reliability, area, and performance. Inmong

these parame-ters, those that we keep variable in our

simulations are as fol-lows:

[1] A. DeHon, “Deterministic addressing of nanoscale devices

assembled at sublithographic pitches,” IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol.,

vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 681–687, 2005.

maximum number of defects which exist per

memory word

;

• scrubbing interval ;

[2] A. DeHon, “Nanowire-based programmable architectures,” ACM J. Emerging Technol. Comput. Syst., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 109– 162, 2005.

• cluster size of memory banks for scrubbing .

[3] A. DeHon, S. C. Goldstein, P. J. Kuekes, and P. Lincoln, “Nonphotolithographic nanoscale memory density prospects,” IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 215–228, Feb. 2005.

For a fixed memory size, bank size, and transient fault rate, we find the right value for , , and to minimize area while achieving the desired performance and reliability. First, we re-view the impact of each of these parameters on area, performance, and reliability.
The threshold on the number of defects per memory word effects area, reliability, and performance.

[4] A. DeHon and M. J. Wilson, “Nanowire-based sublithographic programmable logic arrays,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Field-Program. Gate Arrays, Feb. 2004, pp. 123–132.
[5] M. Forshaw, R. Stadler, D. Crawley, and K. Nikolic´, “A short review of nanoelectronic architectures,” Nanotechnology, vol. 15, pp S220–S223, 2004.
[6] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

