1
User-Oriented FEC Decoding Scheme for Wireless Sensor Networks with Star Topologies
Fan Yang† and Xi Zhang‡ †School of Communication and Information Engineering, University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China, E-mail: {yangf byr@yahoo.cn} ‡Networking and Information Systems Laboratory, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA, E-mail: {xizhang@ece.tamu.edu}

Abstract—In recent years, wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have attracted a great deal of research attention from both academia and industry. In most cases, WSNs employ the adaptive forward error correction (FEC) coding schemes dynamically adapting to the channel, while paying less attention to user’s requirements. Sometimes, the decoding delay and the decoding performance of WSNs are more crucial than the power consumption for users. We propose an FEC decoder for the trade-off among decoding delay, complexity, and performance according to user’s needs. The proposed decoder designed for short packet transmission is a two-stage hybrid decoder (TSHD) including a serial min-sum decoder and an adaptive list decoder. For hard decision decoding, our simulation results show that the proposed TSHD scheme outperforms the existing schemes with less average complexity.
Index Terms—M-algorithm, serial min-sum decoder, hybrid decoder, real-time, low-density parity-check codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
W Ireless sensor networks (WSNs) are widely used in industry, medical assistance, video surveillance, etc. In WSNs, a large number of small sensor nodes are deployed surround the sensed object to collect data for users [1]. The most important challenge is to design sensors efficiently to minimize the wireless sensor resource. In order to lower the decoding latency and reduce the transmitting power, WSNs tend to include an forward error correction (FEC) coding to avoid retransmissions [2]. Since the decoding processing may consume much power, the FEC coding is often applied to a star-WSN with sensed data from sensor nodes routed via a central node [3]. The sensor nodes of the star-WSN are energyconstrained, while the central node often has a relatively larger energy resource.
Because a large amount of data need to be processed in the central node, the reduction for its decoding complexity without performance loss is still necessary. Furthermore, wireless environment conditions can be time-varying, the adaptive algorithms are favorable for WSNs scenarios. Moreover, these algorithms should be aware of user’s requirements. We take fire disaster monitoring for instance. Usually, reduction for the power consumption is the primary task. Once the fire disaster
This work was supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant CNS-205726 and the U.S. National Science Foundation CAREER Award under Grant ECCS-0348694.

happens, the data of the real situation should be transmitted to the monitor with low latency and high data precision. Thus, the trade-off among power, latency, and performance is important to user’s needs. Empirically, more power should be consumed for the sake of the low latency and the performance improvement. Due to hardware limitations, we analyze the decoding complexity instead of measuring the power consumption. In [4], convolutional codes were first addressed for WSNs. Later on, algebraic codes such as BCH codes and Reed-Solomon (RS) codes were proposed in [5], and LDPC codes were considered due to its remarkable performance [6].
Convolutional codes are decoded on a trellis using either Viterbi decoding, MAP decoding, or sequential decoding, while M-algorithm decoding remains unexplored for convolutional codes applying to sensor network. Compared with the sequential decoding, the M-algorithm decoding can be implemented with constant storage and complexity for long constraint codes [7]. Moreover, the authors of [8] proved that a systematic feed-forward convolutional code is better than a non-systematic convolutional code when using an M-algorithm decoder, the former allows quick recovery of a lost correct path. They also indicated that M-algorithm with a systematic feed-forward encoder is 2-4 times more efficient than the Viterbi algorithm in terms of survivor paths. On the other hand, BCH and RS codes are decoded using either syndrome decoding, algebraic decoding or chase algorithm decoding.
Usually, the transmitting packet size is often changed according to user’s requirements or specified channel qualities, which can be flexibly adjustable using convolutional codes. LDPC codes decoded based on a bipartite graph use either belief propagation (BP) decoding or simplified version of BP called min-sum decoding. The min-sum decoding requires real additions only, and is suitable to hardware implementation with quantized received values.
As authors of [4] indicated that current commercial radio transceivers are not ideal for WSNs’ applications, the innovative solutions in transceiver design are required to transmit short packets effectively. In recent years, the researchers are interested in convolutional-type codes, such as low density parity check convolutional codes (LDPCCCs), convolutional self-orthogonal codes (CSOCs) and convolutional self-doublyorthogonal codes (CSO2Cs) [9], [10]. In [11], [12], repeataccumulate codes have been used in single-hop or multiple

978-1-4673-5239-0/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2

relay for WSNs. All of the above schemes are decoded by BP algorithm or its simplified versions, however, the memory requirement of these algorithm is very large due to iterative decoding. Moreover, the use of iterative decoding technique is not well suitable to delay-intolerant scenarios, and the ensuring for the independency of the extrinsic information needs transmission long packets.
Traditionally, LDPC decoders and trellis decoders are performed separately based on their own code structures, since convolutional codes decoded by BP algorithms directly always results in poor performance, this is mainly due to a large number of short cycles (especially 4-cycles) in its parity check matrix. In our previous work [13], we proposed a method to design systematic feed-forward convolutional codes with no 4-cycles (SFCC-N4) which has a sparse parity check matrix and is suitable for BP decoding. In this paper, we try to combine the LDPC decoder and the trellis decoder together for application in star-WSNs. In our proposed scheme, the SFCC-N4 code is used as the encoder and its associated decoder is a two-stage hybrid decoder (TSHD) with a modified serial min-sum decoder and an adaptive list decoder. The TSHD has several merits such as adaptive optimization, low average computation without performance loss, suitable for short packet transmissions. As we will show, the TSHD has a good trade-off among complexity, decoding delay, and performance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the TSHD is introduced by presenting the modified serial minsum decoder and the adaptive list decoder, respectively. In Section III, we analyze the decoding complexity of TSHD by comparing it with conventional single M-algorithm decoder (SMAD). Then simulation results are provided, and the tradeoff for adaptive optimization are shown in Section IV. Finally, Section V presents the conclusion.
II. THE TWO-STAGE HYBRID DECODER
Before describing TSHD, it should be emphasized that the concept adaptive optimization is somewhat different from adaptive error control. Fig. 1 shows the transmission from sensor node to central node in a single-hop. The adaptive error control module changes the parameters according to channel conditions. For example, the encoder can increase the code rate or choose less powerful codes when the channel is good, and vice versa. The adaptive optimization module varies parameters followed by user’s requirements or the control signal. If user wants to shorten the decoding delay while maintain the performance, then the adaptive optimization module can increase code rate or apply more powerful codes for the encoder, and can increase the list size for the decoder. That means no matter how good the channel condition is, more power should be consumed for the sake of low latency. Clearly, the priority of adaptive optimization is higher than that of adaptive error control.
In the following, the rate-1/2 binary SFCC-N4 code is considered over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel using BPSK modulation. The codeword c = {cn} is mapped into a bipolar transmitted sequence x = {xn}, for

Sensed Object

Control Signal

User Application Layer

Collecting Data
Source Encoding
SFCC-N4 Encoding

Activate Adaptive N Opimization˛

Link Layer

Adjust the parameters of the encoder

Y
Adaptive Opimization
Module Conversion Between Power and Performance
Conversion Between Power
and Delay

Adjust the parameters of the decoder

Decoded Data Sequence
Source Decoding
Two-Stage Hybird Decoding

BPSK Modulation
Sensor Nodes

Adaptive Error Control

Adjust the parameters of the encoder

Channel Estimation

AWGN Channel

BPSK Demodulation
Central Nodes

Fig. 1. User-oriented adaptive optimization model.

1 ≤ n ≤ 2N . Then the received vector y = x + w, where w = {wn}, and wn is a random variable with zero mean and variance σ2. Let xˆ = {xˆn} be the output binary sequence of the modified serial min-sum decoder, and xˆ[2t−1,2t] = (xˆ2t−1, xˆ2t) is the estimated symbol generated by the modified serial min-sum decoder at time t with a systematic bit xˆ2t−1 and a parity check bit xˆ2t, such that 1 ≤ t ≤ N .
In TSHD, the first stage employs low complexity modified serial min-sum decoder to explore the received vector, and the second stage applies the powerful M-algorithm to correct rest errors. In the modified serial min-sum decoder, the variable nodes are updated one-by-one in sequence and a check node is activated whenever its message is demanded by a neighboring variable node. At the first stage, the modified serial min-sum decoder generates a binary estimated coded sequence, which might not be a valid codeword. Since there is a one-to-one correspondence between a valid codeword and a continuous path in trellis, the adaptive list decoder gradually forms a continuous single path by verifying the generated symbol according to the trellis structure. Whenever the path departs from a valid codeword at trellis depth t (or time t), the adaptive list decoder applies M-algorithm to re-decode the erroneous segment from time t′ to t by extending the single path to Mp survivor paths, where Mp is the list size of the Malgorithm decoder. The recovered partial path corresponding to the segment is the survivor path with the largest cumulated metric among the Mp survivor paths. Then the verification process continues from time t, and the Mp paths return to a single path again. The remaining process is the same as above

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3

until reaching the end of the trellis.

A. The Modified Serial Min-Sum Decoder

A regular binary (2N, J, 2J) LDPC code with J ”1”s in

each column and 2J ”1”s in each row can be described by

a sparse parity check matrix H of size M × 2N . The min-

sum algorithm is composed of two phases of message passing,

i.e., the variable-to-check node message passing L(qnm) and

the check-to-variable node message passing L(rmn). L(qn)

denotes the a posteriori log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of variable

n. L(pn) represents the a priori LLR of variable n. Moreover, N (m) = {n|hmn = 1} denotes the set of variable nodes

connecting to check node m, and M (n) = {m|hmn = 1}

denotes the set of check nodes connecting to variable node n.

N (m)\{n} represents the set N (m) other than variable node

n, similarly, M (n)\{m} represents the set M (n) other than

check node m.

Compared with the parallel min-sum algorithm, the conver-

gence speed of the serial min-sum algorithm is faster with less

storage requirement. The modified serial min-sum decoder is a

serial algorithm which updates the variable nodes one-by-one

in sequence and generates a continuous output after L time

units. Moreover, the modified serial min-sum decoder can be

implemented for real-time structure since it executes only one

iteration.

Let αnm and βnm be the sign and the magnitude of

L(qnm), respectively. According to the parallel min-sum de-

coder [14], the conventional serial min-sum decoder needs

to serially calculate minn˜∈N(m)\{n} βn˜m for each variable node n in check m, requiring 2N J(2J + ⌈log2 2J⌉ − 2) additions for this operation in one iteration, however, it is

rather complex for large J values. Note that the minimum

values minn˜∈N(m)\{n} βn˜m associated with each check m can be determined by identifying the two minimum values

corresponding to this check [14]. Suppose γ1 and γ2 are the two minimum values corresponding to set n ∈ N (m) before

updating βnm, such that γ1 < γ2. Once βnm is updated, let γu

be the value of the updated βnm, then γ1 and γ2 may no longer

be the two minimum values of this set. At the nth time unit,

the two minimum values of check m can be determined by

comparing three values (γ1, γ2 and γu), i.e., the two minimum

values among the three are regarded as the new γ1 and γ2.

The modified serial min-sum decoder can be summarized as

follows:

Initialization: For each m, n, set L(pn) = yn, L(qnm) =

L(pn). For each check m, compute γ1 and γ2. One-iteration processing: Update L(qnm) in four steps

according to n = 1, 2, ..., 2N .

1) Step 1: For the given n and m ∈ M (n), compute





∏

L(rmn) = 

αn˜m min βn˜m (1)

n˜∈N (m)\{n}

n˜∈N (m)\{n}

The calculation for minn˜∈N(m)\{n} βn˜m is replaced by using

γ1 or γ2.

2) Step 2: For the given n and m ∈ M (n), compute ∑

L(qn) = L(pn) +

L(rmn)

(2)

m∈M (n)

L(qnm) = L(qn) − L(rmn)

(3)

Then update γ1 and γ2 according to the rule: If γu < γ1, set γ2 = γ1 and γ1 = γu; If γ1 ≤ γu ≤ γ2, maintain γ1 and set γ2 = γu; Otherwise, γ2 < γu, γ1 and γ2 are not changed.
3) Step 3: If n < 2N , the estimated bit xˆn is determined by L(qn) such that xˆn = 1 if L(qn) < 0, and xˆn = 0 if L(qn) > 0. Then n = n + 1, go to step 1; Otherwise, go to step 4.
4) Step 4: Create xˆ = {xˆn}. If HˆxT = 0, then ˆx is considered as a valid decoded codeword and the processing
ends; Otherwise, a failure is declared, apply adaptive list
decoder for re-decoding.

B. The Adaptive List Decoder
Considering a single-stage trellis from time t − 1 to t, st−1 and st denote the two states connected by branch bt. x¯[2t−1,2t] = (x¯2t−1, x¯2t) represents the branch symbol corresponding to bt. The verification for a generated symbol and a branch symbol is to assume they have the same systematic bit, then check whether the parity check bit equal or not. In other words, assume x¯2t−1 = xˆ2t−1, check if x¯2t and xˆ2t are equal.

xx x

xx x

xx x

xx x

t ' t  dL

xx x

t

t '' dL

(a)




xx x
t ''

xx x

xx x

xx x

xx x

t ' t  dL

xx x

t '' dL

t

(b)

xx x
t ''

Fig. 2. An example for adaptive list decoder procedure (Mp = 2). (a) Two segments are separated satisfying t < t′′ − dL. (b) Two segments are overlapped such that t ≥ t′′ − dL.
The list size of adaptive list decoder has two levels corresponding to a single path and Mp survivor paths. When the first symbol is generated by the modified serial min-sum decoder, adaptive list decoder starts the verification process from the zero state by comparing it with branch symbol x¯[1,2]. Assuming that S0t−1 = (0, s1, s2, .., st−1) is a continuous single path formed from time 0 to t − 1. Considering the tth time unit, if xˆ[2t−1,2t] = x¯[2t−1,2t], or xˆ2t = x¯2t, the path extends to S0t by adding the state st to the end of S0t−1; Otherwise, the mismatching of the two symbols indicates that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4

the path is broken at trellis depth t, then adaptive list decoder

uses M-algorithm to re-decode the received symbols in the segment from time t′ to t, the single path S0t′ extends to Mp survivor paths from state st′ , where t′ < t in time order. Let dL be the backtracking depth such that dL = t − t′. After that, a partial path Stt′ = (st′ , st′+1, ..., st) of S0t is recovered
by M-algorithm, which is the survivor path with the largest

metric among Mp survivor paths (the red line in Fig. 2 (a)). The verification process goes on until S0N is formed. By the
way, when the path is broken twice (or more) within a time

interval less than dL, i.e., the path is broken at time t and later at time t′′ such that t′′ − t ≤ dL, where t′ < t < t′′

in time order (see Fig. 2 (b)). Our method is to continue M-

algorithm for decoding the received symbols from time t to

t′′

to

recover

S t′′
t′

,

and

Stt′

has

been

updated

(In

Fig.

2

(b),

the

blue line corresponds

S t′′
t′

).

Thus,

the

trellis

to Stt′ , stages

and the from t′′

red line − dL to

corresponds to t has decoded

only once, there is no repetition for trellis decoding and no

extra computation is required.

C. Implementation of Two-Stage Hybrid Decoder
Although TSHD has two steps of decoding, as mentioned above, it still can be implemented as a real-time decoder with fixed decoding delay. Let L be the constraint length of the SFCC-N4 code. Each time two channel outputs enter the decoder, and it takes L initial time units for the modified serial min-sum decoder to generate a symbol, then adaptive list decoder starts the verification from all zero state through trellis. After L time units, the modified serial min-sum decoder and the adaptive list decoder can be processed in parallel. The decoding delay of adaptive list decoder depends on the backtracking depth dL, and accordingly, the decoding delay for TSHD is L + dL time units. In addition, the storage requirement for TSHD is a little more than SMAD because of the additional pre-decoder. Note that the modified serial minsum decoder executes only one iteration in a serial manner, there is no need to store 2N L(qnm) values for the next iteration. Since the parity check matrix of SFCC-N4 code is periodic, then the additional memory for TSHD are 2J and L units corresponding to L(rmn) and L(qnm), respectively. For the central node, the additional memory cost is negligible.

III. COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS

Since the parity check matrix of convolutional code is

periodic, and the odd column weight J1 and the even column

weight

J2

of

H

satisfy

J

=

J1

+J2 2

.

The

rate-1/2

SFCC-N4

code can be viewed as quasi-regular LDPC code with constant

row

weight

2J

and

average

column

weight

J

=

w+1 2

.

As

[14]

indicates that the minimum values minn′∈N(m)\{n}{βn′m}

associated with each check sum m require 2J + ⌈log2 2J⌉ − 2

comparisons with the help of a binary tree. Compared with

the parallel min-sum algorithm, the additional computation for

the modified serial min-sum decoder is caused by the updating

rule. Identifying the two minimum values among the three (γ1, γ2 and γu) for each check m needs at most 4J comparisons.

According to [14], the complexity of the modified serial min-

sum decoder is shown in Table I.

TABLE I DECODING COMPLEXITY OF THE MODIFIED SERIAL MIN-SUM DECODER
FOR 2N BITS

Operation
minn′∈N (m)\{n} βn′m L(qn) and L(qnm)

Number of Computations
N (6J + ⌈log2 2J⌉ − 2) 4N J

Each time, M-algorithm operates mainly in two parts: (1) The path extension unit extends Mp survivor paths to 2Mp paths and calculates the associated metrics. (2) The path selection unit sorts the 2Mp paths and selects the Mp survivor paths based on the metrics. The sorting operation requires 2Mp log(2Mp) comparisons using the fast sorting algorithm. Note that we only need to find out the Mp largest values among the 2Mp metrics. In [15], an improved technique is introduced, which provides 3Mp − 1 comparisons for sorting 2Mp metrics per trellis stage. The complexity of M-algorithm is summarized in Table II.

TABLE II DECODING COMPLEXITY OF M-ALGORITHM FOR N TRELLIS STAGES

Operation
path extension path selection

Number of Computations
4N Mp N (3Mp − 1)

The overall computations for TSHD and SMAD are

N (10J + ⌈log2 2J⌉ − 2) + θ(7Mp − 1) and N (7Mp − 1), respectively, where θ represents the number of trellis stages re-

decoded by M-algorithm in adaptive list decoder. Statistically

speaking,

the

ratio

ρ

=

θ N

is

asymptotically

a

constant

value

as

N increases, where ρ ≤ 1. Then the computations for TSHD

and SMAD per trellis stage are 10J +⌈log2 2J⌉−2+ρ(7Mp − 1) and 7Mp − 1, respectively.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Simulations are performed to compare proposed scheme with conventional scheme using rate-1/2, length 200 code. In the conventional scheme, SMAD is used for decoding the optimum distance profile (ODP) code [8] with generator Go = (400000, 671166)octal, while in the proposed scheme, TSHD is applied to SFCC-N4 code with generator G4 = (400000, 620241)octal for the same constraint length. As [16] suggested, the adoption of an error control code with simple decoding structures is quite energy efficient. Thus the list size Mp with small-to-medium value is used in our simulation.
Fig. 3 (a) compares the bit error rate (BER) performance of two schemes with hard decision decoding. At the BER of 10−4, we could see that TSHD is about 0.4dB superior to SMAD with Mp = 8, and the performance narrowed as Mp increases. For Mp = 32, the two schemes almost have the same performance. The fact is that TSHD mitigates the path loss problem for small Mp with the help of the modified serial min-sum decoder.
Fig. 3 (b) depicts the complexity comparison mentioned in Fig. 3 (a). TSHD achieves the significant computation reduction to SMAD in medium-to-high SNR region. It should be emphasized that TSHD is less efficient in the low SNR

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5

10-1

10-2

BER

10-3

TSHD, Mp=8

SMAD, Mp=8

10-4

TSHD, Mp=16

SMAD, Mp=16

TSHD, Mp=32

10-5

SMAD, Mp=32

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

7.5

Eb/No(dB)

(a)

250 TSHD, Mp=8

SMAD, Mp=8

200

TSHD, Mp=16

SMAD, Mp=16

TSHD, Mp=32

150

SMAD, Mp=32

100

Average Operations per Trellis Stage

50

0

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

7.5

Eb/No(dB)

(b)

Fig. 3. (a) BER performance of TSHD and SMAD. (b) The average complexity of TSHD and SMAD in (a).

region with small list size. However, this can be avoided by sending the received data to adaptive list decoder directly, the first stage of TSHD is not used. Bypassing the first stage means the complexity of TSHD is the same with that of SMAD. At BER 10−4, TSHD is about 0.4dB better than SMAD, and the saving is 33.4% for Mp = 8. In addition, TSHD has almost the same performance to SMAD, and the saving is up to 74.6% for Mp = 32.
The conversion between decoding delay and complexity is shown in Table III. According to Fig. 3 (a), the decoding delay effect on the BER performance and the ratio ρ is tested at 6.5dB with Mp = 8. It can be seen that dL > 3L has no performance improvement for TSHD, but the complexity increase as ρ grows.

TABLE III THE EFFECTS OF DIFFERENT DECODING DELAY FOR TSHD

d L

0

L

2L

3L

4L

5L

BER 1.1245e-002 4.9360e-004 4.4447e-004 4.5688e-004 4.4985e-004 4.5665e-004
U 2.3097e-002 4.4484e-002 5.9514e-002 6.9713e-002 7.7428e-002 8.2215e-002

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, an FEC scheme was presented for the trade-
off among decoding delay, complexity, and performance ac-
cording to user’s needs. The proposed scheme combining two
decoders without interleaver has at least three merits:
1) Adaptive optimization;
2) Low average computation without performance loss;
3) Suitable for short packet transmissions.
The adaptive list decoder is superior to the single M-
algorithm decoder with small survivor paths. Compared with
SMAD in medium-to-high SNR region, the ALD has no-
ticeable computational savings by hard decision decoding
without performance loss. Moreover, the adaptive optimization
mechanism makes TSHD suitable for WSNs applications.
REFERENCES
[1] I. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, “A survey on sensor networks,” IEEE Commun. Magazine, vol. 40, no. 8, pp. 102– 114, Aug. 2002.
[2] S. Howard, K. Iniewski, and C. Schlegel, “Error control coding in low-power wireless sensor networks: When is ECC energy-efficient?” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, pp. 1–14, Apr. 2006.
[3] J. A. Gutierrez, M. Naeve, E. Callaway, M. Bourgeois, V. Mitter, and B. Heile, “IEEE 802.15.4: A developing standard for low-power, lowcost wireless personal area networks,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 12–19, Sep. 2001.
[4] E. shih, S. Cho, N. Ickes, R. Min, A. Sinha, A. Wang, and A. Chandrakasan, “Physical layer driven protocol and algorithm design for energy-efficient wireless sensor networks,” ACM SIGMOBILE’01, pp. 272–287, July 2001.
[5] Y. Sankarasubramaniam, I. F. Akyildiz, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Energy efficiency based packet size optimization in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE International Workshop on Sensor Network Protocols and Applications, 2003, pp. 1–8, 2003.
[6] M. R. Islam and K. Jinsang, “Capacity and BER analysis for Nakagamin channel in LDPC coded wireless sensor network,” International Conference on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing, 2008, pp. 167–172, 2008.
[7] K. S. Zigangirov and V. D. Kolesnik, “List decoding of trellis codes,” Probl. Contr. Inform. Theory, pp. 347–364, 1980.
[8] H. Osthoff, J. B. Anderson, R. Johannesson, and C. F. Lin, “Systematic feed-forward convolutional encoders are better than other encoders with an M-algorithm decoder,” IEEE Trans. Infor. Theory, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 831–838, Mar. 1998.
[9] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Infor. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[10] Y. He, D. Haccoun, and C. Cardinal, “Performance comparison of iterative BP and threshold decoding for convolutional self-doubly-orthogonal codes,” VTC ’07- Spring, pp. 2000–2004, 2007.
[11] A. W. Eckford and R. S. Adve, “A practical scheme for relaying in sensor networks using repeat-accumulate codes,” The 40th Annual Conf. on Information Sciences and Systems, 2006, pp. 386–391, 2006.
[12] Y. Ye, X. Liu, and H. Cho, “An energy-efficient single-hop wireless sensor network using repeat-accumulate codes,” International Conference on Communications, Circuits and Systems, 2008, pp. 419–423, 2008.
[13] F. Yang, Z. Luo, B. Tian, and Y. Li, “Design of turbo-like codes for short frames,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 172–174, Feb. 2010.
[14] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May. 1999.
[15] A. D. Kot, “A linear-time method for contender sifting in breadth-first decoding of error control codes,” Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering, 1993, vol. 1, pp. 262–265, 1993.
[16] S. Kasnavi, S. Kilambi, B. Crowley, K. Iniewski, and B. Kaminska, “Application of error control codes (ECC) in ultra-low power RF transceivers,” Architecture, Circuits and Implementtation of SOCs, 2005, pp. 195–198, Sep. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

