2013 IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems

SIGNAL PROCESSING TECHNIQUES FOR RELIABILITY IMPROVEMENT OF SUB-20NM NAND FLASH MEMORY
Dong-hwan Lee, Jonghong Kim, and Wonyong Sung
Seoul National University Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-744 Korea Email: ldh@dsp.snu.ac.kr, jhkim@dsp.snu.ac.kr, wysung@snu.ac.kr

ABSTRACT
The capacity of NAND flash memory has been continuously increased by adopting process technology scaling and multi-level cell (MLC) data coding. However, the reliability of stored data becomes a very important issue because the scaled feature size lowers the number of electrons at each floating-gate while increasing the cell-to-cell interference. In this paper, we review recent advances in signal processing techniques for reliability improvement of sub-20 nm NAND flash memory, which includes estimation of the threshold voltage distribution, cell-to-cell interference cancellation, and optimal multi-level memory sensing. We also present experimental results for the explained signal processing algorithms. Especially, we demonstrate the reliability improvement when combining all these techniques.
Index Terms— NAND flash memory, signal processing, cell-to-cell interference, error correction
1. INTRODUCTION
High density NAND flash memory devices are critical components for many mobile devices such as smart phones. Moreover, NAND flash memory is rapidly adopted to solid state drives (SSDs) and replaces the conventional hard disk drives (HDDs). The advances in semiconductor process technology have propelled the continued density growth, which is well known as the Moore’s law. However, advanced process technology itself is no more sufficient to increase the density of NAND flash memory because scaling also lowers the quality of threshold voltage signal sensed from memory cells. As the feature size of memory cells reduces, not only the number of electrons stored at each floating-gate diminishes but also
This paper summarizes the key results in our previous publications [1–3], and shows the overall performance when combining all these techniques. This work was supported by the Brain Korea 21 Project and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MEST), Republic of Korea (No. 2012R1A2A2A06047297). Dong-hwan Lee was also financially supported by the NRF of Korea under the Global Ph.D. Fellowship project.

the cell-to-cell interference (CCI) increases. Even worse is the multi-level cell (MLC) data coding that stores two or three bits at each memory cell for density doubling or tripling.
In order to solve the reliability problems of NAND flash memory, hard-decision error correction that employs BCH (Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem) or RS (Reed-Solomon) error correction codes (ECCs) has been widely used because these codes can fix a small number of bit errors quite efficiently and are relatively simple to implement [4, 5]. However, these error correction techniques are not efficient when the signal quality is low. Thus, the conventional hard-decision error correction is not enough for NAND flash memory with sub-20 nm process technologies, and soft-decision error correction as well as various signal processing approaches are very needed.
In this paper, we summarize our works on signal processing techniques for reliability improvement of high density NAND flash memory. We address three techniques: fast estimation of threshold voltage distribution, CCI cancellation, and optimum quantization for soft-decision error correction. The threshold voltage distribution of NAND flash memory changes continuously according to the data retention time and the number of PE cycles. We have developed a parameter estimation algorithm to offer statistical information of the threshold voltage signal to ECC decoders and signal processing units [1]. We also explain an efficient CCI cancellation scheme that employs a least squares based algorithm for fast convergence [2]. Since the CCI cancellation and soft-decision error correction demand multi-level memory sensing, efficient quantization schemes are needed. We adopt the maximizing mutual information (MMI) quantizer [6] that yields satisfactory post-FEC (forward error correction) BER (bit error rate) performance.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the effects of scaling in sub-20nm NAND flash memory. Section 3 presents the threshold voltage distribution estimation scheme. In Section 4, cell-to-cell interference cancellation techniques as well as a soft-information computation scheme are explained. In Section 5, the MMI quantization is ex-

978-1-4673-6238-2/13 $31.00 © 2013 IEEE

318

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

'HVLJQUXOHQP 1XPEHURIHOHFWURQVSHUORJLFOHYHO



,0)*

6DPVXQJ

7RVKLED



+\QL[







 











Fig. 1. Scaling trend of 2-bit MLC NAND flash memory [7].

6/& OHYHOV 0/& OHYHOV 7/& OHYHOV 4/& OHYHOV




 







'HVLJQUXOHQP

plained. Finally, concluding remarks are made in Section 6.
2. SCALING OF NAND FLASH MEMORY AND ITS EFFECTS
In recent years, the density of NAND flash memory has been increased even faster than predicted by the Moore’s law. Figure 1 shows the scaling trend of 2-bit multi-level cell (MLC) NAND flash memory [7]. In this figure, we can find that the size of NAND flash memory cell has been reduced by half approximately every 2.5 years. Samsung, Toshiba, and Hynix already have begun the production of sub-20 nm class NAND flash memory.
Although the growth rate of NAND flash memory density has been successfully maintained until the pitch size becomes 20 nm, further process technology scaling is considered to be quite challenging due to the reliability issue. The disturbance of the threshold voltage becomes quite large for sub-20 nm NAND flash memory because the number of charges at each floating gate is too small. Figure 2 shows the expected number of electrons per voltage level at the floating gate according to the design rule [7]. For MLC NAND flash memory with 20 nm process technologies, around 100 electrons (about 25 electrons per level) can be stored at the floating gate, but this number is reduced almost half for the 10 nm one. The number of electrons that discriminate each voltage level is even more reduced by employing MLC data coding, which requires additional voltage margins. As a result, loss of a single electron due to the data retention process causes a substantial change in the threshold voltage distribution.
The cell-to-cell interference (CCI), which is caused by the capacitance coupling, becomes another major source of bit errors for sub-20 nm NAND flash memory. It is well known that the amount of CCI is proportional to the coupling coefficients as well as the amount of voltage shifts of the interferencing cells [8]. Since the programming and the erase voltages, which are usually quite high, are not scaled well, the amount of voltage shift that induces the CCI remains almost the same. As the feature size becomes smaller, however, the distance between two adjacent cells decreases, thus the

Fig. 2. The expected numbers of electrons per voltage level at the floating gate of NAND flash memory [7].
amount of CCI increases. According to [9], the amount of CCI is over 50 % of the total noise in NAND flash memory with 20 nm process technologies. Although some cell structures have been devised to reduce the CCI, removing the CCI is very critical for sub-20 nm flash memory devices [9].
3. ESTIMATION OF THRESHOLD VOLTAGE DISTRIBUTION
The threshold voltage distribution of NAND flash memory continuously varies according to the data retention time and the number of PE cycles. Figure 3 shows PDFs (probability density functions) of threshold voltage signal obtained from a 20-nm class NAND flash memory device. The signal distribution of NAND flash memory is not only widened but also shifted to the negative direction due to the charge loss caused by data retention. If memory sensing reference voltages (MSRVs) are not properly adjusted, the raw bit error rate (BER) grows exponentially as the amount of shift increases, which leads to frequent occurrence of ECC (error correcting code) decoding failures. According to [6], the error correcting capability is dependent on the accuracy of the SNR (signal-tonoise ratio) information. Thus, it is important to estimate the threshold voltage distribution accurately and provide reliable SNR information to ECC decoder.
A straightforward approach to estimate the threshold voltage distribution is building a relative frequency histogram by conducting memory sensing operations many times while changing the MSRVs. Figure 3 shows an example of the straightforward estimation. The histograms were obtained from actual NAND flash memory with 51 times memory sensing operations while moving the MSRVs by 0.1 V each time. However, this straightforward approach requires a large number of memory sensing operations, which demands additional delay and energy consumption. According to [10], one voltage sensing operation takes approximately 15 μs and 0.81 μJ for a 20 nm-class NAND flash memory device whose

319 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.


. QR UHWHQWLRQ .  \HDU UHWHQWLRQ .  \HDU UHWHQWLRQ


T

T

T T T T T T T T T

1XPEHURIFHOOV

























7KUHVKROGYROWDJH9

Fig. 3. Threshold distribution of 2-bit MLC NAND flash memory.
page size is 8 KBytes. In order to reduce the number of memory sensing operations while finding the optimal MSRVs, a moving read technique was proposed in [11]. This technique observes the changes in the number of cells that belong to the highest voltage level, i.e. symbol 10 in Fig. 3. If the change is quite substantial, the MSRVs are adjusted by referencing a pre-defined look-up table. Although this method provides an improved BER performance for hard-decision error correction, it does not provide SNR information that is essential for soft-decision error correction [6].
To provide reliable statistical information, such as SNR, to signal processing units or ECC decoders, we have developed a sensing directed estimation (SDE) algorithm [1]. In this scheme, the threshold voltage distribution of actual NAND flash memory is modeled as a Gaussian mixture [12], and the first and the second order moments of the model are iteratively found. Let us consider 2-bit MLC NAND flash memory whose threshold voltage distribution is shown in Fig. 4. By conducting multiple memory sensing operations (11 times in Fig. 4) and counting the number of cells that belong to each voltage region, we can build a relative frequency histogram of the threshold voltage distribution. We can also obtain the histogram of the modeled distribution by using the partial CDF (cumulative density function) of the Gaussian mixture. If the modeled distribution is similar to the original one, the cost function, which is defined by the Euclidean distance between the two histograms, is close to zero. Thus, the best-fit parameters of the modeled distribution, which are the means and the standard deviations of the Gaussian mixture, can be found by minimizing the cost function. Since the cost function is non-linear with respect to the model parameters, iterative optimization methods, such as gradients descent (GD) and Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) algorithms, need to be applied.
The SDE algorithm does not need to be conducted at every page read request but only when ECC decoding failure occurs. To find the parameters of the modeled distribution accurately, the SDE algorithm requires at least 11 memory sensing operations that results in 12-level voltage division. After the estimation process, the MSRVs are adjusted by using the

Fig. 4. Relative frequency histograms of the actual threshold voltage distribution and the modeled one.
updated parameters. Then, a retrial of data read operation is also conducted to recover the previously ECC decoding failed page. Figure 5 shows the estimation errors for the mean of each symbol when the SDE algorithm is applied to simulated NAND flash memory described in [13]. The number of PE cycles is fixed to 5,000 times, while the data retention time grows from 1 K to 128 K hours. We use 8-, 12-, and 16level voltage division that require 7, 11, and 15 memory sensing operations, respectively. When no estimation is utilized, the estimation errors are denoted as ‘Total change’. With 11 memory sensing operations (or 12-level), the SDE algorithm can find the means and the standard deviations of the modeled Gaussian mixture quite accurately, and the estimation errors are lower than 0.01 V. However, when 8-level voltage sensing is used, the estimation errors are much higher except for the symbol 11 case. Note that the amount of leakage charges for symbol 11 is very small since this symbol is not programmed. The estimation errors for the standard deviation are quite similar to those for the mean [1].

4. CELL-TO-CELL INTERFERENCE CANCELLATION AND SOFT-INFORMATION
COMPUTATION

As the distance between two adjacent cells decreases, the threshold voltage shift due to capacitance coupling becomes more severe. Recent studies have shown that the amount of CCI can be modeled as a linear combination of threshold voltage shifts at the neighboring cells [8, 14]. Thus, simple signal processing based approaches that are similar to FIR filtering can resolve the CCI [2, 14, 15]. The cell-to-cell interference canceller (CCIC) utilizes the following equation to estimate the amount of CCI:

M −1

VCCI =

Ci · ΔV [i].

(1)

i=0

320 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(VWLPDWLRQHUURUIRUWKHPHDQ9

6\PERO



7 RWDO FKDQJH

*' OHYHOV



*' OHYHOV

*' OHYHOV



/0 OHYHOV

/0 OHYHOV



/0 OHYHOV



6\PERO

6\PERO

6\PERO

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5HWHQWLRQ WLPH KRXU

Fig. 5. Estimation errors for the mean when increasing the data retention time.

1XPEHURIFHOOV





















7KUHVKROGYROWDJH9

Fig. 6. Distribution of the CCI removed threshold voltage signals.

T T

T

T

T

T

Fig. 7. Gaussian mixture approximation of the CCI removed threshold voltage signals.
In (1), ΔV [i] denotes the observed threshold voltage shift of the i-th neighbor cell. Note that M , which represents the number of interferencing cells, is either 3 (for odd victim cells) or 5 (for even victim cells) when assuming an evenodd bit-line structure [16]. The coefficients are denoted as Ci, and finding the optimal values of them is very important to achieve a satisfactory post-CCIC BER performance.
In [14], simple signal processing techniques, such as data post-compensation and pre-distortion, were proposed. The former utilizes the output signals of multi-level voltage sensing to eliminate the CCI when reading memory, while the latter modifies the target programming voltage of the ISPP (incremental step pulse programming) scheme to compensate the CCI when a writing page. Since the coupling coefficients have different values according to the locations of victim cells [17], an adaptive LMS (least mean square) filter based coupling canceller was proposed in [15]. This approach continuously updates the coefficients of the CCI canceller by using a single data sample at each iteration. Even though theses tech-

niques offer effective solutions for removing the CCI, they require high resolution memory sensing output and increase the latency too much.
In [2], we developed a least squares based CCI canceller (LS-CCIC) that shows satisfactory BER performance with only a small number of memory sensing operations. The LS-CCIC consists of coefficient training and CCI removal steps. Unlike the adaptive LMS filtering approach, the coefficient of the LS-CCIC are found by utilizing many data samples (around 1,000) during the coefficient training step. Thus, this approach shows much improved and robust BER performance. During the CCI removal step, the amount of CCI is estimated and removed from the threshold voltages of the victim cells. In LS-CCIC, not only the victim cells but also the neighboring cells need to be sensed. Let us denote Nc and Nn as the numbers of memory sensing operations for the victim and the neighboring cells, respectively. Then, the LS-CCIC requires Nc +3Nn and Nc +2Nn memory sensing operations as a total for the even and the odd victim cells, respectively. Since the training step is invoked only when there is a significant change in the threshold voltage distribution, the memory sensing overhead is not critical. However, the CCI removal step needs to be conducted at every page read operation, thus the memory sensing overhead is relatively large. Optimal memory sensing schemes for the CCI cancellation were also studied in [2]. The uniform quantizer is preferred for the training step where the sensed signal needs to be processed with heavy arithmetic. On the other hand, the maximizing mutual information (MMI) memory sensing scheme [6], which shows optimal error correcting performance, is demanded for the CCI removal step.
The distribution of the CCI removed signal is quite different from the original one as shown in Fig. 6. In order to apply soft-decision error correction with the CCI removed signal, its PDF needs to be found. In [3], we derived a mathematical formulation for the PDF of the CCI removed signal by using a Gaussian mixture model as shown in Fig. 7. Also, we proposed a conditional LLR (log-likelihood ratio) as softinformation. In the following section, we present the experimental results for soft-decision error correction that utilizes the CCI removed signal.

321 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

 ;







T T T T T T

< 

  

Fig. 8. Non-uniform voltage sensing scheme for 2 bit MLC with 6 voltage sensing operations.

5. MULTI-LEVEL QUANTIZATION FOR SOFT-DECISION ERROR CORRECTION

Unlike hard-decision error correction that uses only binary input data for the decoding process, soft-decision one demands multi-level memory sensing to generate soft-information as the input to SISO (soft input soft output) decoders. LDPC (low-density parity-check) codes and TPCs (turbo product codes) based error correction circuits are widely used as for the SISO decoders and show much improved error performances when compared to hard-decision error correction [18, 19]. Thus, it is very important to find optimal MSRVs to obtain satisfactory BER performance when using soft-decision error correction. Recently, an MMI quantization scheme that shows near optimal post-FEC (forward error correction) BER performance was proposed in [6].
In the MMI quantization scheme, MSRVs that maximize the mutual information between the input and the output symbols are used for the memory sensing operations. Figure 8 illustrates the threshold voltage distribution with 7-level memory sensing. The input symbols (0, 1, 2, and 3 in Fig. 8) are programmed and mapped to the seven output symbols. Let us define Pi,j as the probability that the input symbol i is mapped to the output symbol j. Assuming that the input symbol is equally likely to be 0, 1, 2, and 3, the mutual information between the input and the output symbols becomes

I

(X;

Y)

=

H

(

1 4

3

Pi,0,

1 4

3

Pi,1,

···

,

1 4

3

Pi,6)

i=0

i=0

i=0

−

1 4

3

H(Pi,0, Pi,1, · · · , Pi,6).

(2)

i=0

The mutual information I(X; Y) in (2) is a function of MSRVs q1 ∼ q6. Thus, by selecting qi that maximizes the mutual information, the optimal memory sensing scheme for the given threshold voltage distribution can be found. It is well known that the MMI quantization scheme results in a non-uniform quantizer similar to Fig. 8.
In this paper, we present the post-FEC BER performance of soft-decision error correction when combining CCI canceller and soft-decision error correction [3]. For the exper-

%(5

  

8QFRGHG 8QFRGHG /6&&,& 00,4 OHYHO  VHQVLQJ /'3& :2 /6&&,& 00,4 OHYHO  VHQVLQJ /'3& :2 /6&&,& 8QTXDQWL]HG /'3& /6&&,& 00,4 OHYHO  VHQVLQJ /'3& /6&&,& 00,4 OHYHO  VHQVLQJ /'3& /6&&,& 00,4 OHYHO  VHQVLQJ





















5HWHQWLRQWLPHKRXUV

Fig. 9. Error performance of the (68254, 65536) EG-LDPC code for even MSB pages of NAND flash memory [3].

iments, a (68254, 65536) EG (Euclidian geometry) LDPC code with the min-sum decoding algorithm was used, and the LS-CCIC as well as the conditional LLR computation scheme were also applied. In the CCI removal step, 7-, 10-, and 13level MMI quantizers are used for the victim cells, while 4level uniform memory sensing is applied to the neighboring cells. For the comparison purpose, soft-decision error correction without CCI cancellation was also conducted. Figure 9 shows the error performance for the even MSB page. It is demonstrated that the LS-CCIC can improve the postFEC BER performance significantly. Even for the ‘LS-CCIC, MMIQ 7-level’ case, which demands 15 memory sensing operations, the error correcting capability outperforms that of the ‘LDPC, W/O LS-CCIC, Unquantized’ case. As the resolution of the sensed signal increases, the tolerable data retention time grows significantly. For example, the data retention limit of the ‘LS-CCIC, MMIQ 10-level’ case is an order of magnitude larger than that of the LS-CCIC, MMIQ 7-level’ case. However, the former requires more memory sensing operations, thus increasing the delay. In order to mitigate the delay induced by fine-grain sensing, the look-ahead softdecision memory sensing can be applied [20]. It is also noteworthy that improving the BER performance of even MSB pages is very important to increase the retention time limit of NAND flash memory.
6. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we review recent signal processing techniques that improve the reliability of multi-level cell (MLC) NAND flash memory. The threshold voltage distribution can be found by employing the sensing directed estimation (SDE) algorithm, thus the effect of data retention can be minimized. The deterministic disturbance caused by the cell-to-cell interference (CCI) can be mitigated by using the least squares based CCI cancellation, which requires only a small number of memory sensing operations. In the experiments with simu-

322 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

lated NAND flash memory, we evaluated the performance of a combined signal processing approach that includes the maximizing mutual information quantization, the threshold voltage estimation, the CCI cancellation, and the soft-information computation schemes. The experimental results show that the combined approach can improve the retention time limit by more than 5 times when compared to the case that employs only soft-decision error correction.
7. REFERENCES
[1] D. Lee and W. Sung, “Estimation of NAND flash memory threshold voltage distribution for optimum softdecision error correction,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 440–449, Jan. 2013.
[2] D. Lee and W. Sung, “Least squares based coupling cancelation for MLC NAND flash memory with a small number of voltage sensing operations,” J. Signal Process. Syst., vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 189–200, June 2013.
[3] D. Lee and W. Sung, “Soft-decision decoding with cell-to-cell interference removed signal in NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech and Signal Process. (ICASSP), 2013, pp. 2518–2522.
[4] W. Liu, J. Rho, and W. Sung, “Low-power highthroughput BCH error correction VLSI design for multilevel cell NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), 2006, pp. 303–308.
[5] B. Chen, X. Zhang, and Z. Wang, “Error correction for multi-level NAND flash memory using Reed-Solomon codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), 2008, pp. 94–99.
[6] J. Wang, T. Courtade, H. Shankar, and R. Wesel, “Soft information for LDPC decoding in flash: Mutualinformation optimized quantization,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, 2011, pp. 5–9.
[7] M. Wang, “Technology trends on 3D-NAND flash storage,” in Proc. Interational Microsystems, Packaging, Assembly, and Circuit Technology conference (IMPACT), 2011.
[8] J. D. Lee, S. H. Hur, and J. D. Choi, “Effects of floatinggate interference on NAND flash memory cell operation,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 264–266, May 2002.
[9] K. Prall, “Scaling non-volatile memory below 30nm,” in Proc. 22nd IEEE Non-Volatile Semiconductor Memory Workshop, 2007, pp. 5–10.

[10] Micron Technology Inc., “64Gb, 128Gb, 256Gb, 512Gb asynchronous/synchronous NAND features,” https://www.micron.com/parts/ nand-flash/mass-storage.
[11] B.S. You et al., “A high performance co-design of 26 nm 64 Gb MLC NAND flash memory using the dedicated NAND flash controller,” J. Semicond. Technol. Sci., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 121–129, Feb. 2011.
[12] Y. Cai, E. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Threshold voltage distribution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling,” in Proceedings of Design, Automation, and Test in Europe Conference (DATE), 2013, pp. 1285–1290.
[13] G. Dong, Y. Pan, N. Xie, C. Varanasi, and T. Zhang, “Estimating information-theoretical NAND flash memory storage capacity and its implication to memory system design space exploration,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1705–1714, Sept. 2012.
[14] G. Dong, S. Li, and T. Zhang, “Using data postcompensation and predistortion to tolerate cell-to-cell interference in MLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2718– 2728, Nov. 2010.
[15] D. Park and J. Lee, “Floating-gate coupling canceller for multi-level cell NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 624–628, Mar. 2011.
[16] K. Takeuchi, Y. Kameda, S. Fujimura, et al., “A 56-nm CMOS 99-mm2 8-Gb multi-level NAND flash memory with 10-MB/s program throughput,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 219–232, Jan. 2007.
[17] P. Poliakov, P. Blomme, M.M. Corbalan, J.V. Houdt, and W. Dehaene, “Cross-cell interference variability aware model of fully planar NAND Flash memory including line edge roughness,” Microelectronics Reliability, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 919–924, May 2011.
[18] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of softdecision error-correction codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[19] C. Yang, Y. Emre, and C. Chakrabarti, “Product code schemes for error correction in MLC NAND flash memories,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2302–2314, Dec. 2012.
[20] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng, “LDPC-in-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. 11th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST), 2013, pp. 244–256.

323 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

