IEEE ICC 2013 - Communications Theory

Spatially Coupled Streaming Modulation
Dmitri Truhachev∗ and Christian Schlegel† ∗Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada, dmitryt@ualberta.ca †Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada, christian.schlegel@dal.ca

Abstract—A novel modulation format based on coupling for streaming data transmissions is proposed. The construction utilizes an infinite parity-check matrix of a low-density paritycheck convolutional code which is used for data encoding with real-domain addition instead of modulo-two addition. The demodulation and decoding is accomplished using iterative bit estimation and interference cancellation. We demonstrate that the threshold saturation effect of spatial graph coupling holds for the proposed format and the achievable communication rate approaches the additive white Gaussian noise channel capacity and exceeds the capacities of traditional PAM modulations.
I. INTRODUCTION
Signal modulation is an essential part of the physical layer signal processing in most communication systems. Achieving the information-theoretic capacity of a communication channel requires a specific input distribution. Hence, the transmitted data needs to be mapped to a carefully selected signal set to provide near-capacity operation. As a result a significant amount of research in communications theory [1] has been dedicated to the design of modulation techniques and their joint interaction with error correction coding.
For the classic additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel the capacity-achieving input distribution is Gaussian. Therefore, the binary data at the output of the forward error correction encoder needs to be mapped to a set of constellation points in the real (or complex) domain which spans the support of the input distribution. This approach is used in classic pulse-amplitude modulation (PAM) (or quadrature-amplitude modulation (QAM) for complex-valued channels) which are part of numerous communications standards. The mapping between the data bits encoded by a forward error correction code and the constellation points can be accomplished in several ways, including trellis-coded modulation [2], multi-level coding [3], bit-interleaved coded modulation [4] and others. The majority of these approaches include a mapping of distinct coded data streams to distinct subsets of constellation points corresponding to different signal-to-noise ratios (SNR)’s, i.e., multi-level coding. Often an interleaver is present between the forward error correction encoder and the modulator allowing to accomplish demodulation and decoding using turbo-decoding principles in which the demodulator and the decoder exchange information throughout the decoding iterations.
The novel modulation format proposed in this paper is based on two ideas. The first is a design of a modulated signal via superposition of interfering redundant data streams constructed to allow efficient layering (separation) at the receiver. This principle relates to multi-user communication over a multipleaccess channel and in particular to the recently developed generalized modulation technique [6]. Despite the fact that

the receiver needs to perform two tasks - data stream layering and error correction decoding - these can be efficiently accomplished in two stages and a spectral efficiency within 1 [bit/dimension] of the AWGN channel capacity can provably be achieved over the entire SNR range [7].
The second idea relates to spatial graph coupling theory which recently received a lot of attention in the literature [9]– [17]. The concept of coupling a sequence of identical small structured graphs into a graph chain with improved properties, first demonstrated in the context of LDPC convolutional codes (LDPCCC)s [8], has been shown to be applicable to a diverse list of problems, such as compressed sensing [9], multi-user communication [10] [11], quantum codes [12], and models in statistical physics [17]. Moreover, it has recently been shown [15] and then proven analytically that the belief propagation decoding thresholds of regular LDPCCC ensembles approach the maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) decoding thresholds of the LDPC block code ensembles with the same structure [16], resulting in the so-called threshold saturation effect.
In the proposed modulation format the information sequence is encoded by a binary forward error correction encoder and then replicated and permuted. The latter is efficiently accomplished using a multiple convolutional permutor which is essentially a parity-check matrix for an LDPCCC. Thus a superposition of a few equal power data streams is created in which each bit is replicated a number of times. Moreover, the streams are superimposed with an offset following the coupling principle, essential for achieving capacity. The demodulation and decoding is performed in two stages iterative bit estimation and parallel interference cancellation is followed by error correction decoding. We demonstrate that the resulting communication rate achieved by the demodulator exceeds that of PAM modulation and approaches the AWGN channel capacity.
Contrary to higher order modulations the spatially coupled modulator uses data streams of equal power which are encoded by a single error-correction code and do not require multiple rate optimization. Contrary to bit-interleaved coded modulation, each data bit is not only permuted but also replicated. This allows to perform iterative data demodulation (which can be pipelined) prior to single error correction decoding. The format has similarities with repeat-accumulate codes. The latter, however, include differential encoding accumulation creating a convolutional outer code and utilize modulo-two bit addition. A spatially coupled modulator, on the contrary, transmits a set of (pseudo-)random sums of repeated bits. Finally, it is worth mentioning that LDPCCCs also have been used in conjunction with classic modulation and mapping [5]. In the present work

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-4673-3122-7/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

3418

we show that blending the code and modulator structure tighter together not only leads to performance improvement but is capacity achieving asymptotically.
The paper is organized as follows. We start by describing the modulation scheme and the iterative demodulator structure in Section II. An analysis of the demodulation and decoding performance of the proposed scheme is presented in Section III and the results are given in Section IV. Finally Section V concludes the paper.
II. CONSTRUCTION
P L

u  

v 
  
  x


 
  


 

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the spatially coupled modulator.

A schematic diagram of the coupled modulator is given in Fig. 1. First a binary information stream u = u1, u2, u3, · · · enters a binary forward error correction encoder. It will be shown latter in the analysis section that it is desirable to use a strong error correction steaming code, such as an LDPCCC, as the forward error correction code. The encoded binary sequence v = v1, v2, v3, · · · , where vj ∈ {−1, 1}, enters a multiple convolutional permutor. An M/L multiple convolutional permutor is described by a semi-infinite binary matrix H which has M ones in each row and L ones in each column (except for the first few columns) while all the other elements of H are zeros. H is casual and the maximum width of its diagonal containing all the non-zero entries is called the memory of the multiple convolutional permutor and denoted by m. An example of a 4/4 multiple convolutional permutor of memory m = 16 is shown in Fig. 2. The modulated signal x = (x1, x2, x3, · · · ) is computed as the product

x = vH

(1)

L data streams. Contrary to encoding of an LDPCCC the summation is performed in the real and not the binary domain. We also note that these L data streams created by the multiple convolutional permutor add up with an offset. This effect of data stream coupling, giving the name to the proposed modulator, results from the triangular structure of the upper portion of the matrix H.
The sequence x at the output of the modulator is multiplied by the power normalizing amplitude P/L and transmitted over the channel. In this paper we consider transmission over a real-valued AWGN channel. Thus, the received signal is

y=

P L

x

+

n

(4)

where n = (n1, n2, · · · ) is a noise vector with standard iid Gaussian components of zero mean and unit variance. The
power of the modulated signal xt P/L for t > m equals P since xt is a sum (3) of L independent binary random variables attaining the values −1 and 1 with probability 1/2. Therefore, the total signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is normalized to P for t > m and is slightly smaller for the first few time instants, i.e. for t ≤ m.

Fig. 2. A section of a 4/4 multiple convolutional permutor. Black squares indicate the positions of ones.

where

∞

L

xt = vj hj,t = v˜t,l t > m ,

(2)

j=1

l=1

and by v˜t,l, l = 1, 2, · · · , L, t = m + 1, m + 2, · · · we denote permuted replicas of the symbols vj, j = 1, 2, · · · produced by the multiple convolutional permutor. The rightmost equality
follows from the fact that only L terms hj,t = 0 (i. e. hj,t = 1) for any fixed t. For some small t the number of non-zero terms
hj,t is less than L and therefore

L(t)

xt = v˜t,l t ≤ m .

(3)

l=1

where L(t) ≤ L denotes the number of non-zero terms hj,t in the tth column of H. The task of the multiple convolutional permutor is to replicate each data bit M times, permute the replicas, and form L virtual data streams out of the permuted
bits. Finally the permutor computes the addition of these

A. Permutor Construction and Spatial Graph Coupling
Multiple convolutional permutors can be constructed by stacking up permutation matrices as shown in Fig. 3. Alternatively, periodical permutors can be constructed from paritycheck matrices of block LDPC codes [8]. One period of a multiple convolutional permutor can be created by cutting a block parity-check matrix along the diagonal and shifting the lower triangular part to the right.
A graph representation of the proposed modulation system similar to the Tanner graph of an LDPCCC can be constructed from Equation 2 relating the data bits vj (variable nodes) to the modulation signals xt (channel nodes). The matrix H is the incidence matrix of the system’s graph. In case of multiple convolutional permutors constructed from permutation matrices a protograph representation [19] can be more useful.
The protograph corresponding to the system with multiple convolutional permutor shown in Fig. 3 is given in Fig. 4. Each black node represents a variable node corresponding to a block

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
3419

where h = P/L(1, 1, · · · , 1). The vector ξj = (ξj,t1 , ξj,t2 , · · · , ξj,tM ), where T (j) = (t1, t2, · · · , tM ) is the noise-and-interference vector with respect to the signal vj. The
components of the noise-and-interference vector are

ξj,t =

P L

vj + nt, t ∈ T (j) .

j ∈J (t),j =j

The vector ξj can be approximated by a Gaussian random vector (due to central limit theorem) with independent zero-mean components and covariance matrix Rj = diag(σt21 , σt22 , · · · , σt2M ) where σt2 denotes the variance of ξj,t. For t > m the cardinality of the set J (t) is |J (t)| = L giving the variance σt2 = (L − 1)P/L + 1. However, since |J (t)| = L(t) < L for some t ≤ m and since the variances
are influenced by the interference cancellation throughout the
demodulation iterations we prefer to write a general expression based on σt2.
We now perform minimum mean squared error (MMSE) filtering on yj to form an estimate of vj with the highest possible SNR. The output of this MMSE filter is

Fig. 3. A section of a 3/6 multiple convolutional permutor built from permutation matrices. Black squares indicate the positions of ones.

zj = wj yj = wj hvj + wj ξj ,

(6)

where

wj = (I + h∗R−j 1h)−1h∗Rj−1

satisfies the minimization condition ||wjyj − vj|| → min. The resulting SNR of the signal zj equals

γj

= h∗Rj−1h =

P L

1 t∈T (j) σt2

.

(7)

Fig. 4. A section of a protograph of a spatially coupled modulator constructed from the 3/6 multiple convolutional permutor shown in Fig. 3.
of data bits while each green node represents a channel node corresponding to a block of modulated symbols. The size of the data blocks equals to the size of the permutation matrices. Thus each variable node is connected to three channel nodes and each channel node is connected to six variable nodes. This happens with the exception of the first two channel nodes which connect to two and four variable nodes, respectively. The protograph shown in Fig. 4 is composed of many identical vertical sections containing one channel and two variable nodes which are connected (coupled) to the neighbouring sections. Therefore, this protograph is a spatially coupled graph chain.

Since the memory of the convolutional permutor H equals

m the replicas of vj are spread apart by at most m time

instances in the received vector y. Therefore, the estimates zj

can be calculated in a pipeline fashion. Since vj ∈ {1, −1},

and takes each of the two values with probability 1/2, we can

form a conditional expectation estimate vˆj of vj as

⎡

⎤

vˆj

=

E(vj |zj )

=

tanh(zj γj )

=

tanh

⎣zj

P L

t∈T

(j)

1⎦ σt2

(8)

Once the estimates vˆj are generated for all data bits vj, j = 1, 2, · · · the next iteration starts with an interference
cancellation step performed by computing

yj(1) = hvj + ξj(1) ,

(9)

B. Iterative Demodulation and Decoding

The received signal y contains M replicas of each transmit-
ted bit vj, j = 1, 2, · · · . Let T (j) denote the set of indices t such that the signal xt, and therefore yt, contains vj. Moreover, by J (t) we denote a set of all indices j such that vj is included in yt. For each bit vj we use a set of received signals {yt}t∈T (j) to form a vector yj. Since each yt, t ∈ T (j) contains vj we have

yj = hvj + ξj

(5)

where h = P/L(1, 1, · · · , 1) and

ξj(,1t) =

P L

(vj − vˆj ) + nt .

(10)

j ∈J (t),j =j

We then proceed with calculating the new estimates vˆj(1) according to (6) and (8).
The estimation and interference cancellation process is repeated for a number of iterations. To avoid reusing the same information throughout the iterations we compute M vectors yj(i,t), t ∈ T (j) for each bit vj at each iteration i. Vector yj(i,t)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
3420

is composed of



yj(,it) =

P L

vj

+

P L

(vj − vj(,it−1)) + nt (11)

j ∈J (t ),j =j






where t ∈ T (j), t = t. The vectors yj(i,t) are used to form M estimates zj(,it) according to (6) and corresponding vˆj(,it)



estimates according to (8).

We consider a two-stage decoding schedule in which I 

iterative demodulation iterations are followed by the decod-

ing of the forward error correction code. For the proposed 

streaming system the demodulation and decoding can be

implemented in a window based manner when a number  of iterations is performed within a window sliding over the

received sequence [13].


α=6 α=5 α=4 α=3 α=2

III. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS

To simplify the derivations we assume that the coupled modulator uses a multiple convolutional permutor constructed from permutation matrices such as the one depicted in Fig. 3. The permutor matrix H contains M permutation matrices in each row and L permutation matrices in each column except for a few first columns. Let us assume that the time t is measured in blocks of symbols equal to the size of the permutation matrices in the multiple convolutional permutor. Time t = 1 corresponds to the first column of H. The ratio α = L/M corresponding to the number of data bits transmitted per channel use is called the modulation load.
By σi2,t we denote the noise-and-interference power at section t of the received vector y at iteration i. By γi,t we denote the SNR of the data bits vj whose replicas are spread over the received signal blocks {t − (M − 1)/2, t − (M − 1)/2 + 1, · · · , t + (M − 1)/2} = T (j) while i is the iteration index. The relation between these quantities can be computed as follows. The SNR equals

γi,t

=

P L

(M −1)/2 μ=−(M −1)/2

1 σi2,t+μ

(12)

according to (7).

The minimum mean squared error of a data bit estimate at iteration i − 1 (see (11)) is a function of the SNR γi−1,t

E vj − vˆj(,it−1) 2 = g(γi−1,t)

(13)

where the function g(·), introduced in [18], is given by

g(a) = E

√ 1 − tanh a + ξ a

2

,

ξ ∼ N (0, 1) ,

and N (0, 1) denotes a standard normal random variable.
The interference contributing to σi2,t consists, according to (11), of the minimum mean squared error terms g(γi−1,t+μ), where μ = −(M − 1)/2, −(M − 1)/2 + 1, · · · , (M − 1)/2, since data bits in these blocks contribute to noise-andinterference power at block t. The contribution of each term g(γi−1,t+μ) needs to be scaled by α = L/M to reflect the





















Fig. 5. AWGN channel capacity (red curve) compared to communication rate achieved by the coupled modulator with two-stage demodulation (blue curve) and the capacities of 2M -PAM modulations, M = 1, 2, · · · , 6 (magenta curves from bottom to top).

amount of the interfering data bits. This finally gives

σi2,t

=

α

P L

(M −1)/2

g (γi−1,t+l) + 1 .

l=−(M −1)/2

(14)

We note that the noise-and-interference power is smaller for t < M since the first columns of H contain fewer non-zero entries. Equations (12) and (14) are initialized according to

γ02,t = +∞ t ≤ 0 ,

(15)

γ02,t = 0 t > 0 ,

(16)

since there is no data transmitted for t ≤ 0 while for t > 0 the data is completely unknown at the beginning of the demodulation process.
At the first stage of the reception process I demodulation iterations are performed. The residual noise-and-interference power of a data bit in block t after I demodulation iterations equals γI,t. The error correction decoding performed at the second stage of the reception process is successful iff

γI,t > θ, ∀t

(17)

where θ is the decoding threshold of the forward error correction code. The convergence of the SNR propagates along the received data stream with some speed s. Thus for each t the number of iterations required to achieve a specific SNR level needs to be I(t) = st, where s is a speed of convergence.

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Communication rate achieved by the coupled modulator with the two-stage decoding schedule is shown in Fig. 5. The blue curve shows communication rates achieved of the coupled modulator with loads α ∈ [2, 6] as a function of the signal-to noise ratio P/σ2 = P given in decibels. The points

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
3421

corresponding to loads α = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 are shown by the blue
stars. The capacity of the real-valued AWGN channel with an
un-constrained input distribution is given by the red curve. The
magenta curves (from bottom to top) correspond to capacities of 2M -PAM modulations for M = 1, 2, · · · , 6. These are
plotted as capacities of the real-valued AWGN channel with inputs constrained to an 2M -PAM constellations in which all
constellation points are equiprobable.
The points on the blue curve are computed assuming
capacity achieving underlying binary codes, i. e. codes with rate CBIAWGN(P/σ∞ 2 ,t), for any t. The magenta curves are computed assuming capacity-achieving non-binary coding for the corresponding 2M -PAM constellation. We notice that the
communication rate of the coupled modulator achieved with
the proposed practical demodulation algorithm exceeds the capacity of 2M -PAM modulation. Moreover, the gap between
the rate of the coupled modulator achieved with the two-stage
schedule and the AWGN channel capacity is diminishing as the
SNR grows. The asymptotic behaviour of the communication
rate achieved with the two-stage decoding is given by the
following theorem. Theorem 1: There exists an α∗ > 0 such that communica-
tion rate achievable by the two-stage decoding satisfies

Ceff (α∗, P ) ≥ CAWGN(P ) for CAWGN(P ) ≥ 5.1, where

1 2

+

1 2

1

−

26 CA2WGN(P )

(18)

CAWGN(P )

=

1 2

log2(1

+

P)

is the capacity of the AWGN channel. Proof: Omitted due to space limitations.

Note that (18) implies that

lim
P →∞

[Ceff

(α,

P

)

−

CAWGN(P )]

=

0

,

and the gap between the achievable rate and capacity is proportional to 1/CAWGN(P ).
The modulation load α∗ in the capacity-achieving regime is approximately equal to the channel capacity itself, i.e.,

α∗ ≈ CAWGN(P ) ,

while the rate of the binary error correction code is

CBIAWGN(P/σ∞ 2 ,t) ≈ 1 .

This can be also noticed from the numerical results presented in Fig. 5 where communication rate corresponding to loads α = 2, 3, · · · , 6 is approximately equal to α bits.
Besides its capacity-achieving property spatially coupled modulation has a number of convenient features. In contrast to multi-level coding schemes all data bits are transmitted at the same power level. Moreover, it is sufficient to use a single forward error correction code. Multiple convolutional permutors can be conveniently constructed from parity-check matrices of LDPCCC codes. The same matrix can be used to encode the forward error correction code and to perform the modulation, first with modulo-two and then with real domain arithmetic. Finally, the two-stage decoding schedule does not

require a feedback loop between the error correction decoder
and the demodulator. This feature can simplify inplementation
of the receiver considerably.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, spatially coupled modulation for streaming
transmission of information is presented. The new format is
based on a superposition of replicated and permuted data
streams which are summed up with an offset. Demodulation
is accomplished via iterative data estimation and interference
cancellation. The resulting communication rate is greater than
that of PAM modulation and approaches the AWGN channel
capacity as the SNR grows.
REFERENCES
[1] J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications. McGraw Hill Higher Education; 4th Edition, 2000.
[2] G. Ungerboeck, “Channel coding with multilevel/phase signals,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 28, pp. 55–67, Jan. 1982.
[3] H. Imai and S. Hirakawa, “A new multilevel coding method using error correcting codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 23, pp. 371–377, May 1977.
[4] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 927–946, May 1998.
[5] J. Pittermann, M. Lentmaier, and K. Zigangirov, “On coded modulation using LDPC convolutional codes,” Int. Journal Electron. Commun (AEU¨ ), vol. 59, pp. 254–257, 2005.
[6] C. Schlegel, M. Burnashev, and D. Truhachev, “Generalized superposition modulation and iterative demodulation: A capacity investigation,” Hindawi Journal of Electr. and Comp. Eng., vol. 2010, Sep. 2010.
[7] D. Truhachev, C. Schlegel, and L. Krzymien, “A two-stage capacityachieving demodulation/decoding method for random matrix channels,” IEEE Tran. on Inform. Theory, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 136–146, Jan. 2009.
[8] A. Jime´nez Felstro¨m and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sept. 1999.
[9] S. Kudekar and H. D. Pfister, “The effect of spatial coupling on compressive sensing,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. on Communications, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Sept. 2010.
[10] C. Schlegel and D. Truhachev, “Multiple Access Demodulation in the Lifted Signal Graph with Spatial Coupling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Inf. Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Aug. 2011.
[11] K. Takeuchi, T. Tanaka, and T. Kawabata, “Improvement of BP-based CDMA multiuser detection by spatial coupling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Inf. Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Aug. 2011.
[12] M. Hagiwara, K. Kasai, H. Imai, and K. Sakaniwa, “Spatially coupled quasi-cyclic quantum LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Inf. Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Aug. 2011.
[13] G. E. Corazza, A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, A. VanelliCoralli, and J. K. Wolf, “Latency constrained protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Iterative Inf. Processing, Brest, France, Sept. 2010.
[14] D. Truhachev, “Achieving AWGN Multiple Access Channel Capacity with Spatial Graph Coupling,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 585–588, May 2012.
[15] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.
[16] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803– 834, Feb. 2011.
[17] S. H. Hassani, N. Macris, and R. Urbanke, “Coupled graphical models and their thresholds,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Dublin, Ireland, Oct. 2010.
[18] M. Burnashev, C. Schlegel, W. Krzymien, and Z. Shi, “Characteristics Analysis of Successive Interference Cancellation Methods”, Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 297–317, Dec. 2004.
[19] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, INP Progress Report 42-154, Aug. 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
3422

