254

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Minimum Distance and Trapping Set Analysis of Protograph-Based LDPC Convolutional Codes
David G. M. Mitchell, Member, IEEE, Ali E. Pusane, Member, IEEE, and Daniel J. Costello, Jr., Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) convolutional codes have been shown to be capable of achieving capacity-approaching performance with iterative message-passing decoding. In the first part of this paper, using asymptotic methods to obtain lower bounds on the free distance to constraint length ratio, we show that several ensembles of regular and irregular LDPC convolutional codes derived from protograph-based LDPC block codes have the property that the free distance grows linearly with respect to the constraint length, i.e., the ensembles are asymptotically good. In particular, we show that the free distance to constraint length ratio of the LDPC convolutional code ensembles exceeds the minimum distance to block length ratio of the corresponding LDPC block code ensembles. A large free distance growth rate indicates that codes drawn from the ensemble should perform well at high signal-to-noise ratios under maximum-likelihood decoding. When suboptimal decoding methods are employed, there are many factors that affect the performance of a code. Recently, it has been shown that so-called trapping sets are a significant factor affecting decoding failures of LDPC codes over the additive white Gaussian noise channel with iterative message-passing decoding. In the second part of this paper, we study the trapping sets of the asymptotically good protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes considered earlier. By extending the theory presented in part one and using similar bounding techniques, we show that the size of the smallest non-empty trapping set grows linearly with the constraint length for these ensembles.
Index Terms—Free distance, graph-based codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) block codes, LDPC convolutional codes, protographs, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) block codes form a class of codes which approach the (theoretical) Shannon limit. Regular LDPC codes were first introduced in 1962 by
Manuscript received August 15, 2011; revised March 20, 2012; accepted May 30, 2012. Date of publication August 07, 2012; date of current version December 19, 2012. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grants CCF-0830650 and CCF-1161754, in part by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant NNX09-AI66G, and in part by the EU FP7 Marie Curie IRG under Grant 268264. This paper was presented in part at the 2008 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, in part at the International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Lausanne, Switzerland, August 2008, in part at the Information Theory and Applications Workshop, San Diego, CA, February 2009, and in part at the 2009 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
D. G. M. Mitchell and D. J. Costello, Jr. are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA (e-mail: david.mitchell@nd.edu; costello.2@nd.edu).
A. E. Pusane is with the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bogazici University, 34342 Istanbul, Turkey (e-mail: ali.pusane@boun.edu.tr).
Communicated by D. Burshtein, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2211995

Gallager [1]. However, they were considered impractical at that

time and very little related work was done until Tanner provided

a graphical interpretation of the parity-check matrix in 1981 [2].

More recently, in his Ph.D. thesis, Wiberg revived interest in

LDPC codes and further developed the relation between Tanner

graphs and iterative decoding [3]. Luby et al. showed that the

performance of LDPC codes could be improved significantly

by introducing irregularity into the code graphs [4], and care-

fully designed irregular LDPC codes with large block lengths

were soon shown to approach capacity on the binary additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [5], [6]. Multi-edge type

LDPC codes [7], a generalization of irregular LDPC codes, have

recently inspired the design of LDPC codes with imposed sub-

structures. LDPC codes based on a protograph [8] (or projected

graph [9]) form a subclass of multi-edge type codes that have

been shown in the literature to have many desirable qualities,

such as fast encoding/decoding, low iterative decoding thresh-

olds, and linear minimum distance growth; see, for example,

[10] and [11], and the references therein.

LDPC convolutional codes, the convolutional counterparts

of LDPC block codes, were introduced in [12] and [13], and

they have been shown to have certain advantages compared to

LDPC block codes of the same complexity [14], [15]. In the

first part of this paper, we use ensembles of tail-biting LDPC

convolutional codes derived from protograph-based ensembles

of LDPC block codes to obtain a lower bound on the free dis-

tance of ensembles of protograph-based LDPC convolutional

codes. Using this bound, we show that it is possible to construct

asymptotically good ensembles of protograph-based LDPC con-

volutional codes, i.e., ensembles that have the property that the

free distance grows linearly with constraint length.

Combining this bound and combinatorial techniques from

[10], we begin by considering a variety of

-regular LDPC

convolutional code ensembles derived from protograph-based

LDPC block code ensembles. For each, we calculate a lower

bound on the free distance to constraint length ratio , com-

pare it to the Costello bound [16] on the free distance growth

rate of random convolutional codes of the same rate, and show

that it exceeds the minimum distance growth rate of the corre-

sponding LDPC block codes. We then construct convolutional

code protographs based on the irregular repeat-jagged-accumu-

late (RJA) and accumulate-repeat-jagged-accumulate (ARJA)

block code protographs [17]. These block code ensembles have

been shown to have improved iterative decoding thresholds

compared to

-regular ensembles while maintaining good

asymptotic distance properties. We show that the free distance

growth rates of the resulting protograph-based irregular LDPC

convolutional code ensembles again exceed the growth rates

of the block code ensembles on which they are based. Large

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

255

free distance growth rates indicate that codes drawn from these

II. PRELIMINARIES

ensembles should have a low error floor under maximum-

likelihood (ML) decoding.

A. Protograph-Based LDPC Block Codes

This leads us to the second part of the paper, which extends the theory to investigate the so-called trapping sets of these asymptotically good LDPC convolutional code ensembles, a significant factor affecting decoding failures of LDPC codes over the AWGN channel under iterative message-passing decoding. Trapping sets, graphical substructures existing in the Tanner graph of LDPC codes, were first studied in [18]. Known initially as near-codewords, they were used to analyze the performance of LDPC codes in the error floor, or high signal-tonoise ratio (SNR), region of the bit error rate (BER) curve. In [19], Richardson developed these concepts and proposed a twostage technique to predict the error floor performance of LDPC codes based on trapping sets, and asymptotic results on average trapping set distributions for both regular and irregular LDPC block code ensembles appeared in [20]. Here, building on work by Abu-Surra et al. [21] and extending the theory developed for distance bounds, asymptotic methods are used to calculate a lower bound on the trapping set numbers for the regular and irregular ensembles of asymptotically good, protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes considered earlier. These trapping set numbers define the size of the smallest, non-empty trapping sets in an ensemble. Again, we use ensembles of tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes to obtain a lower bound on the trapping set numbers of these code ensembles. Similar to the distance analysis, we find that the trapping set numbers of these asymptotically good LDPC convolutional code ensembles grow linearly with respect to the constraint length, and we show that the convolutional trapping set growth rates exceed the trapping set growth rates of the associated block codes. These large trapping set growth rates suggest that the LDPC convolutional codes will exhibit good iterative decoding performance in the high SNR region.
The paper is structured as follows. In Sections II-A and II-B, we describe the protograph construction method and the tools required for the weight enumerator analysis of pro-

A

-regular LDPC block code is defined as the null space

of a binary parity-check matrix , where each row of contains

exactly ones, each column of contains exactly ones, and

both and are small compared with the number of rows in .

An LDPC code is called irregular if the row and column weights

are not constant. It is often useful to represent the parity-check

matrix as a bipartite graph.1 In this context, it is typical to refer

to the graph as a Tanner graph. In the Tanner graph representation

of a parity-check matrix , each column of corresponds to a

variable node and each row corresponds to a check or constraint

node. If position

of is equal to one, then check node

should be connected to variable node in the Tanner graph; oth-

erwise, there is no edge connecting these nodes.

1) Block Protograph Construction: A protograph is a small

Tanner graph

that connects a set of variable

nodes

to a set of check nodes

by a set of edges . A protograph-based LDPC

block code can be created using the “copy-and-permute” (CAP)

operation [8]. The CAP operation consists of two steps: first

taking copies of the original protograph, and then permuting

the edges connecting the check and variable nodes, ensuring

that the type of edge connection is maintained. This operation

is equivalent to taking an -fold graph cover [22], or “lifting,”

of the protograph.

Example 1: An example of a Tanner graph obtained using

the CAP method for a simple base protograph with

is

illustrated in Fig. 1.

The protograph can be represented by a parity check or base biadjacency matrix , where is taken to be the number of edges connecting variable node to check node .
The base matrix associated with the protograph displayed in Fig. 1 is given as

(1)

tograph-based block and convolutional codes, respectively. In Section III, we present a method to obtain a lower bound

on the free distance growth rate of ensembles of periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional codes based on convolutional protographs. Numerical results are then presented in Section IV for a variety of regular and irregular protograph-based LDPC convolutional code ensembles. Section V introduces the notion of trapping set enumerators, and we summarize the work by Abu-Surra et al. [21] on the average trapping set enumerators of protograph-based LDPC block code ensembles. In Section VI, we show that, analogous to the distance analysis in Section III, the trapping set growth rates of ensembles of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes can be bounded below by considering the trapping set growth rates of ensembles of tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes with increasing block length. Numerical results for the trapping sets growth rates of the asymptotically good LDPC

A parity-check matrix associated with an ensemble of pro-

tograph-based block codes can be obtained from by replacing

ones with

permutation matrices and zeros with the

all zero matrix. In the case when a variable node and a check

node are connected by repeated edges (these are referred to

as multi-edge codes), the associated entry in equals and the

corresponding block in consists of a summation of

permutation matrices. The ensemble is defined as the set of all

possible parity-check matrices that can be formed using this

method.

The ensemble has design rate

, where is

the number of variable nodes connected to the channel. Codes

in the ensemble have block length

, and, crucially,

the same degree distribution and edge connectivity as the un-

derlying protograph. Moreover, allowing to be sufficiently

convolutional code ensembles constructed in Section IV are then presented in Section VII. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section VIII.

1A bipartite graph is a graph whose vertices can be divided into two disjoint sets A and B such that every edge of the graph connects a vertex in set A to a vertex in set B.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

256

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Fig. 1. Example of the CAP operation for a protograph.

large results in a protograph-based LDPC block code ensemble.

Fixing the code structure in this way proves useful when an-

alyzing the ensemble. Among other benefits, such as simpli-

fied calculation of the structured ensemble iterative decoding

threshold (see [10]), the calculation of the ensemble average

weight enumerator is greatly facilitated.

2) Weight Enumerator Analysis of Protograph-Based LDPC

Block Codes: In his thesis, Gallager [23] analyzed the average

distance spectrum of a variety of

-regular LDPC block

code ensembles. He showed that for certain

-regular en-

sembles with

and large block length , the minimum

Hamming distance of most members of the ensemble could

be bounded below by

for some positive constant . He

then argued that, since is independent of the block length

, the minimum distance of a typical member of the ensemble

grows linearly with . If such a

exists for a particular

ensemble, then the ensemble is called asymptotically good. In

the remainder of this section, we describe the procedure used

in [10] to obtain the average distance spectrum for a proto-

graph-based ensemble and to test if it is asymptotically good.

Suppose that all variable nodes of the protograph are to be

transmitted over the channel and that each of the transmitted

variable nodes has an associated weight , where

for all .2 Let

be the set of all

possible weight distributions such that

. The ensemble weight enumerator for the protograph is then

given by

(2)

2In this context, the “weight” associated with a particular variable node in the protograph refers to the portion of the overall Hamming weight of a codeword that is distributed over the variable nodes of type in the -fold graph cover. Since we use copies of the protograph, the weight associated with a particular variable node in the protograph can be as large as .

where is the average number of codewords in the ensemble with a particular weight distribution

Combinatorial expressions for have been derived in [10] and

[24]. Note that if

variable nodes are to be transmitted

over the channel, then the weight enumerator is a double

summation over all possible partial weight patterns and

of the punctured and transmitted variable node weights, respec-

tively, where the input weight is the sum of the partial weights

associated with the transmitted nodes (see [10] for details).

The asymptotic spectral shape function of a code ensemble

can be written as

, where

,

, is the Hamming weight, is the block

length, and is the ensemble average weight distribution.

Suppose that the first positive zero crossing of occurs at

. If is negative in the range

, then

is called the minimum distance growth rate of the code en-

semble. By considering the probability

it is clear that, as the block length becomes sufficiently large,

if

, then we can say with high probability

that a randomly chosen code from the ensemble has a minimum

distance that is at least as large as

[10], i.e., the minimum

distance increases linearly with block length . We refer to such

an ensemble of codes as asymptotically good.

B. Protograph-Based LDPC Convolutional Codes

A rate

binary convolutional code [25] can be de-

fined as the set of semi-infinite binary sequences

that

satisfy the equation

, for the parity-check

matrix

given in (3) at the bottom of the page, where

...

...

...

(3)

...

...

...

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

257

the blank spaces in

correspond to zeros and the binary

submatrices

,

, satisfy the

conditions that

for at least one

,

,

and

for all . The transposed parity-check matrix

is known as the syndrome former matrix. We call the

syndrome former memory, and the maximum number of sym-

bols that can be involved in the parity-check equations at

any time is called the decoding constraint length. From (3),

we observe that the decoding constraint length can be at most

. To obtain an LDPC convolutional code, we

require that

be sparse. The sparsity of the parity-check

matrix is ensured by demanding that its rows have Hamming

weight much less than . In general, the code is time-varying.

A rate

time-varying LDPC convolu-

tional code is periodically time-varying with period if

is periodic, i.e.,

, , , and if

,

, , the code is time-invariant. The code is said to be regular

if its parity-check matrix

has exactly ones in every

column and, excluding the first

rows, ones in every

row. The other entries are zeros. We refer to a code with these

properties as a

-regular LDPC convolutional code.

An LDPC convolutional code is called irregular if its row

(after the first

rows) and column weights are not

constant. The notion of degree distribution is used to charac-

terize the variations of check and variable node degrees in the

Tanner graph corresponding to an LDPC convolutional code.

Optimized degree distributions have been used to design LDPC

convolutional codes with good iterative decoding performance

in the literature (see, e.g., [26]–[29]).

1) Convolutional Protograph Construction: Analogously to

block codes, an ensemble of LDPC convolutional codes can be

constructed from a convolutional protograph. We proceed by

forming a semi-infinite convolutional base matrix composed of

component

submatrices

as follows:

ponent submatrices. Starting from a block base parity-check ma-

trix , the

component submatrices are chosen such

that

. Note that the submatrices

necessarily have the same size as , i.e.,

and

.

The resulting infinite convolutional base matrix

created

by repeating these component matrices indefinitely has the same

rate and degree distribution as the block base matrix . This op-

eration can be regarded as an infinite lifting or graph-cover of

(see [31] for details).

In general, a code drawn from the convolutional ensemble

with base matrix

will be time-varying, as the permu-

tation matrices are chosen randomly and independently for

each column of

. However, by limiting the random

selection of permutation matrices to the first columns of

, one can derive periodically time-varying ensembles

for some designated period , and for

, the ensemble

is time-invariant. This will be discussed further in Section III.

Periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional code ensembles

are interesting from an implementation perspective (see [13]

and [32] for further details). In the case of a

-regular

block base matrix , the semi-infinite matrices

and

have a “structured irregularity” due to the “start-up” at

time

. As a result, the check node degrees corresponding

to the first

rows of

(the first

rows of

) are, in general, less than , while the variable node

degrees corresponding to the columns of

and

remain unaltered and equal . In the case of an irregular block

base matrix , the check node degree distribution is similarly

affected by the start up at , while the variable node degree

distribution is again unchanged.

2) Distance Properties of LDPC Convolutional Codes:

Definition 1: The minimum free distance of a convolutional code, denoted by , is defined as the minimum Hamming distance between any two distinct code sequences in the code. Since convolutional codes are linear, this condition simplifies to

...

...

...

(4) where

denotes the Hamming weight of the argument, i.e.,

...

...

...

is the weight of the minimum Hamming weight nonzero code sequence.
Analogously to the case of LDPC block code ensembles,

Note that the convolutional base matrix

defines the

parity-check matrix of a time-invariant convolutional code with

syndrome former memory and decoding constraint length

, where the submatrices are of size

.

An infinite Tanner graph can be associated with

and

can be regarded as a convolutional protograph. An ensemble

of time-varying LDPC convolutional codes can be formed

from

using the protograph construction method based

on

permutation matrices described in Section II-A.

The resulting convolutional ensemble has memory and

decoding constraint length

where the

one can define the notion of an asymptotically good LDPC convolutional code ensemble. An ensemble of convolutional codes is said to be asymptotically good if the minimum free distance grows linearly with respect to the constraint length. This characteristic will be formally defined in Section III, and in Section IV, we show the existence of such ensembles, where it will be shown that we can use the block weight enumerator analysis described in Section II-A2 to calculate a lower bound on the free distance growth rate for a variety of regular and irregular LDPC convolutional code ensembles by making use of tail-biting LDPC convolutional code ensembles.

submatrices have size

.

In order to obtain a convolutional protograph with exactly

III. FREE DISTANCE BOUNDS

the same node connectivity as a block protograph, one can use In this section, we present a method for obtaining a lower

a technique known as edge spreading [30] to construct the com- bound on the average free distance of ensembles of asymp-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

258

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

totically good, periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional removed and added to the first

rows. The resulting

codes derived from protograph-based LDPC block codes. To

tail-biting parity-check matrix with termination factor

proceed, we will make use of a family of tail-biting LDPC con-

is shown as follows:

volutional code ensembles with incremental increases in block

length. The tail-biting ensembles, while not the focus of this

paper, will be used as a tool to obtain a bound on the average

free distance of the desired ensembles of unterminated periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional codes.

...

...

. . . ...

A. Terminated LDPC Convolutional Code Ensembles

Consider the base parity-check matrix

of the proto-

...

graph-based, unterminated LDPC convolutional code ensemble

described in Section II-B. Suppose that the convolutional code

is terminated after

time instants, i.e., after informa-

tion blocks have been encoded into a resulting code sequence

...

...

...

...

...

consisting of symbols. By terminating the convo-

lutional code with parity-check matrix defined in (4) after

(6)

time instants, we obtain the (block) parity-check matrix

(Note that, for

, after removing the last

rows

... . . .

of the terminated parity-check matrix

them to the first

rows, the matrix

and adding contains blocks

. . . ...

on the main diagonal.) Terminating

in such

a way preserves the design rate of the ensemble, i.e.,

, and we see that

has

exactly the same degree distribution as the original block base

i.e., we truncate the matrix from the right-hand side such that

columns remain. The matrix

can be considered as

the base matrix of a terminated protograph-based LDPC con-

volutional code ensemble. In this paper, we will call the “ter-

mination factor” of a convolutional code. Termination in this

fashion results in a block base parity-check matrix with size

and design rate

matrix if

.

Similarly, for

, the parity-check matrix

associ-

ated with the semi-infinite LDPC convolutional code ensemble

derived from

can be terminated to form a parity-check

matrix

associated with a tail-biting LDPC convolutional

code ensemble with block length

. In this case,

the last

rows of the terminated matrix

are removed and added to the first

rows. As

(5)

noted in Section II-B, the resulting tail-biting ensemble can be time-varying, periodically time-varying, or time-invariant, de-

where

is the design rate of the

unterminated LDPC convolutional code ensemble. Assuming

and finite , the terminated base matrix

has

reduced design rate

as shown in (5). As the termi-

nation factor increases, the rate increases and approaches

the design rate of the unterminated LDPC convolutional code

ensemble. Also, as a result of the start-up and termination, the

“structured irregularity” that was noted earlier in the semi-infi-

nite convolutional protograph associated with

now ex-

ists at both ends of the Tanner graph representation of the ter-

minated convolutional base matrix

. When a terminated

convolutional LDPC code ensemble is formed by applying the

protograph construction to

, it has been shown in [30],

[33], and [34] that this structured irregularity results in substan-

tially improved iterative decoding thresholds compared to the

underlying regular LDPC block code ensemble.

pending on how many columns of

are chosen randomly.

As an alternative to obtaining tail-biting LDPC convolutional code ensembles as described previously, we can also apply the

protograph construction method to a tail-biting base matrix.

Given a block base matrix , we first generate a family of

tail-biting convolutional base matrices

with increasing

block lengths ,

, as illustrated

in (6). Since tail-biting convolutional codes are themselves

block codes, we can treat the Tanner graph of

as a proto-

graph for each value of . Then, denoting this

as simply

and replacing its entries with either

permutation

matrices or

all-zeros matrices, using the block proto-

graph construction method discussed in Section II-A, creates

a family of tail-biting LDPC convolutional code ensembles

with block lengths

and parity-check matrices ,

. We note that the ensemble

constructed in this way is identical to the ensemble

con-

B. Tail-Biting LDPC Convolutional Code Ensembles

structed previously in the case when periodically time-varying with period

is time-varying or . However, when

The convolutional base matrix

can also be terminated

,

describes a sub-ensemble of the ensemble asso-

using tail-biting [35], [36]. Here, for any

, the last ciated with , since there are fewer permutation matrices to

rows of the terminated parity-check matrix

are be chosen randomly.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

259

In Section III-C, we lower bound the free distance of an

ensemble of periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional

codes associated with

by the minimum distance of

related ensembles of tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes

associated with

. As noted previously, these tail-biting

LDPC convolutional code ensembles are equivalent to the

ensembles generated by a tail-biting base matrix

if

, i.e., the ensemble associated with

is equivalent

to the ensemble associated with . This equivalence proves useful in Section IV, where we consider the special case when

and perform an empirical analysis of the minimum

distance of the family of ensembles associated with , for

. Since these ensembles have base

matrix , we can apply the block code protograph theory

described in Section II-A2.

C. Free Distance Bound

We begin by showing that tail-biting convolutional codes

can be used to establish a lower bound on the free distance of

an associated unterminated, time-invariant convolutional code

by showing that the free distance of the unterminated time-in-

variant code is bounded below by the minimum distance of any

of its tail-biting versions. We then extend this result to obtain a

similar bound on the average free distance of an ensemble of

time-invariant LDPC convolutional codes with respect to the

average minimum distance of any of its associated ensembles

of tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes. Finally, we show that

this same bound holds for periodically time-varying LDPC

convolutional code ensembles with period

for any

tail-biting termination length that is a multiple of , where

is defined by the edge spreading applied to .

We now establish an important lemma that will later be used

in the proof of Theorem 4.

Definition 2: Let denote a rate

unter-

minated, time-invariant convolutional code with decoding con-

straint length

, syndrome former memory ,

and parity-check matrix

defined in (4). Also, let de-

note the associated rate

tail-biting convolutional

code, with

parity-check matrix

defined in (6),

obtained by tail-biting with termination factor

.

Lemma 3: Let lutional code . Then, the

be a codeword in the convorow vector

It is clear that any codeword

satisfies

,

since row of

,

sponds exactly to the sum

and

, corremod 2, where is the entry in row

and column of

, i.e., each row of

is a linear

combination of rows of

. Suppose, we now partition

into sections of length , i.e.,

where each has length . Consider the vector

of length . Because of the repeated struc-

ture of , we observe that

.

The method used to prove the following bound is based on a technique that was used to prove a minimum distance bound in [37] and [38]. The reader may find it helpful to consult Example 2 shown in the following when considering Theorem 4 and its proof.

Theorem 4: Let

be the minimum distance of the tail-

biting convolutional code

that is obtained by tail-biting

convolutional code with termination factor

. Then,

the free distance

of the unterminated convolutional code

is lower bounded by for any termination factor , i.e.,

Proof: We can consider any codeword

with Ham-

ming weight to be, equivalently, a set of distinct variable nodes

in the Tanner graph of the parity-check matrix, i.e.,

where

are the positions of nonzero en-

tries in . The equivalence arises as follows: if we apply weight

one to each of the variable nodes in and weight zero to the

remaining variable nodes in the Tanner graph corresponding to

(4), then all of the check nodes will be satisfied (i.e., have even

weight). In a slight abuse of notation, we will denote the equiv-

alence between these structures as

.

Here,

is an index vector of

length and the elements ,

, are distinct

by definition. Now, suppose

and consider the modular

index vector obtained by letting

mod , for

. Then, by applying Lemma 3 and using the

equivalence

, the set of variable nodes

is a codeword in the tail-biting convolutional code , i.e.,

(8)

.
Proof: Consider the infinite concatenated parity-check matrix

corresponds to a codeword in the tail-biting convolutional code

, where is the Kronecker delta function:3

iff

and zero otherwise.

(7)

3Here, we avoid the standard notation “ ” for the Kronecker delta function since in this paper, is used to denote a distance growth rate.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

260

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Fig. 2. Example protograph and associated base matrix.

Suppose the codeword has Hamming weight . By the con-

struction of , clearly , since if any of the elements of the

modular index vector are repeated, then we obtain a reduction

in . If the elements of are unique, then the original codeword

(with Hamming weight ) has not been affected by the mod-

ular wrapping back procedure (8) and therefore equals . If,

however, there are

copies of the same index value in

, then the value of is reduced by . In the Tanner graph,

this corresponds to the case when multiple variable nodes in

the codeword are wrapped back on top of each other. If there

is an even number of such nodes at the same position, none of

them survives as a member of the tail-biting codeword , and

if the repetition value is odd, only one node survives. These

reductions are cumulative over all of the repetitive index values

in .

This implies that every codeword in the unterminated convo-

lutional code induces a codeword in any of its tail-biting ter-

minated codes that has Hamming distance at most as large

as the original one. The main result now follows by wrapping

back the unterminated codeword with minimum Hamming

weight.

Fig. 3. Codeword (a) in the infinite Tanner graph of the unterminated convo-

lutional code of Example 2 and the associated wrapped back codewords in the

tail-biting convolutional codes with termination factors (b)

, (c)

,

and (d)

.

where the blank spaces correspond to zeros. Now consider the

following infinite length convolutional codeword with Ham-

ming weight

:

Suppose, without loss of generality, that the equivalent set of variable nodes is

The following example demonstrates the result of Theorem 4.

Example 2: Consider the protograph and associated base matrix shown in Fig. 2.
Using the edge spreading construction technique described in Section II-B, we spread the edges of over the component submatrices

with associated index vector

. The

set is highlighted in Fig. 3(a). We now wrap the convolutional

code back onto itself with different termination factors using

the modular operation defined in (8).

1)

. Here, we wrap the convolutional codeword back

onto itself with modulus

. The resulting mod-

ular index vector is

. Ob-

serve that ,

and all have index value 0, i.e.,

and

for this index value, and we obtain a weight re-

duction of

. Since is odd, only one occurrence

of the resulting variable node appears in the wrapped back

codeword. Examining the other index values, we see that

to form the parity-check matrix of an unterminated time-in-

variant convolutional code with rate

,

syndrome former memory

, and decoding constraint

length

. The convolutional code parity-check matrix is

given as follows:

and

, so

for

these index values, which results in a weight reduction of

2 in both cases. Thus, the variable nodes corresponding

to these index values do not appear in the reduced code-

word. Finally, index values

and

appear

only once, so both of the corresponding variable nodes are

present in the reduced codeword. Then, represents the set

of variable nodes

in the Tanner graph of

the tail-biting convolutional code with termination factor

. We observe that

is a

...

codeword with Hamming weight

in the tail-biting

convolutional code with parity-check matrix . This is

highlighted in Fig. 3(b).

...

2)

. For modulus

modular index vector as

, we calculate the resulting ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

261

and we obtain a weight reduction of 2 for the following inition 5, i.e., where each of the

permutation matrices

index values:

and

. used to construct the submatrices

The resulting tail-biting codeword with Hamming weight varies over the different possible choices. This ensemble

is represented by

. This cor- has design rate

, decoding

responds to the codeword in the tail-biting convolutional constraint length

, and syndrome former

code with parity-check matrix shown in Fig. 3(c). memory . Also, let

denote the associated

3)

. For modulus ,

, the termination factor ensemble of tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes, where, for

is large enough that the modular index vector is . Here, we obtain no weight reduc-
tion for any of the index values and the resulting tail-biting

each

, there exists a code

in the ensemble

obtained by tail-biting the associated LDPC convolutional code

with termination factor

.

codeword with Hamming weight

is represented

by

. This

corresponds to a codeword in the tail-biting convolutional

code with parity-check matrix , for

. The code-

word

is illustrated in Fig. 3(d) for

.

The following simple corollary arises by considering a time-

invariant -fold graph cover of the convolutional protograph

with base matrix

. Here, the low-density criteria of an

LDPC code is satisfied if we choose a sufficiently large positive

integer .

Corollary 8: Let denote the average minimum distance

of the tail-biting LDPC convolutional code ensemble

as-

sociated with ensemble . Then, the average free distance

of the unterminated LDPC convolutional code ensemble is

bounded below by for any termination factor

and

positive integer .

Proof: It follows from Corollary 6 that the free distance

of each member of the unterminated time-invariant

LDPC convolutional code ensemble satisfies

,

where

is the minimum distance of the tail-biting LDPC

Definition 5: Let denote a rate

unterminated, time-invariant LDPC convolutional code

with decoding constraint length

, syndrome

former memory , and parity-check matrix

defined in

(3), where the Tanner graph of

is obtained as an arbi-

trarily chosen time-invariant -fold graph cover of the convolu-

tional protograph associated with

. In particular, the

submatrices

are constructed from the submatrices

, respec-

tively, using the block protograph expansion method described

in Section II-A (choosing the

permutation matrices

convolutional code

for any termination factor

.

Thus, the average free distance

of the unterminated,

time-invariant LDPC convolutional code ensemble is

bounded below by the average minimum distance

of

the ensemble

of tail-biting convolutional codes for any

termination factor

and any positive integer .

Note that, because there is no danger of ambiguity, from

now on we will drop the overline notation when discussing

ensemble average distances. Thus, for an ensemble of convo-

lutional codes,

, and for an ensemble of tail-biting

randomly and independently), and then repeated indefinitely to convolutional codes with termination factor ,

.

form

, such that

note the associated rate

, , . Also, let

de- Note that, since these are ensemble averages, the value of (respectively ) need not be an integer.

tail-biting convolutional code, with matrix , obtained by tail-biting
.

parity-check with termination factor

Remark 9: Suppose the edge spreading procedure is applied

over two component submatrices, i.e.,

. By considering

in Corollary 8, it is easily seen that the average free dis-

Corollary 6: For any termination factor

and positive

integer , the free distance of the convolutional code is

bounded below by the minimum distance of the associated

tail-biting convolutional code .

Proof: The result follows directly from the proof of The-

orem 4 by considering the time-invariant parity-check matrix

tance of a protograph-based unterminated LDPC convolutional code ensemble is bounded below by the average minimum distance of the protograph-based LDPC block code ensemble on which it is based.
We now extend the aforementioned results to ensembles of periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional codes.

in Definition 5 instead of the matrix

defined in Definition 10: Let denote a rate

(4) and replacing

with

, with , and with

unterminated, periodically time-varying LDPC con-

.

volutional code with period , decoding constraint length

We have now shown that the free distance

of a par-

ticular unterminated, time-invariant LDPC convolutional code

is bounded below by the minimum distance of the associ-

ated tail-biting LDPC convolutional code . We now for-

malize the more general result that the same holds for ensemble

averages.

, syndrome former memory , and parity-check

matrix

defined in (3), where the Tanner graph of

is obtained as an arbitrarily chosen periodically time-varying

-fold graph cover of the convolutional protograph with base

matrix

. In particular, for

, the

submatrices

are constructed from the submatrices

,

Definition 7: Let

denote the set (ensemble) of respectively, using the block protograph expansion method de-

all possible time-invariant LDPC convolutional codes with scribed in Section II-A (choosing the

permutation ma-

parity-check matrices

constructed as described in Def- trices randomly and independently), and then repeated periodi-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

262

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

cally (indefinitely) to form

such that

,

,.

Definition 11: Let

denote the ensemble of all pos-

sible periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional codes

with period and parity-check matrices

constructed as

described in Definition 10, i.e., where each of the

permu-

tation matrices used to construct the submatrices

,

, varies over the

different possible choices. This ensemble has design rate

, decoding constraint length

, and syndrome former memory . Also,

let

denote the associated ensemble of tail-biting

LDPC convolutional codes, where, for each

, there

exists a code

in the ensemble

with

parity-check matrix

obtained by tail-biting the associated

periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional code with ter-

mination factor

.

Theorem 12: Consider the ensemble of periodically time-

varying LDPC convolutional codes with period

.

The free distance of this ensemble is bounded below by the

minimum distance of the ensemble of tail-biting con-

volutional codes with termination factor

,

i.e.,

for any

, any termination factor

, and any positive integer .

Proof: Note that a parity-check matrix

associated

with the periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional code with period , memory , and submatrix size

can equivalently be viewed as a time-invariant

LDPC convolutional code with modified submatrix size

and memory

, where the

component submatrices

and

used to form

are derived (respectively) from

Also note that the tail-biting ensembles with submatrix size

obtained from the time-invariant

ensemble by using termination factors

are equiva-

lent to the tail-biting ensembles with submatrix size

obtained from the periodically time-varying en-

semble by using termination factors

.

Based on viewing the ensemble associated with

as a

time-invariant LDPC convolutional code ensemble, the results

of Corollaries 6 and 8 hold, i.e., the average free distance

of the ensemble is bounded below by the average minimum

distance of any tail-biting ensemble with termination

factor

.

Example 3: Consider applying the edge spreading technique

to a block base matrix over

component sub-

matrices and using these to form a convolutional base matrix

in the form of (4). Now take a periodically time-varying

-fold graph cover with period

of the convolutional

protograph with base matrix

, i.e., for

, 1, 2, in-

sert permutation matrices randomly and independently to form

submatrices

,

,

and

from , , and , respectively, and indefi-

nitely repeat these blocks periodically to form

such that

, ,.

Denoting the randomly and independently chosen

component submatrices as

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

, and

, we can write

...

... . . .

...

. . . ... . . .

and

...

. . . ...

where the

... component subma-

trices

and

are given by

by inserting permutation matrices randomly and independently, and subsequently repeated indefinitely to obtain

The LDPC convolutional code parity-check matrix

has

decoding constraint length

and

... ...

can be considered as either:

1) periodically time-varying with period

and syn-

drome former memory

, where the submatrices

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

263

,

and

,

, have size

, or

2) time-invariant with syndrome former memory

,

where the submatrices

and

have size

.

Viewing

as time-invariant, Corollary 8 implies that

the average free distance of the associated code ensemble is bounded below by the average minimum distance of the

tail-biting LDPC code ensemble with associated parity-check

matrix

, for

where the tail-biting is applied

with submatrix size

. As

noted in the proof, this “time-invariant” tail-biting code en-

semble associated with

is equivalent to the “periodically

time-varying” tail-biting code ensemble associated with ,

with termination factors

, where the

tail-biting is applied with submatrix size

.

In the following corollary, we look at the special case of

Theorem 12 when

, i.e., when the tail-biting termina-

tion factor is equal to the period of the periodically time-

varying LDPC convolutional code ensemble. As discussed in Section III-B, in this case, the resulting tail-biting ensemble

associated with

is equivalent to the tail-biting ensemble

associated with

derived from the base matrix

. This viewpoint will allow us to use the mechanics dis-

cussed in Section II-A2 to calculate asymptotic spectral shape

functions for tail-biting LDPC convolutional code ensembles in

Section IV.

Corollary 13: Consider the ensemble of periodically time-

varying LDPC convolutional codes with period

and let the average free distance of this ensemble be . Then,

is bounded below by the average minimum distance

of the LDPC block code ensemble with tail-biting base matrix

for

, i.e.,

(9)

Proof: Fix any

and consider the ensemble

of periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional codes with

period . Also, consider the tail-biting LDPC convolutional

code ensemble with termination factor

. From The-

orem 12, the minimum distance of the tail-biting ensemble

is a lower bound on the free distance of the period-

ically time-varying ensemble . Additionally, as discussed in

Section III-B, since

, this tail-biting LDPC convolutional

code ensemble is equivalent to the ensemble derived from the

tail-biting base matrix

.

Example 3 (cont.): Consider the periodically time-varying

LDPC convolutional code ensemble associated with

parity-check matrix

with

defined earlier.

Now consider tail-biting this ensemble with termination factor

. The resulting associated parity-check matrix is

given as

From Theorem 12, the average minimum distance

of

this tail-biting LDPC code ensemble is a lower bound on the av-

erage free distance of the periodically time-varying LDPC

code ensemble with

and parity-check matrix

,

i.e.,

. Note that, because the permutations used in

, , and ,

, 1, 2, are chosen randomly and inde-

pendently, the ensemble of codes with parity-check matrix

can equivalently be considered as all -fold graph covers of the

protograph with tail-biting base matrix

derived from the convolutional base matrix

. This process

can be repeated for

, and for each , we obtain

the result

.

D. Free Distance Growth Rate
The minimum distance growth rate of an asymptotically good block code ensemble is defined as its minimum distance to block length ratio in the limit as the block length goes to infinity. For the protograph-based tail-biting LDPC convolutional code ensembles with termination factor defined in Section III-B, this ratio is given as

(10)

For convolutional codes, we can normalize the free distance

with respect to different parameters, depending on how we wish

to interpret the free distance growth rate. For LDPC convolu-

tional codes, conventionally defined as the null space of a sparse

parity-check matrix

, it is natural to define the free dis-

tance growth rate with respect to the decoding constraint length

, i.e.,

. In many ways, the decoding con-

straint length of an LDPC convolutional code is an analo-

gous property to the block length of an LDPC block code, and

as such, is a sensible normalization factor for the free distance

growth rate. In particular, note that the pipeline decoder for an

LDPC convolutional code described in [13] requires a processor

that can exchange messages among code symbols. In this

context, we say that an ensemble of protograph-based LDPC

convolutional codes is asymptotically good if the probability of

choosing a code at random from the ensemble with minimum

free distance less than

for some fixed

is

negligible in the limit as the decoding constraint length tends

to infinity.

For the protograph-based, periodically time-varying LDPC

convolutional code ensembles described in Section II-B we ob-

tain in general

(11)

Combining (10) and (11) and bounding using (9) gives us the desired bound on the free distance growth rate as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(12)

264

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

We proceed by defining the maximum free distance

growth rate associated with the family of periodically

time-varying LDPC convolutional code ensembles with period

, submatrix size

, rate

, and decoding constraint length

that can be derived from a convolutional

base matrix

as

(13)

i.e.,

is the free distance growth rate of the periodically

time-varying ensemble with the largest

. Note that, as the

period increases, the tail-biting LDPC code ensemble with

base matrix

becomes a better representation of the unter-

minated LDPC convolutional code ensemble with base matrix

(as

the two structures are indistinguishable).

This is reflected in the ensemble average weight enumerators,

and it is shown in Section IV that increasing

provides us

with minimum distance growth rates that converge to a lower

bound on

when scaled appropriately. The period is an

important factor when considering the implementation of LDPC

convolutional codes (see [13]), so we would typically choose the period no larger than the smallest value of that maximizes

.

Traditionally, a convolutional code is defined by its gener-

ator matrix, and correspondingly, the free distance growth rate is defined with respect to the encoding constraint length , i.e.,

. As a result, existing free distance bounds

for convolutional code ensembles were derived with respect

to [16]. The encoding constraint length corresponds to the maximum number of transmitted digits that can be affected

by a single nonzero block of information digits, and, in gen-

eral, differs from the decoding constraint length . Suppose the

semi-infinite generator matrix is given as

memory elements required for the controller canonical form realization) are equal [25, Th. 2.66]. Now, assuming that the shift registers associated with each input are of equal length, the relation between and can be expressed as
(15)
which implies that, for code rates less than 1/2, the encoder memory is larger than the syndrome former memory, and vice versa for code rates greater than 1/2.
For the protograph-based, periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional code ensembles described in Section II-B we obtain in general
(16)
Assuming (15) holds and bounding using (9) gives us the desired bound on the free distance growth rate as

(17)

Continuing, similar to (13), we can define the maximum

free distance growth rate as

.

The bound of (17) gives us an approximate growth rate that

we can compare to the Costello bound given a periodically

time-varying LDPC convolutional code ensemble defined by

its parity-check matrix.

E. Edge Spreading to Optimize the Bound

There are many ways to construct a convolutional base matrix

using the edge spreading technique. Here, we detail two edge

spreading techniques that we will use in Section IV to construct

-regular convolutional code ensembles.

...

...

...

Design Rule 1: For a rate code ensemble with

,

-regular block

, a simple design rule is to

(14) start with a block base matrix of size

, where

,

,

, and all entries are equal

where the blank spaces in

correspond to zeros and the bi-

nary

submatrices

,

, satisfy the con-

ditions that

for at least one

and

for all . Then, is called the encoder memory and the en-

coding constraint length is at most

.

In [16], Costello derived a lower bound on the free distance

growth rate of nonsystematic time-varying convolutional codes

that guarantees the existence of at least one code with a free dis-

to . We continue by choosing

all-one component

submatrices

to create a binary convolutional

base matrix

. Here, the block base matrix is as small

as possible and, as a result, the decoding constraint length

of the resulting convolutional base matrix is

as small as possible for a binary

-regular convolutional

code. For example,

-regular LDPC convolutional base

matrices can be constructed using (4), where the

tance to encoding constraint length ratio that is bounded below

component submatrices are

for

by the given function of rate. In order to compare the growth

, and

.

rates of protograph-based LDPC convolutional code ensembles Design Rule 2: If

, the code constructed using

to the Costello bound, we must rely on the relationship between Design Rule 1 and defined by base matrix

has syndrome

generator and syndrome former matrices. Assuming that we former memory zero, with repeating, disconnected blocks of

have minimal-basic polynomial encoder and syndrome former the original base matrix on the leading diagonal, i.e.,

matrices, the overall constraint lengths (defined as the number of does not describe a convolutional base matrix. In this case, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

265

F. Discussion

One must be careful in comparing the distance growth rates of

codes with different underlying structures. A fair basis for com-

parison generally requires equating the complexity of encoding

and/or decoding of the two codes. Traditionally, the minimum

distance growth rate of block codes is measured relative to block

length, whereas constraint length is used to measure the free dis-

tance growth rate of convolutional codes. These measures are

based on the complexity of decoding both types of codes on a

trellis. Indeed, the typical number of states required to decode

Fig. 4. Sections of a (3, 5)-regular convolutional base matrix

resulting from a stairway edge spreading with cutting vectors (a)

and (b)

.

at time ,

a block code on a trellis is exponential in the block length, and similarly the number of states required to decode a convolutional code is exponential in the constraint length. This has been an accepted basis of comparing block and convolutional codes

for decades, since ML decoding can be implemented on a trellis

form the all-ones

base matrix and spread the edges for both types of codes.

over component submatrices

such that

The minimum (resp. free) distance is an important param-

. Clearly, the component submatrices eter when implementing ML decoding for block codes (resp.

must contain zeros, and thus, there is a possibility of reducing sequential or ML (e.g., Viterbi) decoding for convolutional

the decoding constraint length below

. In

this situation, we spread the edges of the base matrix over

two component submatrices

in a “stairway” fashion.

This stairway edge spreading operation can be represented suc-

cinctly by a “cutting” vector consisting of step parame-

ters

, where

,

, and each

for

. The element indicates that the

first entries in row of should be copied into the same po-

sition of , for

. The remaining positions of

should be set to zero, and then is set to

.

codes), as, in particular, a code with large minimum (resp. free) distance should display good performance in the high SNR region. However, the minimum/free distance is also an important design characteristic when constructing LDPC block/convolutional codes because it is a code property that is not dependent on the particular realization of the code or the channel. Moreover, this code property has an effect on parameters that are crucial in iterative belief propagation (BP) decoding. For example, the minimum/free distance of an LDPC block/convolutional code is an upper bound on the minimum

Example 4: Consider the (3, 5)-regular block code ensemble.

Since

, we use Design Rule 2 and form

the 3 5 all-ones base matrix . Fig. 4 depicts the nonzero

areas of two (3,5)-regular convolutional base matrices

at time resulting from stairway edge spreadings with cutting

vectors

and

, respectively. According

to the definition of decoding constraint length as the maximum

number of symbols that can be involved in the parity-check

equations at any time , we find that the code associated with

cut

has

and cut

has

. The associated ensembles

of LDPC convolutional codes have decoding constraint lengths

and

, respectively. Note that such a reduction

in constraint length may result in an increase in the growth rate

, depending on the values of in the two cases.

Since stairway edge spreading can result in a reduced decoding constraint length, it is convenient to leave the bound of (12) in the more general form

pseudo-distance of the code, and therefore, it is related to the

size of the harmful pseudocodewords that are known to cause

decoder failures in iterative message-passing decoders (see [37]

for further details). There is also a close connection between

the minimum/free distance and trapping sets in an iterative

decoder. For example, in a regular code with column weight

3, an

trapping set (a codeword) implies the existence of

an

trapping set (see Section V for a definition of

trapping sets).

The definition of decoding complexity is different, however,

for LDPC codes. The sparsity of their parity-check matrices,

along with the iterative message-passing decoding algorithm

typically employed, implies that the decoding complexity per

symbol depends on the degree distribution of the variable and

check nodes and is independent of both the block length and

the constraint length. The construction technique described in

Section II-B1 preserves the degree distribution of the under-

lying LDPC block code, and thus, the decoding complexity per

symbol is the same for the block and corresponding convolu-

tional codes considered in this paper.

(18) For randomly constructed LDPC block codes, state-of-the-art

encoding algorithms require

operations [39], where

This stairway edge spreading is equivalent to the original LDPC

,

, is a “gap” parameter dependent on the parity-

convolutional code construction method introduced by Felström check matrix . Moreover, codes with optimized degree dis-

and Zigangirov [13]. A similar reduction in constraint length is tributions (typically with a large number of degree two vari-

possible for edge spreadings of irregular block base matrices , able nodes) have been designed where the gap satisfies

as will be illustrated in Section IV-B.

, i.e., the code has linear encoding complexity [39]. On

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

266

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Fig. 5. Minimum distance growth rates

for the (3, 6)-regular LDPC tail-biting convolutional code ensembles with termination factor

and

the corresponding lower bounds on the free distance growth rates

of the associated unterminated periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional code

ensembles with period

defined in Example 5.

the other hand, if the parity-check matrix of an LDPC convo- rate

, as originally computed by Gallager [1].

lutional code satisfies the conditions listed in Section II-B, the According to Design Rule 1, since

, we choose

number of encoding operations per symbol is only

[32] the

block base matrix

corresponding

(assuming

has full rank for all ). Thus, the encoding to the following protograph.

complexity per symbol for properly designed LDPC block and

convolutional codes is essentially independent of both the block

length and the constraint length, respectively.

Another possible way to compare the distance growth rates

of LDPC block and convolutional codes is to consider the complexity of implementing the encoding and decoding operations in hardware. Typical hardware storage requirements for both LDPC block encoders and decoders are proportional to the block length , whereas the hardware storage requirements for LDPC convolutional encoders and decoders are proportional to the constraint length [32].

A family of (3, 6)-regular tail-biting LDPC convolutional code

ensembles with

can now be constructed using

(6), where the

component submatrices are

chosen as

for

, 1, 2. For

,

the minimum distance growth rate was calculated for the

tail-biting LDPC convolutional code ensembles with base ma-

trices

using the approach outlined in Section II-A and the

IV. EXAMPLES AND SIMULATIONS

We now present results on the free distance growth rate for

several ensembles of asymptotically good LDPC convolutional

codes based on protographs. We first consider a wide variety of

regular ensembles (including all the regular ensembles originally

considered by Gallager [1]), and for each we calculate a lower

bound on the free distance to constraint length ratio

and

compare it to the corresponding LDPC block code minimum dis-

tance growth rate . We also examine the effect that different

edge spreadings can have on the distance growth rates of the en-

sembles defined from a given base matrix. We then look at two ir-

regular ensembles of practical interest. For these ensembles, we

calculate lower bounds on the free distance to constraint length

ratio

and compare them to the block code minimum dis-

method in [40]. These growth rates are shown in Fig. 5, along

with the corresponding lower bound on the free distance growth

rate

of the associated ensemble of unterminated, peri-

odically time-varying LDPC convolutional codes with period

. Note that, for a rate

ensemble, the lower bound

calculated using (12) is equal to the

lower bound on

obtained using (17) under the assump-

tions of (15), so that the results of Fig. 5 hold also for the free

distance growth rate

.

We observe that the calculated tail-biting convolutional code

ensemble minimum distance growth rates remain constant

at

for

, and then start to decrease

as the termination factor exceeds 11, tending to zero as tends

to infinity. Correspondingly, as exceeds 11, the lower bound

tance growth rates

calculated in [17]. Finally, we present calculated for

levels off at

for

.

some simulation results for two example ensembles.

This agrees with the results presented in [38] and [41] and rep-

A.

-Regular Ensembles

resents a significant increase over the value of

,

the minimum distance growth rate of the (3, 6)-regular LDPC

Example 5: Consider the rate

, (3, 6)-regular block code ensemble [1]. This leveling-off phenomenon occurs

LDPC block code ensemble with minimum distance growth as a result of the fact that the minimum weight codeword in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

267

TABLE I LOWER BOUNDS ON THE FREE DISTANCE GROWTH RATE FOR SOME

-REGULAR ENSEMBLES

a typical member of the unterminated convolutional code en-

semble also appears as a codeword in a typical member of the

tail-biting code ensemble once exceeds 11.

Numerically, it becomes problematic to evaluate

for

large values of , but the leveling-off effect noted in Fig. 5,

which also occurs in all the other cases we have examined,

strongly suggests that the lower bound on

remains

constant once is increased beyond a certain value. This is

consistent with intuition, since, for a fixed constraint length, we

would not expect further increases in the period to result in con-

volutional ensembles with larger free distances. This indicates

that, in terms of maximizing free distance, it is sufficient to

choose a code from the ensemble of periodically time-varying

codes derived from

with period

. Moreover,

using (13), we obtain

, indicating that the free

distance growth rate of the ensemble of general, time-varying

LDPC convolutional codes with base matrix

, considered

as all -fold graph covers of the convolutional protograph with

base matrix

, can be bounded below as

,

consistent with the results of [38] and [41]. Due to the more

complicated nature of implementing the numerical techniques

used in [38] and [41], the authors restricted their study to (3,

6)-regular and (4, 8)-regular ensembles. By contrast, as we will

demonstrate in the remainder of this section, the general and

relatively simple approach adopted in this paper can be used to

evaluate bounds for any protograph-based ensemble.

Example 6: Consider the rate

, (4, 6)-regular LDPC

block code ensemble. The minimum distance growth rate for

this ensemble is

[1]. Again, using Design Rule 1,

since

, we begin with the block base matrix of

size

with all entries equal to two and spread the

edges of over

component submatrices such that

(19)

. We observe that, as in Example 5, the minimum dis-

tance growth rates calculated for increasing provide us with

lower bounds on the free distance growth rate

of the pe-

riodically time-varying convolutional code ensembles that con-

verge to

, which exceeds the value of .

Example 7: Consider the rate

, (4, 8)-regular LDPC

block code ensemble. The minimum distance growth rate for

this ensemble is

[1]. Again, since

,

we employ Design Rule 1, starting with the (4, 8)-regular block

base matrix

. Component base matrices

for

are combined to form a convolutional base

matrix

with syndrome former memory

and de-

coding constraint length

. For the resulting

rate

periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional

code ensembles with period

, the lower bound on

obtained using (12) is given by

. This converges to the lower bound

on the periodically time-varying ensemble free distance growth

rate for

, which is again significantly larger than .

Moreover, we observe that by increasing the density of the graph

from (3, 6)-regular to (4, 8)-regular, both the block and convo-

lutional distance growth rates are increased.

Example 4 (cont.): For the (3, 5)-regular LDPC block code

ensemble, the minimum distance growth rate is

[1]. In this case, since

, we use Design Rule 2 and

apply stairway edge spreading to the all-ones base matrix of

size 3 5. Recall that cuts

, and

give

decoding constraint lengths

and

, respec-

tively. After calculating the corresponding value of in these

cases and using (18), we obtain the lower bounds

and

, respectively, indicating that cut

(which has the smaller decoding constraint length)

is preferable in terms of distance growth rate.

Clearly,

, so this is a valid edge spreading for . A

(4, 6)-regular convolutional base matrix

is obtained by

combining these submatrices as shown in (4). For the resulting

rate

periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional

code ensembles with period

, the lower bound on

In addition to those discussed previously, results for other

-regular ensembles are presented in Table I. For each of

these ensembles, if

, we use Design Rule 1; oth-

erwise, we employ Design Rule 2 and the edges of the all-ones

base matrix of size

are spread over

component

submatrices according to a given cut . The minimum distance

obtained using (12) is given by

growth rate

of each tail-biting LDPC convolutional code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

268

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Fig. 6. Calculated LDPC code distance growth rates with the Gilbert–Varshamov bound for random block code minimum distance growth rates and the Costello bound for random convolutional code free distance growth rates.

ensemble was calculated using the usual spectral shape analysis bound is approached by increasing . Finally, we note that in

and the resulting lower bound on the free distance growth rate using (17) to calculate the free distance growth rates

, we

of the periodically time-varying convolutional code en- assume the encoding constraint length is

. We

sembles with period

was calculated using either (12) saw in Section III-E that when

, it was possible to

or (18).

reduce the decoding constraint length so that

From Table I, we see that, for all the

-regular ensem- by a careful choice of edge spreading. It is likely that a similar

bles considered, the free distance grows linearly with the de- reduction in the encoding constraint length is also possible, and

coding constraint length . In the cases where

, hence, the values we plot in Fig. 6 for the lower bound on

there is the potential to improve the growth rates by choosing are likely to be underestimated in these cases.

better edge spreadings, in particular ones that reduce the decoding constraint length. We also see that some of the bounds on B. Irregular Ensembles

the free distance growth rate

are larger than 0.5, which The notion of degree distribution is an important factor in

reflects the fact that these growth rates are defined with respect the design of irregular LDPC codes. The performance of a BP

to the decoding constraint length, rather than the more com- decoder for LDPC codes is closely related to the variable and

monly employed encoding constraint length.

check node degrees in the Tanner graph of the code. In order to

Fig. 6 displays the calculated distance growth rates for LDPC improve decoder performance, irregular code ensembles with

code ensembles and the corresponding lower bounds on the a variety of node degrees have been proposed (see, e.g., [4]).

growth rates of general ensembles of random block and convo- The node degree distribution also influences the minimum dis-

lutional codes. Here, for the LDPC convolutional code ensem- tance properties of the code ensemble. We have seen so far in

bles, we plot the lower bounds on the free distance to encoding this section that

-regular LDPC block/convolutional code

constraint length ratio

, calculated using (17), in order to ensembles with constant node degrees have minimum/free dis-

be consistent with the bound for the general convolutional code tance that grows linearly with block/constraint length for

,

ensemble.4 We observe that

-regular LDPC block and i.e., they are asymptotically good; however, they also have com-

convolutional code ensembles share the property that increasing paratively poor iterative decoding thresholds. In the remainder

the density of the codes in an ensemble with a particular design of this section, we construct asymptotically good periodically

rate results in an increase in the distance growth rate, i.e., the time-varying LDPC convolutional code ensembles by spreading

LDPC code ensemble distance growth rate moves closer to the the edges of irregular block code protographs that possess good

general code ensemble growth rates. For example,

-reg- asymptotic properties.

ular LDPC block code ensembles have a minimum distance

growth rate relatively close to the Gilbert–Varshamov bound

[43], [44] and one would expect this gap to decrease for

.

Comparing the LDPC convolutional code free distance growth

rates to the Costello bound [16], we also see that the general

Example 8: The following rate

irregular protograph

is from the RJA family [17]: It was shown to have a good iter-

ative decoding threshold

while maintaining

linear minimum distance growth

. We display in

the following the block base matrix and corresponding pro-

4Note that the LDPC convolutional code distance growth rates shown here tograph.

are, in some cases, slightly different than those reported in [42], which were

calculated using an alternative assumed relationship between encoding and de-

coding constraint length. Regardless of the particular assumption employed,

however, the important point is that the free distance grows linearly with con-

straint length in all the cases considered.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

269

Note that repeated edges are permitted to connect pairs of nodes

in this protograph, and correspondingly, the base matrix con-

tains integer entries larger than one. In this case, the corre-

sponding block of associated with integer consists of a sum-

mation of

permutation matrices. For this irregular en-

semble, we will use the stairway edge spreading technique de-

scribed in Design Rule 2 to obtain component submatrices

and using the cut

as follows:

As a result of the stairway cut, the resulting convolutional base

matrix obtained using and in (4) has decoding constraint

length

, i.e., at any time , the max-

imum number of symbols that are involved in the parity-check

equations is

(see Section III-E). We observe that, as in

the previous examples, the minimum distance growth rates of

the tail-biting LDPC convolutional code ensembles calculated

for increasing provide us with lower bounds on the free dis-

tance growth rates

of the periodically time-varying con-

volutional code ensembles with period

using (18), where

. The lower bounds converge to

(for

), significantly larger than the minimum distance growth

rate of the underlying block code ensemble.

Fig. 7. Simulation results for a periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional

code with period

drawn from the (3, 6)-regular ensemble defined in

Example 5 and the associated tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes with termi-

nation factors

, 6,12, and 24.

to the block code result, we obtain a larger lower bound for the free distance growth rate of the ARJA-based periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional code ensemble compared to the RJA-based ensemble of Example 8.

Example 9: The following irregular protograph is from the C. Simulation Results

ARJA family [17].

We now give simulation results for LDPC block and con-

volutional codes based on the protographs of Examples 5

and 9, assuming binary phase shift keying modulation and

an AWGN channel. All decoders were allowed a maximum

of 100 iterations and the block code decoders employed a

syndrome-check based stopping rule. As a result of their block

As illustrated by the undarkened circle in this protograph, vari-

able node is punctured. This implies that the symbols asso-

ciated with the variable nodes of type in any graph cover

should be punctured. The protograph has

variable nodes

connected to the channel and the resulting design rate of the en-

semble is

. In addition, as described in

Section II-A2, the protograph weight enumerator must be mod-

ified accordingly, as shown in [10]. This protograph is of signif-

icant practical interest, since it has

and iterative

decoding threshold

, i.e., modifying the pro-

tograph of Example 8 as shown previously and then puncturing

variable node provides an improvement in both values.

For this ARJA example, as in Example 8, we use Design Rule

2 with cutting vector

to obtain two component

submatrices and as follows:

structure, tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes were decoded

using standard LDPC block decoders employing a BP decoding

algorithm. The unterminated periodically time-varying LDPC

convolutional codes, on the other hand, were decoded by a

sliding-window-based BP decoder [25].

Example 5 (cont.): Consider the rate

, (3, 6)-regular

convolutional base matrix

constructed using component

submatrices

. For simulation pur-

poses, we consider a randomly chosen periodically time-varying

LDPC convolutional code obtained from base matrix

with

and period

. This convolutional code

has syndrome former memory

and decoding constraint

length

, where the submatrices of

have size

. The resulting

BER performance of this code is shown in Fig. 7, along with

the performance of the corresponding tail-biting LDPC convo-

lutional codes with termination factors

, 6, 12, and 24.

We observe that the protograph-based tail-biting LDPC con-

volutional codes outperform the underlying protograph-based

Using (18), the lower bound converges to

(for

), where

(including punctured nodes), signif-

icantly larger than the minimum distance growth rate

of

the underlying block code ensemble.5 In addition, analogously

LDPC block code (which can also be seen as a tail-biting code

with termination factor

). Larger termina-

tion factors yield improved error performance, eventually ap-

proaching the performance of the unterminated convolutional

code, which can be seen as a tail-biting code with an infinitely

5The decoding constraint length can also be considered without the inclusion large termination factor. It should be noted here, however, that

of punctured nodes. In this case, we obtain

.

the block length of the tail-biting convolutional codes, given

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Fig. 8. Simulation results for a periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional

code with period

drawn from the ARJA-based ensemble defined in

Example 9 and the associated tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes with termi-

nation factors

, 4, 8, and 16.

nite termination factor. Again, no error floor is observed since

the code ensemble is asymptotically good and has a large free

distance growth rate

(see also Example 13).

Moreover, for the constraint length

, the water-

fall performance of the code at a BER of

is only 0.13

dB from the iterative decoding threshold of the ARJA block

code ensemble

, and we expect the perfor-

mance to improve for larger . Comparing Examples 5 and 9,

we see that by carefully designing an irregular convolutional

protograph, one can significantly improve the waterfall perfor-

mance of the codes. Analogously to the block code ensembles

on which these convolutional ensembles are based, we observe

that this waterfall improvement comes at the cost of a reduced

distance growth rate (the ARJA-based convolutional code en-

semble has

compared to

for

the

-regular convolutional code ensemble).

V. TRAPPING SETS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED CODES

In [18], MacKay and Postol discovered a “weakness” in the

by

, increases with . The error perfor-

mance improvement, known as the “convolutional gain,” that

is observed when a convolutional code is constructed in such

a way from a block code was demonstrated in [31] and can

be attributed in part to the fact that cycles in the convolutional

code must be at least as large as the corresponding cycles in the

block code [45]. For the constraint length

, the wa-

terfall performance of the LDPC convolutional code at a BER

of

is only 0.04 dB from the iterative decoding threshold

for (3, 6)-regular block codes. As a result of

starting in a fixed state of the convolutional code with semi-in-

finite parity-check matrix

, for larger constraint lengths,

we can observe a crossing of the block code threshold, but the

ultimate threshold of the unterminated ensemble is unknown. (If

the termination in Section III-A is applied, however, it has re-

cently been shown that a significant improvement in the iterative

decoding threshold occurs, relative to the block code threshold.

See, for example, [30], [33], [34], [46], and [47].) We also note

that no error floor is observed for the convolutional code, which

is expected, since the code ensemble is asymptotically good and

has a relatively large distance growth rate

(see

also the trapping set discussion in Example 10).

Example 9 (cont.): We consider a periodically time-varying

LDPC convolutional code obtained from the ARJA-based

convolutional base matrix described in Section IV-B with

and period

. This code has rate

,

syndrome former memory

, and decoding constraint

length

(including punctured nodes). The

resulting BER performance of this periodically time-varying

ARJA-based LDPC convolutional code with period

is shown in Fig. 8, along with the performance of the corre-

sponding tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes with termina-

structure of the Margulis construction of a (3, 6)-regular Gallager code. Small graphical substructures, described as nearcodewords, existing in the Tanner graph of LDPC codes cause the iterative decoding algorithm to get trapped in error patterns. These weaknesses were shown to contribute significantly to the performance of the code in the error floor, or high SNR, region of the BER curve. Richardson developed this concept in [19] and defined these structures as trapping sets. In this paper, trapping sets were shown to have a strong influence on the position and slope of the error floor and the author proposed a two-stage technique to predict the error floor performance of LDPC codes based on computer search strategies: first, examine the Tanner graph for candidate trapping sets; then, evaluate their contribution to the error floor. Asymptotic results on trapping set enumerators for both regular and irregular LDPC block code ensembles were published in [20].
Previously, such weaknesses of LDPC codes on the binary erasure channel (BEC) had been defined as stopping sets [48], which can be viewed as trapping sets on the BEC under BP decoding. Stopping sets also play a role on Gaussian channels but are not dominant. In [49], the authors propose another important subclass of trapping sets called absorbing sets. An absorbing set is defined as a decoder-independent combinatorial object that can be studied analytically. So-called fully absorbing sets have been shown to be stable under bit-flipping operations [50].
In this second part of this paper, we extend the theory presented in Section III and describe a method of forming a lower bound on the trapping set growth rates for the ensembles of asymptotically good protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes considered in Section IV. These growth rates can be used to form an estimate of where the error floor will occur for these codes under iterative message-passing decoding.

tion factors

, 4, 8, and 16.

Similar to Example 5, we observe that increasing the termina-

tion factor results in improved performance for the tail-biting

A. Trapping Set Enumerators for Protograph-Based LDPC Block Code Ensembles

LDPC convolutional codes, with the unterminated LDPC con- We begin with the formalized definition of a trapping set pre-

volutional code being viewed as a tail-biting code with infi- sented in [51].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

271

variable nodes (equal to the number of check nodes). This method of enumerating trapping sets for protograph-based codes is presented in [21].

Fig. 9. Example protograph and a modified version with auxiliary variable nodes.

Definition 14: Let be the parity check matrix of an LDPC

code. An

trapping set is a set of columns of with

a projection that contains

odd weight rows.6 It follows

that an

trapping set can be equivalently defined in the

corresponding Tanner graph of as a set of variable nodes of

size which induce a subgraph with exactly odd-degree check

nodes (and an arbitrary number of even-degree check nodes).

An ensemble average trapping set enumerator

tells us

that, given particular trapping set parameters and , an av-

erage member of the ensemble has

trapping sets. In

order to calculate ensemble average trapping set enumerators

for protograph-based block codes, we make use of combinato-

rial arguments for enumerating codewords of a specified weight

in protograph-based ensembles [24], [40]. The technique intro-

duced in [21] involves considering a two-part weight enumer-

ator for a modified protograph with the property that any

trapping set in the original protograph is a codeword in the mod-

ified protograph. We now briefly describe the procedure.

First, an auxiliary “flag” variable node is added to each check

node in the protograph, as displayed in Fig. 9. Now, consider a

subset with cardinality of the set of variable nodes

; for example,

and

. We

now attach weight 1 to these variable nodes and weight 0 to the

remaining nodes in

. We observe that check nodes

and are satisfied,7 since they both have input weight 2, but

that check node (with input weight 3) is unsatisfied. Thus,

there is

odd-degree (unsatisfied) check node. This is an

example of a (3, 1) trapping set. Thus, contains the subset

.

For any subset of variable nodes, we can satisfy any odd-de-

gree check nodes by assigning weight 1 to the corresponding

auxiliary variable node. Note that the weight of the variable

nodes is

and the weight of the auxiliary nodes is

for this (3, 1) trapping set, which suggests that the

trapping sets of a protograph can be enumerated by applying

a two-part weight enumerator analysis to the modified proto-

graph. We thus consider a two-part weight enumerator over

sets of variable nodes

and auxiliary nodes

, where is the number of variable nodes

in the initial protograph and is the number of auxiliary

B. Asymptotic Trapping Set Enumerator Analysis

Suppose that a modified protograph contains variable

nodes connected to the channel. Also, suppose that each of

the variable nodes has an associated weight , where

for all .8 Let

be the set of all possible weight distributions such that

. Finally, let

be

the set of all weight distributions such that

,

where

for all . Then, the two-part ensemble

average trapping set weight enumerator for the modified pro-

tograph is given by

where is the average number of codewords in the modified ensemble with weight distribution
The two-part normalized logarithmic asymptotic trapping set spectral shape function of a code ensemble can be written as

where

,

,

, and are

Hamming weights, is the block length, and is the two-

part ensemble average weight distribution.

Suppose now we are interested in the ratio of to for an

trapping set enumerator. Let

,

. As proposed in [21], we may now classify the trapping

sets as

i.e., contains all the possible sets of any columns of

parity-check matrix ,

, such that the projection of

each set contains exactly odd weight rows, where

.

For each , we define

to be the -trapping set number,

which is the size of the smallest, non-empty trapping set in

. Now consider fixing and plotting the normalized weight

against the two-part asymptotic spectral shape function

. Suppose

and the first zero crossing

of

occurs at

. If

is negative in the

range

, then the first zero-crossing

is

called the -trapping set growth rate of the code ensemble. If

exists, and if the probability

6The projection of a set of columns, indexed by

, of a given

matrix ,

, is an

matrix consisting of the elements

where

and

.

7Recall that a check node corresponds to a row of a parity-check matrix. In this sense, if the check node has an even number of connections with nonzero weights, the parity-check sum is equal to zero modulo 2 and that particular sum (or check node) is deemed to be satisfied. If the check sum is equal to one modulo 2 (or the check node has an odd number of connections), the parity-check equation fails and we say the node is unsatisfied.

for a sufficiently large block length , we can say with high probability that a code drawn randomly from the ensemble has
8Since we use copies of the protograph, the weight associated with a particular variable node in the protograph can be as large as .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

272

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Fig. 10. Example of a modified convolutional protograph (a) and corresponding tail-biting versions for (b)

, and (c)

.

a -trapping set number is at least as large as

, i.e., that where is the

identity matrix. For any

,

increases linearly with . This implies that, for suffi- we can now calculate the -trapping set number

for

ciently large , a typical member of the ensemble has no small the ensemble of tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes derived

trapping sets in .

from base parity-check matrix .

Experimental results have indicated that the failure events

that dominate the performance of LDPC codes with iterative

decoding in the error floor region of the BER curve can be

attributed to trapping sets of small size [19]. (Since small

trapping sets contain relatively few variable nodes, it is more

likely that all of the variable nodes have unreliable channel

values in a small trapping set than in a larger trapping set.)

Thus, an ensemble that guarantees no small trapping sets on

average is highly desirable. For example, two particularly prob-

lematic graphical configurations in the

Margulis

construction of a (3, 6)-regular Gallager code [52] were found

to be a (12, 4) trapping set, followed by a (14, 4) trapping

set [18], [19]. These harmful configurations each appear 1320

times in the Tanner graph and dominate the iterative decoding

performance over the AWGN channel in the high SNR region

[19]. For the (12, 4) trapping set,

,

and thus,

. Similarly,

. In an inves-

tigation of the error floor of codes over the binary symmetric

As discussed in Section III, as the termination factor in-

creases, the base matrix

becomes a better representation

of the infinite convolutional base matrix

. To calculate

the trapping set number of the convolutional code ensemble,

we should analyze the modified convolutional protograph asso-

ciated with

, which we denote by

. An example

of the modified convolutional protograph of Example 2 (see

Section III-C) is shown in Fig. 10(a), and the corresponding tail-

biting versions for

and 2 are shown in Fig. 10(b) and (c),

respectively.

Note that as increases, the modified tail-biting base matrix

becomes a better representation of

. This is reflected

in the trapping set enumerators, and we will show in Section VI

that the -trapping set numbers

obtained for increasing

can be used to form a lower bound on the -trapping set

numbers of the ensembles of periodically time-varying LDPC

convolutional codes with period .

channel (BSC), Chilappagari et al. [51], [53] found that the two most harmful configurations of the Margulis construction using the Gallager B decoder were the 1320 occurrences of a (4, 4) trapping set, followed by the 11 088 occurrences of a (5, 5) trapping set. Both and exist in the set .

VI. TRAPPING SET BOUNDS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODE ENSEMBLES
Methods to form an ensemble of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes from a convolutional protograph were presented in Section II-B. In this section, we present a technique

C. Trapping Set Enumeration of Tail-Biting Convolutional Codes

Recall that, in Section III-B, tail-biting LDPC convolutional

code ensembles were derived from tail-biting base parity-check

matrices

for termination factors

. To study the average trapping set enumerators of

these tail-biting code ensembles, we add auxiliary flag variables

to obtain a lower bound on the -trapping set number of an ensemble of periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional codes derived from protograph-based LDPC block codes. Due to the connection between enumerating trapping sets of a protographbased code ensemble and enumerating codewords of the code ensemble derived from the modified protograph, the structure of this section closely follows that of Sections III-C and III-D.

to the protograph following the procedure detailed previously. A. Lower Bound on the Convolutional -Trapping Set Number

The resulting modified tail-biting base matrix is given by

We begin by presenting a technique to obtain a lower bound

(20) on the convolutional -trapping set number

for the

time-invariant convolutional code with parity-check matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

273

. This is achieved by showing that

must be

at least as large as the -trapping set number

of an

ensemble of block codes obtained by tail-biting termination of

the underlying convolutional code ensemble with termination

factor

. The reader may find it helpful to consult

Example 10 when considering Theorem 15 and its proof.

Theorem 15: Consider a time-invariant convolutional code

as described in Definition 2. Let

be the -trapping

set number of a tail-biting convolutional code

formed by

tail-biting the convolutional code with termination factor

. Then, for any

, the -trapping set number

of the unterminated LDPC convolutional code is

bounded below by

for any termination factor

;

i.e.,

Proof: Consider the unterminated convolutional code .

Now take any

trapping set that consists of a set of vari-

able nodes

allows us to use the techniques in the proofs of Lemma 3 and

Theorem 4.9

Recall that an

trapping set is a set of variable nodes

that induce odd-degree check nodes. The odd-degree check

nodes can be satisfied by setting appropriate auxiliary flag vari-

ables to have weight one. Thus, combining (23) and (24), the

proposition is equivalent to the claim that

where

and

is a codeword of the modified tail-biting convolutional code

with parity-check matrix . Here, the auxiliary variable node

is attached to check node for

.

The

trapping set of the unterminated convolutional

code with parity-check matrix

defined by (21) and (22)

can equivalently be viewed as a codeword10 of the modified

convolutional code with parity-check matrix

, where

(21)

that connect to a set of exactly odd-degree check nodes

(22)

in the induced bipartite subgraph. Here, the vectors

and

are index vectors of length and , respectively, and the entries

of each vector are distinct. Fix

and consider the

modular index vector (resp. ) obtained by letting

mod , for

(resp.

mod ,

for

). This modular operation corresponds to

“wrapping back” the unterminated convolutional code as a

tail-biting convolutional code with termination factor .

Then, the sets

and we use the notation that

if , otherwise

(resp.

if

, otherwise

).

As in the proof of Lemma 3, now consider the semi-infinite

concatenated parity-check matrix

It is clear that any codeword
code satisfies into sections of length

in the modified convolutional
. Suppose next that we partition , i.e.,

where each section has length

, and consider the

vector

of length

. Due to the

(23) repeated structure of , we observe that

,

thus proving that is a codeword in the modified tail-biting

and

code with parity-check matrix , or equivalently, an

trapping set of the tail-biting convolutional code with parity-

check matrix .

The values of and are determined as follows: if the ele-

ments of the modular index vectors and are still unique, then

we say that the original

trapping set has not been affected

(24) by the wrapping back procedure and therefore, equals and

yield an

trapping set in the Tanner graph of the tail-biting

parity-check matrix

, where

is the Kronecker delta

function:

iff

, and zero otherwise. In order to

prove this statement, we first translate this trapping set structure

9Note that the term “modified code” refers to the code with an associated Tanner graph that has been modified from the original Tanner graph by connecting one distinct auxiliary flag variable node to each check node as described in Section V-A, or, equivalently, the code with a parity-check matrix that has been modified from the original parity-check matrix by appending an identity matrix, as described in Section V-C.

into a codeword in the associated modified code, which in turn 10This will be demonstrated in Example 10.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

274

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Fig. 12. (3, 3) trapping set in the tail-biting convolutional protograph with ter-

mination factor

.

Fig. 11. (a) (7, 5) trapping set in the convolutional protograph associated with

convolutional base matrix

, and (b) the corresponding codeword in the

modified convolutional protograph with parity-check matrix

.

Fig. 13. (5, 3) trapping set in the tail-biting convolutional protograph with ter-

mination factor

.

equals . If, however, there are

copies of the same index

value in (resp. ), then the value of (resp. ) is reduced by

. This corresponds to the case when multiple variable or

check nodes in the trapping set are wrapped back on top of each

other. If there is an even number of such nodes at the same po-

sition, none of them survive as a member of the tail-biting

trapping set, and if the repetition value is odd, only one node

survives. These reductions are cumulative over all the repetitive

index values in and .

This implies that a trapping set in the unterminated convolu-

tional code induces a trapping set in any of its tail-biting ter-

minated codes that has at most the same size as the original

one. It follows that the smallest trapping set size of an untermi-

nated convolutional code is at least as large as the smallest

trapping set size of any of its associated tail-biting convolutional

codes , i.e., codes with any termination factor

.

with termination factor

. The resulting modular index vec-

tors, with modulus 6 and 3, respectively, are

and

. Observe that index values and

equal 0, i.e.,

for this index value, and we obtain the re-

duction value of

. Since is even, the variable nodes

corresponding to these index values do not appear in the re-

duced trapping set. In addition, index values , , and

equal 2, i.e.,

for this index value, and we obtain

the reduction value of

. Since is odd, only one of

the variable nodes corresponding to these index values appears

in the reduced trapping set. Thus, represents the set of vari-

able nodes

in the (3, 6)-regular tail-biting

convolutional protograph with parity-check matrix , and

. A similar reduction in is obtained as

a result of the equality

. Hence,

and the reduced set of check nodes represented

Example 10: Consider the (3, 6)-regular LDPC convolutional by is

.

code ensemble constructed using Design Rule 1. Here, the

The code sequence corresponding to is

, and

component submatrices forming base matrix

are it induces a subgraph in the tail-biting protograph with three

chosen as

for

, 1, 2. The convolutional proto- odd-degree check nodes ( , and ), i.e., the modular index

graph corresponding to

is displayed in Fig. 11(a). Now, vectors and represent a (3, 3) trapping set in the Tanner

consider the set of variable nodes

graph of a (3, 6)-regular tail-biting convolutional protograph

with termination factor

, as illustrated in Fig. 12.

(25) By setting the termination factor

, for example, with

modulus

and

, respectively, the resulting

in this protograph. We observe that the

nodes in this set in- modular index vectors are

and

duce

odd-degree check nodes

,

, and the set of variable nodes corresponding to is

i.e., the resulting subgraph corresponds to a (7, 5) trapping set

. We observe from Fig. 13 that

in the convolutional protograph. This trapping set is highlighted induces three odd-degree check nodes

(it is

in Fig. 11(a). We observe in Fig. 11(b) that after modifying the easy to check that the set corresponds to the modular index

convolutional protograph and setting the auxiliary variables to vector ), and thus, the set corresponds to a (5, 3) trapping

appropriate values, this (7, 5) trapping set can be viewed as a set in the tail-biting convolutional protograph with termination

codeword in the modified convolutional protograph.

factor

.

Suppose, without loss of generality, that the (7, 5) trapping set For the termination factor

, with modulus

has index vectors

and

. and

, respectively, we obtain the modular index vectors

Consider setting

. By wrapping the untermi-

and

. The only reduction

nated code onto itself with modulus

for variable nodes occurs for

. Thus, in the tail-biting convolu-

and with modulus

for check nodes, we obtain a code se- tional protograph with termination factor

, we obtain a

quence in the (3, 6)-regular tail-biting convolutional protograph (7, 3) trapping set. Finally, for

, with modulus and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

275

TABLE II

SIZE

OF THE TRAPPING SET IN THE (3, 6)-REGULAR

TAIL-BITING CONVOLUTIONAL CODE WITH TERMINATION FACTOR

CORRESPONDING TO THE (7, 5) TRAPPING SET DEFINED BY (25)

IN THE CONVOLUTIONAL PROTOGRAPH

The result of Corollary 17 can now be extended to an ensemble of periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional codes.
Theorem 18: Consider the ensemble of periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional codes with period

as described in Definition 11. Let

be

the average -trapping set number of this ensemble. Then,

for

, any positive integer , and any

, respectively, we obtain the modular index vectors

,

is bounded below by

, where

and

; i.e., there is no reduction in the (7, 5) trapping set of is the average -trapping set number of the ensemble

of

the tail-biting convolutional protograph with termination factor tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes, i.e.,

. Table II displays the values obtained for the size of the trapping set existing in the tail-biting convolutional protograph

(26)

with termination factor that corresponds to the (7, 5) trapping

Proof: Recall, from the proof of Theorem 12, that a pe-

set defined by (25).

riodically time-varying LDPC convolutional code with pe-

Now consider an unterminated time-invariant LDPC convolutional code obtained by taking a time-invariant -fold graph cover of the convolutional protograph with base matrix
, as described in Definition 5. Then, the following corollary for protograph-based convolutional codes follows.

Corollary 16: Let

be the -trapping set number

of the tail-biting LDPC convolutional code

obtained by

tail-biting with termination factor

. Then, for any

, the -trapping set number

of the untermi-

nated time-invariant LDPC convolutional code is bounded

below by

, for any termination factor

.

Proof: The result follows directly by replacing with

and with in the proof of Theorem 15.

riod and parity-check matrix

, with submatrix size

, can equivalently be viewed as a

time-invariant LDPC convolutional code with modified subma-

trix size

and memory

.

Consequently, the results of Corollaries 16 and 17 can be ap-

plied to this time-invariant ensemble, i.e., the average -trap-

ping set number

of the time-invariant ensemble is

bounded below by the average -trapping set number

of any associated tail-biting ensemble with termination factor

and block length

. It follows, using a

similar argument to that described in the proof of Theorem 12,

that the average -trapping set number

of the pe-

riodically time-varying ensemble is bounded below by the

average -trapping set number

of any tail-biting en-

We have now shown that the -trapping set number of an unterminated, time-invariant, protograph-based LDPC convolutional code is bounded below by the -trapping set number of any associated tail-biting LDPC convolutional code. We now formalize the more general result that the same holds for ensemble averages.

Corollary 17: Consider the set (ensemble) of time-in-

variant LDPC convolutional codes as described in Definition

7. Denote by

the average -trapping set number of the

semble with termination factor

.

In Section VII, we will consider a sequence of LDPC tail-

biting convolutional code ensembles derived from base matrices

in the form of (20) for termination factors

and, for each , consider the special case of Theorem 18

when

, i.e., when the tail-biting termination factor is

equal to the period of the periodically time-varying LDPC

convolutional code ensemble. Recall that, in this case, the re-

sulting tail-biting ensemble associated with

is equivalent

associated tail-biting LDPC convolutional code ensemble

to the tail-biting ensemble associated with

derived from

with termination factor

. Then, the average -trapping the base matrix

.

set number

of the unterminated LDPC convolutional Then, considering the ensemble

of periodically

code ensemble is bounded below by

for any termi- time-varying LDPC convolutional codes with period

nation factor

,

, and positive integer .

, and letting the average -trapping set number of

Proof: By using Corollary 16, it is clear that, for every this ensemble be denoted as

, it follows that

is

member of the ensemble ,

for bounded below by the average -trapping set number

any

and any termination factor

. The result of the LDPC block code ensemble with tail-biting base matrix

then follows directly for any termination

for any

and

, i.e.,

factor

and any positive integer .

(27)

Since there is no danger of ambiguity, from now on we will

drop the overline notation when discussing ensemble average

trapping set numbers. Thus, for an ensemble of unterminated

convolutional codes,

, and for an en-

semble of tail-biting convolutional codes with termination

factor ,

. Note that, since these are en-

B. Elementary Trapping Sets
So far, we have considered a general notion of trapping sets following Definition 14. However, there exists an important subset of trapping sets called elementary trapping sets.

semble average trapping set numbers,

and

Definition 19: An

elementary trapping set is a set

need not be integers.

of columns of a parity-check matrix with a projection that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

276

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Fig. 14. (7, 5) elementary trapping set in the Tanner graph of a (3, 6)-regular convolutional protograph.

TABLE III TAIL-BITING CONVOLUTIONAL CODE TRAPPING SET TYPES (NON-ELEMENTARY OR ELEMENTARY) CORRESPONDING TO THE (7, 5) ELEMENTARY TRAPPING SET IN THE CONVOLUTIONAL
PROTOGRAPH OF EXAMPLE 10

biting ensembles for trapping sets in general following Defi-

nition 14. The interesting question of enumerating elementary

trapping sets for LDPC convolutional code ensembles remains

an open problem. However, as was discussed in [21] for LDPC

block code ensembles, it is expected that the lower bounds cal-

culated for the -trapping set number

of protograph-

based LDPC convolutional code ensembles obtained using the

definition of trapping sets in general (Definition 14) will be ap-

proximately the same as those calculated using the definition

of elementary trapping sets (Definition 19). This is because, for

small and , most of the trapping sets are in fact elementary.

only contains rows with weights 0, 1, or 2 and exactly

weight 1 rows.

Equivalently, an

elementary trapping set of a Tanner

graph is a set of variable nodes of size which induce a subgraph

with only degree-one and degree-two check nodes, and exactly

degree-one check nodes.

Extensive simulations (see, e.g., [19]) have shown that in

fact most of the decoding failures in iterative decoding corre-

spond to elementary trapping sets. This is because the low con-

nectivity of these check nodes to the rest of the subgraph re-

sults in the trapping set not being able to obtain enough inde-

pendent (and possibly helpful) messages during decoding itera-

tions. Weight enumerators for elementary trapping sets of pro-

tograph-based LDPC block code ensembles can be calculated in

exactly the same way as for trapping sets in general after intro-

ducing extra constraints on the check node degrees; see [21] for

further details. However, we will see from the next example that

the bounding techniques for protograph-based LDPC convolu-

tional code ensembles detailed in Section VI-A may not imme-

diately be applied.

Example 10 (cont.): Consider the set of variable nodes

in the (3, 6)-regular unter-

minated convolutional protograph. The set corresponds to

a (7, 5) elementary trapping set and is highlighted in Fig. 14.

When we apply the modular wrapping back procedure defined

in Section VI-A, however, the resulting trapping set in the

tail-biting convolutional code may be non-elementary. The

trapping set types of this set in the associated tail-biting

convolutional codes with termination factors are displayed in

Table III. We observe that, as becomes sufficiently large, the

tail-biting convolutional code trapping set size

and type

becomes equal to the size

and type of trapping set in the

unterminated convolutional protograph.

C. Convolutional -Trapping Set Growth Rate

As noted in Section V-B, the -trapping set growth rate of a

block code ensemble is defined as its -trapping set number to

block length ratio in the limit as

. For the protograph-

based tail-biting LDPC convolutional code ensembles defined

in Section III-B, this ratio is given by

(28)

Analogous to the free distance growth rate definition in

Section III-D, the -trapping set growth rate of an ensemble

of LDPC convolutional codes can be defined as the ratio of the

-trapping set number to either its encoding constraint length

or its decoding constraint length , in the limit as

or

, respectively. The -trapping set growth rate of the

unterminated, periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional

code ensemble with base matrix

defined with respect to

the decoding constraint length is expressed as

(29)

Then, combining (27)–(29) gives us the desired lower bound

(30)

for any period

and

.

Note that (30) assumes the longest possible decoding con-

straint length

. In the case of reduced con-

straint lengths, such as those resulting by following Design Rule

2, the lower bound in (30) is given by

We note from Example 10 that an elementary trapping set

(31)

in the Tanner graph of an unterminated convolutional code can

result in a non-elementary trapping set in the Tanner graph of If

, then (31) reduces to (30).

a tail-biting convolutional code for small termination factor . A similar procedure can be followed to obtain the -trapping

Thus, in Section VII, we investigate the enumerators of tail- set growth rate of the unterminated, periodically time-varying

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

277

Fig. 15. Zero-contour curves for the (3, 6)-regular tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes defined in Example 10.

LDPC convolutional code ensemble with base matrix

(3, 6)-regular block code ensemble,

defined with respect to the encoding constraint length . Since

, where is the minimum distance growth rate for the

LDPC convolutional codes are described by their parity-check (3, 6)-regular ensemble, as originally calculated by Gallager [1].

matrix, we must use the relationship between encoder and syn- Furthermore, for larger values of , the value for

agrees

drome former memories (15) to form an expression based on with the earlier results for the minimum distance growth rates the parameters of the parity-check matrix. In this case, we ob- of tail-biting convolutional codes given in Example 5.

tain the following relationship:

As ranges from 0 to , the points

trace out the so-called zero-contour curve for a proto-

graph-based block code ensemble [21]. Note that we are

particularly interested in small values of , since this means

that the ratio of induced odd-degree check nodes to variable (32) nodes is small. This implies that there are relatively few odd-de-

gree check nodes available to pass messages to a large number Since there are no existing trapping set bounds for convolutional of variable nodes, suggesting that the decoder may get stuck in

code ensembles with which to compare values of

, such a subgraph. The zero-contour curves for the (3, 6)-regular

we will restrict our attention to the growth rates Section VII.

in tail-biting LDPC convolutional code ensembles with termi-

nation factors

are shown in Fig. 15), and the

-trapping set growth rates are highlighted for

.

VII. TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODE ENSEMBLES
We now present a trapping set analysis for several asymptotically good ensembles of unterminated, periodically timevarying LDPC convolutional codes. As described in Section VI, we make use of ensembles of tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes to obtain lower bounds on the desired -trapping set growth rate of ensembles of periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional codes.

The zero-contour curve is key to understanding the role of

trapping sets in iterative decoding. Recall that, for any fixed

, it is desirable that the size of the smallest non-empty

trapping set

, called the -trapping set number,

should be as large as possible, since small trapping sets domi-

nate iterative decoding performance in the error floor [19]. Con-

sequently, we want the -trapping set growth rate

of

a tail-biting convolutional code ensemble to exist and to be as

large as possible for each value of . In the zero-contour plot,

a fixed value of

corresponds to the straight line

A.

-Regular Ensembles

. Therefore, for each (corresponding to the set ),

we hope that the point

,

, on

Consider once more the standard (3, 6)-regular LDPC convo- the zero-contour curve lies as far as possible from the origin,

lutional code ensemble constructed using Design Rule 1, where implying a large -trapping set growth rate. In Fig. 15, the

the

component submatrices are chosen as case

(corresponding to the set

) is highlighted.

for

, 1, 2. We now proceed to calculate the Tracing the line

from left to right, we see that the en-

-trapping set growth rate

for the modified tail-biting semble with termination factor

has the smallest -trap-

convolutional code ensembles with base parity-check matrices ping set growth rate

and is closest to the origin. Con-

for various fixed values of and increasing values of the tinuing, the growth rates

increase as we move from

termination factor . Note that setting

corre- left to right crossing each zero-contour curve until we reach the

sponds to the minimum distance growth rate problem consid- largest growth rate (which is equal for the tail-biting ensembles

ered in Section IV. Thus, for

, which corresponds to the with

).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Fig. 16. -trapping set growth rates for Example 10.

We observe in Fig. 15 that

for

and all

, i.e., the -trapping set growth rates

are decreasing as increases beyond 11 for all values

of

. This is analogous to the decrease in the minimum dis-

tance growth rate with increasing observed in Section IV. If a

zero-contour curve of ensemble A is always below the zero-con-

tour curve of ensemble B, then, in general, we would expect a

code drawn from ensemble A to exhibit poorer error floor per-

formance than one drawn from ensemble B. Thus, we would ex-

pect worse error floor performance with increasing for the tail-

biting convolutional code ensembles for a fixed block length.11

For this (3,6)-regular ensemble, the lower bound on

is calculated using (30), since

was con-

structed using Design Rule 1. The -trapping set growth rates

for Example 10 are plotted in Fig. 16 for

, 0.01, and 0.05.

We observe that, once the termination factor of the tail-biting

convolutional code ensemble exceeds 11, the -trapping set

growth rates

of the tail-biting convolutional code

ensembles begin to decrease and tend to zero as the termination

factor

(i.e., as the block length of the base matrix

).Using (30), the tail-biting growth rates provide

us with a lower bound on

, the -trapping set growth

rate of the periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional code

ensemble. Analogously to the lower bounds calculated for the

free distance growth rates in Section IV, we find that the lower

bounds calculated for

level off for each distinct

value of as

exceeds 11. Moreover, note that the curves

for

correspond to the lower bound on the ensemble free

distance growth rates

and tail-biting minimum distance

growth rates

calculated in Example 5 and displayed in

Fig. 5. Finally, we note the significant increase in the value of

for

compared to

, the -trapping

set growth rate of the underlying block code ensemble.

Example 11: Consider the rate

, (3, 9)-regular LDPC

code ensemble with the all-ones base matrix of size 3 9. We

Fig. 17. Convolutional lower bound zero-contour curves for several -regular ensembles.
TABLE IV BLOCK CODE -TRAPPING SET GROWTH RATES AND LOWER BOUNDS ON THE
CONVOLUTIONAL -TRAPPING SET GROWTH RATES FOR SEVERAL VALUES OF FOR THE REGULAR (3, 9)-ENSEMBLE

form a convolutional base matrix

using Design Rule 1.

Values for the block code ensemble minimum distance growth

rate and the lower bound on the convolutional code ensemble

free distance growth rate were presented in Table I. For this rate

ensemble, the lower bound on

is calcu-

lated using (30). We observe that, as in Example 10, the -trap-

ping set growth rates calculated for fixed values of with in-

creasing provide us with a constant lower bound on the con-

volutional -trapping set growth rate for sufficiently large ,

which exceeds the value of

, the -trapping set growth

rate of the underlying block code ensemble. The bounds calcu-

lated for several values of are given in Table IV.

11We observe from the zero-contour curves of Example 10 that increasing

results in smaller -trapping set growth rates for

. However, we must

be careful in this case to remember that the block lengths also increase and the

-trapping set number is

.

Just as we expect the tail-biting ensemble zero-contour curve

values

to correspond to the minimum distance growth

rates of the associated block code ensembles, we expect that the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

279

Fig. 18. Block zero-contour curves and convolutional lower bound zero-contour curves for the RJA and ARJA ensembles.

lower bound on the free distance growth rate

of the reg- Example 13: As a final example, we return to the ARJA-

ular LDPC convolutional codes (found in Section IV) to corre- based LDPC convolutional code ensemble defined in Example

spond to the value

of the convolutional lower bound 9. Distance analysis and simulation results for this ensemble

zero-contour curve. This can be seen in Fig. 17, where the lower were discussed in Sections IV-B and IV-C, respectively. For

bounds on

are plotted (for a sufficiently large various fixed values of , we find that the lower bounds on

such that the bound has reached a constant value) against the convolutional -trapping set growth rate

, cal-

to form a convolutional lower bound zero-contour culated using (31), converge for

. The ARJA block and

curve for several

-regular convolutional code ensembles. convolutional lower bound zero-contour curves are displayed in

For the

, (3, 4)-regular and

, (3, 5)-regular Fig. 18, along with the corresponding RJA curves.12

ensembles, the convolutional protograph

is constructed We observe that, analogous to the distance results, the con-

using Design Rule 2 with cutting vectors

and volutional (lower bound) zero-contour curves are significantly

, respectively.

larger than the corresponding block zero-contour curves. (Re-

We observe that, in general, as the rate increases, the con- call that

is the minimum distance growth rate of the

volutional lower bound zero-contour curves become lower, in- block code ensemble and

is the lower bound on the

dicating the likelihood of worse error-floor performance. This free distance growth rate of the convolutional code ensemble.)

is consistent with the conclusions drawn from the free distance In addition, both the block and convolutional RJA and ARJA

bounds presented in Section IV.

curves display the interesting behavior that the curves intersect,

B. Irregular Ensembles

indicating that, for

and

(approxi-

mately), respectively, the RJA curves have larger trapping set

In this section, we investigate the -trapping set growth growth rates, and vice versa.

rates of the irregular ensembles discussed in Section IV-B.

These irregular ensembles were shown in [10] and [17] to

have improved iterative decoding thresholds compared to reg-

VIII. CONCLUSION

ular ensembles while maintaining good asymptotic distance properties.

In the first part of this paper, asymptotic methods were used to calculate a lower bound on free distance that grows linearly

Example 12: Consider the RJA protograph [17]. A lower with constraint length for several ensembles of

-regular

bound on the free distance growth rate of the unterminated, and irregular, unterminated, protograph-based time-varying

time-varying RJA-based LDPC convolutional code ensemble, LDPC convolutional codes. It was shown that asymptotically

, was presented in Example 8. We observe that, as good LDPC convolutional code ensembles can be obtained

in previous examples, the -trapping set growth rates of corre- from asymptotically good LDPC block code ensembles and

sponding tail-biting ensembles calculated for increasing pro- that the free distance growth rates of the convolutional code

vide us with a lower bound on the -trapping set growth rate of ensembles exceed the minimum distance growth rates of the

the unterminated convolutional code ensemble, for each value corresponding block code ensembles. Different techniques to

of . The RJA block zero-contour curve and the convolutional construct protograph-based LDPC convolutional code ensem-

lower bound zero-contour curve are displayed in Fig. 18. Re- bles using the edge spreading procedure were discussed and it

call that

is the minimum distance growth rate of the RJA was shown that the lower bound obtained on the free distance

block code ensemble and that

is the lower bound on

the free distance growth rate of the RJA-based LDPC convolu-

tional code ensemble.

12In applying (31), we normalize the -trapping set growth rates by the number of transmitted variable nodes (i.e., not counting punctured nodes) in the decoding constraint length.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

280

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

growth rate can be improved by properly choosing the edge spreading.
In the second part, the theory from Section III-C was extended to find a lower bound on the -trapping set number that grows linearly with constraint length for the asymptotically good LDPC convolutional code ensembles presented in Section IV, and it was shown that the -trapping set growth rates obtained for the convolutional code ensembles exceed the
-trapping set growth rates of the corresponding block code ensembles. The large free distance and trapping set growth rates obtained suggest that LDPC convolutional codes constructed in this way will exhibit good iterative decoding performance in the high SNR region of the BER curve.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments and suggestions that helped improve the presentation of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[3] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[4] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[5] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] S. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 db of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[7] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Multi-edge type LDPC codes,” presented at the Workshop honouring Prof. Bob McEliece on his 60th Birthday, Pasadena, CA, May 2002.
[8] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, INP Progress Report 42-154, 2003.
[9] T. J. Richardson and V. Novichkov, “Methods and Apparatus for Decoding LDPC Codes,” U.S. Patent 6 633 856, Oct. 2003.
[10] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. Jones, and K. Andrews, “Capacity-approaching protograph codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 876–888, Aug. 2009.
[11] A. Abbasfar, D. Divsalar, and K. Yao, “Accumulate repeat accumulate codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 692–702, Apr. 2007.
[12] R. M. Tanner, “Error-Correcting Coding System,” U.S. Patent 4 295 218, 1981.
[13] A. J. Felström and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[14] D. J. Costello, Jr., A. E. Pusane, S. Bates, and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “A comparison between LDPC block and convolutional codes,” presented at the Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2006.
[15] D. J. Costello Jr., A. E. Pusane, C. R. Jones, and D. Divsalar, “A comparison of ARA- and protograph-based LDPC block and convolutional codes,” presented at the Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2007.
[16] D. J. Costello, Jr., “Free distance bounds for convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 356–365, May 1974.
[17] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and C. Jones, “Construction of protograph LDPC codes with linear minimum distance,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 664–668.
[18] D. J. C. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theoretical Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003.

[19] T. J. Richardson, “Error-floors of LDPC codes,” presented at the 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 2003.
[20] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[21] S. Abu-Surra, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Enumerators for protograph-based ensembles of LDPC and generalized LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 858–886, Feb. 2011.
[22] W. S. Massey, Algebraic Topology: An Introduction, ser. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1977, vol. 56.
[23] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, 1963.
[24] S. L. Fogal, R. McEliece, and J. Thorpe, “Enumerators for protograph ensembles of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 2156–2160.
[25] R. Johannesson and K. Sh. Zigangirov, Fundamentals of Convolutional Coding. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Press, 1999.
[26] M. B. S. Tavares, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and G. P. Fettweis, “Tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 2341–2345.
[27] G. Richter, M. Kaupper, and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Irregular low-density parity-check convolutional codes based on protographs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1633–1637.
[28] A. Sridharan, D. Sridhara, D. J. Costello, Jr., and T. E. Fuja, “A construction for irregular low density parity check convolutional codes,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun. 2003.
[29] A. E. Pusane, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Construction of irregular LDPC convolutional codes with fast decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 2006, pp. 1160–1165.
[30] M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Approaching capacity with asymptotically regular LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2009, pp. 173–177.
[31] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from LDPC block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 835–857, Feb. 2011.
[32] A. E. Pusane, A. J. Felström, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008.
[33] M. Lentmaier, D. G. M. Mitchell, G. P. Fettweis, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Asymptotically good LDPC convolutional codes with AWGN channel thresholds close to the Shannon limit,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Brest, France, Sep. 2010, pp. 324–328.
[34] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.
[35] G. Solomon and H. C. A. Tilborg, “A connection between block and convolutional codes,” SIAM J. Appl. Math., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 358–369, Oct. 1979.
[36] H. H. Ma and J. K. Wolf, “On tail biting convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 104–111, Feb. 1986.
[37] R. Smarandache, A. E. Pusane, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Pseudo-codeword analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2577–2598, Jun. 2009.
[38] D. Truhachev, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Distance bounds for periodically time-varying and tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 4301–4308, Sep. 2010.
[39] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[40] D. Divsalar, “Ensemble weight enumerators for protograph LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1554–1558.
[41] A. Sridharan, D. Truhachev, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Distance bounds for an ensemble of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 4537–4555, Dec. 2007.
[42] D. G. M. Mitchell, A. E. Pusane, N. Goertz, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Free distance bounds for protograph-based regular LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Lausanne, Switzerland, Sep. 2008, pp. 408–413.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

281

[43] E. N. Gilbert, “A comparison of signalling alphabets,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 31, pp. 504–522, 1952.
[44] R. R. Varshamov, “Estimate of the number of signals in error correcting codes,” Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR, vol. 117, no. 5, pp. 739–741, 1957.
[45] M. Lentmaier, D. V. Truhachev, and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “To the theory of low-density convolutional codes II,” Problems Inf. Transmiss., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 288–306, Aug. 2001.
[46] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.
[47] S. Kudekar, C. Méasson, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation on BMS channels via spatial coupling,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Brest, France, Sep. 2010, pp. 309–313.
[48] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[49] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolić, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., San Francisco, CA, Nov. 2006.
[50] L. Dolecek, P. Lee, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikolić, and M. Wainwright, “Predicting error floors of structured LDPC codes: Deterministic bounds and estimates,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 908–917, Aug. 2009.
[51] M. Ivković, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasić, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.
[52] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of regular and irregular LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001.
[53] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasić, “Error floors of LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 2006, pp. 1089–1094.

David G. M. Mitchell (S’08–M’10) received the B.Sc. degree in mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, in 2005 and 2009, respectively.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Research Associate in the Dept. of Electrical Engineering at the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN. His research interests include coding theory and practice, and information theory.
Ali E. Pusane (S’99–M’08) received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electronics and communications engineering from Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey, in 1999 and 2002, respectively, and the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering, the M.Sc. degree in applied mathematics, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, in 2004, 2006, and 2008, respectively.
He was a Visiting Assistant Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, during 2008–2009, after which he joined the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey, as an Assistant Professor. His research is in coding theory.
Daniel J. Costello, Jr. (S’62–M’69–SM’78–F’86–LF’08) received his Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from the University of Notre Dame in 1969. Since 1985, he has been a Professor of Electrical Engineering at Notre Dame and from 1989 to 1998 served as Chair of the Department. In 2000, he was named the Leonard Bettex Professor of Electrical Engineering.
Dr. Costello has been a member of IEEE since 1969 and was elected Fellow in 1985. In 2000, the IEEE Information Theory Society selected him as a recipient of a Third-Millennium Medal, and he was a co-recipient of the 2009 IEEE Donald G. Fink Prize Paper Award and the 2012 ComSoc & Information Theory Society Joint Paper Award.
Dr. Costello’s research interests are in the area of digital communications, with emphasis on error control coding and coded modulation. He has numerous technical publications in his field, and in 1983 he co-authored a textbook entitled “Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications”, the 2nd edition of which was published in 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

