588

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Merging Belief Propagation and the Mean Field Approximation: A Free Energy Approach
Erwin Riegler, Member, IEEE, Gunvor Elisabeth Kirkelund, Carles Navarro Manchón, Mihai-Alin Badiu, and Bernard Henri Fleury, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We present a joint message passing approach that combines belief propagation and the mean field approximation. Our analysis is based on the region-based free energy approximation method proposed by Yedidia et al. We show that the message passing fixed-point equations obtained with this combination correspond to stationary points of a constrained region-based free energy approximation. Moreover, we present a convergent implementation of these message passing fixed-point equations provided that the underlying factor graph fulfills certain technical conditions. In addition, we show how to include hard constraints in the part of the factor graph corresponding to belief propagation. Finally, we demonstrate an application of our method to iterative channel estimation and decoding in an orthogonal frequency division multiplexing system.
Index Terms—Belief propagation (BP), iterative algorithms, iterative decoding, message passing, parameter estimation.
I. INTRODUCTION
V ARIATIONAL techniques have been used for decades in quantum and statistical physics, where they are referred to as the mean field (MF) approximation [2]. Later, they found their way to the area of machine learning or statistical inference, see, e.g., [3]–[6]. The basic idea of variational inference is to derive the statistics of “hidden” random variables given the knowledge of “visible” random variables of a certain probability density function (pdf). In the MF approximation, this pdf is approximated by some “simpler,” e.g., (fully) factorized pdf and the Kullback–Leibler divergence between the approximating and the true pdf is minimized, which can be done in
Manuscript received January 05, 2012; accepted May 09, 2012. Date of publication September 12, 2012; date of current version December 19, 2012. This work was supported in part by the WWTF under Grant ICT10-066, in part by the FWF under Grant S10603-N13 within the National Research Network SISE, in part by Renesas Mobile Corporation, in part by the 4GMCT cooperative research project funded by Intel Mobile Communications, Agilent Technologies, Aalborg University and the Danish National Advanced Technology Foundation, in part by the project ICT-248894 Wireless Hybrid Enhanced Mobile Radio Estimators 2, and in part by the project SIDOC under Contract POSDRU/88/1.5/S/ 60078. This paper was presented in part at the 2010 IEEE International Symposium on Turbo Codes.
E. Riegler is with the Institute of Telecommunications, Vienna University of Technology, 1040 Vienna, Austria (e-mail: erwin.riegler@nt.tuwien.ac.at).
G. E. Kirkelund, C. N. Manchón, and B. H. Fleury are with the Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University, 9220 Aalborg, Denmark (e-mail: gunvor@es.aau.dk; cnm@es.aau.dk; bfl@es.aau.dk).
M.-A. Badiu is with the Communications Department, Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Cluj-Napoca 3400, Romania (e-mail: mihai.badiu@com.utcluj.ro).
Communicated by A. Moustakas, Associate Editor for Detection and Estimation.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2218573

an iterative, i.e., message passing like way. Apart from being fully factorized, the approximating pdf typically fulfills additional constraints that allow for messages with a simple structure, which can be updated in a simple way. For example, additional exponential conjugacy constraints result in messages propagating along the edges of the underlying Bayesian network that are described by a small number of parameters [5]. Variational inference methods were recently applied in [7] to the channel state estimation/interference cancellation part of a class of multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) receivers that iterate between detection, channel estimation, and decoding.
An approach different from the MF approximation is belief propagation (BP) [8]. Roughly speaking, with BP one tries to find local approximations, which are—exactly or approximately—the marginals of a certain pdf.1 This can also be done in an iterative way, where messages are passed along the edges of a factor graph [10]. A typical application of BP is decoding of turbo or low-density parity-check codes. Based on the excellent performance of BP, a lot of variations have been derived in order to improve the performance of this algorithm even further. For example, minimizing an upper bound on the log partition function of a pdf leads to the powerful tree reweighted BP algorithm [11]. An offspring of this idea is the recently developed uniformly tree reweighted BP algorithm [12]. Another example is [13], where methods from information geometry are used to compute correction terms for the beliefs obtained by loopy BP. An alternative approach for turbo decoding that uses projections (that are dual in the sense of [14, Ch. 3] to the one used in [13]) on constraint subsets can be found in [15]. A combination of the approaches used in [13] and [15] can be found in [16].
Both methods, BP and the MF approximation, have their own virtues and disadvantages. For example, the MF approximation:
+ always admits a convergent implementation; + has simple message passing update rules, in particular
for conjugate-exponential models; is not compatible with hard constraints; and BP: + yields a good approximation of the marginal distributions if the factor graph has no short cycles; + is compatible with hard constraints like, e.g., code constraints; may have a high complexity, especially when applied to probabilistic models involving both discrete and continuous random variables.
1Following the convention used in [9], we use the name BP also for loopy BP.

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RIEGLER et al.: MERGING BELIEF PROPAGATION AND THE MEAN FIELD APPROXIMATION: A FREE ENERGY APPROACH

589

Hence, it is of great benefit to apply BP and the MF approximation on the same factor graph in such a combination that their respective virtues can be exploited while circumventing their drawbacks. To this end, a unified message passing algorithm is needed that allows for combining both approaches.
The fixed-point equations of both BP and the MF approximation can be obtained by minimizing an approximation of the Kullback–Leibler divergence, called region-based free energy approximation. This approach differs from other methods, see, e.g., [17],2 because the starting point for the derivation of the corresponding message passing fixed-point equations is the same objective function for both BP and the MF approximation. The main technical result of our work is Theorem 2, where we show that the message passing fixed-point equations for such a combination of BP and the MF approximation correspond to stationary points of one single constrained region-based free energy approximation and provide a clear rule stating how to couple the messages propagating in the BP and MF part. In fact, based on the factor graph corresponding to a factorization of a probability mass function (pmf) and a choice for a separation of this factorization into BP and MF factors, Theorem 2 gives the message passing fixed-point equations for the factor graph representing the whole factorization of the pmf. One example of an application of Theorem 2 is joint channel estimation, interference cancellation, and decoding. Typically, these tasks are considered separately and the coupling between them is described in a heuristic way. As an example of this problematic, there has been a debate in the research community on whether a posteriori probabilities (APP) or extrinsic values should be fed back from the decoder to the rest of the receiver components; several authors coincide in proposing the use of extrinsic values for MIMO detection [18]–[20] while using APP values for channel estimation [19], [20], but no thorough justification for this choice is given apart from the achieved superior performance shown by simulation results. Despite having a clear rule to update the messages for the whole factor graph representing a factorization of a pmf, an additional advantage is the fact that solutions of fixed-point equations for the messages are related to the stationary points of the corresponding constrained region-based free energy approximation. This correspondence is important because it yields an interpretation of the computed beliefs for arbitrary factor graphs similar to the case of solely BP, where solutions of the message passing fixed-point equations do in general not correspond to the true marginals if the factor graph has cycles but always correspond to stationary points of the constrained Bethe free energy [9]. Moreover, this observation allows us to present a systematic way of updating the messages, namely, Algorithm 1, that is guaranteed to converge provided that the factor graph representing the factorization of the pmf fulfills certain technical conditions.
This paper is organized as follows. In the remainder of this section, we fix our notation. Section II is devoted to the introduction of the region-based free energy approximations proposed by [9] and to recall how BP, the MF approximation, and the EM algorithm [21] can be obtained by this method. Since
2An information geometric interpretation of the different objective functions used in [17] can be found in [14, Ch. 2].

the MF approximation is typically used for parameter estimation, we briefly show how to extend it to the case of continuous random variables using an approach presented already in [22, pp. 36–38] that avoids complicated methods from variational calculus. Section III is the main part of this study. There we state our main result, namely, Theorem 2, and show how the message passing fixed-point equations of a combination of BP and the MF approximation can be related to the stationary points of the corresponding constrained region-based free energy approximation. We then 1) prove Lemma 2, which generalizes Theorem 2 to the case where the factors of the pmf in the BP part are no longer restricted to be strictly positive real-valued functions, and 2) present Algorithm 1 that is a convergent implementation of the message passing update equations presented in Theorem 2 provided that the factor graph representing the factorization of the pmf fulfills certain technical conditions. As a byproduct, 1) gives insights into solely BP (which is a special case of the combination of BP and the MF approximation) with hard constraints, where only conjectures are formulated in [9]. In Section IV, we apply Algorithm 1 to joint channel estimation and decoding in an OFDM system. More advanced receiver architectures together with numerical simulations and a comparison with other state-of-the-art receivers can be found in [23] and an additional application of the algorithm in a cooperative communications scenario is presented in [24]. Finally, we conclude in Section V and present an outlook for further research directions.

A. Notation

Capital calligraphic letters

denote finite sets. The

cardinality of a set is denoted by . If

, we write

for

. We use the convention that

, where

denotes the empty set. For any finite set , denotes the indi-

cator function on , i.e.,

if

and

else.

We denote by capital letters discrete random variables with a

finite number of realizations and pmf . For a random variable

, we use the convention that is a representative for all pos-

sible realizations of , i.e., serves as a running variable, and

denote a particular realization by . For example,

runs

through all possible realizations of and for two functions

and depending on all realizations of ,

means

that

for each particular realization of . If is a

functional of a pmf of a random variable and is a func-

tion depending on all realizations of X, then

means that

is well defined and holds for each par-

ticular realization of . We write

for the re-

alizations of the vector of random variables

.

If , then

runs through all possible realizations

of but . For any nonnegative real-valued function with

argument

and

,

denotes with

fixed argument

. If a function is identically zero, we

write

and

means that it is not identically zero. For

two real-valued functions and with the same domain and

argument , we write

if

for some real pos-

itive constant

. We use the convention that

,

if

, and

[25, p. 31]. For

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

590

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

Fig. 1. Factor graph corresponding to the factorization of the pdf in (28) with

and

part is chosen in such a way that utilizes most of the advantages of BP and the MF approximation.

. The splitting of the factor graph into BP and MF

if

and zero else. Matrices are denoted by cap-

ital boldface Greek letters. The superscripts and stand for

transposition and Hermitian transposition, respectively. For a

matrix

, the entry in the row and column is

denoted by

. For two vectors

and

,

denotes

the Hadamard product of and . Finally,

stands

for the pdf of a jointly proper complex Gaussian random vector

with mean and covariance matrix .

II. KNOWN RESULTS

factors. The factorization in (1) can be visualized in a factor

graph.4 In a factor graph,

is the set of all variable nodes

connected to a factor node

and

represents the set of

all factor nodes connected to a variable node . An example

of a factor graph is depicted in Fig. 1.

A region

consists of subsets of indices

and

with the restriction that

implies that

. To each region , we associate a counting number

. A set

of regions and associated counting

numbers is called valid if

A. Region-Based Free Energy Approximations [9]

Let be a certain positive pmf of a vector of random

variables

that factorizes as

(1)

for all

.

For a positive function approximating

variational free energy [9]5

, we define the

where

and

with

for all

. Without loss of generality, we assume

that

, which can always be achieved by renaming

indices.3 Since is a strictly positive pmf, we can assume

without loss of generality that all the factors of in (1)

are real-valued positive functions. Later in Section III, we shall

show how to relax the positivity constraint for some of these

3For example, we can write

(2)

In (2),

denotes the entropy [25, p.5] of and

is called

average energy of . Note that

is the Kullback–Leibler

divergence [25, p. 19], between and , i.e.,

. For a set of regions and associated counting numbers,

the region-based free energy approximation is defined as [9]

with

This implies that any function that is defined pointwise on and defined. For example, if in addition to the definition of the sets

we set

for all

, the function

is well

with because

4Throughout the paper, we work with Tanner factor graphs as opposed to Forney factor graphs.

denoting the collection of all subsets of

for all

.

is well defined

5If is not normalized to one, the definition of the variational free energy contains an additional normalization constant, called Helmholtz free energy [9, pp. 4–5].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RIEGLER et al.: MERGING BELIEF PROPAGATION AND THE MEAN FIELD APPROXIMATION: A FREE ENERGY APPROACH

591

Here, each is defined locally on a region . Instead of min- with

imizing with respect to , we minimize with respect to

all

, where the have to fulfill certain con-

straints. The quantities are called beliefs. We give two exam-

(6)

ples of valid sets of regions and associated counting numbers.

Example 2.1: The trivial example

. It

leads to the MF fixed-point equations, as will be shown in

Section II-C.

Example 2.2: We define two types of regions:

1) large regions: ;

, with

for all

2) small regions: .

, with

for all

Note that this definition is well defined due to our assumption

that

. The region-based free energy approximation

corresponding to the valid set of regions and associated counting

numbers

is called the Bethe free energy [9], [26]. It leads to the BP fixedpoint equations, as will be shown in Section II-B. The Bethe free energy is equal to the variational free energy when the factor graph has no cycles [9].
B. BP Fixed-Point Equations
The fixed-point equations for BP can be obtained from the Bethe free energy by imposing additional marginalization and normalization constraints and computing the stationary points of the corresponding Lagrangian function [9], [27]. The Bethe free energy reads

(3)

with

for all

,

for all

, and

. The normalization constraints for the beliefs

and the marginalization constraints for the beliefs

and

can be included in the Lagrangian

[28, Sec. 3.1.3]

for all

and vice versa. Here,

are

positive constants that ensure that the beliefs

are

normalized to one.

Often, the following alternative system of fixed-point equa-

tions is solved instead of (6):

(7)

for all

, where

are ar-

bitrary positive constants. The reason for this is that for a fixed

scheduling, the messages computed in (6) differ from the mes-

sages computed in (7) only by positive constants, which drop

out when the beliefs are normalized. See also [9, eqs. (68) and

(69)], where the

symbol is used in the update equations

indicating that the normalization constants are irrelevant. A so-

lution of (7) can be obtained, e.g., by updating corresponding

likelihood ratios of the messages in (6) or by updating the mes-

sages according to (6) but ignoring the normalization constants

. The algorithm converges if the normalized beliefs

do not change any more. Therefore, a rescaling of the messages

is irrelevant and a solution of (7) is obtained. However, we note

that a rescaled solution of (7) is not necessarily a solution of (6).

Hence, the beliefs obtained by solving (7) need not be stationary

points of the Lagrangian in (4). To the best of our knowledge,

this elementary insight is not published yet in the literature and

we state a necessary and sufficient condition when a solution of

(7) can be rescaled to a solution of (6) in the following lemma.

Lemma 1: Suppose that is a solution of (7) and set

(8)

Then, this solution can be rescaled to a solution of (6) if and

only if there exist positive constants

such that

(9) (4)
Proof: See Section A in the Appendix.

The stationary points of the Lagrangian in (4) are then related to the BP fixed-point equations by the following theorem.
Theorem 1 [9, Th. 2]: Stationary points of the Lagrangian in (4) must be BP fixed points with positive beliefs fulfilling

Remark 2.1: Note that for factor graphs that have a tree struc-

ture, the messages obtained by running the forward–backward

algorithm [10] always fulfill (9) because we have

and

in this case.

C. Fixed-Point Equations for the MF Approximation

A message passing interpretation of the MF approximation was derived in [5] and [29]. In this section, we briefly show how (5) the corresponding fixed-point equations can be obtained by the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

592

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

free energy approach. To this end, we use 1 together with the factorization constraint6

from Example (10)

Plugging (10) into the expression for the region-based free energy approximation corresponding to the trivial approximation
, we get

D. Expectation Maximization (EM)

Message passing interpretations for EM [21] were derived in

[31] and [32]. It can be shown that EM is a special instance of the

MF approximation [33, Sec. 2.3.1], which can be summarized

as follows. Suppose that we apply the MF approximation to

in (1) as described previously. In addition, we assume that for

all

, the beliefs fulfill the constraints that

. Using the fact that

, we can rewrite

in (11) as

(11)

with

. Assuming that all the beliefs

have

to fulfill a normalization constraint, the stationary points of the corresponding Lagrangian for the MF approximation can easily

be evaluated to be

(14)

For all

, the stationary points of

in (14) have

the same analytical expression as the one obtained in (12). For

, minimizing in (14) with respect to yields

(12)

for all

, where the positive constants

are such

that is normalized to one for all

.7

For the MF approximation, there always exists a convergent

algorithm that computes beliefs

solving (12) by

simply using (12) as an iterative update equation for the beliefs.

Since for all

Setting

for all

, we get the

message passing update equations defined in (13) except that

we have to replace the messages

for all

and

by

and the set of all beliefs satisfying the normalization con-

straint

is a convex set, the objective function

in (11) cannot increase and the algorithm is guaranteed to

converge. Note that in order to derive a particular update

, we need all previous updates with

.

By setting

for all

, the

fixed-point equations in (12) are transformed into the message

passing fixed-point equations

with

for all

.

III. COMBINED BP/MF APPROXIMATION FIXED-POINT EQUATIONS
Let (15)

(13)

for all

. The MF approximation can be ex-

tended to the case where is a pdf, as shown in Section B

in the Appendix. Formally, each sum over (

) in (12)

and (13) has to be replaced by a Lebesgue integral whenever the

corresponding random variable is continuous.

be a partially factorized pmf with

and

. As earlier, we have

,

, with

for all

, and

for all . We refer to the factor

graph representing the factorization

in (15) as

“BP part” and to the factor graph representing the factorization

in (15) as “MF part.” Furthermore, we set

6For binary random variables with pmf in an exponential family, it was shown

in [30] that this gives a good approximation whenever the truncation of the

Plefka expansion does not introduce a significant error. 7The Lagrange multiplier [28, p. 283] for each belief

corre- and

sponding to the normalization constraint can be absorbed into the positive con-

stant

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RIEGLER et al.: MERGING BELIEF PROPAGATION AND THE MEAN FIELD APPROXIMATION: A FREE ENERGY APPROACH

593

Next, we define the following regions and counting numbers:

1) one MF region

, with

;

2) small regions for all

, with ;

3) large regions

, with

for all

.

This yields the valid set of regions and associated counting num-

bers

We will show in Lemma 2 that the region-based free energy

approximation in (17) fulfilling the constraints (18) and (19) is

a finite quantity, i.e.,

.

The constraints (18) and (19) can be included in the La-

grangian [28, Sec. 3.1.3]

(16)

The additional terms

in the counting numbers of the

small regions

defined in 2) compared to the

counting numbers of the small regions for the Bethe approxi-

mation (see Example 2.2) guarantee that

is indeed a

valid set of regions and associated counting numbers. The valid

set of regions and associated counting numbers in (16) gives the

region-based free energy approximation

(17)

(20)

The stationary points of the Lagrangian

in (20) are then

obtained by setting the derivatives of

with respect to

the beliefs and the Lagrange multipliers equal to zero. The fol-

lowing theorem relates the stationary points of the Lagrangian

to solutions of fixed-point equations for the beliefs.

Theorem 2: Stationary points of the Lagrangian in (20) in the combined BP-MF approach must be fixed points with positive beliefs fulfilling

with

. In (17), we have already plugged in

(21)

the factorization constraint

with

with and
tion constraints

and

. The beliefs

have to fulfill the normaliza-

(18)

and the marginalization constraints

and vice versa. Here,

and

(19)

constants that ensure that the beliefs

are normalized to one with

for all

Proof: See Section C in the Appendix.

(22) are positive and .

Remark 3.1: Note that there is no need to introduce normal-

ization constraints for the beliefs

. If

,

then it follows from the normalization constraint for the belief

and marginalization constraint for the beliefs and that

Remark 3.2: Note that for each

, Theorem 2 can

be generalized to the case where is a continuous random

variable following the derivation presented in Section B in the

Appendix. Formally, each sum over with

in the

third identity in (22) has to be replaced by a Lebesgue integral

whenever the corresponding random variable is continuous.

Remark 3.3: Note that Theorem 2 clearly states whether “ex-

trinsic” values or “APPs” should be passed. In fact, the first

equation in (22) implies that each message

is an “extrinsic” value when

and an “APP”

when

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

594

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

A. Hard Constraints for BP
Some suggestions on how to generalize Theorem 1 ([9, Th. 2]) to hard constraints, i.e., to the case where the factors of the pmf are not restricted to be strictly positive real-valued functions, can be found in [9, Sec. VI.D]. An example of hard constraints are deterministic functions like, e.g., code constraints. However, the statements formulated there are only conjectures and are based on the assumption that we can always compute the derivative of the Lagrange function with respect to the beliefs. This is not always possible because

with from (3). In the sequel, we show how to generalize

Theorem 2 to the case where

for all

based on

the simple observation that we are interested in solutions where

the region-based free energy approximation is not plus infinity

(recall that we want to minimize this quantity). As a byproduct,

this also yields an extension of Theorem 1 ([9, Th. 2]) to hard

constraints by simply setting

.

Lemma 2: Suppose that

(23) (24)

then there exists a convergent implementation of the combined

message passing equations in (22). In fact, we can iterate be-

tween updating the beliefs with

and the for-

ward backward algorithm in the BP part, as outlined in the fol-

lowing algorithm.

Algorithm 1: If the BP part has no cycle and (26) is fulfilled,

the following implementation of the fixed-point equations in

(22) is guaranteed to converge.

1) Initialize for all

and send the corre-

sponding messages

to all factor nodes

.

2) Use all messages

with

and

as fixed input for the BP part and run the forward/

backward algorithm [10]. The fact that the resulting beliefs

with

cannot increase the region-based free

energy approximation in (17) is proved in Section E in the

Appendix.

3) For each

and

, the message

is now available and can be used for further up-

dates in the MF part.

4) For each

, successively recompute the mes-

sage

and send it to all

. Note that for

all indices

and

for all

and each realization of .8

Furthermore, we assume that

and

fulfill the constraints (18) and (19). Then

1)

;

2) the condition

and the set of all beliefs satisfying the normalization con-

straint (first equation in (18)) is a convex set. This implies

that for each

, we are solving a convex opti-

mization problem. Therefore, the region-based free energy

(25)

approximation in (17) cannot increase.

5) Proceed as described in 2).

is necessary and sufficient for

;

3) if (25) is fulfilled, the remaining stationary points

( ) and

excluding all from (25) (

)

of the Lagrangian in (20) are positive beliefs fulfilling (21)

and (22) excluding all from (25) and vice versa.

Remark 3.5: If the factor graph representing the BP part is not cycle free, then Algorithm 1 can be modified by running loopy BP in step 2). However, in this case, the algorithm is not guaranteed to converge.

4) Moreover, (21) and (22) hold for all realizations (in-

cluding all from (25)) and, therefore, (21) contains (25)

IV. APPLICATION TO ITERATIVE CHANNEL

as a special case.

ESTIMATION AND DECODING

Proof: See Section D in the Appendix.

In this section, we present an example where we show how

Remark 3.4: At first sight, it seems to be a contradiction to to compute the updates of the messages in (22) based on Algo-

the marginalization constraints (19) that (25) holds and all the rithm 1. We choose a simple communication model where the

beliefs (

) are strictly positive functions. To illustrate updates of the messages are simple enough in order to avoid

that this is indeed the case, let

,

, and fix one overstressed notation. A class of more complex MIMO-OFDM

realization of . Since

, we also have

. receiver architectures together with numerical simulations can

This implies that

for at least one realization

be found in [23]. In our example, we use BP for modulation and

with

and, therefore,

. decoding and the MF approximation for estimating the param-

The marginalization constraints (19) together with the fact that eters of the a posteriori distribution of the channel gains. This

the belief must be a nonnegative function then implies that splitting is convenient because BP works well with hard con-

we have indeed

.

straints and the MF approximation yields very simple message

B. Convergence and Main Algorithm If the BP part has no cycle and

passing update equations due to the fact that the MF part in our example is a conjugate-exponential model [5]. Applying BP to all factor nodes would be intractable because the complexity is

(26)

too high; (cf., the discussion in Section IV-C). Specifically, we consider an OFDM system with

ac-

8If

, then we can simply remove this realization of .

tive subcarriers. We denote by

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RIEGLER et al.: MERGING BELIEF PROPAGATION AND THE MEAN FIELD APPROXIMATION: A FREE ENERGY APPROACH

595

the sets of subcarrier indices for the data and pilot sym-

bols, respectively, with

,

, and

.

In the transmitter, a random vector

representing the information bits is encoded and interleaved

using a rate

encoder and a random interleaver,

respectively, into the random vector

TABLE I PARAMETERS OF THE OFDM SYSTEM

of length representing the coded and interleaved bits. Each

random subvector mapped, i.e., modulated, to

of length is then Now define with

, where is a complex modulation alphabet of size

.

(31)

After removing the cyclic prefix in the receiver, we get the

following input–output relationship in the frequency domain:

(27)

where

is the random vector corresponding

to the transmitted data symbols,

is the vector

containing the transmitted pilot symbols, and

and

are random vectors representing

the multiplicative action of the channel, while

and

are random vectors representing

additive Gaussian noise with

and

. Note that (27) is very general and

can also be used to model, e.g., a time-varying frequency-flat

channel.

Setting

and

,

the pdf

admits the factorization

(28)
where we used the fact that is independent of , , and and is independent of and conditioned on . Note that

(32)

and set

for all

. For example, we have

. We choose a splitting of into

and

with

(33) With this selection

which implies that

. The factor graph

corresponding to the factorization in (28) with the splitting of

into

and

as in (33) is depicted in Fig. 1.

We now show how to apply the variant of Algorithm 1 re-

ferred to in Remark 3.5 to the factor graph depicted in Fig. 1.

Note that (26) is fulfilled in this example; however, cycles occur

in the BP part of the factor graph due to the combination of

(convolutional) coding, interleaving, and high-order modula-

tion (see Table I).

Algorithm 2:

1) Initialize

by setting

(29)

with

We choose for the prior distribution of

(30)

and

and set

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

596

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

2) Using the particular form of the distributions

in (29) and

in (30),

compute

for all

. Here, we used Lemma 3 in Section F in the

Appendix to get the updated parameters

(34) with

and

The update for the belief is

for all

with

.

3) Use the messages

as fixed

input for the BP part and run BP.

4) After running BP in the BP part, compute the messages

and update the messages in

the MF part. Namely, after setting

for all

, compute the messages

i.e.,

.

5) Proceed as described in 2).

A. “Extrinsic” Values Versus “App”

In consideration of Remark 3.3, it is instructive to analyze

the messages coming from the variable nodes

, which are contained in the BP and MF part of

the factor graph depicted in Fig. 1. Whether a message passing

from a variable node to a factor node is an “extrinsic” value or

an “APP” depends on whether the corresponding factor node is

in the BP or the MF part. Thus, for all

, the messages

which are passed into the BP part, are “extrinsic” values, whereas the messages

for all
for all and

which are passed into the MF part, are “APPs.” Note that this result is aligned with the strategies proposed in [19] and [20], where “APPs” are used for channel estimation and “extrinsic values” for detection.

B. Level of MF Approximation

Note that there is an ambiguity in the choice of variable nodes

in the MF part. This ambiguity reflects the “level of the MF

approximation” and results in a family of different algorithms.

For example, instead of choosing as a single random variable,

we could have chosen

to be separate

variable nodes in the factor graph. In this case, we make the

assumption that the random variables

are

independent and the set of indices in (31) has to be replaced

by

Since this is an additional approximation, the performance of the receiver is expected to decrease compared to the case where
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RIEGLER et al.: MERGING BELIEF PROPAGATION AND THE MEAN FIELD APPROXIMATION: A FREE ENERGY APPROACH

597

factor graph like, e.g., expectation propagation (EP). A comparison between EP and BP-MF can be found in [36] where it was shown that BP-MF yields the best performance-complexity tradeoff and does not suffer from numerical instability.

D. Estimation of Noise Precision

Fig. 2. Bit error rate as a function of signal-to-noise ratio for Algorithm 2 (BP-

MF), BP combined with Gaussian approximation as described in Section IV-C,

and BP with perfect CSI at the receiver. Pilot spacing

and

.

Algorithm 2 can be easily extended to the case where the

noise precision is a realization of a random variable . In

fact, since

and

are

linear in , we can replace any dependence on in the existing

messages in Algorithm 2 by the expected value of and get

simple expressions for the additional messages using a Gamma

prior distribution for , reflecting the powerfulness of exploiting

the conjugate-exponential model property in the MF part for

parameter estimation. See [23] for further details on the explicit

form of the additional messages.

V. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK

we choose as a single random variable. However, it is possible that the complexity reduces by applying an additional MF approximation. See [23] for further discussions on this ambiguity for a class of MIMO-OFDM receivers.

We showed that the message passing fixed-point equations of a combination of BP and the MF approximation correspond to stationary points of one single constrained region-based free energy approximation. These stationary points are in one-to-one correspondence to solutions of a coupled system of message

C. Comparison With BP Combined With Gaussian

passing fixed-point equations. For an arbitrary factor graph and

Approximation

a choice of a splitting of the factor nodes into a set of MF and

The example makes evident how the complexity of the

message passing algorithm can be simplified by exploiting

the conjugate-exponential property of the MF part, which

leads to simple update equations of the belief . In fact, at

each iteration in the algorithm, we only have to update the

parameters of a Gaussian distribution (34). In comparison,

let us consider an alternative split of by moving the factor

nodes

in (29) and

in (30)

to the BP part. This is equivalent to applying BP to the whole

factor graph in Fig. 1 because

. Doing

so, each message

does no longer

admit a closed-form expression in terms of the mean and the

variance of the random variable and becomes a mixture

of Gaussian pdfs with components; in consequence, each

message

becomes a sum of

terms. To keep the complexity of computing these messages

tractable, one has to rely on additional approximations.

As suggested in [34] and [35], we can approximate each mes-

sage

by a Gaussian pdf. BP com-

bined with this approximation is comparable in terms of com-

plexity to Algorithm 2, since the computations of the updates

of the messages are equally complex. However, Algorithm 2

clearly outperforms this alternative, as can be seen in Fig. 2.

It can also be noticed that the performance of Algorithm 2 is

close to the case with perfect channel state information (CSI)

at the receiver, even with a low density of pilots, i.e., such that

the spacing between any two consecutive pilots

approxi-

mately equals the coherence bandwidth9

of the channel

or twice of it.

To circumvent the intractability of the BP-based receiver, one

BP factor nodes, our result gives immediately the corresponding message passing fixed-point equations and yields an interpretation of the computed beliefs as stationary points. Moreover, we presented an algorithm for updating the messages that is guaranteed to converge provided that the factor graph fulfills certain technical conditions. We also showed how to extend the MF part in the factor graph to continuous random variables and to include hard constraints in the BP part of the factor graph. Finally, we illustrated the computation of the messages of our algorithm in a simple example. This example demonstrates the efficiency of the combined scheme in models in which BP messages are computationally intractable. The proposed algorithm performs significantly better than the commonly used approach of using BP combined with a Gaussian approximation of computationally demanding messages. An interesting extension of our result would be to generalize the BP part to contain also continuous random variables. The results in [37] provide a promising approach. Indeed, they could be used to generalize the Lagrange multiplier for the marginalization constraints to the continuous case. However, these methods are based on the assumption that the objective function is Fréchet differentiable [38, p. 172]. In general a region-based free energy approximation is neither Fréchet differentiable nor Gateaux differentiable, at least not without any modification of the definitions used in standard text books [38, pp. 171–172].10 An extension to continuous random variables in the BP part would allow to apply a combination of BP with the MF approximation, e.g., for sensor self-localization, where both methods are used [39], [40]. Another interesting extension could be to generalize the region-based free energy approximation such that the

could also apply other approximate inference algorithms to the 10For a positive real-valued function ,

might fail to be a positive

9Calculated as the reciprocal of the maximum excess delay.

real-valued function for arbitrary perturbations with sufficiently small norm .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

598

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

messages in the BP part are equivalent to the messages passed in tree reweighted BP or to include second-order correction terms in the MF approximation that are similar to the Onsager reaction term [30].
APPENDIX

A. Proof of Lemma 1

Suppose that

is

a solution of (7) and set

(35)

with

. Plugging (35) into (7),

we obtain the following fixed-point equations for the messages

:

and reversing all the steps finishes the proof.

B. Extension of the MF Approximation to Continuous Random Variables

Suppose that is a pdf of the vector of random variables .

In this section, we assume that all integrals in the region-based

free energy approximation are Lebesgue integrals and have fi-

nite values, which can be verified by inspection of the factors

(

) and the analytic expressions of the computed beliefs

(

). An example where the MF approximation is applied

to continuous random variables and combined with BP is dis-

cussed in Section IV.

For each

, we can rewrite

in (11) as

with

for all only if

(36) . Now, (36) is equivalent to (6) if and
(37)

It follows from [22, Th. 2.1] that

to

if and only if

is minimized subject

(38)

where the positive constants

are such that the beliefs

in (5) are normalized to one. This normalization of

the beliefs

in (5) gives

(40)

up to sets of Lebesgue measure zero. Formally, in (40) differs from in (12) by replacing sums with Lebesgue integrals.

C. Proof of Theorem 2

The proof of Theorem 2 is based on the ideas of the proof of

[9, Th. 2]. However, we will see that we get a significant simpli-

fication by augmenting it with some of the arguments originally

used in [11] for Markov random fields and adopted to factor

graphs in [12]. In particular, we shall make use of the following

observation. Recall the expression for

in (17)

(39)

where we used (35) in the second step and (8) in the last step.

Combining (37)–(39), we obtain

(41)

the marginalization constraints

(42) with

Now, suppose that (9) is fulfilled. Setting

and the normalization constraints

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(43)

RIEGLER et al.: MERGING BELIEF PROPAGATION AND THE MEAN FIELD APPROXIMATION: A FREE ENERGY APPROACH

599

Using the marginalization constraints (42), we see that

Setting

(48) we can rewrite (47) as
(44)
Combining (44) with (41), we further get (49)
where

with the mutual information [25, p. 19]

(45)
are such that the normalization constraints in (43) are fulfilled. Finally, we define

Next, we shall compute the stationary points of the Lagrangian

(50)

for all

. Plugging the expression for

in (50) into the expression for

in (49), we find that

(46)

using the expression for

in (45). The particular form

of

in (45) is convenient because the marginalization

constraints in (42) imply that for all

and

, we

have

. Setting the derivative of

in (46) with respect to

and

equal to zero for all

and

, we get the following fixed-point equations

for the stationary points:

(51)

Using the marginalization constraints in (42) in combination

with (51) and noting that

for all

, we further

find that

(52)

for all gives

. Dividing both sides of (52) by

(47)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(53)

600

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

for all for all

and in (48) as

. Noting that , we can write the messages

(54)

for all

. Now, (50), (53), and (54) are

equivalent to (22) and (51) is equivalent to (21). This completes

the proof that stationary points of the Lagrangian in (20) must

be fixed points with positive beliefs fulfilling (21). Since all the

steps are reversible, this also completes the proof of Theorem

C.

D. Proof of Lemma 2

We rewrite

in (17) as

with

implies that (25) is a special case of the first equation in (21), which proves 4) and, therefore, finishes the proof of Lemma 2.
E. Proof of Convergence
In order to finish the proof of convergence for the algorithm presented in Section III-B, we need to show that running the forward/backward algorithm in the BP part in step 2) of Algorithm 1 cannot increase the region-based free energy approximation
in (17). To this end we analyze the factorization
(55)

with

. The factorization in (55) is the

product of the factorization of the BP part in (15) and the in-

coming messages from the MF part. The Bethe free energy (3)

corresponding to the factorization in (55) is

and set

Then

(56)

We now show that minimizing in (56) is equivalent to mini-

mizing

in (17) with respect to and for all

and

. Obviously

and

This follows from the fact that

differs from

by

This proves 1). Now (23) implies that

terms that depend only on with

. Now suppose that

, (24) implies that

, and

. In this case, we find that

if and only if (25) is fulfilled, which

proves 2).

Suppose that we have fixed all

(

) from (25).

Then, the analysis for the remaining

and

excluding all from (25)

is the same as in the

proof of Theorem 2 and the resulting fixed-point equations are

(57)

identical to (21) and (22) excluding all from (25) and vice

versa, which proves 3). We can reintroduce the realizations

and

with

(

) from (25) in (22) because they

do not contribute to the message passing update equations, as

can be seen immediately from the definition of the messages

in (22). The same argument

(58)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RIEGLER et al.: MERGING BELIEF PROPAGATION AND THE MEAN FIELD APPROXIMATION: A FREE ENERGY APPROACH

601

From (22), we see that

Then

for all

(59) . Note that, according to step 2) in Algorithm with

1, the messages

in (59) are fixed inputs for the BP

part. Therefore, we are not allowed to plug the expressions for

the messages

in (59) into (58) in general. However,

since

and

, condition (26) implies that

and guarantees that

Proof: Follows from direct computation.

is constant in step 2) of Algorithm 1 for all

. Therefore, we are indeed allowed to plug the expressions

of the messages

in (59) into (58) and finally see also

that

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Prof. Ralf R. Müller for his comments on a previous draft of this paper.

REFERENCES

Hence, minimizing

in (56) is equivalent to minimizing

in (17).

By assumption, the factor graph in the BP part has a tree struc-

ture. Therefore, [9, Prop. 3] implies that

1)

;

2)

if and only if the beliefs

in (56) are the

marginals of the factorization in (55).

Hence, for fixed with

, we see that

in

(17) is minimized by the marginals of the factorization in (55).

It remains to show that running the forward/backward algo-

rithm in the BP part as described in step 2) in Algorithm 1 in-

deed computes the marginals of the factorization in (55). Ap-

plying Theorem 1 to the factorization in (55) yields the message

passing fixed-point equations

(60)

for all

. The message passing fixed-point

equations in (60) are the same as the message passing fixed-

point equations for the BP part in (22) with fixed-input mes-

sages

for all

and

. Hence,

running the forward/backward algorithm in the BP part indeed

computes the marginals of the factorization in (55) and Algo-

rithm 1 is guaranteed to converge.

F. Product of Gaussian Distributions Lemma 3: Let

[1] E. Riegler, G. E. Kirkelund, C. N. Manchón, and B. H. Fleury, “Merging belief propagation and the mean field approximation: A free energy approach,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sep. 2010, pp. 256–260.
[2] P. Parisi, Statistical Field Theory. Oxford, U.K.: Perseus, 1988. [3] Z. Ghahramani and M. J. Beal, Graphical Models and Variational
Methods, D. Saad and M. Opper, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000. [4] M. I. Jordan, Z. Ghahramani, T. S. Jaakola, and L. K. Saul, “An introduction to variational methods for graphical models,” J. Mach. Learn., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 183–233, 1999. [5] J. Winn and C. Bishop, “Variational message passing,” J. Mach. Learn., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 661–694, 2005. [6] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2006. [7] G. E. Kirkelund, C. N. Manchón, L. P. B. Christensen, E. Riegler, and B. H. Fleury, “Variational message-passing for joint channel estimation and decoding in MIMO-OFDM,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecom. Conf., Miami, FL, Dec. 2010, pp. 1–6. [8] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1998. [9] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Constructing free-energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2282–2312, Jul. 2005. [10] F. R. Kschischang, J. F. Brendan, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001. [11] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “A new class of upper bounds on the log partition function,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2313–2335, Jul. 2005. [12] H. Wymeersch, F. Penna, and V. Savic, “Uniformly reweighted belief propagation: A factor graph approach,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Jul./Aug. 2011, pp. 2000–2004. [13] S. Ikeda, T. Tanaka, and S.-I. Amari, “Information geometry of turbo and low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1097–1114, Jun. 2004. [14] S.-I. Amari and H. Nagaoka, Methods of Information Geometry. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 2000. [15] M. Moher and T. A. Gulliver, “Cross-entropy and iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 3097–3104, Nov. 1998. [16] J. M. Walsh, C. R. Johnson, and P. A. Regalia, “A refined information geometric interpretation of turbo decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., Philadelphia, PA, Mar. 2005, pp. 481–484. [17] T. Minka, Divergence measures and message passing 2005, Microsoft Res. Tech. Rep. MSR-TR-2005-173. [18] X. Wang and H. V. Poor, “Iterative (turbo) soft interference cancellation and decoding for coded CDMA,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 1046–1061, Jul. 1999.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

602

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

[19] J. Wehinger and C. F. Mecklenbrauker, “Iterative CDMA multiuser receiver with soft decision-directed channel estimation,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 3922–3934, Oct. 2006.
[20] S. P. Rossi and R. R. Müller, “Joint twofold-iterative channel estimation and multiuser detection for MIMO-OFDM systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 7, no. 11, pp. 4719–4729, Nov. 2008.
[21] A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin, “Maximum-likelihood from incomplete data via the EM algorithm,” J. Roy. Statist. Soc., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 1–38, 1977.
[22] S. Kullback, Information Theory and Statistics. New York: Wiley, 1978.
[23] C. N. Manchón, G. E. Kirkelund, E. Riegler, L. Christensen, and B. H. Fleury, Receiver architectures for MIMO-OFDM based on a combined VMP-SP algorithm 2011, arXiv: 1111.5848.
[24] M.-A Badiu, C. N. Manchón, V. Bota, and B. H. Fleury, “Distributed iterative processing for interference channels with receiver cooperation,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Turbo Codes, Gothenburg, Sweden, Aug. 2012, pp. 1–5.
[25] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley, 2006.
[26] H. A. Bethe, “Statistical theory of superlattices,” Proc. Roy. Soc. London, ser. A, vol. 150, no. 871, pp. 552–575, 1935.
[27] T. Heskes, “Stable fixed points of loopy belief propagation are minima of the Bethe free energy,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003, pp. 343–350.
[28] D. P. Bertsekas, Nonlinear Programming, 2nd ed. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 2003.
[29] J. Dauwels, “On variational message passing on factor graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 2546–2550.
[30] T. Tanaka, “Information geometry of mean-field approximation,” Neural Comput., vol. 12, pp. 1951–1968, 2000.
[31] A. W. Eckford, “The factor graph EM algorithm: Applications for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE SPAWC, New York, Jun. 2005, pp. 910–914.
[32] J. Dauwels, S. Korl, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Expectation maximization as message passing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 1–4.
[33] B. Hu, “A variational Bayesian framework divergence minimization and its application in CDMA receivers,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electron. Syst., Aalborg Univ., Aalborg, Denmark, 2010.
[34] C. Knievel, P. A. Hoeher, A. Tyrrell, and G. Auer, “Multi-dimensional graph-based soft iterative receiver for MIMO-OFDM,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1599–1609, Jun. 2012.
[35] X. Xu and R. Mathar, “Low complexity joint channel estimation and detection for LDPC coded MIMO-OFDM systems,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf., Budapest, Hungary, May 2011, pp. 1–5.
[36] M.-A. Badiu, G. E. Kirkelund, C. N. Manchón, E. Riegler, and B. H. Fleury, “Message-passing algorithms for channel estimation and decoding using approximate inference,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Cambridge, MA, Jul. 2012, pp. 1–5.
[37] B. D. Craven, “A generalization of Lagrange multipliers,” Bull. Austral. Math. Soc., vol. 3, pp. 353–362, 1970.
[38] D. G. Luenberger, Optimization by Vector Space Methods. New York: Wiley, 1997.
[39] H. Wymeersch, J. Lien, and M. Z. Win, “Cooperative localization in wireless networks,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 97, no. 2, pp. 427–450, Feb. 2009.
[40] C. Pedersen, T. Pedersen, and B. H. Fleury, “A variational message passing algorithm for sensor self-localization in wireless networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Jul.–Aug. 2011, pp. 2158–2162.
Erwin Riegler (M’07) received the Dipl-Ing. degree in Technical Physics (with distinction) in 2001 and the Dr. techn. degree in Technical Physics (with distinction) in 2004 from Vienna University of Technology.
He was a visiting researcher at the Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences in Leipzig, Germany (Sep. 2004–Feb. 2005), the Communication Theory Group at ETH Zürich, Switzerland (Sep. 2010–Feb. 2011), and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at The Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio (Mar. 2012). From 2005–2006, he was a post-doc at the Institute for Analysis and Scientific Computing, Vienna University of Technology. From 2007–2010, he was a senior researcher at the Telecommunications Research Center Vienna (FTW). Since 2010, he has been a post-doc at the Institute of Telecommunications at Vienna University of Technology.
His research interests include noncoherent communications, machine learning, interference management, large system analysis, and transceiver design.

Gunvor Elisabeth Kirkelund received her master degree (cum laude) in Wireless Communication from Aalborg University, Denmark, in 2008.
Since 2008 she has been pursuing a Ph.D. degree at the Section Navigation and Communications, Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University. Her research interests lie within the field of statistical signal processing, message-passing techniques and design of iterative algorithms for wireless receivers.
Carles Navarro Manchón received the degree in telecommunications engineering from the University Miguel Hernández of Elx, Spain, in 2006 and the PhD degree in wireless communications from Aalborg University, Denmark, in 2011.
Since 2006 he has been with Aalborg University, where he is currently an Assistant Professor in the Section Navigation and Communications, Department of Electronic Systems. His research interests lie within the area of statistical signal processing for wireless communications, including joint channel estimation and decoding, distributed signal processing for cooperative communications and estimation and reconstruction of sparse signals.
Mihai-Alin Badiu received the Dipl.-Ing. degree in electrical engineering in June 2008 and the Master degree in telecommunications in June 2010 from the Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania. Since Oct. 2009, he is pursuing a Ph.D. degree at the Communications Department of the same university.
From Nov. 2008 to May 2010, he was a Research Assistant at the Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania. In 2011 he spent an 8-month stay as a Visiting Researcher with the Section Navigation and Communications of the Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University, Denmark. Since Feb. 2012 he is affiliated with this Section as a Research Assistant. His research interests include advanced wireless receiver design based on message-passing algorithms and cooperative communications.
Bernard Henri Fleury (M’97–SM’99) received the Diploma in electrical engineering and mathematics in 1978 and 1990, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (ETHZ), Switzerland, in 1990.
Since 1997, he has been with the Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University, Denmark, as a Professor of communication theory. He is the Head of the Section Navigation and Communications, which is one of the eleven laboratories of this Department. From 2006 to 2009, he was a Key Researcher with the Telecommunications Research Center Vienna (FTW), Austria. During 1978–1985 and 1992–1996, he was a Teaching Assistant and a Senior Research Associate, respectively, with the Communication Technology Laboratory, ETHZ. Between 1988 and 1992, he was a Research Assistant with the Statistical Seminar at ETHZ.
Prof. Fleury’s research interests cover numerous aspects within communication theory, signal processing, and machine learning mainly for wireless communications. His current scientific activities include stochastic modeling and estimation of the radio channel especially for MIMO systems operating in harsh conditions, iterative message-passing processing with focus on the design of efficient feasible architectures for wireless receivers, localization techniques in wireless terrestrial systems, and radar signal processing. He has authored and co-authored more than 120 publications in these areas. He has developed with his staff a high-resolution method for the estimation of radio channel parameters that has found a wide application and has inspired similar estimation techniques both in academia and in industry.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

