440

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, JANUARY 15, 2013

Estimation of NAND Flash Memory Threshold Voltage Distribution for Optimum Soft-Decision
Error Correction
Dong-hwan Lee, Student Member, IEEE, and Wonyong Sung, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—As the feature size of NAND flash memory decreases, the threshold voltage signal becomes less reliable, and its distribution varies significantly with the number of program-erase (PE) cycles and the data retention time. We have developed parameter estimation algorithms to find the means and variances of the threshold voltage distribution that is modeled as a Gaussian mixture. The proposed methods find the best-fit parameters by minimizing the squared Euclidean distance between the measured threshold voltage values and those obtained from the Gaussian mixture model. For the parameter estimation, the gradient descent (GD) and the Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) based methods are employed. The developed algorithms are applied to both simulated and real NAND flash memory. It is also demonstrated that error correction with the estimated mean and variance values yields much better performance when compared to the method that only updates the mean.
Index Terms—Gradient descent, Levenberg-Marquardt, low-density parity check (LDPC) code, NAND flash memory, parameter estimation, soft-decision error correcting code (ECC).
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE threshold voltage distribution of sub-20 nm NAND flash memory varies significantly as the program-erase (PE) cycles and the data retention time increase because there are not many electrons stored in each floating-gate transistor [1]. The multi-level cell (MLC) technology, which doubles or triples the memory density, also leads to a high bit error rate (BER). As a result, the conventional error correcting codes (ECCs), such as BCH (Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem) and RS (Reed-Solomon) codes, that employ hard-decision decoding algorithms are no more efficient for the application to high density NAND flash memory devices [2], [3]. Instead, soft-decision decoding algorithms are demanded to yield good error correcting performance with a limited parity ratio. There are several recent works that employ the soft-decision low-density
Manuscript received May 09, 2012; revised September 19, 2012; accepted September 22, 2012. Date of publication October 03, 2012; date of current version December 28, 2012. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. Zhiyuan Yan. This work was supported in part by the Brain Korea 21 Project and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Korean government (MEST) (No. 2012R1A2A2A06047297), and in part by the SK Hynix Inc. The work of D. Lee was also financially supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF), Republic of Korea, under the Global Ph.D. Fellowship project, and by the Qualcomm Inc. under the Qualcomm Fellowship program.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744 Korea (e-mail: ldh@dsp. snu.ac.kr; wysung@snu.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2012.2222399

parity check (LDPC) codes or turbo product codes (TPCs) for error correction of NAND flash memory [4]–[7]. There are also several works on efficient hardware based implementation of LDPC decoding algorithms [8]. The error correcting capability of soft-decision decoding algorithms heavily depends on the accuracy of soft reliability information that can be obtained by multiple memory sensing operations [5].
In multiple precision data sensing for soft-decision error correction, the SNR (signal-to-noise ratio) information is very important. For example, if the SNR of the threshold voltage signal is very high, simple hard-decision memory sensing is enough to ensure satisfactory error correction, while multiple precision memory sensing is mandatory when the SNR is not high enough. Even when the data precision is fixed, the optimal quantizer that considers the SNR can lead to a higher chance of successful error correction [5]. In NAND flash memory, however, the SNR value varies continuously according to the retention time and the number of PE cycles. In NAND flash memory devices with a 20 nm process technology, the number of electrons that distinguishes each logic level is less than 100 [1]. Thus, the discharge of one electron will lead to more than 1 percent of threshold voltage variation. This phenomenon will be more profound as higher density semiconductor technologies are employed. Not only the data retention and PE cycling but also the cell-to-cell interference (CCI) will increase the variability in the threshold voltage distribution [1], [9]–[11]. Thus, for the practical use of soft-decision error correction, the SNR information needs to be estimated, which is equivalent to finding the means and variances or the PDF (probability density function) of the threshold voltage signal.
In this paper, we develop parameter estimation algorithms that find the mean and standard deviation of threshold voltage for each symbol of data stored in Flash memory. The threshold voltage distribution is modeled as a Gaussian mixture, which is fairly close to that of actual NAND flash memory. The proposed algorithms iteratively minimize the squared Euclidean distance between the threshold voltage distribution and the modeled one by searching the best-fit parameter values, means and variances. The parameter search is conducted by the gradient descent (GD) and the Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) methods. The proposed algorithms are evaluated by using the data samples obtained from both simulated and actual NAND flash memory, and the accuracy of estimated means and standard deviations is assessed. It is also demonstrated that the estimated SNR information can be used to find the mutual information optimized quantizer proposed in [5]. The BER performance of a message passing decoder with the estimated SNR information is also presented.

1053-587X/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE AND SUNG: ESTIMATION OF NAND FLASH MEMORY THRESHOLD VOLTAGE DISTRIBUTION

441

Fig. 2. Threshold voltage distribution of real NAND flash memory according Fig. 1. Two-bit MLC NAND flash memory structure (all bit-line) and the pro- to the number of PE cycles. gramming order. The numbers represent the programming order.

This paper is organized as follows. Section II explains the basic operations and the noise sources of NAND flash memory and also presents the approximation of the threshold voltage distribution by a Gaussian mixture. In Section III, we propose parameter estimation algorithms that are based on the GD and the LM methods. In Section IV, the experimental results are shown. Finally, concluding remarks are made in Section V.

bound for representing each symbol [18]. In this programming

scheme, the threshold voltage of each target cell increases as

much as

and is compared with the target voltage at each

iteration. If the programmed voltage is higher than the target

one, the programming operation stops. It is well known that the

ideal ISPP results in an uniform distribution with the width of

. However, the ideal distribution becomes distorted by var-

ious noise sources, such as the CCI, RTN, and charge loss.

II. THRESHOLD VOLTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF NAND FLASH MEMORY AND ITS MODELING
In this section, we explain the program and erase operations as well as the noise sources in NAND flash memory, such as the cell-to-cell interference (CCI), random telegraph noise (RTN), and data retention problem. By observing the threshold voltage distributions of PE cycled and baked memory devices, it is demonstrated that the RTN and the data retention problem alter the distribution quite significantly. Finally, the signal distribution is approximated by a mixture of Gaussian distributions, and its validity is demonstrated by showing a quantile-quantile (Q-Q) plot [12].

The threshold voltage shift of one cell affects the neighbor cells through the parasitic capacitor-coupling effect. Thus, when one cell is programmed, not only the threshold voltage of the target cell but also those of the surrounding cells increase. This is referred to as the CCI, which becomes the biggest noise source in high density NAND flash memory [1]. The RTN and the data retention problem cause non-stationary disturbance that varies with the number of PE cycles and the retention time. It is apparent that semiconductor technology scaling will increase the effects of these noise sources because the number of charges at each floating-gate decreases and the cell-to-cell distance becomes shorter.
Fig. 2 shows the threshold voltage distributions of fresh and

A. Basics of NAND Flash Memory

baked cells. For the baked cells, PE cycling of 1 K, 1.5 K, or 3 K times is conducted before 10 hours of baking process

A block in NAND flash memory is a two-dimensional cell at

. The threshold voltages are obtained by conducting

array that consists of multiple word- and bit-lines as shown in many memory sensing operations while changing the sensing

Fig. 1. According to the bit-line structure, NAND flash memory reference voltages, and a 20 nm NAND flash memory device

can be categorized as either the even/odd bit-line or the all bit- is used for this measurement. Since the memory device cannot

line structure. In the even/odd bit-line structure, the cells on the measure the voltages below

, this voltage region is not

even bit-lines form even pages, while those on the odd bit-lines drawn in this figure. As the number of PE cycles grows, the

become odd ones [13], [14]. On the other hand, there is no such distribution becomes wider, which significantly increases the

distinction in the all bit-line structure [15], [16]. The even/odd raw bit error rate (BER) of the memory devices. Also, the

structure requires less hardware than the all bit-line scheme be- baking process or the data retention causes negative shift of the

cause the page buffers and the peripheral circuits are shared by threshold voltage distribution, thus adjusting the sensing refer-

the even and odd pages. However, the all bit-line structure in- ence voltages is needed even if hard-decision error correction

duces smaller CCI than the even/odd one. In this paper, we con- is used.

sider the all bit-line structure, but the same approach can be applied to the even/odd one. Since each cell in 2-bit MLC NAND B. Gaussian Mixture Model for Threshold Voltage Distribution

flash memory has one of four distinct threshold voltage levels, a word-line in the all bit-line structure contains both MSB (most significant bit) and LSB (least significant bit) pages.
Before programming the memory cells, an erase operation is needed to remove charges stored in each cell’s floating-gate. The threshold voltage distribution of the erased cells tends to be the

The threshold voltage distribution of NAND flash memory

cells can be approximated to a mixture of Gaussian distributions

unless

for the ISPP is too large. When the distribution of

each symbol is modeled as a Gaussian function, the likelihood

function for a given input symbol can be written as

Gaussian due to the variability in the erase process [17]. When

the cells are programmed, the incremental stair pulse program-

(1)

ming (ISPP) is widely used to achieve a tight threshold voltage

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

442

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, JANUARY 15, 2013

Fig. 4. Pictorial representation of the variables used for defining the cost function.

or data retention problem, which causes ECC decoding failures

or too many iterations for iterative decoding [7]. If the pro-

Fig. 3. Q-Q plot for the threshold voltage distribution versus its Gaussian mix- posed algorithms find accurate signal statistics, more reliable

ture model.

hard-decision data or soft-information can be fed to a hard- or

for

and 3. Note that is the input symbol and rep-

resents the threshold voltage, while and are the mean and

soft-decision decoder, thus error correction is more likely to be successful.

standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution, respectively. In

order to compare the true threshold voltage distribution with its

Gaussian mixture model, the Q-Q plot is illustrated in Fig. 3. In

this figure, the quantiles are sampled from the modeled distri-

bution, while the values are the observed threshold voltages.

Since the points in the Q-Q plot almost lie on the line of

,

we consider that the two distributions are quite close [12]. Since

a Gaussian distribution is completely characterized by only two

parameters, the approximation using the Gaussian mixture sim-

plifies the modeling process very much. Note that the proposed

parameter estimation methods can also be applied to signal with

a non-Gaussian density function as long as it can be character-

ized by a small number of parameters.

A. Cost Function

The cost function is needed to guide the search algorithms

by assessing the closeness between the data and the model.

In this work, the cost function is defined by using the squared

Euclidean distance between the true distribution and the

modeled one. Consider two-bit NAND flash memory whose

threshold voltage distribution is shown in Fig. 4. By conducting

seven voltage sensing operations with the reference voltages

of

, and , we can divide the voltage region into

eight levels. Note that and correspond to

and ,

respectively. Let us define

(for

, and 7)

as the number of cells in a page whose threshold voltages

are in the range of

, then it can be determined by

III. PARAMETER SEARCH ALGORITHMS FOR ESTIMATING THRESHOLD VOLTAGE DISTRIBUTION
One simple approach for estimating the threshold voltage distribution is to build a relative frequency histogram by conducting memory sensing operations many times while changing the reference voltage. For example, if the reference voltage is altered by 0.05 V at each sensing operation, we can obtain a quite accurate threshold voltage distribution, but this demands more

counting the number of cells at each voltage level. This process is equivalent to building a relative frequency histogram for the threshold voltage. Similarly, let be the estimator of , and it provides the relative frequency histogram obtained from the Gaussian mixture model. If the modeled distribution is close enough to the measured one, the difference between and will be minimized.
In the Gaussian mixture model, can be computed as

than 100 times of memory sensing operations. Apparently, it

is desired to reduce the number of memory sensing operations

for the sake of access time and energy. According to [19], one

voltage sensing operation takes approximately

and con-

sumes the energy of

per page for a 20 nm-class NAND

flash memory device whose page size is 8 KBytes.

In this section, we propose two parameter search algorithms

to estimate the mean and standard deviation values that are

needed to model the threshold voltage distribution. The mea-

sured data are obtained by conducting multiple voltage sensing

operations for a page with different reference voltages and used

(2)

to determine the parameters of the Gaussian mixture model.

We use the gradient descent (GD) and the Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) methods for the parameter search. The proposed

where

algorithms are invoked only when the currently stored means and standard deviations are no longer valid due to PE cycling

(3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE AND SUNG: ESTIMATION OF NAND FLASH MEMORY THRESHOLD VOLTAGE DISTRIBUTION

443

for

. In (2), and for

,

and 3 are the means and standard deviations values of the likeli-

hood function

, respectively.

is the number of

cells that were written as the symbol during the programming

operation. In this work, we assume that

is counted before

the programming operation and written at the spare region of

the page. By letting

, we can simplify (2) as

(4)

When we apply memory sensing operations with the refer-

ence voltages of to

, the voltage region is divided into

distinct ones. In the determination of , the currently stored

mean and variance values that were obtained during the latest

parameter estimation process can be used, thus choosing is

inherently an adaptive process. In this work, the hard-decision

boundaries as well as the points that evenly divide these bound-

aries are used as .

Using the above equations, we can define a cost function as

(5)

where is the total number of cells in each page. The cost function corresponds to the squared Euclidean distance between the two histograms [20]. Note that the cost function also depends on the number of voltage levels . For example, and are two different cost functions. By minimizing the cost function, we can find the best-fit parameters of the Gaussian mixture model.
(6)

denotes the Jacobian matrix of lating the equations, we can obtain

...

...

...

. By reformu...

where

...

...

...

...

(10)

(11)

and (12)

If is equal to 4,

is an 8 by 4 matrix whose rank

is at most 4. Thus,

can be

a zero vector even if

is not a zero vector, which means

that the proposed algorithm can converge to non-optimal points.

To make

be a full rank matrix, needs to be larger

than or equal to 8.

The entire algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1. Note that

is used as the stopping criterion, thus the iter-

ation stops when this value is smaller than . The initial trial

parameter is denoted as , and the currently stored mean and

standard deviation values can be used for it. For example, if

the proposed estimation methods are invoked for the first time,

the means and standard deviations of initial threshold voltage

distribution are used for . Since the GD based method uses

only the first order derivatives, it usually converges slowly.

B. Gradient Descent Method Based Parameter Search

Since the exhaustive search to find the global minimum of

the cost function is impractical, we employ the gradient descent

method, which is one of the simplest optimization technique.

First, let

be the

parameter vector in (6), then the cost function can be rewritten

as

Algorithm 1: Gradient Descent Method Based Parameter Search

Initialization:

and

while

and

do

compute

using (10)

(7)

where

end while

C. Levenberg-Marquardt Method Based Parameter Search

...

The gradient descent method produces a sequence

imizes

by using the following equation:

(8) that min-

The Levenberg-Marquardt method is a hybrid of the gradient descent and the Newton algorithms, and it is widely used in many applications for solving non-linear least squares problems [21]. Usually, the LM method shows faster convergence speed than the GD one.
The LM optimization method operates as follows [21], [22]:

(9) Note that

(13)

and represent the Hessian of

and

Note that represents the constant step size. The gradient of an 8 by 8 identity matrix, respectively, and is a positively

or

is equal to

where valued step size. In order to compute

exactly, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

444

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, JANUARY 15, 2013

second order derivatives are required, which demands a high

computational overhead. However,

can be approxi-

mated to

, thus (13) can be rewritten as

TABLE I THE NUMBER OF ARITHMETIC OPERATIONS FOR EACH ITERATION OF THE GD
AND THE LM BASED PARAMETER ESTIMATION ALGORITHMS

(14)

During each iteration, the step size is updated, and we adopt a simple step size updating algorithm presented in [23]. The LM method based parameter estimation is described in Algorithm 2. If the estimation error value of the current parameter vector,
, is smaller than that of the previous one, , we accept the update and decrease by a factor of . Otherwise, we retract the update and increase by the same factor. In this work, is set to 10 by referring [23].

Algorithm 2: Levenberg-Marquardt Method Based Parameter Search

Initialization:

,

and

while

and

do

if

then

compute

,

and

end if

solve

Fig. 5. NAND flash memory signal generation model.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We conducted experiments in order to evaluate the performance of the proposed parameter estimation algorithms. We used data samples that were obtained from the simulated NAND flash memory model and the actual NAND flash memory devices. The simulated 2-bit MLC NAND flash memory is generated according to [4], [24], while Flash memory with a 20 nm-class technology is used for the real devices. In both cases, we assume the worst case scenario that the parameter estimation process is invoked for the first time, thus the means and variances of initial threshold voltage distribution for NAND flash memory devices are used for . In order to remove the data dependency of the experiments, all the input data are scrambled before being written to the Flash memory. The scrambling operation is also known to relieve the CCI problem [25].

if

then

A. Parameter Estimation With Simulated NAND Flash Memory

,

,

1) Distribution Modeling of 2-Bit MLC NAND Flash

Memory: One block of our hypothetical NAND flash memory

else

has 64 K bit-lines and 64 word-lines with the all bit-line struc-

ture. We assume that the erase operation results in the symbol 0

whose PDF is a Gaussian distribution with the mean and stan-

dard deviation of 0.0 V and 0.30 V, respectively. The symbol

end if

1, 2, and 3 are programmed with the target voltages of 2.5 V,

3.4 V, and 4.3 V, respectively. The RTN whose distribution

end while

is approximated to a symmetric exponential function is added to each cell’s threshold voltage after ideal programming. For

Table I shows the number of arithmetic operations for each

iteration of the GD and the LM based parameter estimation al-

gorithms. Note that except for the matrix inversion, small con-

stant terms are ignored. We assume that the exponential and the

Q-functions are implemented by using the look-up tables (de-

noted as ‘LUT’ in Table I). The total number of arithmetic op-

erations for the GD based algorithm is the sum of data in the first

four rows. In the LM based method, the number of arithmetic

operations for the matrix-matrix multiplication

and the

the CCI, the coupling coefficients for the and directions are chosen as 0.1034 and 0.006721, respectively, by referring [1], [26]. We approximate the noises due to the data retention problem as Gaussian random variables according to [24].
2) Convergence: To study the convergence capability and speed, the proposed estimation methods are applied to simulated NAND flash memory whose PE cycle and retention time are set to 5,000 times and 64 K hours (7.3 years), respectively. Note that most 2-bit MLC NAND flash memory devices only allow 3,000 PE cycles [27]. In this condition, the mean values of the

matrix inversion

is added to that of the GD based one. We symbol 1, 2, and 3 are shifted as much as

,

,

assume that the matrix inversion employs the Gaussian-Jordan and

, respectively, as shown in Fig. 6. The standard

elimination.

deviations are changed as much as 0.027 V, 0.037 V, and 0.048

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE AND SUNG: ESTIMATION OF NAND FLASH MEMORY THRESHOLD VOLTAGE DISTRIBUTION

445

Fig. 6. The simulated and estimated threshold voltage distributions of NAND flash memory with PE cycles of 5,000 times and the data retention time of 64 K hours.

V, respectively. While changing from 8 to 16, we assess

(red dot in Fig. 7(a)) is far away from the optimal one.

the convergence characteristics of the proposed algorithms. The In most cases, however, is located near the optimal point

vertical lines in Fig. 6 represent the sensing reference voltages. because the parameter estimation algorithms can utilize the pre-

Among them, the solid lines are the hard-decision boundaries viously determined mean and standard deviation values. When

of the initial distribution, while the other reference voltages (the the parameter estimation fails, we may retry it after changing

dotted lines) are determined by uniformly dividing two adjacent the sensing reference voltages to eliminate degenerate voltage

hard-decision boundaries.

levels. One simple strategy for adjusting the reference voltages

The distributions of simulated (blue solid curves), initial in the retrial process is to shift them into the negative direction

(dotted curves), and estimated (curves with markers) threshold with a fixed amount. For example, the right most degenerate

voltages are shown in Fig. 6. When the number of voltage voltage level of the 8-level case can be removed if we move

levels is larger than or equal to 12, the estimated distributions all the reference voltages by

. Then, the proposed algo-

follow the simulated ones very closely, and we can find that rithms can converge. Fig. 7(b) shows the surface plot for

both estimation algorithms converge to the global optimum with one degenerate voltage level. Since at least eight non-de-

points. However, no algorithm can find the optimum points generate voltage levels are needed to find the unique solution

when the number of voltage levels is 8.

vector of eight parameters, the rank deficiency due to the degen-

In Fig. 6, it is shown that the threshold voltage distribution erate voltage level causes infinitely many solutions for the equa-

shifts to the left and widens quite substantially after 64 K hours tion of

. As shown in Fig. 7(b), there exist many

of data retention. When the distribution is extremely left-shifted, minimum points approximately along the straight line, and the

the memory sensing operations with high reference voltages proposed algorithms cannot find the optimum one.

yield no additional information about the true distribution. It In Fig. 8,

and

are plotted according to the

is because the number of cells between these voltage levels is iteration. Regardless of , the LM based estimation algorithm

almost zero. We can consider the voltage level with no infor- converges much faster than the GD based one. However, the

mation as the degenerate one. For example, when is 16, al- computational complexity for each iteration of the LM based

most no cells exist in the three right-most voltage levels, and method is a few times larger than that of the GD based one due

they provide not much additional information for the estima- to the matrix multiplication and inversion. In this figure, we can

tion. When the th voltage level is the degenerate one, the

also find that the final estimation error value of the 12 voltage-

column of

in (10) becomes a zero vector because level case is much smaller than that of the 16 voltage-level one.

and

are almost zeros as approaches the optimal But this does not imply that the estimation with 12 voltage levels

point. If the number of degenerate voltage levels increases, the is better than that with 16 levels because

and

rank of

can be less than 8 and the proposed algorithms are basically different cost functions. For small , the true and

cannot converge. However, even for the 8 voltage-level case, the estimated distributions are compared less strictly, while the

the optimal parameters can be found if there exist no degenerate comparison is conducted more strictly when is large. When

voltage levels.

and

are computed with the same distributions,

Fig. 7(a) shows the surface plot for

, which measures the former is usually smaller than the latter.

the distribution in 12 levels, when the number of PE cycles and 3) Results for NAND Flash Memory Model With Varying Re-

retention time are 5,000 times and 64 K hours, respectively. tention Time: We apply the proposed parameter estimation al-

We obtained this plot by changing ( axis) and ( axis) gorithms to hypothetical NAND flash memory whose retention

while the other parameters were set to the optimal ones. Since time varies from 1 K to 256 K hours (29.2 years) while the

the cost function is not a convex function, the proposed algo- number of PE cycles is fixed to 5,000 times. The amounts of

rithms can settle down to a local minimum if the initial point mean and standard deviation shifts due to the data retention time

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

446

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, JANUARY 15, 2013

Fig. 9. The amount of mean shift for each symbol when increasing the data retention time.

Fig. 10. The amount of standard deviation change for each symbol when increasing the data retention time.
0.181 V, which can be considered as 3.0 dB increase in noise power. When the retention time is larger than 256 K hours, the parameter estimation algorithms fail to converge, thus we did not plot beyond this point.
In order to evaluate the accuracy of the estimated parameters, the estimation errors for the mean and the standard deviation are defined as follows:

Fig. 7. Error surface plot for (a)

and (b)

. The means of symbol

1 and 3 ( and ) are changed, while the other parameters are set to the

optimal ones. The red dots and stars represent the initial and optimal points,

respectively.

In (15),

(15) and are the actual mean and standard deviation,

while and are the estimated ones. For comparison pur-

pose, we also compute the estimation errors when the means and

standard deviations of the initial voltage distribution are used for

and , respectively.

Fig. 11 shows the estimation error (V) for the mean when

increasing the data retention time. When there is no parameter

estimation (denoted as ‘Total change’ in Fig. 11), the estima-

tion errors are in the range of 0.2 V to 0.5 V, and they grow al-

most linearly with the retention time. When the retention time is

smaller than 256 K hours, the parameter estimation with 12 or 16

Fig. 8. Learning curves of the proposed parameter estimation algorithms with voltage levels results in the estimation error below 0.01 V, while

of 12 or 16.

the error is quite large for the 8 voltage-level case. The estima-

tion error (V) for the standard deviation is plotted in Fig. 12. The

errors for the unestimated distributions are in the range of 0.02 V

are plotted in Fig. 9 and 10 . When we observe the mean of the to 0.05 V and linearly increase with the retention time. When

symbol 3 in Fig. 9, it is changed about 14%, from 4.60 V to 3.94 is 8, the estimation errors for the proposed algorithms are even

V, by the retention of 256 K hours. The standard deviation of the larger than those of the initial distribution, which means that the

symbol 3 shown in Fig. 10 grows about 41%, from 0.128 V to proposed algorithms converge to the non-optimum points. We

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE AND SUNG: ESTIMATION OF NAND FLASH MEMORY THRESHOLD VOLTAGE DISTRIBUTION

447

Fig. 11. Estimation errors for the mean when increasing the data retention time.

Fig. 13. Number of iterations when increasing the data retention time.

TABLE II THE ESTIMATION ERRORS AND THE NUMBER OF ITERATIONS (ITER.) OF THE PROPOSED PARAMETER ESTIMATION ALGORITHMS WHEN APPLIED TO REAL
NAND FLASH MEMORY

Fig. 12. Estimation errors for the standard deviation when increasing the data

retention time.

at

, the threshold voltage distributions of non-initial states

were also obtained.

find that at least 12 voltage sensing levels are needed for fairly

correct estimation of the standard deviation.

Fig. 13 illustrates the required number of iterations until both

methods converge. Note that the maximum number of iterations

(

in Algorithm 1 and 2) is set to 200. In most cases, the

GD based method requires more iterations than the LM based

one, and their difference becomes larger as the data retention

time increases. According to Table I, one iteration of the LM

based method requires a few times more arithmetic operations

Table II shows the estimation errors. During the experiments, the number of voltage levels is fixed to 12. Note that ‘ ’ and ‘ ’ on the ‘Total change’ columns denote the average mean and standard deviation shifts from the initial threshold voltage distribution after applying PE cycling and the data retention process. Similar to the simulated memory case, the proposed parameter estimation algorithms work well. We can find that the estimation errors for the mean and the standard deviation are less than 0.02 V in every case.

than the GD based one. Thus, in most cases, the total amount of C. Determination of Output Precision and Memory Sensing

arithmetic operations for the LM based method is smaller than Reference Voltages

that of the GD based one.

The estimated mean and standard deviation values can be

B. Parameter Estimation With Real NAND Flash Memory

used for both hard- and soft-decision ECCs. For the hard-decision decoding, the decision boundary between two symbols,

We apply the proposed parameter estimation algorithms to the data samples that are obtained from the actual 2-bit MLC NAND flash memory devices with a 20 nm-class process tech-

e.g., symbol and , can be determined by considering the Mahalonobis distances from two mean values, or by solving the following equation.

nology. The numbers of word- and bit-lines are the same as

those of the simulated one; however, this memory employs the

(16)

even/odd bit-line structure. In order to obtain the real mean and

standard deviation data, the threshold voltages are measured for

, and 2.

with the precision of 0.1 V. Note that the memory device used in For soft-decision ECCs, the SNR or of the threshold

this work supports manufacturer defined functions that can alter voltage signal can be used to determine the minimum memory

the sensing reference voltages. The initial threshold voltage dis- output precision for successful decoding. Note that the es-

tribution is obtained from the fresh memory cells. After 1.0 K, timated SNR value is a function of the means and standard

1.5 K, or 3 K times of PE cycling and 10 hours of baking process deviations of the Gaussian mixture. Fig. 14 shows the error

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

448

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, JANUARY 15, 2013

In Fig. 14, we can find that utilizing more accurate SNR information for the ‘4-levels’, ‘7-levels’, and ‘10-levels’ cases yields the gains of approximately 0.3 dB, 0.2 dB, and 0.15 dB, respectively. As a result, we can expect approximately 700%, 300%, and 180% longer retention time limits in each case. Note that in our NAND flash memory model, doubling the retention time decreases the by about 0.1 dB when the number of PE cycles is set to 5,000 times. Similarly, the numbers of tolerable PE cycles for the ‘4-levels’, ‘7-levels’, and ‘10-levels’ cases increase by 46%, 29%, and 20%, respectively, when the retention time is fixed to 10,000 hours. These results show that not only the mean but also the standard deviation values are indispensable for the optimum quantizer design in NAND flash memory access.

Fig. 14. Error performance of the (68254,65536) EG-LDPC code for MSB pages of NAND flash memory.

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
We have developed mean and standard deviation estimation algorithms for modeling the threshold voltage distribution of

multi-level cell (MLC) NAND flash memory. The proposed al-

correcting performance of a (68254, 65536) EG-LDPC code gorithms that employ the gradient descent (GD) and Levenberg-

[7] when applying several quantization schemes to simulated Marquardt (LM) based optimization require about 11 memory

NAND flash memory. In this figure, the ‘4-levels’, ‘7-levels’, sensing operations to estimate all the mean and variance values

and ‘10-levels’ denote the mutual information optimized quan- of four symbols in 2-bit MLC NAND flash memory. The devel-

tization schemes that employ only one, two, and three voltage oped algorithms are applied to both simulated and real NAND

sensing operations at each symbol boundary, respectively. The flash memory devices and acquire the mean and the standard de-

‘4-levels’ case is the hard-decision error correction. We can viation values within 0.02 V estimation errors, respectively. The

find that increasing the sensing precision improves the error LM based algorithm shows a much faster convergence speed

correcting performance. As illustrated in Fig. 14, when the

although it demands more arithmetic operations for each itera-

is fairly high, we can use the hard-decision data as the input to tion. We also show that the estimated statistical information is

an ECC decoder, which demands much less time for voltage very useful when deciding the precision of memory access and

sensing and data transfer. However, when the estimated is determining the sensing reference voltages for both hard- and

not high enough, we need to increase the output precision for soft-decision error correction in NAND flash memory.

obtaining reliable soft-information at the expense of more time for voltage sensing and data transfer.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

In addition, we can take advantage of the estimated distri- The authors would like to thank Jonghong Kim for providing bution when adaptively deciding the soft-decision reference the EG-LDPC code and its decoding algorithm. voltages. We demonstrate the optimization of the non-uniform

memory sensing scheme proposed in [5] as an example.

REFERENCES

Assume that two voltage sensing operations are conducted for discriminating a boundary of two symbols, then six voltage sensing operations are needed for 2-bit MLC NAND flash memory with four symbols. Let us define the soft-decision reference voltages as to from the smallest one. For example,
and are located at the boundary of symbol 0 and 1. In order to achieve the optimal error correcting performance with six voltage sensing operations, we need to carefully decide

[1] K. Prall, “Scaling non-volatile memory below 30 nm,” in Proc. 22nd IEEE Non-Volatile Semiconductor Memory Workshop, 2007, pp. 5–10.
[2] W. Liu, J. Rho, and W. Sung, “Low-power high-throughput BCH error correction VLSI design for multi-level cell NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. Design Implementation (SiPS), 2006, pp. 303–308.
[3] B. Chen, X. Zhang, and Z. Wang, “Error correction for multi-level NAND flash memory using Reed-Solomon codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), 2008, pp. 94–99.
[4] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision error-

the optimum sensing reference voltages. The value of , for to 6, can be decided to maximize the mutual information
between the input and the quantized output [5]. Since the mutual information is a function of SNR, providing more accurate SNR information usually yields better BER performance for ECC decoding.
In order to know the effects of accurate SNR information for determining the quantization levels, we compare the two approaches. One approach utilizes the estimated means and standard deviations ( and ), while the compared one uses the estimated means and the initial (non-updated) standard deviations. Note that the ‘non-updated mean’ case is not considered because it yields a very poor performance resulting from incorrect decision boundaries.

correction codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011. [5] J. Wang, T. Courtade, H. Shankar, and R. Wesel, “Soft information for LDPC decoding in flash: Mutual-information optimized quantization,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2011, pp. 5–9. [6] C. Yang, Y. Emre, and C. Chakrabarti, “Product code schemes for error correction in MLC NAND flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2302–2314, Dec. 2012. [7] J. Kim, D. Lee, and W. Sung, “Performance of rate 0.96 (68254 65536) EG-LDPC code for NAND flash memory error correction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC) Workshop Emerging Data Storage Technol., 2012, pp. 7029–7033. [8] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Jun. 2003. [9] J. Lee, S. Hur, and J. Choi, “Effects of floating-gate interference on NAND flash memory cell operation,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 264–266, May 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE AND SUNG: ESTIMATION OF NAND FLASH MEMORY THRESHOLD VOLTAGE DISTRIBUTION

449

[10] J. Lee, J. Choi, D. Park, and K. Kim, “Effects of interface trap gen-

eration and annihilation on the data retention characteristics of flash

memory cells,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 4, no. 1, pp.

110–117, Jan. 2004.

[11] K. Fukuda, Y. Shimizu, K. Amemiya, M. Kamoshida, and C. Hu,

“Random telegraph noise in flash memories-model and technology

scaling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2007,

pp. 169–172.

[12] M. Wilk and R. Gnanadesikan, “Probability plotting methods for the

analysis of data,” Biometrika, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 1–17, Jan. 1968.

[13] K. Takeuchi et al., “A 56-nm CMOS

8-Gb multi-level NAND

flash memory with 10-MB/s program throughput,” IEEE J. Solid-State

Circuits, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 219–232, Jan. 2007.

[14] K. Park, M. Kang, D. Kim, S. Hwang, B. Choi, Y. Lee, C. Kim, and

K. Kim, “A zeroing cell-to-cell interference page architecture with

temporary LSB storing and parallel MSB program scheme for MLC

NAND flash memories,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 4,

pp. 919–928, Apr. 2008.

[15] Y. Li et al., “A 16 Gb 3 b/cell NAND flash memory in 56 nm with 8

MB/s write rate,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC),

2008, pp. 506–632.

[16] R. Cernea et al., “A 34 MB/s MLC write throughput 16 Gb NAND

with all bit line architecture on 56 nm technology,” IEEE J. Solid-State

Circuits, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 186–194, Jan. 2009.

[17] K. Takeuchi, T. Tanaka, and H. Nakamura, “A double-level-Vth select

gate array architecture for multilevel NAND flash memories,” IEEE J.

Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 602–609, Apr. 1996.

[18] K. Suh et al., “A 3.3 V 32 MB NAND flash memory with incremental

step pulse programming scheme,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 30,

no. 11, pp. 1149–1156, Nov. 1995.

[19] NAND flash Memory Product Catalogue, SK Hynix, Inc., Gyeonggi-

do,, Korea [Online]. Available: http://www.skhynix.com/prod-

ucts/support/catalogue.jsp

[20] S. Cha, “Taxonomy of nominal type histogram distance measures,” in

Proc. Amer. Conf. Appl. Math., 2008, pp. 325–330.

[21] D. Marquardt, “An algorithm for least-squares estimation of nonlinear

parameters,” J. Soc. Ind. Appl. Math., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 431–441, Feb.

1963.

[22] J. More, “The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm: Implementation and

theory,” Numer. Anal., pp. 105–116, 1978.

[23] B. Flannery, W. Press, S. Teukolsky, and W. Vetterling, Numerical

Recipes. New York: Univ. of Cambridge, 1992.

[24] G. Dong, Y. Pan, N. Xie, C. Varanasi, and T. Zhang, “Estimating infor-

mation-theoretical NAND flash memory storage capacity and its impli-

cation to memory system design space exploration,” IEEE Trans. Very

Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Syst., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1705–1714,

Sep. 2012.

[25] B. Shin, C. Seol, J. Chung, and J. Kong, “Error control coding and signal processing for flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), 2012, pp. 409–412.
[26] P. Poliakov, P. Blomme, M. Corbalan, J. Houdt, and W. Dehaene, “Cross-cell interference variability aware model of fully planar NAND flash memory including line edge roughness,” Microelectron. Rel., vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 919–924, May 2011.
[27] 64 Gb, 128 Gb, 256 Gb, 512 Gb Asynchronous/Synchronous NAND Features, Micron Technology, Inc., Boise, ID [Online]. Available: https://www.micron.com/parts/nand-flash/mass-storage
Dong-hwan Lee (S’09) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering and computer science in 2009 from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests include development of signal processing and channel coding systems for reliable storage devices and parallel implementation of signal processing algorithms.
Wonyong Sung (S’84–M’87–SM’07) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of California, Santa Barbara, in 1987. During his Ph.D. work, he studied vector and multiprocessor implementation of signal processing algorithms.
Since 1989, he has been a member of the faculty at the Seoul National University. His major research interests are the development of fixed-point optimization tools, implementation of VLSI for digital signal processing, and development of parallel processing software for signal processing. Dr. Sung was the Chair of the design and implementation of signal processing systems (DISPS) technical committee of the IEEE Signal Processing Society from 2010 to 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

