Muller C-element based Decoder (MCD):
A Decoder Against Transient Faults
Yangyang Tang∗†, Emmanuel Boutillon∗, Chris Winstead†, Christophe Je´go‡ and Michel Je´ze´quel§ ∗Universite´ de Bretagne Sud, UMR CNRS 6285 Lab-STICC, Lorient, France
†Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Utah State University, Logan, Utah 84322 ‡Institut Polytechnique Bordeaux, UMR CNRS 5218 Lab-IMS, Bordeaux, France
§Institut TELECOM/TELECOM Bretagne, UMR CNRS 6285 Lab-STICC, Brest, France Email: yangyang.tang@univ-ubs.fr

Abstract— This work extends the analysis and application of a digital error correction method called Muller C-element Decoding (MCD), which has been proposed for fault masking in logic circuits comprised of unreliable elements. The proposed technique employs cascaded Muller C-elements and XOR gates to achieve efficient error-correction in the presence of internal upsets. The error-correction analysis of MCD architecture and the investigation of C-element’s robustness are first introduced. We demonstrate that the MCD is able to produce error-correction benefit in a high error-rate of internal faults. Significantly, for a (3,6) short-length Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) code, when the decoding process is internally error-free the MCD achieves also a gain in terms of decoding performance by comparison to the well-known Gallager Bit-Flipping method. We further consider application of MCD to a general-purpose fault-tolerant model, coded Dual Modular Redundancy (cDMR), which offers low-redundancy error-resilience for contemporary logic systems as well as future nanoeletronic architectures.
I. INTRODUCTION
Due to the rapid development of logic circuit manufacturing in the last two decades, electronic devices are now miniaturized to nanoscale dimensions. Nanoscale devices are increasingly sensitive to faults due to manufacturing defects, environmental fluctuations, and electronic noise or interference. From the circuit perspective, semiconductor faults fall into three main categories: permanent, intermittent, and transient. Permanent faults are caused by manufacturing defects, or device wear-out. They reflect irreversible physical changes. Intermittent faults occur because of unstable or marginal hardware; they can be activated and later reversed by environmental changes, like higher or lower temperature and voltage. Transient defects occur on a shorter time-scale, arising from device noise, interference or particle interactions. Due to the size downscaling processes, digital logic circuits are increasingly vulnerable to the transient faults [1].
Since any embedded fault-masking solution is implemented using the same device as the logic it protects, it is important for a fault-masking technique to be also tolerant of internal errors within its own logic. Researchers previously investigated the performance of a variety of error-correcting schemes under the influence of intrinsic faults [2]–[7]. In many cases, the proposed fault-masking solutions are limited to particular applications or algorithms. For example, an Algorithmic NoiseTolerance (ANT) technique was introduced by Shim et al.,

for reliable low-power digital signal processing [2]. The ANT method is based on a reduced precision replica to achieve low-power robust system in certain DSP algorithms. However, the ANT method is difficult to adapt if the reduced precision block cannot be done in an efficient way. An Error Resilient System Architecture (ERSA) [3] was proposed for low-cost robust systems, but incurs higher costs for general-purpose applications. Thus, the need of an efficient general-purpose fault-tolerant design is evident.
In the authors’ previous work [8], [9], an error-correction method based on Muller C-elements was introduced and shown to be robust against internal transient faults. This method, referred as to MCD, is an implementation of iterative Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) [10] decoders suitable for embedding into digital logic circuits. The MCD method consists primarily of C-elements and XOR gates which implement a parity-check decoding algorithm. The MCD differs from traditional parity-check algorithms in that its circuit topology is designed to suppress internal upsets within the decoder.
In this paper, an extended work of MCD technique and its implementation for embedded robust design are detailed. The main contributions of this work are threefold: First the error-correction analysis of MCD is shown. Second, the study of error-resilience capacity inherited by C-element is detailed. Lastly, we study a coded Dual Modular Redundancy (cDMR) application with a short length MCD, which achieves a significant gain in terms of decoding performance for both error-free and noisy decoding cases.
II. BIT-FLIPPING METHOD AND MCD ARCHITECTURE
A. Gallager’s Bit-Flipping Method
LDPC decoding methods are traditionally described as message-passing on a code’s Tanner graph [11]. The Tanner graph contains two sets of nodes – variable nodes vi and parity-check nodes pj. Some edges connect the variable nodes to the parity-check nodes thanks to a sparse parity-check matrix associated to each LDPC code. The degree of a node is the number of edges connected to it in the Tanner graph. Let dv be the degree of variable node vi, and let Vi be the set of edges that are connected to vi. Similarly, let dc be the degree of parity-check node pj, and let Pj be the set of edges that are connected to pj. During the decoding process, binary

978-1-4673-5762-3/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

1680

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

messages are exchanged between the two sets of nodes. The message passed from node vi to pj is written yij, and the returning message from pj to vi is written fji. All nodes are simple processing functions that follow the standard extrinsic information principle: the outgoing message on edge k is computed using information from all edges except k.
Gallager’s Bit-Flipping Methods (GBF) were among the first LDPC decoding algorithms introduced by Gallager [10]. The GBF methods are defined for frames that were transmitted over a Binary Symmetric Channel (BSC), as a binary hard decision message-passing decoding method [12]. A GBF algorithm can be described as follows. The variable nodes initially transmit messages yij = xi for all i, j. For each parity-check node, the outgoing message on edge k is equal to the modulo2 sum of all local incoming messages (excluding edge k). For the variable nodes, the outgoing message along edge k is equal to xi unless at least b incoming messages (excluding edge k) disagree with the xi. Traditionally, there are two versions of the algorithm. When b = (dv −1), all local incoming messages are required to be unanimous, the method is known as the Gallager-A algorithm. If b is fixed to a smallest integer during the decoding iteration as explained in [10] and [12], then the method is known as the Gallager-B algorithm.
B. The MCD Architecture
The MCD architecture is characterized by the processing steps applied at the variable nodes. For each variable node vi, a set of C-element gates Ck, 0 ≤ k < (dv − 1), is associated as shown in Fig. 1(a) [8]. The circuit is a cascade of C-element gates, modified for the initialization of the state memory. In this figure, dv = 4. Each C-element has three inputs; the left-side inputs are the usual inputs, and the top-side input is the initial state for the C-element’s memory. Each C-element gate Ck contains a single-bit storage element ck. Moreover, a standard binary C-element circuit is shown in Fig. 1(b) [13]. The MCD decoding algorithm is described as follows:
1) Initialize yk = xi, for all k ∈ V. 2) Compute fji = ⊕m∈Pj\i ymj for all j ∈ P. 3) Initialize each C-element memory as ck = fk , where
k = (k + dv − 1) mod dv. 4) The C-element’s port connections are as follows. For
C0, the inputs are f0 (f0 = xi) and f1, and the output is c0. For Ck, the inputs are ck−1 and fk+1, and the output is ck. 5) Iterate steps 2 and 4 during a fixed number of iterations, as the restoration phase. Note that the initialization in step 3 is performed only during the first iteration. 6) The corrected output is zi = c(dv−1). This algorithm is guaranteed to correct a single error during each iteration. It can also correct many multi-error patterns as well [8], [9]. The MCD method can be regarded as a circuitlevel implementation for variable nodes in an LDPC decoder.
III. ERROR-CORRECTION ANALYSIS
An error obtained from fk may originate from an internal error within the decoder. The C-element cascade helps to stop

W eak-keeper

A

C

B

Q

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1: A local implementation of a variable node (a), and a standard Muller C-element circuit of which the state memory ck is realized by a weak-keeper (b).

the propagation of such errors. As the error-correction analysis done in [9], a single error event can be masked during an iteration. In the rest of this subsection we study the cases of double-error events in restoration phase during an iteration.
A. Double errors appear at fk and fl
If a variable node vi receives two erroneous messages at fk and fl, such that |k − l| ≥ 1, there are three possible cases:
• If f0 and f1 are erroneous, the output of C0 is thus erroneous. Since the rest of fk and storages are correct, the error from C0 is masked.
• f0 and fk (k > 1) are incorrect. In this case, the output of C0 is correct, and any erroneous fk can’t induce an error event.
• fk and fl, (k = l = 0), are erroneous. In this case, any single error event is waived.
B. Double errors appear at ck and cl
If a variable node vi generated two upsets at ck and cl, such that |k − l| ≥ 1, these events can be sorted as a single error event occurrence. Consequently, these cases are masked by the inherent fault-tolerance by C-element.
C. Double errors appear at fk and cl
If two upsets occur at fk and cl of a variable node vi, where |k − l| ≥ 0, three cases are possible:
• if k = (dv − 1) and l = (dv − 2), the value of Celement Cl, cl, is correct. Since only single-error event is occurred among the C-elements except Cl, due to Celement’s behavior another input of Cl is assured errorfree. In this case, only fk is erroneous that can not induce an error at the output.
• When k = (dv − 1) and l = (dv − 2), fk and cl are correct. Hence, the output from vi is correct as well.
• At last, if k = (dv − 1) and l = (dv − 2), fk and cl are thus incorrect. In this case, the output is erroneous.
To sum up, a cascaded C-element set is able to correct any single error event regardless of where those errors originate. Any double-error events can be corrected, except a single pattern, namely the local incoming message to the last Celement and its storage are simultaneously flipped over. For the burst errors, the C-element set can also correct some patterns.

1681
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Original Function s

F (u)

ECC

sˆ rˆ

Parity-Mapped Function

r

H · F (u)

Fig. 3: Architecture of the cDMR model.

Fig. 2: Simulated error rate results obtained using the 0.6μm CMOS model in Virtuoso Spectre.
IV. FAULT-TOLERANCE INHERITED BY C-ELEMENT
To further reveal the error-resilience inherited from Celement, we study the reliability of a state memory of Celement by comparison to a static logic gate, namely an inverter. Without loss of generality, the state memory was designed for a 0.6μm CMOS logic process. For comparison, an inverter was also designed. Both circuits were simulated in Virtuoso Spectre from Cadence, where signal errors are set up in a large scale by the “noisescale” parameter. Fig. 2 shows an overlay of Monte Carlo transient simulation runs form both the state memory and the static gate simulations. The “noisescale” parameter is set as large scale in order to induce enough upset cases to measure and compare the error rate for those two components. An error occurs whenever the difference crosses 0.05V threshold when 5V as the correct output. More precisely, if the difference of output value to the correct one (5V ) is bigger than 0.05V , then an error is considered. The difference lower than 0.05V is bypassed. For the static gate, errors appear quite frequently as indicated by numerous threshold-crossings. By contrast, in the state memory case, the amplitude of output noise fluctuations is significantly cutoff. Thanks to the feedback mechanism in the state memory, up to a magnitude of two orders as the robustness gain. Consequently, by comparison to a static logic gate, C-element is able to tolerates the upset events with errorresilience gain between multiple times up to magnitude of two orders.
V. THE CDMR TECHNIQUE BY APPLYING MCD
A. cDMR Technique
One of the authors (Winstead) proposed an LDPC-coded Fault Compensation Technique (LFCT) in [5]. This technique is relevant to higher LDPC codes resulting in a more powerful error-correcting ability. With taking the principle of LFCT, a coded Dual-Modular Redundancy (cDMR) technique can be defined as shown in Fig. 3. More detailed can also be found

in [8] and [9]. A logic function F (u) is implemented using a digital CMOS technology that is subject to errors at its output. The original function F (u) is augmented by the addition of a redundant parity-generator module, H · F (u), where H represents the encoding function that generates parity bits codeword space at the output of F (u) as explained in [5]. The systematic output word s is then concatenated with the parity outputs r from H · F (u), yielding a complete codeword [s r]. According to the code’s H matrix, namely the parity-check matrix that defines the error-correction code, an Error Control Codes (ECC) is supposed to perform the error-correction in the presence of internal faults.
B. Good Decoder Candidate for the ECC of cDMR
In this subsection, we demonstrate a good candidate for the ECC of cDMR. By comparison to the GBF approach, the performance improvement achieved with MCD was analyzed using two metrics: the BER performances over BSC under a error-free decoding process and faulty decoding process. For the sake of facility, only LDPC code with dv = 3 is studied.
A (3,6) LDPC code of length 64 was simulated over BSC in the cases of error-free and noisy decoding process, respectively, as shown in Fig. 4. First, in the case of noisy decoding as dashed curves, the GBF performance worsens with increased iterations, but MCD does not suffer from this degradation. Significantly, when the length of a LDPC code is short, the MCD performs a gain in terms of decoding performance, as shown the solid curves in Fig. 4. As such, this short MCD decoder is a good candidate to the ECC block. Consequently, with employing the MCD architecture, the cDMR technique that can prevent the internal upsets provides a general-purpose robust system to logic design.
VI. DISCUSSION: CDMR’S IMPLEMENTATION
To avoid the occurrence of correlated errors among s and r, the most reliable approach is regarded in two cases: if F (u) has low complexity, such like finite-state machines, F (u) and H · F (x) then can be easily designed without resulting correlated errors; if F (u) has a high complexity and large fanin and fanout, a flat truth-table synthesis can be used, as is done with cross-bar logic arrays [14]. To explain this constraint, we may contrast the two circuits shown in Fig. 5. In Fig. 5(a), a ripple-carry implementation, a single gate error may propagate to the several of the output signals. An example of error propagation is indicated by the symbol in Fig. 5(a). In the cDMR system, error-propagation may induce many simultaneous faults in the [s r] codeword, which are not likely to be correctable.

1682
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Error-Free, (solid) and Faulty Decoding, internal fault rate 0.0001 (dashed) 10−1

10−2

BER

10−3
(a)
10−4

10−5 10−160−4

20-Iteration GBF 2-Iteration GBF 20-Iteration MCD 2-Iteration MCD

10−3

BSC Parameter

10−2

10−1

Fig. 4: Simulation results of (3,6) LDPC code of length 64 under faulty and error-free decoding.

In the crossbar implementation, as shown in Fig. 5(b), logic is implemented by fabrics of AND-logic and OR-logic. The “dots” indicate the placement of junctions which physically implement the logic operations. In this style of implementation, every operation is associated with only a single output. If a momentary fault occurs at some junction, it will propagate only to a single output. This implementation guarantees that single-error events are correctable. The major disadvantage of crossbar logic is that the operation counts are not optimal. The crossbar adder in Fig. 5(b), for instance, is composed of 57 separate operations. Crossbar logic does not generally obtain minimized gate complexity, but it offers improved reliability by eliminating error propagations.
VII. CONCLUSION
The Muller C-element based Decoder, referred as to MCD, has been proposed for efficient error-correction in the presence of high error rate internal upsets. In this work, an extended study of MCD is presented. The error-correction analysis of MCD and the study of C-element’s fault-tolerance are first introduced. By comparison to the well-known Gallager’s BitFlipping method, for a (3,6) LDPC code of short length, the MCD yields a gain in terms of decoding performance in the cases of error-free and faulty decoding. At last, by applying the MCD, a coded Dual-Modular Redundancy (cDMR) technique designed for robust hard-on to current logic or future nanoelectronics is optimized.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the US National Science Foundation under award ECCS-0954747 and CCF-0916105.
REFERENCES
[1] R. C. Baumann, “Soft errors in advanced semiconductor devices-part i: the three radiation sources,” IEEE Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 17–22, 2001.

(b)
Fig. 5: Two-bit binary adder implementations, representing a traditional ripple-carry design (a), and a crossbar design suitable for some nanoelectronic device families (b).
[2] B. Shim and N. Shanbhag, “Energy-efficient soft error-tolerant digital signal processing,” Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 336 –348, april 2006.
[3] L. Leem, H. Cho, J. Bau, Q. A. Jacobson, and S. Mitra, “Ersa: error resilient system architecture for probabilistic applications,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Design, Automation and Test in Europe, ser. DATE ’10, 2010, pp. 1560–1565.
[4] C. Winstead, Y. Luo, E. Monzon, and A. Tejeda, “An error correction method for binary and multiple-valued logic,” Multiple-Valued Logic, IEEE International Symposium on, pp. 105–110, 2011.
[5] C. Winstead and S. Howard, “Probabilistic LDPC-coded fault compensation technique for reliable nanoscale computing,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II – Express Briefs, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 484–488, June 2009.
[6] Y. Tang, E. Boutillon, C. Je´go, and M. Je´ze´quel, “A new single-error correction scheme based on self-diagnosis residue number arithmetic,” in DASIP, 2010, pp. 27–33.
[7] S. Yazdi, C.-H. Huang, and L. Dolecek, “Optimal design of a gallager b noisy decoder for irregular ldpc codes,” Communications Letters, IEEE, vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 2052 –2055, december 2012.
[8] Y. Tang, C. Winstead, E. Boutillon, C. Je´go, and M. Je´ze´quel, “An ldpc decoding method for fault-tolerant digital logic,” in Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2012 IEEE International Symposium on, may 2012, pp. 3025 –3028.
[9] C. Winstead, Y. Tang, E. Boutillon, C. Jego, and M. Jezequel, “A spacetime redundancy technique for embedded stochastic error correction,” in Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC), 2012 7th International Symposium on, aug. 2012, pp. 36 –40.
[10] R. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. MIT Press, 1963. [11] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-
product algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, 2001. [12] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 599–618, 2001. [13] D. Muller and W. Bertky, “A theory of asynchronous circuits,” in Proc. International Symposium on the Theory of Switching, Part 1, 1959, pp. 204–243. [14] W. Rao, A. Orailoglu, and R. Karri, “Logic mapping in crossbar-based nanoarchitectures,” Design Test of Computers, IEEE, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 68 –77, jan.-feb. 2009.

1683
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

