156

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

their low-power consumption property. When compared to the conventional design, its stability is degraded by 0.6% only at extremely low supply voltages. At 1 V operating condition, both designs are equally stable with no sensing errors, according to our Monte Carlo simulations. Its area overhead is about 11%. It is therefore the most suitable design for implementing high capacity parallel CAM in sub-65-nm CMOS technologies.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Pagiamtzis and A. Sheikholeslami, “Content-addressable memory (CAM) circuits and architectures: A tutorial and survey,” IEEE J. SolidState Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 712–727, Mar. 2006.
[2] A. T. Do, S. S. Chen, Z. H. Kong, and K. S. Yeo, “A low-power CAM with efficient power and delay trade-off,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), 2011, pp. 2573–2576.
[3] I. Arsovski and A. Sheikholeslami, “A mismatch-dependent power allocation technique for match-line sensing in content-addressable memories,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 1958–1966, Nov. 2003.
[4] N. Mohan and M. Sachdev, “Low-leakage storage cells for ternary content addressable memories,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 604–612, May 2009.
[5] O. Tyshchenko and A. Sheikholeslami, “Match sensing using matchline stability in content addressable memorys (CAM),” IEEE J. SolidState Circuits, vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 1972–1981, Sep. 2008.
[6] N. Mohan, W. Fung, D. Wright, and M. Sachdev, “A low-power ternary CAM with positive-feedback match-line sense amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 566–573, Mar. 2009.
[7] S. Baeg, “Low-power ternary content-addressable memory design using a segmented match line,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1485–1494, Jul. 2008.
[8] K. Pagiamtzis and A. Sheikholeslami, “A low-power content-addressable memory (CAM) using pipelined hierarchical search scheme,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 1512–1519, Sep. 2004.

Error Detection in Majority Logic Decoding of Euclidean Geometry Low Density Parity Check (EG-LDPC) Codes
Pedro Reviriego, Juan A. Maestro, and Mark F. Flanagan
Abstract—In a recent paper, a method was proposed to accelerate the majority logic decoding of difference set low density parity check codes. This is useful as majority logic decoding can be implemented serially with simple hardware but requires a large decoding time. For memory applications, this increases the memory access time. The method detects whether a word has errors in the first iterations of majority logic decoding, and when there are no errors the decoding ends without completing the rest of the iterations. Since most words in a memory will be error-free, the average decoding time is greatly reduced. In this brief, we study the application of a similar technique to a class of Euclidean geometry low density parity check (EG-LDPC) codes that are one step majority logic decodable. The results obtained show that the method is also effective for EG-LDPC codes. Extensive simulation results are given to accurately estimate the probability of error detection for different code sizes and numbers of errors.
Index Terms—Error correction codes, Euclidean geometry low-density parity check (EG-LDPC) codes, majority logic decoding, memory.
I. INTRODUCTION
Error correction codes are commonly used to protect memories from so-called soft errors, which change the logical value of memory cells without damaging the circuit [1]. As technology scales, memory devices become larger and more powerful error correction codes are needed [2], [3]. To this end, the use of more advanced codes has been recently proposed [4]–[8]. These codes can correct a larger number of errors, but generally require complex decoders. To avoid a high decoding complexity, the use of one step majority logic decodable codes was first proposed in [4] for memory applications. Further work on this topic was then presented in [5], [6], [8]. One step majority logic decoding can be implemented serially with very simple circuitry [9], but requires long decoding times. In a memory, this would increase the access time which is an important system parameter. Only a few classes of codes can be decoded using one step majority logic decoding [9]. Among those are some Euclidean geometry low density parity check (EG-LDPC) codes which were used in [4], and difference set low density parity check (DS-LDPC) codes [9].
A method was recently proposed in [10] to accelerate a serial implementation of majority logic decoding of DS-LDPC codes. The idea behind the method is to use the first iterations of majority logic decoding to detect if the word being decoded contains errors. If there are no errors, then decoding can be stopped without completing the remaining
N iterations, therefore greatly reducing the decoding time. For a code with block length , majority logic decoding (when im-
N plemented serially) requires iterations, so that as the code size grows,
so does the decoding time. In the proposed approach, only the first three iterations are used to detect errors, thereby achieving a large speed in-
N crease when is large. In [10] it was shown that for DS-LDPC codes,
all error combinations of up to five errors can be detected in the first

Manuscript received March 17, 2011; revised July 12, 2011; accepted December 07, 2011. Date of publication January 02, 2012; date of current version December 19, 2012. This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation under Grant AYA2009-13300-C03-01.
P. Reviriego and J. A. Maestro are with the Universidad Antonio de Nebrija, Madrid E-28040, Spain (e-mail: previrie@nebrija.es; jmaestro@nebrija.es).
M. F. Flanagan is with the School of Electrical, Electronic, and Mechanical Engineering, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland (e-mail: mark. flanagan@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2011.2179681
1063-8210/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

157

TABLE I ONE STEP MLD EG-LDPC CODES

TABLE II UNDETECTED ERRORS IN EXHAUSTIVE CHECKING

1) All equations include the variable whose value is stored in the last
c register (the one marked as 14).

2) The rest of the registers are included in at most one of the check

equations.

If errors can be detected in the first few iterations of MLD, then

whenever no errors are detected in those iterations, the decoding can

be stopped without completing the rest of the iterations. In the first it-

eration, errors will be detected when at least one of the check equations

is affected by an odd number of bits in error. In the second iteration,

as bits are cyclically shifted by one position, errors will affect other

equations such that some errors undetected in the first iteration will be

detected. As iterations advance, all detectable errors will eventually be Fig. 1. Serial one-step majority logic decoder for the (15,7) EG-LPDC code. detected.

three iterations. Also, errors affecting more than five bits were detected with a probability very close to one. The probability of undetected errors was also found to decrease as the code block length increased. For a billion error patterns only a few errors (or sometimes none) were undetected. This may be sufficient for some applications.
Another advantage of the proposed method is that it requires very little additional circuitry as the decoding circuitry is also used for error detection. For example, it was shown in [10] that the additional area required to implement the scheme was only around 1% for large word sizes.
The method proposed in [10] relies on the properties of DS-LDPC codes and therefore it is not directly applicable to other code classes.

In [10] it was shown that for DS-LDPC codes most errors can be detected in the first three iterations of MLD. Based on simulation results and on a theoretical proof for the case of two errors, the following hypothesis was made.
“Given a word read from a memory protected with DS-LDPC codes, and affected by up to five bit-flips, all errors can be detected in only three decoding cycles”.
Then the proposed technique was implemented in VHDL and synthesized, showing that for codes with large block sizes the overhead is low. This is because the existing majority logic decoding circuitry is reused to perform error detection and only some extra control logic is needed.

In the following, a similar approach for EG-LDPC codes is presented. The rest of this brief is divided into the following sections. Section II

III. RESULTS

provides preliminaries on EG-LDPC codes, majority logic decoding and the method proposed in [10]. Section III presents the results of applying the method to EG-LDPC codes, comprising simulation results and a hypothesis based on those results. This is complemented by a theoretical proof for the cases of one and two errors that is provided in an Appendix.

The method proposed in [10] has been applied to the class of one step MLD EG-LDPC codes. To present the results, the conclusions are presented first in terms of a hypothesis that is then validated by simulation and also partially by a theoretical analysis presented in the Appendix.
The results obtained can be summarized in the following hypothesis. “Given a word read from a memory protected with one step MLD

II. PRELIMINARIES

EG-LDPC codes, and affected by up to four bit-flips, all errors can be detected in only three decoding cycles”.

Finite geometries have been used to derive many error-correcting Note that this hypothesis is different from the one made for

codes [9], [11]. One example are EG-LDPC codes which are based DS-LDPCs codes in [10] as in that case errors affecting up to five

on the structure of Euclidean geometries over a Galois field. Among bits were always detected. This is due to structural differences be-

EG-LDPC codes there is a subclass of codes that is one step majority tween DS-LDPC and EG-LDPC codes, which will be detailed in the

logic decodable (MLD) [9]. Codes in this subclass are also cyclic. The
N parameters for some of these codes are given in Table I, where is the K J block size, the number of information bits, the number of MLD t check equations and ML the number of errors that the code can correct

Appendix. To validate the above hypothesis, the EG-LDPC codes considered have been implemented and tested.
For codes with small words and affected by a small number of bit flips, it is practical to generate and check all possible error combina-

using one step MLD.

tions. As the code size grows and the number of bit flips increases, it is

One step MLD can be implemented serially using the scheme in no longer feasible to exhaustively test all possible combinations. There-

N = 15 Fig. 1 which corresponds to the decoder for the EG-LDPC code with fore the simulations are done in two ways, by exhaustively checking all . First the data block is loaded into the registers. Then the check error combinations when it is feasible and by checking randomly gen-

equations are computed and if a majority of them has a value of one, erated combinations in the rest of the cases.

N the last bit is inverted. Then all bits are cyclically shifted. This set of
operations constitutes a single iteration: after iterations, the bits are in the same position in which they were loaded. In the process, each bit
N may be corrected only once. As can be seen, the decoding circuitry is
simple, but it requires a long decoding time if is large.

The results for the exhaustive checks are shown in Table II. These

results prove the hypothesis for the codes with smaller word size (15

N = 255 and 63). For

up to three errors have been exhaustively tested

N = 1023 while for

only single and double error combinations have

been exhaustively tested.

The check equations must have the following properties (see [9] for To complement the results of the exhaustive checks for larger codes

more details).

and number of errors, simulations using random error patterns have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

158

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

TABLE III UNDETECTED ERRORS WITH ONE BILLION RANDOM ERROR COMBINATIONS

been used. In all the experiments, one billion error combinations are would enable a fine-grained tradeoff between decoding time and error

tested. The results for errors affecting more than four bits are shown detection capability.

in Table III, since for errors affecting up to four bits there were no

undetected errors. It can be observed that for errors affecting more than four bits there is a small number of error combinations that will not be detected in the first three iterations. This number decreases with word size and also with the number of errors. The decrease with the word size can be explained as follows: the larger the word size, the larger the number of MLD check equations (see Table I) and therefore it is more unlikely that errors occur in the same equation. As for the number of errors, a similar reasoning applies: the more errors occur, the larger the probability that an odd number of errors occurs in at least one equation. Finally it must be noted that the probabilities of undetected errors are different for an even and an odd number of errors as in the latter case, one of the errors must occur in a bit which is not checked by any equation.
The simulation results presented suggest that all errors affecting three and four bits would be detected in the first three iterations. For errors affecting a larger number of bits, there is a small probability of not being detected in those iterations. For large word sizes, the probabilities are sufficiently small to be acceptable in many applications.
In summary, the first three iterations will detect all errors affecting four or fewer bits, and almost every other detectable error affecting more bits. This is a slightly worse performance than in the case of DS-LDPC codes [10] where errors affecting five bits were additionally always detected. However, the majority logic circuitry is simpler for EG-LDPC codes, as the number of equations is a power of two and an approach based on sorting networks proposed in [8] can be used to reduce the cost of the majority logic voting. In addition, EG-LDPC codes have block lengths close to a power of two, thus fitting well to the requirements of modern memory systems. This may mean that in some cases it may be more convenient to use an EG-LDPC code and keep a word size compatible with existing designs (power of two) than using a DS-LDPC code requiring a different word size or a shortened version of that code. When using word size which is a power of two, there would be a bit which is not used by the EG-LDPC code (see Table I). This bit can be used for a parity covering all bits in the word that would detect all errors affecting an odd number of bits. In that case, the design using the EG-LDPC would also detect all errors affecting five or fewer bits.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this brief, the detection of errors during the first iterations of serial one step Majority Logic Decoding of EG-LDPC codes has been

APPENDIX

In this Appendix, a theoretical proof is presented for the case of er-

rors affecting one or two bits. We begin by introducing the necessary

m background information about EG-LDPC codes. Euclidean Geometry Low Density Parity Check Codes: An -di-

m; m mensional
by EG(

2 ) 2 Euclidean Geometry s is formed by the

omvser

the Galois Field GF(2s) -tuples over GF(2s) by

denoted defining

vector addition and scalar multiplication as follows [9]:

(a0; a1; . . . ; am01) + (b0; b1; . . . ; bm01)

= (a0 + b0; a1 + b1; . . . ; am01 + bm01)

 1 (a0; a1; . . . ; am01)

= ( 1 a0;  1 a1; . . . ;  1 am01) :

(1)

m m; EG( 2 ) Each -tuple is called a point in

s , with the all zero

m m; EG( 2 ) 2 -tuple being called the origin. A line in

s is formed by s

a c + points and can be expressed as f

g where a and c are points in

m; EG( 2s).

EG-LDPC codes are derived from these Euclidean Geometries. The

EG(2; 2 ) N = 2 1 EG-LDPC codes which are
derived from geometries

one

step
s

majority logic decodable with block length

ar2es

those 0.

EG(2; 2 ) For these codes, the MLD check equations are taken from the incidence

vectors of the lines which do not pass through the origin in

s.

2 Each of those vectors has s points that correspond to the ones in the

2 check equations. For each point there are s such lines, and for each

2 2 1 line there is an incidence vector [9]. s points, there are in reality only

B2sut0sinc(etheeacnhumlinbeerpaosfspesoitnhtrsoudgifh-

ferent than the origin) different lines (and incidence vectors) as the

same line is counted in each of its points. Another useful property of

the EG-LDPC codes is that every cyclic shift of an incidence vector is

also an incidence vector [9].

Next we consider the number of bits that participate in an MLD
2 2 equation at each iteration. Each equation has s ones and there are s

2 2 + 1 2 2 eq2suationss 0

[9]. As every equation checks the final bit, this bits are checked by the equations. This leaves

means
s
0

that bits

which are not checked by any equation at a given iteration. Those posi-

tions are precisely the ones which correspond to the line that passes

k (2 + 1) k = through the origin [9] and are of the form 1 s

with

s
1; 2; . . . 2 2 0

. This is in contrast to DS-LDPC codes where every

bit is checked by all of the MLD check equations at every iteration.

studied. The objective was to reduce the decoding time by stopping the decoding process when no errors are detected. The simulation results A. Theoretical Proof for Single and Double Errors

show that all tested combinations of errors affecting up to four bits are Single errors will not be detected in the first iteration when they occur

detected in the first three iterations of decoding. These results extend in one of the positions not checked by any equation. As these positions
2 + 1 the ones recently presented for DS-LDPC codes, making the modified are spaced s apart, the error will be always detected in the second

one step majority logic decoding more attractive for memory applica- iteration.

tions. The designer now has a larger choice of word lengths and error For double errors, we begin the proof with the following lemmas.

correction capabilities.

Lemma 1: The MLD check equations in a one step MLD EG-LDPC

Future work includes extending the theoretical analysis to the cases of three and four errors. More generally, determining the required number of iterations to detect errors affecting a given number of bits

code
2 1 2 1 N = 2 1 there

Paarrreeooafl2:lscS0 yicnlcicecystchhlieifcrtessohafirfeotsnoe2fsaon0 noethveedrc.iftoferraelnstoi(nsciindceence

vect2osrs0an)d,

seems to be an interesting problem. A general solution to that problem we can conclude that all the vectors are made from the cyclic shift of a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013

159

single vector which defines the code. Therefore the equations for MLD may all be obtained from cyclically shifting this single vector. This property is also found in DS-LDPC codes [9].
In addition, to meet the conditions required for one step MLD (see
0 Section II), the 2s 1 remaining equations are obtained from the first
equation by cyclically shifting the previous equation by the smallest amount such that the last bit is checked.
Lemma 2: There is no MLD check equation which has two ones
1 0 at a distance k (2s + 1) with k = 1; 2; . . . 2s 2.
Proof: Suppose there are two such ones in an equation, then as equations are shifted to obtain the rest of the equations, at some point
0 0 1 there will be an equation with a one on position 22s 1 k (2s +1) = 0 0 1 (2s 1 k) (2s + 1) which would contradict one of the properties
of the EG-LDPC codes (see previous subsection). Lemma 3: Every pair of ones in a check equation is at a different
distance. Proof: Suppose that there is another pair of ones at the same dis-
tance in the check equation. Since every check equations corresponds to a line in the Euclidean geometry, and any cyclic shift of such a line necessarily yields another line, then it may be seen that shifting the check equation yields a line which shares two points with the first one. This is not possible as in a Euclidean geometry, two distinct lines cannot share the same two points.
Theorem: Given a block protected with a one step MLD EG-LDPC code, and affected by two bit-flips, these can be detected in only three decoding cycles.
Proof: Let us consider the different situations that can occur for errors affecting two bits. An error will be detected in the first iteration unless a) they occur in bits which are not checked by any equation, or b) both errors occur in bits which are checked by the same MLD equation in the first iteration.
For case a), the properties of the code force the bits in error to be at a
1 distance k (2s + 1). Therefore, the error will be detected in the second
iteration unless there are two ones in the MLD vector at a distance
1k (2s+1). This cannot be the case due to Lemma 2. Therefore the error
must be detected in the second iteration. For case b), the separation of the bits which are not checked by any equation means that it is not possible in the second and third iteration for the two errors not to be checked by any equation.
Also, using Lemma 3 for case b), in the second iteration the bits will be checked by a single equation again only if this second equation is simply the previous one shifted by one position. The same applies to the rest of the iterations: if the bits are checked by one equation then it must be the one in the previous iteration shifted by one position. Finally there can not be three MLD equations that are consecutive shifts as that would mean that there are three consecutive ones in the equations. This would mean that at least one register apart from the last one is checked by more than one equation and therefore the code would not be one step MLD. Therefore the errors will always be detected in the first three iterations.
REFERENCES
[1] R. C. Baumann, “Radiation-induced soft errors in advanced semiconductor technologies,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Reliab., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 301–316, Sep. 2005.
[2] M. A. Bajura, Y. Boulghassoul, R. Naseer, S. DasGupta, A. F. Witulski, J. Sondeen, S. D. Stansberry, J. Draper, L. W. Massengill, and J. N. Damoulakis, “Models and algorithmic limits for an ECC-based approach to hardening sub-100-nm SRAMs,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 935–945, Aug. 2007.
[3] R. Naseer and J. Draper, “DEC ECC design to improve memory reliability in sub-100 nm technologies,” Proc. IEEE ICECS, pp. 586–589, 2008.

[4] S. Ghosh and P. D. Lincoln, “Dynamic low-density parity check codes for fault-tolerant nano-scale memory,” presented at the Foundations Nanosci. (FNANO), Snowbird, Utah, 2007.
[5] S. Ghosh and P. D. Lincoln, “Low-density parity check codes for error correction in nanoscale memory,” SRI Computer Science Lab., Menlo Park, CA, Tech. Rep. CSL-0703, 2007.
[6] H. Naeimi and A. DeHon, “Fault secure encoder and decoder for memory applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Defect Fault Toler. VLSI Syst., 2007, pp. 409–417.
[7] B. Vasic and S. K. Chilappagari, “An information theoretical framework for analysis and design of nanoscale fault-tolerant memories based on low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 2438–2446, Nov. 2007.
[8] H. Naeimi and A. DeHon, “Fault secure encoder and decoder for nanomemory applications,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 473–486, Apr. 2009.
[9] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[10] S. Liu, P. Reviriego, and J. Maestro, “Efficient majority logic fault detection with difference-set codes for memory applications,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 148–156, Jan. 2012.
[11] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–596, Feb. 2005.
Techniques for Compensating Memory Errors in JPEG2000
Yunus Emre and Chaitali Chakrabarti
Abstract—This paper presents novel techniques to mitigate the effects of SRAM memory failures caused by low voltage operation in JPEG2000 implementations. We investigate error control coding schemes, specifically single error correction double error detection code based schemes, and propose an unequal error protection scheme tailored for JPEG2000 that reduces memory overhead with minimal effect in performance. Furthermore, we propose algorithm-specific techniques that exploit the characteristics of the discrete wavelet transform coefficients to identify and remove SRAM errors. These techniques do not require any additional memory, have low circuit overhead, and more importantly, reduce the memory power consumption significantly with only a small reduction in image quality.
Index Terms—Error compensation, error control coding, JPEG2000, SRAM errors, voltage scaling.
I. INTRODUCTION
JPEG2000 is a widely used image coding standard that has applications in digital photography, high definition video transmission, medical imagery, etc., [1]. Since it processes one entire frame at a time, it has large memory requirements, and consequently, large memory power consumption. Voltage scaling is an effective way of reducing memory power. For instance, it was shown in [2] that for a JPEG2000
Manuscript received March 16, 2011; revised August 16, 2011; accepted November 10, 2011. Date of publication January 09, 2012; date of current version December 19, 2012. This work was supported in part by NSF CSR0910699.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281 USA (e-mail: yemre@asu. edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2011.2180407

U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

