IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

1399

Customized Branched Neural Network-Aided Shuffled Min-Sum Decoder for Protograph LDPC Codes
Yurong Wang, Liang Lv , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Yi Fang , Senior Member, IEEE, Yonghui Li , Fellow, IEEE, and Shahid Mumtaz , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The paper designs a novel neural shuffled min-sum (NSMS) decoder with the model-driven deep learning method to achieve higher efficient and lower complexity decoding for protograph low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. We propose a new type of customized branched neural network (CBNN) structure, which integrates shuffled min-sum (SMS) decoding algorithm and shuffled belief-propagation (SBP) decoding algorithm. In such a network structure, we can adjust layer arrangement and simplify parameter groups at a specific stage (i.e., training or inference stage) to reduce the unwarranted computational workload. Furthermore, we utilize the branched neuron mean difference (BNMD) to optimize the training targets of the proposed NSMS decoder, which significantly accelerates the convergence speed of the network. Analytical and simulation results show that the proposed NSMS decoder can achieve better performance than the state-ofthe-art counterparts in terms of convergence speed, error rate and computational complexity.
Index Terms—Branched neuron mean difference (BNMD), customized branched neural network (CBNN), model-driven deep learning, neural shuffled min-sum decoder (NSMS), protograph LDPC codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, as one popular type of the channel coding schemes, protograph low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been widely applied in various communication scenarios such as the Internet of Things (IoT), data storage systems, and 5G new radio (NR) systems [1], [2], [3], [4]. Protograph
Received 29 April 2024; revised 30 July 2024; accepted 8 September 2024. Date of publication 12 September 2024; date of current version 16 January 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62071131, Grant 62322106, and Grant 62171135, and in part by Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant 2022B1515020086. The review of this article was coordinated by Dr. Zilong Liu. (Corresponding author: Yi Fang.)
Yurong Wang, Liang Lv, and Yi Fang are with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: wangyurong0714@163.com; lianglv0206@163.com; fangyi@gdut.edu.cn).
Yonghui Li is with the School of Electrical and Information Engineering, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia (e-mail: yonghui.li@sydney.edu.au).
Shahid Mumtaz is with the Department of Computer Sciences, Nottingham Trent University, NG1 4FQ Nottingham, U.K., and also with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do 17104, South Korea (e-mail: dr.shahid.mumtaz@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2024.3459692

LDPC codes have been proven to obtain performance close to the Shannon capacity limit [5] by utilizing iterative decoding algorithms [6], [7], [8]. Among the existing iterative decoding algorithms, the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm can achieve the optimal performance, but it suffers from high computational complexity [9], [10]. Compared to the BP algorithm, the minsum (MS) algorithm [11], its variants (e.g., normalized min-sum (NMS) and offset min-sum (OMS) [12], [13], [14]) have lower complexity and have been widely applied in practical systems. To accelerate the convergence speed of the decoding process, layered schedule [15] and shuffled schedule [16] have been proposed. Different from conventional flooding schedule [17], [18], layered schedule updates check-node (CN) messages sequentially, while shuffled schedule updates variable-node (VN) messages sequentially [19]. However, the above-mentioned decoding algorithms are based on certain mathematical models that lack flexibility, and thus the decoders can be further designed to achieve more efficient decoding [20], [21].
To tackle the above issue, neural networks have been utilized in channel decoding [22]. To be specific, the researchers have employed model-driven deep learning methods in decoding [23]. In [22], the neural BP decoder has been proposed to improve the decoding performance by iteratively update the learnable weighted parameters. In [24], the authors have employed the multi-loss method to enhance the training process and improve the decoding performance. Nevertheless, the above works focus on high-density parity-check (HDPC) codes.
In recent years, some researchers have adopted shallow network structures to enhance the decoding performance of an LDPC decoder [25]. Actually, the LDPC decoders with the shallow network structures have been proven to merely achieve limited performance gains [26]. As an enhanced version, deeper network structures have been considered to further improve the performance of an LDPC decoder. For example, in [27], the authors have employed the factor graph neural network (FGNN) combined with the BP algorithm. The FGNN requires plenty of network parameters and datasets, leading to high complexity in the case of long codewords. To simplify the input of network parameters and reduce computational complexity, a neural layered decoder has been proposed in [28]. The neural layered decoder combines the layered schedule with the deep neural network (DNN) which can accelerate the convergence performance of

0018-9545 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

decoding. In [29], the authors have proposed a parameter-sharing mechanism to guarantee that the network can learn the characteristics of each edge-type of the protograph LDPC codes. Actually, the neural LDPC decoders mentioned above require more hidden layers to ensure the iterative decoding converges. Additionally, the authors have proposed a new finite alphabet iterative decoder for LDPC codes based on the recurrent quantized neural networks [30]. In [31], a joint optimization method of the NMS algorithm and the component parity check matrix for generalized LDPC codes has been proposed based on maximum a-posteriori probability decoding. Besides, to reduce the complexity of the deep-learning-based LDPC decoding, the authors have proposed the Tensor-Train decomposition method based on the NMS algorithm [32]. However, the above-mentioned works only simply integrate the neural networks and decoding algorithms and do not improve the structure of neural networks. How to design a low-complexity neural decoding network is an extremely challenging issue.
An alternative method to enhance the performance of the neural protograph decoder is to optimize the training method for the neural decoding network. The training method is the key part of the learning process for a neural network, directly affecting the learning effect of the neural network. For instance, in [22], the root mean square propagation (RMSProp) method has been utilized in network training to mitigate the gradient differences between messages in decoding. In [33], the authors have adopted the multi-loss training method to increase the gradient of the backpropagation and learn the characteristics of the lower hidden layers. However, the above training methods are both based on the binary-cross-entropy (BCE) function. The BCE loss function takes the coded bits as labels and a-posteriori soft information as predicted values, which cannot rapidly optimize the network parameters in the training stage due to the limited log-likelihood ratio (LLR) characteristic learning ability. Thus, it is essential to optimize the training method for the neural decoding network.
Among state-of-the-art network structures in segmentation, detection, and video classification, the parallel network (ParNet) with the multi-stream structure has been adopted in some existing works [34], [35]. Specifically, the existing multi-stream networks contain convolutional layers, pooling layers, and fullyconnected layers, etc. The authors in [34], [35] have utilized the multi-stream structure to form the network branches, aiming to reduce the network depth, and thereby reducing latency while preserving high performance. However, the existing neural decoders do not take into account using the ParNet structure to improve error performance.
Furthermore, some other existing works related to the neural decoder have attempted to improve the performance of neural decoders by designing the loss function [22], [24], [36], [37], [38]. For example, the soft bit-error-rate (BER) loss function and frame-error-rate (FER) loss function have been employed to enhance the performance [36], [37], [38]. Nevertheless, the performance of neural decoders with the aforementioned loss functions can be further improved because these loss functions suffer from inefficient parameter update and local optimality problems. On the other hand, the over-estimation value (OEV)

has been proposed to quantitatively describe the over-estimation problems of the min-sum decoding [39]. In particular, the authors have proposed a Monto-Carlo method to improve the performance of the conventional decoders with the aid of OEV [39]. The OEV can not only quantitatively represent the decoding difference between the min-sum and the true values, but also can be compatible with the ParNet structure. Therefore, with the aid of OEV, designing a new loss function for the training method is conducive to improving the performance of the proposed ParNet-structured neural decoder.
Inspired by the above motivation, we design a novel neural protograph LDPC decoder by proposing a new type of customized branched neural network (CBNN) and the new training method based on the branched neuron mean difference (BNMD) loss function. The proposed CBNN and the BNMD loss function can both reduce the network depth while maintaining the excellent performance. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work on the design of neural network and decoding. Moreover, the training method plays an important role in the neural decoder. A well-designed training method can help speed up the convergence of the network. The key contributions of this work are summarized as follows.
1) We propose a novel neural shuffled min-sum (NSMS) decoder based on the CBNN with the model-driven deep learning method. Based on the multi-stream feature of the proposed CBNN, the NSMS decoder can achieve better decoding performance with the same number of hidden layers.
2) We propose a new BNMD loss function to optimize the training method of the neural protograph LDPC decoder, which can accelerate the convergence speed and error performance of the proposed decoding network.
3) In the training stage, we analyze the robustness, generalization, and convergence speed of the proposed NSMS decoder in the case of the different codeword lengths and channel conditions.
4) Theoretical and simulation results demonstrate that the proposed NSMS decoder outperforms the existing counterparts in terms of convergence speed, error performance, and computational complexity.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present the neural protograph LDPC decoding system and review the shuffled LDPC decoding algorithms. In Section III, we describe the proposed NSMS decoder and its training method. Section IV shows the theoretical analyses and simulation results. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
Notations: Let mod (a, b), E[·], | · |, and ReLU(·) denote the remainder calculation, expectation function, absolute value function, and the linear rectification function, respectively.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES
A. Protograph LDPC Codes
The LDPC codes adopted in 5G NR systems are protograph LDPC codes with quasi-cyclic (QC) structure [1], [40]. A protograph LDPC code is represented by a base graph (BG), which consists of several sets of VNs, CNs, and edges [41],

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CUSTOMIZED BRANCHED NEURAL NETWORK-AIDED SHUFFLED MIN-SUM DECODER FOR PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES

1401

Fig. 2. Block diagram of the neural protograph LDPC decoding system.

1, 2, . . ., n. After that, the τ -th modulated symbol sτ is transmitted through the channel. In this paper, we consider the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and the Rayleigh fast fading channel [46]. The corresponding channel output yτ can be represented as

yτ = hτ · sτ + wτ ,

(1)

Fig. 1. An example of the generation procedure for a protograph LDPC code.
[42], [43], [44]. Fig. 1 shows a toy example of the generation procedure for a protograph LDPC code consisting of 3 VNs and 2 CNs, where the black circles and circles with a plus sign represent the VNs and CNs, respectively. In a BG, each edge connects a CN ci with a VN vj. The BG with code rate R = (nb − mb)/nb corresponds to a base matrix B = (bi,j) of size mb × nb, where mb and nb are the numbers of CNs and VNs, respectively, bi,j ∈ {0, 1} denotes the edge connecting ci and vj. Note that each base matrix B = (bi,j) corresponds to a cyclic shift matrix F = (fi,j) with the same size, where fi,j denotes the cyclic shift index of bi,j.
To construct a protograph-based QC LDPC code, the lifting operation (i.e., copy-and-permute operation) is performed on a BG [1], [45]. Typically, a BG is copied Z times to derive a larger protograph (i.e., parity check matrix H) with size of m × n, where n = nb · Z, m = mb · Z, and Z is the lifting factor. Then, the edges are permuted through cyclic-shifting operations. Specifically, each element “0” and “1” in a base matrix B is replaced by an all-zero matrix OZ×Z and an identity matrix IZ×Z , respectively. Subsequently, each identity matrix IZ×Z that replaces the element bi,j is cyclically shifted to the right pi,j times, where pi,j = mod (fi,j, Z). Based on the lifting operation, a protograph LDPC code can be generated by setting the lifting factor and the cyclic shift matrix.
B. System Model
Fig. 2 illustrates the block diagram of the neural protograph LDPC decoding system. Specifically, the length-k information-bit sequence x = {x1, x2, . . . , xk} is sent to the protograph encoder, and thus a length-n coded-bit sequence z = {z1, z2, . . . , zn} is generated. After encoding procedure, the coded-bit sequence z is modulated into a length-n symbol sequence s = {s1, s2, . . . , sn} via a binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulator, where sτ = (−1)zτ ∈ {−1, 1}, τ =

where wτ denotes the complex Gaussian noise with zero mean and variance σ2 = N0/2 in each dimension, and N0 is the noise

power spectral density. Moreover, the probability density func-

tion (PDF) of the channel coefficient hτ follows the Rayleigh distribution, E[|hτ2 |] = 1, where E[·] denotes the expectation
function. Besides, the channel fading is constant over the du-

ration of a symbol. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is defined

as

Eb/N0

=

10

log10

1 2Rσ2

.

In

particular,

an

AWGN

channel

is

obtained when the channel coefficient hτ = 1.

At the receiver, the received signals are processed by the

proposed NSMS decoder, which consists of the input layer,

hidden layers, and the output layer. To be specific, at the input

layer, the LLRs of the received signals are computed and sent

to the hidden layers. Then, the extrinsic LLRs of the CNs are

calculated and sent to the output layer. After that, one can get

the estimated bits.

C. Shuffled LDPC Decoding Algorithms

To accelerate the convergence speed of decoding, the shuffled iterative message-passing methods are adopted for LDPC decoding [47], [48], [49]. The shuffled iterative message-passing methods include initialization, iterative update, and a-posteriori LLR update. The detailed steps of the shuffled iterative messagepassing are as follows.
1) Initialization: The LLR of the τ -th bit in the coded-bit sequence z is calculated as

lτ

=

ln

Pr(yτ |zτ Pr(yτ |zτ

= =

0) 1)

=

2yτ σ2

,

(2)

where Pr(yτ |zτ ) denotes the condition probability, σ2 denotes the noise variance, and τ = 1, 2, . . . , n. 2) Iterative Update: The decoding of LDPC codes can be characterized as the iterative message update between VNs and CNs. Note that the iterative message update strictly follows the connection relationship between VNs and CNs in the Tanner graph (i.e., parity check matrix H). The updating process can be divided into the vertical step and the horizontal step during each iteration. Specifically, according to the shuffled schedule, we divide all VNs

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1402

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

into g groups in a sequential order, each group Gγ = {vαγ+1, vαγ+2, . . . , vαγ+α}, where γ = 0, 1, . . . , g − 1, and α = n/g denotes the number of VNs in every group.
In the vertical step, the message passing from every VN in group Gγ to the associated CN cδ during the t-th iteration can be calculated as

lv(tτ)→cδ = lτ +

lc(tδ−→1)vτ ,

(3)

cδ ∈M(vτ )\cδ

where τ = αγ + 1, αγ + 2, . . . , αγ + α, δ = 1, 2, . . . , M , and M(vτ )\cδ represents the set of all CNs connected to the τ -th VN except the δ-th CN. After the vertical step,
we describe the message passing from CN to VN in the horizontal step.1
i) Shuffled MS decoding algorithm: The message passing from every CN to the associated VN in group Gγ during t-th iteration can be calculated as

lc(tδ)→vτ = s(ctδ)→vτ × max{rc(tδ)→vτ − β(t), 0}, (4)

where

s(ctδ)→vτ =

sgn(lv(tτ) →cδ )

vτ ∈N (cδ )\vτ τ <α·γ

×

sgn(lv(tτ−→1)cδ ),

(5)

vτ

∈N τ

(cδ )\vτ ≥α

·γ

and ⎛

rc(tδ)→vτ

=

min ⎝
vτ

min
∈N (cδ)\vτ

·γ

|lv(tτ)

→cδ

|,

τ <α

⎞

vτ

min
∈N (cδ)\vτ

|lv(tτ−→1)cδ |⎠ .

(6)

τ ≥α·γ

In (4), β(t) denotes the offset factor of t-th iteration, and it is used to correct the decoding error due to the approximation calculation [14], [50]. In (5), N (cδ)\vτ represents the set of all VNs connected to the δ-th CN except the τ -th VN, and sgn(·) denotes the sign function calculation. ii) Shuffled BP decoding algorithm: The message passing from every CN to the associated VN in group Gγ during t-th iteration can be described as
⎛

qc(tδ)→vτ = 2 tanh−1 ⎜⎝⎜

tanh

vτ ∈N (cδ )\vτ τ <α·γ

lv(tτ) →cδ 2
⎞

×

tanh

lv(tτ−→1)cδ 2

⎟⎟⎠ .

(7)

vτ ∈N (cδ )\vτ

τ ≥α·γ

1In the horizontal step, the message passing from CNs to VNs is differing in the shuffled MS decoding algorithm and the shuffled BP decoding algorithm.

Note that the iterative update of the vertical and horizontal steps are alternately performed in sequence for group Gτ during the t-th iteration, where t = 1, 2, . . . , T and T denotes the maximum number of iterations. 3) A-Posteriori LLR Update: After t-th iteration, the aposteriori LLR of τ -th VN is calculated as

pτ = lτ +

lc(tδ)→vτ ,

(8)

cδ ∈M(vτ )

where M(vτ ) represents the set of all CNs connected to the τ -th VN. Then, the estimated bit zτ can be obtained by

zτ

=

1 − sgn(pτ ) , 2

(9)

where sgn(pτ ) denotes the sign of pτ .

III. THE PROPOSED NEURAL SHUFFLED MIN-SUM (NSMS) DECODER
This section presents the CBNN network structure of the proposed NSMS decoder, the neuron model of the NSMS decoding network, and the optimization of the training method with the aid of BNMD.

A. Structure of Proposed NSMS Decoder
According to the Tanner graph, the model-driven deep learning method is adopted to unfold the shuffled LDPC decoding algorithms into an interpretable network [21], [23], and the above offset factor (i.e., β(t) in Section II-C) can be set as the learnable network parameters. In order to improve the pertinence and memory efficiency of the network, we design two different neural networks for the training stage and the inference stage, respectively. In contrast to existing neural decoders (e.g, the neural flooding min-sum (NFMS) decoder [29], the neural layered min-sum (NLMS) decoder [28]), the proposed NSMS decoder has different network variability, network structure, damping nodes, output messages, and the arrangement of output layers.
Fig. 3 illustrates the network structure of the NSMS decoder for the training stage, which includes an input layer and T hidden layers. To be specific, the input layer consists of E neurons, where E denotes the edge number of the Tanner graph. Subsequently, each hidden layer consists of g groups, and each group consists of a VN sublayer lv(t,)γ , a CN sublayer lc(t1),γ , and a shuffled belief-propagation (SBP) sublayer lc(t2),γ, where t = 1, 2, . . . , T denotes the layer index of hidden layers and γ = 0, 1, . . . , g − 1 denotes the index of the group Gγ, and each sublayer in the group has E neurons. Moreover, differing from the existing neural decoders [24], [28], [29], we set the last CN sublayer lc(T1,g)−1 and SBP sublayer lc(T2,g)−1 in the T -th layer as output layers. Likewise, Fig. 4 illustrates the network structure of the NSMS decoder for the inference stage, which contains the same input layer, VN sublayers, and CN sublayers as the network structure of the NSMS decoder for the training stage. In contrast to the training stage, we remove the SBP sublayer lc(t2),γ in each group, and add an output sublayer lo(t) containing n neurons

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CUSTOMIZED BRANCHED NEURAL NETWORK-AIDED SHUFFLED MIN-SUM DECODER FOR PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES

1403

Fig. 3. Network structure of the NSMS decoder for the training stage.

Fig. 4. Network structure of the NSMS decoder for the inference stage.

at the end of each hidden layer. Note that each of the above neurons corresponds to an edge of the Tanner graph. We label each edge as eε = (vτ , cδ), ε = 1, 2, . . . , E, which represents that this edge connects the τ -th VN to the δ-th CN. Furthermore, the corresponding neuron is labeled as nε = (vτ , cδ).
Actually, the neural decoding algorithm in [24], [28], [29] use the flooding min-sum decoding algorithm, the layered min-sum decoding algorithm, and the flooding min-sum decoding algorithm, respectively, while the decoding algorithm in this paper uses the shuffled min-sum algorithm. Besides, the proposed NSMS decoder exploits a CBNN structure having multi-stream feature to enhance the decoding performance, but the neural decoders in [24], [28], [29] adopts the conventional single-stream customized sparse neural network (CSNN). Although alternative ParNets with multi-stream features have been proposed, the existing ParNets adopt the data-driven deep learning method, which cannot meet the requirements of neural decoding [34], [35]. Compared with the existing ParNets adopting the datadriven deep training method, the proposed CBNN adopts the deep learning method driven by the mathematical model of LDPC decoding (i.e., the model-driven deep learning method) and constructed by sublayers encapsulating the VN and CN update algorithms. Therefore, the proposed CBNN can improve the performance the decoding and ensures the effectiveness of the network training.
Furthermore, the network of the proposed NSMS decoder strictly follows the decoding procedure and the layered and shuffled algorithms only have differences in grouping nodes,

similarities inevitably exist between the NLMS decoder [28]

and the proposed NSMS decoder. However, some differences

between the NLMS decoder and the proposed NSMS decoder

stilrl

exist that need to be noted The NLMS decoder in

and can be summarized as follows: [28] adopts the same architecture

for the training and inference stages, while the proposed

NSMS decoder contains two different architectures for the

training and inference stages, respectively, to save unnec-

r

essary memory overhead in each stage. The NLMS decoder in [28] adopts the single-stream net-

work structure, while the proposed NSMS decoder adopts

the branched multi-stream network structure in the training

stage to improve the capture efficiency of CN message

r

features. In the training stage,

the

NLMS

decoder

in

[28]

outputs

the decision of the a-posteriori VN messages from decision

sublayers, while the proposed NSMS decoder utilizes CN

sublayers and SBP sublayers to output the CN messages. In

this way, not only the feature differences of the predicted

and the label values of the proposed NSMS decoder are

reduced for more efficient network training, but also the

memory overhead associated with SBP sublayers can be

saved by removing decision sublayers.

B. Neuron Model of the NSMS Decoding Network
At the training stage, the input layer receives the channel output signal with the length of n and calculates the channel

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1404

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

initial messages according to (2). Then, based on the Tanner
graph, the channel initial messages are mapped into the E neurons, and are passed to the first VN sublayer lv(1,0). We refer to the τ -th VN and the δ-th CN as VN τ and CN δ, respectively. For
instance, if VN 1 connects with CN 1, CN 3, CN 4, CN 6, and
CN 7, the LLR value of VN 1 will be stored in the neurons
n1 = (v1, c1), n2 = (v1, c3), n3 = (v1, c4), n4 = (v1, c6), and n5 = (v1, c7). After that, the VN sublayer lv(1,0) sends the LLR messages from the VN update to the first CN sublayer lc(11,)0 and the first SBP sublayer lc(12,)0. Subsequently, the output messages from lc(11,)0 and lc(12,)0 are utilized in the loss function and the update of the parameters in lc(11,)0. Likewise, the CN sublayer lc(11,)0 sends the LLR messages from the CN update to the VN sublayer lv(1,1). The update of LLR messages in group 1 is similar to that in
group 0, and so on. After all the sublayers in hidden layer 1
complete the updates, the output messages from the CN sublayer lc(11,)g−1 will be transmitted to the VN sublayer lv(2,0). The update in each hidden layer will be repeated until all the T hidden layers
complete the updates.
As for the neuron model, in the hidden layer t (i.e., the t-th
iteration of the decoding process) and group γ, the update of the
VN message in the ε-th neuron nε = (vτ , cδ) of the VN sublayer lv(t,)γ can be represented as

l(lv(t,)γ )
nε=(vτ ,cδ )

=

lτ

+

l , n(lεc(t1−,γ1))

nε =(vτ ,cδ ),cδ =cδ

(10)

where nε = (vτ , cδ ), cδ = cδ denotes all the neurons in lc(t1−,γ1)
except the neuron nε = (vτ , cδ). Note that in the hidden layer 1, ln(lεc(01),0) = 0 for all nε . When the CN updates in group γ are com-
pleted, for the neurons that have been involved in the updates, ln(lεc(01),γ) = 0, while for the neurons that have not been involved in the updates, ln(lεc(01),γ) = 0. With the group index γ increasing, the number of neurons with zero values (i.e., ln(lεc(01),γ) = 0) will be gradually reduced. After the CN updates in group g − 1 are completed in the hidden layer 1, ln(lεc(01),g−1) = 0 for all nε . Likewise, the update of the CN message in the ε-th neuron nε = (vτ , cδ) of the CN sublayer lc(t1),γ can be represented as

l = s × ReLU (lc(t1),γ )
nε=(vτ ,cδ )

(lc(t1),γ ) nε=(vτ ,cδ )

r − β (lc(t1),γ )

(t)

nε=(vτ ,cδ )

λ

,

(11)

where

s = (lc(t1),γ )
nε=(vτ ,cδ )

sgn(ln(lεv(t,)γ ))

nε =(vτ ,cδ ),vτ =vτ τ <α·γ

×

sgn(ln(lεv(t,−γ1) ) ),

v ∈N (c)\v τ ≥α·γ

(12)

and

⎛

r(lc(t1),γ )
nε=(vτ ,cδ )

=

min

⎝
nε

min
=(vτ ,cδ ),vτ

=vτ

|l(lv(t,)γ
nε

)

|,

τ <α·γ

⎞

nε

min
=(vτ ,cδ ),vτ

=vτ

|l |⎠ (lv(t,−γ1))
nε

.

τ ≥α·γ

(13)

In (11), ReLU(·) denotes the activation function and is written as

ReLU(x) = max(x, 0),

(14)

and the offset factor βλ(t) denotes the biased parameter of the set of neurons ψλ in the hidden layer t, where λ = 1, 2, . . . , EB

denotes the index of edge-type and EB = E/Z denotes the

number of edges in the BG.2 In (12), nε = (vτ , cδ), vτ = vτ denotes all the neurons in lv(t,)γ except the neuron nε = (vτ , cδ).

Meanwhile, the update of the CN message in the ε-th neuron

nε = (vτ , cδ) of the SBP sublayer lc(t2),γ can be represented as

⎛

⎛

⎞

l(lc(t2),γ )
nε=(vτ ,cδ )

=

2 tanh−1

⎜⎝⎜

tanh

⎝

l(lv(t,)γ
nε

)

⎠

2

nε =(vτ ,cδ ),vτ =vτ

τ <α·γ

⎛

⎞⎞

tanh

⎝

l(lv(t,−γ1)
nε
2

)

⎠⎠⎟⎟

.

nε =(vτ ,cδ ),vτ =vτ

τ ≥α·γ

(15)

At the inference stage, the updates of LLR messages in
sublayers are the same as in the training stage. Compared to
the training stage, the difference is that the last CN sublayer lc(t1),g−1 in the hidden layer t sends the LLR messages from the CN update to the output sublayer lo(t). Specifically, the LLRs from the E neurons of the CN sublayer lc(t1),g−1 will be mapped into the n neurons of the output sublayer lo(t). Then, the output sublayer lo(t) can calculate the a-posteriori LLRs in the hidden
layer t and it is described as

lv(tτ) = lτ +

l , n(lεc(t1),γ )

nε =(vτ ,cδ )

(16)

where nε = (vτ , cδ) denotes all the neurons in lc(t1),γ. Moreover, the output sublayer lo(t) passes the LLR messages from lc(t1),g−1 to the next VN sublayer lv(t,+0 1). Note that we use the MS algorithm instead of the BP algorithm when combining with neural net-
works because the MS algorithm has lower computational com-
plexity [9], [10], [11], superior compatibility [24], and higher
generalization ability [29] than the BP decoding algorithm.

2For a simple example, if the edges e1, e2, e3 ∈ ψ1 (the edges e1, e2 and e3
are derived from the same edge of the BG), the corresponding neurons n1, n2 and n3 in hidden layer t share the same biased parameter β1(t).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CUSTOMIZED BRANCHED NEURAL NETWORK-AIDED SHUFFLED MIN-SUM DECODER FOR PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES

1405

Algorithm 1: Training the NSMS Decoder.

where

l(lc(t1),g−1 )
nε=(vτ ,cδ )

and

l(lc(t2),g−1 )
nε=(vτ ,cδ )

can

be

regarded

as

the

pre-

dicted value and the label value, respectively. Then, we extend

from a single neuron to the whole parity check matrix. In the

other words, we calculate the BNMD for each neuron and the

average of the obtained BNMDs. Combining the calculation of

BNMDs and the mean square error (MSE) function, we propose

the BNMD loss function, which is represented as

E
L(l , l ) = 1 (lc(t1),g−1) (lc(t2),g−1) E
ε=1

l − l . n(lεc(t1),g−1)

n(lεc(t2),g−1) 2

(18)

The binary classification problem of the neural decoding
network can be simplified into a regression problem surrounding
CN message updates by varying the learning objective of the
neural decoding network. As a result, the low learning efficiency
caused by the BCE function can be overcome.
Furthermore, we adopt the ADAM algorithm to optimize
the NSMS decoder [51]. To be specific, in each batch of
training, the activation values of each sublayer are computed
in a sequential order in the forward propagation. Then, the gradient ∇β(t) L is computed based on the loss function in the backpropagation. According to the gradient received by sublayers lc(t1),0, lc(t1),1, . . . , lc(t1),g−1, the offset factors β(t) = {β1(t), β2(t), . . . , βE(tB) } are adjusted to the optimal values by gradient descent method to achieve the minimal loss value, which can be
represented as

C. Training the NSMS LDPC Decoder
As an indication of the difference between predicted and true values, the loss function plays a crucial role in the neural network. The appropriate loss function can greatly improve the learning ability of the neural network, thereby reducing the time complexity required for network convergence. In recent years, some neural MS decoding algorithms have been proposed in [24], [28], [29], [36], [37], [38], which utilize the BCE loss function, soft BER loss function, and FER loss function. However, these may suffer from inefficient parameter updates and further lead to slower convergence speed of the decoding network.
In order to solve the above problem, we adopt the BNMD to calculate the mean difference value between the neurons of each branched CN sublayer and the corresponding SBP sublayer in CN messages, instead of measuring the difference between the probability distributions of coded bits and decoded bits as in case of the BCE function. According to the relationships between edges and neurons, we design the BNMD for the calculations of LLR difference values between branched neurons. Specifically, since the CN sublayer lc(t1),g−1 and the SBP sublayer lc(t2),g−1 connect with the same VN sublayer lv(t,)g−1, the VN messages received by the above two sublayers (i.e., the CN sublayer and the SBP sublayer) are the same. Therefore, for the ε-th neuron nε = (vτ , cδ) of CN sublayer lc(t1),g−1 and SBP sublayer lc(t2),g−1, the BNMD can be defined as

d = l − l , (t)
nε=(vτ ,cδ )

(lc(t1),g−1 ) nε=(vτ ,cδ )

(lc(t2),g−1 ) nε=(vτ ,cδ )

(17)

β(t) = arg min L(l(lc(t1),g−1), l(lc(t2),g−1)).

(19)

Based on the aforementioned training design, in order to decrease the complexity and improve the reusability of the network, the greedy training method [28], [29] is employed to construct the neural network layer by layer (i.e., training one hidden layer each time). To illustrate further, the proposed training method is summarized in Algorithm 1.

IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND SIMULATION RESULTS
To further verify the advantage of the proposed NSMS decoder, we provide the performance analysis of the network training and simulations of the neural protograph LDPC decoding system under TensorFlow framework. The trajectory-based extrinsic information transfer (T-EXIT) algorithm is utilized to track the average mutual information transfer process between VNs and CNs [29]. Besides, we also analyze the decoding computational complexity and the training time complexity of the NSMS decoder.
In the training stage, the learning rate η = 0.001 and the single-threaded are adopted, where the batch size is set to 1. Setting the batch size to “1” can avoid the local optimality and insufficient iteration problems. Moreover, experiments have demonstrated that this setting allows the proposed NSMS decoder to achieve the optimal performance. For the NFMS and NLMS decoders (i.e., the benchmarks), the number of hidden layers is set to 10, the learning rate is set to η = 0.001, and the batch size is set to 50. These settings are the same as those in [29]. Besides, the SNRs for training batches cover the range

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1406

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

Fig. 5. BER and BLER curves of the proposed NSMS decoder under different training SNR conditions: (a) different training SNR values; (b) different SNR training step sizes.

Fig. 6. Generalization analysis of the proposed network: (a) codeword lengths; (b) channel conditions.

of simulation. In the inference stage, the information bits are encoded by BG2 (defined in [45]) with a code rate of 1/5. Unless otherwise mentioned, the batch number of training for neural decoders is 1600, the maximum number of iterations for decoders is set to 10 (i.e., the number of hidden layers is 10), and the group number is set to 2.3 The codeword length n and the information length k have been uniformly defined as (n, k) in the paper. The simulations in this section are implemented on the CPU of 11th Gen Intel Core i5-11500 and the GPU of NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060.
A. Performance Analysis of Network Training
In the training stage, SNR is considered an important influencing factor for the effectiveness of training data [21]. In Fig. 5(a), we provide the BER and BLER performance of the proposed neural decoder over an AWGN channel under three different
3In neural decoders, the larger the number of groups, the deeper network structure is formed, which results in bad allocation, gradient vanishing, and high hardware complexity. Moreover, the performance of the proposed NSMS decoder may not be improved when the group numbers increase. Therefore, we set the group number to g = 2. This can not only avoid the problems of bad allocation and gradient vanishing, but also improve the gain obtained by the proposed NSMS decoder.

SNR values (e.g., SNR = 0, 2, and 5 dB), because these three specific training SNR values can represent the performance of the proposed NSMS decoder under low SNR, medium SNR, and high SNR regions. As seen, when adopting (832, 160) BG2 code, at the BLER of 10−4, one can see that the proposed neural protograph LDPC decoder under SNR = 0 dB respectively obtains about 0.47 dB and 0.75 dB gains over the decoder under SNR = 2 dB and SNR = 5 dB. In Fig. 5(b), we have also demonstrated through experiments that the training performance of the proposed NSMS decoder across the entire testing SNR range is basically consistent with that under SNR = 0 dB. The analysis results illustrate that the dataset generated under a low SNR will be more effective for the training of our proposed network. Therefore, the neural protograph LDPC decoder possesses strong robustness against channel noise.
Subsequently, in Fig. 6, we provide the BER and BLER curves of the neural protograph LDPC decoder with different training parameters (i.e., codeword lengths and channel conditions) to illustrate the generalization of the proposed network. Specifically, in Fig. 6(a), the blue curves represent the neural protograph LDPC decoder adopting the same codeword length (i.e., n = 832) in both training and inference stages, while the red curves represent the neural protograph LDPC decoder adopting

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CUSTOMIZED BRANCHED NEURAL NETWORK-AIDED SHUFFLED MIN-SUM DECODER FOR PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES

1407

Fig. 7. Simulated curves of training convergence speed of the proposed NSMS decoder, the existing NFMS decoder, and the NLMS decoder: (a) rate-0.2 (156, 30) BG2 code; (b) rate-0.2 (832, 160) BG2 code.

Fig. 8. BER and BLER curves of the NLMS decoder with the BCE loss function, the proposed NSMS decoder with the BCE loss function, and the proposed NSMS decoder with the proposed BNMD loss function over an AWGN channel: (a) (156, 30) BG2; (b) (832, 160) BG2.

(156, 30) and (832, 160) BG2 5G codes in the training and inference stages, respectively. One can see that the blue curves agree well with their corresponding red curves. Likewise, in Fig. 6(b), the blue curves represent the neural protograph LDPC decoder over a Rayleigh channel with (832, 160) BG2 5G code in both training and inference stages, while the red curves represent the neural protograph LDPC decoder over an AWGN channel in the training stage and a Rayleigh channel in the inference stage. One can observe that the two different training databases achieve similar simulation performance. Thus, simulation results show that the proposed network has noteworthy generalization ability.
In order to evaluate the training convergence speed of the NSMS decoder, we compare the required batch number of training to achieve convergence for the proposed NSMS decoder with those of two existing neural decoders, i.e., the NFMS decoder [29] and NLMS decoder [28]. Note that the decoding computational complexity of each batch can be seen as the same. As seen from Fig. 7(a), when adopting (156, 30) BG2 5G code, at a BLER of 10−2, the proposed NSMS decoder needs about 1600 batches of training to achieve convergence, while other two neural decoders need more batches of training. Likewise,

when adopting (156, 30) BG2 5G code, at a BLER of 10−4, the proposed NSMS decoder needs fewer batches of training than the existing neural decoders to achieve convergence. Similar result can be observed in Fig. 7(b), when adopting (832, 160) BG2 5G code. In this case, the convergence speed of the NSMS decoder also outperforms the corresponding benchmarks.
B. Performance Analysis of Proposed Network and Loss Function
In Fig. 8, we investigate the BER and BLER performance of the NLMS decoder with the CSNN and the BCE loss function, the NSMS decoder with the CSNN and the BCE loss function, the NSMS decoder with the proposed CBNN and the BCE loss function, and the NSMS decoder with the proposed CBNN and the proposed BNMD loss function to distinguish the respective gains attributed to the CBNN structure and the BNMD loss function. Specifically, in Fig. 8, the NLMS decoder and the NSMS decoder have almost the same performance when the CSNN and the BCE loss function are adopted, which demonstrates the layered and the shuffled algorithms have the same performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1408

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

Fig. 9. BER and BLER curves of the NSMS decoder with the soft BER loss function, FER loss function, BCE loss function, and the proposed BNMD loss function over an AWGN channel: (a) (156, 30) BG2; (b) (832, 160) BG2.

Fig. 10. T-EXIT curves of the NFMS decoder, the NLMS decoder, and the proposed NSMS decoder: (a) rate-0.2 (156, 30) BG2 code, where the SNR is 4.0 dB; (b) rate-0.2 (832, 160) BG2 code, where the SNR is 1.5 dB.

in terms of neural decoding. As can be seen from Fig. 8(a), when adopting a rate-0.2 (156, 30) BG2 code, the proposed NSMS decoder with the BCE loss function has a gain of about 0.34 dB over the NLMS decoder with the BCE loss function to achieve a BER of 10−5, while the proposed NSMS decoder with the BNMD loss function has a gain of about 0.31 dB over the proposed NSMS decoder with the BCE loss function. As shown in Fig. 8(b), when adopting a rate-0.2 (832, 160) BG2 code, the proposed NSMS decoder with the BCE loss function has a gain of about 0.22 dB over the NLMS decoder with the BCE loss function to achieve a BER of 10−5, while the proposed NSMS decoder with the BNMD loss function has a gain of about 0.25 dB over the proposed NSMS decoder with the BCE loss function. Consequently, the proposed CBNN structure and the BNMD loss function are superior to the state-of-the-art counterparts.
In Fig. 9, we also investigate the BER and BLER performance of the proposed NSMS decoder with the soft BER loss function [36], the FER loss function [37], the BCE loss function [29], and the proposed BNMD loss function. As shown in Fig. 9(a), in order to achieve a BER of 10−5 with a rate-0.2 (156, 30) BG2 code, the proposed NSMS decoder with the BNMD loss function

can respectively achieve gains of about 0.72 dB, 0.53 dB, and 0.31 dB over the proposed NSMS decoder with the soft BER loss function [36], the FER loss function [37], and the BCE loss function [29]. Likewise, the NSMS decoder using the proposed BNMD loss function also achieves better BLER performance compared to those using other loss functions. Moreover, as can be seen from Fig. 9(b), the proposed BNMD loss function is superior to other counterparts when the code parameters change to (832, 160).
C. Mutual Information Analysis of Proposed NSMS Decoder
By utilizing the T-EXIT algorithm [29], we simulate the convergence behaviors of a rate-1/5 BG2 code [45] in the proposed NSMS decoders over an AWGN channel. Note that the NFMS decoder and the NLMS decoder are used as benchmarks. As seen from Fig. 10(a), in the case of (n, k) = (156, 30), the external average mutual information (AMI) increment step size of the proposed NSMS decoder outperforms its benchmarks. In the case of (n, k) = (832, 160) in Fig. 10(b), the difference between the NSMS decoder compared with its benchmark becomes more apparent for external AMI trajectories. We can conclude that the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CUSTOMIZED BRANCHED NEURAL NETWORK-AIDED SHUFFLED MIN-SUM DECODER FOR PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES
TABLE I INTERSECTION COORDINATES OF Tv CURVE AND Tc CURVE IN THE T-EXIT CHART

1409

Fig. 11. BER and BLER curves of the SMS decoder, the SOMS decoder, the SBP decoder, and the proposed NSMS decoder: (a) rate-0.2 (156, 30) BG2 code; (b) rate-0.2 (832, 160) BG2 code.
proposed NSMS decoder exhibits better performance with the long codeword. Thus, the T-EXIT analysis results are consistent with simulation results (see Section IV-D). Additionally, we also estimate the intersection coordinates of two T-EXIT curves (i.e., Tv and Tc curves) for the proposed NSMS decoder, the NFMS decoder, and the NLMS decoder. As seen from the Table I, in the case of (n, k) = (156, 30) or (n, k) = (832, 160), the extrinsic AMI of the proposed NSMS decoder is closer to 1. It is clear that the proposed NSMS decoder appears better convergence performance in terms of mutual information.
D. Error Performance of Proposed NSMS Decoder
In Fig. 11, we simulate the BER and BLER curves of the proposed NSMS decoder, the shuffled min-sum (SMS) decoder [47], the shuffled offset min-sum (SOMS) decoder (the offset factor β = 0.15) [50], and the shuffled belief-propagation

(SBP) decoder [49].4 To be specific, in the case of (n, k) = (156, 30), Fig. 11(a) shows that the proposed NSMS decoder, the SMS decoder, the SOMS decoder, and the SBP decoder respectively need about 5.93 dB, 6.67 dB, 6.34 dB, and 6.03 dB to achieve a BER of 10−5. The proposed NSMS decoder has about 0.74 dB, 0.41 dB and 0.1 dB gains compared with the SMS decoder, the SOMS decoder, and the SBP decoder, respectively. As shown in Fig. 11(b), in the case of (n, k) = (832, 160), the proposed NSMS decoder also shows the better performance than the SMS decoder and the SOMS decoder. Although the performance of the proposed NSMS decoder is slightly inferior to that of the SBP decoder, the computational complexity of the NSMS decoder is much lower than that of the SBP decoder. Besides, it is noticeable that BLER performance possesses the same trend in both Fig. 11(a) and (b) as the BER performance.
As a further insight, the BER and BLER curves of three different neural decoders (i.e., the proposed NSMS decoder, the NFMS decoder, and the NLMS decoder) over an AWGN channel are shown in Fig. 12. As observed from Fig. 12(a), in the case of (n, k) = (156, 30), the proposed NSMS decoder possesses gains of about 0.5 dB and 0.3 dB over the NFMS decoder and the NLMS decoder, respectively, at a BER of 10−5. For the BLER performance, at a BLER of 10−4, the proposed NSMS decoder possesses gains of about 1.0 dB and 0.6 dB over the NFMS decoder and the NLMS decoder, respectively. Similar results can be seen in Fig. 12(b) for the case of (n, k) = (832, 160), the proposed NSMS decoder also achieves desirable gains over the NFMS decoder and the NLMS decoder. One can easily observe that the proposed NSMS decoder also exhibits better performance compared with the NLMS decoder and the NFMS decoder when the codeword length varies to n = 520 and n = 1248 (i.e., Fig. 12(c) and (d)).
In Fig. 13, we also investigate the BER and BLER performance of the three neural decoders over a Rayleigh fading channel. Specifically, in the case of (n, k) = (156, 30), to achieve a BER of 10−5, the proposed NSMS decoder has gains of about 1.0 dB and 0.6 dB over the NFMS decoder and the NLMS decoder, respectively. Likewise, the proposed NSMS decoder has gains of about 0.9 dB and 0.4 dB over the NFMS decoder and the NLMS decoder to achieve a BLER of 10−4, respectively. In the case of (n, k) = (156, 30), Fig. 13(b) shows that the proposed NSMS decoder still has significant gains over the two counterparts.
In Fig. 14, we also investigate the BER and BLER performance of the three neural decoders with a different code rate (i.e.,
4Actually, the value of offset factor β in the offset min-sum (OMS) algorithms should be optimized by using the density evolution (DE) [13]. We assume that β = 0.15 in this paper, which is recommended and adopted in [25], [29], [50].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1410

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

Fig. 12. BER and BLER curves of the NFMS decoder, the NLMS decoder, and the proposed NSMS decoder over an AWGN channel: (a) rate-0.2 (156, 30) BG2 code; (b) rate-0.2 (832, 160) BG2 code; (c) rate-0.2 (520, 100) BG2 code; (d) rate-0.2 (1248, 240) BG2 code;

rate-0.5) BG2. Specifically, in the case of (n, k) = (154, 70), to achieve a BER of 10−5, the proposed NSMS decoder has gains of about 0.8 dB and 0.4 dB over the NFMS decoder and the NLMS decoder, respectively. Likewise, the proposed NSMS decoder has gains of about 0.7 dB and 0.3 dB over the NFMS decoder and the NLMS decoder to achieve a BLER of 10−4, respectively. In the case of (n, k) = (880, 400), Fig. 14(b) shows that the proposed NSMS decoder still has significant gains over the two counterparts.
Moreover, we have provided simulation curves of the proposed NSMS decoder, the NLMS decoder, and the NFMS decoder with the (672, 336) rate-0.5 IEEE 802.11 LDPC code and (672, 504) rate-0.75 IEEE 802.11 LDPC code [52], over an AWGN channel in Fig. 15. As seen, with the IEEE 802.11 LDPC code, the proposed NSMS decoder also achieves better performance than the NLMS decoder and the NFMS decoder. The above simulation results and comparisons substantially demonstrate the generalization and robustness of the proposed NSMS decoder.
Remark 1: We have also performed simulations with other parameter settings (e.g., different codeword lengths, code rates, and code types) and found that the proposed NSMS decoder

still have distinguished advantages compared with the existing counterparts over both AWGN and Rayleigh channels.
According to the above observations, the proposed NSMS decoder exhibits better error performance than the existing neural decoders.
E. Convergence Performance of Proposed NSMS Decoder
To further illustrate the performance advantages of the proposed NSMS decoder, we compare the required SNR versus the number of iterations between the proposed NSMS decoder and two existing neural decoders (i.e., the NFMS decoder, and the NLMS decoder) to achieve BLER = 10−2 or 10−4. Referring to Fig. 16(a), to achieve the BLER of 10−2, in the case of (n, k) = (156, 30), the proposed NSMS decoder with iteration number t = 10 outperforms the NFMS decoder and the NLMS decoder about 0.8 dB and 0.5 dB over an AWGN channel, respectively. To achieve the BLER of 10−4, in the case of (n, k) = (156, 30), the proposed NSMS decoder with iteration number t = 10 also outperforms the NFMS decoder and the NLMS decoder about 0.8 dB and 0.5 dB over an AWGN channel, respectively. Likewise, similar phenomenon

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CUSTOMIZED BRANCHED NEURAL NETWORK-AIDED SHUFFLED MIN-SUM DECODER FOR PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES

1411

Fig. 13. BER and BLER curves of the NFMS decoder, the NLMS decoder and the proposed NSMS decoder over a Rayleigh channel: (a) rate-0.2 (156, 30) BG2 code; (b) rate-0.2 (832, 160) BG2 code.
in the case of (n, k) = (832, 160) can be observed in Fig. 16(b). Furthermore, in Fig. 17, we also compare the required SNR versus the number of iterations between the proposed NSMS decoder and the two benchmarks to achieve BLER = 10−2 or 10−4 over a Rayleigh fading channel. It can be seen that the proposed NSMS decoder still requires minimum SNR to achieve the BLER = 10−2 or 10−4.
The above simulations show that the proposed NSMS decoder has better decoding convergence performance under different channel conditions. In other words, it means that NSMS decoder only requires fewer hidden layers (i.e., less memory cost) to achieve the desired error performance.
F. Complexity Analysis
In this subsection, we provide the decoding complexity analysis of three different neural decoders, i.e., the proposed NSMS decoder, the NFMS decoder, and the NLMS decoder. First, the number of operations required in each decoding iteration of the above-mentioned decoders is shown in Table II. The evaluation pattern follows the pattern reported in [25], [29]. Referring to Table II, the number of addition “+”, comparison and sign flip operations that the neural decoders (i.e., the proposed NSMS

Fig. 14. BER and BLER curves of the NFMS decoder, the NLMS decoder, and the proposed NSMS decoder over an AWGN channel: (a) rate-0.5 (154, 70) BG2 code; (b) rate-0.5 (880, 400) BG2 code.
TABLE II NUMBER OF OPERATIONS OF DIFFERENT NEURAL DECODERS FOR EACH
ITERATION
decoder, the NFMS decoder, the NLMS decoder) require can be seen as the same, respectively. Nevertheless, the proposed NSMS decoder does not need any multiplication operations “×”, while the NFMS decoder and the NLMS decoder need to perform E times multiplication operations during each iteration.
Besides, we provide the training complexity analysis of the CBNN with four different loss functions, i.e, the proposed BNMD MSE loss function, the soft BER loss function [36], the FER loss function [37], and the BCE loss function [29]. Referring to Table III, the CBNN with the proposed BNMD MSE loss function does not require the sigmoid operation, the power operation, and the log operation during each iteration compared to the other three schemes (i.e., the CBNN with the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025
TABLE III NUMBER OF OPERATIONS OF DIFFERENT LOSS FUNCTIONS FOR TRAINING EACH HIDDEN LAYER

Fig. 15. BER and BLER curves of the NFMS decoder, the NLMS decoder, and the proposed NSMS decoder over an AWGN channel: (a) (672,336) rate-0.5 IEEE 802.11 LDPC code; (b) (672,504) rate-0.75 IEEE 802.11 LDPC code.
soft BER loss function, the FER loss function, and the BCE loss function). Furthermore, the CBNN with the proposed BNMD MSE loss function requires fewer numbers of arithmetic operations (i.e., the tanh operations, comparison operations, and sign flip operations). Hence, the proposed BNMD MSE loss function benefits from lower training complexity than the existing counterparts.Moreover, the time complexity of the three neural decoders are summarized in Table IV. Specifically, in the case of (n, k) = (156, 30), we train the proposed NSMS decoder, the NFMS decoder and the NLMS decoder with 10 hidden layers (i.e, the number of iterations is 10). As shown in Table IV, the NFMS decoder and the NLMS decoder require about 660 s and 636 s to reach convergence state, respectively, while the

Fig. 16. SNR required for neural decoders to achieve BLER = 10−2 or 10−4 over an AWGN channel: (a) rate-0.2 (156, 30) BG2 code; (b) rate-0.2 (832, 160) BG2 code.
TABLE IV TIME COMPLEXITY OF DIFFERENT NEURAL DECODERS TO REACH
CONVERGENCE STATE
proposed NSMS decoder merely requires about 128 s. Note that the hardware configurations of the three neural decoders are mentioned at the beginning of Section IV.
From the above discussions, the proposed NSMS decoder owns lower training complexity, computational complexity and time complexity compared with its counterparts.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CUSTOMIZED BRANCHED NEURAL NETWORK-AIDED SHUFFLED MIN-SUM DECODER FOR PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES

1413

technique for high-reliability and low-complexity protograph LDPC-coded communication systems.

Fig. 17. SNR required for neural decoders to achieve BLER = 10−2 or 10−4 over a Rayleigh channel: (a) rate-0.2 (156, 30) BG2 code; (b) rate-0.2 (832, 160) BG2 code.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper has investigated the design and the performance of the neural protograph LDPC decoder. In particular, we have first constructed a novel neural protograph LDPC decoder by exploiting the CBNN, namely NSMS decoder, which adopts the model-driven deep learning method. The proposed NSMS decoder requires merely a non-deep network structure to exhibit the desirable error performance, which dramatically reduces computational complexity. Furthermore, with the aid of BNMD, we have optimized the training method of the neural protograph LDPC decoder to accelerate the convergence speed of the neural decoding network. Both T-EXIT analyses and simulation results have indicated that the proposed NSMS decoder has superior error performance and faster convergence speed compared to the existing neural decoders. More importantly, the proposed NSMS decoder possesses a lower computational workload than the state-of-the-art counterparts. Thanks to the above advantages, the proposed NSMS decoder stands out as a competitive

REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of low-density parity check codes for 5G new radio,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28–34, Mar. 2018.
[2] P. Chen, K. Cai, and S. Zheng, “Rate-adaptive protograph LDPC codes for multi-level-cell NAND flash memory,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1112–1115, Jun. 2018.
[3] Z. Yang, Y. Fang, G. Han, and K. M. S. Huq, “Spatially coupled protograph LDPC-coded hierarchical modulated BICM-ID systems: A promising transmission technique for 6G-enabled Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 5149–5163, Apr. 2021.
[4] H. Ma, Y. Fang, P. Chen, S. Mumtaz, and Y. Li, “A novel differential chaos shift keying scheme with multidimensional index modulation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 237–256, Jan. 2023.
[5] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forneyand, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[6] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[7] L. Lv, Y. Fang, L. Dai, Y. Li, and M. Guizani, “Asymmetric dual-mode constellation and protograph LDPC code design for generalized spatial MPPM systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 3165–3177, Jun. 2023.
[8] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 908–917, May 2001.
[9] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[10] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[11] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[12] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X. Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[13] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BPbased decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[14] X. Wu, Y. Song, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Adaptive-normalized/offset min-sum algorithm,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 667–669, Jul. 2010.
[15] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[16] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[17] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[18] P. Chen, Z. Xie, Y. Fang, Z. Chen, S. Mumtaz, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “Physical-layer network coding: An efficient technique for wireless communications,” IEEE Netw., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 270–276, Mar./Apr. 2020.
[19] C. A. Aslam, Y. Guan, K. Cai, and G. Han, “Informed fixed scheduling for faster convergence of shuffled belief-propagation decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 32–35, Jan. 2017.
[20] K. Zhao, Y. Xu, D. He, Y. Guan, and W. Zhang, “Variable LLR scaling in LDPC min-sum decoding under horizontal shuffled structure,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Broad. Multimedia Syst. Broadcast., 2016, pp. 1–7.
[21] Q. Wang et al., “Normalized min-sum neural network for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 70–81, Feb. 2023.
[22] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning,” in Proc. 54th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., 2016, pp. 341–346.
[23] H. He, S. Jin, C. K. Wen, F. Gao, G. Y. Li, and Z. Xu, “Model-driven deep learning for physical layer communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 77–83, Oct. 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

[24] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and Y. Be’ery, “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, Feb. 2018.
[25] X. Wu, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Decoding optimization for 5G LDPC codes by machine learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 50179–50186, 2018.
[26] N. Shah and Y. Vasavada, “Neural layered decoding of 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 3590–3593, Nov. 2021.
[27] V. G. Satorras and M. Welling, “Neural enhanced belief propagation on factor graphs,” in Proc. 24th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Stat., 2021, pp. 685– 693.
[28] D. Zhang et al., “Neural layered min-sum decoding for protograph LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2021, pp. 4845–4849.
[29] J. Dai et al., “Learning to decode protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1983–1999, Jul. 2021.
[30] X. Xiao, B. Vasic´, R. Tandon, and S. Lin, “Designing finite alphabet iterative decoders of LDPC codes via recurrent quantized neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 3963–3974, Jul. 2020.
[31] H.-Y. Kwak, J.-W. Kim, Y. Kim, S.-H. Kim, and J.-S. No, “Neural min-sum decoding for generalized LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 2841–2845, Dec. 2022.
[32] Y. Liang, C.-T. Lam, and B. K. Ng, “A low-complexity neural normalized min-sum LDPC decoding algorithm using tensor-train decomposition,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 2914–2918, Dec. 2022.
[33] J. Yang, S. Hong, and L. Wang, “A task-guided normalized min-sum decoding network for LDPC codes-based DJSCC,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 1934–1938, Aug. 2023.
[34] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. Yuille, “DeepLab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected CRFs,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 834–848, Apr. 2018.
[35] J. Wang et al., “Deep high-resolution representation learning for visual recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 10, pp. 3349–3364, Oct. 2021.
[36] M. Lian, F. Carpi, C. Hager, and H. D. Pfister, “Learned belief-propagation decoding with simple scaling and SNR adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2019, pp. 161–165.
[37] X. Xiao, N. Raveendran, B. Vasic, S. Lin, and R. Tandon, “FAID diversity via neural networks,” in Proc. 11th Int. Symp. Topics Coding, Aug. 2021, pp. 1–5.
[38] H.-Y. Kwak, D.-Y. Yun, Y. Kim, S.-H. Kim, and J.-S. No, “Boosting learning for LDPC codes to improve the error-floor performance,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf Process. Syst. (NeurlPS), Dec. 2023, pp. 22115–22131.
[39] Y. Xu et al., “A polygonal line min-sum decoding scheme for low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 203–214, Mar. 2022.
[40] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[41] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” in Proc. IPN Prog. Rep., Aug. 2003, pp. 42–154.
[42] Y. Fang, G. Bi, Y. L. Guan, L. Yong, and F. C. M. Lau, “A survey on protograph LDPC codes and their applications,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1989–2016, Fourthquarter 2015.
[43] L. Dai, Y. Fang, Z. Yang, P. Chen, and Y. Li, “Protograph LDPC-coded BICM-ID with irregular CSK mapping in visible light communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 11033–11038, Oct. 2021.
[44] L. Dai, Y. Fang, P. Chen, G. Zhang, and M. Guizani, “A new transceiver design for protograph LDPC-coded LACO-OFDM VLC systems with deep learning,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 896–900, Mar. 2023.
[45] “Multiplexing and channel coding,” Release 16, 3GPP, Standard TS 38.212, V16.0.0, Sophia Antipolis, France, Dec. 2019.
[46] J. A. Maya and A. M. Tonello, “Selection square combining: A fullydistributed radio source detector for fast fading channels based on energy measurements,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 70, pp. 6348–6359, 2022.
[47] Y.-L. Ueng, C.-J. Yang, and C.-J. Chen, “A shuffled message-passing decoding method for memory-based LDPC decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., May 2009, pp. 892–895.
[48] Y.-L. Ueng, Y.-L. Wang, L.-S. Kan, C.-J. Yang, and Y.-H. Su, “Jointly designed architecture-aware LDPC convolutional codes and memory-based shuffled decoder architecture,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 4387–4402, Aug. 2012.

[49] Z. Yang, Y. Fang, G. Cai, G. Zhang, and P. Chen, “Design and optimization of tail-biting spatially coupled protograph LDPC codes under shuffled belief-propagation decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 1378–1382, Jul. 2020.
[50] Y.-L. Ueng, B.-J. Yang, C.-J Yang, H.-C Lee, and J.-D. Yang, “An efficient multi-standard LDPC decoder design using hardware-friendly shuffled decoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I.: Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 743–756, Mar. 2013.
[51] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representation (ICLR), 2015, pp. 7–9.
[52] IEEE Standard for Information Technology–Telecommunications and Information Exchange between Systems - Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Specific Requirements – Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications - Redline, IEEE Standard 802.11-2020 (Revision of IEEE Standard 802.11-2016) Redline, Feb. 26, 2021.
Yurong Wang received the B.Sc. degree in information engineering and the M.Sc. degree in new generation electronic information technology from the Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2021and 2024, respectively. His research interests include channel coding and deep-learning.
Liang Lv (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. degree in communication engineering from Suqian University, Suqian, China, in 2020, and the M.Sc. degree in communication engineering in 2023 from the Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with the School of Information Engineering. His research interests include channel coding and modulation.
Yi Fang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China, in 2013. In 2012, he was a Research Assistant in electronic and information engineering with Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong. From 2012 to 2013, he was a Visiting Scholar of electronic and electrical engineering with University College London, London, U.K. From 2014 to 2015, he was a Research Fellow with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He is currently a Full Professor and Vice Dean with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. His research interests include information and coding theory, spread-spectrum modulation, and cooperative communications. He was the Publicity Co-Chair of the International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing, 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CUSTOMIZED BRANCHED NEURAL NETWORK-AIDED SHUFFLED MIN-SUM DECODER FOR PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES

1415

Yonghui Li (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing, China, in 2002. Since 2003, he has been with the Centre of Excellence in Telecommunications, the University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. He is currently a Professor and the Director of Wireless Engineering Laboratory, School of Electrical and Information Engineering, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW. His research interests include wireless communications, with a particular focus on MIMO, millimeter wave communications, machine to machine communications, coding techniques, and cooperative communications. He holds a number of patents granted and pending in these fields. He was the recipient of the Australian Queen Elizabeth II Fellowship in 2008 and the Australian Future Fellowship in 2012. He is the Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY. He was the guest Editor for several IEEE journals, such as IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE Communications Magazine, IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, IEEE ACCESS. He was the recipient of the best paper awards from IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2014, IEEE PIRMC 2017, and IEEE Wireless Days Conferences, 2014.

Shahid Mumtaz (Senior Member, IEEE) is currenlty a Professor with Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, U.K. He is the author of four technical books, 12 book chapters, and 300+ technical papers 200+ IEEE Journals/transactions, 100+ conference, two IEEE best paper awards in the area of mobile communications. Most of his publication is in the field of Wireless Communication. He is/was the IET Fellow, IEEE ComSoc, IAS, and ACM Distinguished speaker. He was the recipient of IEEE ComSoC Young Researcher Award (2020). He is/was the Founder and EiC of IET Journal of Quantum communication’ ViceChair: Europe/Africa Region- IEEE ComSoc: Green Communications and Computing Society and Vice chair for IEEE standard on P1932.1: Standard for Licensed/Unlicensed Spectrum Interoperability in Wireless Mobile Networks. He is the Scientific Expert and Evaluator for various Research Funding Agencies. He was awarded an Alain Bensoussan fellowship,’ in 2012. He was the recipient of the NSFC Researcher Fund for Young Scientist, China. in 2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:53:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

