1746

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 43, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2025

Hidden Feature Extraction Learning and End-to-End Joint Equalization With LDPC Decoding Method for Optical Interconnect
Chuanchuan Yang , Senior Member, IEEE, Hao Qin , Tianxiang Lan, Yunfeng Gao, Jiaxing Wang , Yuping Zhao , and Constance J. Chang-Hasnain , Fellow, IEEE
(Invited Paper)

Abstract—The vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers and multimode fiber (VCSEL-MMF) solution has successfully emerged in optical interconnects (OIs), which meets the challenges of signal impairments in ultra-high-speed scenarios. Deep learning (DL) techniques, which can approximate any nonlinear function, enable the design of communication systems by carrying out the optimization in a single end-to-end (E2E) process including the transceivers as well as communication channels. In this paper, we propose a hidden feature extraction learning method for neural network equalization to improve training efficiency without increasing computational burden. Superior bit error rate (BER) is demonstrated in achieving 288 Gb/s 100 m VCSEL-MMF interconnect compared with black-box training strategy. Furthermore, an E2E joint equalization and low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoding method is proposed to improve the overall performance. Based on the autoencoder (AE) architecture, the E2E network involves a digital pre-distorter (DPD), a digital optical link model, a feed forward equalizer (FFE) and a deep learning based Normalized Offset Min-Sum (DL-NOMS) LDPC decoder. Experimental results demonstrate that the BER performance of the proposed E2E scheme is two-magnitude lower than the E2E equalization and FFE+DL-NOMS decoding method in back-to-back (BTB) and 100 m VCSEL-MMF links.
Received 5 July 2024; revised 24 September 2024 and 16 November 2024; accepted 19 November 2024. Date of publication 25 November 2024; date of current version 17 February 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2023YFB2905501, in part by the Shenzhen Science and Technology Program under Grant JSGGZD20220822095601003, and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U21A20454. (Corresponding author: Chuanchuan Yang.)
Chuanchuan Yang and Yuping Zhao are with the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Optical Communication Systems and Networks, Department of Electronics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China, and also with Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Nanshan District, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: yangchuanchuan@pku.edu.cn; yuping.zhao@pku.edu.cn).
Hao Qin and Tianxiang Lan are with the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Optical Communication Systems and Networks, Department of Electronics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China (e-mail: qinhao0@pku.edu.cn; 2101111425@stu.pku.edu.cn).
Yunfeng Gao is with CITIC Group Corporation, Beijing 100020, China (email: gaoyf5@citic.com).
Jiaxing Wang and Constance J. Chang-Hasnain are with Berxel Photonics Company Ltd., Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: jiaxing.wang@berxel.com; connie.chang@berxel.com).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2024.3505415.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JLT.2024.3505415

Index Terms—End-to-end learning, joint equalization and decoding, LDPC codes, neural network, optical interconnect, VCSEL.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N RECENT years, the surge in bandwidth-intensive applications has catalyzed a profound escalation in data center traffic, necessitating the establishment of robust interconnection networks to accommodate the burgeoning demand [1]. As a result, optical interconnects (OIs) have emerged as the cornerstone of modern data center architecture, owing to their unparalleled efficiency and scalability [2]. To address the exigencies of high-performance data centers, interconnection networks have undergone rapid evolution. Multimode fiber (MMF) together with 850 nm vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs) have emerged as the preferred solution for short-reach connections at distances within 100 meters. Given the substantial number of interconnects involved, cost and power efficiency show paramount importance [3]. VCSEL, a cost-effective and power-efficient light source capable of direct modulation at high speeds, perfectly meets this demand, thereby facilitating the development of data center optical interconnects. The solutions based on VCSEL and MMF have emerged as highly successful in interconnection systems due to their low cost, high speed, and high capacity [4]. The exponential increase in modulation bandwidth of 850 nm VCSEL has paved the way for the deployment of VCSEL-based short-reach OIs with lane rates of 112 Gbps, enabled by commercially available VCSELs boasting bandwidths nearing 30 GHz [5], [6]. Moreover, ongoing developments in design-optimized 850 nm VCSEL hold the promise of further increasing single-lane rates to 288 Gbps over 100 m MMF, underscoring the pivotal role of VCSEL-MMF based solutions in OIs [7], [8].
In ultra-high-speed scenarios, the VCSEL-MMF based intensity modulation and direct detection (IM/DD) systems meet the challenges of signal impairments, inducing the error transmission. On the one hand, the signal quality is affected by device bandwidth limitations, modulation nonlinearities and fiber nonlinear effects. On the other hand, noise such as laser-included relative intensity noise (RIN) and signal-signal beating noise

0733-8724 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:54:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: HIDDEN FEATURE EXTRACTION LEARNING AND END-TO-END JOINT EQUALIZATION WITH LDPC DECODING METHOD

1747

(SSBN) caused by square-law detection reduces the signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) of the received signal. There are two key technologies to compensate the signal impairments and improve the transmission performance, equalization and forward error correction (FEC). Traditional equalization algorithms such as feed forward equalizer (FFE), decision feedback equalizer (DFE) and Volterra nonlinear equalizer (VNLE) have been widely used in IM/DD systems [9]. Given that many nonlinearities in optical links can only be approximately characterized and are difficult to compensate with traditional equalization algorithms [10], some equalizers based on artificial neural network (NN) [11], such as convolutional neural network (CNN) [12] and recurrent neural network (RNN) [7] have been applied. Adaptive neural network (AdaNN) based equalizer is also attractive due to its generalization ability when the properties of optical link change [13]. In contrast to traditional block-based signal processing methods, NN achieves global optimum by directly fitting from raw data to the final target. Actually, a deep neural network with multiple layers autonomously acquires a robust representation of the input message through numerous iterations. However, the training process belongs to an entire black-box strategy. In order to ensure the accuracy and effectiveness of training results, a large amount of data input is highly required [14].
At the same time, FEC or channel coding techniques play a significant role in optical data transmission. In order to alleviate the impact of signal impairments and enhance the system reliability, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been selected as the most promising channel coding scheme in various communication standards (WLAN [15], Ethernet [16], the fifth generation mobile network [17], etc.) and widely used in optical transmissions [18]. Compared with the traditional FEC codes such as Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) codes [19] and Reed-Solomon (RS) codes [20], LDPC codes are extremely attractive for their ability to achieve performance close to the Shannon limit by using message passing decoding mechanism [21], [22]. Moreover, as widely deployed in most of the optical interconnect systems, jointly using equalization and FEC is a recognized excellent solution. It has been indicated that the joint equalization and decoding scheme can improve overall performance. In [23], we have proposed a joint equalization and decoding method based on RNN for trellis coded modulation (TCM) systems. However, to the best of our knowledge, there has not been any researches of the joint equalization and decoding method for LDPC codes.
The end-to-end (E2E) learning architecture was first introduced to optical fiber communications in [24], including the complete chain of transmitter, channel model, and receiver. The E2E autoencoder (AE) methods can enhance the overall performance by co-optimizing entire parameters of transmitters and receivers based on deep neutral network, which has been introduced in VCSEL-based optical interconnects [25], [26], but the encoder and decoder of FEC haven’t been incorporated.
In this paper, firstly, a hidden feature extraction (HFE) learning method is proposed to improve the training efficiency of neural network equalization. Based on the validity and reliability of the proposed method, VCSEL-based high-speed interconnect up to 288 Gb/s over 100 m link is achieved. Then we further

enhance the system performance of VCSEL-MMF based optical interconnect by joint equalization and decoding method. The structure of digital pre-distorter (DPD) and the E2E AE architecture are illustrated. An E2E joint equalization and LDPC decoding method is proposed, which consists of a DPD, a digital optical link model, a FFE and a LDPC decoder. The greedy training method is also proposed to optimize the parameters of E2E network. We apply a Deep Learning based Normalized Offset Min-Sum (DL-NOMS) decoding algorithm to decode the LDPC codes, which is also realized by deep neural network. Experimental results show the bit error rate (BER) performance gain than baseline schemes by two orders of magnitude. The generalization ability of proposed E2E network is also be experimentally demonstrated.

II. HIDDEN FEATURE EXTRACTION LEARNING BASED NEURAL NETWORK EQUALIZATION

As a consequence of nonlinear distortions induced by transceivers and the fiber, the short-reach optical interconnect behaves as a non-Gaussian channel. Moreover, arising from the interaction of inter-symbol interference (ISI) and square-law detection, the channel has nonlinear memory effects [27]. For neural networks with linearly-connected neurons, the nonlinearity is predominantly approximated by the activation function with an arduous burden in training. In this paper, based on our work presented at Optical Fiber Communications Conference and Exhibition (OFC) [8], an enhanced deep recurrent neural network equalization method based on hidden feature extraction learning is proposed, which owns more effective training talent.
Fig. 1 shows the complete flowchart of the proposed enhanced HFE learning method. We introduce the hidden feature extraction as pre-training before the sequence training. It should be noted that hidden features refer to characteristics that cannot be observed directly from the raw data but are critical for improving NN-based signal detection. It can be extracted through feature learning process as follows. Based on the original received signal sequence {x(t)}, quadratic space transformation characterizes the nonlinear memory effects by considering the repeatable product of a certain length of received signal, which is expressed as

c(1t), . . . , c(Lt+) 1, . . . , c(2tL)+1, c(2tL)+2, . . . , c(pt), . . . , c(Nt)f = x(t + L), . . . , x(t), . . . , x(t − L), x2(t + L), . . . ,

x (t − r1) x (t − r2) , . . . , x2(t − L) ,

(1)

where −L ≤ r1 ≤ r2 ≤ L and L is the number of adjacent symbols required for transformation. The number of characterized features, denoted as Nf , is equal to (2L + 1)(L + 2). The neural network can learn directly with the feature component as c(pt)(p = 1, . . . , Nf ) input, but its size will be further expanded compared to the raw data. Consequently, principal component
analysis is introduced for further compression. Define the pre-compression feature matrix A:

A = C1, . . . , Cp, . . . , CNf Nt×Nf ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:54:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1748

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 43, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2025

Fig. 1. Flowchart of the proposed HFE learning method, including the feature (pre-training) and sequence learning process.

Cp =

c(pt), . . . , c(pt+Nt−1)

T
.

(2)

Nt denotes the length of training data. Due to the fact that AT A is a real symmetric matrix and has an equal rank with A, there must exist a Nf -order orthogonal matrix V = (Vij)Nf ×Nf that satisfies

V T AT AV = diag (λ1, . . . , λm, 0, . . . , 0) =

D02 00
(3)

where m is the rank of A and λg (g = 1, 2, . . . , m) is the nonzero eigenvalue of A. D is the diagonal matrix composed of singular values as λg. As it is feasible to keep λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ . . . ≥ λm, the features can be characterized by the former Nrf dimensional sub-blocks (1 ≤ Nrd ≤ Nf ). The hidden features
after dimensionality reduction can be derived as

SNt×Nrd = ANt×Nf V . Nf ×Nrd

(4)

As a pre-training process, the HFE learning method can be

applied to train any NNs. In this work, the sequence learning

is performed based on RNN. Through connection feedback and

parameter sharing, it allows the current output to influence the

subsequent input in the same node, exhibiting time-dependent

dynamic tracking capability. The depth fitting in the input/output

direction is also achieved by increasing the number of hidden

layers. Although the RNN structure is not easily parallelizable

in hardware implementation, recent works have shown that

the parallelization problem of RNN equalizers can be solved

by using advanced techniques such as knowledge distillation,

so that the hardware implementation of RNN models can be

essentially simplified [28].

The forward propagation process of RNN with l hidden layers

can be expressed as

⎧

h(jt)

⎨ =⎩

σ

σ W r,j h(jt−1) + W s,j s(t) + bj W r,j h(jt−1) + W s,j h(jt−)1 + bj

,j = 1 , j ∈ (1, l]

,

o(t) = softmax W s,l+1h(lt) + bl+1 .

(5)

where σ(.) is the activation function. W s,j, W r,j, bj are the weights of neurons in the j-th layer and h(jt) is the corresponding

hidden layer state. All parameters are learned by the back propagation through time algorithm.
After the training stage described above, the proposed RNN equalizer works online. We propose a new HFE learning method as described above and after the training, RNN also works in the classical way. For the Pulse Amplitude Modulation (PAM) -K signal, the predicted probability of each modulation amplitude o(kt)(k = 1, 2, . . . , K) can be obtained by softmax function. Based on the maximum posterior probability rule, the signal detection results after equalization are derived as

K

y(t) = arg max
k

o(kt)

,

o(kt) = 1.

(6)

k=1

Generally, Nrd = 1 is sufficient to meet the performance requirements. In our implementation, the complexity of HFE is far below than that of RNN sequence learning process. Compared to the traditional training method for RNN, the input dimension remains the same after HFE, which means we try to improve the training efficiency of neural networks without increasing computational burden for the sequence learning process.

III. END-TO-END LEARNING ARCHITECTURE FOR OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS
The traditional OI system architecture executes several functions by different modules independently. At the transmitter (Tx), modules such as coding, pre-distortion, resample and pulse-shaping are applied to generate the transmission data, while match-filter, resample, synchronization, equalization and decoding are applied to recover the original data at the receiver (Rx). It’s not necessary to construct a surrogate channel model in traditional architectures, because we can design these modules regardless of the specific channel characteristics. In contrast, the E2E AE architecture consists of three cascaded NN-based modules, Tx-NN, digital twin (DT) and Rx-NN, which are illustrated as follows.
The Tx-NN generally plays the role of a DPD [25], to precompensate the transmitted signal in the digital domain prior to transmission, improve the E2E performance, as well as reduce the receiver complexity [29]. Since the linear DPD is unable to entirely mitigate the signal distortions, the NN-based nonlinear DPDs have attracted much interests, using different structures such as fully connected neural network (FCNN) [30], CNN [31]

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:54:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: HIDDEN FEATURE EXTRACTION LEARNING AND END-TO-END JOINT EQUALIZATION WITH LDPC DECODING METHOD

1749

Fig. 2. Measured power-current-voltage characteristics of a VCSEL.

and RNN [32]. There are two widely used DPD approaches, namely the indirect learning architecture (ILA) and the direct learning architecture (DLA). For ILA, the inverse channel response is trained firstly, which is equivalent to the post-equalizer function fpost. Then the post-equalizer function is applied as the pre-distorter function fILA, i.e.,

fˆILA fpost.

(7)

For DLA, the optimization objective of pre-distorter function fDLA can be written as

fˆDLA

=

1 arg min
n fDLA

n i=1

y(i) − x(i)

2
,

(8)

where y = fDT (fDLA(x)), x denotes the input signals and fDT is the digital twin of the optical link which will be explained in the following. It has been generally acknowledged that the DLA can achieve better performance than ILA because of the employment of the digital twin [25], [32], [33]. As a result, the DLA DPD is widely applied in the E2E AE method.
The digital twin is a differentiable surrogate model of actual optical link so that the Tx and Rx can be jointly optimized by gradients propagation in AE. In [24], the optical channel was simply modeled as a chromatic dispersion (CD) effect, which is not sufficient to adapt the VCSEL-MMF based nonlinear channel. As shown in Fig. 2, the characteristics of a VCSEL are generally described as a nonlinear Power-Current-Voltage curve. Besides, the direct modulation will cause the chirp effect due to the on/off process controlled by the drive current. To enable the modeling of the nonlinear behavior of a VCSEL, the Volterra series are applied to approximate the relationship between input drive current I and optical output power P , which are represented by the input x(n) and output y(n) of the Volterra series [25]. To provide more powerful approximating ability, NN-based models such as FCNN [34], CNN [26] and generative adversarial network (GAN) [35], [36] have been applied as the surrogate model. In [26], the digital twin substitutes the physical link including Arbitrary Waveform Generator (AWG), VCSEL, Photo-Diode (PD), Digital Sampling Oscilloscope (DSO), etc. Some novel networks such as physics-informed neural network

(PINN) [37] and noise adaption network [38] were proposed as well, aiming to acquire better performance in the expected system. In digital domain, the Tx and Rx are actually designed to compensate the signal impairments derived from the digital twin rather than the physical link. Consequently, the accuracy of digital twin significantly determines the effectiveness of the E2E AE.
The Rx-NN is generally regarded as a post-equalizer to compensate the dispersion and nonlinearity and recover the input signal at receiver side. Therefore, all the NN-based equalizers can be used as the Rx-NN in the E2E AE architectures. It is worth noting that the complexity of the post-equalizers in E2E AE should be constrained since one of the intentions of E2E learning method is to reduce the receiver complexity. The trade-off between performance gain and complexity also exists in E2E architectures, especially in the Rx module.
Autoencoders are simple learning circuits which aim to transform inputs into outputs with the least possible amount of distortion [39]. We use three nonlinear functions fT x, fDT , and fRx, respectively, to express the three modules mentioned above. The training process of E2E AE includes two steps. In the first step, the fDT is optimized to fˆDT :

yDT = fDT (xDT )

fˆDT

=

1 arg min
fDT n

n i=1

yDT (i) − xDT (i)

2
,

(9)

where xDT and yDT denote the input and output sequence of the digital twin, respectively. In the second step, we fix fDT and jointly optimize fT x and fRx to fˆT x and fˆRx:

yE2E = fRx {fDT [fT x(xE2E )]}

fˆT x, fˆRx

=

1 arg min n fT x,fRx

n i=1

yE2E (i) − xE2E (i) 2

s.t. fDT = fˆDT ,

(10)

where xE2E and yE2E denote the input and output sequence
of the entire E2E link, respectively. After the two training steps, we use fˆT x/fˆRx as the Tx/Rx function.

IV. JOINT EQUALIZATION AND LDPC DECODING METHOD
The advantages of E2E architecture mainly represent on its ability to learn towards the ultimate task intelligently, so that the system overall performance can be improved. However, most of the existing researches only focus on the equalization task, which is not fully utilizing the advantage of E2E learning. Extra modules such as FEC decoding should be incorporated to achieve more performance gain for VCSEL-based OI systems. In this section, we present a joint equalization and LDPC decoding method based on E2E learning architecture.

A. DL-NOMS LDPC Decoding Algorithm
There has been extensive research into the decoding of LDPC codes. Initially, Density Evolution (DE) algorithm was proposed for iterative decoding of regular/irregular LDPC codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:54:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1750

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 43, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2025

Fig. 3. Network structure of DL-NOMS LDPC decoder.

on Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel and Binary

Erasure Channel (BEC) using the Belief Propagation (BP) Algo-

rithm, enabling theoretical estimations of LDPC decoding per-

formance [40], [41], [42]. Based on the Sum-Product Algorithm

(SPA), simplified Min-Sum (MS) decoding algorithms [43] were

proposed, along with improved Normalized/Offset Min-Sum

(NMS/OMS) decoding algorithms and Normalized Offset Min-

Sum (NOMS) decoding algorithms [44]. Recently, as the rapid

development of machine learning and deep learning techniques,

several LDPC decoders based on neural network were pro-

posed [45], [46]. These algorithms focus on optimizing bias and

normalization coefficients in AWGN channels to achieve decod-

ing performance close to SPA. Nevertheless, in IM/DD optical

communication systems, non-Gaussian channel characteristics

inevitably lead to a decrease in the performance of the optimal

parameters in AWGN channel. The optimal decoding algorithm

for specific channels still remains to be studied.

In traditional NOMS decoding algorithm, the message pass-

ing from m-th check node (CN) cm to n-th variable node (VN)

vn in d-th iteration is

⎛

⎞

lmd →n = ⎝

sgn lnd →m ⎠

n ∈Vm\n

· max α · min
n ∈Vm\n

lnd →m

− β, 0 ,

(11)

where l denotes the log-likelihood ratio (LLR), the function sgn(l) denotes the sign of l, Vm denotes the neighboring node set consisting of VNs which are adjacent to the CN cm, and Vm\n denotes the neighboring node set except the VN vn. By optimizing the values of normalization scaling factor α and offset factor β, the NOMS algorithm can exhibit decoding per-
formance close to SPA. In density evolution analysis for AWGN channels, suggested values for the parameters are α = 0.8 and β = 0.15 [44]. However, when channel characteristics change,

such as in the case of non-AWGN channels in IM/DD optical communication systems, the overall decoding performance of NOMS with the normalization factor scaling and offset factor of the aforementioned values deteriorates. Optimizing the parameters of the NOMS decoding method for the non-Gaussian channel characteristics is the primary research objective of the DL-NOMS algorithm.
According to the model-driven DNN design approach, we find that the normalization scaling factor α and offset factor β employed in (11) of the NOMS decoding algorithm share a similar form to the weights and biases of neuron connections in NN. Based on the proposed NN-based decoding algorithms [47], [48], [49], we construct a DL-NOMS decoding algorithm for LDPC codes by modeling the iterative decoding process between CNs and VNs as a multi-layer feedforward neural network as shown in Fig. 3. The network combines the efficient learning capability of NN with the interpretability of Tanner graph models for the iterative decoding process, as well as utilizes parameter learning and backpropagation to compensate for model inaccuracies of traditional NOMS algorithm.
The network structure is illustrated in Fig. 3. The size of input and output layer is eaual to the number of VNs in Tanner graph, and the size of hidden layer is equal to the number of edges in Tanner graph. The d-th hidden layer corresponds to d-th decoding iteration. Every hidden layer consists of two sublayers, called VN update sublayer and CN update sublayer, which correspond to the LLR update of VNs and CNs in iterative decoding, respectively. The forward propagation of DL-NOMS network corresponds to the traditional NOMS decoding process. The message passing from VNs to CNs is the same as traditional NOMS decoding:

lnd→m =

lch,n,

lch,n +

lmd−→1 n,

m ∈Cn\m

d=1 d>1 ,

(12)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:54:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: HIDDEN FEATURE EXTRACTION LEARNING AND END-TO-END JOINT EQUALIZATION WITH LDPC DECODING METHOD

1751

Fig. 4. The E2E joint equalization and LDPC decoding network structure. The trainable parameters are located at the top of each module. The NN implementations are located at the bottom of each module.

where lch,n denotes the channel LLR input of vn, Cn denotes the

neighboring node set consisting of CNs which are adjacent to

the VN vn, and Cn\m denotes the neighboring node set except

the CN cm. The message passing from CNs to VNs described

by (11) is modified as

⎛

⎞

lmd →n = ⎝

sgn lnd →m ⎠

n ∈Vm\n

· ReLu

αnd ,m

·

n

min
∈Vm \n

lnd →m

− βnd,m

,

(13)

where αnd,m, βnd,m denote the weight and bias connecting vn and cm in d-th hidden layer, respectively. ReLu(x) = max(x, 0) is the rectified linear unit, widely used in DNNs as activation
function. After the calculation and activation in the output layer,
the final output can be expressed as

on = σ lch,n +

lNmax
m→n

,

m∈Cn

(14)

where Nmax is the maximum number of iterations, and σ(x) =

1 1+e−x

is

the

sigmiod

activation

function

to

limit

the

output

in

range [0,1].

In the DL-NOMS algorithm, the connectivity of hidden layer

neurons is based on the parity-check matrix H of the employed

LDPC code. Due to the low-density characteristic of H, the

constructed network is a deep sparse network with a non-fully

connected structure. Moreover, when we focus on the protograph

LDPC codes, since the macroscopic structure can be captured

by its small base graph [17], for any edge pair belonging to

the same edge-type, the same values are applied to the neurons

corresponding to these two edges. This method is called the

protograph-based parameter-sharing mechanism [47]. By ex-

ploiting the parameter-sharing mechanism, only a small weight

and bias list is required when we decode protograph LDPC codes

using DL-NOMS algorithm. Therefore, the computational and

training complexity of the DL-NOMS network is significantly

reduced compared to a fully-connected deep neural network.

B. End-to-End Joint Equalization and Decoding Network Structure
The E2E joint equalization and decoding network structure is shown in Fig. 4. Compared to the E2E architectures in Section III, the DL-NOMS decoder network is cascaded after the Rx FFE, and we add a Peak Constraint module after the

digital pre-distorter. The detailed structures and functions of each module are illustrated as follows.
In our E2E network, the digital pre-distorter is implemented by bidirectional long short-term memory (bi-LSTM) model. LSTM is similar to standard RNN, but replaces each ordinary recurrent node with a memory cell. Each memory cell contains an internal state, which facilitates gradient flow across many time steps without vanishing or exploding. LSTMs incorporate three types of gates: input gates, forget gates, and output gates to manage information flow. The hidden layer output of an LSTM comprises both the hidden state and the internal state of the memory cell. Only the hidden state is passed into the output layer while the memory cell internal state remains entirely internal [50]. In bi-LSTMs, the hidden state for each time step is simultaneously determined by the data prior to and after the current time step. These characteristics make bi-LSTM suitable to process the data sequences in IM/DD systems, in order to compensate the ISI and nonlinear effects. The trainable parameters in digital pre-distorter are denoted by θDP D.
Before input the pre-distorted signal into the optical link, the peak constraint operation is necessary, since the uniform PAM signal amplitudes are transformed into a distribution over a larger range after the DPD. As the A/D conversion performs a maximum normalization, the average output power will severely decrease. Therefore, we define the peak constraint as

xlim = max(min(xDP D, xth), −xth),

(15)

where xDP D and xlim denote the signal before and after the peak constraint operation, respectively. xth is the trainable positive threshold. Smaller value may increase the training loss of the E2E network, but the experiment performance can be better due to the larger average output power.
The digital optical link model is the digital twin of optical transmission link, which can be illustrated by Fig. 5. It is also implemented by bi-LSTM, aiming to learn the nonlinear effects of VCSEL based optical link and predict the output signal sequence of the system. It is worth noting that our digital optical link model not only models the overall optical link including A/D conversion, VCSEL, MMF, PD, D/A conversion. etc, but also contains the necessary processes such as resample, pulseshaping, matched filter and synchronization. This approach avoids modeling above traditional functions separately, thus making the E2E architecture more compatible with actual systems. The peak constraint limits the output amplitude between -1 and 1, which makes the network easier to converge. The trainable parameters in digital optical link model are denoted by θDT .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:54:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1752

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 43, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2025

Fig. 5. The schematics of digital optical link model.

The FFE is considered as a Finite Impulse Response (FIR) filter, filtering the input sequence x(n) to obtain the output sequence y(n) as

L

y(n) =

h(m) · x(n − m).

(16)

m=−L

The number of FFE taps is equal to 2L + 1. In practice, the FFE is implemented by one-dimensional convolutional neural network (1D-CNN) [26], and h(n) is the trainable convolutional kernel with size 2L + 1. Because FFE is a linear operation, there is no need to add activation function into 1D-CNN. The trainable parameters in FFE are denoted by θF F E.

C. The Greedy Training Method

In order to train the E2E network including several subnetworks, a multi-loss function approach has been used in researches to inject the gradients directly to every sub-networks. However, in practice, the multi-loss function approach may lead to the gradient vanishing problem when directly training all the parameters. In this work, we apply the greedy training method to accelerate network convergence. We perform a phased training strategy for the E2E network in Fig. 4. Once each training stage is completed, the corresponding parameters are fixed in later stages. As a result, only a part of parameters are learnable in each stage, which makes the E2E network easier to converge. The detailed training method is as follows.
1) Digital Optical Link Model Training: Firstly, the digital optical link model is trained to obtain a digital twin of optical transmission link, which facilitates the subsequent training process. We randomly generate data sequence x1 as the network input, and collect the experimental receiver data sequence y1 as the label. x1 and y1 can also be regarded as the input and output of the system shown in Fig. 5. As this training stage executes a regression task, we use mean-square error (MSE) loss function,

1n L1 = n

y1(i) − yˆ1(i)

2
.

(17)

i=1

After training, the parameter θDT is fixed, and the digital optical link model is able to substitute the physical link in digital domain.
2) Equalizer Training: Then we jointly optimize the parameters θDP D, xth and θF F E. Since these parameters jointly execute the equalization task as pre- and post-equalizers, the

joint optimization will get better performance. These parts of networks can be regarded as an AE, which input the original data sequence x2 and output the equalized sequence y2. There is still not an ultimate answer to the question of what would be the best loss function in optical communication, as each popular choice has drawbacks, such as MSE and cross-entropy loss (CEL) [51]. In this training stage, MSE is quite suitable because we expect to obtain the received signal values rather than classification results. The continuous signal values are more convenient to calculation the channel LLR, which will input to the LDPC decoder. The loss function in this stage is expressed as

1n L2 = n

y2(i) − x2(i)

2
.

i=1

(18)

3) LDPC Decoder Training: Before training the DL-NOMS

network, we need to calculate the channel LLR input from the

FFE output. The detailed methods are illustrated in Appendix A.

Using the LLR initialization, we train the DL-NOMS LDPC

decoding network by using the parameter-sharing mechanism

and Iteration-by-Iteration Greedy Training method [47]. Due to

one layer in the DL-NOMS network representing one iteration

of decoding process, the network is growing from a one-layer

network for only one iteration to a multi-layer network for Nmax iterations. Only the parameters in the last layer are learnable at

each time. We use the CEL to optimize the DL-NOMS network

as

L3

=

−1 n

n

[si log (oi) + (1 − si) log (1 − oi)]

(19)

i=1

where oi denotes the output symbol of the LDPC decoder and si denote the corresponding transmitted symbol.
Moreover, in order to further accelerate all the training processes, we apply the idea of transfer learning. Specifically, for different transmission fiber length, we initialize the E2E network parameters by the values obtained from back-to-back (BTB) E2E network training. And for other different parameters such as lauch power, we also do not need to train the network from randomly initialized parameters every time since the similarity of these different VCSEL-based OI links makes complete re-training unnecessary.

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In order to evaluate the performance of proposed equalization and decoding schemes, we have conducted experiments based

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:54:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: HIDDEN FEATURE EXTRACTION LEARNING AND END-TO-END JOINT EQUALIZATION WITH LDPC DECODING METHOD

1753

Fig. 6. (a) Micrograph of the 850 nm VCSEL. (b) S21 characteristic of the VCSEL. (c) S21 characteristic of the 100 m VCSEL-MMF link.

on the VCSEL-MMF optical interconnection system. We first introduce the VCSEL characteristics and experimental setup, then evaluate the performance of enhanced RNN equalizer via hidden feature extraction learning (HFE-RNN), finally we assess the performance of E2E joint equalization and LDPC decoding method.

Fig. 7. Experimental configuration of optical transmission system utilizing 850 nm VCSEL.

A. VCSEL Characteristics
Fig. 6(a) displays the die picture of our design-optimized mass-production 850 nm VCSEL. The epitaxial layers of the VCSEL are grown on GaAs substrates. The n-type AlGaAs distributed bragg reflectors (DBRs) with graded interfaces are deposited as bottom reflector, followed by the AlGaAs/InGaAs multiple quantum wells (MQWs) as active region. One thin 98% AlGaAs layer is used as oxide layer for the thermal oxidation process in the fabrication. Then p-type AlGaAs DBRs are deposited as top reflector. At last, a highly doped p++ GaAs is deployed on the top to form ohmic contact. In the fabrication, the oxide layer is oxidized to approximately 7–8μm size aperture for lateral current confinement. P&N metal contact pads are evaporated on the same side of chip to reduce parasites while benzo-cyclo-butene is used to reduce pad capacitance. We choose 8 mA as the operating bias to derive a good BER performance. After 100 m MMF transmission, the received optical power is 1.5 dBm. The 3-dB bandwidth of the VCSEL at current bias set is 23 GHz as presented in Fig. 6(b). And the 3-dB bandwidth of the 100 m VCSEL-MMF link is 10.5 GHz as presented in Fig. 6(c).
B. Evaluation of HFE-RNN Performance
The experimental setup and digital signal processing (DSP) diagram are depicted in Fig. 7. At the transmitter side, PAM-8 symbols are generated by an AWG with 120 GSa/s sampling rate. The operating bias is set with a 65 GHz bias-T and the optical signal is coupled into the 100 m OM-4 MMF via a lensed fiber. At the receiver side, the optical signal is directly detected by a photoreceiver with 22 GHz bandwidth. To reduce the interference of oscilloscope noise floor, the received signal is amplified by a 22 dB electrical amplifier (EA) before being sampled. The real-time DSO captures the signal at 160 GSa/s rate. While evaluating the performance of RNN trained by the proposed HFE method, RNN trained in the traditional way is adopted as the benchmark. The number of hidden layers l is kept to 3, and ReLU is used as the activation function to avoid the vanishing gradients in training. Following [51], we do not use pseudo-random bit sequence (PRBS) pattern to produce the

Fig. 8. Measured BER performance of RNN trained in the traditional way and RNN trained by the proposed HFE method at different transmission rates.
data stream. Instead, a binary sequence is obtained by applying the sign(.) function to a Gaussian noise sequence generated in MATLAB. A dataset containing 510,0000 PAM-8 symbols are obtained. We have extracted 450,0000 of them to construct the training set, while the rest are put into the test set. Fig. 8 shows the BER performance at different transmission rates. Compared to the traditional RNN, RNN trained by HFE obtains a growing BER gain as the data rates increase. This is attributed to the pre-training process that extracts hidden features and guides the deep RNN in channel learning, where L and Nrd are set to 2 and 1 respectively for optimal performance. The experimental results present that BER of 288 Gb/s PAM-8 signal transmission based on HFE-RNN over 100 m OM4 MMF is much lower than 20% soft-decision FEC threshold. This result means that even if the data rates continue to increase in the future, VCSEL is still a promising optical source in data center to provide high-performance transmission with low cost. It can be also regarded as a near-optimal result of 100 m VCSEL-MMF link by low-cost commercial devices aided by neutral network method for academia.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:54:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1754

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 43, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2025

Fig. 9. Performance comparison of different training methods for RNN.

Fig. 11. Eye diagrams of 100 Gbps PAM-4 signals after 100 m MMF transmission. (a) Original received signal. (b) Post-equalization signal.

Fig. 10. The experimental pre-FEC and post-FEC BER of 100 m VCSEL-

MMF link.

Fig. 12. Performance comparison of different LDPC decoding algorithms.

Fig. 9 compares the performance of the two training methods for RNN. As epochs gradually increase, the loss shows a trend of rapid reduction followed by a slow decrease until convergence. It should be noted that slight fluctuation of the loss during the iteration process is normal, which does not affect the achievement of convergence. This indicates that the training process effectively learns the channel characteristics of the high-capacity VCSEL-MMF system. Compared with the traditional method, HFE has lower loss performance as well as higher efficiency in the same number of epochs.
C. Evaluation of E2E Joint Equalization and Decoding Performance
Also using the experimental optical link depicted in Fig. 7, we evaluate the BER performance of the proposed E2E joint equalization and LDPC decoding network presented by Figs. 4 and 5. In order to evaluate the performance of decoding methods effectively, we use PAM-4 modulation here to ensure the decoding performances. Firstly, we evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method in 100 m VCSEL-MMF link, and the pre-FEC BER as well as post-FEC BER are shown in Fig. 10. Since the post-FEC BER is lower than 10−10 at the transmission rates tested, it is demonstrated that our method achieves the requirement of practical application given by IEEE Std. 802.3 db 2022, which outlines the standards for 100 Gbps

optical IM-DD links utilizing MMF. The eye diagrams of original received signal and post-equalization signal are shown in Fig. 11.
Next, we evaluate the performance of DL-NOMS LDPC decoding algorithm and compare it with the traditional MS and NOMS algorithm. In this experiment, we use the FFE and LDPC decoder modules in Fig. 4 and calculate the output BER. The employed LDPC code is BG1 defined in 5G new radio (NR) system [52], which has 46 rows and 68 columns in the parity-check matrix. (2240, 1760) LDPC code with rate R = 0.7857 is used to encode 65536 PAM-4 symbols. 50% of the transmit symbols are used for parameter training by Adam optimizer, and the remaining symbols are used for test. The number of layers in DL-NOMS network is 15, and the number of test iterations is 50. The results in Fig. 12 show the BER of 124 Gbps PAM-4 signal transmission over 100 m OM4 MMF for different number of iterations and different decoding methods. As the iterations increase, the BER of DL-NOMS algorithm is lower than the traditional MS and NOMS algorithm. The distribution of weights αnd,m and biases βnd,m in training process are presented in Fig. 13. We count all the weights or biases as one column for each iteration. The weights are mainly distributed in the range of 0.92 to 0.95 while the biases are mainly distributed in the range of 0.03 to 0.06, which deviate from the traditional NOMS parameters that weight is 0.8 and bias is 0.15.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:54:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: HIDDEN FEATURE EXTRACTION LEARNING AND END-TO-END JOINT EQUALIZATION WITH LDPC DECODING METHOD

1755

Fig. 14. BTB link BER performance of FFE+DL-NOMS decoding method, E2E equalization method and E2E joint equalization and decoding scheme.

Fig. 13. Distributions of weights and biases for DL-NOMS network.

Then we evaluate the performance of the proposed E2E joint equalization and decoding method. The number of LSTM layers is set to 3, and the number of FFE taps is set to 31. Since the lack of amplifier for 850 nm VCSEL+MMF link, we evaluate the BER performances vs. different data rates in the following 3 figures. The baseline methods compared include E2E equalization method and FFE+DL-NOMS LDPC decoding method. As shown in Fig. 4, E2E equalization jointly optimize the DPD and FFE to equalize the received signal without LDPC coding. In the decoding scheme, we use FFE before DL-NOMS LDPC decoder, which is the same as the previous experiment. Fig. 14 shows the results in BTB scenario. We demonstrate that the proposed E2E joint equalization and decoding method performs a BER gain of two orders of magnitude. The results of 100 m MMF scenario are shown in Fig. 15. Although the performance gain reduces as the data rate increases, the E2E joint equalization and decoding method is still much better than the baseline schemes.
Furthermore, we evaluate the generalization ability of our E2E network. The generalization ability of a neural network refers to its capability to effectively perform on previously unseen datasets which are not included in its training phase. To demonstrate the generalization ability of our E2E network, we apply the optimized parameters from BTB scenario to 100 m scenario. As illustrated in Fig. 16, the BER of the E2E joint equalization and decoding network only slightly increases than the normal case of both training and testing on the 100 m link. Therefore, the proposed E2E network has the potential to apply the same optimized parameters to different transmission scenarios.

Fig. 15. 100 m link BER performance of FFE+DL-NOMS decoding method, E2E equalization method and E2E joint equalization and decoding scheme.
Fig. 16. The generalization ability of E2E joint equalization and decoding network. The blue line represents training and testing on the 100 m link in a normal way. The red line represents training parameters on the BTB link and testing on the 100 m link.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:54:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1756

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 43, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2025

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a HFE learning method is proposed to improve the training efficiency of NN equalization methods. Compared with the traditional black-box structure of end-to-end learning, HFE obtains enhanced feature input through quadratic space transformation, principal component analysis and dimensionality reduction. It is capable of improving the learning efficiency of NNs without increasing the computational burden. Using the new method, single-lane 288 Gb/s signal transmission over 100 m MMF is implemented with BER well below the 20% SD-FEC threshold. Moreover, based on the E2E AE architecture, we propose an E2E joint equalization and LDPC decoding method. A DPD and a digital optical link model constructed by bi-LSTM, a FFE constructed by 1D-CNN, and a LDPC decoder constructed by the DL-NOMS network are jointly optimized by a greedy training method. Experimental results demonstrate that the DLNOMS decoding algorithm performs better than the traditional MS and NOMS algorithm by training the weights and biases for the VCSEL-MMF optical link. It is also demonstrated that the BER performance of E2E joint equalization and decoding method is two-magnitude lower than the E2E equalization and FFE+DL-NOMS decoding method in BTB and 100 m MMF scenarios. The proposed E2E network shows the potential of generalization, which enables the optimized parameters to apply in different scenarios.

APPENDIX A LLR INITIALIZATION METHOD FOR DL-NOMS NETWORK

Let rn denote the received symbol and sn denote the corresponding transmit symbol. For on-off keying (OOK) modulation in AWGN channel with mean 0 and variance σ2, the initial LLR
can be expressed as

lch,n

=

log

P (rn P (rn

| |

sn sn

= =

0) 1)

=

2rn σ2

,

(20)

where P(rn | sn = 0) and P(rn | sn = 1) are the posterior probabilities of rn when sn is known. Meanwhile, since the NOMS algorithm only involves addition and comparison operations, it is not necessary to estimate channel noise variance when initializing LLR. The initialization formula (20) can be simplified as

lch,n

=

log

P (rn P (rn

| |

sn sn

= =

0) 1)

=

rn,

(21)

which means the received OOK symbol can be directly used as LDPC decoder input.
For PAM-K modulation, due to one symbol consisting of log K bits, we need to use the following calculation method. Let bm denote the m-th received bit, the initial LLR is calculated as

lch,m

=

log

P (rn P (rn

| bm | bm

= =

0) 1)

P (rn | sn = si, bm = 0) P (sn = si) = log si
P (rn | sn = sj, bm = 1) P (sn = sj)
sj

P (rn | sn = si, bm = 0) = log si
P (rn | sn = sj, bm = 1)
sj

P (rn | sn = si)

= log si∈S0

.

(22)

P (rn | sn = sj)

sj ∈S1

The third equation holds because the transmit symbols have equal probabilities. S0 and S1 are the set of transmit symbols which make the specified position bit equal to 0 and 1, respectively.

REFERENCES
[1] T. Barnett, S. Jain, U. Andra, and T. Khurana, “Cisco visual networking index (VNI) complete forecast update 2017–2022,” Americas/EMEAR Cisco Knowl. Netw. Presentation, pp. 1–30, 2018.
[2] Q. Cheng, M. Bahadori, M. Glick, S. Rumley, and K. Bergman, “Recent advances in optical technologies for data centers: A review,” Optica, vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 1354–1370, 2018.
[3] D. Mahgerefteh et al., “Techno-economic comparison of silicon photonics and multimode VCSELs,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 233–242, Jan. 2016.
[4] H.-T. Cheng, Y.-C. Yang, T.-H. Liu, and C.-H. Wu, “Recent advances in 850 nm VCSELs for high-speed interconnects,” Photonics, vol. 9, no. 2, 2022, Art. no. 107.
[5] F. Karinou, N. Stojanovic, C. Prodaniuc, Z. Qiang, and T. Dippon, “112 gb/s PAM-4 optical signal transmission over 100-m om4 multimode fiber for high-capacity data-center interconnects,” in Proc. 42nd Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun., 2016, pp. 1–3.
[6] M. R. Murty et al., “Development and characterization of 100 Gb/s data communication VCSELs,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 33, no. 16, pp. 812–815, Aug. 2021.
[7] Y. Gao et al., “288 Gb/s 850 nm VCSEL-based interconnect over 100 m MMF based on feature-enhanced recurrent neural network,” in Proc. 2022 Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. Exhib., 2022, pp. 01–03.
[8] C. Yang, Y. Gao, J. Wang, H. Li, and C. J. Chang-Hasnain, “Enhanced recurrent neural network equalization based on hidden feature extraction learning for optical interconnect,” in Proc. 2024 Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. Exhib., 2024, pp. 1–3.
[9] H. Zhou et al., “Recent advances in equalization technologies for shortreach optical links based on PAM4 modulation: A review,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 11, 2019, Art. no. 2342.
[10] T. O’shea and J. Hoydis, “An introduction to deep learning for the physical layer,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 563–575, Dec. 2017.
[11] M. Schaedler, C. Bluemm, M. Kuschnerov, F. Pittalà, S. Calabrò, and S. Pachnicke, “Deep neural network equalization for optical short reach communication,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 21, 2019, Art. no. 4675.
[12] C.-Y. Chuang et al., “Convolutional neural network based nonlinear classifier for 112-Gbps high speed optical link,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf., 2018, pp. 1–3.
[13] Q. Zhou, F. Zhang, and C. Yang, “AdaNN: Adaptive neural network-based equalizer via online semi-supervised learning,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 38, no. 16, pp. 4315–4324, Aug. 2020.
[14] Z. Xu, C. Sun, J. H. Manton, and W. Shieh, “Joint equalization of linear and nonlinear impairments for PAM4 short-reach direct detection systems,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 425–428, May 2021.
[15] Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, IEEE Std. 80211-1997, 1997.
[16] Management Parameters for 25 Gb/s and 50 Gb/s Passive Optical Networks, IEEE P802.3ca 50G-EPON, 2019.
[17] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of low-density parity check codes for 5G new radio,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28–34, Mar. 2018.
[18] L. Schmalen, A. J. d. L. van Wijngaarden, and S. Ten Brink, “Forward error correction in optical core and optical access networks,” Bell Labs Tech. J., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 39–66, 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:54:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: HIDDEN FEATURE EXTRACTION LEARNING AND END-TO-END JOINT EQUALIZATION WITH LDPC DECODING METHOD

1757

[19] R. C. Bose and D. K. Ray-Chaudhuri, “On a class of error correcting binary group codes,” Inf. Control, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 68–79, 1960.
[20] I. S. Reed and G. Solomon, “Polynomial codes over certain finite fields,” J. Soc. Ind. Appl. Math., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 300–304, 1960.
[21] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 db of the shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[22] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 908–917, May 2001.
[23] X. Qin et al., “Recurrent neural network based joint equalization and decoding method for trellis coded modulated optical communication system,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1734–1741, Mar. 2023.
[24] B. Karanov et al., “End-to-end deep learning of optical fiber communications,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 36, no. 20, pp. 4843–4855, Oct. 2018.
[25] M. Srinivasan et al., “End-to-end learning for vcsel-based optical interconnects: State-of-the-art, challenges, and opportunities,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 3261–3277, Jun. 2023.
[26] L. Minelli, F. Forghieri, T. Shao, A. Shahpari, and R. Gaudino, “TDECQbased optimization of nonlinear digital pre-distorters for VCSEL-MMF optical links using end-to-end learning,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 621–635, Jan. 2024.
[27] Y. Gao et al., “Least angle regression-based modified volterra nonlinear equalizer for optical interconnection system,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 3622–3632, Jun. 2022.
[28] S. Srivallapanondh et al., “Knowledge distillation applied to optical channel equalization: Solving the parallelization problem of recurrent connection,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf., 2023, pp. 1–3.
[29] P. W. Berenguer et al., “Nonlinear digital pre-distortion of transmitter components,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 1739–1745, Apr. 2016.
[30] M. U. Hadi, M. Awais, M. Raza, K. Khurshid, and H. Jung, “Neural network DPD for aggrandizing SM-VCSEL-SSMF-based radio over fiber link performance,” Photonics, vol. 8, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 19.
[31] V. Bajaj, F. Buchali, M. Chagnon, S. Wahls, and V. Aref, “Single-channel 1.61 tb/s optical coherent transmission enabled by neural network-based digital pre-distortion,” in Proc. 2020 Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun., 2020, pp. 1–4.
[32] G. Paryanti, H. Faig, L. Rokach, and D. Sadot, “A direct learning approach for neural network based pre-distortion for coherent nonlinear optical transmitter,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 38, no. 15, pp. 3883–3896, Aug. 2020.
[33] V. Bajaj, F. Buchali, M. Chagnon, S. Wahls, and V. Aref, “Deep neural network-based digital pre-distortion for high baudrate optical coherent transmission,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 597–606, Feb. 2022.
[34] M. Srinivasan, J. Song, C. Häger, K. Szczerba, H. Wymeersch, and J. Schröder, “Learning optimal PAM levels for vcsel-based optical interconnects,” in Proc. 2022 Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun., 2022, pp. 1–4.
[35] B. Karanov, M. Chagnon, V. Aref, D. Lavery, P. Bayvel, and L. Schmalen, “Concept and experimental demonstration of optical IM/DD end-to-end system optimization using a generative model,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf., 2020, pp. 1–3.
[36] H. Yang et al., “Fast and accurate optical fiber channel modeling using generative adversarial network,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 1322–1333, Mar. 2021.
[37] D. Wang et al., “Applications of physics-informed neural network for optical fiber communications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 32–37, Sep. 2022.
[38] Y. Xu, L. Huang, W. Jiang, X. Guan, W. Hu, and L. Yi, “End-to-end learning for 100G-PON based on noise adaptation network,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 2328-2337, Apr. 2024.
[39] P. Baldi, “Autoencoders, unsupervised learning, and deep architectures,” in Proc. 2011 Int. Conf. Unsupervised Transfer Learn. Workshop, 2012, pp. 37–49.
[40] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved bpbased decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[41] V. Rathi and R. Urbanke, “Density evolution, thresholds and the stability condition for non-binary LDPC codes,” IEE Proc. Commun., vol. 152, no. 6, pp. 1069–1074, 2005.
[42] G. Li, I. J. Fair, and W. A. Krzymien, “Density evolution for nonbinary LDPC codes under Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 997–1015, Mar. 2009.
[43] A. Anastasopoulos, “A comparison between the sum-product and the minsum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Telecommun. Conf., 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1021–1025.

[44] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[45] K. Niu, J. Dai, K. Tan, and J. Gao, “Deep learning methods for channel decoding: A brief tutorial,” in Proc. 2021 IEEE/CIC Int. Conf. Commun. China, 2021, pp. 144–149.
[46] L. Wang, S. Chen, J. Nguyen, D. Dariush, and R. Wesel, “Neural-networkoptimized degree-specific weights for LDPC minsum decoding,” in Proc. 11th Int. Symp. Topics Coding, 2021, pp. 1–5.
[47] J. Dai et al., “Learning to decode protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1983–1999, Jul. 2021.
[48] Q. Wang et al., “Normalized min-sum neural network for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 70–81, Feb. 2023.
[49] N. Shah and Y. Vasavada, “Neural layered decoding of 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 3590–3593, Nov. 2021.
[50] A. Zhang, Z. C. Lipton, M. Li, and A. J. Smola, “Dive into deep learning,” Cambridge University Press, 2023.
[51] P. J. Freire, A. Napoli, B. Spinnler, N. Costa, S. K. Turitsyn, and J. E. Prilepsky, “Neural networks-based equalizers for coherent optical transmission: Caveats and pitfalls,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 28, no. 4, Jul./Aug. 2022, Art. no. 7600223.
[52] 3GPP, “Multiplexing and channel coding,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Sophia Antipolis, France, Tech. Specification (TS) 38.212, vol. 6, 2018.
Chuanchuan Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in 2003, and the Ph.D. degree in communication and information system from Peking University, Beijing, China, in 2008. She is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electronics, Peking University. Her research interests include high speed optical transmission, optical interconnects and optical sensing.
Hao Qin received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering from Peking University, Beijing, China, in 2023. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in communication and information system. His research interests include high speed optical communication and optical interconnects.
Tianxiang Lan received the B.S. degree in electronic information science and technology from Peking University, Beijing, China, in 2021. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in communication and information system. His research interests include high speed optical communication and optical interconnects.
Yunfeng Gao received the Ph.D. degree in communication and information systems from Peking University, Beijing, China, in 2023. His research interests include high speed optical communication and optical interconnects.
Jiaxing Wang received the bachelor’s and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2007 and 2013, respectively. After graduation with outstanding doctoral thesis honor, he joined Lattice Power as a Senior R&D Engineer, then become an R&D Manager. During his job with Lattice Power, he led a team to develop high-efficiency near-ultraviolet LEDs (365–405 nm), which have been commercialized. In 2016, he was with the University of California as a Postdoc then become an Assistant Research Scientist, where he developed high-efficiency strain compensated multiple quantum well, conventional DBR VCSEL and novel HCG VCSEL epitaxy technology. He has more than 10 years’ experience on epitaxy and device design, MOCVD material epitaxy and characterization and high-speed device testing. He is currently R&D Vice President with Berxel Photonics. He has authored or coauthored more than 20 papers in peer-reviewed journals and international conferences, filed 17 patents and been cited more than 400 times.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:54:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1758

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 43, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2025

Yuping Zhao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Northern Jiaotong University, Beijing, China, in 1983 and 1986, respectively, and the Ph.D. and Doctor of Science degrees in wireless communications from Aalto University, Espoo, Finland, in 1997 and 1999, respectively. She was a System Engineer for telecommunication companies in China and Japan. She was a Research Engineer with Nokia Research Center, Helsinki, Finland, in the field of radio resource management for wireless mobile communication networks. She is currently a Professor with the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Optical Communication Systems and Networks, School of Electronics, Peking University, Beijing. Her research interests include wireless communications and corresponding signal processing, especially for orthogonal frequency division multiplexing, ultra wideband, and multiple-input multiple-output systems, cooperative networks, cognitive radio, and wireless sensor networks.

Constance J. Chang-Hasnain (Fellow, IEEE) is currently Chairperson of Berxel Photonics, Whinnery Chair Professor Emerita with the University of California, Berkeley (UC Berkeley), Berkeley, CA, USA, and President of Optica, formerly known as OSA. She is Member of the US National Academy of Engineering and National Academy of Inventors. She was a Member of the technical staff with Bellcore (1987–1992) and Assistant/Associate Professor of electrical engineering with Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, from 1992 to 1995. She joined UC Berkeley as a Professor of electrical engineering and computer sciences in 1996. She was Whinnery Distinguished Chair Professor during 2006–2020, Associate Dean for Strategic Alliances of College of Engineering during 2014–2019, and Chair of the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Graduate Group during 2006–2017. Her research interests include semiconductor optoelectronic devices, materials and applications. She pioneered the first planar VCSEL structure using proton implantation for array fabrication with Gbps modulation, first MEMS-VCSEL for wavelength tuning, and the first 1000-element VCSEL arrays for 3D imaging. Prof. Chang-Hasnain has been honored with many awards including the Okawa Prize (2018), UNESCO Medal For the Development of Nanoscience and Nanotechnologies (2015), IEEE David Sarnoff Award (2011), and the OSA Nick Holonyak Jr. Award (2007). She has been awarded with a Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship, Humboldt Research Award, and Guggenheim Fellowship. She was a Member of IEEE LEOS Board of Governors, OSA Board of Directors, and the Board on Assessment of NIST Programs, National Research Council. She was the Editor-in-Chief of Journal of Lightwave Technology during 2007–2012. She is a Fellow of OSA and IEE.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:54:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

