2025 International Conference on Vehicular Technology and Transportation Systems (ICVTTS) | 979-8-3315-6522-0/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICVTTS67119.2025.11296567

Cross-Temperature Effects on NAND Flash in Automotive Systems: A Comprehensive Study and
Broad-Scope Mitigation Strategies
Vineeth P1, Gomathi Kumar2 Engineering & Product Management
SanDisk India Bengaluru, India vineeth.p@sandisk.com1, gomathi.kumar@sandisk.com2

Abstract— The advanced electronic features in modern vehicles have driven the widespread adoption of NAND flash memory in automotive systems. NAND flash memory is exposed to wide thermal fluctuations, often ranging from -40°C to +105°C in automotive environments. This often results in cross temperature conditions which significantly impacts reliability and system performance. This paper explores various techniques and a comprehensive review of existing methods that ensure data integrity, reliability, and performance under such conditions. Methods assessed include thermal throttling, Heat watch algorithm, Dynamic Vth (Threshold Voltage) tracking, adaptive data relocation/refresh and ML (Machine Learning) approaches. The study delves into the strengths and limitations of these methods which serve as a reference for engineers and researchers working to enhance data integrity in memory systems, experiencing extreme automotive temperature conditions.
Keywords—NAND flash memory, Automotive systems, Cross temperature effect
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern vehicles are more reliant on digital systems to support everything from infotainment and navigation to ADAS (Advanced Driver Assistant System) and event data recording. These complex systems require high-speed read and write capabilities to handle large volumes of data that ensure real-time performance [1]. NAND flash memory lies at the core of these systems. The durable and reliable features of NAND including its non-volatility, high storage density, fast read/write speed, and cost make it the most preferred choice in automotive systems and applications.
As these systems operate at different temperature ranges – from freezing cold to intense heat, data reliability becomes a major concern, particularly in NAND, leading to cross temperature(X-Temp) conditions. X-Temp refers to a condition where the data is written in a particular temperature and read at different temperature, this impacts the integrity of data in automotive environment. Though the automotive environment temperature varies from -40°C to +105°C, NAND operates at a much lesser temperature range. These condition impacts the threshold voltage in NAND cells, causing reads failures and decrease the memory performance.
Although cross-temperature issues were already known in planar (2D) NAND flash, recent research confirms that these reliability challenges also extend to 3D NAND flash

technologies. Polycrystalline silicon structure used in 3D NAND is more sensitive to temperature changes than singlecrystal silicon used in 2D NAND, making it more prone to cross-temperature effects [2].
Figure 1 shows the distinguished memory states using a bell curve (normal distribution) for a TLC (Triple level cell) NAND flash. The black curve shows the default programmed state, the red curve shows a left shift from the default programmed state due to high temperature and blue shows a right shift due to lower temperature.VR1-7 represents the default read voltages for the corresponding states.
Fig. 1. Cell Voltage Shift under thermal stress in TLC NAND
Several methods have been developed by researchers and engineers to mitigate the issue. One of the key strategies is the use of advanced ECC (Error Correction Codes) which detects and corrects more numbers of failed bits. Other approaches include thermal throttling which slows down operations that generate excess heat, and Heat watch algorithm that monitors temperature trends to proactively manage workload and thermal risk. Dynamic Vth tracking is another technique that adjusts voltage margins to account for changes due to temperature drift in real time [3]. Adaptive data refresh technique helps by periodically refreshing the stored data to avoid data retention errors, particularly at high temperatures. Temperature-aware wear levelling is used to distribute PEC (Program and Erase Cycles) more evenly across memory cells, minimizing wear and performance degradation.
II. CROSS TEMPERATURE EFFECT ON AUTOMOTIVE
APPLICATIONS
A. ADAS ADAS is a technology that is used in vehicles which
supports safety and convenience features for driving comfort

979-8-3315-6522-0/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:00:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[4]. They primarily use sensors and cameras to support the driver with routine tasks like lane keeping/departure assistance, adaptive cruise control, blind spot monitoring, collision detection and automatic braking. These systems rely on real-time data from sensors and cameras for their processing. NAND flash is used to store data, pre-trained AI models, firmware, and system software. Since ADAS functions must operate across all driving conditions, any degradation in NAND performance, caused due to temperature shifts, can affect system reliability leading to read errors and delayed response, unless mitigated by robust ECC and temperature aware data refresh mechanism.
B. Infotainment Systems
Infotainment Systems provide multimedia entertainment, navigation, and user interface control. They typically include media players, GPS, Bluetooth connectivity, Wi-Fi, voice commands, and smartphone integration. Operating systems files, apps, navigation maps, media content are stored in NAND. These systems require high-capacity and reliable storage. Infotainment Systems, especially in dashboard locations, are subjected to heating and cooling. Cross temperature slows down the boot time of these systems impacting the performance which affects the user experience and may lead to partial system failures if not managed with adaptive read strategies.
C. Digital Instrument clusters
Digital Instrument clusters are reconfigurable displays, which replace traditional gauges. They show vehicle speed, RPM, fuel level and warning messages etc. The graphics and real-time display logic are stored in NAND, cold start conditions may lead to delayed data access and error in display artifacts. As these clusters are more visible to the drivers, any inconsistencies reduce user confidence in the vehicle’s reliability and performance.
D. Autonomous Driving System
Also known as self-driving or driverless, it is a system that performs full or partial vehicle control by using sensor fusion, cameras, AI (Artificial-Intelligence), and real-time control algorithms. A vast number of trained models and real-time data are stored in a NAND flash. These autonomous systems require deterministic behavior and any read errors due to temperature shifts, would cause impact in AI decision making and might lead to system reboot and creates safety risks. Advanced memory management techniques like dynamic voltage scaling and ECC are essential to help ensure the right data is accessed while keeping the vehicle’s autonomous functions uncompromised.
E. EDR (Event Data Recorder)
It is a similar device like a “black box” that is used in flights, which stores vehicle data including status and control actions taken before and after a crash or unexpected event. Critical data such as speed, brake status, airbag deployment and their timestamps are logged into NAND. These data are to remain intact after the event. Any corrupted record in NAND due to cross temperature condition affects the post accidental investigations.
F. BCM (Body Control Module)
This controls and monitors the vehicle's body features such as lighting, door locks, windows, and HVAC systems.

Storing control firmware, configuration data, and diagnostic logs typically use NAND. BCM firmware must be stable across all temperature conditions, as failures may impact critical comfort and safety functions. Data retention loss due to temperature changes may go unnoticed until a system anomaly is seen.
G. BMS (Battery Management system)
This system is responsible for monitoring and controlling battery parameters like charge level, temperature, voltage, and current of EV vehicles. Real time operation logs, calibration maps for diagnostics, and performance tuning are stored in NAND. As battery components themselves undergo wide temperature swings, NAND used here in BMS are directly exposed. This leads to improper charge/discharge calibrations and wrong indication of battery state.
H. Motor and Powertrain ECU (Electronic Control Unit)
These systems are responsible for controlling key vehicle functions like propulsion, engine performance, and transmission. They rely on fast, reliable access to large volumes of data for real-time decision-making, which include firmware and control algorithms, calibration data for different driving conditions, and real-time data to support decision-making. As these ECUs operate in harsh environments—high temperatures, vibration, and power fluctuations, NAND reliability is critical. Errors here can lead to miscalculations in engine timing, fuel efficiency, or emission control, affecting performance and safety. Features like error correction and wear leveling are to be used to ensure consistent operation and keep the system running reliable.
III. MITIGATION PROPOSALS FOR CROSS-TEMPERATURE
EFFECT
There is a significant challenge in automotive applications due to the wide temperature ranges experienced in vehicles. Cars can experience extreme temperature swings, from freezing in winter to scorching heat in summer. These temperature fluctuations directly impact the operation of NAND flash memory, which is critical for storing data in various vehicle systems. To overcome the effect of cross temperature there are multiple methodologies which can be adopted in isolation or in combination depending upon the temperature fluctuations anticipated and the application in use – the criticality of data and so on [5]. In this paper we are discussing about algorithms that fall under four major categories as follows.
A. REAL TIME THERMAL COMPENSATION
Thermal Throttling
NAND flash has a self-regulating mechanism to throttle its own performance if the temperature exceeds a critical threshold. This will allow the NAND to cool down and return to normal operating temperature [6]. This feature is called thermal throttling. The host – in this case the ECU can also monitor the temperature and control the throttling through HCTM (Host Controlled Thermal Management). This feature can be enabled or disabled through set feature command. In addition, the NAND controller also has temperature monitoring and throttling mechanisms for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:00:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

cooling down and operating at nominal temperatures, which is called DITM (Device Initiated Thermal Management). Through this mechanism we can make sure that the write/read happens almost at nominal temperature range – though it is not guaranteed.
The thermal throttling is determined by multiple temperature samples taken from different modules which includes - PCB, ECU, and NAND. This is to take care of the thermal protection of each important component. Each thermal subsystem has its own thermal models with different sets of thresholds. Thermal arbiter will issue thermal throttling based on the worst case.
Fig. 2. Sample thresholds used in Thermal Throttling response curve
The composite temperature is derived from a formula based on the temperature measured at NAND, ECU, and ambient temperature. Based on the thermal throttling principles – there are multiple such thresholds - TMT (Thermal Monitoring Thresholds) defined and conditions/throttle mechanism for each threshold. Some of these thresholds could mean they would operate in states with reduced functionalities or workloads. Whereas higher temperatures could mean that the ECU could enter nonoperational mode with time for it to cool down completely. When the temperature reaches extreme level – it will be configured to result in the thermal shutdown of the corresponding module.
The formula for the composite temperature, TM thresholds and corresponding actions can be optimized specific to the ECU positioning on the automotive, application requirements, and anticipated temperature fluctuation. Figure 2 above shows a sample representation of how to have various levels of throttling based on multiple TMT of temperature.
Dynamic Vth Tracking This method is based on the development of a dynamic algorithm that exploits the synergy of the 3D-TLC NAND Flash memory, namely the CTDVT (Cross-Temperature ∆VTH Tracking) algorithm. The ECU detects the presence of the cross-temperature condition (mostly by using the onboard temperature sensors) and decides whether we are in positive or negative cross-temperature. Then, the CTDVT algorithm is executed. The algorithm, like the MRR(Moving

Read Reference) approach, selects from a look-up table stored in the local memory buffer for the optimal ∆VR offset for each read reference to be applied on the read voltages. The application of the algorithm after endurance stress can improve the reliability of the memory keeping the failure bits count always below the threshold of the ECC (Error Correction Code) correction capabilities [7].
CVD (Cell Voltage Distribution)
CVD Tracking is a system solution that manages read level offsets in order to minimize read errors [8]. CVD uses a concept called TT (Time Tags) – which are the main structure used to maintain read parameters for various blocks. TTs contain read parameters such as the dynamic read shifts that should be used (most relevant for TLC). By looking up what TT a read location belongs to, ECU firmware can find what read parameters to use. CVD Tracking is used for both SLC and TLC blocks, although TLC is the main focus (since TLC BER is much higher than SLC BER).
CVD uses Temperature zones for handling temperature swings. When blocks are programmed, they are assigned to a TT belonging to the current temperature zone (or a TT will be created in this zone). This is to group blocks with similar program temperatures since having large variations in program temperature can lead to different optimal read levels. Firmware periodically fetches the NAND temperature and uses this info to determine the current temperature zone.
Heat watch
The key idea of HeatWatch algorithm is to optimize the read reference voltage, i.e., the voltage applied to the cell during a read operation, by adapting it to the dwell time of the workload and the current operating temperature. [9]
HeatWatch algorithm:
• Efficiently tracks flash memory temperature and dwell time online
• Sends this information to the reliability model to predict the current voltages of flash cells
• Predicts the optimal read reference voltage based on the current cell voltages.
This technique bases on a unified model called URT (Unified Recovery and Temperature) which consists of three components - the impact of temperature and wear out on program variation, impact of temperature on data retention and self-recovery and the impact of time, wear out, and selfrecovery on retention loss. HeatWatch uses URT to dynamically adapt the read reference voltage to the data retention time, dwell time, NAND temperature, and wear out and greatly reduces the raw bit error rate and improves flash lifetime. The main disadvantage of using HeatWatch would be storage overhead – for storing the temperature, dwell time and programing temperature for at least the last 20 writes and latency overhead – Regular logging of the acceleration factor based on temperature and the computation of URT model would contribute to the latency.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:00:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. DATA INTEGRITY AND RETENTION RECOVERY Background Data Relocation based on Temperature Variations The core concept here is to refresh/relocate the data based
on the temperature difference detected. When data is written to NAND flash – the programming temperature is also to be recorded. Based on periodic update received – if the temperature change exceeds a specific threshold, ECU firmware can relocate the data from blocks written at different temperature zones as part of background operations. To achieve this, a module in backend should record the program temperatures of various blocks, take the current NAND temperature, categorize those blocks falling under risk category, and schedule for background relocation [10].
By doing so, we can make sure the read and write are happening at almost the same temperature and would not require complex algorithms for updating the read levels and so on.
The main drawback here would be • High temperature fluctuations increase the relocation
count. • More relocation may increase the PEC, consume
more power, and degrade performance HTDR – Hot Temperature Data Retention There is a need to detect and compensate for the influence of HTDR (Hot Temperature Data Retention) on systems running for extended periods under hot temperature conditions [11]. Many of the existing mechanisms take care of X-temp effects while reading/write/power on. This algorithm covers the possibility of data retention effect appearing in run time under extreme hot conditions or in case of deep sleep at hot temperatures.
Fig. 3. Flowchart of HTDR

This mechanism utilizes the block population split - to separate block populations that suffered HTDR since the differences between them become very significant. In case this block population is not split, it leads to significant performance drop and may result in read errors since the system couldn’t provide optimal read levels for mixed populations.
HTDR provides a solution for distinguishing and separating the programmed TLC/QLC blocks on a device that is either powered or in deep sleep without HW or SW reset. The primary goal of this method is to detect stress effects on block populations that were written prior to the device being powered down. This is because automotive storage devices don’t have a metric of time being out of power and are also not aware of the environmental conditions while being out of power.
HTDR detection will be invoked when the system gets notification when reaching the hot temperature zone. This hot temperature zone with the lowest threshold may be configurable. Figure 3 explains the high-level flow of HTDR detection followed by the temperature tag assignment or allocation.
C. ERROR MARGIN RECOVERY
Secondary ECC and soft bit mechanism
Secondary ECC in NAND flash memory is a strategy
employed to mitigate data loss due to retention errors, which
can accumulate over time and exceed the capacity of primary
ECC to correct [12]. This involves refreshing data or
applying other techniques to minimize the number of
uncorrectable errors. ECC can be achieved by the following
strategies.
• Data Refresh: This involves periodically reading data, correcting any errors using the primary ECC, and
rewriting the corrected data back to the flash cells.
• Utilizing WI (Word line Interference) to Recharge Cells: This involves using the WI to recharge retention-
failed cells, reducing retention errors and improving
ECC correction capabilities.
• Optimizing Rewriting with Program Verify Voltage: Adaptively increasing the program verify voltage
during the rewriting process can help extend retention
time.
• Hybrid Approaches: Combining multiple techniques to maximize data retention and minimize uncorrectable
errors. Soft-decision ECC is increasingly used in NAND flash memory to enhance data retention and reliability, especially with the scaling of technology and the use of multi-bit per cell storage. Soft-decision ECCs, like LDPC(Low Density Parity Check) codes, allow for more robust error correction compared to traditional hard-decision ECCs by leveraging soft information from the memory sensing process. While these powerful codes offer improved error correction, they can also introduce latency overhead. However, techniques like lossless data compression can help mitigate this latency penalty.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:00:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

D. Future Developments
ML Based approach for X-temp Mitigation
An ML-based approach can predict and improve data retention in NAND flash memory by modeling the impact of temperature variations and other factors. By using machine learning, engineers can better predict data retention times, optimize NAND flash memory operations, and potentially extend the lifespan of memory cells.
Machine learning algorithms can be trained to model the relationship between temperature and data retention time. For example, neural networks can be used to predict the retention time based on factors like temperature, number of program/erase cycles (P/E cycles), and the type of NAND flash technology (e.g., SLC, MLC, TLC). Once trained, the ML model can predict data retention time under various temperature scenarios. This information can be used to optimize memory operations, such as wear-leveling and error correction, to minimize data loss and extend the lifespan of NAND flash cells. Few strategies could include
• Predicting Degradation
• Optimizing operations (wear levelling)
• Adaptive ECC
• Predicting optimal decoding modes In automotive applications, where NAND flash is used
for storage and booting, temperature variations can be significant. ML can help predict and mitigate the impact of these variations on data retention. But adapting ML for the predictive algorithms to mitigate the effects of X-temp in the automotive sector is in a very early phase and will evolve over time.
IV. CONCLUSION
The expanding use of NAND flash memory in modern automotive systems from safety critical ECUs in ADAS to data-heavy infotainment systems and other applications makes it essential to address the challenges posed by crosstemperature effects. This study highlights the critical impact of cross-temperature effects on NAND flash reliability, endurance, and performance in automotive applications. By looking at how NAND flash is used across various automotive applications, we’ve shown how thermal vulnerabilities affect different system, depending on workload and system design. We also explored several ways that reduces these temperature-related problems, like thermal throttling, adaptive data relocation/refresh, and HTDR. While these techniques offer meaningful improvements, they require careful integration with the overall system’s to be fully effective.
Building more reliable NAND-based storage systems for automotive depends on the integration between hardware design, firmware algorithms, and how applications manage heat. As vehicles become more advanced, research into thermal modeling and optimizations will be essential. These efforts can make flash memory more resilient, helping it to maintain performance and durability demands of automotive and other systems.

REFERENCES
[1] K. Cho, K.-S. We, C.-G. Lee, and K. Kim, “Using NAND flash memory for executing large volume real-time programs in automotive embedded systems”, in 10th International Conference on Embedded software (EMSOFT), Oct. 2010, pp. 159–168. doi: 10.1145/1879021.1879043.
[2] N. Righetti and G. Puzzilli, "2D vs 3D NAND technology: Reliability benchmark," 2017 IEEE International Integrated Reliability Workshop (IIRW), South Lake Tahoe, CA, USA, 2017, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/IIRW.2017.8361235.
[3] H. Wang, "Challenges in Automotive Memory Solutions," 2018 IEEE International Memory Workshop (IMW), Kyoto, Japan, 2018, pp. 1-7, doi: 10.1109/IMW.2018.8388782.
[4] T. Yamauchi, Y. Yamaguchi, T. Kono and H. Hidaka, "Embedded flash technology for automotive applications," 2016 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), San Francisco, CA, USA, 2016, pp. 28.6.1-28.6.4, doi: 10.1109/IEDM.2016.7838501.
[5] C. Zambelli, L. Crippa, R. Micheloni and P. Olivo, "CrossTemperature Effects of Program and Read Operations in 2D and 3D NAND Flash Memories," 2018 International Integrated Reliability Workshop (IIRW), South Lake Tahoe, CA, USA, 2018, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/IIRW.2018.8727102.
[6] H. Zhang, E. Thompson, N. Ye, D. Nissim, S. Chi and H. Takiar, "SSD Thermal Throttling Prediction using Improved Fast Prediction Model," 2019 18th IEEE Intersociety Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems (ITherm), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2019, pp. 1016-1019, doi: 10.1109/ITHERM.2019.8757319.
[7] C. Zambelli, E. Ferro, L. Crippa, R. Micheloni and P. Olivo, "Dynamic VTH Tracking for Cross-Temperature Suppression in 3DTLC NAND Flash," 2019 IEEE International Integrated Reliability Workshop (IIRW), South Lake Tahoe, CA, USA, 2019, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/IIRW47491.2019.8989886.
[8] Z. Fan, G. Cai, G. Han, W. Liu and Y. Fang, "Cell-State-DistributionAssisted Threshold Voltage Detector for NAND Flash Memory," in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 576-579, April 2019, doi: 10.1109/LCOMM.2019.2900677.
[9] Y. Luo, S. Ghose, Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch and O. Mutlu, "HeatWatch: Improving 3D NAND Flash Memory Device Reliability by Exploiting Self-Recovery and Temperature Awareness," 2018 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), Vienna, Austria, 2018, pp. 504-517, doi: 10.1109/HPCA.2018.00050.
[10] M. Nishi et al., "NAND Flash Memory-Based SSD Controller Using Full Page-Associative Block Recycling Mechanism," 2011 3rd IEEE International Memory Workshop (IMW), Monterey, CA, USA, 2011, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/IMW.2011.5873200.
[11] Z. Xia et al., "Comprehensive modeling of NAND flash memory reliability: Endurance and data retention," 2012 IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium (IRPS), Anaheim, CA, USA, 2012, pp. MY.5.1-MY.5.4, doi: 10.1109/IRPS.2012.6241922.
[12] J. Xiao-bo, T. Xue-qing and H. Wei-pei, "Novel ECC structure and evaluation method for NAND flash memory," 2015 28th IEEE International System-on-Chip Conference (SOCC), Beijing, China, 2015, pp. 100-104, doi: 10.1109/SOCC.2015.7406921.
[13] D. Kenjić and M. Antić, "Connectivity Challenges in Automotive Solutions," in IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 53-59, 1 Sept. 2023, doi: 10.1109/MCE.2022.3183807.
[14] H. Shin, M. Oh, J. Choi, T. Song and J. Kye, "A 28nm Embedded Flash Memory with 100MHz Read Operation and 7.42Mb/mm2 at 0.85V featuring for Automotive Application," 2021 Symposium on VLSI Circuits, Kyoto, Japan, 2021, pp. 1-2, doi: 10.23919/VLSICircuits52068.2021.9492384.
[15] X. Zou et al., "Simulation on threshold voltage of L-shaped bottom select transistor in 3D NAND flash memory," 2016 13th IEEE International Conference on Solid-State and Integrated Circuit Technology (ICSICT), Hangzhou, China, 2016, pp. 1122-1124, doi: 10.1109/ICSICT.2016.7998670.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:00:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

