IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 72, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

1077

A Comparative Analysis of Radiation Tolerance in Charge-Trap and Floating-Gate 3-D NAND Memory Technologies
Mondol Anik Kumar , Student Member, IEEE, Matchima Buddhanoy, Student Member, IEEE, and Biswajit Ray, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— In this article, we present a comparative investigation of total-ionizing-dose (TID) effects on 3-D floating-gate (FG) and charge-trap (CT) memory technologies. FG 64-layer 3-D NAND technology is found to be more sensitive to TID effects than CT 176-layer and 128-layer 3-D NAND chips under identical irradiation conditions. However, irradiated CT memory loses information substantially faster than FG counterparts during room-temperature retention. We explain the observed characteristics based on differences in fundamental cell geometry, discrete charge storage mechanism, and charge diffusion in trap-rich and continuous charge storage layers.
Index Terms— 3-D NAND, charge-trap (CT), floating-gate (FG), total-ionizing-dose (TID).
I. INTRODUCTION
THE 3-D NAND Flash memory technology has emerged as the industry’s primary solution for high-density, nonvolatile data storage applications [1], [2]. Manufactured through a monolithic layer-by-layer deposition process, contemporary memory chips possess an impressive total of over 232 layers. Thus, the bit density continues to increase with every new generation of 3-D NAND Flash memory chips, driven by an increase in the number of vertical layers (3-D scaling) and logical scaling that allows for storing 2, 3, or 4 bits of data per a single memory cell [3]. Mainstream 3-D NAND architectures feature a vertical channel gate-allaround (GAA) cell design, where cells are positioned at the intersection of horizontal metal plates and vertical poly-silicon cylinders or pillars. Commercially available memory chips primarily employ two storage elements: floating-gate (FG) and charge-trap (CT) cells. In FG cells, a poly-Si conductive storage node acts as an isolated island surrounded by dielectric layers. Conversely, CT cells utilize a continuous silicon nitride
Received 9 November 2024; revised 17 December 2024 and 8 January 2025; accepted 11 January 2025. Date of publication 14 January 2025; date of current version 18 April 2025. This work was supported in part by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Energy, under DOE Idaho Operations Office Contract DEAC07-051D14517; in part by the Nuclear Science User Facilities Experiment; and in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant 2346853, Grant 2317563, Grant 2423249, and Grant 2403540. (Corresponding author: Biswajit Ray.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523 USA (e-mail: mondol_anik.kumar@colostate.edu; matchima.buddhanoy@colostate.edu; biswajit.ray@colostate.edu).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TNS.2025.3529821.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNS.2025.3529821

(Si3N4) storage layer, trapping electronic charges in highly dense trap sites. CT cell technology, with its unique gate-last processing steps, offers inherent benefits for future scalability and hence the industry trend leans toward adopting CT cell structures for the next-generation 3-D NAND.
Several investigations have been carried out to understand the total-ionizing-dose (TID) response of both 2-D and 3-D NAND Flash memory technologies in the past and in recent times [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]. Both FG and CT Flash memory are found to be quite sensitive to TID. However, a comprehensive understanding of the differences in TID response between 3-D FG and 3-D CT memories remains elusive. The question of which of these two technologies is more tolerant to TID effects remains unclear, as no investigations have been conducted on these distinct technologies under identical irradiation conditions. Bagatin et al. [13] recently demonstrated TID effects introduced by X-rays on the cell distribution of CT 3-D NAND triple-level-cell (TLC) chips and compared it with gamma-ray-induced TID response [12] of FG 3-D NAND chips. Their findings highlight cell threshold voltage (Vth) distribution changes with TID in both cases, with the most notable difference between CT and FG cells being the distinct position of the neutral threshold voltage level. Although their study sheds significant light on TID response in these two types of technology, it does not offer a conclusive answer regarding the TID sensitivity between the two technologies.
This article aims to provide a comparative analysis of the TID response of 3-D CT and FG NAND Flash cells under identical irradiation conditions. We use commercial-off-theshelf (COTS) FG and CT 3-D NAND Flash memory chips exposed to the same Co-60 gamma source, comparing the TID effects in terms of the raw bit error rate (RBER). While other performance metrics like endurance, latency, and energy consumption are relevant, our primary evaluation criterion for comparing the radiation response between FG and CT NAND technologies is the RBER, as it is the most direct indicator of data integrity. We present a layer-dependent RBER trend between these two technologies, revealing a distinct pattern divided into two physical halves due to the dual-deck stacking technology. We also compare post-irradiation annealing effects on the stored data at room temperature revealing a striking difference between CT and FG technologies in terms of

0018-9499 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1078

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 72, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

room-temperature annealing behavior. We provide a plausible explanation for the different TID sensitivity of 3-D FG and CT cells based on differences in fundamental cell geometry, discrete charge storage mechanism, and charge diffusion in trap-rich and continuous charge storage layers. The results provide valuable guidance for selecting the appropriate 3-D NAND technology for radiation-prone environments, tailored to different mission requirements.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section II provides background on 3-D NAND structure and logical encoding of TLC memory. In Section III, details about experimental hardware and the irradiation process are presented. Section IV explains the results of the irradiation experiments and Section V explores the plausible root causes behind the difference between the irradiation responses of the two technologies. The results from the room-temperature observation of the irradiated data from the memories are presented in Section VI. Finally, a discussion on the significance of the findings and implications on the future development of radiation-hard 3-D NAND technologies is presented in Section VII. Section VIII concludes this article.
II. BACKGROUND
Fig. 1(a) represents a simplified cartoon of a 3-D NAND Flash memory block. In 3-D NAND Flash technology, multiple layers of 3-D Flash memory cells are vertically stacked (otherwise known as z-scaling) on top of each other to achieve higher bit density. This is accomplished by stacking multiple metallic word line (WL) layers in the z-direction (the green layers represent the WLs). The vertical purple pillars running through the WL layers represent poly-Si channels forming the NAND string. This is usually done by the reactive ion etching process through the metallic layers/3-D stack. At each cross section of a purple pillar and a WL, a Flash memory cell is formed. In Fig. 1(a), the red bars connecting the channels at the x–z plane at the top of the schematic form the bit lines (BLs) and the yellow bars connecting the channels in the y–z plane form the select gate (SG) transistors. The blue region at the bottom represents the Si substrate. Fig. 1(b) illustrates a simplified Flash memory subblock array [y–z plane of Fig. 1(a)]. Each subblock contains a certain number of Flash pages, while each Flash page consists of several Flash cells, and all the cells in the same row share the same metal WL. The cells in a vertical column are connected to a metal BL via the drain SG (DSG) transistor and to the ground via the source SG (SSG) transistor at the bottom. Thus, the BLs can be pulled down to the ground only if all Flash transistors in the column are active (resembling the operation of the NAND gate). Every WL layer in the 3-D NAND memory block has multiple physical pages. Logical pages consist of Flash cells belonging to the same WL.
Traditional Flash memory cells store one bit of information [single-level cell (SLC)], and they can be in two different Vth states. The read reference voltage (Vref) is set in between the erased state and the programmed state distributions so that there is enough noise margin to correctly identify the cells’ states. Recent advances in controlling the amount of charge on the Flash cell’s gate dielectric and in sensing the charge

via Vth shift of the cell during a read operation allowed for logical scaling, further increasing bit density. Thus, modern Flash memories store 2 bits [multilevel cell (MLC)], 3 bits (TLC), and even 4 and 5 bits (quad-level cell (QLC) and penta-level cell (PLC), respectively) per cell [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21]. Because in TLC memory technology, each cell stores three bits of information, every physical WL of a TLC memory consists of three logical pages. The number of memory cells belonging to a given WL determines the logical page size of the memory chip. The page size usually varies from 2 to 16 kB, depending on the manufacturer. The most significant bits (MSBs) of the logic states of all the memory cells connected to a given WL form the logical MSB page. Similarly, the least significant bits (LSBs) of the logic states of the memory cells from the same WL form the logical LSB page. Finally, the central significant bits (CSBs) of the logic state of each cell form the CSB page.
Since each cell stores three bits of information in TLC storage, eight distinct Vth levels (L0 L7) are created during the programming operation. The digital interpretation of a specific Vth-state level for any physical page is constructed through the underlying encoding with respect to the logical page scheme. Typically, Gray coding is used, where two successive values differ in only one-bit position. Fig. 1(c) and (d) illustrates two different implementations of the Gray coding scheme for TLC memory. The scheme shown in Fig. 1(c) is used in the CT memory chip, whereas the encoding scheme depicted in Fig. 1(d) is used in the FG memory chip used in this work. A cell’s analog Vth value is determined based on the exact encoding scheme and the data in three shared logical pages. For example, if the MSB page stores all-one data, the CSB page stores all-one data, and the LSB page stores all-zero data, the memory cells corresponding to the physical page are programmed to the L5 state in CT memory, whereas in FG technology, the same encoding represents the L7 state.
Even though both CT and FG 3-D NAND technologies rely on monolithic 3-D fabrication processes, their cell structure and gate dielectric stacks are fundamentally different. Fig. 2(a) and (b) compares the vertical cross-sectional structure of a simplified CT and FG 3-D NAND Flash memory array (for simplicity, three consecutive cells of a NAND string are shown). In CT technology, the information is stored in the form of electronic charge trapped in the localized defects of a Si3N4 layer, while in FG technology, the storage medium is polySi. The blue regions represent the gates of each memory cell [referred to as control gates (CGs)]. The red layer in Fig. 2(a) represents the Si3N4-based CT layer, which is continuous across all cells in one column of the 3-D stack, while in Fig. 2(b), the green regions in the FG cells are the conductive poly-Si storage nodes, which are isolated by surrounding dielectric layers—hence called FG nodes. The poly-Si channel is the thin layer around the central oxide core. The empty white regions in Fig. 2 are usually oxides. Ultimately, a Flash cell is a GAA metal-oxide-semiconductor field effect transistor (MOSFET). The impact of total ionizing irradiation on general MOS structure is a well-researched field [22], [23]. Irradiationinduced trapped charge deposition in the oxides of Flash memory cells is ultimately responsible for Vth shifts of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAR et al.: COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF RADIATION TOLERANCE

1079

Fig. 1. (a) Simplified schematic depicting the organization of a 3-D NAND flash memory block. (b) Simplified circuit diagram of a 3-D NAND flash memory subblock structure. (c) and (d) Vth state’s logical encoding in TLC flash memory of CT and FG technologies.

Fig. 3. Experimental setup for the interfacing of 3-D NAND memory chips with the workstation.

loss path through horizontal charge spreading due to lateral diffusion of the stored electrons from trap to trap which adds an extra component of data loss [24], [25], [26].

Fig. 2. Vertical cross section of the 3-D NAND stack from (a) CT technology and (b) FG technology. Simplified GAA structure of 3-D (c) CT and (d) FG cells.
cells, which cause data corruption or read errors during sensing operation after irradiation. The amount of charge deposited in the oxides depends on the oxide volume and electric field. To compare the TID tolerance between these two technologies, it is essential to note the key differences between their cell structures.
Fig. 2(c) and (d) shows a 3-D view of the gate-stack of the CT and FG NAND cell. Electrons are stored on the FG/CT layers during program operation. From the 3-D stack structure, it is evident that FG technology employs a higher volume of dielectric materials per memory cell due to the surrounding nature of the blocking oxides [see Fig. 2(c) and (d)]. The FG node is surrounded by a dielectric layer known as the interpoly-dielectric (IPD) of the oxide-nitride-oxide (ONO) layer. While the surrounding oxide layer enhances charge retention capability, it also increases the total volume of dielectric material per cell. Unlike FG cells, the continuous nature of the trap-rich CT layer offers an additional charge

III. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
The experimental evaluation was performed on COTS 3-D NAND Flash memory chips with TLC technology. The chips from FG technology have 64 layers, while the chips from CT technology have 128 and 176 layers. The part numbers and other specific details of the chips are given in Table I. The chips were programmed with random data patterns just before the irradiation. The gamma irradiation experiment was performed at the Ohio State University Nuclear Reactor Laboratory [27] using an underwater Co-60 source at a dose rate of 11.7 krad(Si)/h. The chips went through a 10-krad(Si) total dose of gamma irradiation each time. There was a time gap of approximately 1 h between each dose of irradiation and the data readout. A total of 30 krad(Si) of gamma irradiation was applied. During irradiation, all the pins of the chips were grounded. Irradiation on the chips was applied from all directions. To interface the raw NAND chip with the computer, we have used a custom-designed hardware board (see Fig. 3). The hardware setup allows us to access raw memory bits without error correction.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. TID-Induced RBER on Logical Pages
Measured data is then compared with the originally programmed random data pattern to quantify the TID-induced RBER. In Fig. 4, the measured RBER percentages of the logical memory pages (LSB, CSB, and MSB) from FG and CT chips at different TID values are presented. Fig. 4(a)–(d) depicts the page-level RBER for an FG memory block,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1080

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 72, NO. 4, APRIL 2025
TABLE I SPECIFICATIONS OF THE CHIPS

whereas Fig. 4(e)–(h) and (i)–(l) shows the page-level RBER for a CT memory block from 176-layer and 128-layer technologies, respectively.
Several important observations can be made from Fig. 4. First, RBER increases monotonically with increasing doses of TID for both FG and CT memory technologies. Second, among the logical pages, the MSB pages show the highest susceptibility to TID-induced data corruption in the chip from FG technology, while the LSB (CSB) pages exhibit the highest error rate in the chip from 176-layer (128-layer) CT technology after each dose of irradiation. Third, there is significant variability in TID-induced RBER among the logical pages. Lastly, we observe a significantly higher increase in the RBER for FG technology compared to CT technology.
The reason behind the MSB pages being the most error-prone during irradiation lies in the intrinsic Vth-state encoding of the FG memory technology shown in Fig. 1(d). During total ionizing irradiation, the L7 state undergoes the highest amount of Vth loss and distribution widening [8]. Consequently, most of the cells of a physical page that cross the read reference voltage (Vref) in terms of Vth lowering are the cells in the L7 state downshifting to the L6 state. Now, the logical encoding of L7 and L6 states in FG memory technology is “110” and “010,” respectively. When the L7 state cells downshift to the L6 state, the MSBs are changed in logical encoding (from 1 to 0). As a result, these bit flips show up as higher error bits in logical MSB pages.
Among the logical pages of the 176-layer CT memory block, LSB pages are more prone to corruption during irradiation. Fig. 4(e)–(h) shows that LSB pages exhibit the highest number of error bits with each dose of irradiation. This distinct behavior of the CT memory cells can also be explained by its logical Vth-state encoding. The logical encoding of L7 and L6 states (“101” and “100,” respectively) are quite different in the case of CT memory compared to FG technology [see Fig. 1(c)]. The L7 state, being the highest Vth state, contains the highest number of electrons in the CT layer which makes it the most affected during irradiation. When the cells in the L7 state undergo downshifts in their Vth and cross the Vref between L7 and L6, their logical encoding of the LSB is flipped (from 1 to 0). LSB flips in these cells show up as the highest bit errors in the logical LSB pages.
Fig. 4(i)–(l) shows the irradiation-induced RBER among the logical pages of the 128-layer CT memory block. The 128-layer CT memory chip is from the same manufacturer, where CSB pages are more prone to bit errors, unlike the 176-layer chip. This slightly different trend of the 128-layer CT memory chip may be explained through the CT memory chips’ logical encoding of the Vth state as illustrated in

Fig. 1(c). Note that CSB bits flip in total three times among adjacent states (L1 to L2, L3 to L4, and L5 to L6). A higher number of CSB flips in these adjacent states’ encoding has a higher possibility of erroneous flips during irradiation. Consequently, it can be said that erroneous bit flips of logical pages are driven by more than one factor.
We extracted the layer information of the commercial chips under investigation from the datasheets obtained from the official websites [28], [29]. The 64-layer Micron FG chip has 2304 logical pages in each block. The first and last layers of any block contain only SLC storage. The second and 63rd layer of each block contains LSB and MSB pages (MLC storage) and the rest are TLC storage (LSB, CSB, and MSB). We tracked the corresponding logical page numbers of SLC, MLC, and TLC pages and constructed 12 subblocks of the memory block. From each block, we can figure out the layer number information of any LSB, CSB, and MSB pages. The 128-layer Hynix chip and 176-layer Hynix chip have four subblocks and eight subblocks, respectively. Since logical page numbers are designed sequentially in a layer-first fashion, we can uniquely identify the layer number for each logical page.
Fig. 5(a)–(c) displays the layer-by-layer worst case RBER after 30 krad(Si) of irradiation. Lower layer numbers indicate the bottom region of the 3-D stack and higher layer numbers indicate the top layers of the 3-D stack. The worst case RBER is indicated by the RBER from the most affected logical page of a logical layer. For the FG chip, the worst case RBER mostly originates from MSB pages, whereas the worst case RBER is found in the LSB pages for the 176layer CT chip and CSB pages for the 128-layer CT chip. Two important observations can be made from Fig. 5. First, there is significant variability across different layers in terms of the RBER. Second, an abrupt discontinuity in the RBER trend is observed right at the middle layer of the 3-D stack for both CT and FG technologies. Fig. 5(a) shows an abrupt jump in the RBER near the middle layers of the FG memory chip. In Fig. 5(b) and (c), the RBER trend of the CT memory chip also shows abrupt discontinuity around the middle layers.
The variability of the page RBER responses among different layers originates from unavoidable process variation among physical memory layers during fabrication. When the channel hole is etched with the reactive ion etching process, the memory hole ends up in a tapered shape due to the high aspect ratio (HAR) of the etching process. Stacking so many layers in the tapered 3-D stack results in imperfect and different cell shapes and geometries across the layers [9], [30], [31], [32].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAR et al.: COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF RADIATION TOLERANCE

1081

Fig. 4. TID-induced [0–30 krad(Si)] bit error percentages in the logical pages (LSB, CSB, and MSB) of the (a)–(d) 64-layer FG memory chip and (e)–(h) 176-layer and (i)–(l) 128-layer CT memory chips.

Fig. 5. Layer-by-layer worst case RBER of the (a) FG memory block from a 64-layer chip and (b) and (c) CT memory blocks from 176- and 128-layer chips, respectively. (d) Conceptual cartoon of a dual-deck 3-D stack.

Dual-deck stacking technology is currently adopted by most 3-D NAND manufacturers for increasing the number of vertical layers [33], [34]. A conceptual cartoon depicting the dual-deck vertical layer stacks along with the tapered shape of the channel hole is illustrated in Fig. 5(d). The lower deck is first fabricated using HAR etching, and then the upper deck is fabricated following a similar etching process. Thus, dual-deck technology provides a pathway to fabricate more vertical layers without significantly increasing the aspect ratio of the HAR etching process. The signature of the dual-deck process is evident for the FG chip, which exhibits a sudden RBER jump around the middle layer of the stack as shown in Fig. 5(a). Similarly, such an upshift shift is apparent in the case of the CT chips [see Fig. 5(b) and (c)]. Because both decks of the 3-D stack exhibit a tapered shape of the channel hole gradually at the end due to an inefficient

reactive-ion-etching, the dual-deck joint region layers of the 3-D NAND, the tapered end of the first deck, and the start of the next deck may be more defective in the case of the CT chips under investigation. The characteristics of the dual-deck stack are highly dependent on the process and the sequence they are deposited. Finally, a comparison of Fig. 5(a)–(c) reveals that the overall TID-induced RBER of the CT chips is lower for each vertical layer, indicating higher robustness of CT chips compared to FG technology under irradiation.
B. Summary of TID-Induced RBER: Chip-to-Chip Variation
Fig. 6 summarizes the TID-induced RBER on several FG and CT memory chips that were used in this experiment. It is noticeable from Fig. 6 that at each dose point, the RBER values for each chip show a spread, which is a signature of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1082

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 72, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Fig. 7. Planar band diagram showing irradiation-induced e–h pair generation and hole deposition in a flash cell from (a) FG technology and (b) CT technology.

Fig. 6. Summary of TID-induced RBER from several 3-D NAND chips of FG (64-layer) and CT (128-layer and 176-layer) memory technologies.
process variation and statistical variability of responses among chips (the standard deviations are indicated by horizontal bars). The RBER spread is increasing with the increase in irradiation dose. However, chips from the same (FG/CT) technology show an approximately similar RBER response to TID. Each dose point in this plot is derived from 16 different memory blocks, and there is an increase in block-to-block RBER variation with higher TID. Notably, the RBER has increased with the rising dose of TID for both technologies, but the RBER is significantly lower in the CT chips compared to the FG NAND chips. In 3-D NAND Flash technology, state-ofthe-art peripheral circuitry employing error correction codes (ECCs) are used to detect and correct bit errors of Flash memory, for example, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, which are widely used in modern Flash chips. Usually, the RBER limit for the ECC to faithfully correct the raw bits is approximately 0.1%. Fig. 6 clearly shows that, in the case of both FG and CT technologies, even after the very first dose of 10 krad(Si), RBER rises beyond the correction limit. Overall, comparing the RBER responses from the chips of both technologies, CT chips turn out more robust in a gamma radiation environment. As in Fig. 6, the total RBER response of the CT chips up to 30 krad(Si) is significantly lower than the FG chips. The unique physical structure of CT memory cells as well as the 3-D stack stands out to be the dominant reason behind the CT chips being more resilient in ionizing radiation environments.
V. ROOT CAUSE ANALYSIS
In this section, we provide plausible hypotheses for the higher TID sensitivity of 3-D FG memory technology compared to 3-D CT memory technology. Fig. 7 shows the irradiation impacts on an FG cell and a CT cell through a simplified planar band diagram. When a 3-D NAND chip is irradiated, electron–hole pairs are created in the dielectric layers. Electrons, being very mobile [22], [23], are readily swept away because of the oxide electric field created by the

stored electrons. On the other hand, a fraction of the generated holes get recombined with generated electrons. The other remaining/unrecombined fraction of the holes are the ones that are trapped in the localized defects in the oxides. Some of them can hop from trap to trap and toward the oxide-storage interface and may get trapped in the deeper defects near the interface. Both trapped holes decrease the net negative charge of the cell and cause loss of information by lowering the cell Vth. The holes that are not trapped in the oxides can reach the storage layer and annihilate stored electrons (FG layer/CT layer) or get trapped in localized defects (CT layer), which again causes a lowering of net negative charge and thus Vth loss. In CT cells, electron–hole pairs can be created even in the Si3N4 layer, where both electrons and holes can be trapped in the localized defects. Stored electrons in the FG/CT layer can also be stimulated to higher energy by irradiation and the electrons can hop over the barrier and get lost toward the CG/poly-Si substrate. The FG cells show higher charge loss under ionizing irradiation for the following reasons.
First, FG memory cells have more dielectric volume per cell compared to similar-sized (same gate-stack thickness) CT memory cells. A higher volume fraction of dielectric in FG cells leads to a greater amount of electron–hole pair creation during irradiation and a greater number of hole yields. This increased hole yield in FG cells makes them more sensitive to TID-induced Vth shift. The distinct difference in the cell structure of CT and FG cells results in lower data corruption in CT cells. The chips in our study are commercial and the details of the cell structures/technologies are not available. Moreover, as the Vth measurement techniques are not available for all the chips, we are unable to present an exact quantitative estimate of the Vth shifts due to irradiation. In general, TID-induced charge (hole) yield (nh) in the oxide layers can be calculated by [8]
nh = [ f (Eox) × gSiO2 vox + f (Ebox) × gSiO2 vbox] × TID. (1)
Here, Eox and Ebox are the oxide electric fields, f (Eox) and f (Ebox) are the probability of charge yield in tunnel oxide and blocking oxide, respectively, gSiO2 = 8.1 × 1012/rad/cm3 is the experimentally measured ionization constant value for SiO2, vox is the tunnel oxide volume, and vbox is the blocking oxide volume for a memory cell. It should be noted here that (1) is illustrative for understanding the experimental trend and is discussed here only for an empirical estimate. Fraction

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAR et al.: COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF RADIATION TOLERANCE

1083

of Co-60-induced charge yield in SiO2 can be found in [23] and [36]. Taking [23] and [36] as references, we can estimate the Vth shift of the highest state using (1). It should be noted that the oxide field of the highest TLC Vth state is very high (≫1 MV/cm) [35] making the charge yield very close to 1. Assuming typical gate-stack dimensions (12 nm of the blocking oxide and 8 nm of the tunneling oxide) along with perfect cylindrical structure [as indicated in Fig. 2(c) and (d)] for both FG and CT cells [35], our calculation reveals that the FG cell may have approximately 20% more oxide volume per cell. From the estimation of the number of holes yielded, we find the Vth shift of an FG cell after 30 krad(Si) is 12% more than that of a CT cell when the cell is programmed in the highest TLC state. So, extra oxide volumes around the FG layer could be one of the reasons for the higher TID sensitivity of FG cells.
Second, the charge storage layers of FG and CT technologies are quite different. In an FG memory cell, the stored electrons reside in the conduction band (CB) of the so-called floating poly-Si layer. Consequently, these electrons, already being very conductive/mobile, are more susceptible to displacement or removal through irradiation-induced photoemission. In contrast, in CT memory cells, a large fraction of the electrons is deeply trapped in the nitride layer. A fraction of the shallow trapped electrons may undergo photoemission and the electrons residing close to the oxide–nitride interface can be annihilated by the holes moving from the oxide. In general, electrons close to the CB of the CT layer should be more prone to thermal emission. But all the electrons stored in the FG layer surface are basically free electrons moving along the surface, whereas the majority of CT electrons are locally trapped electrons that require a certain amount of energy to de-trap them in the first place [37], [38], which make the FG electrons more probable to get thermally emitted.
Third, annihilation of the stored electrons in the FG layer is easier for the moving holes from the oxides, as electrons mostly reside on the FG surface. In a CT cell, electrons being trapped in uniformly distributed defects in the nitride layer require more time to get annihilated by holes. Ultimately, during irradiation, the net reduction of the stored negative charge is comparatively less in a CT memory cell.
Finally, the loss of stored negative charge is mostly from hole injection into the FG/CT layer. However, there might be some other differentiating factors like relative differences in charge capture/neutralization behavior between preexisting or irradiation-induced defect density at the oxide–Si3N4 and oxide–FG interfaces. Unlike conventional MOS structures [39], the precise nature of these interface defects in the devices under test is not well characterized and is, therefore, beyond the scope of this comparison.
VI. ROOM-TEMPERATURE ANNEALING
After the Co-60 irradiation experiments, we preserved the 3-D NAND chips at room temperature for several months and continued monitoring the irradiated data. The experimental results are summarized in Fig. 8(a)–(c). Although CT memory chips showed higher resilience to irradiation, the postirradiation data retention property of the irradiated CT memory

chip is significantly degraded compared to the irradiated FG memory chip. Even though both the chips went through 30-krad(Si) irradiation, there might be varying components including the annealing of defects over time, with this retention behavior.
Irradiated MOS transistor exhibits room-temperature annealing of the TID effects. Immediately after irradiation, neutralization of trapped holes in the gate dielectric layer begins primarily due to electron tunneling from the transistor channel region. Typically, irradiated n-channel MOS transistors’ Vth increases due to the neutralization of trapped holes. The rate of annealing strongly depends on the bias condition of the channel. If the channel is inverted (n-channel), the annealing rate will be higher due to the presence of a large number of electrons. However, if the channel is kept at the depletion state, the rate of annealing will be slow. Note that the channel of an unbiased Flash memory cell which is programmed with stored electrons remains in the depletion state during room-temperature annealing. Thus, we expect negligible annealing effects or charge gain in the irradiated Flash memory cells. The annealing data of the FG NAND chip supports this slow annealing. In fact, we observe charge loss from the FG cell due to its inherent charge leakage mechanism from the FG due to trap-assisted tunneling.
The quicker charge loss behavior of the irradiated data of the CT chips can be explained through their unique charge loss processes over time. Because of the continuous CT layer, charge spreading from the storage node degrades its room-temperature retention characteristics. Charge spreading is accelerated if neighboring cells have asymmetric Vth state. Typically, electrons from the high Vth state (e.g., L7) diffuse toward the neighboring low Vth state (L0). The interlayer region plays a crucial role in charge spreading. Typically, the interlayer region is charge-neutral. However, if holes are present in the interlayer, it will significantly accelerate charge spreading from the neighboring cells. TID effects may introduce holes in the interlayer region as illustrated in Fig. 9. During irradiation, electron–hole pairs are created in the interlayer dielectrics. Assisted by a fringing field, holes are trapped in the intercell oxide as well as the continuous CT region. With time, the holes from the oxide slowly move toward the continuous intercell region of Si3N4 traps. The presence of holes in the interlayer region significantly degrades the subsequent room-temperature retention characteristics of CT cells.
VII. IMPLICATIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE
While CT 3-D NAND demonstrates higher resilience to TID effects, irradiated CT 3-D NAND chips experience accelerated retention loss. This evaluation provides valuable information for storage controller design that periodically employs data-refresh functions to correct cumulative bit errors in stored data. Our results suggest that data-refresh frequency should increase with higher radiation exposure to maintain data integrity over time. Additionally, our TID-induced bit error analysis reveals a clear dependence on logical page type, as shown in Fig. 4(e)–(h), where LSB pages are found to be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1084

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 72, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Fig. 8. RBER of the irradiated (a) 64-layer FG chip, (b) 176-layer, and (c) 128-layer CT chips after different periods of room-temperature annealing.

Fig. 9. Additional lateral field created by the holes in the intercell CT region.
more vulnerable to TID than MSB pages in 176-layer CT 3-D NAND. This insight can guide the allocation of more ECC resources to LSB pages than to MSB pages. Moreover, our layer-dependent bit error analysis indicates that memory pages in the lower layer of the 3-D stack are more error-prone under TID. This suggests that stronger ECC mechanisms, such as LDPC, should be deployed for memory pages located in these lower layers to enhance overall data integrity.
The comparative RBER analysis between CT and FG 3-D NAND indicates that CT 3-D NAND Flash is more resistant to TID-induced data corruption than FG NAND, making it more suitable for radiation environments with high dose rates. The larger dielectric volume in FG cells increases radiation sensitivity, suggesting manufacturers could reduce TID effects by minimizing oxide volume or adjusting cell geometry for future 3-D NAND technology. Additionally, a hybrid design approach that combines the strengths of CT and FG cells could cater to applications requiring both radiation resilience and extended retention.
Second, the observed increase in the RBER at the dual-deck junction suggests the need for optimized fabrication processes that address multideck variability challenges. Future improvements in dual-deck stacking technology could aim for more uniform cell geometry and reduced tapering effects to improve reliability across all layers.
Third, the lateral charge diffusion in irradiated CT memory could be addressed by engineering trap site energy levels to be

deeper in the Si3N4 layer, which may improve both radiation tolerance and post-irradiation retention over time. Although CT memory degrades faster in terms of data retention, the inclusion of periodic thermal annealing could mitigate charge loss over time [40].
Finally, replacing the CT layer with ferroelectric materials could greatly increase both the radiation tolerance and retention characteristics of 3-D NAND [41], [42], [43]. Since ferroelectric materials are intrinsically resistant to TID effects, integrating them into 3-D NAND architecture presents a promising direction for future 3-D NAND development for radhard applications.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In summary, our comparative analysis shows that FG memory cells exhibit greater sensitivity to TID effects than CT cells, as indicated by an RBER approximately twice as high after 30 krad(Si). The higher volume of the oxide region surrounding the FG structure may provide a plausible explanation. Additionally, we observe a distinct RBER pattern with vertical layer numbers for both CT and FG technologies which is attributable to the dual-deck stacking technology. Lastly, our room-temperature retention test on irradiated memory shows that CT cells exhibit poorer retention characteristics compared to FG cells. The poorer retention performance of CT cells may result from radiation-induced hole trapping in the continuous CT layer, followed by charge diffusion.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. Lei R. Cao, a Professor and the Program Director of the Nuclear Engineering Program, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA, for helping them with irradiation experiments.
REFERENCES
[1] C. M. Compagnoni et al., “Reviewing the evolution of the NAND flash technology,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1609–1633, Sep. 2017.
[2] A. Goda, “3-D NAND technology achievements and future scaling perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1373–1381, Apr. 2020.
[3] Z. Huo, W. Cheng, and S. Yang, “Unleash scaling potential of 3D NAND with innovative Xtacking® architecture,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. VLSI Technol. Circuits (VLSI Technol. Circuits), Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2022, pp. 254–255.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAR et al.: COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF RADIATION TOLERANCE

1085

[4] G. Cellere and A. Paccagnella, “A review of ionizing radiation effects in floating gate memories,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 359–370, Sep. 2004.
[5] X. Guo, S. Yue, J. Li, T. Zhou, and Q. Zha, “Total ionizing dose effects on data retention characteristics of 55nm SONOS flash,” J. Phys., Conf. Ser., vol. 1983, no. 1, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 012061.
[6] J. Bi, “Radiation effects of floating-gate (FG) and charge-trapping (CT) flash memory technologies,” in Proc. Int. Conf. IC Design Technol. (ICICDT), Jun. 2019, pp. 10.1.1–10.1.3.
[7] H. Hu et al., “Experimental characterizations on TID radiation impacts in charge-trap 3D NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Silicon Nanoelectronics Workshop (SNW), Jun. 2021, pp. 35–36.
[8] M. A. Kumar et al., “Total-ionizing-dose effects on threshold voltage distribution of 64-layer 3D NAND memories,” in Proc. IEEE Radiat. Effects Data Workshop (REDW), Jul. 2022, pp. 221–225.
[9] P. Kumari, S. Huang, M. Wasiolek, K. Hattar, and B. Ray, “Layerdependent bit error variation in 3-D NAND flash under ionizing radiation,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 2021–2027, Sep. 2020.
[10] F. Qiao et al., “TID radiation response of 3-D vertical GAA SONOS memory cells,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 955–960, Apr. 2014.
[11] J. Cao et al., “Total-ionizing-dose effects on polycrystalline-Si channel vertical-charge-trapping NAND devices,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 314–320, Mar. 2022.
[12] M. Bagatin et al., “Total ionizing dose effects in 3-D NAND flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 48–53, Jan. 2019.
[13] M. Bagatin, S. Gerardin, A. Paccagnella, and S. Beltrami, “Total ionizing dose effects in 3-D NAND replacement gate flash memory cells,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 412–417, Apr. 2024.
[14] M. J. Gadlage, D. I. Bruce, J. D. Ingalls, D. P. Bossev, M. Mckinney, and M. J. Kay, “Directional dependence of Co-60 irradiation on the total dose response of flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 148–154, Jan. 2019.
[15] E. P. Wilcox and M. J. Campola, “A TID and SEE characterization of multi-terabit COTS 3D NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE Radiat. Effects Data Workshop, Jul. 2019, pp. 238–244.
[16] S. Lee et al., “A 128Gb 2b/cell NAND flash memory in 14nm technology with tPROG=640µs and 800MB/s I/O rate,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers, Jan. 2016, pp. 138–139.
[17] T. Higuchi et al., “A 1Tb 3b/Cell 3D-flash memory in a 170+ wordline-layer technology,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers, vol. 64, Feb. 2021, pp. 428–430.
[18] M. Kim et al., “A 1Tb 3b/cell 8th-generation 3D-NAND flash memory with 164 MB/s write throughput and a 2.4 Gb/s interface,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers, vol. 65, Feb. 2022, pp. 136–137.
[19] W. Cho et al., “A 1-tb, 4b/cell, 176-stacked-WL 3D-NAND flash memory with improved read latency and a 14.8 Gb/mm2 density,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers, vol. 65, Feb. 2022, pp. 134–135.
[20] T. Pekny et al., “A 1-Tb density 4b/cell 3D-NAND flash on 176-tier technology with 4-independent planes for read using CMOS-under-thearray,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers, vol. 65, Feb. 2022, pp. 132–134.
[21] A. Khakifirooz et al., “A 1.67Tb, 5b/cell flash memory fabricated in 192-layer floating gate 3D-NAND technology and featuring a 23.3 Gb/mm2 bit density,” IEEE Solid-State Circuits Lett., vol. 6, pp. 161–164, 2023.
[22] T. R. Oldham and F. B. McLean, “Total ionizing dose effects in MOS oxides and devices,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 483–499, Jun. 2003.
[23] J. R. Schwank et al., “Radiation effects in MOS oxides,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1833–1853, Aug. 2008.

[24] A. Padovani et al., “Understanding and variability of lateral charge migration in 3D CT-NAND flash with and without band-gap engineered barriers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), Monterey, CA, USA, Mar. 2019, pp. 7C.1.1–7C.1.8.
[25] H.-N. Yoo et al., “Effect of lateral charge diffusion on retention characteristics of 3D NAND flash cells,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 1148–1151, Aug. 2021.
[26] A. Maconi et al., “Comprehensive investigation of the impact of lateral charge migration on retention performance of planar and 3D SONOS devices,” Solid-State Electron., vol. 74, pp. 64–70, Aug. 2012.
[27] (2025). The Ohio State University Nuclear Reactor Laboratory. Accessed: Jan. 7, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://reactor.osu.edu/
[28] Micron Technology | Global Leaders in Semiconductors. Accessed: Jan. 7, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.micron.com/
[29] SK Hynix. Accessed: Jan. 7, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www. skhynix.com/
[30] Y. Luo, “Improving 3D NAND flash memory lifetime by tolerating early retention loss and process variation,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., vol. 2, no. 3, Dec. 2018, Art. no. 37.
[31] Y. Wang, L. Dong, and R. Mao, “P-alloc: Process-variation tolerant reliability management for 3D charge-trapping flash memory,” ACM Trans. Embedded Comput. Syst., vol. 16, no. 5s, pp. 1–19, Sep. 2017.
[32] C.-H. Hung et al., “Layer-aware program-and-read schemes for 3D stackable vertical-gate BE-SONOS NAND flash against cross-layer process variations,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1491–1501, Jun. 2015.
[33] J. Alsmeier, M. Higashitani, S. S. Paak, and S. Sivaram, “Past and future of 3D flash,” in IEDM Tech. Dig., San Francisco, CA, USA, Dec. 2020, pp. 6.1.1–6.1.4.
[34] P. Singer. Intel 144-Tier Three-deck FG NAND With 161 Total Gates. Semiconductor Dig. Accessed: Jul. 16, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.semiconductor-digest.com/intel-144-tier-three-deck-fgnand-with-161-total-gates/
[35] S. Aritome, “Study of NAND flash memory cells,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Graduate School Adv. Sci. Matter, Hiroshima Univ., Hiroshima, Japan, 2013. [Online]. Available: https://ir.lib.hiroshima-u.ac.jp/ 00035129
[36] M. R. Shaneyfelt, D. M. Fleetwood, J. R. Schwank, and K. L. Hughes, “Charge yield for cobalt-60 and 10-keV X-ray irradiations of MOS devices,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 1187–1194, Dec. 1991.
[37] M. A. Kumar, A. Padovani, L. Larcher, S. M. R. Chowdhury, and M. Z. Baten, “Pulse optimization and device engineering of 3D chargetrap flash for synaptic operation,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 132, no. 11, Sep. 2022, Art. no. 114501.
[38] C. Di Valentin, G. Palma, and G. Pacchioni, “Ab initio study of transition levels for intrinsic defects in silicon nitride,” J. Phys. Chem. C, vol. 115, no. 2, pp. 561–569, Jan. 2011.
[39] D. M. Fleetwood, “Radiation-induced charge neutralization and interface-trap buildup in metal-oxide-semiconductor devices,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 580–583, Jan. 1990.
[40] M. Buddhanoy, P. Kumari, U. Surendranathan, M. Wasiolek, K. Hattar, and B. Ray, “Total ionizing dose effects on long-term data retention characteristics of commercial 3-D NAND memories,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 390–396, Mar. 2022.
[41] K. Florent et al., “Vertical ferroelectric HfO2 FET based on 3-D NAND architecture: Towards dense low-power memory,” in IEDM Tech. Dig., Dec. 2018, pp. 2.5.1–2.5.4.
[42] M.-K. Kim, I.-J. Kim, and J.-S. Lee, “CMOS-compatible ferroelectric NAND flash memory for high-density, low-power, and high-speed three-dimensional memory,” Sci. Adv., vol. 7, no. 3, Jan. 2021, Art. no. eabe1341.
[43] L. Fernandes et al., “Material choices for tunnel dielectric layer and gate blocking layer for ferroelectric NAND applications,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 1776–1779, Oct. 2024.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

