IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

2235

Low-Density Parity-Check Coded Recording Systems With Run-Length-Limited Constraints
Hsin-Yi Chen1, Mao-Chao Lin1;2, and Yeong-Luh Ueng3
Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan, R.O.C. Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan, R.O.C. Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C.

We propose two techniques for the low-density parity-check (LDPC) coded partial response channel with run-length-limited (RLL) constraints. The first is a modification of the selective flipping technique so that side information is not needed. The second is based on the estimation of flipped bits for the selective flipping technique. The second technique can achieve significant performance improvement over the simple selective flipping technique either with side information or without side information. We also incorporate these two techniques into a known technique to design LDPC coded recording systems that can meet strict RLL constraints without performance degradation.
Index Terms—Constrained codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, recording, run-length-limited (RLL) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

I N data storage systems, run-length-limited (RLL) coding [1], [2] is usually needed to avoid the adverse effect of inter-

symbol interference (ISI) and/or to facilitate the operation of

synchronization. An RLL sequence is a binary sequence, for

which the run length of consecutive 0’s is under a given con-

straint. For example, in a

sequence, the number of con-

secutive 0’s is at least and at most . An RLL code is a col-

lection of RLL sequences, which may not have error-correcting

capability.

Constructing RLL codes with error-correcting (EC) capabil-

ities, i.e., RLL-EC coding scheme, is an interesting topic [3],

[4]. A straightforward method to construct RLL code with EC

capability can be divided into three stages. For the first stage,

we convert a message sequence into a data sequence satisfying

RLL constraint. For the second stage, a systematic EC encoder

adds parity bits which may not satisfy the RLL constraint to the

data sequence. For the third stage, the parity bits which may not

satisfy the RLL constraint are converted into a parity sequence

satisfying RLL constraint. However, the EC capability of the

resultant RLL-EC coding scheme may be changed. In case that

the RLL constraint is the

constraint, there is a very simple

method for which the EC capability of the resultant RLL-EC

coding scheme will not be changed. We first encode a message

sequence into a codeword of length using the ECC (EC code)

encoder and then we insert 1’s into this codeword every bits.

The resultant code will satisfy the

constraint. In [5]–[7],

novel methods have been proposed to insert parity bits of the

ECC into the message sequence which meets the

con-

straint so that the resultant sequence will not violate the

constraint, where

.

In [8]–[11], the channel for data storage and detection is con-

sidered as a partial response (PR) channel. Since a combined

ECC with PR channel can be considered as a concatenated

coding system, we can combine the soft-in-soft-out (SISO)

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2008.2000499

equalizer for the PR channel and the SISO ECC decoder

to achieve high reliability. Since the affect of intersymbol

interference can be effectively removed in this concatenated

structure, we can set

for the

sequence constraint. In

particular, using a turbo code [12] or an LDPC code [13]–[15]

as ECC which is combined with PR channel can achieve very

high error-correcting capability [8]–[11]. In [16], the uncon-

strained LDPC codeword is deliberately bit flipped to satisfy

the RLL constraint before being sent to the channel, while the

deliberately flipped bits are expected to be removed by the

powerful LDPC decoder. This scheme is novel in using the

capability of ECC to eliminate the need of redundancy in RLL

coding. This scheme can be applied to

sequences with

loose constraint, i.e., large . In case of moderate or small ,

the number of deliberately flipped bits will be so great that only

a low rate LDPC code is powerful enough to correct them. To

reduce the number of deliberately flipped bits, Li and Vijaya

Kumar [10] proposed to try a number of test sequences which

are respectively added (modulo 2) to the unconstrained LDPC

codeword to find a resultant sequence which is likely to have

acceptable number of flipped bits. The scheme proposed in [10]

can be applied to

sequence with moderate constraint, i.e.,

moderate , and is an efficient one except for the need of side

information which is required to satisfy the RLL constraint and

requires error protection.

In this paper, we follow the thread of [10] and propose two

techniques for removing the need of side information. In ad-

dition, we incorporate these two techniques into the technique

in [5] to design LDPC coded recording systems which can

meet strict RLL constraint without performance degradation.

In Section II, we propose a side-information free LDPC coded

PR channel design which uses a number of test sequences to

reduce the flipped bits needed for satisfying the RLL constraint.

In Section III, we present the proposed flipped bits estimation

technique. In this way, we can reduce the number of test

sequences needed for reducing deliberately flipped bits. In

Section IV, we combine the techniques of Sections II and III

with a method proposed in [5] so that we can achieve highly

reliable data storage system with strict constraints. Concluding

remarks are given in Section V.

0018-9464/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2236

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

Fig. 1. Encoder for an LDPC coded recording system using the selective flipping technique.
II. SELECTIVE FLIPPING TECHNIQUES

simply , where is obtained from by replacing each com-

ponent in equal to 0 by . According to the channel model

used in [7], [10], we have

and

for

detection, where denotes the operation of convolution, either

or is a vector representing additive noise for which each

component is a zero mean Gaussian random variable with vari-

ance .

We can apply the maximum likelihood decoder to the error-

protection code for side information, , to recover from .

Then, we can find the selected candidate and employ the fol-

lowing algorithm for detection. Let be the maximum number

of iterations between the MAP (maximum a posteriori) detector

(or equalizer) and LDPC decoder.

Fig. 1 shows an encoder of a data recording system, where

is an -bit message to be stored in the recording system. We use as input to the encoder of an LDPC

Algorithm SI

code, , to obtain the -bit output

.

The purpose of LDPC coding is twofold. The first is to enhance

the reliability of the retrieved data. The second is to remove

flipped bits. The sequence may not meet the RLL constraint.

Let be a set of maximum length sequences ( sequences)

of length . For each sequence

, we

have

Set the index of outer iteration

.

Step 1) The MAP detector for the PR channel takes

and the priori LLR (log-likelihood ratio)

value for the bit , denoted

, as input. In

each iteration, MAP detector for the PR channel

generates the posteriori LLR value for ,

denoted

, as output. The extrinsic value

(1)

for is obtained by

=

.

Step 2) Use

as input to

We flip some bits of to result in a sequence that meets

the RLL constraint. Let

be the such

that the number of flipped bits, i.e., the weight of

,

is the smallest among all the

. Each component

in is either 0 or 1. Replacing each component

that is equal to 0 by a component , we converts the sequence

into a corresponding sequence

. The

sequence will be the input of a PR channel with impulse

response

. At the reading side, we can

use soft-in-soft-out (SISO) equalizer to exploit the effect of ISI

caused by the PR channel. Since candidates are used to reduce

the number of flipped bits which are needed to meet the RLL

constraint, we may call this multiple-candidate method a selec-

tive flipping (SLF) technique. This SLF technique for the LDPC

coded PR equalized system with RLL constraint was proposed

in [10]. Multiple-candidate method was also used in the tech-

the decoder of the LDPC code , where

. After iterations

within the LDPC decoder, the LDPC decoder

generates the posteriori LLR value for ,

denoted

as output.

Step 3) Let

. The extrinsic

value for the bit from the decoder is

obtained by

which is used

as the a priori LLR, i.e.,

, in the

MAP detector. The resultant sequence is

which will be

used in the next iteration.

Step 4) Increase by 1. If the index of iteration

, then the hard decision of

, is used as the final

estimate of . Otherwise, go back to Step 1.

nique of guided scrambling to design constrained codes with

high efficiency in [17], [18].

Example 1: Consider the PR channel which is the EPR4

channel with impulse response

. Let the

A. Systems Using Side Information

RLL constraint be the

constraint. Fig. 2 shows

the bit error rate (BER) curve obtained by deliberate flipping

In [10], side information is used to indicate the selected as proposed in [16]. We can use the SLF technique in [10] to

maximum length sequence . Note that needs to be coded into improve the error performance. Let the number of candidates,

to acquire error protection and satisfy the RLL constraint. , be 256. The side information is protected by a (29,8) block

For example, we may use a (25,8) block code shortened from code which is converted from a (25,8) code with distance

a (26,9) binary linear code [19] with minimum distance 9 to 9 by adding bits to satisfy the (0,7) constraint. The number of

protect the 8-bit side information for indicating the candidate message bits is

. An (999, 888) LDPC code [14] is

(maximum length sequence) selected from containing 256 used. From Fig. 2, the BER obtained by using Algorithm SI and

candidates. To meet the RLL constraint, the code length (i.e.,

is very close to the ideal case, i.e., the LDPC coded

the length of ) will be longer than 25. In case of the ( ) PR channel without any RLL constraint, where

and

constraint with

and , the code lengths of the

stands for the consumed energy per message bit

error-protection code for side information, denoted , should and is the one-sided power spectral density of the additive

be increased to 29, 30, and 34 respectively, by periodically in- white Gaussian noise. However, the SLF technique using side

serting 1’s into the codeword of the (25,8) ECC. The input to information has a rate loss of %

%

the PR channel is actually the sequence pair

instead of as compared to this ideal case. To reduce the rate loss, we may

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODED RECORDING SYSTEMS WITH RUN-LENGTH-LIMITED CONSTRAINTS

2237

Fig. 3. Candidate decision for the selected flipping technique without side information (NSI).

Fig. 2. Simulation results of (999, 888) LDPC coded EPR4 channel with (0,7) constraint (U = 1; U = 15).

to modify the selective flipping technique shown in Fig. 1 by deleting the error-protected side information. Hence, the information rate will be exactly the same as the ideal case. For this

side-information free technique, is no longer available. We

use only 16 candidates instead of the original 256 candidates. To

protect the 4-bit side information, we may use a (21,4) binary

linear code with minimum distance 9 that is shortened from a

(26,9) code [19]. To satisfy the (0,7) constraint, the code length

needs to be extended to 24. Thus, the code rate loss will be

%

%. However, as shown in Fig. 2,

the BER obtained by using Algorithm SI and

is quite

now only have

for detection. Due to the lack

of side information, we have no idea of which candidate is

selected. Thus, we have to test every candidate. As shown in

Fig. 3, we have a set of component detectors, each for a can-

didate

. The detection and decoding algorithm for

the side-information free system is shown as follows. Let be

a positive integer which is smaller than .

inferior to that obtained by using Algorithm SI and

.

We may compare Example 1 with Example 2 which is

Algorithm NSI

constructed by using the powerful RLL-LDPC concatenation scheme proposed in [5].
Example 2: According to [5, Table I], we can design a (18,17) RLL code, denoted , meeting the (0,7) constraint, for which 10 of the 18 bit positions in each codeword can be used as unconstrained bits, where each unconstrained bit means that we can arbitrarily assign 0 or 1 to this bit position without violating the constraint. In addition, we can design a (9,8) RLL code, denoted

Step 1) For the th component detector,

, the

iteration (Steps 1–4) for

is the same as that in Algorithm SI

except that should be replaced by

.

Step 2) At the end of the th iteration, we compute the

sum of LLR values

, meeting the (0,7) constraint. Moreover, the concatenation of

and will still meet the (0,7) constraint. We can concate-

(2)

nate 55 and 1 codeword to form a (999, 943) RLL code

meeting the (0,7) constraint, for which 550 bit positions in

each codeword can be used as unconstrained bits. At the begin-

ning of encoding, we encode a 943-bit sequence which contains

888 message bits and 55 zero bits into a 999-bit codeword of

. The 55 zero bits are located at the unconstrained bit posi-

tions. The other 944 bits of a RLL codeword of are encoded

into a codeword of a (999, 944) systematic LDPC codeword,

where the 55 parity bits will replace 55 zero bits in the uncon-

strained bit positions. In this way, we have an LDPC codeword

of length 999 bits which meets the (0,7) constraint. The overall

information rate is

which is the same as Ex-

for each component detector. Decide the

component detector with the largest LLRSUM.

Step 3) Let the -th component detector be the one

with the largest LLRSUM. We complete the

-th to the th iteration for the th

component detector.

Step 4) If the index of iteration

, then the hard

decision of

, for the

th component code is used as the final estimate

of .

ample 1. From Fig. 2, we can see that the BER performances

obtained by using RLL-LDPC concatenation scheme are infe-

rior to those obtained by using Algorithm SI with either

or

.

This side-information free selective flipping technique is de-

signed based on an assumption that the cosets,

and

, are widely separated, where

and

=

. If the assumption is correct, the bit error

B. Systems Without Side Information

rate (BER) of the side-information free selective flipping technique will be similar to the technique using correct side infor-

From Examples 1 and 2, we find that using the selective flip- mation. Although we are unable to prove this fact analytically,

ping technique combined with error-protected side information in our simulation, we randomly pick some LDPC codes from

and LDPC coding for the RLL constrained PR channel has ex- [14] and the simulation results show that this technique works

cellent performance at the cost of rate loss. Now we propose as expected.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2238

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

The computational complexity of Algorithms SI and NSI case that the number of flipped bits is great, the LDPC decoder

is dominated by MAP equalization (detection) and LDPC alone can not correct these flipped bits. We need to employ the

decoding. The computational complexity of Algorithm NSI is

about

times of that of Algorithm SI. Usually,

using equal to 1 or 2 will be enough for the detector to iden-

tify the correct candidate. Hence, the increase of computational

complexity will not be too great. For Algorithms SI and NSI

implemented in hardware, the hardware complexity is highly

dependent on the architectures used and the throughput and

latency requirements. As compared to Algorithm SI, Algorithm

NSI will increase the latency of the detector and decoder based

on the same hardware resource.

Example 3: We modify Example 1 by removing the side in-

formation part and using Algorithm NSI for detection and de-

coding. Now we use the (999, 888) LDPC code from [14]. To

reduce the computational complexity, we consider only the case

of

. In the simulation, we use

and

.

The computational complexity of waiving side information is

times of that of using the side information.

Note that the BER curve of using side information is very close

to the curve of not using side information as shown in Fig. 2, in

this case of

.

To achieve the BER performance approaching that of the

correlation property within the RLL sequences to enhance the

error-correcting capability of the LDPC code.

After we decide the single component detector which em-

ploys the candidate and will be chosen for the th iteration,

, we will execute the decoding and estimation op-

erations as shown in Fig. 4. In each iteration, we have the soft

output of the LDPC decoder, i.e., the posteriori LLR value for

the bit , denoted

. For each component

of equal to 1, we reverse the polarity of corresponding com-

ponent of the

to remove the effect of selective flipping

and obtain

. Make hard decision on

. Then, we

have

which imitates the procedure of selective flipping,

where

is an estimation of obtained by

making hard decision on

. Moreover, we modify

into which satisfies the RLL constraint by flipping some bits

of

. The nonzero bits in

represent the esti-

mation of the flipped bits for satisfying the RLL constraint. The

nonzero bits in

will be used to change the polarity

of

and

in Algorithm SI. The algorithm for detec-

tion and decoding along with the estimation of flipped bits is

summarized as follows.

ideal case, we may divide the 256 candidates into 16 groups and each group contains 16 candidates, where we use a 4-bit side in- ALGORITHM NSIEST

formation to indicate each group and the 4-bit side information

is protected by a (24,4) code . In the detection, the side infor-

mation obtained by decoding can help indicate the chosen

group and the selected candidate inside the chosen group can be

identified by Algorithm NSI. In Fig. 2, we see that the associ-

ated BER performance indicated by SI NSI,

is

close to the ideal case.

In Example 3, if we want to completely remove the need

of side information and have BER performance close to the

ideal case, we need to increase to a very large number, which

will drastically increase the computational complexity. To avoid

such significant increase in computational complexity, we can

resort to the following technique.

III. ESTIMATION OF THE FLIPPED BITS

Step 1) We follow Algorithm NSI until the we identify

the th component detector as the one which

has the largest LLRSUM at the end of the

th iteration. We now consider only the th

component detector. Set

.

Step 2) For each component of equals to 1, we

reverse the polarity of corresponding component

of the

to obtain

. Make hard

decision on

. Then, we have

.

Modify

into which satisfies the RLL

constraint by flipping some bits of

.

Step 3) Change the polarity of

if the th

component of

is 1. We have

.

Then, repeat Step 1 of Algorithm SI except that

We now propose a scheme which alleviates the interference

is replaced by

.

of flipped bits by estimating the positions of these flipped bits in

Step 4) Change the polarity of

if the th

the detection process. In this paper, we apply a selected flipping operation with a small to this estimation scheme so that the number of flipped bits is not too great to estimate.

component of

is 1. We have

. Then, repeat Steps 2 and 3 of Algorithm

SI except that

is replaced by

and

A. Flipped Bits Estimation for Side-Information Free Techniques
Remember that in Section II-B, for the side-information free technique, iterations are implemented for each of the component detectors and in case that the th component detector

is replaced by .

Step 5) If

, then increase by 1 and go back

to Step 2. Otherwise, make hard decision on

, to obtain the final

estimate of .

has the largest LLRSUM at the th iteration then the rest of the The computational complexity of Algorithm NSIEST is

iterations are implemented for only the th component about

times of that of Algorithm SI. If

detector, where each iteration is implemented for the exchange using the same , the computational complexity of Algorithm

of information between the MAP (channel) detector (equalizer) NSIEST is almost the same as that of Algorithm NSI since the

and the LDPC decoder as indicated in Section II-A. Note that additional operations of finding

and bit flipping

the LDPC decoder is used to remove both the additive noise and contribute to insignificant computational complexity increase. the flipped bits which are used to meet the RLL constraint. In However, the latency will be increased.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODED RECORDING SYSTEMS WITH RUN-LENGTH-LIMITED CONSTRAINTS

2239

Fig. 4. Iterative decoding and flipped bits estimation for algorithm NSIEST.

Fig. 5. Additional simulation results of (999, 888) LDPC coded EPR4 channel Fig. 6. Simulation results of (4608, 4096) LDPC coded EPR4 channel with

with (0,7) constraint (U = 1; U = 15).

(0,7) constraint (U = 1).

Example 4: We modify Example 3 by using Algorithm ALGORITHM SIEST NSIEST for detection and decoding instead of using Algorithm

NSI. Now we use the (999, 888) LDPC code from [14]. Other

parameters are

and

. The

computational complexity of using Algorithm NSIEST is only

times of that of using Algorithm SI.

Step 1) Set

.

Step 2) Repeat Step 2 to Step 5 of Algorithm NSIEST

by using to replace .

From Fig. 5, we see that the simulation results indicate that the Example 5: We modify Example 1 by using Algorithm

BER performance of using Algorithm NSIEST is very close to SIEST to replace Algorithm SI. We consider the case of

the ideal case.

. From Fig. 5, we see that the obtained BER perfor-

B. Flipped Bits Estimation Along With Side Information

mance is close to the ideal case. From Fig. 2, we find that the BER performance of the ideal case is similar to that obtained

Either Algorithm NSI or Algorithm NSIEST is designed by using Algorithm SI with

and is much better than

based on the idea of waiving the need of side information so that that obtained by using Algorithm SI with

. In case of

there is no rate loss resulting from using side information. The using identical , the computational complexity of Algorithm

price is the increased computational complexity. The concept SIEST is almost the same as that of Algorithm SI.

of estimation can be applied to the selective flipping technique In the previous examples, we consider the (999, 888) LDPC

with side information to reduce the number of candidates code constructed by using the method in [14]. In the following

needed for selective flipping, i.e., , and hence the number example, we demonstrate Algorithm SIEST can work well for

of bits for side information. In this way, there will be almost a longer LDPC code constructed by using the progressive edge

no penalty for computational complexity increase, while the growth (PEG) method in [20], [21].

number of needed side-information bits can be kept small.

Example 6: In this example, we construct an LDPC coded

Assuming that the side information is correctly recovered, system using SLF to meet the (0,7) constraint by replacing the

we can then find the selected candidate . We have the following (999, 888) LDPC code with a (4608, 4096) PEG-LDPC code

algorithm for iterations based on the estimation of flipped bits. [20], [21]. Fig. 6 shows the BER performance of such a LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2240

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

coded system using Algorithm SIEST with

over an

EPR4 channel. Also included in Fig. 6 are the BER perfor-

mances for the ideal case and the case of using deliberate flip-

ping proposed in [16]. From Fig. 6, we see that the simulation re-

sults indicate that the BER performance using Algorithm SIEST

is very close to the ideal case. For comparison, we also construct

a RLL-LDPC concatenation scheme [5] by using a (4352, 4096)

RLL code and a (4608, 4352) PEG-LDPC code in a way similar

to Example 2. The overall information rate of this RLL-LDPC

concatenation scheme is 4096/4608–0.889 which is the same as

that of the (4608, 4096) PEG-LDPC code. From Fig. 6, we can

see that the BER performance obtained by using RLL-LDPC

concatenation scheme is inferior to that obtained by using Al-

gorithm SIEST with

.

C. Convergence Analysis for Algorithms NSIEST and SIEST
In this paper, we use the technique of EXIT (extrinsic information transfer) chart [22] to examine the convergence behavior of Algorithms NSIEST and SIEST. We assume that the detector is chosen correctly in either NSIEST and SIEST. We consider information exchange between the LDPC decoder and the MAP

Fig. 7. EXIT curves of MAP detector including flipped bits estimator and LDPC decoder. (A) Detector, (E )(N ) = 6:5 dB, (0,7) constraint, L = 16; (B) Detector, (E )=(N ) = 5:0 dB, (0,7) constraint, L = 16; (C) Detector, (E )=(N ) = 6:5 dB, (0,3) constraint, L = 256; (D) Detector, (E )=(N ) = 5:0 dB, (0,3) constraint, L = 256; (E) (999, 888) LDPC Decoder, U = 1; (F) (4608, 4096) LDPC Decoder, U = 1; (G) (4096, 2048) LDPC Decoder, U = 1; (H) (4096, 2048) LDPC Decoder, U = 2.

equalizer (detector) including the flipped bits estimator.

For the MAP equalizer including the flipped bits estimator,

we investigate the EXIT characteristic of the input mutual

information

and the output mutual in-

formation

. Since the channel output is

also an input to the MAP equalizer, we calculate based on

a channel with a certain level of additive noise and a certain

level of flipping errors which are dependent on

, and

, i.e., the number of candidates in the SLF technique. Hence,

is a function of

and , and we write

.

For the LDPC decoder, we investigate the EXIT character-

istic of the input mutual information

and the output mutual information

. Note that is not a function of

or or .

Fig. 7 shows and under various conditions. From

Fig. 7, we find that the LDPC coded system using Algorithm

NSIEST (or SIEST) with

can converge to a low BER at

dB under

constraint since and in-

Fig. 8. Trajectories of iterative processes for MAP detector including flipped bits estimator and LDPC decoder (SIEST with L = 16 and U = 1).

tersect at a value of mutual information equal to 1. In addition,

we find that the LDPC coded system using Algorithm NSIEST

(or SIEST) with

can not converge to a low BER at

dB under

constraint since and in-

tersect at a low value of mutual information.

Although EXIT chart analysis is most effective for long

codes, the EXIT chart for our examples using LDPC codes

of lengths 999 and 4608 respectively still reveals valuable

information. For example, we can investigate the speed of

(999, 888) LDPC code for

greater than 6 dB. How-

ever, at

dB under the

constraint, the BER

performance of the (4608, 4096) PEG LDPC code is worse.

This result can be verified by observing Fig. 7, which shows

that using the (4608, 4096) PEG LDPC code, the and

intersect at a smaller value of mutual information as compared

to using the (999, 888) LDPC code.

convergence by observing the trajectory in Fig. 8. We find that IV. FLIPPED BITS ESTIMATION FOR STRICT RLL CONSTRAINTS

the LDPC coded system using Algorithm NSIEST (or SIEST) can converge to a value of mutual information equal to 1 at the 12th iteration. This observation of convergence speed is verified by the BER results shown in Fig. 6. Both the (4608, 4096) PEG LDPC code and the (999, 888) LDPC code used

For a very strict RLL constraint, such as

,

the number of flipped bits will be great even if the number of

candidates in the SLF technique is very large. To correct such a

large number of flipped bits, the rate of LDPC code should be

low enough.

in this paper have the same rate of 0.888. The longer (4608, Example 7: Consider an LDPC coded system under the (0,3)

4096) PEG LDPC code has better BER performance than the constraint. We use SIEST with

and

. Let

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODED RECORDING SYSTEMS WITH RUN-LENGTH-LIMITED CONSTRAINTS

2241

dB. Suppose that a rate 0.5 (4096, 2048) LDPC

code [14] is used. Two curves plotted for

and

can respectively be found in Fig. 7. For

, it is clear that

and intersect at a value of mutual information smaller than 1.

If we increase the number of inner iterations of the LDPC code

to

and intersect at a value of mutual information

equal to 1. Simulation shows that for the

and

cases, the associated BER are about

and about

respectively.

If we want to avoid using the low rate LDPC code and

using SLF with a large number of candidates, the powerful

method proposed in [5] which has been described at the end of

Section II-A can be used.

Example 8: Consider the case of

. According

to Table I of [5], we can design a (9,8) code meeting the (0,3)

constraint, for which 1 of the 9 bit positions in each codeword

can be used as the unconstrained bit. We concatenate 111 code-

words of to form a (999, 888) RLL code , meeting the

(0,3) constraint, for which 111 bit positions in each codeword

can be used as unconstrained bits and the other

bit positions can be used as constrained bits. In a way sim-

ilar to Example 2, we can have a LDPC codeword of length 999

bits which meets the (0,3) constraint and the overall information

rate is

.

To increase the information rate above the method proposed

in [5], we can encode only a portion of the message bits into a

RLL sequence. After the RLL and LDPC encoding, there are

some code bits which may not meet the RLL constraint and can

be processed by the selective flipping technique and the flipped

bits estimation technique. An example which improves the in-

formation rate of Example 8 is given as follows.

Example 9: Consider the case of

. According

to Table I of [5], we can design a (10,9) code meeting the

(0,3) constraint, for which 1 of the 10 bit positions in each code-

word can be used as the unconstrained bit. We concatenate 98

codewords of to form a (980, 882) RLL code , meeting the

(0,3) constraint, for which 98 bit positions in each codeword can

be used as unconstrained bits and the other

bit positions are used as constrained bits. At the beginning of

encoding, we encode an 882-bit sequence which contains 784

message bits and 98 zero bits into a 980-bit codeword of .

The 98 zero bits are located at the unconstrained bit positions.

The other 882 constrained bits of a codeword of together

with additional 6 message bits are encoded into a codeword of

the (999, 888) systematic LDPC codeword, where 98 out of the

111 parity bits will replace 98 zero bits in the unconstrained

bit positions. The resultant code, denoted , has an overall in-

formation rate of

. In , each codeword is

still an LDPC codeword of length 999 bits for which 980 bits

meets the (0,3) constraint and the other 19 bits may not. We

can deliberately flip some bits of these 19 bits to meet the (0,3)

constraint. At the reading side, we can apply the conventional

message passing between LDPC code and the MAP detector,

which is equivalent to Algorithm SI with

. The associ-

ated BER performances as indicated by “ , deliberate flipping

only” are shown in Fig. 9. We can also apply NSIEST to with

deliberate flipping. From Fig. 9, we can see that the BER per-

formances represented by ” , NSIEST and

”, i.e., pure

estimation without using SLF technique, are clearly superior to

those represented by “ , deliberate flipping only.” In Fig. 9,

Fig. 9. Simulation results of (999, 888) LDPC coded EPR4 channel with (0,3) constraint (U = 1; U = 15).

we also observe that with NSIEST and

provides fur-

ther improvement in the BER performances.

As a comparison, we may consider a partially ideal case for

which in the storage side, without flipping any bit is used,

and in the reading side, conventional message passing between

LDPC code and the MAP detector, equivalently Algorithm SI

with

, is used. Although no bit flipping is needed in this

partially ideal case, we see from Fig. 9 that the associated BER

performances are inferior to those obtained by with NSIEST

and

. A major reason for this phenomenon is that in

with NSIEST and

, the correlation property imposed

by the (0,3) constraint is efficiently exploited to remove errors

caused by additive noise and deliberate flipping. To examine this

argument, we modify the detection of the partially ideal case by

checking the 980 bit positions which are encoded to satisfy the

(0,3) constraint to see whether they meet the (0,3) constraint or

not. Fig. 9 shows that the associated BER performances will be

very close to those obtained by with NSIEST and

.

BER performances of the ideal case, for which LDPC coded

PR channel without RLL constraint is considered, have been

shown in Figs. 2 and 5. For the ideal case, the BER is 10 at

of 6.3 dB. From Fig. 9, we see that with NSIEST

and

, the BER is

at

of 6.75 dB. The loss

of

for with NSIEST and

as compared to the

ideal case at BER

is 0.45 dB, which is resultant from

the rate loss. Since the information rate of is 0.790 and the

information rate of the ideal case is 0.889, the asymptotic rate

loss at very high

will approach 0.51 dB. In this sense,

NSIEST with a sufficiently large is very efficient for ECC

with strict RLL constraint by properly using the technique of

[5].

V. CONCLUSION
We propose two techniques for the LDPC coded partial response channel with RLL constraint. The first is a modification of the selective flipping technique so that side information is not needed. The advantage of this modification is the increased information rate and the disadvantage is the increased computational complexity as compared to the selective flipping technique using side information. The second is based on the esti-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2242

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

mation of flipped bits for the selective flipping technique. This technique can increase the information rate or reduce the BER without the penalty of increasing computational complexity as compared to the selective flipping technique either using side information or not using side information. In case of very strict RLL constraint, the proposed techniques can be incorporated into a technique in [5] to increase the information rate without performance degradation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to the anonymous reviewers who provided valuable comments and suggestions which significantly enhance the quality of this paper. This work was supported by National Science Council of the R.O.C. under Grant NSC 96-2219-E-002-012.
REFERENCES
[1] B. H. Marcus, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Finite-state modulation codes for data storage,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 5–37, Jan. 1992.
[2] K. A. S. Immink, Coding Techniques for Digital Recorders. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1991.
[3] P. Lee and J. K. Wolf, “A general error-correcting code construction for run-length limited binary channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1330–1335, Nov. 1989.
[4] H. H. Tang and M. C. Lin, “A class of multilevel run-length limited trellis codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 35, no. 25, pp. 2192–2193, Dec. 9, 1999.
[5] A. J. van Wijngaarden and K. A. S. Immink, “Maximum runlength limited codes with error control capabilities,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 602–611, Apr. 2001.
[6] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Concatenating a structured LDPC code and a constrained code to preserve soft-decoding, structure, and burst correction,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2558–2560, Oct. 2006.
[7] J. Lu and K. G. Boyer, “Novel RLL-ECC concation scheme for highdensity magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 2271–2273, Jun. 2007.
[8] B. M. Kurkoski, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Joint message-passing decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1410–1422, Jun. 2002.
[9] J. L. Fan and J. M. Cioffi, “Constrained coding techniques for soft iterative decoders,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Rio De Janeiro, Brazil, 1999, pp. 723–727.
[10] Z. Li and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Low-density parity-check codes with run length limited (RLL) constraints,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 344–349, Feb. 2006.
[11] K. Anim-Appiah and S. W. McLaughLin, “Turbo codes cascaded with high-rate block codes for (0; k)-constraint channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 677–685, Apr. 2001.
[12] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC 93), Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[13] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[14] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1997.
[15] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries : A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.

[16] B. Vasic and K. Pedagani, “Run-length-limited low-density parity check codes based on deliberate error insertion,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 1738–1743, May 2004.
[17] A. Kunisa, “Runlength violation of weakly cnstrained code,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 1–6, Jan. 2002.
[18] I. J. Fair, W. D. Gover, W. A. Krzymien, and R. I. MacDonald, “Guided scrambling: A new line coding tecnique for high bit rate fiber optic transmission systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 39, pp. 289–297, Feb. 1991.
[19] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes, Appendix A. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1983.
[20] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf. 2001 (GLOBECOM’01), Nov. 25–29, 2001, vol. 2, pp. 995V–1001.
[21] X.-Yu. Hu, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE. Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[22] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 40, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
Manuscript received November 20, 2007; revised April 23, 2008. Published August 20, 2008 (projected). Corresponding author: M. C. Lin (e-mail: mclin@cc.ee.ntu.edu.tw).
Hsin-Yi Chen was born in Chiayi County, Taiwan, R.O.C., on November 6, 1969. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in graduate institute of communication engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Since 1998, he has served as an Assistant Researcher in Telecommunication Laboratories of Chenghwa Telecom Co., Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China. His research interests are in the area of coding theory and constrained coding for recording systems.
Mao-Chao Lin was born in Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., on December 24, 1954. He received the Bachelor’s and Master’s degree, both in electrical engineering, from National Taiwan University in 1977 and 1979, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Hawaii in 1986.
From 1979 to 1982, he was an Assistant Scientist of Chung-Shan Institute of Science and Technology at Lung-Tan, Taiwan. He is currently a Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C. His research interests are in the area of coding theory and its applications.
Yeong-Luh Ueng (M’05) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1997. At the same university, he received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in communication engineering from the Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering in 1999 and 2001, respectively.
From 2001 to 2005, he was with a private company in Taiwan and focused on the design and development of various wireless chips including RF transceiver chips and Bluetooth and PHS baseband chips. In December 2005, he joined the faculty of National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, where he is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering. His research interests include coding theory, wireless communications, and communication IC.
Dr. Ueng was elected an honorary member of the Phi Tau Phi Scholastic Honor Society.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

