3884

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

The Extraction and Complexity Limits of Graphical Models for Linear Codes
Thomas R. Halford, Member, IEEE, and Keith M. Chugg, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Two broad classes of graphical modeling problems for codes can be identified in the literature: constructive and extractive problems. The former class of problems concern the construction of a graphical model in order to define a new code. The latter class of problems concern the extraction of a graphical model for a (fixed) given code. The design of a new low-density parity-check code for some given criteria (e.g., target block length and code rate) is an example of a constructive problem. The determination of a graphical model for a classical linear block code that implies a decoding algorithm with desired performance and complexity characteristics is an example of an extractive problem. This work focuses on extractive graphical model problems and aims to lay out some of the foundations of the theory of such problems for linear codes. The primary focus of this work is a study of the space of all graphical models for a (fixed) given code. The tradeoff between cyclic topology and complexity in this space is characterized via the introduction of a new bound: the forest-inducing cut-set bound (FI-CSB). The proposed bound provides a more precise characterization of this tradeoff than that which can be obtained using existing tools (e.g., the CSB) and can be viewed as a generalization of the square-root bound for tail-biting trellises to graphical models with arbitrary cyclic topologies. Searching the space of graphical models for a given code is then enabled by introducing a set of basic graphical model transformation operations that are shown to span this space. Finally, heuristics for extracting novel graphical models for linear block codes using these transformations are investigated.
Index Terms—Codes on graphs, complexity measures, cut-set bound (CSB), graphical model complexity, graphical model extraction, graphical model transformation, linear codes, normal realizations, square-root bound.
I. INTRODUCTION
G RAPHICAL models of codes have been studied since the 1960s and this study has intensified in recent years due to the discovery of turbo codes by Berrou et al. [1], the rediscovery of Gallager’s low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2] by Spielman et al. [3] and MacKay et al. [4], and the pioneering
Manuscript received November 17, 2006; revised February 18, 2008. Published August 27, 2008 (projected). This work was supported in part by the Powell Foundation and by the U.S. Army Research Office under MURI Contract DAAD19-01-1-0477. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 44th Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, September 2006. The work of T. R. Halford was carried out at the University of Southern California.
T. R. Halford is with TrellisWare Technologies, Inc., San Diego, CA 921271708 USA (e-mail: thalford@trellisware.com).
K. M. Chugg is with the Communication Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-2565 USA (e-mail: chugg@usc. edu).
Communicated by G. Seroussi, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2008.928271

work of Wiberg, Loeliger, and Koetter [5], [6]. It is now well known that together with a suitable message passing schedule, a graphical model implies a soft-in–soft-out (SISO) decoding algorithm, which is optimal for cycle-free models and suboptimal, yet often substantially less complex, for cyclic models (cf., [6]–[10]). It has been observed empirically in the literature that there exists a correlation between the cyclic topology of a graphical model and the performance of the decoding algorithms implied by that graphical model (cf., [5] and [10]–[16]). To summarize this empirical “folk-knowledge,” those graphical models that imply near-optimal decoding algorithms tend to have large girth, a small number of short cycles, and a cycle structure that is not overly regular.1
Two broad classes of graphical modeling problems can be identified in the literature:
• constructive problems: given a set of design requirements, design a suitable code by constructing a good graphical model (i.e., a model that implies a low-complexity, nearoptimal decoding algorithm);
• extractive problems: given a specific (fixed) code, extract a graphical model for that code that implies a decoding algorithm with desired complexity and performance characteristics.
Constructive graphical modeling problems have been widely addressed by the coding theory community. Capacity-approaching LDPC codes have been designed for both the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel (cf., [19] and [20]) and the binary erasure channel (cf., [21]–[23]). Other classes of modern codes have been successfully designed for a wide range of practically motivated block lengths and rates (cf., [24]–[28]).
Less is understood about extractive graphical modeling problems, however. The extractive problems that have received the most attention are those concerning Tanner graph [11] and trellis representations of block codes. Tanner graphs imply low-complexity decoding algorithms; however, the Tanner graphs corresponding to many block codes of practical interest, e.g., high-rate Reed–Muller (RM), Reed–Solomon (RS), and Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) codes, necessarily contain many short cycles [29] and thus usually imply poorly performing decoding algorithms. There is a well-developed theory of conventional trellises [30] and tail-biting trellises [31], [32] for linear block codes. Conventional and tail-biting trellises imply optimal and, respectively, near-optimal decoding algorithms; however, for many block codes of practical interest, these decoding algorithms are prohibitively complex thus
1There are a number of notable exceptions to this “folk-knowledge,” e.g., LDPC codes based on finite geometries (cf., [17], [18]), which perform well despite having Tanner graphs with many short cycles.

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALFORD AND CHUGG: THE EXTRACTION AND COMPLEXITY LIMITS OF GRAPHICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR CODES

3885

motivating the study of more general graphical models (i.e., models with a richer cyclic topology than a single cycle).
The goal of this work is to lay out some of the foundations of the theory of extractive graphical modeling problems. Following a review of graphical models for codes in Section II, a complexity measure for graphical models is introduced in Section III. A number of properties of graphical models related to this measure are described in Section III and defined precisely in the Appendix. The proposed measure captures a cyclic graphical model analog of the familiar notions of state and branch complexity for trellises [30]. The minimal tree complexity of a code, which is a natural generalization of the well-understood minimal trellis complexity of a code to arbitrary cycle-free models, is then defined using this measure.
The tradeoff between cyclic topology and complexity in graphical models is studied in Section IV. Wiberg’s cut-set bound (CSB) is the existing tool that best characterizes this fundamental tradeoff [6]. While the CSB can be used to establish the square-root bound for tail-biting trellises [31] and thus provides a precise characterization of the potential tradeoff between cyclic topology and complexity for single-cycle models, as was first noted by Wiberg et al. [5], it is very challenging to use the CSB to characterize this tradeoff for graphical models with cyclic topologies richer than a single cycle. To provide a more precise characterization of this tradeoff than that offered by the CSB alone, this work introduces a new bound in Section IV—the forest-inducing cut-set bound (FI-CSB)—which may be viewed as a generalization of the square-root bound to graphical models with arbitrary cyclic topologies. Specifically, it is shown that an th-root complexity reduction (with respect to the minimal tree complexity as defined in Section III) requires the introduction of at least
cycles. The proposed bound can thus be viewed as an extension of the square-root bound to graphical models with arbitrary cyclic topologies.
Much as there are many valid complexity measures for conventional trellises, there are many reasonable metrics for the measurement of cyclic graphical model complexity (cf., [33]). While there exists a unique minimal trellis for any linear block code that simultaneously minimizes all reasonable measures of trellis complexity [34], even for the class of cyclic graphical models with the most basic cyclic topology—tail-biting trellises—minimal models are not unique [32], thus motivating the consideration of complexity measures other that introduced in Section III. In Section V, it is shown that, provided a given complexity measure obeys some reasonable properties, then a generalization of the FI-CSB for that particular measure can be made. In particular, a measure that is a slight relaxation of that introduced in Section III is examined in detail.
The transformation of graphical models is studied in Sections VI and VII. Whereas minimal conventional and tail-biting trellis models can be characterized algebraically via trellis-oriented generator matrices [30], there is, in general, no known analog of such algebraic characterizations for arbitrary cycle-free graphical models [35], let alone cyclic models. In the absence of such an algebraic characterization, it is initially unclear as to how cyclic graphical models can be extracted. In Section VI, a set of basic transformation operations on graph-

ical models for codes is introduced and it is shown that any graphical model for a given code can be transformed into any other graphical model for that same code via the application of a finite number of these basic transformations. The transformations studied in Section VI thus provide a mechanism for searching the space of all graphical models for a given code. The Appendix provides a number of examples that illustrate these basic transformations. In Section VII, the basic transformations introduced in Section VI are used to extract novel graphical models for linear block codes. Starting with an initial Tanner graph for a given code, heuristics for extracting other Tanner graphs, generalized Tanner graphs, and more complex cyclic graphical models are investigated. Concluding remarks and directions for future work are given in Section VIII.

II. BACKGROUND

A. Notation

The binomial coefficient is denoted where

are

integers. The finite field with elements is denoted . Given

a finite index set , the vector space over defined on is the

set of vectors

(1)

Suppose that

is some subset of the index set . The

projection of a vector

onto is denoted

(2)

B. Codes, Projections, and Subcodes

Given a finite index set , a linear code over defined on

is some vector subspace

. The block length, dimen-

sion, and rate of are denoted

,

and

, respectively. If known, the minimum

Hamming distance of is denoted and may be described

by the triplet

. This work considers only linear

codes and the terms code and linear code are used interchange-

ably.

A code can be described by an

,

generator matrix over , the rows of which span . An

generator matrix is redundant if is strictly greater than

. A code can also be described by an

, parity-check matrix over , the rows of which

span the null space of (i.e., the dual code ). Each row of

defines a -ary single parity-check equation, which every

codeword in must satisfy. An

parity-check matrix

is redundant if is strictly greater than

(3)

Given a subset

of the index set , the projection of

onto is the set of all codeword projections

(4)

Note that can be interpreted as the code punctured at .

Closely related to is the subcode : the projection onto

of the subset of codewords satisfying

for

. Note

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3886

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

that can be interpreted as the code shortened at . Both

and are linear codes.

While code projections and subcodes correspond to codes de-

fined on a subset of the code index set, it is also useful to con-

sider codes defined on a superset the index set. Let

be a

superset of . The protracted code is defined as the code of

largest dimension such that the projection of onto is pre-

cisely . Specifically, the dimension of is

.

Suppose that and are two codes over defined on the

same index set . The intersection

of and is a

linear code defined on comprising the vectors in that are

contained in both and .

Finally, suppose that and are two codes defined on

the disjoint index sets and , respectively. The Cartesian

product

is the code defined on the index set

such that

and

.

Equivalently, in terms of protracted codes, it is readily verified

that

.

C. Generalized Extension Codes
Let be a linear code over defined on the index set . Let be some subset of and let

(5)

be a vector of nonzero elements of . A generalized exten-

sion of is formed by adding a -ary parity-check on the subset

of codeword coordinates indexed by to (i.e., a -ary par-

tial parity symbol, rather than the parity-check on all codeword

coordinates used to define classical code extensions [36]). The

generalized extension code is defined on the index set

such that if

, then

where

if

and

(6)

length in is a sequence of vertices

in

such that

for all

. A path is a walk

on distinct vertices while a cycle of length is a walk such that

through are distinct and

. Cycles of length are

often denoted -cycles. Two vertices

are adjacent if a

single edge

connects to . A graph is connected if

any two of its vertices are linked by a walk. A forest is a graph

containing no cycles (i.e., a cycle-free graph) and a tree is a con-

nected forest. A cut in a connected graph is some subset of

edges

the removal of which yields a disconnected graph.

Cuts thus partition the vertex set . Finally, a graph is bipartite

if its vertex set can be partitioned

, such

that any edge in joins a vertex in to one in .

E. Graphical Models of Codes

Graphical models for codes have been described by a

number of different authors using a wide variety of notation

(e.g., [6]–[11]). This work uses the notation described below,

which was established by Forney in his codes on graphs papers

[10], [35].

A linear behavioral realization of a linear code

com-

prises three sets indexed by , and , respectively, the latter

two of which are disjoint and unrelated to as follows:

• a set of visible (or symbol) variables

corre-

sponding to the codeword coordinates2 with alphabets ;

• a set of hidden (or state) variables

with alpha-

bets

;

• a set of linear local constraint codes

.

Each visible variable is -ary while the hidden variable with

alphabet is -ary. The hidden variable alphabet index

sets

are disjoint and unrelated to . Each local con-

straint code involves a certain subset of the visible

and hidden

variables and defines a subspace of the

local configuration space

(7)

The length and dimension of are

and

, respectively, and the minimum distance of sat-

isfies

. Note that if

and

for all

, then is simply a classically defined extended

code [36]. More generally, a degree- generalized extension of

is formed by adding -ary partial parity symbols to and

is defined on the index set

. The th partial

parity symbol in such an extension is defined as a partial

parity on some subset of

.

Each local constraint is a linear code over local index set
with well-defined block length

defined on the (8)

D. Graph Theory

(9)

A graph

consists of the following:

• a finite nonempty set of vertices ; • a set of edges , which is some subset of the pairs
; • a set of half-edges , which is any subset of . Note that the graphs considered in this work do not contain parallel edges. It is nonstandard to define graphs with half-edges; however, as will be demonstrated in Section II-E, half-edges are useful in the context of graphical models for codes. A walk of

and dimension

. Local constraints that involve

only hidden variables are internal constraints while those in-

volving visible variables are interface constraints. The full be-

havior of the realization is the set of all visible and hidden

2Observe that this definition is slightly different than that proposed in [35], which permitted the use of q -ary visible variables corresponding to r codeword coordinates. By appropriately introducing equality constraints and q-ary hidden variables, it can be seen that these two definitions are essentially equivalent.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALFORD AND CHUGG: THE EXTRACTION AND COMPLEXITY LIMITS OF GRAPHICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR CODES

3887

variable configurations, which simultaneously satisfy all local

are internal -ary single parity-check constraints, one cor-

constraint codes

responding to each row of . An edge (hidden variable) con-

nects a repetition constraint to a single parity-check constraint

if and only if the codeword coordinate corresponding to

is involved in the single parity-check equation defined by the

(10) row corresponding to . A Tanner graph for is redundant if

it corresponds to a redundant parity-check matrix. A degree-

generalized Tanner graph for is simply a Tanner graph corre-

The projection of the linear code onto is precisely .3

sponding to some degree- generalized extension of in which

Forney demonstrated in [10] that it is sufficient to consider the visible variables corresponding to the partial parity sym-

only those realizations in which all visible variables are involved bols have been removed. Generalized Tanner graphs have been

in a single local constraint and all hidden variables are involved studied previously in the literature under the rubric of general-

in two local constraints. Furthermore, it is sufficient to con- ized parity-check matrices [37], [38].

sider only those realizations in which no two hidden variables

are involved in the same pair of local constraints. Such normal realizations have a natural graphical representation in which

III. COMPLEXITY MEASURE FOR GRAPHICAL MODELS

local constraints are represented by vertices, visible variables by half-edges, and hidden variables by edges. The half-edge cor- A. -ary Graphical Models

responding to the visible variable is incident on the vertex corresponding to the single local constraint that involves . The edge corresponding to the hidden variable is incident on the vertices corresponding to the two local constraints that involve . The notation and term graphical model are used throughout this work to denote both a normal realization of a code and its associated graphical representation.

This work introduces the term -ary graphical model to de-

note a normal realization of a linear code over that satisfies

the following constraints:

• the alphabet index size of every hidden variable

,

satisfies

;

• every local constraint

, either satisfies

It is assumed throughout that the graphical models considered are connected. Equivalently, it is assumed throughout that the

(12)

codes studied cannot be decomposed into Cartesian products of

shorter codes [10]. Note that this restriction will apply only to

the global code considered and not to the local constraints in a

given graphical model.

Finally, because different local constraints are defined on dif-

ferent index sets, care must be taken in defining the intersection

of local constraints. Let be a graphical model for a code

defined on the index set , and let and be two local con-

straints in defined on the local index sets

and

,

or can be decomposed as a Cartesian product of codes, each of which satisfies this condition. The complexity measure simultaneously captures a cyclic graphical model analog of the familiar notions of state and branch complexity for trellises [30]. From the above definition, it is clear that Tanner graphs and generalized Tanner graphs for codes over are -ary graphical models. The efficacy of this complexity measure is discussed further in Section V.

respectively. Denote by

the union of

the respective local index sets. The intersection of and pro- B. Properties of -ary Graphical Models

tracted to

The following three properties of -ary graphical

models will be used in the proof of Theorem 3 in (11) Section IV. These properties are defined in detail in

is well defined because

and

are defined on

a common index set. When it is clear in context, the notation

is used in place of (11) for brevity’s sake.

Section B of the Appendix (which, in turn, uses notation established in Section A of the Appendix).
1) Internal Local Constraint Involvement Property: Any hidden variable in a -ary graphical model can be made

to be incident (on at least one end) on an internal local

F. Tanner Graphs and Generalized Tanner Graphs

The term Tanner graph has been used to describe different

classes of graphical models by different authors. Tanner graphs

denote those graphical models corresponding to parity-check

matrices in this work. Specifically, let be an

parity-check matrix for the code over defined on the index

set . The Tanner graph corresponding to contains

local constraints of which

are interface repetition con-

straints, one corresponding to each codeword coordinate, and

constraint , which satisfies

without

fundamentally altering the complexity or cyclic topology

of that graphical model.

2) Internal Local Constraint Removal Property: The removal

of an internal local constraint from a -ary graphical

model results in a -ary graphical model for a new code

defined on the same index set.

3) Internal Local Constraint Redefinition Property: Any in-

ternal local constraint in a -ary graphical model sat-

isfying

can be equivalently rep-

= 3Note that it assumed throughout this work that if b 2 is such that b 0, = then b 0.

resented by -ary single parity-check equations over the visible variable index set.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3888

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

These properties are particularly useful in concert. Specifically,

let be a -ary graphical model for the linear code over

defined on an index set . Suppose that the internal constraint

satisfying

is removed from

resulting in the new code . Denote by

the set

of -ary single parity-check equations that result when is

redefined over . A vector in is a codeword in if and only

if it is contained in and satisfies each of these single

parity-check equations so that

(13)

The internal local constraint redefinition property affords the

useful notion of local constraint equivalence. Suppose that

and are two distinct graphical models for the code defined

on the index set . Let and be local constraints in and

, respectively. Denote by

the code that is formed

by the intersection of the single parity-check equations that re-

sult when

is redefined over . The local constraints

and are said to be equivalent (denoted

throughout)

if and only if

. That is, two local constraint codes

are equivalent if they impose identical constraints on the visible

variable set.

C. The Minimal Tree Complexity of a Code
The minimal trellis complexity of a linear code over is defined as the base- logarithm of the maximum hidden variable alphabet size in its minimal (unsectionalized) trellis [39]. Considerable attention has been paid to this quantity (cf., [39]–[44]) as it is closely related to the important, and difficult, study of determining the minimum possible complexity of optimal SISO decoding of a given code. This work introduces the minimal tree complexity of a linear code as a generalization of minimal trellis complexity to arbitrary cycle-free graphical model topologies.
Definition 1: The minimal tree complexity of a linear code over is the smallest integer such that there exists a cycle-free -ary graphical model for .

Fig. 1. The q -ary graphical model representation of a trellis section.

Proof: Consider the section of a minimal trellis for illus-

trated in Fig. 1. The hidden (state) variables have alphabet index

sizes

and

, respectively. Because

and

differ by at most in a minimal trellis, and because

(15)

it is readily shown that for all

(16)

completing the proof.

Proposition 3: Let be an

linear code over de-

fined on the index set . Denote by

the maximum

dimension of any subcode of with support size (cf., [44]).

The tree complexity of is lower-bounded by

(17)

Proof: Let be a hidden variable in a

cycle-free

graphical model for . Because is cycle-free, the edge

corresponding to constitutes a cut-set in that partitions the

visible variable index set into the disjoint subsets

and

. Construct a two-section trellis for with the sections

corresponding to the visible variables indexed by and ,

respectively. Wiberg’s CSB [6] in conjunction with a result due

to Forney [45] can then be used to lower-bound the alphabet

index size of by

Much as

, the minimal tree complexity of a

(18)

code is equal to that of its dual.

The desired bound is obtained by noting that Proposition 1: Let be a linear code over with dual .

Then

(19)

and

(14)

Proof: The dualizing procedure described by Forney [10]

(20)

can be applied to a -ary graphical model for in order to

obtain a graphical model for , which is readily shown to be The lower bound established by Proposition 3 is simply an

-ary.

extension of the dimension-length profile (DLP) bound (cf., [39]

The following propositions establish upper and lower bounds on the tree complexity of linear codes.

and [44]) (which, in turn, is an improvement of Muder’s bound [40]). However, not all lower bounds on readily extend to
. For example, it is not clear how to extend Lafourcade and

Proposition 2: The tree complexity of a linear code is Vardy’s results [39], [46] to bounds for due to the difficulty

upper-bounded by its minimal trellis complexity and thus of considering all possible cycle-free topologies rather than only

all known upper bounds on extend to .

the line graphs implied by trellises.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALFORD AND CHUGG: THE EXTRACTION AND COMPLEXITY LIMITS OF GRAPHICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR CODES

3889

An important question for future study is, therefore, the devel-

opment of tight lower bounds on . An example of a code for

which is strictly smaller than was provided by Forney

in [35]. Specifically, let

be the

binary linear code

generated by

and the resulting cycle-free graphical model is thus at most -ary.
IV. THE TRADEOFF BETWEEN CYCLIC TOPOLOGY AND COMPLEXITY

(21)
The minimal (unsectionalized) trellis complexity of this code can be shown to be
(22) whereas Forney illustrated a cycle-free Tanner graph for so that
(23)

A. The Cut-Set and Square-Root Bounds
Wiberg’s CSB [5], [6] is stated below without proof in the language of Section II.

Theorem 1 (CSB): Let be a linear code over defined on

the index set . Let be a graphical model for containing

a cut corresponding to the hidden variables

,

which partitions the index set into

and

. Let the

base- logarithm of the midpoint hidden variable alphabet size

of the minimal two-section trellis for on the two-section time

axis

be

. The sum of the base- logarithm of

the hidden variable alphabet sizes corresponding to the cut is

lower-bounded by

(26)

The following lemma concerning minimal tree complexity will be used in the proof of Theorem 3 in Section IV. The proof of Lemma 1 is detailed further by example in Section C of the Appendix.

Lemma 1: Let and be linear codes over defined on

the index set such that

comprises a -ary single parity-

check code on some subset of the index set

. Define by

the intersection of and

The CSB provides insight into the tradeoff between cyclic topology and complexity in graphical models for codes and it is natural to explore its power to quantify this tradeoff. Two questions that arise for a given linear code over in such an exploration are as follows.
1) For a given complexity , how many cycles must be contained in a -ary graphical model for ?
2) For a given number of cycles , what is the smallest such that a -ary model containing cycles for can

The minimal tree complexity of is upper-bounded by

exist? (24)
For a fixed cyclic topology, the CSB can be simultaneously applied to all cuts yielding a linear programming lower bound

on the hidden variable alphabet sizes [5]. For the special case (25) of a single-cycle graphical model (i.e., a tail-biting trellis), this

Proof: The result is proved by explicit construction of a technique yields a simple solution [31].

-ary cycle-free graphical model for as follows. Let

be some -ary cycle-free graphical model for and let be

a minimal connected subtree of containing the set of in-

terface constraints, which involve the visible variables in . De-

note by

and

the subset of hidden vari-

ables and local constraints, respectively, contained in . Choose

some local constraint vertex

, as a root for .

Observe that the choice of , while arbitrary, induces a direc-

Theorem 2 (Square-Root Bound): Let be a linear code over

of even length and let

be the base- logarithm

of the minimum possible hidden variable alphabet size of a con-

ventional trellis for at its midpoint over all coordinate order-

ings. The base- logarithm of the minimum possible hidden

variable alphabet size

of a tail-biting trellis for is

lower-bounded by

tionality in : downstream toward the root vertex or upstream

(27)

away from the root vertex. For every

, denote by

the subset of visible variables in , which are upstream

from that hidden variable edge.

A

-ary graphical model for is then constructed from

by updating each hidden variable

, to also con-

tain the -ary partial parity of the upstream visible variables in

The square-root bound can thus be used to answer the questions posed above for a specific class of single-cycle graphical models. For topologies richer than a single cycle, however, the aforementioned linear programming technique quickly becomes intractable. Specifically, there are

. The local constraints

, are updated

accordingly. Finally, is updated to enforce the -ary single

(28)

parity constraint defined by . This updating procedure in-

creases the alphabet size of each hidden variable

, ways to partition a size visible variable index set into two

by at most one and adds at most one single parity-check (or nonempty, disjoint, subsets. The number of cuts to be considered

repetition) constraint to the definition of each

, by the linear programming technique for a given cyclic topology

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3890

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

thus grows exponentially with block length and a different minimal two-stage trellis must be constructed to bound the size of each of those cuts.

B. Forest-Inducing Cuts

Recall that a cut in a graph is some subset of the edges the removal of which yields a disconnected graph. A cut
is thus defined without regard to the cyclic topology of the disconnected components, which remain after its removal. To provide a characterization of the tradeoff between cyclic topology and complexity that is more precise than that provided by the CSB alone, this work focuses on a specific type of cut which is defined below. Two useful properties of such cuts are established by Propositions 4 and 5.

Definition 2: Let be a connected graph. A forest-inducing

cut4 is some subset of edges

the removal of which

yields a forest with precisely two components.

rank. Specifically, the cycle rank of a connected graph is equal to
(33)
and the number of cycles and unions of disjoint cycles in is upper-bounded by (cf., [49]).
C. The Forest-Inducing Cut-Set Bound
With forest-inducing cuts defined, the required properties of -ary graphical models described, and Lemma 1 established, the main result concerning the tradeoff between cyclic topology and graphical model complexity can now be stated and proved.
Theorem 3: Let be a linear code over defined on the index set and suppose that is a -ary graphical model for with forest-inducing cut size . The minimal tree complexity of is upper-bounded by

Proposition 4: Let

be a connected graph. The

size of any forest-inducing cut in is precisely

(29)

Proof: It is well known that a connected graph is a tree if and only if (cf., [49])

(30)

Similarly, a graph composed of two cycle-free components satisfies

(31)

The result then follows from the observation that the size of a forest-inducing cut is the number of edges, which must be removed to satisfy (31).
Proposition 5: Let be a connected graph with forest-inducing cut size . The number of cycles in is lowerbounded by

(34)

Proof: The result is proved by induction on . Let

and suppose that

is the sole edge in some forest-

inducing cut in . Because the removal of partitions

into disconnected cycle-free components, must be cycle-free

and

by construction.

Now suppose that

and let

be an

edge in some forest-inducing cut in . By the first -ary

graphical model property of Section III-B, is (after suitable

transformations) incident on some internal local constraint

satisfying

. Denote by the -ary

graphical model that results when is removed from , and

by the corresponding code over . The forest-inducing cut

size of is at most

because the removal of from

results in the removal a single vertex and at least two edges. By

the induction hypothesis, the minimal tree complexity of is

upper-bounded by

(35)

From the discussion of Section III-B, it is clear that can

(32) be redefined as

single parity-check equations, for

Proof: Let the removal of a forest-inducing cut in the

, over on such that

connected graph yield the cycle-free components and

(36)

and let

with

. Because

is a tree, there

is a unique path in

connecting and . There is thus a It follows from Lemma 1 that

unique cycle in corresponding to the edge pair

. There

are

such distinct edge pairs, which yield the lower bound.

(37)

Note that this is a lower bound because for certain graphs, there can exist cycles that contain more than two edges from a forest- completing the proof.

inducing cut.

An immediate corollary to Theorem 3 results when Proposi-

Note that the forest-inducing cut size of a graph provides tion 5 is applied in conjunction with Theorem 3:

a lower bound on the number of cycles in , in contrast to the Corollary 1: Let be a linear code over with minimal upper bound provided by the more familiar measure of cycle tree complexity . The number of cycles in any -ary

4Note that such cuts were previously described as “tree-inducing” in [47] and [48]. In this work, the terminology “forest-inducing” has been adopted for the cuts and the resulting FI-CSB to emphasize that the graph resulting from the removal of such a cut is disconnected.

graphical model for

is lower-bounded by

(38)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALFORD AND CHUGG: THE EXTRACTION AND COMPLEXITY LIMITS OF GRAPHICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR CODES

3891

D. Interpretation of the FI-CSB

Provided

is known or can be lower-bounded, the

forest-inducing cut-set bound (FI-CSB) (and more specifically

Corollary 1) can be used to answer the questions posed in

Section IV-A. The FI-CSB is further discussed below.

1) The FI-CSB and the CSB: On the surface, the FI-CSB

and the CSB are similar in statement; however, there are three

important differences between the two. First, the CSB does not

explicitly address the complexity of the local constraints on ei-

ther side of a given cut. Forney provided a number of illustrative

examples in [35] that stress the importance of characterizing

graphical model complexity in terms of both hidden variable

size and local constraint complexity. Second, the CSB does not

explicitly address the cyclic topology of the graphical model that

results when the edges in a cut are removed. The removal of a

forest-inducing cut results in two cycle-free disconnected com-

ponents and the size of a forest-inducing cut can thus be used

to make statements about the complexity of optimal SISO de-

coding using variable conditioning in a cyclic graphical model

(cf., [10] and [50]–[54]). Finally, and most fundamentally, the

FI-CSB addresses the aforementioned intractability of applying

the CSB to graphical models with rich cyclic topologies.

2) The FI-CSB and the Square-Root Bound: Theorem 3 can

be used to make a statement similar to Theorem 2, which is valid

for all graphical models containing a single cycle.

Corollary 2: Let be a linear code over with minimal tree complexity and let be the smallest integer such that there exists a -ary graphical model for , which contains at most one cycle. Then

(39)

Golay code. Calderbank et al.’s tail-biting trellis representation

is sectionalized so that there are two codeword coordinates per

trellis section and two state transitions per trellis state (see [31,

Fig. 5]). While the state complexity of this tail-biting trellis is

indeed , each trellis section is described by a length , dimen-

sion code over so that the corresponding graphical model

is -ary. Corollary 2 can, therefore, be used to show that

is at most . However, it is known that

. The minimal

bit-level conventional trellis for contains (noncentral) state

variables with alphabet size 512 and is thus a -ary graphical

model [40].

3) Aymptotics of the FI-CSB: Denote by the minimum

number of cycles in any -ary graphical model for a linear

code over with minimal tree complexity . For large

values of

, the lower bound on established by Corol-

lary 1 becomes

(42)

The ratio of the minimal complexity of a cycle-free model for to that of a -ary graphical model is thus upper-bounded by

(43)

The FI-CSB can be used to argue that -ary graphical models cannot support asymptotically good codes over unless the number of cycles increases with the square of the block length. Specifically, consider a family of codes over with increasing length and constant rate. To aid aymptotic analysis, assume that the DLP bound [44] on trellis complexity of any given code in this family is tight so that

More generally, Theorem 3 can be used to establish the following generalization of the square-root bound to graphical models with arbitrary cyclic topologies.
Corollary 3: Let be a linear code over with minimal tree complexity . For some positive integer , let be the smallest integer such that there exists a -ary graphical model for , which contains at most cycles. Then
(40)

(44) where is some small constant that does not depend on . Under this assumption, the difference between and is bounded (by Proposition 3). The FI-CSB can then be used in conjunction with Lafourcade and Vardy’s lower bound on trellis complexity [46]
(45)

The desired generalization of the square-root bound is ob-

tained by noting that measures the logarithm of decoding

complexity in Corollary 3: an th-root complexity reduction

with respect to the minimal tree complexity requires the intro-

duction of at least

cycles.

There are few known examples of classical linear block codes

that meet the square-root bound with equality. Shany and Be’ery

proved that many RM codes cannot meet this bound under any

bit ordering [55]. There does, however, exist a tail-biting trellis

for the extended binary Golay code , which meets the square-

root bound with equality so that [31]

and

(41)

This tail-biting trellis model cannot, however, be used as the basis for a new result on the minimal tree complexity of the

to show that

. To support an aymptotically

good sequence of codes for which the assumption in (44) holds,

must thus grow linearly with and the number of cycles

must, therefore, grow with the square of . This result is

consistent with the work of Etzion et al. [56] who proved that

Tanner graphs must have cycle rank that increases linearly with

block size to support asymptotically good codes. However, the

focus on forest-inducing cut size rather than cycle rank in this

work affords a tighter resulting bound on the number of cycles.

Note that it remains open as to whether such a statement can

be made for families of codes for which the DLP lower bound

on trellis complexity is not tight or, more generally, for families

of codes for which the difference between and is not

bounded.

To further explore the asymptotics of the FI-CSB, consider

a code of particular practical interest: the binary image

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3892

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

Wiberg’s CSB and the square-root bound for tail-biting trel-

lises are statements that employ hidden variable alphabet size

as a complexity measure. Forney demonstrated in [35] that it is

insufficient to consider only hidden variable size, which can be

viewed as a generalization of trellis state complexity, and argued

that a suitable generalization of trellis branch complexity should

instead be studied. To this end, the constraint complexity of a

cycle-free graphical model was defined in [35] as the maximum

dimension of any of its component local constraint codes. Con-

straint complexity was further studied by Kashyap who intro-

duced the term treewidth to denote the tree complexity induced

by this measure [58]. While the constraint complexity measure

does indeed prevent local constraints from “hiding” complexity,

the dimension of local constraints is a somewhat unsatisfactory

proxy for decoding complexity because, unlike minimal trellis

and tree complexities, the treewidth of a code and its dual need

not be identical.

The complexity measure introduced in Section III-A was mo-

tivated by the desire to simultaneously capture hidden variable

complexity and an indicator of local constraint complexity that

Fig. 2. Minimum number of cycles required for 2 -ary graphical models of is a more accurate gauge of decoding complexity than dimen-

the binary image of the [255; 223; 33] Reed–Solomon code.

sion alone. Specifically, the local constraint complexity mea-

sure used to define -ary graphical models constitutes an albeit

of the

Reed–Solomon code . Because is

maximum distance separable, a reasonable estimate for the min-

imal tree complexity of this code is obtained from Wolf’s bound

[57]

loose upper bound on trellis state complexity over the base field . There are many conceivable alternative measures of local
constraint complexity: one could upper-bound the state complexity of the local constraints or even their -induced tree complexity for some measure (thus defining tree complexity

recursively). Given this range of possible proxies for local con(46) straint decoding complexity, it is useful to consider the family

Fig. 2 plots as a function of for

assuming (46). of proper graphical model complexity measures defined below.

Note that because the complexity of the decoding algorithms Definition 4: A graphical model complexity measure is

implied by -ary graphical models grow roughly as

said to be proper if it obeys the following four properties.

is roughly a

decoding complexity measure.

P1) A graphical model with -complexity has maximum

hidden variable alphabet index set size at most .

V. ON COMPLEXITY MEASURES AND GENERALIZATIONS OF THE FOREST-INDUCING CUT-SET BOUND

P2) The insertion of a degree- repetition constraint does not increase the -complexity of a model.
P3) The removal of a local constraint does not increase the

A. Proper Complexity Measures
Recall that the aim of graphical model extraction is the obtention of a model that implies a decoding algorithm with desired complexity and performance characteristics. Complexity measures for graphical models are, therefore, useful inasmuch

-complexity of a model.

P4) The -induced tree complexity of the intersection of a

code defined on the index set with a single parity-

check constraint

defined on some subset of the

index set

is upper-bounded by

as they are indicative of the complexity of the iterative message-passing algorithms implied by those models. Formally, a

(47)

graphical model complexity measure is simply a map from the space of all graphical models to the set of nonnegative in-

where

is a constant that depends only on .

tegers. Associated with any given graphical model complexity Properties P1)–P3) of proper graphical model complexity

measure is the following generalization of the minimal tree measures reflect the complexity characteristics of the mes-

complexity for that measure.

sage-passing algorithms implied by those models. For example,

Definition 3: The -induced tree complexity of a linear code

over is the smallest integer

such that there exists a

cycle-free model for with -complexity

.

hidden variable alphabet size dictates message size, while it has been noted previously that degree- repetition constraints add no complexity cost to decoding algorithms [35], and thus ought not impact model complexity. Property P4) serves to bound

Results on the -induced tree complexity are clearly ger- the growth in the -induced tree complexity of a code as it is

mane to the question of how small the complexity of optimal constructed as the successive intersection of single parity-check

SISO decoding of a given code can be.

constraints. Note that this property is consistent with existing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALFORD AND CHUGG: THE EXTRACTION AND COMPLEXITY LIMITS OF GRAPHICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR CODES

3893

measures for graphical model complexity. For example, the addition of a single parity-check constraint to a code increases its minimal trellis complexity by at most one. Furthermore, the proof of Lemma 1 can be used to show that the addition of a single parity-check constraint can increase the maximum hidden variable alphabet index set size of a cycle-free graphical model by at most one.

B. A Generalized FI-CSB
The forest-inducing cut-set bound is generalized to all proper graphical model complexity measures in this section. The Proof of Theorem 4 uses the fact that the local constraint redefinition property studied in Section III-B is not confined to the complexity measure introduced in Section III-A. Rather, as illustrated in Section B of Appendix, local constraints can be redefined as equivalent sets of single parity-check constraints on the visible variable set regardless of the chosen graphical model complexity measure.
Theorem 4: Let be a proper graphical model complexity measure. Let be a linear code over defined on the index set
and suppose that is graphical model with -complexity and forest-inducing cut size . The minimal -induced tree complexity of is upper-bounded by

(48)

Proof: The result is proved by induction of . If

,

then is cycle-free and (48) reduces to

. Suppose

that

. As per the proof of Theorem 3, there exists

some local constraint satisfying

that

can be removed from . Denote by the resulting graphical

model and by the corresponding code over . Note that prop-

erties P1)–P3) of proper complexity measures ensure that such a

local constraint exists without loss of generality and that the

complexity of the resulting graphical model is at most .

By the induction hypothesis, the -induced tree complexity of

is upper-bounded by

Proof: The result follows immediately from the applica-

tion of Proposition 5 in conjunction with the observation that

because

, the upper bound of Theorem 4 is further

upper-bounded by

.

C. The Wolf Measure for Graphical Model Complexity

The local constraint complexity measure used to define

-ary graphical models in Section III-A constitutes an upper

bound on trellis state complexity over . It was established

by Lemma 1 that

for this measure and, as a result,

the FI-CSB reduces to a form similar to the square-root bound

for single-cycle models.5 The specific upper bound on trellis

state complexity considered in Section III.A, however, may

not always be the best bound to consider in the context of

message-passing decoding algorithms. Specifically, let be

a graphical model for the linear code over . Suppose

that is some local constraint in incident on the hidden

variable [i.e.,

]. If is to be decoded optimally

via a trellis, then the time axis of that trellis must be ordered

in such a way that the trellis stages corresponding to

are consecutive. The upper bound on trellis state complexity

considered in Section III-A does not necessarily respect this

ordering requirement. For example, the bit reordering consid-

ered in Section C of the Appendix illustrates a violation of this

requirement for -ary hidden variables.

In light of the above discussion, a graphical complexity mea-

sure that is a slight relaxation of that studied in Sections III and

IV is examined in detail in this section. Because the relaxed

measure uses Wolf’s upper bound on trellis state complexity as

a measure of local constraint complexity [57], it is denoted the

Wolf measure.

Definition 5: A graphical model for a linear code over

has Wolf measure

if:

• the alphabet index size of every hidden variable

,

satisfies

;

• every local constraint

, satisfies

(52) (49)

Because can be redefined as

single parity-check con-

straints over , it follows from property P4) of proper graphical

model complexity measures that

(50)

completing the proof.

Theorem 4 implies the following generalization of Corollary 1 to arbitrary proper graphical model complexity measures.

Corollary 4: Let be a proper graphical model complexity

measure. Let be a linear code over with -induced tree

complexity

. The number of cycles in any graphical

model for with -complexity is lower-bounded by

(51)

In the following, the term Wolf complexity is used as shorthand

for the -induced tree complexity

.

By definition, the Wolf measure obeys property P1) of proper graphical model complexity measures. Following arguments similar to those for -ary graphical models, it is readily verified that the Wolf measure obeys properties P2) and P3) as well. It, therefore, remains to specify how Wolf complexity grows with the addition of a single parity-check constraint. Before stating and proving Lemma 2 below, a useful property of the Wolf measure is first described. Proposition 6 is an analog of the constraint refinement studied by Forney in the context of the constraint complexity measure [35].

Proposition 6: Let be a graphical model for the code
with Wolf measure . Without loss of generality, the maximum
degree of any local constraint in is .
M = 5Indeed, for any proper graphical complexity measure satisfying  1,
the generalized FI-CSB reduces to Corollary 2 for single-cycle models.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3894

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

responding to in is three so that , and

Fig. 3. Replacement of the local constraint C by an equivalent trellis realiza-

(56)

tion.

completing the proof.

Proof: The result is proved explicitly for an internal

local constraint; however, the same argument can be made

for interface constraints. Let be an internal local constraint

in such that

. As illustrated in Fig. 3,

can be replaced by the degree- constraints

corresponding to a trellis realization of . If

,

then the trellis realization of can be constructed via the

generator matrix method, while if

, then

the parity-check matrix method may be employed (cf., [59]).

In either case, the maximum alphabet index size of the new

hidden variables

is . Following Proposition 2, it

is readily verified that for all

Theorem 4 and Corollary 4 can now be immediately specialized to the Wolf measure.
Theorem 5: Let be a graphical model for the linear code with Wolf measure and forest-inducing cut size . The Wolf complexity of is upper-bounded by

(57)

Corollary 5: Let be a linear code over with Wolf

complexity

. The number of cycles in any graphical

model for with Wolf measure is lower-bounded by

(58)

(53)

Therefore, the replacement of in by an equivalent trellis realization neither increases graphical model complexity in terms of the Wolf measure, nor fundamentally alters the cyclic topology of the model.

Lemma 2: Let and be linear codes over defined on

the index set such that

comprises a -ary single parity-

check code on some subset of the index set

. The Wolf

complexity of

is upper-bounded by

Comparing Theorems 3 and 5, the Wolf measure and the complexity measure introduced in Section III yield similar interpretations of the tradeoff between cyclic topology and complexity. Specializing Theorem 5 to single-cycle models, however, illustrates a difference between the two respective graphical model complexity measures.

Corollary 6: Let be a linear code over with Wolf com-

plexity

and let be the smallest integer such that there

exists a graphical model for with Wolf measure con-

taining at most a single cycle. Then

(54)

so that

.

Proof: The result is proved by explicit construction of a

cycle-free model for with Wolf measure at most

as

follows. Let be a cycle-free graphical model for with Wolf

measure

, wherein is the minimal connected subtree of

containing the interface constraints that involve the visible

variables in . Construct a cycle-free model for following

the same procedure as used in the proof of Lemma 1. It is clear

that the maximum hidden variable alphabet index size in is

at most

. It, therefore, remains to consider the local

constraints in .

Let be a local constraint in that is updated as per the

proof of Lemma 1 and denote the resulting updated local con-

straint in by . By Proposition 6, the degree of is at most

. There are two cases to consider. First, suppose that is up-

dated via the addition of a single repetition constraint. In this

case, the degree of the vertex corresponding to in is two so

that

, and

(59)

Thus, the Wolf complexity measure yields a cube-root bound rather than a square-root bound for single-cycle models. In light of the CSB, however, it is clear that this cube-root bound cannot be met so that the complexity measure introduced in Section III yields a bound that may be in some sense tighter than that afforded by the Wolf measure for single-cycle models.

Note finally that the proof of Lemma 2 can also be used to

show that

for the constraint complexity measure [35],

[58]. Statements identical to Theorem 5 and Corollary 5 can,

therefore, be made for constraint complexity and treewidth.

VI. GRAPHICAL MODEL TRANSFORMATION
Let be a graphical model for the linear code over . This work introduces eight basic graphical model operations the application of which to results in a new graphical model for .
1) The merging of two local constraints and into the new local constraint , which satisfies

(60) (55) 2) The splitting of a local constraint into two new local

Next, suppose that is updated via the addition of a -ary single

constraints and , which satisfy

parity-check constraint. In this case, the degree of the vertex cor-

(61)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALFORD AND CHUGG: THE EXTRACTION AND COMPLEXITY LIMITS OF GRAPHICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR CODES

3895

1)

: The graphical model is transformed into the

-ary model as follows. Each local constraint in is split

into the

-ary single parity-check constraints that

Fig. 4. Transformation of G into G~ via nine subtransformations.

define it. A degree- repetition constraint is then inserted into

every hidden variable with alphabet index set size

and

these repetition constraints are then each split into -ary rep-

etition constraints as illustrated in Fig. 5. Each local constraint

in the resulting graphical model satisfies

.

Similarly, each hidden variable in the resulting graphical

model satisfies

.

2)

: A (possibly redundant) generalized Tanner

graph is simply a bipartite -ary graphical model with one vertex

Fig. 5. Transformation of the q -ary hidden variable S into q-ary hidden vari- class corresponding to repetition constraints and one to single

ables.

parity-check constraints in which visible variables are incident

only on repetition constraints. By appropriately inserting de-

3) The insertion/removal of a degree- repetition constraint. 4) The insertion/removal of a trivial length , dimension
local constraint. 5) The insertion/removal of an isolated partial parity-check
constraint.

gree- repetition constraints, the -ary model can be trans-

formed into .

3)

: Let the generalized Tanner graph corre-

spond to an

redundant parity-check matrix

for a degree- generalized extension of with rank

Note that some of these operations have been introduced im-

(62)

plicitly in this paper and in other publications. For example, the

proof of the local constraint involvement property of -ary graphical models presented in Section III-B utilizes degreerepetition constraint insertion. Local constraint merging has been considered by a number of authors under the rubric of clustering (e.g., [9] and [10]). This work introduces the

A finite number of row operations can be applied to

re-

sulting in a new parity-check matrix the last

rows of which are all zero. Similarly, a finite number of basic op-

erations can be applied to resulting in a generalized Tanner

term merging specifically so that it can be contrasted with graph containing

trivial constraints, which

its inverse operation: splitting. Detailed definitions of each can then be removed to yield . Specifically, consider the row

of the eight basic graphical model operations are given in operation on Section D of the Appendix. In this section, it is shown that these

, which replaces a row by

basic operations span the entire space of graphical models for

(63)

.

Theorem 6: Let and be two graphical models for the linear code over . Then, can be transformed into via the application of a finite number of basic graphical model operations.
Proof: Define the following four subtransformations, which can be used to transform into a Tanner graph :

where

. The graphical model transformation corre-

sponding to this row operation first merges the -ary single

parity-check constraints and (which correspond to rows

and , respectively) and then splits the resulting check into

the constraints and (which correspond to rows and ,

respectively). Note that this procedure is valid because

1) the transformation of into a -ary model ;

2) the transformation of into a (possibly) redundant gen-

(64)

eralized Tanner graph ; 3) the transformation of into a nonredundant generalized
Tanner graph ; 4) the transformation of into a Tanner graph . Because each basic graphical model operation has an inverse,
can be transformed into by inverting each of the four subtransformations. To prove that can be transformed into via the application of a finite number of basic graphical model operations, it suffices to show that each of the four sub-transformations requires a finite number of operations and that the

4)

: Let the degree- generalized Tanner graph

correspond to an

parity-check

matrix . A degree-

generalized Tanner graph is

obtained from as follows. Denote by the parity-check

matrix for the degree- generalized extension defined by ,

which is systematic in the position corresponding to the th

partial parity symbol. Because a finite number of row opera-

tions can be applied to

to yield , a finite number of

local constraint merge and split operations can be applied to

transformation of the Tanner graph into a Tanner graph

to yield the corresponding generalized Tanner graph . Re-

corresponding to requires a finite number of operations. This moving the now isolated partial-parity check constraint corre-

proof summary is illustrated in Fig. 4.

sponding to the th partial parity symbol in yields the de-

That each of the five subtransformations from to illus- sired degree-

generalized Tanner graph . By repeat-

trated in Fig. 4 requires only a finite number of basic graphical edly applying this procedure, all partial parity symbols can be

model operations is proved below.

removed from resulting in .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3896

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

evidence concerning the detrimental effect of short cycles on decoding performance (cf., [6], [10]–[16]), and second, by the existence of an efficient algorithm for counting short cycles in bipartite graphs [16]. Simulation results for the models extracted via these heuristics for a number of extended BCH codes are presented and discussed in Section VII-D.

A. A Greedy Heuristic for Tanner Graph Extraction

5)

: Let the Tanner graphs and correspond

to the parity-check matrices and , respectively. Because

can be transformed into via a finite number of row op-

erations, can be similarly transformed into via the ap-

plication of a finite number of local constraint merge and split

operations.

The Tanner graphs corresponding to many linear block codes

of practical interest necessarily contain many short cycles [29].

Suppose that any Tanner graph for a given code must have

girth at least

; an interesting problem is the extraction

of a Tanner graph for containing the smallest number of

-cycles. The extraction of such Tanner graphs is espe-

cially useful in the context of ad hoc decoding algorithms that

utilize Tanner graphs such as Jiang and Narayanan’s stochastic

shifting-based iterative decoding algorithm for cyclic codes

[60] and the random redundant iterative decoding algorithm

presented in [61].

The procedure defined by Algorithm 1 performs a greedy

search for a Tanner graph for with girth

and the

smallest number of

-cycles starting with an initial

Tanner graph

, which corresponds to some binary

parity-check matrix . Define an -row operation as the

replacement of row in by the binary sum of rows

and . As detailed in the proof of Theorem 6, if and are

the single parity-check constraints in

corresponding

to and , respectively, then an -row operation in

is equivalent to merging and to form a new constraint

and then splitting into and (where

enforces the binary sum of rows and ). Algorithm 1

iteratively finds the rows and in with corresponding

-row operation that results in the largest short cycle re-

duction in

at every step. This greedy search continues

until there are no more row operations that improve the short

cycle structure of

.

B. A Greedy Heuristic for Generalized Tanner Graph Extraction

The study of generalized Tanner graphs (GTGs) was intro-

VII. GRAPHICAL MODEL EXTRACTION VIA TRANSFORMATION duced by Yedidia et al. in [38] to obtain sparse representations

The set of basic model operations introduced in the previous section enables the space of all graphical models for a given code to be searched, thus allowing for model extraction to be expressed as an optimization problem. The challenges of defining extraction as optimization are twofold. First, a cost measure on the space of graphical models must be found, which is simultaneously meaningful in some real sense (e.g., highly correlated with decoding performance) and computationally tractable. Second, given that discrete optimization problems are, in general, very hard, heuristics for extraction must be found. In this section, heuristics are investigated for the extraction of graphical models for binary linear block codes from an initial Tanner graph. The cost measures considered are functions of the short cycle structure of graphical models. The use of such cost measures is motivated first by empirical

for codes with necessarily dense Tanner graphs. A number of authors have studied the extraction of GTGs of codes for which
with a particular focus on models that are fourcycle-free and that correspond to generalized code extensions of minimal degree [62], [63]. Minimal degree extensions are sought because no information is available to the decoder about the partial parity symbols in a generalized Tanner graph and the introduction of too many such symbols has been observed empirically to adversely affect decoding performance [63].
Generalized Tanner graph extraction algorithms proceed via the insertion of partial parity symbols, an operation which is most readily described as a parity-check matrix manipulation.6
6Note that partial parity insertion can also be viewed through the lens of graphical model transformation. The insertion of a partial parity symbol proceeds via the insertion of an isolated partial parity check followed by a series of local constraint merge and split operations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALFORD AND CHUGG: THE EXTRACTION AND COMPLEXITY LIMITS OF GRAPHICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR CODES

3897

Following the notation introduced in Section II-F, suppose that a partial parity on the coordinates indexed by

(65)

is to be introduced to a GTG for corresponding to a degree-

generalized extension with parity-check matrix . A row

is first appended to with in the positions corresponding to

coordinates indexed by and in the other positions. A column

is then appended to with, in the case of binary codes, only

in the position corresponding to (note that this is readily gen-

eralized to nonbinary codes). The resulting parity-check matrix

describes a degree-

generalized extension . Every

row

in , which contains in all of the positions

corresponding to coordinates indexed by is then replaced by

the binary sum of and . Suppose that there are such

rows. It is readily verified that the forest-inducing cut size

of the GTG that results from this insertion is related to that of

the initial GTG, , by

(66)

Algorithm 3 performs a greedy search for a four-cycle-free

generalized Tanner graph for with the smallest number of in-

serted partial parity symbols starting with an initial Tanner graph

, which corresponds to some binary parity-check ma-

trix . Algorithm 3 iteratively finds the symbol subsets that re-

sult in the largest forest-inducing cut size reduction and then in-

troduces the partial parity symbol corresponding to one of those

subsets. At each step, Algorithm 3 uses Algorithm 2 to generate

a candidate list of partial parity symbols to insert and chooses

from that list the symbol, which reduces the most short cycles

when inserted. This greedy procedure continues until the gener-

alized Tanner graph contains no four cycles.

Algorithm 3 is closely related to the GTG extraction heuris-

tics proposed by Sankaranarayanan and Vasic´ [62] and Kumar

and Milenkovic [63] (henceforth referred to as the SV and KM

heuristics, respectively). It is readily shown that Algorithm 3

is guaranteed to terminate using the proof technique of [62].

The SV heuristic considers only the insertion of partial parity

symbols corresponding to coordinate index sets of size (i.e.,

). The KM heuristic considers only the insertion of par-

tial parity symbols corresponding to coordinate index sets satis-

fying

. Algorithm 2, however, considers all coordinate loses nearly 1 dB with respect to optimal (trellis) decoding thus

index sets satisfying

and

and then motivating the search for more sophisticated graphical models.

uses (66) to evaluate which of these coordinate sets results in

the largest tree-inducing cut size reduction. Algorithm 3 is thus able to extract GTGs corresponding to generalized extensions C. A Greedy Heuristic for -ary Model Extraction

of smaller degree than the SV and KM heuristics. To illustrate For most codes, the decoding algorithms implied by general-

this observation, the degrees of the generalized code extensions ized Tanner graphs exhibit only modest performance gains with

that result when the SV, KM, and proposed (HC) heuristics are respect to those implied by Tanner graphs, if any, thus moti-

applied to parity-check matrices for three codes are provided in vating the search for more complex graphical models. Algo-

Table I. Fig. 6 compares the performance of the three extracted rithm 4 iteratively applies the constraint merging operation to

GTG decoding algorithms for the

BCH code to illus- obtain a -ary graphical model from an initial Tanner graph

trate the efficacy of extracting GTGs corresponding to exten-

for some prescribed maximum complexity . At

sions of smallest possible degree. Note that while the decoding each step, Algorithm 4 determines the pair of local constraints

algorithm extracted using the HC heuristic outperforms those and , which when merged reduces the most short cycles

corresponding to the SV and KM heuristics, respectively, it still without violating the maximum complexity constraint . To

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3898

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

Fig. 6. BER performance of three GTG decoding algorithms for the [31; 21; 5] BCH code. One hundred iterations of a flooding schedule were performed. Binary antipodal signaling over an AWGN channel is assumed.

Fig. 7. BER performance of different decoding algorithms for the [32; 21; 6] extended BCH code. Fifty iterations of a flooding schedule were performed for all of the suboptimal SISO decoding algorithms.

TABLE I GENERALIZED CODE EXTENSION DEGREES CORRESPONDING TO THE FOUR-CYCLE-FREE GTGS OBTAINED VIA THE SV, KM, AND HC HEURISTICS

respectively. In both Figs. 7 and 8, the performance of a number

of suboptimal SISO decoding algorithms for these codes is com-

pared to algebraic hard-in–hard-out (HIHO) decoding (i.e., a

classical Berlekamp–Massey-style decoder) and optimal trellis

SISO decoding. Binary antipodal signaling over AWGN chan-

ensure that the efficient cycle counting algorithm of [16] can be utilized, only pairs of constraints that are both internal or both interface are merged at each step. Because the initial Tanner graph is bipartite with vertex classes corresponding to interface (repetition) and internal (single parity-check) constraints, the graphical models that result from every such local constraint merge operations are similarly bipartite.

nels is assumed throughout.

Initial parity-check matrices were formed by extending

cyclic parity-check matrices for the respective

and

BCH codes (with rows corresponding to cyclic

shifts of the generators polynomials of their respective duals)

[36]. These initial parity-check matrices were used as in-

puts to Algorithm 1, yielding the parity-check matrices ,

which in turn were used as inputs to Algorithm 3, yielding

D. Simulation Results

four-cycle-free generalized Tanner graphs. The suboptimal decoding algorithms implied by these graphical models are

The proposed extraction heuristics were applied to two ex- labeled

, and

, respectively. The

tended BCH codes with parameters

and

, generalized Tanner graphs extracted for the

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALFORD AND CHUGG: THE EXTRACTION AND COMPLEXITY LIMITS OF GRAPHICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR CODES

3899

TABLE II SHORT CYCLE STRUCTURE OF THE INITIAL AND EXTRACTED GRAPHICAL
MODELS FOR THE [32; 21; 6] EXTENDED BCH CODE

TABLE III SHORT CYCLE STRUCTURE OF THE INITIAL AND EXTRACTED GRAPHICAL
MODELS FOR THE [64; 51; 6] EXTENDED BCH CODE

Fig. 8. BER performance of different decoding algorithms for the [64; 51; 6] extended BCH code. Fifty iterations of a flooding schedule were performed for all of the suboptimal SISO decoding algorithms.

TABLE IV SHORT CYCLE STRUCTURE OF THE INITIAL AND EXTRACTED GRAPHICAL
MODELS FOR THE [256; 239; 6] EXTENDED BCH CODE

codes correspond to degree- and degree- gen-

eralized extensions, respectively. Finally, the parity-check

matrices were used as inputs to Algorithm 4 with var-

ious values of . The number four-, six-, and eight-cycles

contained in the extracted graphical models for

the

and

codes are given in Tables II and

III, respectively.

The utility of Algorithm 1 is illustrated in both Figs. 7 and

8: the

algorithms outperform the

algorithms

by approximately 0.1 and 0.5 dB at a bit error rate (BER) of

illustrated in Fig. 9 were constructed in a manner analogous to

those for the

and

codes. Table IV illus-

trates the number of four-, six-, and eight-cycles contained in

the extracted models. Note that the decoding algorithm implied

by the -ary graphical model for this code gains less than 1 dB

with respect to algebraic decoding. The results of Fig. 9 thus

motivate the study of extraction beyond simple greedy searches

as well as those that use all of the basic graphical modeling

operations (rather than just constraint merging).

for the

and

codes, respectively. For

both codes, the four-cycle-free generalized Tanner graph de-

VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

coding algorithms outperform Tanner graph decoding by ap- This work studied the space of graphical models for a given

proximately 0.2 dB at a BER of . Further performance im- code to lay out some of the foundations of the theory of extrac-

provements are achieved for both codes by going beyond binary tive graphical modeling problems. The primary contributions of

models. Specifically, at a BER of , the suboptimal SISO this work were the introduction of a new bound characterizing

decoding algorithm implied by the extracted -ary graphical the tradeoff between cyclic topology and complexity in graph-

model for the

code outperforms algebraic HIHO de- ical models for linear codes and the introduction of a set of basic

coding by approximately 1.5 dB. The minimal trellis for this graphical model transformation operations that were shown to

code is known to contain state variables with alphabet size at span the space of all graphical models for a given code. It was

least

[39], yet the -ary suboptimal SISO decoder per- demonstrated that these operations can be used to extract novel

forms only 0.7 dB worse at a BER of . At a BER of , cyclic graphical models—and thus novel suboptimal iterative

the suboptimal SISO decoding algorithm implied by the ex- soft-in–soft-out (SISO) decoding algorithms—for linear block

tracted -ary graphical model for the

code outper- codes.

forms algebraic HIHO decoding by approximately 1.2 dB. The There are a number of interesting directions for future work

minimal trellis for this code is known to contain state variables motivated by the statement of the FI-CSB and its generalization

with alphabet size at least [39]; that a -ary suboptimal to proper complexity measures. While the minimal trellis com-

SISO decoder loses only 0.7 dB with respect to the optimal SISO plexity of linear codes is well understood, less is known

decoder at a BER of

is notable.

about the minimal tree complexity and characterizing those

Fig. 9 illustrates the performance of the proposed heuristics codes for which

is an open problem. The recent

when applied to the

extended BCH code. The work of Kashyap indicates that tools from matroid theory can

graphical models corresponding to the decoding algorithms be brought to bear on this problem [64]. A study of those codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3900

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

algorithms that reduce the floors exhibited by Tanner graph decoding of certain codes is also interesting. While the extraction heuristics presented in this work are not suited to such problems (because the Tanner graphs of modern codes tend to avoid four cycles), a number of authors have recently investigated the application of other graphical model transformations—e.g., redundant check insertion [67] and constraint merging [68]—to the Tanner graphs for the length 2640 Margulis code with promising results.

APPENDIX
This Appendix provides detailed definitions of both the -ary graphical model properties described in Section III-B and the basic graphical model operations introduced in Section VI. The proof of Lemma 1 is also further illustrated by example. To elucidate these properties and definitions, a single-cycle graphical model for the extended Hamming code is studied throughout.

Fig. 9. BER performance of different decoding algorithms for the [256; 239; 6] extended BCH code. Fifty iterations of a flooding schedule were performed for all of the suboptimal SISO decoding algorithms.
that meet or approach the FI-CSB is also an interesting direction for future work, which may provide insight into construction techniques for good codes with short block lengths (e.g., tens to hundreds of bits) defined on graphs with a few cycles (e.g., 3, 6, or 10). The development of statements similar to the FI-CSB for graphical models of more general systems (e.g., group codes, nonlinear codes, and general factor graphs) is also interesting.
There are also a number of interesting directions for future work motivated by the study of graphical model transformation. While the extracted graphical models presented in Section VII-D are notable, ad hoc techniques utilizing massively redundant models and judicious message filtering outperform the models presented in this work [60], [61]. Such massively redundant models contain many more short cycles than the models presented in Section VII-D indicating that short cycle structure alone is not a sufficiently meaningful cost measure for graphical model extraction. It is known that redundancy can be used to remove pseudocodewords (cf., [65]) thus motivating the study of cost measures, which consider both short cycle structure and pseudocodeword spectrum.
Finally, this work has been primarily concerned with the extraction of graphical models for classical linear codes, which are known to have necessarily dense Tanner graphs. A class of extractive graphical modeling problems of particular practical interest concern the extraction of graphical models for fixed modern codes. The extraction of graphical models for standard codes (e.g., the DVB-S2, IEEE 802.11n, and IEEE 802.16e LDPC codes [66]), which imply decoding architectures that are particularly amenable to fast hardware implementation, is an important problem currently faced by industry. Furthermore, the extraction of graphical models that imply decoding

A. Single-Cycle Model for the Extended Hamming Code

Fig. 10 illustrates a single-cycle graphical model (i.e., a tail-

biting trellis) for the length extended Hamming code . The

hidden variables and are binary while

,

and are -ary. All of the local constraint codes in this model

are interface constraints. Equations (67)–(70) define the local

constraint codes via generator matrices (where generates )

(67)

(68)

(69) (70)

The graphical model for illustrated in Fig. 10 is -ary (i.e.,

): the maximum hidden variable alphabet index

set size is and all local constraints satisfy

. The behavior of this graphical model is gener-

ated by (71), shown at the bottom of the next page. The projec-

tion of onto the visible variable index set

, is thus

generated by

(72) which coincides precisely with a generator matrix for .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALFORD AND CHUGG: THE EXTRACTION AND COMPLEXITY LIMITS OF GRAPHICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR CODES

3901

Fig. 11. Insertion of hidden variable S and internal local constraint C into
the tail-biting trellis for C .

Fig. 10. Tail-biting trellis graphical model for the length 8 extended Hamming code C .

of and trices

redefines

over

resulting in the generator ma-

B. -ary Graphical Model Properties (73)

The three properties of -ary graphical models introduced

in Section III-B are restated and discussed in detail in the fol-

lowing where it is assumed that a -ary graphical model

with behavior for a linear code over defined on an index

set is given. Note that the model for the extended Hamming

code studied in the previous extension is studied further in this

section.

1) Internal Local Constraint Involvement Property: Any

hidden variable in a -ary graphical model can be made to

be incident (on at least one end) on an internal local constraint

, which satisfies

without fundamentally

altering the complexity or cyclic topology of that graphical

model.

Suppose there exists some hidden variable (involved in

the local constraints and ) that does not satisfy the local

constraint involvement property. A new hidden variable that

is a copy of is introduced to by first redefining over

and then inserting a local repetition constraint that enforces

. The insertion of and does not fundamentally

alter the complexity of because

and because degree- repetition constraints are trivial from a

decoding complexity viewpoint. Furthermore, the insertion of

and does not fundamentally alter the cyclic topology of

because no new cycles can be introduced by this procedure.

As an example, consider the binary hidden variable in

Fig. 10, which is incident on the interface constraints and

. By introducing the new binary hidden variable and bi-

nary repetition constraint , as illustrated in Fig. 11, can be

made to be incident on the internal constraint . The insertion

Clearly, the modified local constraints and satisfy the con-

dition for inclusion in a -ary graphical model.

2) Internal Local Constraint Removal Property: The re-

moval of an internal local constraint from a -ary graphical

model results in a -ary graphical model for a new code

defined on the same index set.

The removal of the internal constraint from in order to

define the new code proceeds as follows. Each hidden vari-

able

, is first disconnected from and connected

to a new degree- internal constraint , which does not impose

any constraint on the value of (because it is degree- ). The

local constraint is then removed from the resulting graphical

model yielding with behavior . The new code is

the projection of onto .

As an example, consider the removal of the internal local con-

straint from the graphical model for described above;

the resulting graphical model update is illustrated in Fig. 12.

The new codes and are length , dimension codes,

which thus impose no constraints on and , respectively. It

is readily verified that the code , which results from the re-

moval of from , has dimension and is generated by

(74)

(71)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

Fig. 12. Removal of internal local constraint C from the tail-biting trellis for C.

projection; each coordinate of is defined as a -ary sum of

some subset of the visible variables by . Following this pro-

cedure, the internal local constraint is redefined over by sub-

stituting the definitions of implied by for each

into each of the -ary single parity-check equations, which

determine .

Returning to the example of the tail-biting trellis for , the

internal local constraint in Fig. 11 is redefined over the visible

variable set as follows. The projection of onto

is

generated by

Note that corresponds to all paths in the tail-biting trellis

representation of , not just those paths that begin and end in

the same state.

The removal of an internal local constraint results in the in-

troduction of

new degree- local constraints. Forney de-

scribed such constraints as “useless” in [35] and they can indeed

be removed from because they impose no constraints on

the variables they involve. Specifically, for each hidden variable

, involved in the (removed) local constraint , de-

note by the other constraint involving in . The constraint

can be redefined as its projection onto

. It

is readily verified that the resulting constraint satisfies the

condition for inclusion in a -ary graphical model.

Continuing with the above example,

, and can

be removed from the graphical model illustrated in Fig. 12 by

redefining and with generator matrices

(75)

(78)
A valid parity-check matrix for this projection that is systematic in the position corresponding to is
(79)
which defines the binary hidden variable as (80)
where addition is over . A similar development defines the binary hidden variable as
(81)

3) Internal Local Constraint Redefinition Property: Any in-

ternal local constraint in a -ary graphical model satisfying

can be equivalently represented by

-ary single parity-check equations over the visible variable

index set.

Let satisfy

and consider a hidden

variable involved in [i.e.,

] with alphabet index

set . Each of the coordinates of can be redefined as a

-ary sum of some subset of the visible variable set as follows.

Consider the behavior and corresponding code , which

result when is removed from (before is discarded). The

projection of onto

, has length

The local constraint thus can be redefined to enforce the single parity-check equation

(82)

Finally, to illustrate the use of the -ary graphical model

properties in concert, denote by the single parity-check con-

straint enforcing (82). It is readily verified that only the first four

rows of

[as defined in (74)] satisfy . It is precisely

these four rows that generate proving that

(83)

(76)

and dimension

(77)

over . There exists a generator matrix for

that is sys-

tematic in some size

subset of the index set [36]. A

parity-check matrix that is systematic7 in the positions

corresponding to the coordinates of can thus be found for this

C. Illustration of Proof of Lemma 1
In the following, the proof of Lemma 1 is illustrated by updating a cycle-free model for [as generated by (74)] with the single parity-check constraint defined by (82) in order to obtain a cycle-free graphical model for . A cycle-free binary graphical model for is illustrated in Fig. 13.8 All hidden variables in Fig. 13 are binary and the local constraints labeled
, and are binary single parity-check constraints

7Let C be a code defined on the index set I with dual C . A parity-check ma-
 C trix H for the code C is said to be systematic in the coordinates corresponding
to J I if H is a systematic generator matrix for in those coordinates.

8To emphasize that the code and hidden variable labels in Fig. 13 are in no
C way related to those labels used previously, the labeling of hidden variables and
local constraints begin at S and , respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALFORD AND CHUGG: THE EXTRACTION AND COMPLEXITY LIMITS OF GRAPHICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR CODES

3903

Fig. 14. Local constraint merging notation. The local constraints C and C
are common.

coordinates of the redefined is

, and ). The generator matrix for

(87)

Fig. 13. Cycle-free binary graphical model for C . The minimal spanning
tree containing the interface constraints that involve V ; V ; V , and V , respec-
tively, is highlighted.
while the remaining local constraints are repetition codes. By construction, it has thus been shown that
(84)

The updated constraints all satisfy the condition for inclusion in a -ary graphical model. Specifically, can be decomposed into the Cartesian product of a length binary repetition code and a length binary single parity-check code. The updated graphical model is -ary and it has thus been shown by construction that

(88)

In light of (82) and (83), a -ary graphical model for can

be constructed by updating the graphical model illustrated in

Fig. 13 to enforce a single parity-check constraint on

,

and . A natural choice for the root of the minimal spanning

tree containing the interface constraints incident on these vari-

ables is . The updating of the local constraints and hidden

variables contained in this spanning tree proceeds as follows.

First, note that because

, and simply enforce

equality, neither these constraints, nor the hidden variables inci-

dent on these constraints, need updating. The hidden variables

, and are updated to be -ary so that they send

downstream to the values of

, and , respectively.

These hidden variable updates are accomplished by redefining

the local constraints

, and ; the respective gen-

erator matrices for the redefined codes are

D. Graphical Model Transformations
The eight basic graphical model operations introduced in Section VI are discussed in detail in the following where it is assumed that a -ary graphical model with behavior for a linear code over defined on an index set is given.
1) Local Constraint Merging: Suppose that the two local constraints and shown in Fig. 14 are to be merged. Without loss of generality, assume that there is no hidden variable incident on both and (because if there is, a degree- repetition constraint can be inserted). The hidden variables incident on may be partitioned into two sets
(89)

where each

, is also incident on a constraint

that is adjacent to . The hidden variables incident on may

be similarly partitioned. The set of local constraints incident

on hidden variables in both

and

are denoted

(85) common constraints and indexed by

.

The merging of local constraints and proceeds as

follows. For each common local constraint

,

(86) denote by

the hidden variable incident on

and

. Denote by

the projection of

onto the two-variable index set

and define a new

Finally, is updated to enforce both the original repetition

-ary hidden variable , which encapsulates the

constraint on the respective first coordinates of

, possible simultaneous values of and (as constrained

and and the additional single parity-check constraint on by

). After defining such hidden variables for each

, and (which correspond to the respective second

, a set of new hidden variables results, which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3904

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

Fig. 15. Merging of constraints C and C in a 4-ary graphical model for C . The resulting graphical model is 8-ary.

is indexed by

. The local constraints and are

then merged by replacing and by a code defined over Fig. 16. Splitting of constraint C into C and C .

while (90)

and are replaced by , which is equivalent to and is generated by

which is equivalent to

and redefining each local con-

straint

, over the appropriate hidden variables

in

.

As an example, consider again the -ary cycle-free graphical

model for derived in the previous section, a portion of which is reillustrated on the bottom left of Fig. 15, and suppose that the local constraints and are to be merged. The local

constraints

, and are defined by (85) and (87).

The hidden variables incident on are partitioned into the

sets

and

. Similarly,

and

. The sole common

constraint is thus . The projection of onto and

has dimension and the new -ary hidden variable is de-

fined by the generator matrix

(91)

The local constraints and when defined over rather than and , respectively, are generated by

(94)

Note that the graphical model that results from the merging of

and is -ary. Specifically, is an -ary hidden variable

while

and

.

2) Local Constraint Splitting: Local constraint splitting is

simply the inverse operation of local constraint merging. Con-

sider the local constraint illustrated in Fig. 16, which is de-

fined on the visible and hidden variables indexed by

and

, respectively. Suppose that is to be split into two local

constraints and defined on the index sets

and

, respectively, such that

and

partition

while

but

and

need not be disjoint. Denote by

the intersec-

tion of

and

. Local constraint splitting proceeds as

follows. For each

, make a copy of and

redefine the local constraint incident on (which is not ) over

both and . Denote by

an index set for the copied

hidden variables. The local constraint is then replaced by

and such that is defined over

and is

defined over

where

Finally,

(92)

(95)

Following this split procedure, some of the hidden variables in

and

may have larger alphabets than neces-

is redefined over and generated by

sary. Specifically, if the dimension of the projection of

onto a variable

, is smaller

than the alphabet index set size of , then can be redefined

(93) with an alphabet index set size equal to that dimension. The merged code in the example of the previous section

can be split into two codes: defined on

, and ,

and defined on

, and . The projection of onto

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALFORD AND CHUGG: THE EXTRACTION AND COMPLEXITY LIMITS OF GRAPHICAL MODELS FOR LINEAR CODES

3905

Fig. 17. Insertion and removal of degree-2 repetition constraints.

has dimension and can thus be replaced by the -ary

hidden variable . Similarly, the projection of onto

has dimension and can be replaced by the -ary hidden

variable .

3) Insertion/Removal of Degree- Repetition Constraints:

Suppose that is a hidden variable involved in the local con-

straints and . A degree- repetition constraint is inserted

by defining a new hidden variable as a copy of , redefining

over and defining the repetition constraint , which

enforces

. Degree- repetition constraint insertion can

Fig. 18. Insertion/removal of an isolated partial parity-check constraint on V and V in a Tanner graph for C .

be similarly defined for visible variables. Conversely, suppose is self-dual so that the generator matrix defined in (72) is also a

that is a degree- repetition constraint incident on the hidden valid parity-check matrix for ].

variables and . Because simply enforces

, it

can be removed and relabeled . Degree- repetition con-

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

straint removal can be similarly defined for visible variables. The insertion and removal of degree-2 repetition constraints is illustrated in Fig. 17(a) and (b) for hidden and visible variables, respectively.
4) Insertion/Removal of Trivial Constraints: Trivial con-

The authors would like to the anonymous reviewers for their help in clarifying the presentation of this work, particularly, the development of Section III-C. They would also like to thank G. D. Forney, Jr. for his helpful comments on early drafts and N. Kashyap for discussions pertaining to Section V-C.

straints are those incident on no hidden or visible variables so

that their respective block lengths and dimensions are zero.

Trivial constraints can obviously be inserted or removed from

graphical models.

5) Insertion/Removal of Isolated Partial Parity-Check Con-

straints: Suppose that

are -ary repetition con-

straints (that is each repetition constraint enforces equality on

-ary variables) and let

be nonzero. The in-

sertion of an isolated partial parity-check constraint is defined as

follows. Define

new -ary hidden variables

,

and , and two new local constraints and such that

enforces the -ary single parity-check equation

(96)

and is a degree- constraint incident only on with dimen-

sion . Note that the new hidden variable is involved in

and (for

), while the new hidden variable

is involved in and . The new local constraint defines

the partial parity variable and is denoted isolated because

it is incident on a hidden variable which is involved in a de-

gree- , dimension local constraint (i.e., does not constrain

the value of ). Because is isolated, the graphical model that

results from its insertion is indeed a valid model for . Similarly,

any such isolated partial parity-check constraint can be removed

from a graphical model resulting in a valid model for .

As an example, Fig. 18 illustrates the insertion and removal

of an isolated partial parity-check on the binary sum of and

in a Tanner graph for corresponding to (72) [note that

REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1660–1686, Nov. 1996.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” Inst. Electr. Eng. Electron. Lett., vol. 33, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[5] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 513–525, Sept.–Oct. 1995.
[6] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electr. Eng., Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[7] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.
[8] K. M. Chugg, A. Anastasopoulos, and X. Chen, Iterative Detection: Adaptivity, Complexity Reduction, and Applications. Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 2001.
[9] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[10] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 520–548, Feb. 2001.
[11] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[12] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good lowdensity parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., Helsinki, Finland, Jun. 2001, vol. 1, pp. 41–44.
[13] D. M. Arnold, E. Eleftheriou, and X. Y. Hu, “Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” in Proc. Globecom Conf., San Antonion, TX, Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 995–1001.
[14] X.-P. Ge, D. Eppstein, and P. Smyth, “The distribution of loop lengths in graphical models for turbo decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 2549–2553, Sep. 2001.
[15] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3906

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2008

[16] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “An algorithm for counting short cycles in bipartite graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 287–292, Jan. 2006.
[17] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[18] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–596, Feb. 2005.
[19] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[20] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–673, Feb. 2001.
[21] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[22] P. Oswald and A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3017–3028, Dec. 2002.
[23] H. D. Pfister, I. Sason, and R. Urbanke, “Capacity-achieving ensembles for the binary erasure channel with bounded complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2352–2379, Jul. 2005.
[24] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Design of parallel concatenated convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 591–600, May 1996.
[25] S. Dolinar, D. Divsalar, and F. Pollara, “Code performance as a function of block size,” Jet Propulsion Laoratories, Pasadena, CA, Tech. Rep. TDA Progr. Rep. 42-133, May 1998.
[26] C. Berrou, “The ten-year-old turbo codes are entering into service,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 110–116, Aug. 2003.
[27] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[28] K. M. Chugg, P. Thiennviboon, G. D. Dimou, P. Gray, and J. Melzer, “A new class of turbo-like codes with universally good performance and high-speed decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Military Commun. Conf., Atlantic City, NJ, Oct. 2005, pp. 3117–3126.
[29] T. R. Halford, A. J. Grant, and K. M. Chugg, “Which codes have 4-cycle-free Tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 4219–4223, Sep. 2006.
[30] A. Vardy, Handbook of Coding Theory, V. S. Pless and W. C. Huffman, Eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 1999, ch. Trellis structure of codes.
[31] A. R. Calderbank, G. D. Forney, Jr., and A. Vardy, “Minimal tail-biting trellises: The Golay code and more,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1435–1455, Jul. 1999.
[32] R. Koetter and A. Vardy, “The structure of tail-biting trellises: Minimality and basic principles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 2081–2105, Sep. 2003.
[33] R. Koetter, “On the representation of codes in Forney graphs,” in Codes, Graphs, and Systems, R. E. Blahut and R. Koetter , Eds. Boston, MA: Kluwer, Feb. 2002, pp. 425–450.
[34] R. J. McEliece, “On the BCJR trellis for linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1072–1092, Jul. 1996.
[35] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Codes on graphs: Constraint complexity of cyclefree realizations of linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1597–1610, Jul. 2003.
[36] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1978.
[37] D. J. C. MacKay, “Relationships between sparse graph codes,” in Proc. Inf.-Based Induction Sci., Izu, Japan, Jul. 2000.
[38] J. S. Yedidia, J. Chen, and M. C. Fossorier, “Generating code representations suitable for belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.
[39] A. Lafourcade and A. Vardy, “Lower bounds on trellis complexity of block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1938–1954, Nov. 1995.
[40] D. J. Muder, “Minimal trellises for block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1049–1053, Sep. 1988.
[41] Y. Berger and Y. Be’ery, “Bounds on the trellis size of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 203–209, Jan. 1993.
[42] T. Kasami, T. Takata, T. Fujiwara, and S. Lin, “On the optimum bit orders with respect to the state complexity of trellis diagrams for binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 242–245, Jan. 1993.

[43] T. Kasami, T. Takata, T. Fujiwara, and S. Lin, “On complexity of trellis structure of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 1057–1064, May 1993.
[44] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Density/length profiles and trellis complexity of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1741–1752, Nov. 1994.
[45] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Coset codes II: Binary lattices and related codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-34, no. 5, pt. 1, pp. 1152–1187, Sep. 1988.
[46] A. Lafourcade and A. Vardy, “Asymptotically good codes have infinite trellis complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 555–559, Mar. 1994.
[47] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “The tradeoff between cyclic topology and complexity in graphical models of linear codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., Sep. 2006.
[48] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “The complexity limits of graphical models for linear codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, Sep. 2007, pp. 144–149.
[49] R. Diestel, Graph Theory, 2nd ed. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2000. [50] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “Conditionally cycle-free generalized
Tanner graphs: Theory and application to high-rate serially concatenated codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1881–1885. [51] Y. Wang, R. Ramesh, A. Hassan, and H. Koorapaty, “On MAP decoding for tail-biting convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Ulm, Germany, Jun. 1997, p. 225. [52] S. M. Aji, G. B. Horn, and R. J. McEliece, “Iterative decoding on graphs with a single cycle,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 276. [53] J. B. Anderson and S. M. Hladik, “Tailbiting MAP decoders,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 297–302, Feb. 1998. [54] J. Heo and K. M. Chugg, “Constrained iterative decoding: Performance and convergence analysis,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals Syst. Comput., Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 2001, pp. 275–279. [55] Y. Shany and Y. Be’ery, “Linear tail-biting trellises, the square-root bound, and applications for Reed-Muller codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1514–1523, Jul. 2000. [56] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenberg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cycle-free Tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2173–2181, Sep. 1999. [57] J. K. Wolf, “Efficient maximum-likelihood decoding of linear block codes using a trellis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-24, no. 1, pp. 76–80, Jan. 1978. [58] N. Kashyap, “On minimal tree realizations of linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 2007 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0711. 1383, submitted for publication [59] S. Lin, T. Kasami, T. Fujiwara, and M. Fossorier, Trellises and TrellisBased Decoding Algorithms for Linear Block Codes. Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 1998. [60] J. Jiang and K. R. Narayanan, “Iterative soft decision decoding of ReedSolomon codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 244–246, Apr. 2004. [61] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “Random redundant soft-in soft-out decoding of linear block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 2230–2234. [62] S. Sankaranarayanan and B. Vasic´, “Iterative decoding of linear block codes: A parity-check orthogonalization approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 3347–3353, Sep. 2005. [63] V. Kumar and O. Milenkovic, “On graphical representations for algebraic codes suitable for iterative decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 729–731, Aug. 2005. [64] N. Kashyap, “A decomposition theory for binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory. 2006 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/ 0611028, submitted for publication [65] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2005, submitted for publication. [66] T. Brack, M. Alles, T. Lehnigk-Emden, F. Kienle, N. Wehn, N. E. L’Inslata, F. Rossi, M. Rovini, and L. Fanucci, “Low complexity LDPC code decoders for next generation standards,” in Proc. Design Autom. Test Eur., Nice, France, Apr. 2007, pp. 16–20. [67] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “When does one redundant parity-check equation matter?,” in Proc. Globecom Conf., San Francisco, CA, Nov. 2006, pp. 1–6. [68] Y. Han, Y. Zang, and W. E. Ryan, “Toward low floors in LDPC and G-LDPC codes,” presented at the IEEE Commun. Theory Workshop, Sedona, AZ, May 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

