Analysis of Complexity for the Message Passing Algorithm
Federico Maguolo,† Alessandra Mior,† † University of Padova – Department of Information Engineering
Via Gradenigo 6/B, 35131 Padova, Italy alessandra.mior@dei.unipd.it

Abstract: Besides turbo codes, Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes form another class of Shannon limit-approaching codes. Their large coding gains are mostly due to the decoding algorithm, termed Message Passing Algorithm (MPA) or SumProduct Algorithm (SPA).
This algorithm gives the best error performance and, even if its computational complexity is very high, it is yet practically implementable. This is the reason why it is always chosen as decoding algorithm for the LDPC codes.
In this paper we propose a modification of the MPA in order to reduce the number of multiplications in each iteration.
To get this target, a threshold is defined and all log-likelihood ratios higher than the threshold are considered fully reliable.
When the algorithm is implemented in fixed point, this threshold helps in the choice of the minimum number of bits required.
1. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes were first discovered by Gallager [1] - [2] in the early 1960s. As it is well known they was mostly ignored for almost 20 years, until Tanner’s work [3] in 1981 provided a new interpretation of LDPC codes from a graphical point of view. This work was also ignored for 14 years, until the late 1990s when some researchers began to investigate codes on graphs and iterative decoding. Their researches resulted in the rediscovery of Gallager’s LDPC codes and further generalizations.
This discovery makes the LDPC codes strong turbo codes competitors for error correction in many communication and digital storage systems, where high reliability is required. In fact, LDPC codes have some advantages over turbo codes: they do not require a long interleaver to achieve good error performance, have an error floor at lower BER and their decoding is not trellis based.
A problem with the LDPC codes comes in their construction, in fact Gallager didn’t provide a method for constructing algebrically or systematically good codes, however, he proposed a general method for constructing a class of pseudorandom LDPC codes. Until our days, good LDPC codes that have been found are largely computer generated, especially long codes, and their encoding is very complex owing to the lack of structure.
The LDPC codes can be decoded in various ways ranging from low to high decoding complexity and from reasonably good to very good error performance.

The most used algorithm is the Message Passing Algorithm (MPA) also known as Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) which is an Iterative Decoding based on a Belief Propagation (IDBP) [4] and it results extremely efficient for decoding LDPC codes. It is a symbol-by-symbol soft-in soft-out decoding algorithm which iteratively processes the received symbol, in order to improve its reliability, based on the parity check sums computed from the hard decisions of the received symbol. The reliability of a decoded symbol can be measured by its marginal a posteriori probability, its LogLikelihood Ratio (LLR) or the value of its corresponding received symbol. At the end of each decoding iteration the computed reliability measures of code symbols are used as input for the next iteration. The decoding iteration process continues until a certain stopping condition (or criterion) is satisfied. Then, based on computed reliability measures of code symbols, hard decision is made.
MPA requires real-number addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, exponential and logarithm operations and, as it is well known, the last four operation are more complex than addition and subtraction. In [5] the number of multiplications in this algorithm is defined as a linear function of the number of 1’s in the parity check matrix.
What we are going to propose is the reduction of the number of multiplications, so, in the following we will use the terms reduction of complexity or reduction of the number of multiplications indifferently, even if it’s an abuse of notation. In our modified MPA we assume that all the received bits which exceed, in terms of absolute value, a given threshold are reliable. This means that we assume that the value assigned to these bits doesn’t change with the evolution of the algorithm. This observation suggests to assign to these bits a value, in term of LLR, equal to ±∞, where the sign is in accordance with the LLR’s one. In Section 4.1 we will show how to choose the threshold and how this assumption can be used to reduce the number of multiplications at each iteration. The modified MPA has a reduced complexity because the number of multiplications has been reduced, but, can present an error floor dependent on the threshold value. To verify if the modified proposed algorithm can be competitive with the known ones we will compare the complexity and the error performance.
The paper is organized as follow: Section 2 gives a brief description of LDPC codes; while in Section 3 the known

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:07:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

decoding techniques for the LDPC codes are described, focusing in particular on the MPA. In Section 4 the system considered and the modified MPA are described and in Section 5 examples of applications and fully commented results are reported. Section 6 is made by conclusions and future works.

2. LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES AND THEIR PROPERTIES

Definition: A LDPC code is defined as the null space

of a parity-check matrix H that has the following structure

properties: each row consists of ρ 1’s; each column consist

of γ 1’s; the number of 1’s in common between any two

columns, denoted by λ, is no greater than 1 and both ρ and

γ are small compared with the length of the code and the

number of rows in H, respectively.

Because both ρ and γ are small compared with the code

length and the number of rows in the parity-check matrix, H

therefore has a small density of 1’s and is said to be a low-

density parity-check matrix and the code specified by itself is

hence called LDPC code.

Define n the codeword length, i.e. the number of columns

in H, and n − m the sourceword length, where m is number

of rows in H. A LDPC code is called a (γ, ρ)-regular LDPC

code

if

r

=

ρ n

=

γ m

,

where

r

is

the

density

of

the

parity-check

matrix. LDPC codes with different weights on the rows and

columns of H are called irregular and are the ones with the

best performance.

3. LDPC DECODING TECHNIQUES
A LDPC code can be decoded in various ways, namely: majority-logic (MLG) decoding, bit-flipping (BF) decoding, weighted BF decoding, a posteriori probability (APP) decoding, and iterative decoding based on belief propagation (IDBP), commonly known as sum-product algorithm (SPA) or message passing algorithm (MPA).
The first two types are hard decision decoding, the last two are soft decision decoding and the third one is in between. MLG [5] is the simplest one in decoding complexity; BF requires a little more decoding complexity, but gives better error performance than MLG. APP and MPA decoding provide much better error performance but require much large complexity than the former two. MPA decoding gives the second best error performance among the five types of decoding algorithms and yet is practically implementable, conversely the APP provides the best error performance, but it is computationally intractable. A simplified version can be considered to reduce the computational complexity, but error performance degrades. The most important algorithm for a comparison with our proposed one is the weighted-BF algorithm, because it’s said to represent a good trade-off between the computational complexity and the error performance.

Let define a codeword v = (vo, v1, . . . , vn−1), y = (y0, y1, . . . , yn−1) the soft decision received sequence at the output of the demodulator and z = (zo, z1, . . . , zn−1) the corresponding hard decision. Let H be the parity-check matrix
of an LDPC code C with m rows and n columns, then we can define the syndrome of the received sequence z as

s = zHT .

(1)

The received vector z is a codeword if and only if s = 0, otherwise errors in z are detected, in fact nonzero syndrome component sj indicates a parity failure. We can define the error pattern e given by e = v + z which must satisfies s = eHT .
Once given these few definitions we can briefly describe
the decoding algorithms.

3.1 Majority-Logic Decoding

From the structural properties of the parity-check matrix H, we see that for every bit position l, there’s a set

Al = {h1(l), h2(l), . . . , hγ(ll)}

(2)

of γl rows in H that are orthogonal on this bit position. Now we define the set of γl check-sums orthogonal on the error digit el

Sl = {ehj(l) : hj(l) ∈ Al, for 1 ≤ j ≤ γl}

(3)

These check-sums can be used for estimating the error digit

el based on the one step MLG decoding rule [5], which

guarantees

the

correction

only

if

there

are

γl 2

or

fewer

errors

in the pattern error e.

3.2 Bit-Flipping Decoding Algorithm
This algorithm, presented for the first time by Gallager in [2], is based on the change (or flip) of the number of parity failures in s when a bit in the received sequence z is changed or flipped.
First, the decoder computes all the parity-check sums based on (1) and than changes any bit in the received sequence z that is contained in more than some fixed number δ of failed parity check equations. Using the modified received sequence z , the decoders recompute the syndrome and the process is repeated until all parity-check sums are satisfied or a preset maximum number of iterations is reached. The design parameter δ is called threshold and should be chosen to optimize the error performance while minimizing the number of computation of parity-check sums. The value of δ depends on the code parameters: ρ, γ, dmin(C) and SN R.
Owing to the nature of low-density parity-check codes, BF decoding algorithm corrects many error patterns whose number of errors exceeds the error correcting capability of the code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:07:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3.3 Weighted Bit-Flipping (WBF) Algorithm

To improve the performance of the BF algorithm some
kind of reliability information can be considered. So now we consider the soft-decision received sequence y and for 0 ≤ l ≤ n − 1 and 1 ≤ j ≤ m define:

|yj|(ml)in {min{|yi|} : 0 ≤ i ≤ n − 1, hi,j = 1} (4)

and

El

(2sj(l) − 1)|yj |(ml)in.

(5)

s(jl) ∈Sl

where Sl is the set of check-sums orthogonal on bit-position l.
Now we observe that El is simply a weighted check sum that is orthogonal on the code bit position l and can be used in the bit-flipping algorithm.

- Initialization

L(qji) = L(ci) - Horizontal step

j = 1, 2, . . . , m; i = 1, 2, . . . , n (7)

L(rji) = 2 tanh−1

tanh

1 2

L(qji

)

(8)

i ∈Vj\i

- Vertical step

L(qji) = L(ci) +

L(rj i)

(9)

j ∈Ci\j

In this step we also compute L(Qi), the quantity corresponding to the pseudo-a-posteriori probability:

L(Qi) = L(ci) +

L(rj i)

(10)

j ∈Ci

3.4 Message Passing Algorithm

Table I – Description of the message passing algorithm.

This is an iterative decoding algorithm based on belief propagation and is extremely efficient for decoding LDPC codes. The reliability of the decoded bit is measured by its log-likelihood ratio (LLR) defined as follows:

and it is the new log-likelihood ratio, used to determine the hard decision of the bit ci.

L(ci) = log

P [ci = 0|channel output for ci] P [ci = 1|channel output for ci]

i = 1, 2, . . . , n.

(6)

4. PROPOSED ALGORITHM AND SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

Before explaining the decoding algorithm in Table I, we As said in the Introduction we ignore the additions and the

define:

subtractions in this analysis of complexity of MPA. Observing

- Ci the set of check nodes connected to the variable the algorithm description in Table I, we find that the number

node i;

of multiplications needed in each iteration of the decoding

- Ci\j the set of check nodes connected to the variable process is of the order O(2mρ¯+4nγ¯) where ρ¯ and γ¯ represent

node i excluded the check node j;

the mean number of 1’s per rows and columns respectively

- Vj the set of variable nodes connected to the check and the number of logarithm operations needed is of the order

node j;

O(n) [5]. From these values and observing the evolution

- Vj\i the set of variable nodes connected to the check of the algorithm we had the idea for a modification of the

node j excluded the variable node i.

algorithm which should drive to a reduction of the number of

The decoding iteration process continues until a certain multiplications required.

stopping condition (or criterion) is satisfied. Then, based on the computed reliability measures of code symbols, hard 4.1 MPA variation

decisions are made.

Let’s try to analyze the algorithm step by step to find all

In the algorithm, described in Table I, there are three key the possibilities to reduce the algorithm complexity.

variables: L(qji), L(rji) and L(Qi) with j = 1, 2, . . . , m Starting from the initialization step defined in equation (7), where m represents the number of the parity check nodes the L(qj,i)’s equal the LLRs defined in (6), so if some absolute and i = 1, 2, . . . , n. The L(·) means that we are considering value of these quantities are greater than a given threshold we

the logarithm values. The former is the logarithm of the can say that the corresponding bits are reliable and change

probability that the i-th bit of the codeword has the value x, their LLR values to ±∞ according with the known signs.

given the information obtained via the check nodes other than When we compute the horizontal step as defined in equation

check node j; the second is the logarithm of the probability (8), we observe that for every L(qj,i ) with ±∞ value the that a check node j is satisfied, i.e. zj = 0, when bit i is tanh(·) is equal to ±1 and so all what we need is to keep fixed to a value x and the other bits are independent with trace of the number of −1, because this can change the

probabilities qj,i , i ∈ Vj\i. Finally the last one, expressed sign of the product result, but we don’t need to compute the in (10), is the logarithm of the pseudo-a-posteriori probability multiplications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:07:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Note that in the vertical step (equation (9)) we sum the contributions of L(rji)’s. In case two or more values of L(rji) are equal to ±∞ we could sum terms infinitely large with opposite sign to obtain an undetermined result. In order to avoid this case we put the constraint that, in each Vj\i (equation (8)), at least one variable node is different from ±∞, which means that attention must be paid in the choice of the threshold, because its value can’t be too small. Adding this constraint means that the L(rji) can assume ±∞ value when, with high probability, the bit is enough reliable and so it’s hard to obtain undetermined results. Unfortunately, this is not enough to handle all the NaN cases. In the update of L(qj,i) (equation (9)) we don’t need to compute the update for the values fixed at the former steps, because we expect they don’t change. However, in this case there are not multiplications, so at this step we don’t save operations of the type we are focusing on.
The most important topic of our modified algorithm is the determination of the threshold: if it is chosen too small we fix some values that are not enough reliable and, as a consequence, in equation (9), we try to sum +∞ and −∞, without reaching a result. On the other side, we don’t want to use a threshold too high, because this doesn’t allow us to improve the efficiency of the algorithm.

4.2 System description
The system we consider here is represented in Figure 1. The source bits are encoded through an LDPC code of rate 1/2 and codeword length n = 576, then they are modulated through a QPSK modulator and transmitted on an AWGN channel. At the receiver we have a soft demodulator whose log-likelihood ratios are the input to the decoder. Obviously, the decoding is performed with our modified MPA and to have some terms of comparison we perform the decoding also through the standard MPA and the weighted BF algorithm [6].

+ b LDPC c QPSK s

encoder

modulator

r Demodulator cˆ

LDPC decoder

ˆb

w

Figure 1. Representation of the considered transmission scheme, where the LDPC decoder can be implemented with the standard or modified MPA or with the WBF.

Since we want to have reliable performance results, we consider the concept of confidence, i.e. we have a probability equal to 95% that the measured value lies in the computed confidence interval [7].
We suppose that our system transmit 100 words of 288 information bits every time. These bits are encoded, modulated and transmitted on the channel. At the receiver side, the received signal (i.e. the signal at the output of the channel) is demodulated, decoded and the bit error rate (BER) is computed. At this point we compute the confidence interval and verify if it’s equal or smaller than the 15% of the

estimated BER value; if it’s not we run the simulation again for other 100 words and recomputed BER and confidence interval. The process is iterated until the constraint on the confidence interval is satisfied or a maximum number of iterations, equal to 1000˙ 00, is reached.
When we consider our modified MPA we need to handle the not-a-number (NaN) cases due to the attempt of summing together some +∞ and −∞. This can happen when we use a threshold which is too low and so we consider reliable some bits which aren’t. What we do in these situations is considering a failure of the decoder on the word with the NaN bit and compute the BER on the other words.

5. SIMULATION RESULTS

To test our algorithm we consider the LDPC code proposed

for the WiMAX system (IEEE 802.16e [8], [9]) with a codeword of length n = 576.

Figure 2 represents the performance in terms of bit error

rate for the above LDPC code when it’s decoded through dif-

ferent algorithms, namely the standard and our modified MPA,

with different thresholds, and the WBF algorithm. To have

other terms of comparison, the BER for the hard decision and

for a ’3G’ turbo code is plotted. The reason why we choose

the ’3G’ turbo code and not the one defined for the WiMAX

system is because we want to compare the performance of our

algorithm with the ones of a general turbo code, i.e. a turbo

code composed by two identical convolutional code and an

interleaver, and in the standard 802.16e there are no codes of

this type. Another term of comparison is given by the WBF decoding algorithm, represented through the solid line with ◦

marker. As we can see from Figure 2, the performance of this

algorithm is not so good, but this can be explained considering

that it is proposed for decoding finite geometry LDPC codes

[6] and the code we are considering is not of this type.

In Figure 2 the solid line with represents the hard

decision performance, the solid line with represents the

performance of the standard MPA algorithm and the solid line

with represents the turbo code performance. The dotted lines with ◦, , and represent the performance of our modified

algorithm for different threshold values, which are defined by the maximum value of the received LLRs (max) or through

the equation:

th

=

min
llr

+

p 100

(max
llr

−

min).
llr

(11)

where p = 40, 50, 90, the values reported in Figures 2 and 3.

Finally, in Figure 2 we can see a solid line with hexagon

marker which represents the performance we can obtain

choosing the best threshold at each SNR value. In this Figure,

only the thresholds that lead to a significant gain on the

performance of the standard algorithm are represented, but,

obviously, we simulated more thresholds, to be sure that our

choice is the best one.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:07:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

To reach the best performance we can use our modified algorithm with different threshold until 4.5 dB and then we must use the standard algorithm.
What we want to underline is that all the results represented in this Figure are computed on the bit error rate of the words decoded through our modified algorithm; this means that we are not handling the not-a-number (NaN) cases. The same policy is adopted for the computation of the interval of confidence.

BER

BER comparison
100

WBF − LD

10−1

Hard decision

Standard MPA

10−2

Modified MPA − threshold = 90 Modified MPA − threshold = 50

Modified MPA − threshold = 40

10−3

Turbo

Modified MPA − threshold = max

10−4

Better threshold

10−5

10−6

10−7

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

SNR [dB]

Figure 2. Bit error rate comparison when an LDPC code is decoded through different algorithms: MPA standard and modified, and WBF. Comparison of the performance of the LDPC code with a turbo code of the same rate.

Saved products [%]

Percentage of saved products
100 40
50 50 90
max

0

−2

0

2

4

6

8

SNR [dB]

Decoded words [%]

a)

Percentage of decoded words

100 40

50

50 90

max

0

−2

0

2

4

6

8

SNR [dB]

b)

Figure 3. Percentage of a) saved products b) decoded words when we consider the modified MPA with different threshold.

Underling how much important is the choice of a good threshold when the algorithm is implemented in a fixed-point environment, our future works will be about the understanding and justification of the behavior of the percentage of decoded words, the handling of the NaN and the development of a fixed-point MPA.

Figure 3 represents the percentage of saved products and decoded words when the modified MPA algorithm is used with the four different thresholds. Figure 3.a) shows an expected result: the percentage of saved products is higher when the threshold is lower and, for example, at SNR= 2 dB and for p = 90 proposed algorithm saves the 35% of multiplication with respect to the standard MPA. What we can conclude is that, if we know the type of application we are using and so the reliability we need, we can reach a tradeoff between the computational complexity and the system reliability, just choosing the correct threshold.
From Figure 3.b) we can observe that the more products we save the less words we can decode and so what is important, at this point, is to study a way to handle the NaN. Looking the Figure, we observe also a strange behavior of these percentages: for all the thresholds there’s a minimum around 1 − 1.5 dB. To understand this strange behavior will be one of the first topics of our future research.
6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper we proposed a modified MPA for the LDPC decoding. The aim of our modification is the reduction of the number of products performed at each iteration in the standard MPA. Our results show that, choosing a good threshold allows a reduction of the BER, but this performance is computed only on the words the algorithm is able to decoding.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the TRLabs for giving them the opportunity and the facilities to develop this works.

References

[1] R. G.Gallager. Low density parity check codes. IEEE Transac-

tion on Information Theory, IT-8, pages 21–28, January 1962.

[2] R. G. Gallager. Low density parity check codes. MIT Press,

Cambridge, 1963.

[3] R. M. Tanner. A recursive approach to low complexity codes.

IEEE Transaction of Information Theory, IT-27, pages 533 – 547,

September 1981.

[4] D. J. C. MacKay. Information theory, inference, and learning

algorithms. University Press, Cambridge, 2003.

[5] S. Lin and D. J. Costello. Error control coding. Pearson, Prentice

Hall, New York, 2004.

[6] Z. Liu and D. A. Pados. Low complexity decoding of finite

geometry LDPC codes. IEEE International Conference on Com-

munications (ICC’03), 4:2713–2717, 2003.

[7] V. J. Easton and J. H. McColl.

Statis-

tics glossary - v1.1.

Available online at

http://www.stats.gla.ac.uk/steps/glossary/confidence intervals.html.

[8] IEEE 802.16-2004 Standard, air interface for fixed broadband

wireless access systems. October 2004.

[9] IEEE Std 802.16e-2005 and IEEE Std 802.16-2004/Cor 1-2005

(Amendment and Corrigendum to IEEE Std 802.16-2004) part

16: Air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access

systems. amendment 2:physical and medium access control layers

for combined fixed and mobile operation in licensed bands and

corrigendum 1. February 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:07:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

