Proceedings of 2009 12th International Conference on Computer and Information Technology (ICCIT 2009) 21-23 December, 2009, Dhaka, Bangladesh

A Reduced Complexity Message Passing Algorithm with Improved Performance for LDPC Decoding
Vikram Arkalgud Chandrasetty and Syed Mahfuzul Aziz School of Electrical & Information Engineering, University of South Australia,
Mawson Lakes, SA 5095, Australia vikramac@ieee.org, mahfuz.aziz@unisa.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, a simplified message passing algorithm for decoding Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes is proposed with a view to reduce the implementation complexity. The algorithm is based on simple harddecision decoding techniques while utilizing the advantages of soft channel information for improvement in decoder performance. The algorithm has been validated through simulation using LDPC code compliant with Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN –IEEE 802.11n) standard. The results show that the proposed algorithm can achieve significant improvement in bit error rate (BER) performance and average decoding iterations compared to fully hard-decision based decoding algorithms.
Keywords: Digital communication, Error correction coding, Low-Density Parity-Check, Iterative decoding.

difference between the LDPC code and any other block code [7]. The LDPC matrix is described by various parameters. The code rate is defined by the number of rows to columns ratio of the H matrix. The number of non-zero entries in each of the rows and columns of H matrix is collectively known as degree distribution. An H matrix is said to be regular if the degree distribution of rows and columns are uniform, otherwise it is Irregular. The H matrix can be represented as a graph called Tanner graph. A cycle in the graph is a sequence of connected nodes, which start and end at the same node. The girth or the smallest cycle in the parity-check graph, significantly contributes to the performance of the iterative decoding algorithms [8, 9]. A regular (3, 6) parity-check matrix with 10-bit code length is shown in Fig. 1 (a) and the corresponding Tanner graph representation of the parity-check matrix is shown in Fig. 1 (b).

I. INTRODUCTION
The Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes were first proposed by Gallager in 1962 [1]. They were not popular for a few decades after its introduction due to high implementation complexity. However, it gained its popularity after it was formally re-introduced by MacKay and Neal in 1997 [2]. It has been shown that LDPC codes, when optimally designed, have the capability to perform very close to Shannon Limit [3]. LDPC codes have several advantages over turbo codes, including reduced implementation complexity, better bit error rate (BER) performance at low signal to noise ratio (SNR) and the inherent code structure that supports high degree of parallelism [4]. Hence LDPC codes have become increasingly popular and have been adopted in latest generation high data rate applications such as WLAN, WiMax and Digital Video Broadcasting Second Generation (DVB-S2) [5].
II. OVERVIEW OF LDPC DECODING
LDPC codes belong to a class of block codes [6]. As their name suggests, its parity-check matrix (H) consists of very small number of non-zero elements. The sparseness of H determines the decoding complexity and the minimum distance of the code. Apart from the requirement that the LDPC matrix be sparse, there is no other

Fig. 1. A ½ rate (3, 6) 10-bit LDPC code
The decoding of LDPC code involves passing of messages between the nodes along the edges in the Tanner graph. This class of decoding algorithms is often called as message passing algorithm. Each of the nodes in the Tanner graph works in isolation with information available along the connected edges only. These decoding

978-1-4244-6284-1/09/$26.00 ©2009 IEEE

19

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:39:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

algorithms require passing of the messages between the nodes for a fixed number of times or till the result is achieved. Hence such algorithms are also known as iterative algorithms [9]. LDPC decoding algorithms generally operates by making either hard-decision or soft- decision on the messages received from the noisy channel. In the former case, a binary hard-decision is made on the data received from the channel and then passed to the decoder, e.g. Bit-Flip Algorithm (BFA). But in case of soft-decision based algorithms, the input data to the decoder is the channel probabilities represented in logarithmic ratio which is also known as log-likelihood ratio (LLR). The messages passed between the nodes in the decoder are also soft messages, e.g. Belief Propagation based algorithms uses soft LLR input for decoding. It is known that the decoder using soft-decision methods perform better compared to that of the hard-decision, due to its ability to correct errors based on the bit probabilities [7]. The Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) which is based on soft-decision decoding achieves best BER performance but with high complexity. Many modifications have been proposed to simplify the algorithm operations, but the implementation complexity of these algorithms is still high. Although the check node operation of SPA is simplified in the min-sum algorithm, it requires higher quantized messages to be passed between the nodes for decoding [10]. In [11], a simplified sum-product algorithm is proposed with a modification in check node operation. However, the implementation of the algorithm is still complex. In contrast, Bit-Flip algorithm which is based on hard-decision decoding has the least complexity but suffers from poor performance. A number of modifications have been proposed to improve the performance, but all these algorithms require complex operations that can achieve very little improvement in performance [12], [13]. In [14], an improved weighted bit-flip (WBF) algorithm is proposed. However, WBF algorithms require complex variable node operations and are still based on hard-decision decoding technique. In this paper, a low complexity LDPC decoding is proposed to achieve a tradeoff between implementation complexity compared to fully soft-decision based algorithms (SPA) and decoding performance (such as BER and iterations) compared to fully hard-decision based algorithms (BFA). The algorithm is based on a simple hard-decision message passing technique to reduce the complexity. However, it uses the soft inputs and performs a distinct variable node operation to improve the decoding performance. With a slight increase in complexity of variable node operation, the proposed algorithm not only improves the BER performance, but also reduces the average iterations required for decoding. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section III, a brief overview of LDPC decoding algorithms are presented. Section IV discusses about the proposed al-

gorithm and its node operations. Section V provides performance simulation results of the proposed algorithm, followed by conclusion in Section VI.
III. LDPC DECODING ALGORITHMS In this section, a highly complex Sum-Product algorithm that can achieve very good performance compared to a low complexity Bit-Flip algorithm that suffers from poor performance is presented.

A. Sum-Product Algorithm
The Sum-Product algorithm for LDPC decoding is a soft-decision message-passing algorithm that requires LLR (intrinsic message) for variable node operations to make decoding decisions. To begin with the decoding process, the LLRs are passed over to the variable nodes. The variable nodes (V) perform the ‘sum’ operations on the input LLRs, as in (1) and the computed messages (extrinsic) are passed along the connected edges to the check nodes (C) [10].

SPA Variable node operation:

∑ Vi = LLRn + Cj

(1)

j≠i

where, n = 1,2,….number of variable nodes

i, j = 1,2,….degree of variable node

The check nodes (C) perform the parity check operation and also computes the messages [10], that are to be passed to the respective variable nodes (V), as in (2). This process is repeated till the maximum iterations is reached or the parity check is satisfied.

SPA Check node operation:

∏ Ck

=

2 tanh −1

k ≠l

tanh Vl 2



(2)

where, l, k = 1,2,….degree of check node

It can be noted that the SPA has non-linear function in the check node operation and also requires high precision extrinsic messages to be passed between the nodes. This represents high decoding complexity. However, the SPA can achieve very good decoding performance [10].

B. Bit-Flip Algorithm
The Bit-Flip algorithm is based on hard-decision message-passing technique. A binary hard-decision is done on the received channel data and then passed to the decoder. The messages passed between the check node and variable nodes are also single-bit hard-decision values. The variable node (V) sends the bit information to the connected check nodes (C) over the edges. The

20

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:39:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

check node performs a parity check operation on the bits received from variable node (Eq. 3) [12]. It sends back the message to the respective variable nodes with a suggestion of the expected bit value for the parity check to be satisfied.

BFA Check node operation:

Ck = V 1 ⊕ V 2 ⊕ ..... ⊕ Vl ∀l ≠ k

(3)

where, l, k = 1,2,….degree of check node
The variable node (V) receives a set of response or the suggested bit values from the check nodes (C). Based on the majority of the suggested bit values, the variable node flips the current bit (Eq. 4) [12] or retains the original value. This operation is repeated until the parity check is satisfied or maximum number of iterations is reached

BFA Variable node operation:

 0 If , majority(Ci) = 0

Vn

=

 

1

If , majority(Ci) = 1

(4)

Vn

Otherwise,

where, n = 1,2,….number of variable nodes i = 1,2,….degree of variable node
Clearly the BFA has simple check node and variable node operations, thus making it a very low complexity decoding algorithm compared to the SPA presented above. But this advantage comes with a poor decoding performance [12].
IV. SIMPLIFIED MESSAGE PASSING ALGORITHM
It is well known that SPA can achieve good decoding performance [10] but with high implementation complexity and BFA has low implementation complexity but poor performance [12]. The main aim of the proposed Simplified Message Passing Algorithm (SMPA) is to achieve a tradeoff between the decoding performance and implementation complexity of the above two algorithms. The check node and variable node operations of the proposed SMPA are presented next.
A. Check Node Operation
The complexity of a message passing algorithm significantly depends on the quantization length of extrinsic messages and the check node operation. These aspects are particularly critical in case of hardware implementation of large LDPC codes. In order to reduce the complexity of SMPA, the check node consists of a simple

parity check operation (Eq. 5) only, similar to BFA. However, the performance improvement of SMPA over BFA is achieved from a distinct variable node (V) operation.

SMPA Check node operation:

Ck = V 1 ⊕ V 2 ⊕ ..... ⊕ Vl ∀l ≠ k

(5)

where, l, k = 1,2,….degree of check node

B. Variable Node Operation
A fully hard-decision based decoding algorithm suffers from poor performance because of the hard-decision intrinsic and extrinsic messages used in the decoding process. In SMPA, the performance improvement is achieved by using soft LLR input for decoding, like any other soft-decision based algorithms. The variable node (V) performs ‘sum’ operation similar to SPA, but the difference is that SMPA requires original LLR value only at the beginning of the decoding cycle, as in (6). The updated new LLR value is used in subsequent iterations, as in (9). In the analysis of hard-decision based channels presented in [15] the variable node operates directly on the hard-decision bit received from the check nodes. In contrast, the proposed SMPA maps the bit suggestion from the check nodes (C) to an optimized integer constant called ‘Weight’ (±W), which is determined from simulations to achieve the best possible BER performance. It is either added to or subtracted from the current LLR value. For example, at a variable node if binary ‘0’ is received from the check node, it is mapped to +W and if its binary ‘1’ it is mapped to –W, as in (7) and (8) respectively. After this operation, a hard-decision is performed on the updated LLR value and it is sent across to the respective check nodes for parity check, as in (10). The process is repeated until the parity check is satisfied or the maximum iteration is reached.

SMPA variable node operation:

Initial (at iteration 0): Vn = LLR

(6)

Subsequent iterations:

Xi = +W , If Ci = 0

(7)

Xi = −W , If Ci = 1

(8)

∑ Vn = Vn + Xi

(9)

Vi = sign(Vn − Xi)

(10)

[‘+’ → ‘0’ and ‘-‘→’1’]

where, n = 1,2,….number of variable nodes i = 1,2,….degree of variable node W = optimized integer constant obtained from

21

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:39:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

simulations Note that in SMPA, the variable node performs addition operations and uses mapping logic, and check node performs simple XOR operation. Hence it can be implemented using simple hardware blocks, such as adders and Look-Up-Tables (LUT). A comparison of check node and variable node structures for the SMPA, SPA and BFA is shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Comparison of decoding node structures for SMPA, SPA and BFA

eration. At a BER of 10-5, a significant improvement of over 1.8 dB is achieved compared to BFA by using 4bit LLR. However, little improvement in performance is achieved (0.1~0.2 dB at 10-5 BER) by using 5-bit LLRs over 4-bit. A similar behavior is observed in case of FER performance. The convergence rate of the algorithms is assessed by analyzing the average decoding iterations for each of the algorithms, as shown in Fig. 5. The average iteration results clearly indicate that the proposed SMPA (4-bit and 5-bit) has higher convergence rate and requires fewer iterations compared to BFA. The results also indicate that the average decoding iteration reduces as the LLR precision increases. Although the iteration count for SPA is much lower than SMPA, each of the iteration in SPA is likely to take significantly more time due to the highly complex operations at the variable and check nodes (see Eq. 1 and Eq. 2). In contrast, the proposed SMPA has much simpler node operations (see Eq. 5-10).

V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS

To evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm, simulations were carried out for two different code lengths, 1000-bit and 648-bit. The latter is compliant with WLAN (IEEE 802.11n) standard [16]. A bit-true simulation model has been developed using the C programming language in MatLab environment. The LDPC codes were generated using Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) based algorithm [17] and the simulations were carried out assuming that the codewords were Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) modulated and passed over an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel [18]. Simulations were done with different LLR precisions to study the effect on the decoding performance. The LDPC code parameters and specifications used in the performance simulations are as follows:

(a) 648-bit LDPC code

• Code lengths – 648-bit (WLAN) and 1000-bit

• ½ rate and (3, 6) regular code

• LLR quantization for SMPA: 3-bit, 4-bit (Weight, W = 1) and 5-bit (Weight, W = 2)

• Maximum decoding iterations – 10

The BER and frame error rate (FER) performance simulation results for the proposed SMPA are shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 respectively. A comparison of BER and FER performances is provided in Table I. From the simulations, it can be observed that the error correction capability (BER and number of iterations) has improved in SMPA compared to BFA. This has been the consequence of using soft LLR inputs and a unique variable node operation. The BER improvement of using 3-bit LLR in SMPA compared to BFA is at least 0.8 dB at 10-5. It is clear that the performance improves gradually as the LLR precision increases in the variable node op-

(b) 1000-bit LDPC code Fig. 3. BER performances for the SMPA, SPA and BFA

22

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:39:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) 648-bit LDPC code

(b) 1000-bit LDPC code
Fig. 5. Average decoding iterations for the SMPA, SPA and BFA

(b) 1000-bit LDPC code Fig. 4. FER performances for the SMPA, SPA and BFA

Table I. Comparison of BER and FER performance of the algorithms

Algorithms

648-bit (WLAN)

BER

FER

1000-bit BER FER

SPA

10-5 3.2 dB

10-2 2.8 dB

10-5 2.9 dB

10-2 2.6 dB

BFA

10-5 8 dB

10-2 7.1 dB

10-5 7.9 dB

10-2 7.1 dB

3-bit

10-5 7.2 dB

10-2 6.5 dB

10-5 6.8 dB

10-2 6.5 dB

SMPA 4-bit

10-5 6.2 dB

10-2 5.6 dB

10-5 5.9 dB

10-2 5.6 dB

5-bit

10-5 6.0 dB

10-2 5.5 dB

10-5 5.8 dB

10-2 5.5 dB

(a) 648-bit LDPC code

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper a simplified message passing algorithm has been proposed. The algorithm incorporates a novel approach to improve the overall performance of the decoder compared to fully hard-decision based decoding solutions. It uses soft-inputs for variable node operation along with hard-decision messages between the nodes. It has been shown that both the BER and FER performances are improved by combining higher LLR precisions with single-bit hard-decision message passing between the decoding nodes. It is also shown that the average decoding iterations are reduced compared to the fully hard-decision based decoding algorithms. The proposed algorithm significantly reduces computational complexity at the decoding nodes and will lead to much reduced hardware implementation overheads.
23

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:39:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors wish to acknowledge Dr Mark Ho of the School of Electrical and Information Engineering, University of South Australia, for his advice on carrying out the performance simulations.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, Low-density parity-check codes. IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no.1, pp. 21-28, 1962.
[2] D.J.C. MacKay and R.M. Neal, Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes. Electronics Letters, vol. 33, no.6, pp. 457458, 1997.
[3] D.J.C. MacKay, Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, no.2, pp. 399431, 1999.
[4] G.L.L. Nicolas Fau (2008) LDPC (Low Density Parity Check) - A Better Coding Scheme for Wireless PHY Layers Design and Reuse Industry Article.
[5] Tetsuo Nozawa (2005) LDPC Adopted for Use in Comms, Broadcasting, HDDs. Nikkei Electronics Asia.
[6] D. Costello Jr, et al. A comparison between LDPC block and convolutional codes. in Proceedings of the Information Theory and Applications Workshop. 2006. San Diego, USA.
[7] S.J. Johnson, Introducing Low-Density ParityCheck Codes. 2006, University of Newcastle, Australia.
[8] B. Leiner, LDPC Codes–a brief Tutorial, in Stud. ID.: 53418L April. 2005.
[9] J.C. Moreira, Essentials of error-control coding, ed. P.G. Farrell. 2006, West Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons.

[10] A. Anastasopoulos. A comparison between the sum-product and the min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution. in IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference. 2001.
[11] S. Papaharalabos and P.T. Mathiopoulos, Simplified sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes with optimal performance. Electronics Letters, vol. 45, no.2, pp. 116-117, 2009.
[12] N. Miladinovic and M.P.C. Fossorier, Improved bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, no.4, pp. 1594-1606, 2005.
[13] T.M.N. Ngatched, F. Takawira, and M. Bossert, An improved decoding algorithm for finitegeometry LDPC codes. IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 57, no.2, pp. 302-306, 2009.
[14] Q. Dajun, et al. A Modification to Weighted BitFlipping Decoding Algorithm for LDPC Codes Based on Reliability Adjustment. in IEEE International Conference on Communications. 2008.
[15] G. Lechner, T. Pedersen, and G. Kramer. EXIT Chart Analysis of Binary Message-Passing Decoders. in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory. 2007.
[16] IEEE 802.11n Wireless LAN Medium Access Control MAC and Physical Layer PHY specifications. 2006, IEEE 802.11n-D1.0.
[17] X.-Y. Hu. Software to Construct PEG LDPC code. 2008 [cited 2009 May]; Available from: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/PEG _ECC.html.
[18] J.G. Proakis, Digital communications. 5th ed. ed, ed. M. Salehi. 2008, New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 10-102.

24
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:39:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

