EFFICIENT COMBINATION OF MULTIPLE HYPERSPECTRAL DATA PROCESSING CHAINS USING BINARY DECISION TREES
K. Bakos and P. Gamba , Senior Member, IEEE
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Universita` di Pavia, Via A. Ferrata, 1, 27100 Pavia, Italy Faculty of Geography and Regional Studies, University of Warsaw, 00-927 Warszawa, Poland

ABSTRACT According to the technical literature, there is no classification algorithm which is able to extract different classes with the same quality. In this paper we introduce a novel methodology to build a multi-stage, hierarchical data processing approach that is able to combine the advantages of different processing chains, which may be best suited for specific classes. The combination process is carried out using a binary decision tree (BDT) structure where at each node the most useful input information source, in the form of different processing chains, is used, according to the outcome of a simple learning mechanism on small training/validation subsets. Final results are instead achieved by applying the designed BDT to the whole data set. The usefulness of the procedure is proved by extensive analysis of a standard test data set, the Indian Pine AVIRIS set.
1. INTRODUCTION
Although the use of remotely sensed data is increasing, most of the studies presented in technical literature and also in commercial applications are strongly targeted. This is no exception for hyperspectral data when it is considered for land cover mapping. As a matter of fact, there is no standard chain for generic mapping products by means of hyperspectral images and this missing framework makes more difficult to the end users an efficient exploitation of these data sets.
In this study the approach is based on the generic idea of what is a “processing chain” for hyperspectral images [1]. In our model, a somehow “standard” chain starts from radiometrically and geometrically corrected data and consists of a data volume reduction and transformation step (feature selection or feature extraction), followed by a classifier and, optionally, a post-classification refinement. The multiple ways to implement each of these three parts is the reason for the vast amount of algorithms for mapping using hyperspectral data. For example, in the case of vegetation mapping, Minimum Noise Fraction (MNF), Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Decision Boundary Feature Extraction (DBFE) are usually considered as the options for feature reduction, but they are usually tested and chosen on an “ad hoc” basis for mapping different vegetation ecosystems. In [2] a comparison between

three different classifiers and three different feature extraction steps brings to the conclusion that salt marsh mapping is better achieved using Maximum Likelihood after MNF, while in [3] a neural network classifier provide good results after MNF or PCA in a mountainous region.
The research carried out in this work is based on some of these algorithms, already tested by many researchers as the most useful or most efficient ones. The ultimate goal would be to combine these approaches in a general procedure. To this aim, a novel hierarchical fusion approach based on a Binary Decision Tree (BDT) [4] is proposed.
2. OVERALL METHODOLOGY
As stated in the previous Section, the use of different processing chain to eventually classify hyperspectral data is usually leading to different results at the class as well as the overall mapping level. This is not a problem of hyperspectral data alone, but it is enhanced by the huge amount of data, the need for a large enough training sets [5] and the additional feature extraction/reduction step before the classifier.
The problem of an efficient mapping using hyperspectral data is thus somehow requiring an answer to two different questions:
1. which is the most suitable selection of data processing chains for a given mapping application?
2. Is it possible to combine the results of these chains in a flexible yet effective manner?
The first question may be addressed by performing data processing using different chains, analyzing the results and finally trying to understand where the differences arose. For instance, an extensive analysis and comparison of different algorithms and their combinations, in the case of vegetation mapping using hyperspectral data, have been published in [6]. In that case, best results may be achieved by considering feature selection based either on band selection using transformed divergence index [7] (BS-TD), principal components analysis (PCA) [8], or minimum noise fraction rotation (MNF) [9]. Similarly, different classification algorithms

978-1-4244-8907-7/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:42:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. Overall structure of the proposed procedure.

were selected: maximum likelihood (ML), support vector machines (SVM) [10], spectral angle mapper (SAM) [11] and neural networks (NN) [12].
2.1. Efficient mapping using hierarchical binary decision trees
The answer to the second question is the main goal of this research work, and will be addressed by means of a decision tree classifier.
The overall architecture of the mapping procedure is shown in Fig. 1. The processing chains selected due to availability, best practises or results in technical literature are applied to a minimum training set, whereas minimum refers to the statistical requirements of the classification algorithm. The stress is however on the fact that no complete classification of the whole scene under test is performed. Instead, confusion matrices and accuracy values are computed on a small validation set, and used to design the core of the proposed methodology, a hierarchical binary decision tree (BDT) architecture.
Hierarchical classification and ensembles are well known in data classification methods. In this section we introduce a methodology to create an ensemble of different classifiers using a hierarchical tree structure by means of a simple learning algorithm. The learning is based on the initial analysis of the available data and it optimizes the structure of the BDT, treated as an ensemble, in terms of nodes, inputs, and decision rules to be applied at each node. This can be useful when sets of data dimensionality reduction techniques and classification algorithms are already available for the user. The aim is to combine the classification results of different processing chains using an ensemble that enables to achieve higher mapping accuracy level than any of the individual processing chains.
The learning mechanism starts with a series of initial preclassifications of a limited subset of the data and class con-

fusions, which are validated. Using the obtained confusion matrices the following information is obtained:
for each class the processing chain that enables the most accurate discrimination of the particular class;
a ranking of classes based on the previously identified best possible discrimination from highest to lowest accuracy level.
This information then enables the generation of a hierarchical decision tree (which is labeled as “design step”, see Fig. 1) which we use together with a sequential data classifier. In practice, the design of the decision tree structure starts with the full set of confusion matrices obtained from the results of different classifiers, each one containing all the classes of the training data. Then, the procedure iteratively identifies the combination of a class and an input source (i. e. processing chain) for which the effective accuracy defined using Equ. 1 is maximal. After the class-input source pair has been identified, the class is removed from the full set of confusion matrices and the diagonal element of the selected class is set to 0. The procedure is then repeated until each class is selected once. Eventually, a decision tree configuration is obtained by means of the selected input and class combinations. The first chosen pair corresponds to the top node of the tree, while other combinations are used to build the BDT classifier by means of a top-down approach.
The effective accuracy, for the estimation procedure is calculated by means of the following formula:
(1)
where , are the producer and user accuracy values respectively for the class of interest.
Once the BDT structure has been completed, the actual classification of the whole scene is carried out. The BDT

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:42:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Table 1. Accuracy values per class of the BDT classifier, best single stage classification and majority voting (U = User’s Accuracy, P = Producer’s Accuracy).

Class 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 OA

BDT

P

U

92.19 82.73

80.10 95.43

98.19 92.60

99.20 98.15

99.59 100.00

81.10 86.93

85.78 86.66

91.04 87.76

99.61 99.54

90.4839%

ML on MNF

P

U

88.15 82.51

83.33 72.70

97.18 93.79

98.80 97.36

99.59 100.00

85.54 80.00

76.18 87.16

86.48 86.76

99.38 99.46

87.6619%

Majority vot.

P

U

91.00 77.59

76.62 89.25

95.37 95.18

99.60 95.63

99.59 99.59

88.12 85.81

77.35 89.00

90.39 73.71

99.54 99.84

88.3253%

Fig. 2. Indian Pines data set: structure of the BDT used for the classification.
classifier sequentially processes the data by changing the input source (i. e. the feature extraction/selection method) and the classifier at each iteration, masking out the already labelled pixels at higher level nodes. With this algorithm the final classification map is the result of an ensemble classification where each class is detected using the estimated most suitable feature extraction and classification methods.
3. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The test data used in this research is the “Indian Pines” standard data set, acquired using Airborne Visible Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS) on June 12, 1992 and referring an area in Indiana (USA) close to the location with the same name of the data set [14]. This data set is often used for demonstration of new methodologies or making comparison among different image interpretation techniques. Starting from the original AVIRIS data set, water absorption bands were removed, obtaining a 200 band spectrum at each pixel.
Because of the limited number of pixels available in some of the classes, in technical literature it is customary to reduce the validation set to 9 classes [13]. This reduction is required by the fact that classes with limited samples do not allow appropriate training of all classifiers and do not have enough samples to assess the interpretation accuracy without biasing the results.
The Indian Pines data set was used because it is more suitable for comparison among different classification ap-

proaches, because of the large amount of technical literature and the detailed field data available. In addition to the ML classifier, in this test other classification approaches were considered, and basically the best available per-pixel approaches were considered. As a matter of fact, support vector machines [10], neural network and class-dependent neural network (CDNN) [16] were applied to the data set after a feature extraction by means of Independent Component Analysis (ICA) or the above mentioned MNF and DBFE procedure.
The performance of the hierarchical ensemble is assessed by comparing the accuracy values using a per-class basis single stage classification. The results of the best performing single stage processing chain (ML classifier after MNF feature extraction) is used to understand which are the specific improvements of the BDT combination.
As shown in Fig. 2, the hierarchical BDT is a sort of structured classifier ensemble that uses different inputs and classification rules at different nodes adapting to the data properties. In Fig 3 the visual differences among the results of the proposed and the best single stage methodology may be detected.
For comparison, the same figure reports the results of another well-known method of ensemble classification, i. e. majority voting. It is worth mentioning however that the majority voting approach by its nature requires a complete classification of the full scene as opposed to the proposed optimized methodology where only a small subset of the image must be processed. This is because the majority voting approach is using the final labels of different classifications on a per pixel basis for the whole scene. In order to characterize better the different results, producer’s and user’s accuracy values for each class, as well as the overall accuracy of the complete maps, are detailed in Table 1.
It may be noted that BDT classification not only outper-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:42:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

tions.

Fig. 3. Indian Pines data set: classification results for (a) the BDT classifier, (b)the best single stage processing chain, (c) the combination by majority voting of all classification maps.
forms the best processing chain but also gains higher accuracy levels than a majority voting procedure. At the same time the approach requires less computational power than carrying out majority voting, since only the relevant inputs and methodologies are selected to be included within the classification procedure.
Of course, there are some limitations of the methodology, specifically the inability to significantly boost the accuracy level and the requirement for good quality training and validation samples for the design procedure. The first limitation is simply based on the fact that it is not a novel classification methodology but only a way to create ensemble of classifiers with a reasonably good design, hence the absolute performance of the system is determined by the classifiers that are used to create the ensemble structure.
4. CONCLUSIONS
The proposed procedure is able to exploit different processing chains and combine them into a hierarchical fusion framework based on a Binary Decision Tree structure. The results obtained in a test area are effective, and show the potential of the procedure. However, more work need to be done. Specifically, the dependence of the results on the training set needs to be discussed and possibly improved in future implementa-

5. REFERENCES
[1] D. Landgrebe, Signal Theory Methods In Multispectral Remote Sensing, John Wiley and Sons, 508 pages plus a CD, 2003.
[2] E. Belluco, M. Camuffo, S. Ferrari, L. Modenese, S. Silvestri, A. Marani, M. Marani, “Mapping salt-marsh vegetation by multispectral and hyperspectral remote sensing”, Remote Sensing of Environment, Vol. 105, no. 1, pp. 54-67,2006.
[3] B. Zagajewski, A. Kozlowska, M. Krowczynska, M. Sobczak and M. Wrzesien, “Mapping high mountain vegetation using hyperspectral data”, EARSeL eProceedings, Vol. 4, 1/2005.
[4] A.V. Kulkarni and L.N. Kanal, “An optimization approach to hierarchical classifier design,” Proc. of 3 Int. Joint Conf. on Pattern Recognition, San Diego, CA, Vol. 17, pp. 359-369, 1976.
[5] G.F. Hughes, “On the mean accuracy of statistical pattern recognizers,” IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, pp. 5563, 1968.
[6] K. Bakos, P. Gamba, “Potential of hyperspectral remote sensing for vegetation mapping in high mountain ecosystems”, Proc. of 6 EarSEL SIG IS workshop 2009, Tel Aviv, Israel, unformatted CD-ROM.
[7] J.A. Richards, Remote Sensing Digital Image Analysis, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, p. 240, 1999.
[8] I.T. Jolliffe , Principal Component Analysis, 2 ed., Springer, NY, 2002.
[9] A.A. Green, M. Berman, P. Switzer, and M. D. Craig, “A transformation for ordering multispectral data in terms of image quality with implications for noise removal,” IEEE Trans. Geoscience Remote Sens., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 65-74, 1988.
[10] G.M. Foody and A. Mathur, “A Relative Evaluation of Multiclass Image Classification by Support Vector Machines,” IEEE Trans. Geoscience Remote Sens., vol. 42, pp. 1335-1343.
[11] O.A. De Carvalho, and P.R. Meneses, “Spectral Correlation Mapper (SCM); An improvement on the Spectral Angle Mapper (SAM),” Summaries of the 9 JPL Airborne Earth Science Workshop, JPL Publication. 9 p., 2000.
[12] P.M. Atkinson, and A.R.L. Tatnall, “Introduction to neural networks in remote sensing,” Int. Journal of Remote Sensing, vol. 11, pp. 699- 709, 1997.
[13] G. Camps-Valls, and L. Bruzzone, “Kernel-Based Methods for Hyperspectral Image Classication,” IEEE Trans. Geoscience Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1351-1362, 2005.
[14] D. Landgrebe, “Indian Pines AVIRIS Hyperspectral Reflectance Data: 92av3c,” 1992. Available from http://makalu.jpl.nasa.gov/locator/index.html
[15] M. Pesaresi, and J.A. Benediktsson, “A new ap- proach for the morphological segmentation of high- resolution satellite imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geoscience Remote Sens, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 309320.
[16] P.R. Marpu, P. Gamba, I. Niemeyer, “Hypersepctral data classification using an ensemble of class-dependent neural networks,” in Proc. of IEEE GRSS Workshop on Hyperspectral Image and Signal Processing Conference (WHISPERS), Grenoble, France, Aug. 2009, unformatted CD-ROM.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:42:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

