A High-Performance Multibit-Flipping Algorithm for LDPC Decoding
Jui-Hui Hung1 and Sau-Gee Chen2(Invited Paper)
Institute of Electronics & Department of Electronics Engineering National Chiao Tung University Hsinchu, Taiwan
1paholisi.nctu@gmail.com 2sgchen@mail.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract—For LDPC decoding, bit-flipping (BF) algorithms are much simpler than the min-sum algorithms (MSA). However, BF algorithms have the disadvantages of poorer performances and higher iteration counts than MSA. This paper introduces the concepts of low correlation search and culprit vote to further improve the efficiency of the existing BF algorithms. High decoding performances and low iteration number are achieved by flipping those bits with low correlation as much as possible and introducing an additional syndrome vote procedure. As a result, the proposed algorithm can achieve significant decoding performance which is very close to the min-sum algorithm (MSA) but with much lower computation complexity.
Index Terms—channel coding, LDPC codes, bit-flipping algorithm
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity check (LDPC) code was introduced in 1962 [1], which can achieve performance close to Shannon bound. As such, LDPC has been adopted by many state-of-theart communication systems, such as the recent DVB-S2, DMBTH, 802.3an, 802.15.3c and 802.16e systems. It is a kind of binary linear block code whose parity check matrix is sparse which has much fewer 1’s than a common matrix. A sparse parity check matrix facilitates simple decoding algorithms and low-complexity decoder designs.
Check matrix of a LDPC code is often represented by a bipartite graph, called Tanner graph [2], which is composed of n variable nodes and m check nodes. Those variable nodes and check nodes are connected by edges defined by nonzero entries of matrix H. The number of 1s in each column of H determines the number of edges for each variable node connected to check nodes, and the number of 1s in each row of H determines the connections from each check node to variable nodes. Tanner graph shows a clear picture of all the information exchange links in a decoding process.
There are many LDPC decoding methods in the literature. The sum-product algorithm (SPA) [3] has the highest decoding performance close to the Shannon limit. However, it is impractical for applications, due to its high complexity. In comparison, the popular MSA presented in [4] has lower complexity, with comparable performance to SPA. Still, its complexity is too high to be efficiently realized in hardware implementation. Both MSA and SPA are based on the concept

of message passing, which involves complicated message computations and updates. In contrast, the conventional BF (CBF) algorithm [1] has a much simpler bit-update scheme than those two algorithms. The basic idea of BF algorithm is simply to flip those potential error bits one by one, until the check matrix equation is equal to zero. However, its performance is much lower than that of SPA and MSA. To remedy this problem, the weighted bit-flipping (WBF) algorithm [5] and the modified WBF (MWBF) algorithm [6] attain better performances than the CBF algorithm, at the cost of additional computation. An improved MWBF (IMWBF) algorithm [7] and a reliability-ratio based WBF (RRWBF) algorithm [8] further improve the decoding performance over [5], [6]. However, all of them are still significantly inferior to SPA and MSA in terms of both performances and iteration counts.
Recently we proposed an efficient BF algorithm in [9]. The algorithm introduces a voting scheme on those syndromes associated with a chosen potential culprit bit which has high probability of being erroneous, and then decides if the culprit bit should be flipped or not in each iteration. As such, the decoding performances can be noticeably increased. Besides, to reduce iteration number of BF-based algorithms, we proposed an efficient BF decoding algorithm in [10] which flips multi-bits in each iteration. Based on the advantages of these two algorithms, this work proposes a decoding procedure which combines these two algorithms with the existing BFbased algorithms. As a result, high decoding performances and low iteration counts can be achieved, as will be detailed as follows.
II. CONCEPT OF THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM
The proposed LDPC decoding procedure integrates our recent LDPC decoding techniques including the Culprit-Vote Bit-Flipping (CVBF) algorithm [9] and Low-Correlation Multi Bit-Flipping (LCMBF) algorithm [10]. By combining the proposed algorithm with the existing BF algorithms, the performances of conventional BF algorithms can be significantly increased, and meantime their iteration numbers can be effectively reduced. The basic concepts of these two algorithms will be introduced below.

151

ISIC 2009

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:38:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 1. A Tanner graph of a (10,6) LDPC code.
Figure 2. An example of additionally introduced error occurrence, (a) before flipping b2, (b) after flipping b2.
A. The CVBF algorithm [9] Although IMWBF algorithm maintains the advantages of
low complexity and high speed of WBF and MWBF algorithms, its performance is still not good enough, compared to SPA. By observing the flipped bit in each iteration of both IMWBF and WBF algorithms, one can find a major weakness: when a bit is incorrectly flipped, it may induce chain reaction in wrongly flipping all the related message bits. Those errors bits cost additional decoding iterations and sometimes end up with infinite iteration loop.
To resolve the bit-error propagation problem, a syndrome vote technique of a defined culprit bit set, named CVBF algorithm was proposed in [9] that introduces an extra reliability check scheme of a bit node and decide if the bit should be flipped or not, in each iteration. The basic idea of the CVBF scheme is to flip the bit that can attain a syndrome vector closer to the zero vector than before. Doing so, the probability of wrongly flipping a bit will be significant decreased, and there will be much less bit error propagation problem.
Since BF-based algorithms only flip one bit in each iteration,

only the associated syndrome of the flipped bit will be inverted (i.e., 0 becomes 1 or 1 becomes 0). Take Fig. 1 as an example, if one flips the message bit circled by the dotted line (i.e., b6), the syndrome vector will become (1,0,1,1). In this case, the total number of 1s of the syndrome vector is increased from two to three. The error may induce some chain reaction in wrongly flipping all the related message bits as mentioned before. Alternatively, if we flip the message bit b3, the syndrome vector will become (0,0,1,0). The total number of 1s of the syndrome vector is reduced from two to one. It means that this flipped bit can make the syndrome vector closer to the zero vector than the original one.
In summary, if one flips the bit which has a larger number of 1s in the associated syndrome vector than the number of 0s, the syndrome vector will get closer to the zero vector. This tactic can be simply achieved by applying the majority vote scheme to the associated syndrome vector. Before doing that, the CVBF algorithm first defines a set, called the culprit set, which includes all the bits considered to have high probabilities of incorrectly decoded (obtained from the adopted BF decoding algorithm, such as WBF, MWBF or IMWBF). For the ensuing discussion, let the number of elements in the culprit set be denoted as Nc. As a result, the decoding performance of BF-based algorithms can be further improved. Please refer to [9] for detailed introduction of the algorithm.
B. The LCMBF algorithm [10]
All of the mentioned BF-based algorithms only flip one bit in each iteration and need high iteration counts to obtain the final decoding results. The most intuitive and simplest way to reduce iteration numbers is flipping more than one bit in each iteration. However, there is risk that one may induce additional error bits and propagate the errors to later iterations, as demonstrated below.
Consider a (10,4) LDPC code for an example, where its corresponding Tanner graph is shown in Fig. 2(a). Assume WBF or RRWBF algorithm is used, and b2 is the first flipped bit as signified by the circle in Fig. 2, and b10 is correctly decided to be flipped next, according to the updated syndrome and value of error term after the b2 flipping, as shown in Fig. 2(b). On the other hand, if we adopt the strategy of flipping two bits at a time and assume that both b2 and b4 are to be flipped in the first iteration, then an additional error will be so introduced due to the wrongly flipped b4. It results in an inferior performance to the anticipation. One solution for this is to reduce the occurrence probability of additional error bits when flipping more than one bit at a time.
The basic concept of the LCMBF algorithm is very simple. For example, supposed that we want to flip two bits at a time. First, the reliability measure is calculated and the bit with the maximum measure is chosen. Next, the second bit which has the maximum reliability measure among all the bits (not connected to the first bit by any links in the Tanner graph). Then these two bits are flipped and all syndromes associated

152 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:38:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

with these two bits are updated. This ends an iteration and enters to the next iteration. Similar concept can be applied to flipping more than two bits at a time. In this case, note that all the later chosen bits should not be connected to those earlier chosen bits. However, as the number of flipped bits is increased, it is hard to find any disconnected bits, especially for those parity check matrices which have high bit connectivity. Under this situation, we can relax the previous unconnected link constraint by allowing choosing those bits with indirect connection, as will be clearly defined below. According to the Tanner graph, there exist three different kinds of relationships between any two bit nodes, as follows:
1) Unconnected: There is no any path connecting these two bit nodes.
2) Indirectly connected: These two bit nodes are connected by a path, and the path passes through more than one check node in between these two bit nodes.
3) Directly connected: These two bit nodes are connected by a path, and the path passes through only one check node in between these two bit nodes.
Take b2 in Fig. 2 as an example, which is unconnected to b7, b8, b9 and b10. It is indirectly connected to both b1 and b3. Besides, it is directly connected to b4, b5 and b6. Obviously, if a bit node is unconnected to another node, then the flipping of any of these two bit nodes will not affect the syndrome (and also the reliability measure) of the other bit node. Similar to the first relationship, if two bit nodes are indirectly connected, then the flipping of one of these two bit node will not change the corresponding syndrome of the other bit node. However, it may change the total reliability E corresponding to the other bit node, and possibly induce additional error bits. If the third relationship holds for a bit node pair, then flipping one of these two bit nodes will increase the number of 1s the most in the syndrome vector. Therefore, it will induce the chain reaction of incorrectly flipping bit nodes, and cause additional burst error bit nodes. This condition is the major concern in designing a multibit-flipping algorithm.
Fortunately, from intensive simulations, we find that the probability of additional errors induced by flipping an indirectly connected bit is very low. As a result, we can select those bits as the candidate bits which are indirectly connected or unconnected to each other. Besides, the number of flipping bits per iteration (denoted as Nfb) has to be decided. By intuition, a large Nfb is preferred. However, a large Nfb would increase the probability of wrongly flipping a correct bit. Hence, we should decide a suitable Nfb for the highest gain of the multibit-flipping scheme. The number is highly dependent on the code length, code rate and structure of the parity check matrix. It is very hard to derive the optimal value of Nfb. Therefore, the optimal value of this number can be found by computer simulations. For further detailed introduction of the LCMBF algorithm, please refer to [10].
C. Detailed Flows of the proposed decoding algorithm
As discussed above, since CVBF algorithm and LCMBF

algorithm can significantly improve the decoding performance and reduce the iteration number of conventional BF-based algorithms, respectively, one can integrate these two techniques with BF algorithms for the best decoding effect.
The decoding procedure of the proposed algorithm is quite intuitive: for each candidate flipping bit decided by LCMBF algorithm, the proposed algorithm will additionally do the culprit vote as the final check.
The decoding steps of the proposed algorithm are presented below and an appropriate BF decoding method should be determined initially to combine with this algorithm. Step 1) Initialization: Set the maximum number of iterations
Nitr and the maximum number of bits to be flipped Nfb in each iteration to some prescribed values. Set the bit flipping index i=1 and iteration index j=1. Step 2) First bit flipping: Utilize the reliability measure of the adopted BF algorithm (such as MWBF, IMWBF or RRWBF) and the majority vote scheme to find out the first flipping bit and flip it. Step 3) Decision of Low-correlation set: Find out the corresponding low-correlation set Li,j. If the lowcorrelation set is empty, go to Step 6. Step 4) Next bit flipping: Utilize the reliability measure of the adopted BF algorithm (such as MWBF, IMWBF or RRWBF) and CVBF algorithm to find out the next flipping bit from Li,j and flip it. The culprit set is formed from the low-correlation set. Set i=i+1. Step 5) Depth test: If i> Nfb, set i=1, otherwise go to Step3. Step 6) Check of iteration number: Set j=j+1. If j> Nitr or the parity-check equation is satisfied, go to Step 7, otherwise go to Step 2. Step 7) End of the algorithm: Stop the decoding procedure.
100

10-2

BER

10-4

Proposed iteration=5, Nfb=10, Nc=50

Proposed iteration=10, Nfb=5, Nc=50

10-6

Proposed iteration=25, Nfb=2, Nc=50

LCMBF iteration=25, Nfb=2

CVBF iteration=50 Nc=50

IMWBF iteration=50

10-8

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

SNR(dB)

Figure 4. Performances of the proposed algorithm and existing BF algorithms for regular (816,408) Gallager code with column weight of 5.

153 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:38:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

10-2

BER

10-4

10-6

Proposed iteration=25, Nfb=2, Nc=50

SPA iteration=20

MSA iteration=20

IMWBF iteration=50 10-8
1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6

SNR(dB)

Figure 5. Performances of the proposed algorithm, MSA, modified MSA and SPA for regular (816,408) Gallager code with column weight of 5.

100

10-1

10-2

10-3

BER

10-4

Proposed iteration=50, Nfb=2, Nc=100

LCMBF iteraiton=50, Nfb=2

10-5

CVBF iteraiton=100, Nc=100

IMWBF iteration=100

10-6

MSA iteraiton=20

modified MSA iteration=20, alpha=0.75

SPA iteration=20

10-7

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

SNR

Figure 6. Performances of the proposed algorithm and existing major decoding algorithms for (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS AND COMPARISON
In the simulations, we combine the proposed algorithm with the efficient IMWBF algorithm, because IMWBF algorithm has a good tradeoff between decoding performance and computational complexity. The performances of the proposed algorithm and the existing BF algorithms for the regular (816,408) Gallager code with column weight of 5 are shown in Fig. 4.
In the figure, we can find that the decoding performance of the proposed algorithm (with 25 iterations, Nfb=2 and Nc=50) is very close to CVBF algorithm (with 50 iterations and Nc=50) but only need half of iteration number. It means that the proposed algorithm indeed simultaneously possesses the advantages of CVBF and LCMBF algorithms.
Fig. 5 shows the comparison results of the proposed algorithm (with iteration number of 25, Nfb=2 and Nc=50), IMWBF algorithm, MSA and SPA. The iteration number of the MSA and SPA decoding algorithms is 20 which can get the maximum performance of MSA and SPA for the regular (816,408) Gallager code. As shown, the decoding performance of the proposed algorithm is better than the IMWBF algorithm by about 0.9dB but still has a gap between SPA and MSA. It is

because that the reliability measure of the proposed algorithm is due to the combined algorithm which is not good enough. Thus, if one can improve the reliability measure of the combined BF-based algorithm, the decoding performance of the proposed algorithm can be correspondingly increased. Finally, Fig. 6 shows that the proposed algorithm also works well under different code structure. In this figure, the (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code defined in 802.3an standard [11] is tested.
IV. CONCLUSION
The proposed algorithm integrates the best of our recently proposed LDPC decoding techniques CVBF and LCMBF. Compared with the existing BF algorithms, the proposed algorithm can achieve excellent decoding performances at small iteration numbers. Besides, any reliability measures commonly adopted in the existing BF algorithms can be combined with the proposed algorithm so that performances of conventional BF algorithms can be significantly improved. Finally, low-complexity and accurate reliability measures are under further investigation so that higher-performance multibit-flipping algorithms can be derived.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported in part by the grants NSC 95-2219E-009-004 and MOEA 95-EC-17-A-01-S1-048, Taiwan.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. 27, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D. M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementation of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE GLOBECOM’01, Vol. 02, pp. 1036-1036E, Nov. 2001.
[5] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and, M.P.C. Fossorier, “Low-Density parity check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and more,”IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, pp. 2711-2736, 2001.
[6] J. Zhang, M.P.C. Fossorier,“A Modified Weighted Bit-Flipping Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,”IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 165-167, Mar. 2004.
[7] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z.Shi, and Y. Chen,“An Improvement on the Modified Weighted Bit Flipping Decoding algorithm for LDPC Codes,”IEEE Commum. , Vol. 9, No.9, pp.814-816, Sept. 2005.
[8] F. Guo, and L. Hanzo, “Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for low-density parity-check codes”, Electron. Lett., pp. 13561358, 2004.
[9] J.H. Hung and S.G. Chen, “An Efficient BF LDPC Decoding Algorithm Based on A Syndrome Vote Scheme,” IEEE Proceedings of APCC, pp. 1-5, Oct. 2008.
[10] J.H. Hung and S.G. Chen, “An Effective Multibit-Flipping Algorithm for LDPC Decoding,” IEEE Proceedings of ICSPCS, p.p. 15-17, Dec. 2008.
[11] Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) Access Method and Physical Layer Specifications, IEEE Std. 802.3an, 2006.

154 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:38:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

