Undetected Errors in Quasi-cyclic LDPC Codes Caused by Receiver Symbol Slips

Alexander Kaiser†, Sam Dolinar††, and Michael K. Cheng†† †University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720
††Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are capacity-approaching forward error correction codes that operate at signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) decoding thresholds very near to the capacity limits. Receivers designed for less optimal codes might not function smoothly at the lower values of SNR where LDPC codes can operate. In particular, an artifact of low-SNR receiver operation is the increased probability of symbol slips. Receiver synchronization errors resulting from symbol insertions or deletions can cause unexpected decoder problems, especially for an LDPC code with a quasi-cyclic construction.
In this paper we analyze the theoretical basis for symbol slips to cause undetected errors with quasi-cyclic codes, and we demonstrate these effects via simulations. We also examine several no-cost to low-cost solutions that can mitigate these effects.
I. INTRODUCTION
NASA has begun standardization of low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes for space applications. The proposed standard includes a regular quasi-cyclic code of rate 7/8 and a rate-compatible family of nine irregular AR4JA codes [1], [2] of rates 1/2, 2/3, 4/5, and input block sizes 1024, 4096, 16384. All of these codes are quasi-cyclic, where the paritycheck matrix contains a juxtaposition of smaller cyclic submatrices or circulants. Due to this design, quasi-cyclic shifts of a codeword will result in another codeword in the same code.
Each of these codes can be built by connecting permuted copies of a small template graph called a protograph, where the connections are determined by circulant permutation matrices [1]. For example, the component circulants for the (2048,1024) AR4JA code are 128 × 128 matrices and there are 16 circulants per codeword [2]. Since each copy of the protograph can be treated by an independent decoding circuit, this type of code design facilitates parallel hardware implementation and enables a high speed decoder realization. Thus, quasi-cyclic LDPC code constructions are motivated by practical considerations for many applications, not just those of NASA. For example, the DVB-S2 LDPC codes are also quasi-cyclic designs.
Since a well-designed LDPC code can operate reliably at a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) near its capacity threshold, this puts an onus on the receiver to operate at low values of received symbol SNR, particularly for low code rates. An undesirable artifact of low-SNR receiver operation is the increased probability of a symbol slip, in which the receiver’s symbol synchronization circuit temporarily loses track of symbol boundaries and then incorrectly resynchronizes with either one extra symbol (insertion) or one fewer symbol (deletion) in the stream. This has the effect of shifting the coded block of

symbols fed to the LDPC decoder. The slip rate is a function of modulation (BPSK vs. SQPSK), signal format (NRZ-L vs. bi-phase), rotation of the received constellation, and other variables. Receiver symbol slips introduce decoding problems that are distinctively different from the effects of channel noise on correctly synchronized symbols.
LDPC decoders are normally very good at detecting nearly all of the errors that they fail to correct. Error detection is accomplished by verifying satisfaction of all check node constraints at the end of iterations. Tentative decoder outputs that fail one or more check constraints cannot possibly be correct, and conversely a solution that satisfies all of the check constraints is not likely to be erroneous as long as the code does not have low-weight codewords. As a consequence, welldesigned LDPC codes such as those in the AR4JA family can usually satisfy both error correction and error detection requirements without the assistance of a separate error detection code such as a cyclic redundancy check (CRC) code.
This presumption can fail, however, if the channel is not sufficiently random. Receiver symbols slips produce regular patterns of high-weight errors, because the codeword’s symbols are shifted en masse. If the LDPC code were randomly connected rather than quasi-cyclic, it is still likely that such an offset would totally confuse the decoder and cause its iterations to never converge, resulting in detected codeword errors that could be used to trigger the receiver to resynchronize. However, with quasi-cyclic LDPC code designs, small offsets due to symbol slips can cause the decoder to converge to a false, quasi-cyclicly shifted codeword. It is difficult for a quasicyclic LDPC decoder to detect when it incorrectly produces a false codeword due to symbol slips, rather than the true codeword after properly correcting a few channel errors in correctly synchronized channel symbols.
In this paper, we analyze why symbol slips can produce undetected errors for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes, and we propose several methods to prevent these errors from escaping detection. Other researchers (e.g., see [3], [4], [5], and references therein) have tackled the more difficult problem of designing codes capable of correcting insertions or deletions. Our goal in this paper is much less ambitious. Instead, we merely aim to: explain the theoretical basis for symbol slips to cause undetected errors with quasi-cyclic codes (Section II); demonstrate these effects with test data obtained for the AR4JA(2048,1024) code (Section III); and suggest several no-cost to low-cost solutions that can circumvent any undetected error problems caused by receiver symbol slips without requiring major code re-design (Section IV).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Un9iv7. 8D-o1w-n4l2oa4d4e-d41on48J-u8n/e0294/$,22052.60a0t ©072:4010:495 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE "GLOBECOM" 2009 proceedings.

Expand by 2

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) A regular (2, 4) protograph. (b) The protograph expanded by 2 Figure 3. Code constraints under a channel that causes a quasi-cyclic shift

to eliminate parallel edges.

of the variables.

Figure 2. A quasi-cyclic LDPC code based on the (2, 4) regular protograph.
II. THEORETICAL EFFECTS OF SYMBOL SLIPS ON THE DECODING OF QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES
Let us begin with a simple (2, 4) regular protograph and first expand by a factor of two to eliminate parallel edges as seen in Fig. 1. This is a base protograph for defining a quasi-cyclic code. There are four variable node types: a, b, c, and d. There are two check node types: A and B. There are 8 edge types ϕa−A, ϕa−B , ϕb−A, ϕb−B , ϕc−A, ϕc−B , ϕd−A, ϕd−B . To expand by a factor of T , prescribe one circulant permutation of length T for each edge type e specified by the circulant’s phase ϕe. Without loss of generality, five permutations can be taken to be the identity, e.g. ϕa−A = 0, ϕb−A = 0, ϕc−A = 0, ϕd−A = 0, ϕa−B = 0.
Continuing the example, take T = 4 and define the phases of the remaining three circulant permutations as ϕb−B = 3, ϕc−B = 2, ϕd−B = 1. The graph for the expanded code is given in Fig. 2. The expanded code has T = 4 copies of each variable node, check node, and edge type. The edges between specific variable node copies and specific check node copies are determined by the circulant permutation labeling the edges of the protograph. The expanded code is defined by 8 check constraints at the encoder.
In the next two subsections, we use this simple example to illustrate and explain the mechanism by which a small number of symbol slips can foil an LDPC decoder’s natural errordetecting capability if the code is quasi-cyclic.
A. Code Constraints Under a Quasi-cyclic Shift in the Variable Nodes
We first consider the code constraints for a (not-veryrealistic) channel that causes a quasi-cyclic shift of the received variables as illustrated in Fig. 3. Here, the received variable nodes undergo a quasi-cyclic shift. However, the shift does not change and merely relabels the constraints enforced at the decoder when compared to the original constraints at the encoder. For example, the original check constraint A0 is now merely enforced by A1, A1 by A2, A2 by A3, and A3 by A0.

This relabeling is inconsequential because for each check node in the encoder’s graph (Fig. 2), a different check node in the decoder’s graph does the same job and all 8 check constraints are enforced properly. Thus, the quasi-cyclicly shifted version of the original codeword is also a codeword of the code defined at the encoder.
If, besides shifting the received symbols (quasi-cyclicly), this channel also introduces additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), then the LDPC decoder will converge to the quasicyclicly shifted version of the original codeword with the same probability that it would have found the true codeword if the channel had not introduced the quasi-cyclic shift. In this case, the decoder will not detect that it is producing a quasicyclicly shifted version instead of the true original. This is an undetected error.
B. Code Constraints Under a Linear-Time Shift in the Variable Nodes
Now we look at a more realistic insertion channel that causes a linear-time shift of the received variables. In this example, a new variable node d3 is introduced and the existing variable nodes starting from a0 are right-shifted by one as seen in Fig. 4 and listed in Table I. Here three of eight check constraints are equivalent at the encoder and decoder though labeled differently. Five of the eight check constraints are closely related in that three of the four inputs in the decoder appear in the same combination as at the encoder. The fourth input to these checks is an intruder (subscript “3”) from the neighboring variable node type (or codeword). Each of these intruder symbols might agree or disagree with the symbol that was supposed to participate in the corresponding quasicyclicly shifted check with equal probability. If perchance all of the intruder symbols agree with their quasi-cyclicly shifted counterparts, the decoder would find the same quasi-cyclicly shifted codeword that it finds when the channel introduces a quasi-cyclic shift (as described in Section II-A) instead of a linear-time shift. If some of the intruder symbols disagree, the decoder will attempt to “correct” them to their quasi-cyclicly shifted counterparts. If the channel also introduces AWGN and the decoder is operating sufficiently above its AWGN threshold (relative to the additional rate of “errors” coming from the disagreeing intruder symbols), the decoder will likely find the quasi-cyclicly shifted codeword as the best match to a legitimate codeword.
This is the mechanism by which the decoder makes undetected errors even though the symbol slips cause a linear

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Un9iv7. 8D-o1w-n4l2oa4d4e-d41on48J-u8n/e0294/$,22052.60a0t ©072:4010:495 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE "GLOBECOM" 2009 proceedings.

From previous codeword

Figure 4. Code constraints under a channel that causes a linear-time shift of the variables.

Orig check constraints@encoder ←→ Check constraints@decoder

A0 : a0 ⊕ b0 ⊕ c0 ⊕ d0 = 0 A1 : a1 ⊕ b1 ⊕ c1 ⊕ d1 = 0 A2 : a2 ⊕ b2 ⊕ c2 ⊕ d2 = 0 A3 : a3 ⊕ b3 ⊕ c3 ⊕ d3 = 0 B0 : a0 ⊕ b3 ⊕ c2 ⊕ d1 = 0 B1 : a1 ⊕ b0 ⊕ c3 ⊕ d2 = 0 B2 : a2 ⊕ b1 ⊕ c0 ⊕ d3 = 0 B3 : a3 ⊕ b2 ⊕ c1 ⊕ d0 = 0

≡ A1 : a0 ⊕ b0 ⊕ c0 ⊕ d0 = 0 ≡ A2 : a1 ⊕ b1 ⊕ c1 ⊕ d1 = 0 ≡ A3 : a2 ⊕ b2 ⊕ c2 ⊕ d2 = 0 = A0 : a3 ⊕ b3 ⊕ c3 ⊕ d3 = 0 = B1 : a0 ⊕ a3 ⊕ c2 ⊕ d1 = 0 = B2 : a1 ⊕ b0 ⊕ b3 ⊕ d2 = 0 = B3 : a2 ⊕ b1 ⊕ c0 ⊕ c3 = 0 = B0 : d3 ⊕ b2 ⊕ c1 ⊕ d0 = 0

Table I A LINEAR-TIME SHIFT OF THE VARIABLE NODES.

time-shift of the received variables rather than an exact quasicyclic shift. If not too many variables are shifted across the circulant block boundaries, then the decoder’s iterations will unsuspectingly “repair” these variables to match the code symbols of the quasi-cyclicly shifted codeword. In the next section, we examine how this phenomenon varies as a function of the number of slipped symbols. We expect that the decoder will make frequent undetected errors if the number of slipped symbols is small, but mostly detected errors when this number is large enough to overpower the capability of the decoder to falsely “correct” them. These analytical predictions are borne out by our tests described in the next section.

III. TESTS ON THE EFFECTS OF RECEIVER SYMBOL SLIPS ON DECODING OF THE AR4JA LDPC CODE
Through simulations, we measured the propensity of receiver symbol slips to cause undetected decoding errors for the (2048, 1024) AR4JA quasi-cyclic LDPC code. For these tests we simulated an AWGN channel with soft outputs, together with varying numbers and locations of symbol insertions or deletions. The LDPC decoder had a maximum limit of 200 iterations, but would stop and declare success as soon as it found a solution that satisfied all of the code’s check constraints. Conversely, it would declare a decoding failure (i.e., a detected error) if it ran to its maximum iteration limit without ever satisfying all of the check constraints.
First we examine the decoder’s behavior when symbols are deleted starting at the leading codeword boundary. This models the case where the symbol slips occurred in one or more preceding codewords, but they continue to affect succeeding codewords until resynchronization is performed. In this experiment, we randomly pick a codeword in the (2048, 1024) AR4JA code, add this codeword to AWGN, delete a number of code symbols starting at the leading codeword boundary, left-shift undeleted code symbols by the number of deleted positions, zero fill the remaining symbols, and decode. We repeated this procedure for 1000 trials with AWGN generated

at a bit-SNR Eb/N0 of 2.5 dB, which is somewhat above the decoding threshold for this code.
When we delete only the 0th symbol, the original codeword undergoes a linear-time shift (to the left) by one position toward the leading codeword boundary. Ignoring the effects of AWGN for the moment, the resulting word will match exactly to a quasi-cyclicly shifted version of the original codeword with possible single-symbol exceptions at each of the 16 circulant boundaries. Assuming code symbols are equally likely 0 or 1, about half of the 16 symbols will not match. The decoder will correct these errors plus those induced by AWGN and output a codeword that is a quasi-cyclicly shifted version of the original without identifying that a miscorrection has occurred. At an Eb/N0 of 2.5 dB, and with only AWGN (no deletions), the decoder takes an average of 11.05 iterations to decode. When one symbol is deleted, the decoder must work harder to correct the additional hard symbol errors at the circulant boundaries, and it produces a result in about 12.8 iterations on average.
We continue the experiment by deleting the 0th and the 1st symbol positions of a codeword and then decoding. Again, the original codeword undergoes a linear-time shift to the left and the result will match exactly (ignoring AWGN) to a quasi-cyclicly shifted version of the original with exceptions at the 16 circulant boundaries. But in this case, there are two possible mismatches at every boundary for a total of 32. Assuming equal likely symbols, about half of these 32 symbols will be in error and the decoder will again produce a quasicyclicly shifted codeword by correcting these errors plus those caused by AWGN. In this case, the decoder requires about 14.5 iterations on average.
We continue by deleting the first 3 symbols, 4 symbols, and so on, of a codeword, and then decoding. As we delete more symbols, the number of potential mismatches increases at the circulant boundaries. The decoder works harder to converge to the quasi-cyclicly shifted codeword, and for many trials the decoder runs to its maximum iteration limit of 200 without ever converging to a codeword. Fig. 5 plots the average number of decoding iterations versus the number of symbols deleted starting at the 0th symbol position.
At around 5 deletions, the plot of average iterations in Fig. 5 starts to rise sharply because the decoder is running to 200 iterations on a few of its 1000 trials. In other words, a channel introducing about 5 deletions and operating at an Eb/N0 of 2.5 dB causes the decoder to fail at a rate of several times per thousand codewords, which is the same failure rate when this code is used on a pure AWGN channel at an Eb/N0 of about 1.5 dB. Thus, for this code a string of about 5 deletions degrades the iterative decoder’s ability to converge to a codeword about as effectively as a dB of extra AWGN. It is interesting to quantitatively compare the raw channel corruptions caused by symbol slips for this case, and those introduced by AWGN. Since there are 5 intruder symbols at each of 16 circulant boundaries, each 50% likely to disagree with the quasi-cyclicly shifted codeword, the 5 deletions cause about 40 hard symbol errors, or about 2% of the symbols in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Un9iv7. 8D-o1w-n4l2oa4d4e-d41on48J-u8n/e0294/$,22052.60a0t ©072:4010:495 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE "GLOBECOM" 2009 proceedings.

Bit Slip Testing with the (2048, 1024) AR4JA LDPC Code at an SNR of 2.5 dB 200

Single Bit Deleted at Multiple Positions with AR4JA LDPC

180

1

Average Number of Decoding Iterations Word Error Rate

160
decoder flagged decoding errors
0.8 140

120

decoder found

the correct codewords

0.6

100

decoder found quasi-cyclicly

80

shifted codewords

0.4

(these are undetected errors)

60

40 0.2
20

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Number of Bits Deleted Starting From the 0th Bit

0

0

200

400

600

800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000

Position of Bit Deleted

Figure 5. Average number of decoding iterations versus symbol slip length, at Eb/N0 = 2.5 dB (1000 trials for each slip length).

Figure 6. Decoder codeword error rate versus location of deleted symbol (averaged over 1000 trials for each position).

codeword. AWGN introduces soft corruptions, but a first-order estimate of the magnitude of these corruptions is given by the AWGN hard symbol error rate of 9.1% at Eb/N0 = 2.5 dB, or 11.7% at Eb/N0 = 1.5 dB. In view of the empirical evidence from our decoder experiments with deletions, the 2% hard errors introduced by 5 deletions have about the same effect on the decoder’s failure rate as the 2.6% increase in AWGN hard symbol rate between operating at 2.5 dB and 1.5 dB. Thus, at least for this case, we have established a very rough equivalence between the two types of channel corruptions in terms of the number of hard channel errors they cause.
We also studied how the location of a single symbol slip affects the decoder’s ability to decode the codeword in which the slip occurs. For this experiment, we decode a codeword that has the ith symbol deleted for i = 0, 1, · · · , 2047. For each symbol removed, we apply a right linear-time shift of all the symbols to the left of the deleted position to fill that position and zero pad the 0th position. We plot the result in Fig. 6. When the deleted symbol position is close to the left edge, a small number of symbols are shifted, so the decoder produces the correct codeword with some probability. When the deleted position approaches the right edge, most symbols in the codeword experience a linear-time right shift, and the decoder outputs the quasi-cyclicly shifted version of the original codeword with some probability. When a symbol deletion occurs somewhere in the middle portion of a codeword, a substantial fraction of the symbols experience a linear-time shift while another substantial fraction remains fixed. This substantial “mixing” of different symbol shifts dramatically alters the original check constraints enforced at the encoder and renders the decoder useless. This observation is used as the basis for the “parity-reverse” method introduced in Section IV-B as one simple technique to prevent undetected errors.

IV. METHODS TO PREVENT UNDETECTED ERRORS UNDER RECEIVER SYMBOL SLIPS
Many techniques exist that enable a quasi-cyclic LDPC decoder to reliably detect an out-of-sync condition caused by symbol slips. Here we describe three such approaches that do not require major code re-design and can be accomplished with very little to no additional cost in complexity.
A. Pseudo-Random Number Sequence
In many practical systems, coded data is bit-randomized by XORing it with a pseudo-random number (PN) sequence before transmission. This is done to promote accurate symbol timing recovery [6] by avoiding long runs of constant 0s or 1s. This pseudo-randomization operation is undone at the receiver by XORing the incoming data with the same PN sequence in hard decision decoding, or by modulating the signs of the received symbol log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) according to the PN sequence in soft-decision decoding.
It turns out that the use of a PN sequence to maintain symbol timing has the added benefit of preventing undetected decoder errors for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes caused by receiver symbol slips. Thus, practical systems that already include a pseudorandomizer do not need any additional modification to avoid undetected symbol slip errors.
Let the sender codeword be c and the PN sequence be z. The bit-randomized and transmitted sequence is therefore y = c ⊕ z. At the receiver, the PN sequence is removed by XORing the incoming data with the same PN sequence. y ⊕ z = c ⊕ (z ⊕ z) = c. When there is a symbol slip, the received sequence will be shifted y → y and the derandomization procedure will destroy the quasi-cyclic property of the codeword and produce a word that is very different than the original. The vector y ⊕ z = c ⊕ (z ⊕ z), (z ⊕ z) = 0, will be unlike c or any quasi-cyclicly shifted version of c. Therefore, the LDPC decoder will not be able to decode y and will flag a decoder error. We verify this observation through

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Un9iv7. 8D-o1w-n4l2oa4d4e-d41on48J-u8n/e0294/$,22052.60a0t ©072:4010:495 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE "GLOBECOM" 2009 proceedings.

randomly generated message

insert or delete symbols here

Randomization to model receiver symbol slips

of source bits AWGN/

Encoder

soft symbol

computation

0

Negate

1

De-randomization of soft symbols

Decoder soft symbols

decoded message

CCSDS PN Sequence

Figure 7. De-randomization of soft symbols for LDPC decoding. To confirm that the addition of a PN sequence does in fact prevent undetected errors under symbol slips, we artificially delete or insert symbols before the decoder.
an experiment illustrated in Fig. 7. We encode a randomly generated information stream using the (2048,1024) AR4JA LDPC code, apply the CCSDS PN sequence [6], and filter the bit stream through an AWGN channel to model the transmitter. We compute the soft symbol LLRs from the channel output and remove the PN sequence to model the receiver. In softdecision decoding, the PN sequence is undone by negating the sign of each soft symbol LLR wherever the corresponding PN bit is 1. Before de-randomization, we include the effects of receiver symbol slips by deleting symbol LLRs and linear-time shifting the remaining LLRs.
We ran two experiments with the above setup. In the first experiment, we deleted only the 0th bit position of a random codeword and left-shifted the remaining symbols and decoded. We performed this experiment with and without PN randomization for Eb/N0 = 2, 3, 5, 10, 12 dB, and 10,000 trials at each SNR. In this scenario, each shifted codeword closely resembled a quasi-cyclicly shifted codeword. Without PN randomization the decoder miscorrected and produced the quasi-cyclicly shifted codeword in all 10,000 trials for each SNR tested. On the other hand, with PN randomization the decoder always flagged a decoding error in all 10,000 trials for each SNR tested.
The second experiment tested the PN randomization technique with longer strings of deleted symbols. We deleted 5, 10, or 20 consecutive symbols starting from the 0th position, left linear-time shifted the remaining symbols, zero-padded the unfilled positions, and decoded. The decoder was tested at the same SNRs as in the previous experiment, again with 10,000 trials at each SNR. With PN randomization and nonzero symbol deletions, the decoder never produced a quasicyclic shifted codeword from the original and always flagged a failure for all trials and each of the deletion lengths tested. Therefore, in all cases undetected errors were eliminated with PN randomization of the transmitted sequence.
B. Parity-Reverse
We now return to our small example code built from the (2, 4) base protograph with T = 4. Here, we look at what happens to the constraints when the variable nodes undergo a linear-time shift but we reverse the transmission order of variable types “c” and “d”. The resulting graph is given in Fig. 8, and the constraints are listed in Table II. We notice that there are still four symbols (boldface and underlined) that intrude from one variable type to a neighboring variable

type. Now, however, the reverse transmission strategy also causes the non-intruding “c” and “d” symbols to appear in check constraints with different combinations of “a” and “b” symbols. The out-of-place non-intruding symbols are marked by boldface only. If T were increased while holding the number of symbol insertions at one, the fraction of intruders (underlined) would diminish as 1/T , but the fraction of out-ofplace non-intruding symbols (boldface only) would be around 50% independent of T.
Effectively, a single linear-time symbol shift together with a reverse transmission of variable node types “c” and “d” shifts the “a” and “b” variables by +1 position and the “c” and “d” variables by –1 position. Thus, around half the variables participating in each check come from a shift in one direction, and half from a shift in the other direction. No check looks like a quasi-cyclicly shifted version of another check. The decoder is extremely unlikely to find any quasi-cyclicly shifted version of the true codeword because so many out-of-place boldface symbols are included throughout all of the checks. The threshold for “successful” decoding in this case is most likely zero insertions, which means that all nonzero insertion lengths are almost always detected.
If the same scheme is applied to the (2048, 1024) AR4JA LDPC code by reversing the transmission order of the parities, 50% of the (non-punctured) variables [2] will contribute to checks circularly shifted by +1 position, and 50% to checks circularly shifted by –1 position. Since the AR4JA code is not regular, this 50% ratio will not be constant across all checks, but there are still sufficient out-of-place boldface symbols participating in each check to confuse the decoder beyond repair.
We verified our finding through two experiments. In the first, we deleted only the 0th symbol position, linear-time left-shifted the remaining symbols, zero-filled the void and decoded. We ran 10,000 trials each at the same SNRs used in the pseudo-randomizer tests, Eb/N0 = 2, 3, 5, 10, 12 dB. With the transmission order of the parities reversed, the decoder always flagged a failure, instead of correcting to a quasicyclicly shifted version of the original codeword, in all 10,000 trials for each of the tested SNRs. In the second experiment, we tested multiple symbol slips by deleting 5, 10, or 20 consecutive symbols starting at the 0th position. For each deletion length, we ran 10,000 decoding trials at the same SNRs as before. Again, with the parities reversed, the decoder always flagged a failure in all trials at all SNRs for all deletion lengths tested. Thus, we conclude that parity-reverse is another simple but effective method to prevent undetected decoder errors under the condition of receiver symbol slips.
C. Decoder Corrections at Circulant Boundaries
The final method that we investigated attempts to detect symbol slips by having the decoder look at the distribution of its corrected symbols throughout the codeword. These are the locations where the decoder thinks that it has corrected an input symbol, rightly or wrongly. A corrected symbol is one that differs after decoding from a hard-limiting of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Un9iv7. 8D-o1w-n4l2oa4d4e-d41on48J-u8n/e0294/$,22052.60a0t ©072:4010:495 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE "GLOBECOM" 2009 proceedings.

c'0 a0

a1

a2

a3

b0

b1

b2

c1

c2

c3

d0

d1

d2

d3

b3

From previous codeword

A0

A1

A2

A3

B0

B1

B2

B3

Figure 8. Code constraints under a channel that causes a linear-time shift of the variables (with parity-reverse).

Orig check constraints@encoder
A0 : a0 ⊕ b0 ⊕ c0 ⊕ d0 = 0 A1 : a1 ⊕ b1 ⊕ c1 ⊕ d1 = 0 A2 : a2 ⊕ b2 ⊕ c2 ⊕ d2 = 0 A3 : a3 ⊕ b3 ⊕ c3 ⊕ d3 = 0
B0 : a0 ⊕ b3 ⊕ c2 ⊕ d1 = 0 B1 : a1 ⊕ b0 ⊕ c3 ⊕ d2 = 0
B2 : a2 ⊕ b1 ⊕ c0 ⊕ d3 = 0 B3 : a3 ⊕ b2 ⊕ c1 ⊕ d0 = 0

←→
= = = =
= =
= =

Check constraints@decoder
A1 : a0 ⊕ b0 ⊕ c2 ⊕ d2 = 0 A2 : a1 ⊕ b1 ⊕ c3 ⊕ d3 = 0 A3 : a2 ⊕ b2 ⊕ b3 ⊕ d0 = 0 A0 : a3 ⊕ c0 ⊕ c1 ⊕ d1 = 0 B3 : a2 ⊕ b1 ⊕ c2 ⊕ d1 = 0 B0 : c0 ⊕ b2 ⊕ c3 ⊕ d2 = 0 B1 : a0 ⊕ a3 ⊕ d0 ⊕ d3 = 0 B2 : a1 ⊕ b0 ⊕ c1 ⊕ b3 = 0

Table II A LINEAR-TIME SHIFT OF THE VARIABLE NODES (WITH
PARITY-REVERSE).

corresponding soft channel symbol. If one or more symbol slips have occurred, then decoder corrections will occur with greater frequency near the circulant edges, because coded bits there are random compared to the quasi-cyclicly shifted codeword that the decoder will find. If the decoder discovers that symbols near the circulant edges are changed at a higher frequency than other bits, it is likely that a symbol slip has occurred.
This method is as efficient as possible at the encoder end, requiring zero extra calculation or storage. Thus, it may be appropriate in applications for which no modifications at all are permitted at the encoder, not even a simple XORing with a PN sequence or a reversal of the transmission order of some symbols. At the decoder end, the method of counting decoder corrections requires storing the hard-limited channel output and a small amount of additional calculation, but this is insignificant compared to overall decoder complexity.
For the (2048, 1024) AR4JA LDPC code that has only 16 circulants, this scheme provides the equivalent of a 16bit synchronization marker in the presence of a single symbol slip. At an Eb/N0 of 2.2 dB in the vicinity of this code’s decoding threshold, the rate of symbol errors due to AWGN is approximately 10%. Thus, the decoder correction rate for the 16 boundary symbols would be about 10% if there were no symbol slips, and about 50% if one or more slips had occurred. In such high noise conditions, the 16 boundary symbols would constitute a very weak equivalent sync marker, and the occurrence of the slip(s) would not be detected reliably. However, detection reliability would be improved by increasing either the SNR of the channel or the length of the equivalent sync marker. At high enough SNR, even a short 16-bit equivalent sync marker would be adequate for reliable symbol slip detection. For lower SNRs, longer equivalent sync markers can be obtained with a longer quasi-cyclic code (with a larger number of circulants) or by waiting for several codewords before deciding whether a slip has occurred. The

decoder could also create a series of longer equivalent sync markers within one codeword by examining its correction rates for m = 2, 3, 4, or more symbols at each circulant boundary. However, in this case each longer equivalent marker would only be effective in detecting symbol slips of lengths m and higher, and the previously mentioned methods would still have to be applied to improve the detectability of slips of shorter lengths.
V. CONCLUSION
An artifact of low-SNR receiver operation is the increased probability of symbol slips. For an LDPC code with a quasicyclic construction, we demonstrated through examples that symbol slips can cause the decoder to produce a codeword that is a quasi-cyclic version of the original. Although not the “true” codeword, the decoder’s ability to find another codeword that is predictably related to the original could be considered as a feature in some applications. In scenarios where this outcome is not desirable, solutions exist. We discussed three approaches that prevent undetected codeword errors for quasi-cyclic codes: PN randomization, parity-reverse, and decoder corrections at circulant boundaries. We showed through simulation that each of these schemes can prevent undetected decoder errors at little or no additional cost.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The authors would like to thank Kenneth Andrews for providing the AR4JA LDPC decoder, Jon Hamkins for identifying that PN randomization can prevent undetected decoder errors, and Chatwin Lansdowne of Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, for proposing the parity-reverse solution.
REFERENCES
[1] K. S. Andrews, D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, J. Hamkins, C. R. Jones, and F. Pollara, “The development of Turbo and LDPC codes for deep-space appications,” Proc. of the IEEE, vol. 95, no. 11, pp. 2142–2156, Dec. 2007, special Issue on Tech. Adv. in Deep Space Comm. and Tracking: Part 2.
[2] CCSDS, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for Use in Near-Earth and Deep Space,” Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems Standard, 131.1-O-2, Sept. 2007, Orange Book.
[3] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Reliable communication over channels with insertions, deletions, and substitutions,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 687–698, Feb. 2001.
[4] T. G. Swart and H. C. Ferreira, “A note on double insertion/deletion correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 269– 273, Jan. 2003.
[5] L. Dolocek and V. Anantharam, “Using Reed-Muller RM(1,m) codes over channels with synchronization and substitution errors,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1430–1443, April 2007.
[6] CCSDS, “Telemetry Synchronization and Channel Coding,” Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems Standard 231.0-B-1, Sept. 2003, Blue Book.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Un9iv7. 8D-o1w-n4l2oa4d4e-d41on48J-u8n/e0294/$,22052.60a0t ©072:4010:495 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE "GLOBECOM" 2009 proceedings.

