Combined Normalized and Offset Min-Sum Decoding over Partial Response Channels

Mahdi Shaghaghi and Yong Liang Guan School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering Nanyang Technological University Emails: {Mahd0001, EYLGuan}@ntu.edu.sg

Kui Cai and Zhiliang Qin Data Storage Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117608 Emails: {Cai Kui, qin zhiliang}@dsi.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract—In this paper, the combined normalized and offset min-sum algorithm is proposed for efficient decoding of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes in optical and magnetic storage systems. The proposed algorithm can be considered as a general case of the normalized and offset algorithms, and offers better BER performance compared to them. The performance improvement is presented for a partial response magnetic recording channel. Our simulations are based on an LDPC code from the class of finite-geometry LDPC codes. It will be shown that the proposed method has a performance very close to that of the belief propagation algorithm which has a much higher complexity.
Index Terms—Turbo decoding, LDPC codes, belief propagation, normalized/offset min-sum algorithms.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have emerged as a new coding scheme for the purpose of error control in optical and magnetic storage systems. These codes exhibit outstanding performance with iterative decoders such as the so-called belief propagation (BP) algorithm [1], [2]. However, the computational complexity of the BP algorithm may still be regarded too high for general applications, and there has been an intensive research during the past decade to reduce its complexity while trying to avoid performance degradation.
In [3], the min-sum (MS) algorithm was introduced which is an approximation of the BP algorithm. This decoder has much less computational complexity, but suffers from performance degradation compared with the BP algorithm. Several methods have been proposed to fill the gap between the performance of the MS and the BP algorithms. The normalized MS (NMS) algorithm was introduced in [4] which significantly improves the performance of the MS algorithm with imposing a negligible increase to its complexity. In [5], offset MS (OMS) algorithm was presented, and in [6], the NMS algorithm was generalized to irregular LDPC codes.
In this paper, we introduce the combined normalized and offset MS (NOMS) algorithm, and we will analyze its performance over a partial response magnetic recording channel. The NOMS algorithm is a generic method that includes the NMS and OMS algorithms as special cases. It will be shown that the NOMS algorithm has a better performance compared with the

NMS and OMS algorithms, and its performance approaches to that of the BP algorithm.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the system model is described. In Section III, we briefly review the Bahl-Cocke-Jelinek-Raviv (BCJR) algorithm which is used for the purpose of channel detection. Next, the BP and the MS algorithms appear in Section IV, and the NOMS algorithm is presented in Section V. Section VI gives the simulation results, and finally, Section VII concludes the paper.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

We consider a serial concatenated system, where K user

data bits b = (b1, b2, . . . , bK ) are encoded by an LDPC encoder into a codeword c = (c1, c2, . . . , cN ) of length N . Next,

the transmitted sequence x = (x1, x2, . . . , xN ) follows the binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) signalling, i.e. xn = 2cn−1,

and passes over an ideal channel whose impulse response is

denoted as {hi}, i = 0, 1, . . . , L, where L is the length of the

channel memory. The received sequence y = (y1, y2, . . . , yN )

is given by

L

yn = hixn−i + νn,

(1)

i=0

where νn’s are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) zero-mean Gaussian random variables with variance N0/2.
Detection and decoding is performed in an iterative manner as illustrated in Fig. 1. This scheme is known as Turbo decoding, and comprises a soft-in soft-out (SISO) detector and a SISO decoder. The detector and decoder exchange extrinsic soft information as shown in Fig. 1.

III. BCJR CHANNEL DETECTOR

The BCJR detector produces the a posteriori information of coded bits in the form of log-likelihood ratio (LLR), which can be expressed as [7]

Λn = log

{S n−1 →S n {S n−1 →S n

:xn :xn

=−1} =+1}

P P

(S (S

n−1, n−1,

S S

n n

, ,

y, y,

Ldnec Ldnec

) )

,

(2)

where Sn = (xn, xn−1, . . . , xn−L+1) is the channel state at time instant n, and Lndec is the extrinsic information fed back

978–1–4244–4657–5/09/$25.00 c 2009 IEEE

ICICS 2009

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:41:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Lndec

y

BCJR detector

Ldnet

LDPC decoder

cˆ Decision

Fig. 1. Turbo decoding scheme for coded partial response channels.

from the LDPC decoder, and is used as the a priori information
for the BCJR detecter. For the first turbo iteration, Lndec is set to 0. Next, the output extrinsic information of the BCJR detector

is obtained by

Ldnet = Λn − Ldnec,

(3)

and is passed to the LDPC decoder.

IV. DECODING LDPC CODES
A binary (N, K) LDPC code is defined as the null space of a sparse J ×N parity-check matrix H and is represented by the Tanner graph with J check nodes and N variable-nodes [8]. An LDPC code is called (dv, dc)-regular if all the variable-nodes in its corresponding Tanner graph have the same degree dv, and all the check nodes have the same degree dc. An irregular LDPC code is defined by a degree distribution pair for the variable and the check nodes [9].
Decoding is performed by iteratively passing messages along the edges of the Tanner graph, where messages are considered to be in the form of log-likelihood ratios [1]. At the th iteration, two types of messages are exchanged: one from variable to check nodes Zn( m) , and the other from check to variable nodes Lm ( )n.

A. Belief Propagation Algorithm
The steps involved in the LLR-BP decoding are summarized as follows.
1) Initialization: For 1 ≤ n ≤ N , let Fn be the LLR of the a priori probability of bit n. Then, set

Fn = Lndet,

(4)

where Lndet is the extrinsic information obtained form the BCJR detector.
Next, set Zn(0m) = Fn for 1 ≤ n ≤ N and m ∈ M(n), where M(n) = {m : Hmn = 1}, and Zn(0m) is the LLR from variable node n to check node m at the initialization step.
2) Check node update: For 1 ≤ m ≤ J and n ∈ N (m), where N (m) = {n : Hmn = 1}, compute

Lm ( )n = 2 tanh−1

tanh

Zn(

−1) m

2

.

(5)

n ∈N (m)\n

The notation N (m)\n represents N (m) excluding n.

3) Variable node update: For 1 ≤ n ≤ N and m ∈ M(n),

compute

Zn( m) = Fn +

Lm ( )n,

(6)

m ∈M(n)\m

where M(n)\m represents M(n) excluding m. Then, the soft decision for each bit is obtained by

Zn( ) = Fn +

Lm ( )n.

(7)

m∈M(n)

4) Decision: Make the hard decision ˆc = (cˆ1, cˆ2, . . . , cˆN ) such that cˆn = 0 if Zn( ) ≥ 0, and cˆn = 1 if Zn( ) < 0. If cˆHT = 0, output cˆ and stop the algorithm; otherwise, go back to step 2). This process continues until a valid codeword is detected, or a maximum number of iterations occur.
5) Extrinsic information: After the last iteration ( ), the extrinsic information is obtained by

Ldnec = Zn( ) − Ldnet,

(8)

and is passed to the BCJR detector.

B. Min-Sum Algorithm

The core computational burden of the BP algorithm is related to the check node operation. An approximation for the check node update is introduced in [3] which significantly reduces the complexity. However, it imposes some degradation compared with the performance of the BP algorithm.
The procedure of the MS algorithm is the same as the BP algorithm except for the check node update step which is replaced by the following rule.
For 1 ≤ m ≤ J and n ∈ N (m), compute

Lm ( )n =

sgn(Zn(

−m1)).n

∈Nm(imn )\n|Zn(

−1) m

|.

(9)

n ∈N (m)\n

V. COMBINED NORMALIZED AND OFFSET MIN-SUM ALGORITHM

It was mentioned in Section IV that the MS algorithm considerably reduces the computational complexity of the BP algorithm by replacing the tanh function with a simple minimization operation in the step of the check node update. It is proved in [4] that this approximation makes the magnitude of the outgoing LLR’s of the check nodes to become larger while retaining their sign unchanged. Thus, they suggest recovering the performance of the MS algorithm by reducing the absolute values of the output LLR’s of the check nodes. They introduce the NMS algorithm in which the output LLR’s of the check nodes are divided by a normalization factor greater than one. This factor is determined as the ratio of the expected value of the magnitude of LLR’s for the MS algorithm over that of the BP algorithm, so that the mean value of the LLR’s in the MS algorithm is forced to the average value of the LLR’s in the BP algorithm. In [5], the magnitude reduction is achieved by either a normalization factor or an offset term. The performance of the MS algorithm would be the same as the BP algorithm if the probability density functions (pdf’s) of the LLR’s were the same for both algorithms. The normalization of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:41:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

10−1

Bit-error and block-error probabilities

10−2

10−3

10−4

NMS bit α=0.2

NMS block

OMS bit β=1.4

OMS block

10−5

NOMS bit (α,β)=(0.5,0.9)

NOMS block

BP bit

BP block

10−6

4.5

4.7

4.9

5.1

5.3

5.5

5.7

5.9

6.1

6.3

6.5

6.7

6.9 7

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 2. Bit-error and block-error probabilities of the (1023, 781) EG-LDPC code over the MEEPR4 channel.

the LLR’s can be viewed as a scaling of their pdf’s whereas reducing the magnitude of the LLR’s by an offset term can be viewed as a shift of the pdf’s. This implies that the pdf’s of the LLR’s in the NMS and OMS algorithms approach to their corresponding pdf’s in the BP algorithm by the scaling or shifting operations. This makes an intuition that the pdf’s in the MS algorithm may better match those in the BP algorithm if both scaling and shifting operations are deployed. Thus, we propose to combine the NMS and OMS algorithms to take advantage of both scaling and shifting simultaneously.
The NOMS algorithm has the same steps as the MS algorithm with an extra operation after the check node update:
Lm ( )n ← α · sgn(Lm ( )n) · max(|Lm ( )n| − β, 0), (10)
where 0 < α ≤ 1 and β ≥ 0 are the normalization factor and offset term, respectively. For the sake of simplicity, we assume the (α, β) pair to be constant for all iterations and different signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) values. It has been shown in [10] that an adaptive value of the offset term results in a better performance. Furthermore, the (α, β) pair can be optimized for each node degree of the Tanner graph in the case of an irregular LDPC code [6].
The NOMS algorithm is a generic method that includes the NMS and OMS algorithms as special cases. For the (α, 0) pair, the NOMS algorithm degenerates to the NMS algorithm, and for the (1, β) pair, the NOMS algorithm degenerates to the OMS algorithm.

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
We use an LDPC code for our simulations that belongs to the class of codes based on finite geometries which are constructed using the points and lines of the Euclidean geometry [11]. This code is a type-I 2-D (1023, 781) EG-LDPC code. The parity-check matrix of this code is circulant, and therefore, this code is cyclic. Cyclic codes have the advantage that the encoder can be easily implemented using shift registers [12]. This code is a (32, 32)-regular LDPC code, and the length of the shortest cycle in its Tanner graph is 6. EG-LDPC codes have good minimum distances, and this code has a minimum distance of at least 33.
We use 3 Turbo iterations between the BCJR detector and the LDPC decoder, and the maximum number of iterations for the LDPC decoder is set to 30 in our simulations.
Fig. 2 shows the bit-error and block-error probabilities of the (1023, 781) EG-LDPC code with the BP, NMS, OMS, and NOMS algorithms over an ideal coded MEEPR4 channel corrupted with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), whose channel coefficients are given by h = {5, 4, −3, −4, −2}. The optimum value of the normalization factor for the NMS algorithm is 0.2, and the optimum value of the offset term for the OMS algorithm is 1.4. The NMS and OMS algorithms have a bit-error rate (BER) performance very close to each other up to the bit-error probability of 10−4, and then the OMS algorithm exhibits an error floor for higher SNR values. It is observed that there is a gap of about 0.15 dB between the BER performance of the NMS algorithm and that of the BP algorithm at the bit-error probability of 10−4. The optimum

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:41:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

value of the (α, β) pair for the NOMS algorithm is found to be (0.5, 0.9). These parameters have been obtained by simulation. The proposed algorithm achieves a coding gain of 0.07 dB over the NMS algorithm, and 0.12 dB over the OMS algorithm at the bit-error probability of 10−4.
In Fig. 2, similar observations can be made for the blockerror probabilities as it was made for the bit-error probabilities. It is shown that the NOMS algorithm outperforms the NMS and OMS algorithms in terms of the block-error probability as well.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the combined normalized and offset min-sum (NOMS) algorithm was proposed as a generalization to the normalized min-sum (NMS) and offset min-sum (OMS) algorithms. We analyzed the performance of the NOMS algorithm with LDPC codes from the class of finite geometry codes as these codes are structured and they have good minimum distances. Finally, we performed our simulations over a partial response magnetic channel, and it was shown that the proposed algorithm outperforms the NMS and OMS algorithms both in terms of bit-error and block-error probabilities.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[2] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[3] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[4] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near-optimum universal beliefpropagation-based decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[5] ——, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[6] J. Zhang, M. Fossorier, D. Gu, and J. Zhang, “Two-dimensional correction for min-sum decoding of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, pp. 180–182, Mar. 2006.
[7] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[8] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[9] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[10] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, L. Zhang, and E. Xu, “Adaptive offset min-sum algorithm for low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 483–485, Jun. 2006.
[11] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[12] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:41:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

