Absorbing Sets of Fountain Codes over Noisy Channels

Seyed Masoud Mirrezaei, Karim Faez Department of Electrical Engineering
Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran Emails: {sm.mirrezaie, kfaez}@aut.ac.ir

Shahram Yousefi Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada Email: s.yousefi@queensu.ca

Abstract—Although error-prone patterns have been extensively studied for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, to the best of our knowledge, they have never been fully explored for Fountain codes. It is shown that dominant trapping sets of Fountain codes are the absorbing sets. They happen in the so-called error floor, corresponding to a significant flattening in the error probability curves. In this paper, we introduce the properties of these dominant trapping sets for Fountain codes. This definition of absorbing sets leads to better design of practical finite-length Fountain encoders and decoders.
Index Terms—Fountain codes, Luby Transform (LT) codes, rateless codes, trapping sets, absorbing sets, belief propagation decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
Fountain codes have demonstrated great results for the binary erasure channel. The rateless property of Fountain codes holds great promise for noisy channels. These codes are more efficient in dealing with errors as well as erasures over a variety of channel models. Different implementations of Fountain codes for these channels, however, will provide a wide range of complexity, delay, and realized rate tradeoffs.
In this paper, we study error-prone patterns in Fountain codes over noisy channels and their effects on the decoding process. While such patterns have received much attention for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, to the best of our knowledge, they have never been fully explored for Fountain codes.
For LDPC codes over Additive Gaussian Noise Channels, MacKay and Postol [1] early on observed that a class of non-codewords causes the decoder to fail. They referred to these objects as (w, z) near-codewords, where it denotes a binary string of weight w whose syndrome has weight z. Subsequent pioneering work by Richardson [2] was the first to develop a semi-analytic method for predicting the error floors on Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channels. This approach was based on identifying so-called trapping sets as error patterns. As counterparts of stopping sets which are related to erasure channels [3] and suitable for additive noise channels, combinatorial objects that are called absorbing sets were introduced in [4], [5].
This work is supported by grants from an NSERC Discovery Program, Queen’s University SARC, and Iran Telecommunication Research Center (ITRC).

An absorbing set can be viewed as a special type of a nearcodeword or a trapping set, in particular one that is guaranteed to be stable under a bit-flipping decoder. Other researchers have studied the closely related notions of elementary trapping sets [6] for iterative decoding.
Luby Transform (LT) codes [7] and Raptor codes [8] are the best known Fountain codes. Fountain codes are rateless, i.e., they adapt their rate to channel conditions without prior knowledge of the channel statistics. In the previous work [9], for the first time, trapping sets and their repercussions for Fountain codes decoded over noisy channels were studied.
To the best of our knowledge, all previous works on absorbing sets are focused on H-based (where H is the parity-check matrix) code representations. Fountain codes, on the other hand, are generally G-based (where G is the generator matrix) codes with excellent properties over many noisy channel models.
We first formally introduce absorbing sets as a special class of trapping sets for Fountain codes. When the decoder is caught in an absorbing set, it cannot escape. Thus, the decoding process continues, increasing the decoding cost and delay for naught. The decoding process for rateless codes consists of one or more decoding attempts. Our contributions lead to concrete and effective techniques for avoiding or escaping absorbing sets; that is, can aid both the encoder and decoder design of Fountain codes. Though, the latter is the subject of future publication under preparation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We begin in Section II with a brief overview of Fountain codes and their structure. We overview the message-passing Belief Propagation (BP) of Fountain codes on noisy channels. In continuation, we provide a detailed study of the error-prone patterns in high signal to noise ratio (SNR) under BP decoding. In section III, we introduce our novel definition of G-based absorbing sets discovered through an extensive set of MonteCarlo simulations combined with graph analyses. Section IV concludes the paper.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
Most near-capacity codes achieve their outstanding performance with the aid of BP decoding over their Tanner [10] representation. In H-based Tanner graphs, three of the most

978-1-4673-1114-4/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

44

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

well-known error mechanisms are stopping sets, trapping sets [11], and absorbing sets [4], [12].
Fountain codes are a new class of codes with finite dimension and infinite block length. An appropriately designed Fountain code eliminates the need for a sender to guess the quality of the channel to a particular receiver. It enables the design of scalable transmission of data in a broadcast or multi-cast setting. Fountain codes are rateless low-density generator matrix (LDGM) codes [13]. Similar to LDPC codes, decoding for Fountain codes, or more generally LDGM codes, is performed using the BP algorithm on a sparse graph.
Fountain codes use BP on a tanner graph representing the equation mG = x, where m is the message vector of size k and x is codeword of length n ≥ k. Many attempts have been made to estimate the performance of these decoders by characterizing their error mechanisms. Unfortunately, none of these mechanisms leads to general and precise bounds or approximations on the performance of iterative decoding over the AWGN channel.
Trapping sets appear to cause errors on the AWGN channel. For non-erasure channels, empirically, almost all trapping sets are near-codewords [1]. That is, almost all trapping sets are subsets of the graph whose induced subgraph contains only a limited number of check nodes of odd degree, and is therefore nearly a codeword. A near-codeword can be categorized by two numbers, the total number of variable nodes involved and the number of check nodes of odd degree in the induced graph.
Detection and elimination of all trapping sets is very hard; yet the special class of trapping sets which are absorbing sets are not only easier to manage but also are more detrimental to the code performance. Simulations show that the majority of errors encountered in the error floor region during BP decoding of the G-based LT codes could be attributed to absorbing sets.
The G-based tanner graphs contain two types of variable nodes: message nodes m, which represent message bits, and encoded nodes x, which represent encoded bits. We modify the encoding tanner graph of the code to obtain the decoding tanner graph by replicating the encoded nodes and renaming the old encoded nodes as check nodes. These check nodes show that modulo-2 sum of each encoded node and the message nodes it is composed of is zero.
For LDPC codes, it has been shown that small absorbing sets contribute heavily to the error-floor. However, this has not been explored for Fountain codes [4]. The variables in the H- and G-based tanner graphs are different and the decoding messages passed around are also computed differently. As Fountain codes are defined via G-based tanner graphs, it is not clear what particular subgraphs are the major culprits for decoding failure. Notions such as absorbing sets do not automatically transfer to G-based graphs. The goal of this work is to first identify similar sub-structures in G-based tanner graphs leading to decoder’s failure. Then, we set out to provide a comprehensive definition for such subgraphs.

A. The Fountain Codec

For a given message block m = (m1, m2, . . . , mk), a binary Fountain code produces a potentially infinite stream x = (x1, x2, . . .) of encoded bits to be sent over the channel. Each encoded bit is generated independently by sampling from a fixed distribution on subsets of the message block and then performing modulo-2 sum of the information bits in the chosen subset. In this paper, we consider binary codes and the AWGN channel only.
The encoder continues to produce more encoded bits until the decoder acknowledges the message recovery. Thus, the number of encoded bits, n, in the final codeword is not known beforehand. As such, Fountain codes are generated on-the-fly and are rateless.
An LT Fountain code may be represented by a dynamic generator matrix G. The generator matrix has k rows, one for each information bit, and n columns, one for each encoded bit.
A message bit mi belongs to the subset of the message block that was added modulo-2, to produce the encoded bit xj if and only if the element at the intersection of row i and column j of the generator matrix is non-zero. The codeword x at time t can be given as x = mG.
The decoding process for Fountain codes consists of a series of decoding attempts 1, 2, . . ., which correspond to received sequences y1, y2, . . . of lengths n1, n2, . . ., where n1 < n2 < . . .. We denote the received sequence at the final decoding attempt as y.
A decoding attempt a aims to obtain a message estimate mˆ that satisfies a criterion for successful decoding given a received sequence ya. If decoding at attempt a fails to meet the criterion for success, then the decoder awaits the reception of the extra symbols and then performs the next decoding attempt.
We assume the number of symbols that the receiver waits to receive between decoding attempts is a constant T . Hence, the number of symbols received at decoding the attempt a is na = n1 + (a − 1)T . Each decoding attempt uses the iterative BP algorithm. The decoder has a finite number lmax of iterations in which to succeed for a given decoding attempt.
For the Binary Input AWGN (BIAWGN) channel, encoded nodes x are initialized with the prior log-likelihood ratios (LLR) using the channel outputs y :

P r(x = 0|y) 2

L(x|y) = log P r(x = 1|y) = σ2 · y,

(1)

where σ2 represents the channel noise variance.
For each iteration, a message sent from a message node
mi to a check node cj at the lth iteration is represented as Mm(l)i→cj , likewise, a message sent from a check node cj to a message node mi is represented as Mc(jl)→mi . Each encoded node xj sends a constant message to its neighboring check node cj. This message is the channel LLR L(xj|yj), which we will denote as Zj. The notation N (w)\{v} denotes all the neighbors of a node w other than v.

45
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

On the first decoding attempt and first iteration, all message nodes send messages to all their neighboring check nodes with a value of 0. In the following iterations:

Mc(jl)→mi =

 2 · tanh−1 zj ·

tanh

 

Mm(l)i →cj

 

,

(2)

2

mi∈N (cj )\{mi}

III. G-BASED ABSORBING SETS
Let G = (V ∪ C, E) be an H-based tanner graph, where V is the set of variable nodes, C is the set of check nodes and E is the set of edges. For a subset v ⊂ V, Γ(v) denotes the set of neighbors of v in C. O(v) denotes the set of check nodes in Γ(v) with odd degree in G. Similarly, E(v) represents the set of check nodes in Γ(v) with even degree in G.
Definition 1 [15]: A set v ⊂ V is a (w, z) trapping set if |v| = w and |O(v)| = z.

Mm(l+i→1)cj =

Mc(jl)→mi ,

(3)

cj ∈N (mi)\{cj }

where zj = tanh

Zj 2

.

After running the BP algorithm for l iterations, the pseudo
a posteriori LLR of each message bit mi can be calculated as the sum cj∈N (mi) Mc(jl)→mi , where the sum is over all the neighbors of mi. A message estimate mˆ = (mˆ 1, mˆ 2, ..., mˆ k) can be produced through a hard decision on the pseudo a
posteriori LLRs.

B. Error-Prone Patterns in High SNR under BP
For G-and H-based codes under BP we have several types of error categorized as follows [14]:
1) Undetected error: Unavoidable unless we increase the minimum distance of codes by code design.
2) Falling in Trapping sets and reaching the maximum encoded limit (nmax).
The behavior of BP decoder in H- and G-Based tanner graph is very different in the second type. This is the major motivator for this work. In H-based codes when the decoder falls in a trapping set, the behavior of satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes is very variable. However in the G-based codes this behavior is less dynamic.
In each decoding attempt many events may occur. i) The number of satisfied check nodes is equal to the number of encoded bits. In this case, the decoder is successful. ii) After many iterations, both the set of unsatisfied check nodes and the set of incorrect message nodes are fixed forever. iii) The number of unsatisfied check nodes is fixed and the sets of incorrect message nodes have a fixed subset in the rest of the iterations. iv) The number of unsatisfied check nodes and incorrect message nodes do not converge to fixed numbers. In case iii) at iteration lmax, the common set forms a trapping set. The most important situation, the occurrence of an absorbing set, happens just in case ii) at iteration lmax. There are two important points about absorbing sets. First, the set of unsatisfied check nodes and incorrect message nodes are fixed forever, however this does not apply to the other trapping sets. Second, these situations happen in small cardinality and the majority of trapping sets in high SNR are absorbing sets.

Definition 2 [15]: A set v ⊂ V is a (w, z) absorbing set if v is a (w, z) trapping set and if all the nodes in v are connected to more nodes in E(v) than nodes in O(v).
The decoding graph of Fountain codes compared to LDPC codes is structurally different and unlike LDPC codes it is dynamic.
LDPC codes have only one type of ‘variable’ node, whereas Fountain codes have two types: message nodes and encoded nodes. We define the check node degree as the number of connections it has to message nodes and encoded nodes.
Cases ii) and iii) in II-B correspond to trapping sets in Gbased tanner graph. Case ii) is more prevalent than case iii) and is the focus of our work in what follows. The studying of the absorbing sets has 3 possible impacts:
1) Decreasing the error rate. 2) Decreasing complexity. 3) Increasing the realized rate.
We describe an absorbing set on a Fountain code with a triplet (α, β, z), where α is the number of message nodes in the absorbing set, β is the number of incorrect encoded nodes in the absorbing set, and z is the number of unsatisfied check nodes in the induced subgraph of the α and β variable nodes.
Definition 3: An (α, β, z) absorbing set is a subgraph in which all of message nodes have one of following properties:
1) Each message node must only be connected to unsatisfied check nodes.
2) Each message node must only be connected to satisfied check nodes.
3) Each message node must be connected to no fewer unsatisfied check nodes than satisfied check nodes.
An example of tanner graph is shown in Fig. 1(a). The set of incorrect variable nodes in this absorbing set are four message nodes and 2 encoded nodes with black circles and solid triangle, respectively. We also have 2 falsely satisfied check nodes in it. Also the induced graph as a (4, 2, 3) absorbing set is depicted in Fig. 1(b).
Definition 4: An (α, β, z) set is an error-free absorbing set when α = 0 and β = z.
When the error-free absorbing set happens, all of message nodes are correct, whereas not all of check nodes are satisfied. In this case, by increasing the number of iterations, the decoder cannot satisfy the check nodes and should stop the decoding. Detecting the aforementioned absorbing sets will improve the delay and complexity of the decoder significantly.

46
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(b)

Correct Message Node

Incorrect Message Node

Correct Encoded Node

Incorrect Encoded Node

(a)

Satis ed Check Node

Unsatis ed Check Node

Fig. 1. An example of a (4, 2, 3) absorbing set in a G-based tanner graph.

(b)

Correct Message Node

Incorrect Message Node

Correct Encoded Node

Incorrect Encoded Node

Satis ed

Unsatis ed Check

(a)

Check Node

Node

Fig. 2. (a) A whole tanner graph of G-based. (b) A (1, 1, 2) elementary absorbing set in it that the degree of check nodes is just one.

Definition 5: An (α, β, z) set is an elementary absorbing set if its check nodes are just degree one or two.
In high SNR, most of absorbing sets are elementary absorbing sets. This is due to the fact that when there is an incorrect message node connected just to unsatisfied check nodes with degree one, the decoder cannot release from this absorbing set at the current attempt. Therefore, a modification of the decoder or reception of new information bits from the sender is required.
In Fig. 2(a) and 2(b), we depict a (1, 1, 2) elementary absorbing set.

tanner graphs. Absorbing sets are newly introduced in terms
of the generator of a Fountain code. These are error-prone substructures in H-based tanner graph damaging the realized
rate, decoding cost and error performance. We demonstrate these sub-structures are different from those of the H-based
graphs.
Understanding these new absorbing sets leads to better
encoder, decoder as well as code design. Our current studies
show improvements in all these directions as aspects. For instance, with robust soliton distribution at k = 1000 communicated over an AWGN channel, we have observed 20%
reduction of the decoding complexity while at the same time achieving coding gains of 0.6 dB and 0.9 dB at bit error rates of 10−5 and 10−6, respectively.
REFERENCES
[1] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and RamanujanMargulis low-density parity-check codes,” in Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 74, 2003.
[2] T. Richardson,“Error-floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. of the 41st Annual Allerton Conference, Monticello, Ill., Oct. 2003, pp. 14261435.
[3] C. Di, D. Proietti, T. Richardson, E. Telatar, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” in IEEE Transactions on Infofromation Theory, vol. 48, no 6, pp. 15701579, Jun. 2002.
[4] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. J. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of Absorbing Sets for Array-Based LDPC Codes,” inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Glasgow, UK, Jun. 2007, pp. 6261- 6268.
[5] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation,” in Proc. of IEEE Global communications Conference (GLOBECOM), San Francisco, CA, Nov. 2006.
[6] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic,“Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Conf.Wireless Communications, Honolulu, HI, Jun. 2005, pp. 630635.
[7] M. Luby,“LT codes,” in Proc. 43rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, Nov. 2002, pp. 271280.
[8] A. Shokrollahi,“Raptor codes,” in IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 25512567, June 2006.
[9] V. L. Orozco and S. Yousefi, “Trapping sets of fountain codes,” in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 14, no. 8, Aug. 2010.
[10] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219230, Feb. 1998.
[11] D. G. M. Mitchell, A. E. Pusanel and D. J. Costello, “Trapping Set Analysis of Protograph-based LDPC Convolutional Codes,” in ISIT 2009, Seoul, Korea, June 28 - July 3, 2009.
[12] C.-W. Lin and L. Dolecek,“Asymptotic Distribution of Absorbing Sets and Fully Absorbing Sets for Regular Sparse Code Ensembles,”in AusCTW 2011, 2011.
[13] J. Garcia-Frias and W. Zhong, “Approaching shannon performance by iterative decoding of linear codes with low-density generator matrix,” in Communications Letters, IEEE, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 266- 268, june 2003.
[14] N. Bonello, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes and Their Rateless Relatives,” in IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS ,vol. 13, no. 1, First quarter 2011.
[15] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating stopping and trapping sets in LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Iriform Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, Sep. 2007, pp. 248-253.

IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we first introduce Fountain codes and briefly their encoders and decoders. These are necessary to set the ground to introduce error-prone patterns seen in G-based

47
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

