2648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2012

Cyclic and Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes on Constrained Parity-Check Matrices and Their Trapping Sets
Qin Huang, Qiuju Diao, Shu Lin, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar

Abstract—This paper is concerned with construction and structural analysis of both cyclic and quasi-cyclic codes, particularly low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. It consists of three parts. The first part shows that a cyclic code given by a parity-check matrix in circulant form can be decomposed into descendant cyclic and quasi-cyclic codes of various lengths and rates. Some fundamental structural properties of these descendant codes are developed, including the characterization of the roots of the generator polynomial of a cyclic descendant code. The second part of the paper shows that cyclic and quasi-cyclic descendant LDPC codes can be derived from cyclic finite-geometry LDPC codes using the results developed in the first part of the paper. This enlarges the repertoire of cyclic LDPC codes. The third part of the paper analyzes the trapping set structure of regular LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices satisfy a certain constraint on their rows and columns. Several classes of finite-geometry and finite-field cyclic and quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with large minimum distances are shown to have no harmful trapping sets of size smaller than their minimum distances. Consequently, their error-floor performances are dominated by their minimum distances.
Index Terms—Circulant decomposition, cyclic code, finite-geometry (FG) code, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, orthogonal parity-check sums, quasi-cyclic (QC) code, row–column (RC)-constrained LDPC code, trapping set.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE rapid dominance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] in applications requiring error control coding is due to their capacity-approaching performance which can be achieved with practically implementable iterative decoding algorithms. LDPC codes were first discovered by Gallager in 1962 [1] and then rediscovered in late 1990s [2], [3]. Ever since their rediscovery, a great deal of research effort has been expended in design, construction, structural analysis, efficient encoding and
Manuscript received October 20, 2010; revised August 23, 2011; accepted October 25, 2011. Date of publication January 23, 2012; date of current version April 17, 2012. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grants CCF-0727478 and CCF-1015548, by NASA under Grant NNX09AI21G, and by gift grants from Northrop Grumman Space Technology, Intel, and Cadence. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 2011 Information Theory and Applications Workshop and the 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
Q. Huang is with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100083, China (e-mail: qhuang.smash@gmail.com).
Q. Diao, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: judiao@ucdavis.edu; shulin@ece.ucdavis.edu; ghaffar@ece.ucdavis.edu).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2011.2179842

decoding, performance analysis, decoder architecture, and im-

plementation, generalizations and applications of LDPC codes.

Numerous papers have been published on these subjects. Many

LDPC codes have been chosen as the standard codes for various

next-generation communication systems and they are appearing

in recent data storage products.

Let

be a field with elements where is a power of a

prime. A regular -ary LDPC code [1] is given by the null space

of a sparse parity-check matrix over

that has constant

column weight and constant row weight . Such an LDPC

code is said to be

-regular. If the columns and/or rows

of have varying weights, then the null space of gives an

irregular -ary LDPC code. If is an array of sparse circulants

over

of the same size, then the null space of gives a

-ary quasi-cyclic (QC)-LDPC code. If consists of a single

sparse circulant or a column of sparse circulants over

of

the same size, then the null space of gives a cyclic LDPC

code. If

, an LDPC code is said to be binary.

In almost all of the proposed constructions of LDPC codes,

the following constraint on the rows and columns of the

parity-check matrix of an LDPC code is imposed: no two

rows (or two columns) can have more than one place where

they both have nonzero components. This constraint on the

rows and columns of the parity-check is referred to as the

row–column (RC)-constraint. This RC-constraint ensures that

the Tanner graph [4] of the LDPC code given by the null space

of has a girth of at least 6 and that the minimum distance of

the code is at least

, where is the minimum column

weight of [5], [6]. The distance bound

is poor for

small and irregular LDPC codes, but it is tight for regular

LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices have large column

weights, such as finite-geometry (FG) LDPC codes [5]–[9], and

finite-field QC-LDPC codes constructed in [10]–[14] and this

paper. A parity-check matrix that satisfies the RC-constraint

is called an RC-constrained parity-check matrix and the code

given by its null space is called an RC-constrained LDPC code.

LDPC codes can be classified into two general categories:

1) random or pseudorandom codes that are constructed using

computer-based algorithms or methods; and 2) algebraic codes

that are constructed using algebraic or combinatorial tools such

as finite fields, finite geometries, and experimental designs.

Codes in these two categories can be classified into two types:

codes whose parity-check matrices possess little structure and

codes whose parity-check matrices have structure. A code

whose parity-check matrix possesses no structure beyond being

a linear code is problematic in that both encoding and de-

coding implementations become quite complex. A code whose

parity-check matrix has structure beyond being a linear code is

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2649

in general more easily implemented. Two desirable characteristics for hardware implementation of encoding and decoding of LDPC codes are cyclic and QC structures. A cyclic LDPC code can be efficiently and systematically encoded with a single feedback shift-register with complexity linearly proportional to the number of parity-check symbols (or information symbols) [6]. Encoding of a QC-LDPC code can also be efficiently implemented but requires multiple shift-registers [15], [16]. It is, in general, more complex than encoding of a cyclic code but still enjoys linear complexity. However, QC-LDPC codes enjoy some advantages in decoder hardware implementation in terms of wire routing [17]. Furthermore, the QC structure allows partially parallel decoding [18] which offers a tradeoff between decoding complexity and decoding speed, while the cyclic structure allows either full parallel or serial decoding. In this paper, we show that a cyclic LDPC code can be put in QC form through column and row permutations. As a result, a cyclic LDPC code enjoys both encoding and decoding implementation advantages. Encoding is carried out in cyclic form, while decoding is carried out in QC form. In this paper, we present a method for constructing a large class of cyclic LDPC codes.
LDPC codes perform amazingly well with iterative decoding based on belief propagation using algorithms such as the sum–product algorithm (SPA) or the min-sum algorithm (MSA). However, with iterative decoding, most LDPC codes have a common severe weakness, known as the error-floor [19]. The error-floor of an LDPC code is characterized by the phenomenon that, as the SNR continues to increase, the error probability suddenly drops at a rate much slower than that in the region of low to moderate SNR. High error-floors may preclude LDPC codes from applications where very low error rates are required. High error-floors most commonly occur for unstructured random or pseudorandom LDPC codes constructed using computer-based methods or algorithms. Structured LDPC codes constructed algebraically, such as FG and finite-field LDPC codes [5]–[14], in general, have much lower error-floors. Ever since the phenomenon of the error-floors of LDPC codes with iterative decoding became known [20], a great deal of research effort has been expended in finding its causes and methods to resolve or mitigate the error-floor problem. For the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, the error-floor of an LDPC code is mostly caused by an undesirable structure, known as a trapping set [19], [21], in the Tanner graph of the code based on which the decoding is carried out. In this paper, we analyze the trapping set structure of the Tanner graphs of RC-constrained LDPC codes.
This paper is concerned with constructions and structural analysis of both cyclic and QC codes, particularly LDPC codes. It consists of three parts. In the first part (Section II), it is shown that a cyclic code given by a parity-check matrix in circulant form can be decomposed, through column and row permutations, into various cyclic and QC codes, called descendant codes. Some fundamental structures of the descendant codes are developed, including the characterization of the roots of the generator polynomial of a cyclic descendant code. In the second part of the paper (Sections III–VI), it is shown that RC-constrained cyclic and QC-LDPC codes can

be derived from the class of cyclic FG LDPC codes using

circulant decomposition presented in the first part. Several new

families of RC-constrained cyclic and QC-LDPC codes are

presented. These new families of codes enlarge the repertoire

of cyclic and QC-LDPC codes. The third part of the paper

(Sections VII–IX) is concerned with trapping set structure of

RC-constrained regular LDPC codes. It is shown that for an

RC-constrained

-regular LDPC code, its Tanner graph

contains no trapping sets of sizes smaller than or equal to with

numbers of odd-degree check-nodes (CNs) less than or equal to

. Several classes of cyclic and QC-LDPC codes are shown to

have large minimum distances (or minimum weights) and their

Tanner graphs contain no elementary trapping sets [21], [22]

of sizes smaller than their minimum distances. Consequently,

their error-floor performances are dominated by their minimum

distances.

II. CIRCULANT DECOMPOSITION AND CYCLIC AND QC CODES
In this section, we first show that a circulant under certain condition can be decomposed into an array of circulants of the same size through column and row permutations. Using this circulant decomposition, we then show that a cyclic code given by the null space of a circulant parity-check matrix can be decomposed into families of descendant cyclic and QC codes.

A. Circulant Decomposition

A circulant over a certain field is a square matrix such that

every row is the cyclic-shift one place to the right (or one place

to the left) of the row above it and the first row is the cyclic-shift

one place to the right (or one place to the left) of the last row. In

coding theory, a cyclic-shift commonly refers to the cyclic-shift

one place to the right. Hereafter, by a cyclic-shift, we mean a

cyclic-shift one place to the right unless explicitly mentioned

otherwise. A circulant is uniquely specified by its top row, called

the generator of the circulant. The columns and rows of a cir-

culant have the same weight.

Let be an

circulant over the field

. We

label the rows and columns of from 0 to

. Let

be the generator of . We denote

by

. Let

denote the

cyclic shift . Let

denote the circulant generated by

, i.e.,

. The two circulants,

and

, have an identical set of rows except that

the rows of

are obtained by cyclically shifting the

rows of

upward one place.

Suppose can be factored as a product of two positive inte-

gers, and , such that

and

, i.e., and are proper

factors of and

. Let

be the set

of indices (or labels) for the rows and columns of the

cir-

culant

with generator

. Define

the following index sequences: for

(1)

Let

(2)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2650

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2012

Then, gives a permutation of the indices in . Suppose we first of can be decomposed into a

array of circulants

permute the columns and then the rows of based on . These of size in the form given by (3) by permuting its columns

column and row permutations based on result in the following and rows based on defined by (2). The null space gives

array of circulants of size over

:

an

QC code over

. Since is obtained

from

through column and row permutations, the QC code

is combinatorially equivalent (or simple equivalent) to the

cyclic code . Two codes of the same length and same dimen-

sion are said to be combinatorially equivalent to each other if

...

...

...

...

...

there is a one-to-one correspondence between a codeword in one code and a codeword in the other and two corresponding code-

words are permutations of each other [23], [24]. Consequently,

(3)

two equivalent codes have the same weight distributions and the same error performance. We express and as

where for

,

is the generator of the circulant

which is an -tuple

over

called the th cyclic section of the generator

of the circulant

. Each

circulant in

is called a descendant of the circulant

. Since

and

have the same set

and

, respectively.

From the array

, we can construct new cyclic

codes of three different types. These new cyclic codes are called

cyclic descendant codes (simply descendants) of the cyclic code

. The cyclic code itself is called the mother code.

For

, if

is a nonzero circulant, then the null

of rows for

, there are at most distinct descendant space over

of

gives a cyclic descendant

circulants (up to row shifts) of

in the array

, namely of , denoted by , of length . This descendant code is re-

.

ferred to as a type-1 descendant of . Since there are at most

Since the array

is obtained by applying the permuta- distinct descendant circulants of

in the array

tion to the columns and rows of the circulant

, we write

. There are at most distinct type-1 cyclic descen-

. Let be the inverse permutation of . dants of .

Then

, i.e., the circulant

can be ob- From (3), we see that each column block of the array

tained from the array

by applying the inverse permutation

consists of the circulants in the first row block of

to its rows and columns. From the structure of the array

. For

, each circulant

or its cyclic shift

displayed by (3), we see that each row block of cir-

appears once and only once in each column block.

culants is a right cyclic-shift of the row block above it; however, Since the circulant

and its cyclic shift

have an

when the last circulant on the right of the row block is shifted identical set of rows, all the column blocks of circulants of the

around to the left, all its rows are cyclically shifted one place to array

have the same sets of rows. Consequently,

the right within the circulant. This structure is referred to as the the null spaces of all the column blocks of the array

doubly cyclic structure which is pertinent to the construction of

are the same. In fact, the null space of each column block

new cyclic codes, especially new cyclic LDPC codes, as will be of

is identical to the null space of the transpose

shown in later sections. From (3), we see that for

, the of the first row block of circulants of the array

.

th descendant circulant

appears times and its shift For

, let

be distinct integers such that

appears times in the array

. The th descendant

. Let

circulant

of

appears on an off-diagonal of

starting from the th position of the first row block and moving down to the right on a diagonal. When it reaches the last

(4)

(rightmost) column block of

, its shift

appears

in the first (leftmost) position of the next row block of

is a

matrix over

whose null space gives a

and moves down on a diagonal until it reaches the last row cyclic code of length , denoted by , which is referred to as

block of the array

.

a type-2 cyclic descendant code of the mother cyclic code .

B. Cyclic and QC Descendants of a Cyclic Code

For

, let

gers such that

be a set of distinct inte. Suppose we replace the

In the following, we show that cyclic and QC codes can be descendant circulants

of

derived from a given cyclic code using the circulant decompo-

and all their cyclic shifts in the array

by

sition presented previously.

zero matrices of size

. The replacement of a set of cir-

Let be an

cyclic code over

given by the culants in the array

by a set of zero matrices

null space of an

circulant parity-check matrix

is called masking [6], [10], [11], [21]. By masking the circu-

over

with rank where is the generator of the lants

and their cyclic shifts in the

circulant. For every cyclic code, a circulant parity-check ma- array

, we obtain a

array

trix

can always be constructed by using its parity-check of circulants and zero matrices of size

, where the sub-

vector as the generator of the circulant [6], [21], [23]–[28]. script “mask” of

(or

stands for masking.

Suppose can be properly factored as a product of two integers: Since cyclically shifting all the rows of a zero matrix (ZM) still

and . Then, the circulant parity-check matrix

gives a ZM, the array

is still in the form given by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2651

(3) with doubly cyclic structure. Applying the inverse permu- where for

tation to the columns and rows of the

masked array

, we obtain a new circulant matrix over

(7)

(8) (5)

The null space of

gives a cyclic code

which is referred to as a type-3 cyclic descendant code of

the cyclic code . Different masking patterns result in different

type-3 cyclic descendant codes of .

The results developed above show that decomposition of a

circulant parity-check matrix of a cyclic code gives a family

of cyclic descendant codes.

For any pair

of integers with

,

, let

be an

subarray of

. Since

is an array of circulants, its null space gives a QC

code. This QC code is called a QC descendant code of

(or ). Therefore, decomposition of a circulant parity-check

matrix of a cyclic code also gives a family of QC descendant

codes.

A cyclic code whose circulant parity-check matrix can be de-

composed into an array of descendant circulants to produce de-

scendant codes is said to be decomposable.

C. Structural Properties and Generator Polynomials of Cyclic Descendant Codes

We showed earlier that given a decomposable cyclic code

specified by a circulant parity-check matrix, three types of cyclic

descendant codes can be constructed by circulant decomposi-

tion. In the following, we develop some structural properties of

these cyclic descendant codes and characterize their generator

polynomials, more specifically the roots of their generator poly-

nomials.

For any positive integer , let

be an extension field

of

. Let be a factor of

and

. Con-

sider an

cyclic code over

whose generator poly-

nomial

has

as roots which are nonzero elements of

. It is well known in coding theory [23]–[27] that

divides

. Since

, all the roots of

are

distinct elements of

. Let be a primitive th root of

unity. Then, for

, each root of

is a power

of . Since

,

for

.

Let

,

where

,

and

, which is called the

parity polynomial of . Expressing

in terms of its roots,

we have

. Using this expression and

a partial fraction,

can be put in the following form:

Let

and

be the reciprocal polynomials of

and

, respectively. Then,

and

. The

polynomial

is the generator polynomial of the dual code

of . From (6) with some algebraic manipulations, we have

(9)

where for

(10)

For

,

is a polynomial of degree

over

which is associated with the th root of

the generator polynomial

of the cyclic code . The

polynomials,

, are called

root polynomials of the cyclic code . From (9), we see

that

is a linear combination of the root polynomials,

. From (8) and (9), we readily

see that all the coefficients,

, of the root

polynomials in the linear combination given by (9) are nonzero

elements in

. This fact leads to the following lemma

which will be used later to characterize the generator polyno-

mial (or its roots) of a type-1 cyclic descendant of .

Lemma 1: For an

cyclic code over

whose

generator polynomial

has roots ,

, the

generator polynomial

of the dual code of is a linear

combination, with nonzero coefficients in

, of the root

polynomials

associated with the roots ,

.

Lemma 1 simply states that the generator polynomial

of the dual code of an

cyclic is composed of

root

polynomials associated with the

roots of the generator

polynomial

of the

cyclic code .

Form an -tuple over

,

, whose first

components are the

coefficients of

and whose

last

components are zeros. For

,

form an -tuple over

,

whose components are the coefficients of

. The -tuples

are called the root vectors of . All the

components of a root vector are nonzero elements in

.

It follows from (9) that

(11)

Suppose we rename the components of as follows: (6)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(12)

2652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2012

Then,

,

, and

. Using as the generator, we form an

circulant

over

. The null space of this circulant gives the

cyclic

code generated by

. The first

rows of

are lin-

early independent and they form the conventional parity-check

matrix of [6], [23].

gives a circulant parity-check ma-

trix of . The -tuple is called the parity-check vector of .

For

, let

be the

circulant

formed by using the root vector as the generator. We call

a root circulant of the cyclic code . Then it follows

from (9) that the circulant parity-check matrix

can be ex-

pressed as a linear combination of the

root circulants,

, as follows:

(13)

Since each coefficient ,

, is nonzero,

each root circulant

appears in the sum of (13) to form the

circulant parity-check matrix

of .

Suppose can be properly factored as a product of two

integers and . Applying the permutation defined by

(2) to the columns and rows of the circulants

and

’s with

, in (13),

and

’s

can be decomposed into

arrays

and

’s

of

circulants in the form given by (3). These arrays

have doubly cyclic structure. Let

and

be the first row blocks

of the arrays

and

, respectively. Then for

, the th descendant circulant

of

can be expressed as the following linear combination of

:

For

,

, suppose there exists an integer

with

such that

. Since

,

we must have

. We say that and are equal in

th power. Then, it follows from (17) that

and

. Let be the number of distinct circulants

among

. Then, we can par-

tition the

roots,

of the generator poly-

nomial

of the cyclic code , into classes of equal roots

in th power. For

, let

(20)

be the th class of equal roots in th power where each in

is one of the roots,

, and is the number

of roots in . It is clear that

. For

and

, let

(21)

Since For For

and , each circulant
, let

, we have .
is one of the circulants in the second sum of (19).

(22)

be the set of coefficients of the circulants

in the first sum of

(19). Grouping the identical circulants in the second sum of

(19) together and for each with

, using

to

represent the th group of identical circulants, we have

(23)

(14) where

where for

(24)

(15)

From (23), we see that the circulant

(16) ated by

is a linear combination of the

genercircu-

For

lants

, where for

, the circulant

is generated by

(17)

. Then, it follows from (23)

If follows from (16) and (17) that we have

and Lemma 1 that we have the following theorem which characterizes the roots of a cyclic descendant code of a

(18) decomposable cyclic mother code .

Equality (18) implies that if

is known, all the descen-

dant circulants,

’s and their cyclic shifts

’s can

be constructed from

using (18).

It follows from (14) and (18) that

Theorem 1: The generator polynomial

of the type-1

cyclic descendant code of a decomposable cyclic code

given by the null space of the

circulant

has ,

, as a root if and only if

.

Example 1: Let be a primitive element of

.

(19) Consider the binary primitive (2047, 2025, 5) double-error-cor-

recting BCH code whose generator polynomial

has ,

, , , and their conjugates as roots [6]. The length 2047

The null space of the th descendant circulant

gives a of the code can be factored as a product of

and

.

type-1 cyclic descendant code of the cyclic code .

Then, the 2047 2047 circulant parity-check matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2653

generated by its parity-check vector can be decomposed into

a 89 89 array of 23 23 circulants. The null space of each

23 23 descendant circulant gives a (23, 12, 7) Golay code, a

perfect triple-error-correcting code. The generator polynomial

is

[6].

The generator polynomial

of a type-2 cyclic de-

scendant code

of the cyclic code given by the null

space of the matrix

of (4) can be determined by applying

Theorem 1. For

, let

be the generator

polynomial of th type-1 cyclic descendant code

of

given by the null space of th descendant circulant

in

. Then, the generator polynomial

of the

type-2 cyclic descendant code least common multiple of

of is given by the ,

i.e.,

. The set

of roots of

is the union of the sets of roots of

.

Consider the parity-check matrix

of a type-3

cyclic descendant code

of . Express each row of

as a polynomial of degree

or less with the

leftmost component as the constant term and the rightmost com-

ponent as the coefficient of the term of degree . This poly-

nomial is called a row polynomial. Find the greatest common

divisor

of all the row polynomials of

.

Let

be the reciprocal polynomial of

.

Then, the generator polynomial of the type-3 descendant code

of is given by

[6],

[23], [24].

III. CYCLIC DECOMPOSITION OF 2-D CYCLIC EG-LDPC CODES

In the following, we first give a brief review of some impor-

tant concepts and structural properties of 2-D Euclidean geome-

tries over finite fields. Detailed description of the construction

and structural properties of Euclidean geometries can be found

in [6], [21], [25], [31]–[34], and many other texts on combina-

torial mathematics or modern algebra.

Consider a 2-D Euclidean geometry,

, over the field

. This geometry consists of points and

lines.

A point in

is a two-tuple

over

and

the zero two-tuple (0, 0) is called the origin. A line in

is a 1-D subspace, or its coset, of the vector space of all the

two-tuples over

. A line contains points. If a point is

on a line in

, we say that the line passes through

. Any two points in

are connected by one and only

one line. For every point in

, there are lines that

intersect at (or pass through) the point . These lines are said to

form an intersecting bundle of lines at the point . For each line

in

, there are lines parallel to it. Two parallel lines

do not have any point in common.

The field

, as an extension field of the ground

field

, is a realization of

. Let be

a primitive element of

. Then, the powers of

, give all the elements

of

and they represent the points of

[6],

[31], [32]. The zero-element represents the origin of

.

Let

be the subgeometry obtained from

by removing the origin and the

lines passing through

the origin. This subgeometry consists of

nonorigin

points and

lines not passing through the origin. Each

line in

has only

lines parallel to it. Each

intersecting bundle of lines at a nonorigin point consists of

lines. Let

be a line in

. For

, let

. Then,

If the circulant parity-check matrix

of a

cyclic code is a sparse circulant over

and satisfies

the RC-constraint, then the null space of

gives

a cyclic LDPC code over

whose Tanner graph has a

girth of at least 6. Decomposing this cyclic LDPC code, we

can construct families of RC-constrained cyclic and QC-LDPC

codes. The most well-known classes of cyclic LDPC codes

are the classes of LDPC codes constructed using the inci-

dence structure of Euclidean and projective geometries [5],

called EG-LDPC and PG-LDPC codes, whose parity-check

matrices satisfy the RC-constraint. These two classes of cyclic

FG-LDPC codes have large minimum weights and their Tanner

graphs have girth at least 6 [5]. They can be decoded with

various types of iterative decoding algorithms to offer a wide

range of tradeoffs between error performance and decoding

complexity [5], [6], [21], [29], [30]. Decomposition of these

two classes of cyclic FG-LDPC codes results in several large

classes of RC-constrained cyclic and QC FG-LDPC codes.

In this section, we give constructions of cyclic LDPC-codes

by decomposing the circulant parity-check matrices of the

cyclic EG-LDPC codes. We begin with decomposition of

cyclic EG-LDPC codes constructed from 2-D Euclidean ge-

ometries. We call these codes 2-D cyclic EG-LDPC codes.

Decomposition of circulants constructed from higher dimen-

sional Euclidean geometries will be considered in Section V.

is also a line in

and

give

all the

lines in

. This structure of lines in

is called cyclic structure [5]–[7], [21].

Let be a line in

. Based on , we define a

-

tuple over GF(2),

, whose components

correspond to the

nonorigin points

of

, where

if is a point on and

oth-

erwise. It is clear that the weight of is . This

-tuple

is called the incidence vector of the line [5], [6]. Due to the

cyclic structure of the lines in

, the incidence vector

of the line is the cyclic-shift (one place to the right) of

the incidence vector of the line .

Let

. Form an

matrix

over GF(2)

with the incidence vectors of the lines,

,

of

as rows. Then,

is an

circulant with

both column and row weights .

can be obtained by using

the incidence vector of the line [any line in

] as

the generator and cyclically shifting it

times. Since two

lines in

have at most one point in common, their in-

cidence vectors have at most one position where they both have

1-components. Consequently,

satisfies the RC-constraint

and its null space gives a cyclic EG-LDPC code [5], [6],

[21] whose Tanner graph has a girth of at least 6. The RC-con-

straint on

ensures that the minimum distance (or weight)

of is at least . Since is a cyclic code, it is uniquely

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2654

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2012

specified by its generator polynomial. Let

be the gen-

erator polynomial of . The roots of

are elements of

which have been completely characterized in [5], [6],

and [35]–[38].

For the special case with

, the rank of the circulant

parity-check matrix

of the cyclic EG-LDPC code con-

structed from the 2-D Euclidean geometry

is

[6], [38], [39] and the minimum distance of is exactly

[6], [21], [36], [39].

Constructions of cyclic LDPC codes based on finite geome-

tries, Euclidean and projective, were first presented in [5]. In

[5], the authors showed that cyclic FG codes perform very well

over the AWGN channel with iterative decoding based on be-

lief propagation using the SPA and the decoding of these codes

converges very fast.

Let and be two proper factors of

such that

. Decompose the

circulant parity-check matrix

into a

array

of circulants of

size in the form of (3) through column and row permutation

(a)

defined by (2). Note that as a

matrix

over GF(2), every row of

still corresponds to a line

in

not passing through the origin of

. Since

satisfies the RC-constraint, each descendant circulant in

also satisfies the RC-constraint. Based on the array

of circulants, three types of cyclic descendant LDPC-

codes of the cyclic EG-LDPC code can be constructed as

explained in Section II-B.

Example 2: Let the 2-D Euclidean geometry

over

be the code construction geometry. This geometry has

lines not passing the origin of

.

Using the incidence vectors of these lines, we can construct a

4095 4095 RC-constrained circulant

with both column

and row weights 64. The rank of

is

. The

null space of

gives a (4095, 3367) cyclic EG-LDPC code

with minimum distance exactly 65. Its error performances

decoded with 50 iterations of the SPA [3], [6], [21] and the MS

algorithm [40] over the binary AWGN channel are shown in

Fig. 1(a). We see that the error performance of the code de-

coded with 50 iterations of the SPA is slightly better than that

of 50 iterations of the scaled MS algorithm. Furthermore, de-

coding of the code with the MS algorithm converges very fast.

The performance curves with 5, 10, and 50 iterations of the

scaled MS algorithm almost overlap with each other. Also in-

cluded in Fig. 1(a) is the error performance of the code decoded

with the soft-reliability-based iterative majority-logic decoding

(SRBI-MLGD) devised in [29], [30]. We see that, at bit-error

rate (BER) of

, the SRBI-MLGD performs only 0.6 dB

from the scaled MS algorithm with 50 iterations. The SRBI-

MLGD requires only integer and binary logical operations with

a computational complexity much less than that of the SPA and

the MS algorithm. It offers more effective tradeoff between error

performance and decoding complexity compared to the other re-

liability-based iterative decoding, such as the weighted bit-flip-

ping algorithms [5], [6], [21], [41], [42].

Suppose we factor 4095 as the product of

and

.

By column and row permutations, the 4095 4095 circulant

can be decomposed into a 3 3 array

of descen-

dant circulants of size 1365 1365 in the form given in (3). Let

(b)
Fig. 1. (a) Bit error performances of the binary (4095, 3367) cyclic EG-LDPC code given in Example 2 decoded with the SPA and the scaled MS algorithm. (b) Error performances of the binary (1365, 765) cyclic EG-LDPC code given in Example 2 decoded with 50 iterations of the SPA and the MS algorithm.

, , and denote the three descendant circulants of

in the first row of

. Then

The descendant circulants and both have column and row weights 24. The descendant circulant has both column and row weights 16. The rank of is 600. Consider the cyclic
LDPC code given by the null space of . This code is a (1365, 765) cyclic EG-LDPC code of rate 0.56 and minimum

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2655

cyclic-EG-LDPC code

of rate 0.5135 and minimum dis-

tance at least 65. It is a type-2 cyclic descendant of the (4095,

3367) cyclic EG-LDPC code. The error performances of this

code over the AWGN channel decoded with 50 iterations of

the MS algorithm and the SRBI-MLGD algorithm are shown

in Fig. 1(c).

Suppose we replace the circulants, and its cyclic-shift

, in

by two 1365 1365 zero matrices . We

obtain the following 3 3 masked array of circulants of size

1365 1365:

The above array is still in the form of (3) with doubly cyclic

structure. It is a 4095 4095 matrix over GF(2) with both

column and row weights 40. Applying the inverse permutation

to the rows and columns of

, we obtain an

RC-constrained 4095 4095 circulant

with rank

of 1392. The null space of

gives a (40, 40)-regular

(c)

(4095, 2703) cyclic-EG-LDPC code with minimum distance

at least 41. It is a type-3 cyclic descendant code of the (4095,

3367) cyclic EG-LDPC code. The error performances of this

code over the AWGN channel decoded with three, five, and 50

iterations of the SPA are shown in Fig. 1(d).

We can factor 4095 as the product of 15 and 273. Setting

and

, we can decompose the 4095 4095 circu-

lant

given in Example 2 into a 15 15 array

of

circulants of size 273 273. From this array of circulants, we

can construct many type-1, -2, and -3 cyclic descendant LDPC

codes of the (4095–3367) cyclic EG-LDPC code given by

the null space of

.

IV. QC DECOMPOSITION OF 2-D CYCLIC EG-LDPC CODES

In the previous section, we showed that decomposition of a

2-D cyclic EG-LDPC code results in a family of cyclic descen-

dant EG-LDPC codes. In this section, we consider constructions

of QC descendant LDPC codes by decomposing a 2-D cyclic

EG-LDPC code.

In the following, we present two types of QC descendant

EG-LDPC codes. First, we consider the RC-constrained

(d)

array

of circulants over GF(2) of size of

ob-

tained by decomposing the circulant parity-check matrix

Fig. 1. (Cont’d.) (c) Error performances of the binary (1365, 701) cyclic EG-LDPC code given in Example 2 decoded with the MS algorithm and the SRBI-MLGD algorithm. (d) Bit and block error performances of the binary (4095, 2703) cyclic EG-LDPC code given in Example 2.

constructed from the 2-D Euclidean geometry

over

, where

and

. Note that

does not divide

. For

to be a factor of

,

the smallest is

. For any pair of positive integers,

distance at least 17. The error performance of the code over the

AWGN channel using BPSK signaling decoded with 50 itera-

tions of the SPA (or the MS algorithm) is shown in Fig. 1(b). At

the block error rate (BLER) of , the code performs 1.6 dB

from the sphere packing bound.

Suppose we use

as a parity-check ma-

with

,

, let

be an

subarray

of

. This subarray also satisfies the RC-constraint and

its null space gives a QC descendant LDPC code

of the

cyclic EG-LDPC code given by the null space of the

circulant parity-check . The QC-LDPC code

is re-

ferred to as a type-1 QC descendant code of .

trix. This matrix is a 4095 1365 matrix over GF(2) with con- Example 3: Consider the 3 3 array

of circulants of

stant column weight 64 but two different row weights, 16 and size 1365 1365 given in Example 2 constructed from the 2-D

24. Its rank is 664. The null space of

gives a (1365, 701) Euclidean geometry

. Set

and

. Take the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2656

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2012

spond to the

nonorigin points,

,

of

. Permuting the columns and the rows based on the

permutation defined by (2), we decompose the circulant

into a

array

of circulants of size

in the

form of (3). For

, consider the th circulant in

the first row block of the array

. It follows from the

column permutation that the columns of correspond to the

nonorigin points,

. Suppose that

is neither an CPM nor an ZM. Then, the first row

of must have at least two 1-components. Let

and

with

, be the points that

correspond to the two positions where the first row of have

1-components. Then

(25)

Fig. 2. Bit and block error performances of the binary (4095, 3431) QC EG-LDPC code given in Example 3.

where Since in where and

which is a nonzero element in

.

,

. Let

be the line

that contains the points (or connects) and

and are two linearly independent points in

. Then

first row block of

as a 1 3 subarray

of

(26)

1365

, i.e.,

. This subarray is a

4095 matrix over GF(2) with constant row weight 64 but

It follows from (25) and (26) that we have

two different column weights, 16 and 20. The null space of this

(27)

subarray gives a (4095, 3431) QC-EG-LDPC code. The error

performances with 3, 5, and 50 iterations of the SPA are shown Since

, the point is different from the point . Equality

in Fig. 2. We see that the decoder converges quickly.

(27) implies that is also a point on the line

Next, we consider type-2 QC descendants of . Suppose which is parallel to the line

. However, a point

can be factored as a product of two positive integers, and cannot be on two parallel lines. Consequently, the first row of

with , , i.e.,

. Then,

can be fac-

cannot have more than one 1-component and is either a

tored as the following product:

. CPM or a ZM.

Let

. The circulant parity-check matrix

of the As a

matrix over GF(2), the first

cyclic EG-LDPC code of length

can be decom- row of

[the incidence vector of a line in

]

posed into an RC-constrained

array of cir- has -components. Since

is obtained from

culants over GF(2) of size . Theorem 2 gives a fundamental

through column and row permutations, the first row of

structure of this array. It proves that each circulant in this array is

, as a

matrix over GF(2), also

either a circulant permutation matrix (CPM) or a ZM. A CPM is has -components. Based on the result proved previously,

a permutation matrix (PM) for which each row is the cyclic-shift these -components must distribute among CPMs in the

of the row above it and the first row is the cyclic-shift of the last first row block of the array

, one in each. Conse-

row. From this array of CPMs and ZMs, we can construct a large quently, the first row block of the array

consists

class of QC-LDPC codes which are QC descendants of . We of CPMs and

ZMs of size . Since

call this array

the CPM-decomposition of

has the doubly cyclic structure as displayed in (3),

and denote it by

. The null space of

it follows that every row (or column) block of

has

gives a QC-EG-LDPC code which is combinatorially equiva- CPMs and

ZMs. This proves the theorem.

lent to the cyclic EG-LDPC code .

The array

can be used to construct QC-LDPC

Theorem 2: Let

be the

circulant over codes. For any pair of integers,

with

,

,

GF(2) constructed using the

lines of the 2-D Euclidean let

be a

subarray of

. It is

geometry

over

not passing through the origin. an RC-constrained

matrix over GF(2). The null space of

Suppose

can be factored as a product of two integers,

gives a QC-EG-LDPC code

of

and with

,

. Let

. Then,

can length . If

has constant column and row

be decomposed into a

array

of circulants of weights, then

is a regular QC-EG-LDPC code.

size . Each circulant is either an CPM or an ZM. Otherwise,

gives an irregular QC-EG-LDPC

Each row (or column) block of

consists of exactly code.

CPMs and

ZMs.

Here, we consider a special subclass of type-2 QC descen-

Proof: It follows from the definition of the incidence vector dant LDPC codes of the 2-D cyclic EG-LDPC code . The

of a line in

that the

columns of

corre- entire array

is a

matrix over

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2657

GF(2) with both column and row weights equal to . The null

space of

gives a QC-EG-LDPC code

of length

with minimum distance

. If

, then the rank of

is

(the

rank of

is the same as that of

). In this case,

the null space of

gives a QC-EG-LDPC code with

the following parameters: 1) length

; 2) dimension

; and 3) minimum distance

.

For a given 2-D Euclidean geometry

over

,

the previous construction gives a family of structurally compat-

ible QC-EG-LDPC codes.

Each factor of

results in a CPM-decomposition of

the circulant

with CPMs of size

. A special case

of CPM-decomposition of

is

. In this case,

the CPM-decomposition of

is a

array

of CPMs and ZMs of size

. Each

row (or column) block of

consists of CPMs and

one single ZM. There are a total of

ZMs in

.

In constructing the circulant , we can choose a line such

that, after decomposition, the

ZMs in

lie on

its main diagonal. This special case with

was first pre-

sented in [8] as an array of PMs of size

and was

later formulated as an array of CPMs of size

in [9].

Fig. 3. Bit and block error performance of the binary (4095, 3591) QC-LDPC code given in Example 4.

Example 4: Consider the 4095 4095 circulant

over

GF(2) constructed in Example 2 using the incidence vectors of

the lines in the 2-D Euclidean geometry

not passing

through the origin. First, we factor

as the

product of

and

.

Then, we factor 63 as the product of 7 and 9. Set

,

,

and

. Decompose the circulant

into a

585 585 array

of CPMs and ZMs of size 7 7.

Each row (or column) of

consists of 64 CPMs and

521 ZMs. Choose

and

. Take a 72 585 sub-

array

from

. The subarray

is a 504 4095 matrix over GF(2). The

null space of this matrix gives a (4095, 3591) QC-EG-LDPC

code of rate 0.877 whose error performance over the AWGN

decoded with 50 iterations of the SPA is shown in Fig. 3. At

the BLER of , the code performs 1.5 dB from the sphere

packing bound.

Example 5: In this example, we construct a long high-rate

code and show how close the code performs to the Shannon

limit. Let the 2-D Euclidean geometry

over the

Fig. 4. Bit and block error performances of the binary (32 768, 31 747) QC-LDPC code given in Example 5.

prime field GF(257) be the code construction geometry.

Based on the incidence vectors of the lines in

from

not passing through the origin of the geometry, we construct of

, avoiding the ZMs on the main diagonal

. This subarray

is a

a 66 048 66 048 circulant

with both column and row

weights 257. The null space of

gives a cyclic-EG-LDPC

code of length of 66 048 with minimum distance at least 258.

Set

and

.

1024 32 768 matrix with column and row weights 4 and 128,

respectively. The null space of

gives a (4,

128)-regular (32768, 31747) QC-EG-LDPC code of rate 0.969.

The error performance of this code over the AWGN channel

Decompose

into a 258 258 array

of CPMs decoded with 50 iterations of the SPA is shown in Fig. 4. At

and ZMs of size 256 256. In this CPM-decomposition, every the BER of , the code performs 0.6 dB from the Shannon

row block and every column block consists of 257 CPMs and a limit.

single ZM. Suppose

is constructed by choosing a line not If we select a set of CPMs and their cyclic-shifts in

passing through the origin of

such that the 258 ZMs

and replace them by zero matrices of size , we

lie on the main diagonal of the array

. Let

obtain an array

of CPMs and ZMs which has

and

. Take a 4 128 subarray

the form of (3) with doubly cyclic structure. Applying inverse

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2658

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2012

Fig. 5. Error performances of the binary (65 536, 32 768) QC-LDPC code and the DVB S-2 standard code given in Example 6.

permutation to the rows and columns of

,

we obtain a

masked circulant

over GF(2). The null space

gives a cyclic-EG-LDPC

code of length

. Masking is very effective for constructing

irregular QC-LDPC codes as shown in the next example.

Example 6: In this example, we construct a long irregular

QC-EG-LDPC code using the masking technique presented in

[6], [8], and [10]. Consider the 258 258 array

of CPMs and ZMs of size 256 256 constructed in Example

5. Take a 128 256 subarray

with

and

from

.

Next, we construct (by computer search) a 128 256 matrix

over GF(2) with column and row weight

distributions close to the following variable-node (VN) and CN

degree distributions (node perspective) of a Tanner graph op-

timally designed for an irregular code of rate 1/2 and infinite

length (using density evolution [43]):

and

where the coefficients of

in

and

give

the numbers of columns and rows, respectively,

of

with weight

. Take the fol-

lowing matrix product:

,

where

for

and

(a

ZM) for

. This matrix product is called

masking [6], [8], [10]. The matrix

is a

32768 65536 matrix over GF(2) with column and row weight

distributions

and

,

respectively.

The null space of

gives an irregular

(65 536, 32 768) QC-EG-LDPC code. The error performance

of this code with 50 iterations of the SPA is shown in Fig. 5.

We see that at a BER of , the code performs 0.6 dB from

the Shannon limit without a visible error floor. Also included

in Fig. 5 is the performance of the Digital Video Broadcasting

(DVB) S-2 standard (64 800, 32 400) LDPC code [44]. The

DVB S-2 LDPC code is an irregular repeat-accumulate code

[21], [45]. From Fig. 5, we see that the (65 536, 32 768)

QC-EG-LDPC code outperforms DVB S-2 LDPC code by

more than 0.1 dB all the way down to the BER of

. At

the BER of

, the performance curve of the DVB code

starts to change slope.

where the coefficient of represents the percentage of nodes

of degree . The column and row weight distributions of the

constructed matrix

are given as follows:

V. CONSTRUCTION OF QC-LDPC CODES BASED ON DECOMPOSITION OF MULTIPLE CIRCULANTS CONSTRUCTED
FROM HIGH-DIMENSIONAL EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES

Cyclic and QC descendant EG-LDPC codes can be con-

structed by decomposing multiple circulants constructed

from Euclidean geometries with dimension higher than two.

Consider the -dimensional Euclidean geometry

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2659

over

with

[6], [21], [31]–[34]. This geometry

consists of points and

lines.

Each point is an -tuple over

. Each line consists of

points. The field

as an extension field of

is a

realization of the geometry

[6]. Let be a primi-

tive element of

. Then, the powers of ,

,

, represent points of

.

Let

be the subgeometry obtained by removing the

origin and the line passing through the origin from

.

This subgeometry consists of

nonorigin points and

lines not passing through

the origin of

. These lines can be partitioned into

groups, each group consisting

of

lines,

, where is a line in

and is a line as defined in Section III [5], [6],

[21]. Each group of these

lines is said to form a cyclic

class. Therefore, each cyclic class is uniquely specified by a

single line . We denote these cyclic classes of lines with

.

Using the incidence vectors of the lines in the cyclic

classes

of

, we can form

RC-constrained circulants of size

, denoted

[5], [6]. For

, the

columns of each circulant

are incidence vectors of the

lines in the th cyclic class . The column and row

weights of

are both .

For

, form a matrix

which is a column of any

of the circulants

. This

matrix is a

matrix over GF(2) with

column and row weights and , respectively. Since the

rows of

correspond to

lines in

,

it satisfies the RC-constraint. The null space of

gives

a cyclic EG-LDPC code of length

with minimum

distance at least

.

Suppose

can be factored as a product of two positive

integers and , where

,

. Then each circu-

lant

can be decomposed into a doubly cyclic

array

of circulants of size . This results in doubly

cyclic arrays,

. Form

the following

array of circulants:

(28)

It is a

matrix with column and row

weights and , respectively. This array

also sat-

isfies the RC-constraint. Its null space gives an RC-constrained

QC-EG-LDPC code

of length

with minimum

distance at least

. The subscript “ ” of

stands for

the dimension of the Euclidean geometry

used for

the code construction. Using the same techniques presented in

Sections III and IV, we can construct cyclic and QC-EG-LDPC

codes from the array

.

A special decomposition of multiple circulants for con-

structing QC-EG-LDPC codes is given in the following

theorem.

Set

. For

, the

th

circulant

constructed using the

incidence vectors of the lines in the th cyclic class of the

subgeometry

can be decomposed into a

array

of CPMs and ZMs of size

by applying the

-permutation defined by (2) to both the columns and rows of

. Each row block and each column block of

consists of CPMs and

ZMs.

Proof: The proof of this theorem is similar to the proof of

Theorem 2.

Theorem 3 gives a CPM-decomposition of each circulant

constructed from a cyclic class of lines in the

subgeometry

of the -dimensional geometry

. With the CPM-decomposition of each circulant

,

, the array given by (28) becomes the

following array of CPMs and ZMs:

(29)

For

and

, take a

subarray

from

. This subarray is a

matrix over GF(2). Its null space gives a QC-EG-LDPC

code of length . The previous construction using an -dimen-

sional Euclidean geometry

over

with

gives a large family of QC-EG-LDPC codes.

Again, a special case is

and

. In this case,

and

is a

array of CPMs and ZMs of size

over

GF(2). Consider the subarray

of CPMs and

ZMs. As stated in Theorem 3, each column block (or row block)

consists of CPMs and ZMs. Suppose can be factored as

a product and , i.e.,

. We can split each column block

of

into column blocks of the same length with

the CPMs evenly distributed among the new column blocks,

each with CPMs. This column block splitting operation is

referred to as column block splitting. In distributing the CPMs

among the new column blocks, their relative positions are not

changed. This column block splitting results in a

array

of CPMs and ZMs of size , each column block

has CPMs and each row block has CPMs. Next, we split

each row block of

into new row blocks of the same

length with the CPMs evenly distributed among the new row

blocks, each with CPMs. This row block splitting operation

is referred to as the row block splitting. This row block splitting

of

results in a

array

of CPMs

and ZMs of size . The array

is called the

expansion of

. Each column block and each

row block of

consists of CPMs. If we replace

each

subarray

in the array

given by (29) by its

expansion

, we obtain

the following

array of CPMs and ZMs:

Theorem 3: Suppose can be factored as a product of two

integers and . Then,

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(30)

2660

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2012

The expanded array

has a much smaller density of

CPMs than that of the array

. Any subarray of

gives a QC-EG-LDPC code.

Example 7: Let

. Consider the 3-D Euclidean

geometry

over

. This geometry has

nonorigin points and 4599

lines not passing through the origin of the geometry. The 4599

lines not passing through the origin can be partitioned into 9

cyclic classes, each consisting of 511 lines. Using the incidence

vectors of the lines in these nine cyclic classes, we can form

nine circulants,

, of size 511 511.

Factor 511 as the product of

and

. It

follows from Theorem 3, that each 511 511 circulant

can be decomposed into a 73 73 array

of

CPMs and ZMs of size 7 7. Each column block and row

block consists of 8 CPMs and 65 ZMs. Form the following

73 657 array of CPMs and ZMs of size 7 7:

This array is a 511 4599 matrix with column and row weights 8 and 72, respectively. The null space of this matrix gives an (8,

Fig. 6. Error performances of the binary (8176, 7156) QC-LDPC code given in Example 7.

72)-regular (4599, 4227) QC-EG-LDPC code of rate 0.9191.

Suppose we factor

as the product of

and

. Using column block and row block split-

tings, each 73 73 array

can be expanded

into a 146 146 array

of CPMs and ZMs

of size 7 7, each row block and column block con-

sisting of 4 CPMs and 142 ZMs. Take the first eight of

these 146 146 arrays and form the following 146 1168

array of CPMs and ZMs of size 7 7:

. It

is a 1022 8176 matrix over GF(2) with column and row

weight 4 and 32, respectively. The null space of this matrix

gives a (4, 32)-regular (8176, 7156) QC-EG-LDPC code of

rate 0.8752. This code has the same length and rate as the

(4, 32)-regular QC-EG-LDPC code adopted by NASA as the

standard code for LANDSAT high-speed communications and

other missions [21], [46] where the BER requirement is

.

The error performance of this code decoded with 50 iterations

of the SPA and 15 iterations of the MS algorithm are shown

in Fig. 6. (A field-programmable gate array (FPGA) decoder

for this code has been built to simulate very low BER.) We

see that there is no visible error-floor down to the BER of

. At the BER of

, it performs only 1.6 dB from the

Shannon limit. Even though this code performs as well as the

NASA code, its parity-check matrix is structurally different

of cyclic and QC-PG-LDPC codes. In the following, we use

an example for illustration. For construction and structural

properties of projective geometries, readers are referred to [5],

[6], and [32].

Consider the 2-D projective geometry

over

.

This geometry has

points and

lines [5], [6], [32]. Each line contains

points. Two lines

can have at most one point in common. A projective geometry

does not have an origin point. Every point in

, has

lines containing it. The incidence vector of a line is an -tuple

over GF(2) defined in the same manner as the incidence vector

of a line in an Euclidean geometry. The incidence vectors of the

lines in

also have the cyclic structure as the incidence

vectors of the lines in the 2-D Euclidean geometry

not passing through the origin. Using the incidence vectors of

the lines in

, we can form an

circulant

over GF(2) with both column and row weights equal to

.

The null space of

gives a cyclic PG-LDPC code of length

and minimum distance at least

. If

can be properly factored as a product of two integers, and ,

then

can be decomposed into a

array

of

circulants of size with doubly cyclic structure. Based on the

array

, we can construct a family of cyclic PG-LDPC

codes and a family of QC-PG-LDPC codes.

from that of the NASA code.

For the special case with

, the rank of

is

VI. DECOMPOSITION OF CYCLIC PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY LDPC CODES

[5], [6], [39]. The null space of

gives a cyclic PG-LDPC

code with the following parameters: 1) length

;

2) dimension

; and 3) minimum distance

In the previous three sections, we constructed new cyclic and at least

.

QC-EG-LDPC codes by decomposing circulants constructed Decomposition of circulants constructed based on projective

from the lines of Euclidean geometries. Circulants can also geometries of dimensions higher than 2 can be carried out in

be constructed from the lines in projective geometries [5]. the same manner as the decomposition of high-dimensional Eu-

Decomposing these circulants using the same techniques pre- clidean geometries. Decomposition of multiple circulants re-

sented in the last three sections, we can construct new classes sults in large classes of cyclic and QC PG-LDPC codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2661

VII. TRAPPING SETS OF RC-CONSTRAINED LDPC CODES
As pointed out in the introduction of this paper, most LDPC codes have a common severe weakness, known as the errorfloor [19]. The error-floor of an LDPC code is mostly caused by an undesirable structure, known as a trapping set [19], [20], in the Tanner graph of the code. High error-floors may preclude LDPC codes from applications where very low error rates are required. In this section, we analyze the trapping set structure of binary regular LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices satisfy the RC-constraint.

A. Concepts and Definitions

Let be an LDPC code of length given by the null space

of a sparse

parity-check matrix

, over GF(2) with rows and

columns. The Tanner graph of is a bipartite graph with

two sets of nodes: the VNs and the CNs [4]. The VNs, denoted

by

, represent the code bits of a codeword

in the code and the CNs, denoted by

, represent the check-sum constraints that

the code bits must satisfy (they must be all equal to zero). For

convenience, we do not distinguish between a “code bit” and

a “VN,” or between a “check-sum” and a “CN.” We will use

the notation for both the th code bit and its corresponding

VN and the notation for both the th check-sum and its corre-

sponding CN. Basically, the VNs correspond to the columns

of the parity-check matrix and the CNs correspond to the

rows of . A VN is connected to a CN by an edge if and

only if the code bit is contained in the check-sum , i.e.,

. The degree of the VN is defined as the number

of CNs connected to and the degree of the CN is de-

fined as the number of VNs connected to . The degree of

the VN is simply equal to the number of 1-entries in the th

column of the parity-check matrix

and the degree

of the CN is simply equal to the number of 1-entries in

the th row of

. For a

-regular LDPC code, all

the VNs have the same degree and all the CNs have the same

degree .

Fig. 7(a) shows the Tanner graph of a (3, 3)-regular (7, 3)

LDPC code given by the null space of the RC-constrained 7 7

circulant parity-check matrix

with gener-

ator

.

Definition 1: Let be the Tanner graph of a binary LDPC

code given by the null space of an

matrix over

GF(2). For

and

,a

trapping

set [19] is a set

of VNs in which induce a subgraph

of with exactly odd-degree CNs (and an arbitrary number

of even-degree CNs). An elementary

trapping set [22] is

a trapping set for which all CNs in the induced subgraph of the

Tanner graph have degree 1 or degree 2, and there are exactly

degree 1 CNs.

Fig. 7(b) and (c) shows two subgraphs of the Tanner graph

of a (3, 3)-regular LDPC code shown in Fig. 7(a) which are in-

duced by a (3, 3) trapping set and a (4, 4) trapping set, respec-

tively. The (3, 3) trapping set consists of three VNs: , , and

. The subgraph induced by this trapping set has three CNs of

degree 1 and three CNs of degree 2. Therefore, this trapping set

is an elementary trapping set. The (4, 4) trapping set consists

of four VNs: , , , and . The subgraph induced by this

trapping set has three CNs of degree 1, one CN of degree 3, and

three CNs of degree 2.

Suppose in the transmission of a codeword, an error pattern

with errors at the locations of the VNs of a

trapping set

occurs. This error pattern will cause parity-check failures (i.e.,

the check-sums are not equal to zeros, because each of these

check-sums contains an odd number of errors in ). In this case,

for iterative decoding, another decoding iteration must be car-

ried out to correct the unsatisfied (or failed) check-sums. Itera-

tive decoding, such as the SPA and the MS algorithm, is very

susceptible to trapping sets of a code because it works locally

in a distributed-processing manner. Each CN has a local pro-

cessing unit to process the messages received from the VNs con-

nected to it and each VN has a local processing unit to process

the messages received from the CVs connected to it. Hopefully,

these local processing units through iterations and message ex-

changes collect enough information to make a global optimum

decision of the transmitted code bits.

In each decoding iteration, we call a CN a satisfied CN if it

satisfies its corresponding check-sum constraint (i.e., its corre-

sponding check-sum is equal to zero); otherwise, we call it an

unsatisfied CN. During the decoding process, the decoder un-

dergoes state transitions from one state to another until all the

CNs satisfy their corresponding check-sum constraints or a pre-

determined maximum number of iterations is reached. The th

state of an iterative decoder is represented by the hard-decision

decoded sequence obtained at the end of th iteration. In the

process of a decoding iteration, the messages from the satisfied

CNs try to reinforce the current decoder state, while the mes-

sages from the unsatisfied CNs try to change some of the bit

decisions to satisfy their check-sum constraints. If errors affect

the code bits (or the VNs) of a

trapping set

,

the odd-degree CNs, each connected to an odd number of VNs

in

, will not be satisfied while all the other CNs will be

satisfied. The decoder will succeed in correcting the errors in

if the messages coming from the unsatisfied CNs con-

nected to the VNs in

are strong enough to overcome the

(false or inaccurate) messages coming from the satisfied CNs.

However, this may not be the case if is small. As a result,

the decoder may not converge to a valid codeword even if more

decoding iterations are performed and this nonconvergence of

decoding results in an error-floor. In this case, we say that the

decoder is trapped.

For the binary-input AWGN channel, error patterns with

small number of errors (or low-weight error-patterns) are more

probable than error patterns with larger number of errors.

Consequently, in message-passing decoding algorithms, the

most harmful

trapping sets are usually those with small

values of and , especially when the value of is very

small compared to that of . Extensive study and simulation

results [19], [22], [47]–[76] show that the trapping sets that

result in high decoding failure rates and contribute significantly

to high error-floors are those with small values and small

ratios . We call these trapping sets small trapping sets. The

trapping sets with large values of relative to the values of

in general result in relatively small decoding failure rates

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2662

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2012

(a)

(b)

(c) Fig. 7. (a) Tanner graph of a (3, 3)-regular (7, 3) LDPC code. (b) Elementary (3, 3) trapping set. (c) (4, 4) trapping set.

and contribute little to error-floor. From extensive computer The notion of a small trapping set given above is loosely de-

simulations reported in the literature [19], [22], [47]–[76], it fined. A more quantitative definition of small trapping sets was

has been observed that most trapping sets that exert a strong given by Ländner and Milenkovic [22].

influence on the error-floor are elementary trapping sets and

small trapping sets with

.

Besides small trapping sets and their distributions, undetected

errors caused by a small minimum distance (or weight) of a code

also contribute considerably to the error-floor of the code. If

there are no trapping sets of size smaller than the minimum

distance of an LDPC code, then the error-floor of the code de-

coded with iterative decoding is dominated by the minimum dis-

tance of the code.

Definition 2: A

trapping set in the Tanner graph of an

LDPC code of length is said to be small if

and

(i.e., the ratio

).

Constructing (or designing) codes to avoid harmful trapping

sets to mitigate the error-floor problem is a hard combinatorial

problem. Consequently, to lower the error-floor of an LDPC

code caused by (small) trapping sets, an alternate approach is

taken. A most commonly taken approach is a decoder-based

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2663

strategy to remove or reduce the effect of harmful trapping sets on error-floor. Several such decoder-based strategies have been recently proposed [61], [62], [64], [66], [69], [75]. Among them, the most effective decoding strategy is the backtracking iterative decoding algorithm recently presented in [75].

contains transmission errors. Therefore, is an estimate of the transmitted codeword prior to channel decoding. Let

B. Analysis of Trapping Sets of RC-Constrained LDPC Codes where, for

,

and “ ” is modulo-2

In this section, we analyze the structure of trapping sets of

RC-constrained regular LDPC codes. The analysis is based on

the RC-constraint on the rows and columns of the parity-check

matrix and its column weight . For such an RC-constrained

LDPC code, we will show that there is no

trapping set

with

and

. More precisely, for any trapping set

with

VNs, the number of odd-degree CNs is at

addition. If

, then

; otherwise

. Therefore,

the positions in where the components equal to “1” are the

erroneous positions. The -tuple gives the pattern of errors

contained in the received sequence and is called the error pat-

tern contained in [6]. Hence,

.

For any decoding algorithm (soft or hard), the first step is to

compute the syndrome of [6]

least . This is to say that for an RC-constrained

-regular

(32)

LDPC code, there is no harmful trapping set of size smaller than

. Cyclic EG- and PG-LDPC codes given in [5] and their where cyclic and QC descendants given in Sections III–VI of this paper

are RC-constrained LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices

(33)

have large column weights. Hence, they do not have harmful

small trapping sets of size smaller than . Besides the FG-LDPC for

, which is called a syndrome-sum of . If

,

codes, LDPC codes constructed based on finite fields and ex- then the received bits in satisfy all the check-sum con-

perimental designs in [10]–[14] and [77]–[84] are also RC-con- straints given by (31) and is a codeword. In this case, the re-

strained LDPC codes.

ceiver assumes that is the transmitted codeword and accepts it

Let be a binary

-regular LDPC code of length

as the decoded codeword. If

, the received bits in do not

given by the null space of an RC-constrained

matrix satisfy all the check-sum constraints given by (31) and is

over GF(2) with column and row not a codeword. In this case, we say that errors in are being

weights and , respectively. Let

denote detected and the error pattern is called a detectable error pattern.

the rows of , where the th row is an -tuple over GF(2), Then, an error correction process is initiated. Since

, for

. An -tuple and

, it follows from (33) that each syndrome-sum

over GF(2) is a codeword in if and is actually a linear sum of a set of error bits contained in the re-

only if

(a zero -tuple). The condition

ceived sequence ,

gives the following constraints on the bits of a codeword : (34)

(31)

If is error-free,

for

. If is not

for

. The above linear sums of code bits are error-free but the error pattern happens to be identical to a

called check-sums. The check-sums of the code bits equal nonzero codeword in , all the syndrome-sums will be equal

to 0 are the constraints that the code bits of any codeword must to 0. In this case, the received sequence contains an undetected

satisfy.

error pattern and decoding results in an incorrect decoding. The

For

, if

, then the th code bit partic- decoding process is initiated only if not all the syndrome-sums

ipates (or is contained) in the th check-sum given by (31). are equal to zero.

In this case, we say that the th check-sum checks on the th From (34), we see that a syndrome-sum is equal to “1”

code bit of (or the th code bit of is checked by the if and only if the number of nonzero error digits checked by

th check-sum ). Since has constant column weight , there (or participate in the sum ) is odd. A syndrome-sum is

are check-sums containing (or checking on) the code bit . equal to zero if and only if either all the error bits checked by

Since every row of has weight , each check-sum checks are error-free or the number of nonzero error bits checked

on code bits. Furthermore, as satisfies the RC-constraint, by is even. Let be an error pattern with nonzero error bits

no two different rows of have more than one position where which cause nonzero syndrome-sums and an arbitrary number

they both have 1-components. This implies that no two different of zero syndrome-sums. Construct a subgraph

of the

code bits, and , are simultaneously checked by two dif- Tanner graph of the code with a set

of VNs. These

ferent check-sums: and .

VNs correspond to the nonzero error bits in the error pat-

Suppose a codeword

in is tern and are connected to CNs which correspond to the

transmitted over the binary-input AWGN channel. Let nonzero syndrome-sums and/or some CNs which correspond to

over GF(2) be the hard-decision zero syndrome-sums but are adjacent to the VNs in

.

received vector (or sequence). The th received bit of is In this subgraph, the CNs corresponding to the nonzero syn-

simply an estimate of the th code bit of the transmitted drome-sums have odd degrees and the other CNs have even-de-

codeword . If

for

, then

; otherwise, grees. This subgraph

is said to be induced by the error

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2664

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2012

pattern and the set

is a trapping set as defined in Def-

inition 1. Therefore, every error pattern induces a trapping set.

A syndrome-sum that contains an error bit is said to

check on . Since each column of the parity-check matrix

has column weight , there are syndrome-sums checking on

every error bit , i.e., every error bit is checked by syndrome-

sums (or contained in syndrome-sums). Since each row of

has weight , each syndrome-sum checks on error bits. Since

satisfies the RC-constraint, no two error bits can be checked

simultaneously by two syndrome-sums.

For

, we define the index set,

. The indices in give the rows of whose

th components are equal to “1”. Since has constant column

weight ,

for

. For

, define

the following set of rows of

. Then,

it follows from the RC-constraint on the rows of that

has the following structural properties: 1) every row in

has a 1-component at the th position; 2) any 1-component at

a position other than the th position can appear in at most one

row in ; and 3) for

,

, and

,

and

can have at most one row in common. The rows in

are said to be orthogonal on the th code bit .

For

, define the following set of syndrome-sums:

(35)

Then, the th error bit of the error pattern is checked by

(contained in) every syndrome-sum in

and any error bit

other than is checked by at most one syndrome-sum in .

The syndrome-sums in are said to be orthogonal on the

error bit and are called orthogonal syndrome-sums on . The

RC-constraint on the parity-check matrix (or property-3 of

) ensures that any two different orthogonal sets

and

can have at most one syndrome-sum in common. Since

each syndrome sum contains received bits and since each bit

position is checked by syndrome-sums in an orthogonal set,

then each syndrome-sum is contained in orthogonal sets of

syndrome-sums.

Consider an error pattern

with a

single error at the th position with

, i.e.,

.

For this single error pattern, all the syndrome-sums in

orthogonal on are equal to “1”. Since is only checked by

the syndrome-sums in , all the other syndrome-sums not in

are error free and equal to zero. Consequently, the trapping

set corresponding to this single error pattern is a

trapping

set

with one VN and CNs of degree 1. It is clear that

is an elementary trapping set. If

, it is not a small

trapping set of the type defined by Definition 2.

Next, we consider an error pattern with two errors at po-

sitions, and , i.e.,

. Then, all the syn-

drome-sums in the orthogonal set

check on and all the

syndrome-sums in the orthogonal set

check on . If

and

are disjoint, then all the syndrome-sums in

and all the syndrome-sums in

are equal to “1”. In

this case, the trapping set corresponding to the double error pat-

tern is a

elementary trapping set

with 2 VNs

and CNs of degree 1. If

and

are not disjoint, then

they have exactly one common syndrome-sum which checks

on both and and hence this common syndrome-sum is

equal to zero. In this case, the trapping set corresponding to the

double error pattern is a

elementary trapping set

with 2 VNs,

CNs of degree 1 and one CN of degree 2.

The aforementioned analysis shows that the trapping set corre-

sponding to an error pattern with two errors has at least

CNs of odd degrees.

Consider an error pattern with three errors at positions: ,

, and . The trapping set corresponding to this error pattern

has several possible configurations depending on the locations

of the three errors. The first possible configuration is such that

the three errors are checked separately by three mutually disjoint

orthogonal sets, , , and . In this case, the trapping

set corresponding to the error pattern is a

elementary

trapping set

with three VNs and CNs of degree 1,

and no CN with even-degree. The second possible configura-

tion is such that two orthogonal sets, say

and , have

a common syndrome-sum and the third orthogonal set

is

mutually disjoint with

and . In this case, error bits,

and , are jointly checked by a common syndrome-sum in

and

and the error bit is checked only by the syn-

drome-sums in . Then, the trapping set corresponding to

this triple error pattern is a

elementary trapping set

with three VNs,

CNs of degree 1 and one CN of degree

2. The third possible configuration is such that all three errors

are checked by a syndrome-sum which is contained in all three

orthogonal sets: , , and . In this case, all the

syndrome-sums in each of the orthogonal sets, , , and

, are nonzero. The common syndrome-sum in these three

orthogonal sets contains the three errors,

, and all

the other syndrome-sums contain only one of these three errors.

Consequently, the trapping set corresponding to the error pat-

tern is a

trapping set with

CNs of degree 1

and one CN of degree 3 (no CN with even degree). The fourth

possible configuration is that

and

have a common

syndrome sum checking on and ,

and

have

a common syndrome sum checking on and , and

and

are disjoint. For this configuration, the trapping set is

a

elementary trapping set, with

CNs of de-

gree 1 and two CN of degree 2. The fifth possible configuration

is such that the errors , are checked by a common syn-

drome-sum in

and

which is not in , the errors

, are checked by a common syndrome-sum in

and

which is not in , and the errors , are checked

by a common syndrome-sum in

and

which is not in

. Corresponding to this configuration, the trapping set is a

elementary trapping set with

CNs of de-

gree 1 and three CNs of degree 2. In all possible configurations

of three errors, any trapping set has at least

odd-de-

gree CNs. Among all the possible configurations of the errors,

the last one has the smallest number of CNs of odd degree. For

this configuration, the three errors are uniformly distributed in

pairs among the three sets of orthogonal syndrome-sums. This

maximizes the number of CNs of degree 2 and hence minimizes

the number of degree 1 CNs. This uniform distribution of errors

in pairs with each pair of errors contained in the common syn-

drome-sum of two orthogonal sets of syndrome-sums gives the

worst configuration of three errors. This observation leads to a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2665

general analysis of trapping sets caused by error patterns with

errors for

, which is given in the next paragraph.

For

and

, consider an error

pattern of errors at positions

. For large and ,

to analyze all the possible configurations of trapping sets with

VNs is very hard if not impossible. However, a lower bound

on the minimum number of odd-degree CNs can be derived.

A configuration that results in a minimum number of odd-de-

gree CNs is such that for

,

and

, every pair

of errors is checked by the common syndrome-sum

of the pair

of orthogonal sets of syndrome-sums

with

and

orthogonal on and , respectively.

This configuration actually maximizes the number of CNs with

even degrees (all degree 2). If this configuration exists, it results

in a

trapping set

with

CNs of degree 1 and

CNs of degree

2. It is an elementary trapping set. Any other configuration of

errors would result in a trapping set with a larger number of

odd-degree CNs with possibly multiple odd-degrees. For

,

a trapping set with VNs in the Tanner graph of an RC-con-

strained

-regular LDPC code has at least

CNs of odd-degree. For

, the number of odd-degree CNs

is greater than . For

, the number of odd-degree CNs is

at least . Based on Definition 2, if

and

,

there is no small trapping set of size smaller than or equal to .

If the ratio required for a small trapping set is

,

then there is no small trapping set of size smaller than .

The aforementioned analysis shows that the structure of trap-

ping sets of the Tanner graphs of RC-constrained LDPC codes

very much depend on the column weights and orthogonal sets

of rows of the parity-check matrices of the codes. Basically,

for a

-regular LDPC code whose parity-check matrix has

constant column weight , the RC-constraint on the rows and

columns of the parity-check matrix ensures that: 1) the min-

imum distance of the code is at least

; 2) the girth of

the code’s Tanner graph is at least 6; 3) there is no trapping

set of size smaller than

with number of odd-degree CNs

smaller than , (i.e., a trapping set with number of VNs less

than

must have at least CNs of odd-degrees connected

to it); and 4) no trapping set of the type defined by Definition

2 of size smaller than

. Due to these structural properties,

RC-constrained

-regular LDPC codes with large in gen-

eral have much lower error-floors than the unstructured LDPC

codes constructed using computer-based method, and further-

more, decoding of these codes with iterative message-passing

algorithms converges very fast, as demonstrated by extensive

simulation results given in [5]–[14] and [77]–[79].

Summarizing the previous results, we have the following two

theorems for trapping sets of an RC-constrained LDPC code.

Theorem 4: For an RC-constrained

-regular LDPC

code with

, its Tanner graph contains no trapping set of

size smaller than

for which the number of odd-degree

CNs is smaller than .

Theorem 5: Let be a positive integer such that

. For

an RC-constrained

-regular LDPC code of length , if

, then its Tanner graph contains no small trapping set

(based on Definition 2) of size smaller than

.

The previous results are derived based on only the RC-con-

straint on the rows and column of a parity-check matrix and its

constant column weight but not on its row weight. Hence,

the results apply to LDPC codes whose parity-check matrix has

constant column weight but may have multiple row weights.

It is important to note that a trapping set induced by an error

pattern does not necessarily prevent decoder convergence un-

less the error pattern is uncorrectable by the decoder. Only trap-

ping sets induced by error patterns that are uncorrectable by

the decoder may prevent decoder convergence and cause an

error-floor in the code’s error performance. For long codes, it is

hard (or very much time consuming) to identify the configura-

tions of those trapping sets which do trap the decoder and pre-

vent decoder convergence. However, extensive simulations in

many published papers did observe that in general, trapping sets

of small size (relative to the minimum distance of the code)

with small number of odd-degree CNs are the most harmful

ones. If a trapping set is induced by an undetectable error pat-

tern, it is of the form

, in which the erroneous VNs

form a codeword of weight . When this happens, the resultant

syndrome of a hard-decision decoded sequence is zero. In this

case, decoding stops and the decoder converges to an incorrect

codeword. This results in an undetected error. If the minimum

distance of an LDPC code is small, trapping sets induced

by undetectable error patterns that correspond to the minimum

weight codewords may contribute significantly to the error-floor

in the performance of the code. A code, in general, has a lower

error-floor if it does not have small trapping sets (relative to the

minimum distance) with small numbers of odd-degree CNs and

its minimum distance

is reasonable large. If a code does

not have harmful trapping sets of size smaller than its minimum

distance , then the error-floor of the code is dominated by

its minimum distance , i.e., dominated by the trapping sets,

’s, induced by the error patterns that are identical to

the minimum weight codewords.

In Sections VIII and IX, we will show that several classes of

RC-constrained LDPC codes do have large minimum distances

and do not have harmful trapping sets of size smaller than their

minimum distances. Hence, their error-floors are dominated by

their minimum distances.

Since not all the trapping sets defined in Definitions 1 and 2

trap the decoder and prevent decoding to converge, the term,

trapping set, is actually misnamed.

VIII. TRAPPING SETS OF CYCLIC FG-LDPC CODES AND THEIR CYCLIC AND QC DESCENDANTS
Since cyclic FG-LDPC codes and their cyclic and QC descendants are RC-constrained LDPC codes, they have the trapping set structure presented in the previous section. In the following, we consider the trapping set structure of two special subclasses of cyclic FG-LDPC codes. These two subclasses of FG codes have large minimum distances and no small harmful trapping sets. They can be decoded with various decoding algorithms ranging from hard-decision, reliability-based, to pure soft-decision iterative decoding, such as one-step majority-logic-decoding (OSMLGD), the bit-flipping (BF), the weighted BF, the SRBI-MLGD, the MSA and the SPA [21], to provide a wide

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2666

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2012

range of effective tradeoffs between error performance and de-

coding complexity.

The first subclass of cyclic FG-LDPC codes is the class

of cyclic EG-LDPC codes constructed using 2-D Euclidean

geometries presented in Section III. Here, we consider the

cyclic EG-LDPC code

(or its QC equivalent

)

constructed using the 2-D Euclidean geometry

over the field

. The parity-check matrix

of the

code is a

circulant over GF(2) [or a

array of

CPMs over GF(2)]

whose rows are the incidence vectors of the lines in

not passing through the origin of the geometry. The column and

row weights of this circulant parity-check matrix

are both

. Its rank is

. As shown in Section III, the null space

of

gives a

cyclic EG-LDPC code

with minimum distance exactly

. With OSMLGD [6],

[21], this code is capable of correcting

or fewer random

errors (or or fewer erasures) [5], [6], [21].

It follows from the trapping set analysis given in the last sec-

tion that any trapping set corresponding to an error pattern with

or fewer random errors will induce a subgraph of the Tanner

graph of the code which contains at least CNs of odd de-

grees. This is to say that the code has no

trapping set of

size smaller than

with the number of odd-degree

CNs smaller than . This implies that for

, there is no

trapping set with the ratio

. Since the length of

the code is

,

. Then, it follows from The-

orem 5 that the code has no small trapping set of the type de-

fined by Definition 2 of size smaller than

. Notice that

for

, the number of odd-degree CNs is greater than

. Since the code is capable of correcting

or fewer er-

rors with OSMLGD [6], [21], all the trapping sets of size equal

to or smaller than

are unharmful (i.e., they do not prevent

decoding convergence to the correct codeword) if OSMLGD is

performed before each new decoding iteration.

Summarizing all the results developed in the last and this

sections, we have the following parameters for the cyclic

EG-LDPC code

constructed using the 2-D Euclidean

geometry

over

: 1) length

; 2) dimen-

sion

; 3) minimum distance

; 4) girth at least

6; 5) no trapping set of size less than

with number

of odd-degree CNs less than ; and 6) no small trapping set

(based on Definition 2) of size less than

.

Example 8: Consider the (63, 37) cyclic EG-LDPC code

constructed from the 2-D Euclidean geometry

over

. The parity-check matrix of this code is a 63 63

circulant over GF(2) with both column and row weights 8.

The minimum distance of this code is exactly 9. The code

is capable of correcting four or fewer errors with OSMLGD.

By computer search, we found all the trapping sets induced

by error patterns with three up to 22 errors. Table I gives a

partial list of the found trapping sets. From Table I, we see that

for

, the number of odd-degree CNs associated with

every trapping set is much greater than . For

, there

are (9, 0) trapping sets which correspond to minimum weight

codewords of the code. From Table I, we see that for

,

the number of odd-degree CNs associated with each trapping

set of size smaller than 6 is greater than . Then, it follows

TABLE I PARTIAL LIST OF TRAPPING SETS OF THE (63, 37) CYCLIC EG-LDPC CODES

from Definition 2 that the Tanner graph of the code does not

contain small trapping set of size

of the type defined

by Definition 2. In decoding of the (63, 37) cyclic EG-LDPC

code using 50 iterations of the SPA, none of the trapping sets of

size smaller than 9 prevents decoding to converge (or traps the

decoder) and the error patterns corresponding to these trapping

sets are all correctable. The trapping sets

,

,

,

, and

result in undetected error

(incorrect decoding).

Suppose we consider the

cyclic EG-LDPC

code constructed from the

over

. This

code has minimum distance 17. Extensive computer search

found no small trapping set of size smaller than 17 which

prevents decoding to converge or causes decoding failure. We

found some large trapping sets with very large numbers of

odd-degree CNs but are not harmful. These trapping sets are:

,

,

,

,

,

and

. All but

have

.

Example 9: Consider the (4095, 3367) cyclic-EG-LDPC

code with minimum weight 65 constructed using the

over

given in Example 2. The parity-check matrix

of this code has column weight 64. The Tanner graph of

this code has no trapping set of size smaller than 64 with

number of odd-degree CNs smaller than 64. It follows from

Definition 2 that the code has no small trapping set of size

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2667

smaller than 61. As shown in Fig. 1, decoding of this code For

,

is a codeword in of weight

with the MS algorithm converges very fast. Consider the (1365,

. Form the following

matrix over

765) cyclic descendant of the (4095, 3367) cyclic EG-LDPC with

,

as rows:

code given in Example 2. The parity-check matrix of this code

is a 1365 1365 circulant with both column and row weights

16. For this code, any trapping set of size smaller than 17 has at least 16 odd-degree CNs associated with it. Based on

...

Definition 2, it has no small trapping set of size smaller than

13.

Next, we consider the trapping set structure of the cyclic

PG-LDPC code constructed using the 2-D projective ge-

ometry

over

. The parity-check matrix of this

...

...

...

(36)

code is a

circulant

over GF(2)

with both column and row weights equal to

[5], [6]. The This matrix

is the matrix (with rows permuted) given by

null space of

gives an RC-constrained cyclic PG-LDPC (4) in [11] for the construction of the first class of QC-LDPC

code of length

and minimum distance codes. Every row (or column) of

consists of

distinct

at least

, whose Tanner graph has a girth of at least 6. nonzero elements and one 0-element of

. The

zero

Since

satisfies the RC-constraint and its column weight is entries of

lie on its main diagonal. Therefore, both column

, it follows from the analysis given in Section VII that and row weights of

are

.

has no trapping set

for which both the size and

the number of odd-degree CNs are smaller than

. Since

, it follows from Theorem 5 that

has no

trapping set of the type defined by Definition 2 of size smaller

than

. The results on trapping sets of the cyclic PG-LDPC

code are exactly the same obtained in [22] derived using a dif-

ferent approach. Our derivation of the results are simply based

on the RC-constraint on the parity-check matrix which is much

simpler and less mathematical.

Let be a

CPM whose top row is given by the

-tuple

over GF(2) where the components are

labeled from 0 to

and the single 1-component is located at

the 1st position. Then, consists of the

-tuple

and its

right cyclic shifts as rows. For

, let

be the product of with itself times, called

the th power of . Then, is also a

CPM

whose top row has a single 1-component at the th position. Let

, the

identity matrix.

For

, we represent the nonzero element of

by the

CPM . This matrix repre-

IX. OTHER RC-CONSTRAINED LDPC CODES

sentation is referred to as the

-fold binary matrix disper-

AND THEIR TRAPPING SETS

sion (or simply binary matrix dispersion) of . Since there are

Besides EG- and PG-LDPC codes, there are other classes of structured RC-constrained LDPC codes. These classes of codes are either constructed based on finite fields [11]–[14], [77]–[79] or experimental designs [80]–[84]. Codes in most of these classes are QC-LDPC codes. Since the parity-check matrices of the codes in these classes satisfy the RC-constraint, their trapping sets have the structure described in Section VII-B. The constructions based on finite fields given in [11]–[14] and [77]–[79] are of the same nature and they give several large classes of RC-constrained QC-LDPC codes. Among them, several subclasses have large minimum distances. In this section, we choose the first class of QC-LDPC codes given in [11] and the class of QC-LDPC codes constructed from Latin squares given in [13] for illustration of their trapping set

nonzero elements in

and there are exactly

different CPMs over GF(2) of size

, there

is a one-to-one correspondence between a nonzero element of

and a CPM of size

. Therefore, each

nonzero element of

is uniquely represented by a CPM of

size

. For a nonzero element in

, we

use the notation

to denote its binary matrix dispersion. If

, then

. For the zero-element of

, its

binary matrix dispersion is defined as the

ZM,

denoted

.

Dispersing each nonzero entry of into a

CPM over GF(2) and each 0-entry into a

ZM,

we obtain the following

array of CPMs and/or

ZMs over GF(2) of size

:

structure.

Let be a primitive element of the Galois field

.

Let

be the cyclic

RS code over

with two information symbols whose generator

...

...

...

(37)

polynomial

has

as roots. Then,

for

, the two

-tuples over where

for

.

is called

,

, and the binary

-fold array dispersion of . This array

, are two nonzero codewords in

has

ZMs which lie on its main diagonal. It is a

of weight . Note that

are cyclic-shifts of .

matrix over GF(2) with both column and row

For

,

. The subscript “ ” of stands weights equal to

. It was proved in [11] that , as a

for “Reed–Solomon”.

matrix over GF(2), satisfies the RC-constraint.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2668

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2012

Hence, its associated Tanner graph has a girth of at least 6. The

matrix used for constructing the RC-constrained array

of CPMs is called the base matrix for array dispersion [11].

For any pair

of integers and with

,

, let

be a

subarray of .

is a

matrix over GF(2) which also satisfies the

RC-constraint. The null space of

gives a QC-LDPC

code

of length

, whose Tanner graph has a girth

of at least 6. If

does not contain any of the ZMs of

, then has constant column weight and constant row

weight . In this case,

is a

-regular QC-LDPC code.

If

contains ZM’s of , it has two different column

weights, and , and/or two different row weights, and

. In this case, the null space of

gives a near-regular

binary QC-LDPC code.

For a given finite-field

, the previous construction

gives a family of structurally compatible RC-constrained

QC-LDPC codes. Consequently, the construction gives a large

class of binary QC-LDPC codes. Since their parity-check

matrices satisfy the RC-constraint, they have the trapping set

structure presented in Section VII-B.

A very special case is the QC-LDPC code

given by

the null space of the full array [given by (37)] with

.

For this case, the length of the code is

and

its minimum distance is at least

. Using the technique

presented in [13], we find that the rank of is

. (The derivation of this expression is given in a separate

paper [14].) Since the column weight of is

, it follows

from the analysis of trapping set structure of an RC-constrained

LDPC code given in Section VII that for

,

has no trapping set

of size with number of odd-degree

CNs smaller than

. Note that

. It follows

from Theorem 5 that the code has no small trapping set (based

on Definition 2) of size less than

.

Example 10: Let

be the field for code construction.

Based on this field, we can construct a 31 31 array

of

CPMs and ZMs of size 31 31. is a 961 961 matrix over

GF(2) with both column and row weights 30. The null space of

gives a (30, 30)-regular (961, 721) QC-LDPC code with

minimum distance at least 31. This code is the code given in

[11, Example 1]. For this code, any trapping set

with

must have more than 30 CNs of odd-degrees. The code

has no small trapping sets of the type defined by Definition

2 of size smaller than 27. None of the trapping sets of size

smaller than 31 traps the decoder. The error performances of

this code with five, ten, and 100 iterations of SPA are shown

in [11, Fig. 1(b)].

Besides the class of base matrices given previously, several

other classes of base matrices for constructing RC-constrained

arrays of CPMs have been proposed in [10]–[14]. Based on

these arrays of CPMs, several large classes of RC-constrained

QC-LDPC codes have been constructed. Codes in these classes

perform well with iterative decoding using either the SPA or the

MS algorithm. In the following, we describe another method for

constructing a large class of base matrices for array dispersion

to construct RC-constrained QC-LDPC codes. This method is

based on a class of Latin squares over finite fields and is pro-

posed in [13].

An array is called a Latin square of order if each row and

each column contains every element of a set of elements ex-

actly once [34]. Latin squares can be constructed from finite

fields. Consider the field

. Let be a primitive element

of

and be any nonzero element of

. Form the

following

matrix over

:

...

...

...

...

(38)

Then,

is a Latin square of order over

. Every ele-

ment of

appears in each row and each column once and

only once. Binary array dispersion of

gives a

array

of CPMs and ZMs of size

. Each row

or column of

contains one and only one ZM.

is a

matrix over GF(2) with both column and

row weights

. It was proved in [13] that

satisfies the

RC-constraint.

For any pair

of positive integers with

,

, let

be a

subarray of .

is a

matrix over GF(2). If

does not

contain any ZM of , then

, as a

matrix, has column and row weights and , respectively. The

null space of

gives an RC-constrained

-regular

QC-LDPC code

of length

. The code has the

trapping set structure as described in Section VII.

For

, the QC-LDPC code

given by the null

space of the full array

has the following parameters [13]:

(1) Length

, (2) Dimension

,

and (3) Minimum distance

. It follows from the

trapping set analysis given in Section VII that any trapping set

corresponding to an error pattern with

or fewer random

errors will induce a subgraph of the Tanner graph of the code

which contains at least

CNs of odd degrees. If

is the required ratio used to define a small trapping set, then

the QC-LDPC code

has no small trapping set of size

smaller than

. Note that

and the column weight

of is

. It follows from Theorem 5 that the code has

no small trapping set (Definition 2) of size less than

.

Example 11: The code constructed from the Latin square

of order 32 over

is an RC-constrained (992, 750)

QC-LDPC code with minimum distance at least 34. Extensive

computer search found no trapping sets of size smaller than 36

that trap the decoder. Two trapping sets

are found.

Since there are no harmful trapping sets of sizes smaller than

the minimum distance, the error-floor of the code is dominated

by the minimum distance of the code. The error performances

of this code over the AWGN channel with 5, 10, and 50 iter-

ations of the SPA and the MS algorithm are shown in Fig. 8.

We see that there is no visible error-floor down to the BER of

. At the BLER of

(decoded with a min-sum FPGA

decoder), the code performs 1.1 dB from the sphere packing

bound.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2669

Fig. 8. Bit and block error performances of the binary (992, 750) QC-LDPC code given in Example 11.
X. CONCLUSION AND REMARKS
In this paper, we have shown that cyclic and QC descendant codes can be derived from a known cyclic code through decomposition of its parity-check matrix in circulant form using column and row permutations. We have analyzed some structural properties of descendant cyclic codes of a cyclic code, particularly the characterization of the roots of its generator polynomial. By decomposition of cyclic FG LDPC codes, we are able to enlarge the repertoire of cyclic FG LDPC codes and to construct new QC LDPC codes. In this paper, we have also analyzed the trapping set structure of LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices satisfy the RC-constraint. We have shown that several classes of FG and finite-field LDPC codes do not have harmful trapping sets of sizes smaller than the minimum distances of the codes. The codes in these classes have large minimum distances. Consequently, codes in these classes have very low error-floors which are pertinent to some communication and storage systems where very low error-rates are required.
Finally, we would like to point out that there are two large classes of structured LDPC codes [8], [77] which satisfy the RC-constraint but are not QC. The class of LDPC codes given in [8] was constructed using FG decomposition and the class of LDPC codes given in [77] was constructed from Reed–Solomon codes with two information symbols. These two classes of codes have large minimum distances. It follows from our trapping set analysis that they do not have harmful trapping sets of sizes smaller than their minimum distances.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[4] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.

[5] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[6] S. Lin and D. J. Costello Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[7] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–596, Feb. 2005.
[8] J. Xu, L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of regular and irregular LDPC codes: Geometry decomposition and masking,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 121–134, Jan. 2007.
[9] N. Kamiya, “High-rate quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes derived from finite affine planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1444–1459, Apr. 2007.
[10] L. Chen, L. Lan, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “An algebraic method for construction quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl., Parma, Italy, Oct. 10–13, 2004, pp. 535–539.
[11] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels: A finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2429–2458, Jul. 2007.
[12] J. Kang, Q. Huang, L. Zhang, B. Zhou, and S. Lin, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: An algebraic construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1383–1396, May 2010.
[13] L. Zhang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: An algebraic construction, rank analysis, and codes on Latin squares,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3126–3139, Nov. 2010.
[14] L. Zhang, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, Z. Ding, and B. Zhou, “Quasicyclic LDPC codes on cyclic subgroups of finite fields,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 2330–2336, Sep. 2011.
[15] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[16] N. Kamiya and E. Sasaki, “Efficient encoding of QC-LDPC codes related to cyclic MDS codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 846–854, Aug. 2009.
[17] Y. Chen and K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004.
[18] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “Low-complexity high-speed decoder design for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 104–114, Jan. 2007.
[19] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comp., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[20] D. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003.
[21] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[22] S. Ländner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Netw., Commun. Mobile Comput., Maui, HI, Jun. 2005, pp. 630–635.
[23] W. W. Peterson and E. J. Weldon Jr., Error-Correcting Codes, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972.
[24] E. R. Berlekamp, Algebraic Coding Theory. New York: McGrawHill, 1964, (Revised edition, Laguna Hills, CA: Aegean Park Press, 1984.).
[25] I. F. Blake and R. C. Mullin, The Mathematical Theory of Coding. New York: Academic, 1975.
[26] R. E. Blahut, Theory and Practice of Error Control Codes. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1983.
[27] R. M. Roth, Introduction to Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2006.
[28] S. Song, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, Z. Ding, W. H. Fong, and M. Fossorier, “Burst decoding of cyclic codes based on circulant parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 1038–1047, Mar. 2010.
[29] Q. Huang, J. Kang, L. Zhang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Two efficient and low-complexity iterative reliability-based majority-logic decoding algorithms for LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 8–13, 2009, pp. 253–257.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2670

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 5, MAY 2012

[30] Q. Huang, J. Kang, L. Zhang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Two reliability-based iterative majority-logic decoding algorithms for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 3597–3606, Dec. 2009.
[31] R. D. Carmichael, Introduction to the Theory of Groups of Finite Orders. Boston, MA: Ginn & Co, 1937.
[32] H. Mann, Analysis and Design of Experiments. New York, NY: Dover, 1949.
[33] H. Marshall, Jr., Combinatorial Theory, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley, 1986.
[34] R. Lidl and H. Niederreiter, Introduction to Finite Fields and their Applications, Revised ed. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1994.
[35] T. Kasami, S. Lin, and W. W. Peterson, “Polynomial codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 807–814, Nov. 1968.
[36] S. Lin, “On a class of cyclic codes,” in Error Correcting Codes, H. Mann, Ed. New York: Wiley, 1968, ch. 7.
[37] T. Kasami and S. Lin, “On majority-logic decoding for duals of primitive polynomial codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-17, no. 3, pp. 322–331, May 1971.
[38] S. Lin, “On the number of information symbols in polynomial codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-18, no. 6, pp. 785–794, Nov. 1972.
[39] K. J. C. Smith, Majority Decodable Codes Derived From Finite Geometries, ser. Inst. Statist. Mimeo Series, 561. Chapel Hill, NC: Univ. North Carolina, 1967.
[40] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[41] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding for low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[42] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Shi, and Y. Chen, “An improvement on the modified weighted bit-flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814–816, Sep. 2005.
[43] T. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[44] European Standard, (Telecommunications Series): Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing structure, channel coding and modulation systems for broadcasting, interactive services, news gathering and other broadband satellite applications, ETSI EN 302 307 V1.1.2 (2006-06).
[45] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 4, 2000, pp. 1–8.
[46] Low Density Parity Check Code for Rate 7/8, NASA Goddard Technical Standard, Sep. 2005 [Online]. Available: http://standards.gsfc. nasa.gov/gsfc-std/gsfc-std-9100a.doc
[47] S. Sankaranarayanan, S. K. Chilappagari, R. Radhakrishnan, and B. Vasić, “Failures of the Gallager B decoder: Analysis and applications,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 6–10, 2006.
[48] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasic, “Error floors of LDPC codes on binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 11–15, 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1089–1094.
[49] C. A. Cole, S. G. Wilson, E. K. Hall, and T. R. Giallorenzi, “A general method for finding low error-rates of LDPC codes,” , May 2006 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/pdf/cs/0605051v1.pdf
[50] M. Stepanov and M. Chertkov, “Instanton analysis of low-density parity-check codes in error-floor regime,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 9–14, 2006, pp. 552–556.
[51] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolić, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., San Francisco, CA, Nov. 1, 2006, pp. 1–6.
[52] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC codes ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[53] S. Ländner and O. Milenkovic, “LDPC codes based on Latin squares: Cycle structure, stopping set, and trapping set analysis,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 303–307, Feb. 2007.
[54] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating stopping and trapping sets in LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, Sep. 2–6, 2007, pp. 248–253.

[55] M. Ivković, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasić, “Designing LDPC codes without small trapping sets by using Tanner graph covers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 24–29, 2007, pp. 2266–2270.
[56] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolić, “Analysis of absorbing sets for array-based LDPC codes,” in Int. Conf. Commun., Glasgow, Scotland, Jun. 24–28, 2007, pp. 6261–6268.
[57] S. Abu-Surra, W. E. Ryan, and D. Divsalar, “Ensemble trapping set enumerators for protograph-based LDPC codes,” presented at the 45th Annu. Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 2007.
[58] S. Abu-Surra, W. E. Ryan, and D. Divsalar, “Asymptotic ensemble enumerators for protograph-based generalized LDPC codes: Computational complexity,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Jan. 27–Feb. 1 2008, pp. 63–65.
[59] M. Hirotomo, Y. Konishi, and M. Morii, “Approximate examination of trapping sets of LDPC codes using the probabilistic algorithm,” presented at the Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl., Auckland, New Zealand, Dec. 7–10, 2008.
[60] M. Ivković, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasić, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.
[61] J. Kang, L. Zhang, Z. Ding, and S. Lin, “A two-stage iterative decoding of LDPC codes for lowering error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., New Orleans, LA, Nov. 30–Dec. 4 2008, pp. 1–4.
[62] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolić, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Lowering LDPC error floors by postprocessing,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., New Orleans, LA, Nov.–Dec. 30–Dec. 4, 2008, pp. 1–6.
[63] D. G. M. Michell, A. E. Pusane, and D. J. Costello Jr., “Asymptotic trapping set analysis of regular protograph-based LDPC convolutional code ensembles,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 8–13, 2009, pp. 264–271.
[64] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor decoder for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, Jun. 2009.
[65] E. Pusane, D. J. Costello, and D. G. M. Mitchell, “Trapping set analysis of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seoul, Korea, Jun. 28–Jul. 3 2009, pp. 561–565.
[66] Y. F. Zhang and W. E. Ryan, “Toward low LDPC-code floors: A case study,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1566–1573, Jun. 2009.
[67] E. Cavus, C. L. Haymes, and B. Daneshrad, “Low BER performance estimation of LDPC codes via application of importance sampling to trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1886–1888, Jul. 2009.
[68] B. Vasić, S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, and S. K. Planjery, “Trapping set ontology,” presented at the 47th Annu. Conf. Commun, Control, Comput., Allerton, IL, Sep. 30–Oct. 2 2009.
[69] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolić, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance: Quantization and algorithm choices,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 3258–3268, Nov. 2009.
[70] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolić, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[71] S. Abu-Surra, D. Declercq, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Trapping set enumerators for specific LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Jan. 31–Feb. 5 2010, pp. 1–5.
[72] S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, B. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin, “On trapping sets and guaranteed error correction capability of LDPC codes and GLDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1600–1611, Apr. 2010.
[73] H. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor detection/decoding of LDPCcoded partial response channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 252–260, Feb. 2010.
[74] D. V. Nyuyen, B. Vasić, M. Marcellin, and S. K. Chilappagari, “Structured LDPC codes from permutation matrices free of small trapping sets,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Dublin, Ireland, Aug. 30–Sep. 3, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[75] J. Kang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An iterative decoding algorithm with backtracking to lower the error-floors of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 64–73, Jan. 2011.
[76] M. Karimi and A. Banihashemi, “An efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Saint Petersburg, Russia, Jul. 31–Aug. 5 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2671

[77] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[78] Y. Y. Tai, L. Lan, L. Zheng, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Algebraic construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for the AWGN and erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1765–1774, Oct. 2006.
[79] S. Song, B. Zhou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A unified approach to the construction of binary and nonbinary quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on finite fields,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 84–93, Jan. 2009.
[80] S. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Regular low-density parity-check codes from combinatorial designs,” presented at the IEEE Inform. Theory Workshop, Cairns, Australia, Sep. 2–7, 2001, pp. 90--92.
[81] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Construction of low-density parity-check codes from Kirkman triple systems,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., San Antonio, TX, Nov. 25–29, 2001, pp. 970–974.
[82] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial construction of low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[83] B. Ammar, B. Honary, Y. Kou, J. Xu, and S. Lin, “Construction of low-density parity-check codes based on balanced incomplete block designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1257–1568, Jun. 2004.
[84] L. Lan, Y. Y. Tai, S. Lin, B. Memari, and B. Honary, “New construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on special classes of BIBDs for the AWGN and binary erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 39–48, Jan. 2008.
Qin Huang received the B.E. and M.E. degrees from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2005 and 2007, respectively, both in electrical engineering, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of California, Davis, in 2011. He joined in Link-A-Media Devices Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, in 2011. He is currently an associate professor in Beihang (BUAA) university, China.
His research interests include classical and modern coding theory, signal processing, and their applications on communications and storage systems.
Qiuju Diao received the B.S. degree from Xi’an University of science and technology in 2007, in electrical engineering. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at the University of California, Davis. Her research interests include coding theory and its applications to communication and storage systems.

Shu Lin (S’62–M’65–SM’78–F’80–LF’00) received the B.S.E.E. degree from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1959, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Rice University, Houston, TX, in 1964 and 1965, respectively.
In 1965, he joined the Faculty of the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He became an Associate Professor in 1969 and a Professor in 1973. In 1986, he joined Texas A&M University, College Station, as the Irma Runyon Chair Professor of Electrical Engineering. In 1987, he returned to the University of Hawaii. From 1978 to 1979, he was a Visiting Scientist at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, where he worked on error control protocols for data communication systems. He spent the academic year of 1996–1997 as a Visiting Professor at the Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. He retired from University of Hawaii in 1999 and he is currently an Adjunct Professor at University of California, Davis. He has published numerous technical papers in IEEE TRANSACTIONS and other refereed journals. He is the author of the book, An Introduction to Error-Correcting Codes (Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970). He also co-authored (with D. J. Costello) the book, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1st edition, 1982, 2nd edition, 2004), (with T. Kasami, T. Fujiwara, and M. Fossorier) the book, Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms, (Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1998), and (with W. E. Ryan) the book, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern, (Cambridge University Press, 2009). His current research areas include algebraic coding theory, coded modulation, error control systems, and satellite communications. He has served as the Principle Investigator on 32 research grants.
Dr. Lin is a Member of the IEEE Information Theory Society and the Communication Society. He served as the Associate Editor for Algebraic Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 1976 to 1978, and as the Program Co-Chairman of the IEEE International Symposium of Information Theory held in Kobe, Japan, in June 1988. He was the President of the IEEE Information Theory Society in 1991. In 1996, he was a recipient of the Alexander von Humboldt Research Prize for U.S. Senior Scientists and a recipient of the IEEE Third-Millennium Medal, 2000. In 2007, he was a recipient of The Communications Society Stephen O. Rice Prize in the Field of Communications Theory.
Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar received the B.Sc. degree from Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt, in 1980, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, in 1983 and 1986, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
In 1988, Dr. Abdel-Ghaffar joined the University of California, Davis, where he is now a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering. He did research at the IBM Almaden Research Center, San Jose, CA, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands, University of Bergen, Norway, and Alexandria University, Egypt. His main interest is coding theory.
Dr. Abdel-Ghaffar served as an Associate Editor for Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 2002 to 2005. He is a co-recipient of the IEEE Communications Society 2007 Stephen O. Rice Prize paper award.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

