Stochastic Decoding for LDPC Convolutional Codes
Xin-Ru Lee, Chih-Lung Chen, Hsie-Chia Chang, and Chen-Yi Lee Department of Electronics Engineering and Institute of Electronics, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C. Email: {mark, lung}@si2lab.org

Abstract—Among LDPC codes, LDPC convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs) seem to be more suitable for variable length applications. However, a LDPC-CC decoder is difficult to implement for its long latency and large storage usage. The stochastic computation makes the decoding of LDPC-CCs more efficient, but the boundary effect of sliding window causes poor performance. In this paper, a stochastic LDPC-CC decoder with virtual edge compensation as well as decoder architecture is presented. The simulation results based on (491, 3, 6) time-varying LDPC-CC show that under the same signal-to-noise ratio, our proposed decoder could achieve better performance, 60% less decoding latency and 40% storage reduction compared to log-BP decoder with 10 processors.
Index Terms—stochastic decoding, LDPC convolutional codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are powerful error correcting codes with its performance close to Shannon bound. It is introduced by Gallager [1] in 1960s and forgotten for decades due to its extremely computational complexity until rediscovered by Mackay [2]. With advanced VLSI technology, high throughput and better performance of LDPC decoders are exploited. Nowadays, LDPC block codes (LDPC-BCs) have been adopted by several standards such as IEEE 802.16 (WiMAX), IEEE 802.3an (10GBASE-T), and IEEE 802.15.3c.
As the counterpart of LDPC-BCs, LDPC convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs) [3] are more suitable for streaming video and variable length packets based on following features: 1) simple encoding process, 2) regular decoder architecture, 3) powerful decoding performance, 4) flexible code rates.
However, to achieve better performance, a series of pipelined processors should be implemented. Assume the latency and storage requirement of single processor are δ and M , the overall decoding latency and storage for I processors would be δ ∗ I and M ∗ I, respectively. In advanced communication system, large code memory and more processors will be adopted to further reduce the error rate. Then the decoding latency and the memory usage would be significantly increased. For this reason, high efficient decoding method should be provided to reduce the decoding complexity.
Stochastic decoding is an alternative decoding method for error control codes [4-5]. This approach is inspired from stochastic computation which the probabilities are converted

to stochastic bit streams. In this way, the complex probability computations such as multiplication and division of two stochastic bits are simply computed by AND gate and J-K flip-flop [6]. The first stochastic decoding with near-optimal performance for a practical LDPC-BC was proposed in [7]. The ASIC implementation of stochastic LDPC-BC decoder in [8] could realize a high-throughput, area-efficient design for IEEE 802.3an. However, stochastic decoding for LDPC-CCs has not been mentioned yet.
In this paper, we propose a stochastic decoding algorithm with efficient decoder architecture for LDPC-CCs. The algorithm is verified that the performance could be better with less storage requirement and decoding cycles compared to log-BP decoding with 10 processors. The organization of this paper is shown as follows. In Section II, the backgrounds of LDPCCCs and stochastic decoding are briefly introduced. Section III presents the proposed stochastic decoding algorithm. Performance analysis and decoder architecture are discussed in Section IV. Finally the conclusion is given in Section V.
II. BACKGROUND
A. LDPC Convolutional Codes
A binary LDPC-CC is defined by a semi-infinite sparse parity-check matrix H, which the codeword vector v must satisfy vHT = 0. Assume the code is regular, a (ms, J, K) LDPC-CC is defined by code memory ms, column weight K and row weight J in the HT.

w

w

w

w

w

w

w

w

VNU

3 from (3 x (ms+1))

CNU

3 from (3 x (ms+1))

w

w

3 from (3 x (ms+1)) 3 from (3 x (ms+1))

w

w

w

w

w

w

VNU

t t-1

t-(ms-1) t-ms t-(ms+1)

Processor # 1

Processor # I

VNU CNU
VNU

This work was supported by National Science Council, R.O.C., under project NSC 100-2221-E-009-044-MY3.

Fig. 1. Traditional LDPC-CC decoder.

978-1-4673-0219-7/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

2621

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

For LDPC-CC encoding, the encoded sequence could be obtained with systematic encoder. Assume the information sequence and encoded sequence are

u = (u(0), u(1), · · · , u(t − 1))

and

v = (v0(0), v1(0), v0(1), v1(1), · · · , v0(t − 1), v1(t − 1))

for rate-1/2 LDPC-CC. The relationship could be represented as following equations

v0(t) = u(t)

(1)

and

∑ ms

∑ ms

v1(t) = hu(i)(t)u(t − i) + hv(i)(t)v1(t − i). (2)

i=0

i=1

Based on the previous equations, the encoder is only composed of registers, exclusive OR (XOR) gates, and multiplexers to generate the information bits and parity bits.
Traditional decoding method is the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm, which is a iterative decoding process on bipartite graph. Given a rate-1/2 (ms, 3, 6) LDPC-CC decoder in Fig. 1, each processor contains (3+1)×2×(ms+2) shift registers, one check node unit (CNU), and two variable node units (VNUs). The decoding procedure could be summarized that it repeats shifting step and node operations. After I × (ms + 2) time units, the pipelined decoder serially outputs the decoded bits.

B. Stochastic Decoding of LDPC Codes
In stochastic decoding, the log likelihood ratio (LLR) of channel values are converted to stochastic stream called Bernoulli sequence. Under the condition of additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with binary phase shift keying (BPSK), the LLR value and its probability form could be represented as equation (3) (4).

P (u(t) = 0|y(t)) 1

LLR(t) = log(

) = (4y(t)) (3)

P (u(t) = 1|y(t)) N0

P (u(t) = 1|y(t))

1

P (t) = P (u(t) = 1|y(t)) + P (u(t) = 0|y(t)) = 1 + eLLR(t)

(4)

where y(t) is received channel value at time instance t, and

N0 is the power-spectral-density of AWGN channel.

The conversion of probabilities to stochastic stream could be

accomplished by a simple comparator. The stochastic stream is

generated by comparing k-bit probabilities with k-bit random

number generated by the random number generator with

uniform distribution. The observation of 1’s in the stochastic

stream is equal to the probability to be represented. The order

of 1’s in the stream is not important; in other words, the

representation of stochastic stream is not unique.

In stochastic LDPC decoding, each round of 1-bit message

exchanging between check nodes and variable nodes is called

a decoding cycle (DC). According to the message passing

algorithm, the check nodes and variable nodes update the messages by (5) and (6) in each DC.

Pout = Pin1 (1 − Pin2 ) + Pin2 (1 − Pin1 )

(5)

Pout

=

Pin1 Pin2

Pin1 Pin2 + (1 − Pin1 )(1 − Pin2 )

(6)

The above equations could be implemented easily based on

stochastic computation. The CNU is designed by XOR gate

directly. The VNU is based on multiplication and division,

which are mapped to AND gate and J-K flip-flop respectively.

The combination of these two could realize the variable unit,

as shown in Fig. 2

Pin1 P in 2

Pout

(a) Check node unit.

Pin1 P in 2

JQ K

Pout

CLK
(b) Variable node unit.

Fig. 2. Key components for stochastic LDPC decoder

In the early stochastic LDPC decoding, the main challenge was performance loss. The reason is the latching problem, which refers to the variable nodes in one cycle on bipartite graph are all locked. Noise-dependent scaling (NDS) method [7] and probability tracking units [8] were proposed to overcome the problem. The NDS method was used for increasing switching activities in high SNR condition. In this method, the channel values are scaled by a factor as following equation:

LLR′(t) = ( αN0 )LLR(t) = ( 4α )y(t)

(7)

Y

Y

where

α Y

is a design

parameter and needs to be optimized for

different codes.

The variable node employing probability tracking unit in-

volves the calculation of regenerative bit and conservative bit:

the regenerative bit indicates the edge of variable node is not

in hold state condition, and the conservative bit is generated by

variable node stuck in hold state. The hold state occurs when

two inputs of J-K flip-flop are not equal. Probability tracking

units are utilized to track previous regenerative bits. To reduce

the area overhead, [8] had proposed the tracking forecast

memories (TFM). This method measures the probabilities of

outgoing regenerative bits from variable node and updates

itself based on the method of successive relaxation. As long as

the hold state happens, TFM generates an outgoing bit instead

of conservative bit. The strong dependence on recent input bits

and weak reference to older input bits enable TFM to track

changes in probability.

III. PROPOSED DECODING ALGORITHM
Since there are a large amount of messages stored in the memories for single processor, the major challenges in LDPCCC decoder are the immoderate memory usage and long decoding latency. We observe from Fig. 1 that VNU is activated

2622 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Data Input

Sliding Window

x Initial Phase k'

xk

Normal Phase

cj

c (i) → j

L x (i) → k

xk

Lcj

c j'

Terminating Phase

Data Output

: VNU : CNU

: Virtual VNU : Virtual CNU

Data Input

L: maximum decoding cycle

Fig. 3. Bipartite graph of LDPC-CC.

before messages leave the processor. Most of messages are shifted and stored in the memory, while only few messages are updated in single processor. This decoding scheduling is inefficient without utilizing the latest messages. Due to this reason, we propose a novel decoding algorithm based on stochastic decoding to improve the decoding convergence speed. The main idea is to let check node and variable node access the up-to-date messages. Similar to layered decoding algorithm [9] in LDPC-BC, the proposed algorithm updates check node and variable node messages immediately in every DC such that the operations of message passing on bipartite graph are more efficient.

Algorithm 1: Proposed Stochastic Decoding Algorithm

Input: channel value y(t)

Output: decoded bit xˆ(t − L)

1 Step 1. Initialization

2 cntk = 0, T F Mxk→cj = 0

3 Step 2. Shifting one time instance

4 Step 3. Check node update

5

L = cj →xk

xor

(L ) xk′ →cj

xk′ ∈M (cj )\xk

6 Step 4. Variable node update

7

Lxk →cj

=

Lcj′ →xk

,

xor (Lcj′ →xk )
cj′ ∈N (xk )\cj

T F Mxk→cj output , o.w.

=

R(t)

8 Step 5. De{cision

9

cntk =

cntk + 1 , Lxk→cj |j∈N(xk) = 1 or R(t) = 1 cntk − 1 , o.w.

10 Final :

{

1 , cntL ≥ 0 11 xˆ(t − L) =

0 , o.w.

As shown in Algorithm 1, the decoding algorithm could
be separated to following steps. Let L , cj→xk Lxk→cj be the messages from check node cj to variable node xk and the messages from variable node xk to check node cj. M (cj)\xk and N (xk)\cj means those variable nodes connected to check node cj excluding variable node xk and those check nodes connected to variable node xk excluding check node cj. The stochastic stream and maximum decoding cycle are repre-
sented by R(t) and L. The counter of variable node xk is denoted by cntk. Initially, all registers and counters are reset
to zero. As new channel values are received, all registers and

counters are shifted. The next step is check node processes based on stochastic computation. The inputs of XOR gates are input messages of check node excluding the edge which would be updated, and the outputs of XOR gates are check-tovariable updated messages. After that, variable node updates its messages from its neighboring check nodes. To enhance the performance, the probability tracking units are adopted in variable nodes. As long as the initial decoding delay has elapsed, the decoder continuously outputs a decoded bit.
The proposed stochastic decoding for LDPC-CC could be illustrated with infinite bipartite graph; nevertheless, in hardware design the limitation of finite resources forces decoder to implement only partial of the graph. The finite decoding length L is called sliding window; the nodes outside of sliding window and the corresponding edges are defined as virtual VNU/CNU and virtual edges, respectively. From the bipartite graph shown in Fig. 3, only the variable nodes in the middle of sliding window are fully connected without virtual edges, and several variable nodes would connect to virtual nodes through virtual edges. This partially connection in the sliding window is referred to as boundary effect. The messages on the virtual edges are vanished during sliding window decoding, leading to bit-error-rate (BER) degradation. In our experiments, the performance was poor than uncoded curve. To maintain the performance, the decoding algorithm should be revised. For variable node operation, creating various decoding phases to compensate the virtual edges is necessary. The design target is to weaken the boundary effect and ensure the messages of virtual edges are as similar to decoded bits as possible. According to Algorithm 1, the decoding information ahead of sliding window is available only from channel, so the virtual edges could be updated by channel values; the edges behind sliding window would be renovated by probability tracking units which contain the information of decoded bits. Consequently, with the bipartite graph in Fig. 3, the proposed algorithm with three decoding phases is described as follows.
1) Initial phase: In the beginning, the information of decoded bits only come from channel values. Hence the registers are updated with stochastic stream of input LLRs.
2) Normal phase: For those fully connected variable nodes, use the checkto-variable messages to update the registers.
3) Terminating phase: Update registers with the output of probability tracking units which contain the probabilities of decoded bits.

2623 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Bit Error Rate
VNU0 VNUm VNUn VNUk VNUL-1
TFML TFML+1

100 10-1 10-2

Channel Q

value

1

Comparator 1

1

1

Stochastic LDPC-CC Decoder

Initial Phase

Normal Phase

RNG

Terminating Phase
R(t)

10-3 10-4 10-5

Uncoded Log-BP, I=1 Log-BP, I=5 Log-BP, I=10 Log-BP, I=20 Stochastic, L=2000, with boundary effect Proposed, L=1200

CNU0

CNUm

VNU to CNU message

CNU to VNU message

L(i) c j→xk

CNUn

CNUk

CNUI-1

L(i) xk →c j

L: maximum decoding cycle

Proposed, L=1600

Proposed, L=2000

Fig. 5. Architecture of proposed decoder (only information part is shown).

10-6

1

2

3

44

5

6

TABLE I

Eb/N0 (dB)

HARDWARE COST OF LDPC-CC DECODER

Fig. 4. Performance of proposed algorithm.
IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND DECODER ARCHITECTURE
To illustrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm with three decoding phases, we simulate the BER performance and compare hardware cost for a (491, 3, 6) time-varying LDPC convolutional code [10]. The simulation environment of proposed decoder are BPSK modulation, AWGN channel, 8-bit input quantization, 6-bit up/down counter, NDS 0.6, and TFM-based variable node and maximum decoding cycle 2000.
A. Performance Analysis
Fig. 4 shows the performance of proposed decoding algorithm with TFM-based variable node and the floating-point log-BP algorithm with 1, 5, 10 and 20 processors. Assume the target BER is 10−5, the performance curves reveal that the proposed decoder with 2000 decoding cycles could achieve better performance compared to log-BP decoder with 10 processors.
B. Hardware Comparison
Fig. 5 shows the proposed decoder architecture. Because of bit-streaming property, the messages between check/variable node are only 1-bit. The decoder receives new channel values and generates stochastic streams to update check/variable node messages in every DC. At the same time, the older channel values are decoded by other check/variable nodes in parallel until these channel values have shifted L times.
The hardware of LDPC-CC decoder is composed of three major components - CNU, VNU, and memory. Table I lists the cost of two different type decoders. The traditional decoder architecture could be found in [11]. With the processor number increasing, the memory reduction of proposed decoder is significantly increased. In addition, assume it only takes one clock cycle for the messages leaving registers, passing through CNU/VNU, and saved back to registers, the decoding latency of proposed decoder could be only half of traditional decoder. In summary, for (491, 3, 6) time-varying LDPC convolutional code, our proposed decoder could save 60% decoding latency and 40% storage requirement compared to log-BP decoder with 10 processors.

Traditional [11]

Proposed

CNU number

I*(c-b)

10

L*(c-b)

VNU number

I*c

20

L*c

Storage (bit)

(ms +2)*(dv +1) *c*W*I

236,640

L*c*dv *(1+Q) +Q*c*L

Latency (cycle)

(ms+2)*I

4,930

L

L: maximum decoding cycle, rate R=b/c, I: processor number, dv : VNU degree Q: proposed quantization bit, ms: code memory, W: traditional quantization bit for (491, 3, 6) LDPC-CC: L=2,000, rate R=1/2, I=10, dv =3, Q=8, ms =491, B=6

2,000 4,000
140,000
2,000

V. CONCLUSION
In this work, a novel decoding algorithm for LDPC-CC as well as hardware architecture are discussed. Since the boundary effect degrades the performance, our proposed stochastic decoding algorithm can compensate virtual edges to maintain system performance.
In contrast to log-BP algorithm with 10 processors, the proposed LDPC-CC decoder would reach higher decoding efficiency with less 60% latency and 40% memory requirement for (491, 3, 6) LDPC-CC.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Paraty-Check Codes,” Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, “Neal Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457-458, Mar. 1997.
[3] A. J. FelstrLom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181-2191, Sep. 1999.
[4] V. Gaudet and A. Rapley, “Iterative decoding using stochastic computation,” Electron. Lett., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 299-301, Feb. 2003.
[5] W. J. Gross, V. Gaudet and A. Milner, “Stochastic implementation of LDPC decoders,” in Proc. 39th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems, Computers, pp. 713-717, Nov. 2005.
[6] B. D. Brown and H. C. Card, “Stochastic neural computation. I. Computational elements,” IEEE Trans. on Computers, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 891-905, Sep. 2001.
[7] S. S. Tehrani, W. J. Gross and S. Mannor, “Stochastic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 716-718, Oct. 2006.
[8] S. S. Tehrani, A. Naderi, G. Kamendje, S. Hemati, S. Mannor and W. J. Gross, “Majority-Based Tracking Forecast Memories for Stochastic LDPC Decoding,” IEEE Trans. on Signal Processing, vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 4883-4897, Sep. 2010.
[9] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209-213, Feb. 2005.
[10] IEEE 802.16m System Description Document (SDD), IEEE Std. 802.16m-09/0034r4, 2010. 2010.
[11] R. Swamy and et. al, “Design and Test of a 175-Mb/s, Rate-1/2 (128,3,6) Low-Density Parity-Check Convolutional Code Encoder and Decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2245-2256, Oct. 2007.

2624

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:48:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

