Improved Hard-decision Decoding LDPC Codec IP Design

Daehyun Kim, Biwoong Chung, and Roy E. Kim
Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. Hwaseong, Korea 445-701
Email: {daehyun1.kim, bw7.chung, ec.kim}@samsung.com

Abstract—This paper presents an area efficient low density parity check (LDPC) encoder/decoder (Codec) implementation which can deliver high throughput performance and error correction capability for flash memory controller. In order to reduce the size of memory to store variable node LLR values, flooding schedule with column-by-column decoding architecture is exploited for the decoder. The encoder architecture provides area efficient encoding by using the specially designed H-matrix structure. The LDPC Codec IP is implemented with 700Kgates of 45nm standard CMOS technology of Samsung ASIC library and can support decoding data of 400MB/s from NAND flash without compromising the error correction capability up to raw bit-error-rate (BER) range of 2.5E-3 by hard-decision decoding mode.
I. INTRODUCTION
The error control coding (ECC) technique is adopted to guarantee near-zero uncorrectable bit error rate performance in the flash memory. Back in the early age of flash memory products’ use, only the SLC NAND flash memory product was out in the market, the single bit error correction code was enough to satisfy all the reliability-related specifications. As the number of error grows a bit more than several bits on the average of 512 or 1024 byte-long sector multi-bit correcting BCH codes have been widely used. However, further scaledown for the physical NAND flash memory cell feature size and multi-leveling caused simple BCH decoding scheme no longer applicable to achieve the reasonable flash memory reliability. Low density parity check (LDPC) codes are one of the candidates which can possibly replace current BCH code for the future generation NAND flash products. By using the soft information data from the NAND, LDPC code can correct more data than that of BCH decoder within a same code rate. [1] And it brings us advantages of efficient use of flash memory’s storage space.
However, the LDPC code based Codec implementation suffers from the high hardware complexity increase. And it has become a barrier for LDPC Codec to be used as ECC solution for flash memory controllers.

Especially, the soft-decision decoding needs multiple reads from flash memories, and suffers from the decrease in read throughput. In addition, soft-decision decoding is hard to be implemented efficiently in contrast to hard-decision decoding. Therefore, hard-decision decoded error-correcting performance is very important for LDPC Codec to be used as practical flash memories’ ECC solutions.
This paper will show an efficient LDPC Codec hardware architecture with emphasis on hard-decision decoded errorcorrecting performance, which is comparable with that of BCH Codec. [2] In the early life time of flash memory products the decoding is mainly carried out by hard-decision decoding, and guarantees high throughput. At the end of life time soft-decision decoding can complement extending the error correction capability at the cost of decoding latency increase.
For code design, quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code [3] with dual diagonal structure for parity part is used. [4] QC-LDPC code matrix has been widely used for efficient hardware implementation for high speed LDPC encoder and decoder. In chapter II, we will show QC-LDPC encoder architecture. And trade-off between throughput and area cost is also considered. In chapter III, an area efficient QC-LDPC decoder architecture will be described with some heuristic improvement methods for hard-decision decoded error-correcting performance. Finally, Chapter IV concludes this paper.
II. ENCODER ARCHITECTURE
A. Architecture Exploration It requires O(N3) degree of computation complexity to
encode a codeword by straightforward multiplication between information and inverse of parity matrix where N is the length of codeword. However, it is possible to encode with O(N) computation complexity with previously studied algorithms such as Approximate Lower Triangulation [5]. Especially, parity check matrix with dual diagonal structure for parity part enables simple encoding procedure [4]. In view point of low

978-1-4673-0219-7/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

416

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:52:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

cost implementation, it seems rational to choose parity check matrix with dual diagonal structure. B. Trade-off between Target Throughput and Area
According to implementation parallelism, the encoder architectures can vary like shown in Fig. 1. There are differences in implementation parallelism between Fig. 1. (a) to (c). For (a), data-path is dual although (b) and (c) architecture has sing data-path. In addition, (c) architecture computes 1/4 column of parity check matrix in one clock cycle while (b) architecture can compute one column of parity check matrix in single clock cycle. Therefore, there are differences in throughput among the architectures.
When we reduce the implementation parallelism more, area cost can be smaller because the number of the rotators is reduced linearly with result throughput. Synthesized area results for architecture (a) and (c) are shown in TABLE I. We can adjust the area cost for LDPC encoder according to target throughput.
(a) Dual data path

III. DECODER ARCHITECTURE
A. Column-by-column decoding scheme
LDPC decoder architecture for column-by-column decoding scheme is presented in Fig. 2 which supports both of hard and soft decision decoding. Data from NAND are stored in Input Buffer first. And the data are mapped into proper LLR values according to the operation mode like hard/soft decision and channel compensation mode. A variable node processing unit (VNPU) computes addition of initial LLR values and messages from check node processing units (CNPU). CNPUs receive messages from VNPU and feed their messages back to VNPU iteratively. Those messages are processed by min-sum decoding algorithm [6] for low computation complexity, and they are multiplexed properly by the given code presented by parity check matrix, or H matrix. 2to7 and 7to2 multiplexers are used in Fig. 2 as an example. Some of messages from CNPUs are saved in Check Mem in each iteration, and some of messages previously saved in Check Mem are needed to generate current message to VNPU. LRgen modules convert results from CNPUs into LLR format. The messages between CNPU and VNPU are rotated by given H matrix at R module in Fig. 2 to adopt QC LDPC codec implementation. [3]
In view point of hardware cost, a strong point of columnby-column decoding architecture in LDPC decoding is the absence of variable node memories. It is clear that size of variable node memories grows linearly with codeword length for row-by-row decoding scheme. However, check node memories’ complexity for column-by-column decoder is weak point because it grows linearly with length of parity bits.
Since high code rate and very long codeword lengths are common for ECC applied for NAND flash memory products, it is more efficient in terms of memory size to employ column-by-column decoding architecture than row-by-row scheme.

(b) Single data path

(c) Serialized single data path

Figure 1. Encoder architectures with (a) dual data path (b) single data path (c) serialized single data path.

TABLE I.

TARGET VS. THROUGHPUT FOR ENCODER ARCHITECTURE

Architecture (a) (c)

Area (k gate) 67.5 18

Throughput (MB/s) 800 100

Figure 2. Decoder architecture for column-by-column decoding scheme.

417 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:52:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In Fig. 3, internal memory architecture inside CNPU is represented. CNPU needs the previous iteration’s computation results to generate its own messages to be sent to variable nodes, and concurrently makes current iteration’s computation results. Therefore, basically two sets of memories are needed for each check node. We can configure the check node memories efficiently according to the access pattern of each data. For example, 1st and 2nd minimum message values, the location of 1st minimum message value, and the total sign for each check node are appropriate to be saved in registers rather than in SRAM, or register file (RF), because their data depth is too shallow to be efficiently stored in SRAM. On the contrary, SRAM is better choice to store edge signs because data depth of edge signs is deeper than others mentioned previously. In this decoding architecture Check Mem is the only storage element, and it takes 44 % of the total silicon area. This memory configuration is an efficient way compared with flipflop only or SRAM only configuration.
The LDPC decoder architecture described above can support (9088, 8192) LDPC code with 700 k gates of 45nm standard CMOS technology of Samsung ASIC library at 200 MHz operating clock. The most complex parts of the decoder, CNPU and related memories, are implemented efficiently not only in area but also in power dissipation. Clock gating and CEN control for Check Mem alleviate the power consumption.
B. Hard-Decision Decoding Convergence Speed and BER Performance
For LDPC IP in high-end application in throughput like eMMC and SSD, it is not easy to meet target throughput with soft-decision decoding scheme although it promises better error-correcting performance than hard-decision decoding scheme. Thus it is very important to improve hard-decision decoded error-correcting performance. In this subsection, we introduce two heuristic algorithms to improve hard decision decoded error correcting performance.

With a same parity check matrix, error-correcting performance may be improved by slight modification to the original decoding algorithm. One of them is to use proper LLR values for the first iteration. The first iteration’s LLR values are less credible than those of later iterations. Therefore, when we apply smaller (absolute) LLR values (in the experiment, 1) for the 1st iteration than that for the following iterations, the number of decoding iterations also becomes smaller than when monotonic LLR values (in the experiment, 4) are applied. That means proper LLR values mapping causes decoding speed improvement. One or more iterations are saved using the proper LLR values like shown in Fig. 4.
In offset min-sum scheme or normalized min-sum scheme, the error-correcting performance is worse than that of sumproduct scheme. This is because both offset and normalized min-sum algorithms are approximations to sum-product algorithm. In order to approach the error correcting performance of sum-product algorithm, we empirically found the mapping table in our implementation. From the experiment, the mapping table obtained by compromise between offset min-sum and normalized min-sum results in better error-correcting performance (See TABLE II).
Decoding speed performance with some heuristic improvement methods mentioned above is over the current flash memory products’ read speed 400MB/s till near 2.5E-3 Raw BER. The average number of decoding iteration is 3.8 for 2.5E-3 Raw BER like shown in Figure 4. Data of 9088 bit from flash memory can be decoded with in 3.8 (iteration) x 145 (cycle/iteration) x 5 (ns/cycle) by the 200MHz targeted decoder processing 142 columns of H matrix in 145 cycle.

Figure 3. Memory Architecture for a CNPU.

TABLE II.

MAPPING TABLE

Input

01234567
Figure 4. Decoding iteration numbers for initial small absolute LLR value

Offset Min-Sum

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

and nominal LLR value.

Normalized Min-Sum

0

1

1

2

3

4

4

5

TABLE III. LRgen

POSITION OF LRGEN MODULE AND WIRE COMPLEXITY

Logic cost

Wire complexity

Proposed Mapping

0

1

1

2

3

4

5

Position 6 Before 7-to-2 MUX

(k gate) 8.4

(# of 7-to-2 MUX in/out pin) 12544

After 7-to-2 MUX

29.4

3584

418 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:52:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

C. Alleviating multiplexing network complexity inside check node
CNPU blocks are needed as the number of sub-block row in the parity check matrix, i.e., 14, as shown in Fig. 2. And the number of activated CNPU in a time is the column degree of the parity check matrix, i.e., 4. Then 4-to-14 and 14-to-4 multiplexing is needed before and after the check node modules. To reduce the multiplexing network complexity, we can divide the column of Parity check matrix into top half and bottom half. By the technique, we can replace 4-to-14 multiplexer with two 2-to-14 multiplexers, and 14-to-4 multiplexer with two 7-to-2 multiplexers. It is advantageous in both area and speed.

[8] Zongwang Li, Lei Chen, Lingqui Zeng, Shu Lin, and Wai H. Fong, “Efficient Encoding of Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check
Codes”, IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 54, 2006, pp. 71-
81.

D. PNR-aware RTL design
For high throughput LDPC IP, it is unavoidable to adopt parallelism in implementation. Consequently, the design becomes wire-intensive. It results in large post-layout silicon area and PNR failure often. To deal with this problem, it is helpful to take wire complexity into account at RTL design step. For example, LRgen modules in Fig. 2. are simple combinational logic circuits which generate messages from check nodes to variable nodes. However, its connection is critical in wire complexity. As shown in TABLE III, it is possible to mitigate wire complexity with increased logic gates.

IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed an area efficient LDPC IP architecture with two heuristic methods for improving harddecision decoded error-correcting performance. With the proposed architecture, 400MBps sequential read speed is guaranteed with 200MHz operating clock frequency up to raw BER range of 2.5E-3 by hard-decision decoding, and the prelayout area complexity is under 700 k gates.

REFERENCES
[1] Jiadong Wang, Thomas Courtade, Hari Shankar, and Richard D. Wesel, “Soft Information for LDPC Decoding in Flash: Mutual-Information Optimized Quantization”, Global Telecommunications Conference, 2011 IEEE, pp. 1-6.
[2] Jonghong Kim, Junho Cho, and Wonyong Sung, “Error Performance and Decoder Hardware Comparison between EG-LDPC and BCH Codes”, Signal Processing Systems, 2010 IEEE workshop on, pp. 392397.
[3] Marc P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes From Circulant Permutation Matrices”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 50, 2004, pp. 1788-1793.
[4] Seho Myung and Kyeongcheol Yang, “Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes for Fast Encoding”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 51, 2005, pp. 2894-2901.
[5] Thomas J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient Encoding of LowDensity Parity-Check Codes”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 47, 2001, pp. 638-656.
[6] Jinghu Chen, and Marc P. C. Fossorier, “Near Optimum Universal Belief Propagation Based Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes”, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2002, pp. 406-414.
[7] Hao Zhong, Wei Xu, Ningde Xie, and Tong Zhang, “Area-Efficient Min-Sum Decoder for High-Rate QC-LDPC Codes in Magnetic Recoding”, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 43, 2007, pp. 41174122.

419 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:52:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

