High-Rate Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes for Magnetic Recording Channel with Low Error Floor
Hao Zhong*, Tong Zhang*, and Erich F. Haratscht
*ECSE Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA
t Agere Systems, Allentown, PA, USA

Abstract- By implementing an FPGA-based simulator, we investigate the performance of high-rate quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes for the magnetic recording channel at very low sector error rates. Results show that error-floor-free performance can be realized by randomly constructed high-rate regular QC-LDPC codes with column weight 4 for sector error rates as low as 10-9. We also conjecture several rules for designing randomly constructed high-rate regular QC-LDPC codes with low error floor. We also present a decoder architecture that is well suited to achieving high decoding throughput for these high-rate QC-
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, there has been a great interest in replacing ReedSolomon codes with low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in the magnetic recording channel [1]. Hard disk drive storage systems require powerful error correction codes that achieve sector error rates I of about 10-12 (and better) with high code rate. However, due to the lack of accurate analytical methods, it remains a challenge to accurately predict the error-correcting performance of LDPC codes at very low sector error rate. In the past, LDPC codes have been evaluated for the magnetic recording channel mainly based on computer simulations, with which sector error rates of only about 10-4 can currently be reached. In this regard, a high-speed dedicated hardware simulator is necessary to empirically investigate the performance of LDPC codes at very low sector error rates. Only recently, hardware simulators based on FPGA (field programmable gate array) chips [2], [3] have been implemented to investigate the performance of LDPC codes over the AWGN (additive white Gaussian noise) channel.
To be a promising candidate for the magnetic recording channel, LDPC codes must not only achieve very low sector error rate with a high code rate, but also be suitable for high-speed VLSI implementation to meet the high data rate requirements of hard disk drives. Prior work [4]-[8] has demonstrated that quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes are one family of such implementation-oriented LDPC codes. The
parity chepcakrimtaytrix of a QC-LDPC consists of arrays of
circulants. A circulant is a square matrix in which each row is the cyclic shift of the row above it, and the first row is the
This work was supported in part by SRC contract No. 2004-HJ-1 192.I 1Notice that we use the term of sector error rate following the convention in the magnetic storage community. Although in current hard disk drives one sector equals 512 user bytes, throughout the paper, we always assume that the length of one sector equals to the length of the considered LDPC code.

cyclic shift of the last row. However, discussion on how the
structural parameters of the QC-LDPC code may affect the
performance at very low error rate is largely missing in the
perfor
open literature. The contribution of this paper is three-fold: (1) By im-
plementing iterative detection and decoding on an FPGA
simulator for the magnetic recording channel, we demonstrate that randomly constructed high-rate regular QC-LDPC codes with the column weight 4 can be free of error floors at sector
error rates of about 10-9. This provides empirical evidence
that LDPC codes deserve serious consideration for hard disk drives. (2) Based on extensive simulations using our FPGA
platform, we observe that the size of the circulants may largely affect the performance of randomly constructed highrate regular QC-LDPC codes. We therefore speculate empirical rules for designing randomly constructed high-rate regular QC-LDPC codes with low error floor. (3) We improve our
previously developed QC-LDPC decoder VLSI architecture [7] thereby supporting more flexible trade-offs between decoding throughput and silicon area. This new architecture allows to implement high-rate QC-LDPC codes with low error floor for very high decoding throughput.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the read channel detector/dcoder FPGA simulator platform. Section III discusses the quasi-cyclic block-LDPC codes and how the size of the block sub-matrices affect their performance. Section V concludes the paper with some remarks.

II. READ CHANNEL FPGA SIMULATOR Fig. 1 shows the diagram of the simulator that consists
of two Altera Stratix-II 180 FPGA devices. The first FPGA

FPGA device #1

FPGA device #2

AGn

Max-Log-A

~~~~~~~~~~~~

~~~~~EPQR4LDC

Belrorocrk

Model

D dcounter

PC host

random codeword

Fig. 1. System Diagram.

0-7803-9390-2/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE

3546

ISCAS 2006

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

device models the magnetic recording channel as extended partial response class 4 (EPR4) signal in the presence of AWGN. The AWGN generator is designed based on the quantized version of the Box-Muller method [9]. It generates a random sample x with Gaussian distribution (zero mean and standard deviation or = 1) using two random samples x1 and 12 uniformly distributed between [0, 1] as follows:
= f(xl) 9(12), where
f(ii) -=m(i) and 9(12) dc2os(2wz2).
An array of 64-bit linear feedback shift registers is used to generate the random samples x1 and X2. The functions
f(xi) and 9(12) are implemented using look-up tables. The calculated sample 1 is scaled according to the signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) at the output of the AWGN generator. The second FPGA device implements an iterative datapath
consisting of a Max-Log-MAP detector and a QC-LDPC decoder. The well-known sliding window method [10] is used to implement the Max-Log-MAP detector. The QC-LDPC decoder is implemented using the architecture presented in [7]. The detector and decoder operate on the received data iteratively. As shown in Fig. 1, the PC host provides ran-
domly generated codewords for simulation. Due to the speed
mismatch between the FPGA simulation and the data transfer between the FPGA and PC host, each random codeword is used for several rounds of FPGA simulations.
The finite precision parameters of the simulator are outlined as follows: (a) The output of the AWGN generator is 6 bits with 3 fractional bits; (b) In the Max-Log-MAP detector, the branch and path metrics are 9 bits with 3 fractional bits, and the detector soft-output is 6 bits with 3 fractional bits; (c) In the QC-LDPC decoder, the internal decoding messages and soft outputs are 6 bits with 3 fractional bits. For the simulation results presented below, we configured the simulator as follows: (i) The maximum number of detectordecoder iterations is 4, i.e., the decoder sends its soft output back to the detector at most 4 times, and (ii) each time, the QC-LDPC decoder carries out 4 internal decoding iterations.

that there are no any cycles of degree 4 or less. In all the parity check matrices we have ever constructed, at most there are only one or two redundant rows. Hence the code rate can be approximated as (n -m)/n. Leveraging the FPGA simulator, we investigated how the code parameters affect the performance of high-rate QC-LDPC codes, as discussed below. All the simulated sector error rates presented in the following were obtained under the condition that at least 10 erroneous sectors are captured.
First, we show how the circulant size (i.e., the value of p) affects the code performance. We simulated three QC-LDPC codes with the same code length of 4068, code rate of 8/9, and column weight of 4. Three different values for p were considered, including 64, 128, and 256. The QC-LDPC code with p = 64 has the worst performance and badly suffers from an error floor, while the other two do not show an error floor in the region that can be observed using the FPGA simulator. This may suggest that, in order to achieve a low error floor for randomly constructed high-rate QC-LDPC codes, the value of p should be relatively large such that each circulant has weight at least 1.

100

10-2

\

p=256_,w=2 -e- pp == 1642,,ww==1 1

,

N=4608

4

Rate =8/9

Column weight = 4

\

-6

cn1lO

10

l_l_

l_ l_ _l

35

4

45

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

SNR(dB)

III. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Fig. 2. Simulation results that show the effect of circulant size on the

performance.

The parity check matrix H of a QC-LDPC code can be

written as

From the observation, we conjecture the following rules

H1,1 H1,2 ... Hl,n

HH2,1 H2,2

H2,n

2

... ...

for designing randomly constructed high-rate QC-LDPC codes
with low error floors for the magnetic recording channel: (i)
make the circulant size relatively large, and (ii) keep away
. ...from the circulant with weight 0. Moreover, our simulation re-

where each sub-matrix Hij is a p x p circulant over GF(2).
Notice that the permutation matrix and zero matrix are special cases of circulants with the weights 1 and 0, respectively. In
this work, we focus on randomly constructed high-rate regular
QC-LDPC codes, where all the non-zero circulants have the
same weight. Given the structural parameters, including m,
n, p, column weight, and circulant weight, we construct the parity check matrix randomly subject to the constraint

sults suggest that a column weight of 4 may be the best choice for high-rate QC-LDPC codes, as very good performance can be achieved with relatively low computational complexity.
Finally, three high-rate QC-LDPC codes with circulant
weight 2 and column weight 4 are compared in Fig. 3, where the highest code rate is 15/16 (i.e., 0.9375). Although the
performance curve slopes vary for the different code lengths and code rates, none of the simulated codes shows an error
floor.

3547
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

, _,_,memory fabric and interconnect between the memory fabric

*

9r_Xrraattee-=88//99,,

pp-=5215265,,

N
N

=-44690286

| and CNU/VNU array in such a way that all the messages

+ rate = 15/16, p = 512, N = 16384 required for the same variable or check node computation are

10-2

----------------------------------------------------------- sent to the same VNU or CNU at the same clock cycle. In the

°.

8\

w=2following, we present our solution to tackle this issue.

o10 --4
10-6

z \ \ \Column weight = 4

w\

\

------\------ ----\------------------------ ---------

10-8
,3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10o SNR(dB)
Fig. 3. Comparison of three randomly constructed high-rate regular QCLDPC codes.
IV. QC-LDPC DECODER DESIGN FOR HIGH THROUGHPUT
As discussed above, in order to achieve low error floors, the circulant size (i.e., the value for p) of randomly constructed high-rate QC-LDPC codes should be relatively large. The QCLDPC decoder architectures presented in [6], [7] are suitable for high-speed decoding due to their simple datapath and fixed interconnect structure. However, the decoding parallelism in these decoders is reversely proportional to p, i.e., the computations of each group of p variable or check nodes are mapped onto a single hardware processing unit in a timedivision multiplexed mode. Large values for p will directly reduce the achievable throughput of such decoders.
To solve this problem, we propose an improved decoder architecture that can map the computations for each group of v (where p is divisible by v and h is defined as the ratio p/v) variable or check nodes onto a single hardware processing unit, leading to an h times improvement of the decoding parallelism. Fig. 4(a) shows the decoder architecture for a QC-LDPC code
with a (m p) x (n p) parity check matrix. It contains m
groups of check node computation units (CNUs) and n groups of variable node computation units (VNUs), where each group contains h CNUs or VNUs. Each CNU (VUN) performs the
computations associated with consecutive v rows (columns) in the parity check matrix in a time-division multiplexed mode.
All the decoding messages and channel messages are stored in a memory fabric, as shown in Fig. 4(a). Each decoding iteration takes 2v clock cycles:
1) During the first v clock cycles, the decoder works in check node processing mode, i.e., carrying out the
computations associated with all the m p check nodes; 2) During the second v clock cycles, the decoder works
in variable node processing mode, i.e., carrying out the computations associated with all the n p variable nodes. The real challenge in the decoder design is how to design the

The memory fabric mainly contains arrays of decoding mes-
sage memory blocks (DMMBs) and channel message memory
blocks (CMMBs). Recall that w represents the weight of nonzero circulants. All the w p decoding messages associated
with one non-zero circulant are stored in w DMMBs. Notice
that each non-zero circulant can be considered as a sum of
w permutation matrices. Each DMMB stores the p decoding messages associated with the p I's in each permutation matrix. The address space of each DMMB is 0 - v - 1,
and each address location stores h decoding messages. Let
1o, 1,... , p-l denote the p decoding messages sorted in ascendent order by the column index of the corresponding 1's
in the permutation matrix. At the i-th address location, DMMB
stores the h decoding messages {Xi, Xi+v, . Xi+(h-1)v}.
For non-zero circulant Hij, the corresponding DMMB group
has the architecture as shown in Fig. 4(b), which is explained
below.
Each DMMB is a dual-port memory and has one port always configured for read and another one always configured for write. The read address of each DMMB is generated by a binary counter. Let tl,... , tw represent the column indices
of the w non-zero entries in the first row of the circulant
Hij. In each decoding iteration, the state of the binary counter associated with DMMBk (1 < k < w) is initialized as tk mod v at the beginning of the check node processing mode and initialized as 0 at the beginning of the variable node processing mode. The write address is simply a delayed version of the read address depending on how many pipeline stages are inserted in the datapath between the DMMB memory data output and input ports. The barrel shifter is a combinational circuit that can rotate the input by any number of bits in a single operation. The barrel shifters associated with DMMBk are configured to rotate Ltk/vj decoding messages. As illustrated in Fig. 4(b), the DMMB group associated with circulant Hij
connects with the i-th group of CNUs and j-th group of VNUs.
The memory fabric contains n CMMB blocks, each of which stores the channel messages for each group of p
consecutive variable nodes. Each CMMB is a single-port
memory with the address space of 0 - v - 1. Each memory location stores h channel messages. The storage pattern of the
p channel messages in one CMMB is the same as the pattern
in DMMB, i.e., let c0, c1,.. , cp- denote the p channel
messages sorted in ascendent order by the column index, each
CMMB stores h channel messages {ci, ci+v,... , ci+(h-l)v}
at the i-th address location. Since the channel messages are
only used in variable node processing mode, the CMMBs only send the data to the corresponding VNU groups. The read
address of each CMMB is generated by a binary counter that is
initialized as 0 at the beginning of the variable node processing
mode.

3548
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GNU group #1
,1 CNU group
. . . CNU

GNU group #m
CNU group #m
.. . CNUh,

DMMB group for non-zero circulant H
hadrs. . *r Ms

h

~~~~address

h

address

Memory Fabric

h

Counter

h

1 h 1atrel harrel

rr

Barrel

VNU group #1

VNU group #n
(a)

From CNU From VNU To CNU To VNU group #i group #j group #i group #j

From CNU From VNU To CNU To VNU group #i group #j group #i group #j
(b)

Fig. 4. (a) The general decoder architecture, and (b) storage of the decoding messages associated with non-zero circulant Hi,j.

V. CONCLUSION

Using an FPGA-based simulator, we empirically evaluated

high-raseteoQC-LDPCcdes. high-rate QC-LDPC
at low sector error

codes
rates.

ffWorretthhdeemmaagognnetetticircaetrdeeccooddtiihnngrccohhamannnlnmelly

constructed high-rate regular QC-LDPC codes with column

weight 4 can achieve error-floor-free performance for sector

error rates as low as 10-9. Based on extensive FPGA simu-

lations, we speculated empirical rules for designing randomly

constructed high-rate QC-LDPC codes with low error floors.

MoreoMvoerre,oebr,y bimpirmopvrviinngg puubblliissheedd ddeecooddeerr arcchhiittecttuurrees,, wwee

presented a new decoder architecture that is btte suied

achieving high-speed decoding for high rate QC-LDPC codes

with low error floors. Future work is directed to evaluating the

performance of those deterministically constructed QC-LDPC

codes and comparing them with their randomly constructed

counterparts for the magnetic recording channel.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank Dr. Shu Lin for his comments on this work and the manuscript.

[5] D. E. Hocevar, "LDPC code construction with flexible hard-

ware implementation," in IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2003, pp. 2708 -2712.
Comnctns203p.278212
[6] JJ..KH.-aSm.kiLnese,, B."ALesec,alJa.blTehoarrpceh,iteKc.tuArendrofewas,stSr.ucDtoulriendarL,DaPnCd

deor,inItnaoalSmsumnIfrainThry in 2004, 293.
July 2004, p. 293.
[7] Hc.oZnhogng anddeT.sgZhaanpgp,ro"cBhl,o"cDkI-ELDEPC:AnsAactpiroancstiocaCl iLDCPC [8] aaZ.nnddLiS,yssyLt.setmeCshmesI,ni,,voolS.. 55L2pi,np,pp..Wo.766F-6o-7n7g,7,5,anAApdrriilPl.t-2S20.0005Y5.e.h, "Efficient

encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes," IEEE

Tascin nCmuiain,t per 05

[9]cE.W Wenisstin, sBox-uler Tasom

to

From M or-A W ramsWeb

Reouc

httm//athWorld.Wolfram.cm b

MullerTransformation.html.

[10] A. J. Viterbi, "An intuitive justification and a simplified implementation of the map decoder for convolutional codes," IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 16,
pp. 260-264, Feb. 1998.

REFERENCES
[1] A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and M.P.C. Fossorier, "Capacity-approaching codes: can they be applied to the magnetic recording channel?," IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 42, pp. 122-130, Feb. 2004.
[2] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, J. Thorpe, and C. Jones, "Constructing ldpc codes from simple loop-free encoding modules," in Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Communications, May 2005, pp. 658-662.
[3] L. Sun, H. Song, and B.V.K.V. Kumar, "Error floor investigation and girth optimization for certain types of low-density parity check codes," in Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, March 2005, pp. 1101-1104.
[4] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, "Architecture-aware lowdensity parity-check codes," in IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), Bangkok, Thailand, May 2003, pp. 57-60.

3549
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

