Modified Belief Propagation Decoding Algorithm for Low-Density Parity
Check Code Based on Oscillation
Satoshi Gounai t Tomoaki Ohtsuki tt Toshinobu Kanekottt
tGraduate School of Electrical Engineering, Tokyo University of Science ttDepartment of Information and Computer Science, Keio University tttDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Tokyo University of Science t ttt2641 Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba, 278-8510 Japan tt3-14-1 Hiyoshi, Kohoku, Yokohama, 223-8522 Japan E-mail: tt ohtsuki@ics.keio.ac.jp ttt kaneko@ee.noda.tus.ac.jp

Abstract- A Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) code with the Belief Propagation (BP) or the Log-Likelihood Ratio Belief Propagation (LLR-BP) can achieve good Bit Error Rate (BER) performance approaching the Shannon limit. When a parity check matrix of the LDPC code has the cycle, the BP and LLR-BP decoding algorithms achieve approximate Maximum A posterior Probability (MAP) decoding. Although the decoding algorithms are approximate MAP decoding, LDPC codes can achieve very good BER. For the short and middle length LDPC codes, BER and BLock Error Rate (BLER) performances are affected by cycle largely. In each iteration, the magnitudes of a posterior LLRs of some bits oscillate owing to cycles. The oscillation is
the dominant error factor in the high EbINo region for short
and middle length LDPC codes. In this paper, we extend the definition of oscillation to extrinsic LLR (ex-LLR) derived in the bit node process and propose the modified LLR-BP and the modified UMP-BP decoding algorithms. To reduce effects of oscillating ex-LLRs on decoding, for oscillating ex-LLRs, we add the previous ex-LLR to the current ex-LLR. From the computer simulation, we show that for short and middle length LDPC codes, with a simple modification, our proposed decoding algorithms can improve the conventional LLR-BP and UMP-BP decoding algorithms. In particular, we show that the modified UMP-BP decoding algorithm with low complexity can achieve better BER and BLER than the conventional LLR-BP decoding algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, a Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) code [1] has attracted much attention. The LDPC code can achieve good Bit Error Rate (BER) performance approaching the Shannon limit. The LDPC code is defined by the very sparse parity check matrix H that consists of a large number of zeros and a small number of ones. The Belief Propagation (BP) or the Log-Likelihood Ratio Belief Propagation (LLR-BP) decoding algorithm is used for the decoding of the LDPC code. When there are no cycles in the LDPC parity check matrix, the BP and LLR-BP decoding algorithms achieve Maximum A posterior Probability (MAP) decoding. In MAP decoding, each bit must receive the information of the other bits uniformly. However, the bit included in the cycle receives more information of bits in the same cycle than those of the other bits and those affected information are propagated to the other bits. For the finite length LDPC code, since it is difficult to exclude all the cycles, the BP and LLR-BP decoding algorithms

are the approximate MAP decoding. Although the decoding algorithms are approximate MAP decoding, LDPC codes can achieve very good BER. For long length LDPC codes, the probability that the short cycle is constructed is small. On the other hand, for short and middle length LDPC codes, the degradation of error rate performance by cycles is large. For short and middle length LDPC codes, some magnitudes of a posterior LLRs oscillate owing to cycles [2]. When the oscillation happens, the reliability of each bit changes iteration by iteration. In particular, the bit whose sign changes iteration by iteration prevents the convergence of decoding. Even if we increase the number of decoding iterations, the decoding cannot converge to the LDPC codeword satisfying the LDPC parity check matrix. The oscillation becomes the dominant
error factor in the high EbINO region [3].
The check node process of the BP and LLR-BP decoding algorithms require the multiplication and the tanh operation or the look-up table operation. To achieve the low complexity decoding, the Uniformly Most Powerful (UMP) BP decoding algorithm is proposed [4]. Since the UMP-BP decoding algorithm selects the smallest one instead of the multiplication, the check node process of UMP-BP decoding algorithm requires the comparison calculation only. The UMP-BP decoding algorithm achieves the trade-off between the performance and the complexity.
In this paper, we extend the definition of the oscillation to extrinsic LLR (ex-LLR) propagated from the bit node to the check node and propose the modified LLR-BP and the modified UMP-BP decoding algorithms. The modifications are performed based on the oscillation of ex-LLR. In this paper, when the sign of the ex-LLR in the current iteration differs from that in the previous iteration, we regard that ex-LLR as oscillating. Since ex-LLR is propagated to the other bits, one oscillating ex-LLR affects the other bits in the decoding iterations. To reduce effects of oscillating exLLRs on the decoding, we modify the conventional bit node process. The modification is the addition of the previous exLLR and the current one. We regard the result of addition as the new ex-LLR. In the decoding, we cannot decide which exLLR is correct, the previous ex-LLR or the current one. Thus, although the magnitude of that ex-LLR is large, that estimate

0-7803-9392-9/06/$20.00 (c) 2006 IEEE 1467

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:16:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

400

350

-

-

300

Mext-mea
Mf.->>S.>>.X~~~rro btso

-- -- -- --

.... ..

250

z

--------

200

----

:z

150 _----

----

100

--------- -----
---------
------- I--------------

50

0I

0

20

40

60

80 100

Iterations

Fig. 1. The number of oscillating ex-LLRs and the number of error bits
versus iteration number of the LLR-BP decoding algorithm with (504, 252)
LDPC code at EbINO = 2.5 dB

~)U(

ex-LLR

-error bits

400

300

200

this paper, we regard (1) as the oscillation definition.

sgn(zt ,) 7& sgn(ztnj),

(1)

sgn(ztn)

1

(Zt > 0)

(2)

(ztn < )

where t is the iteration number. Zmn is the nth ex-LLR propagated from the nth bit node to the mth check node. In Figs. 1 and 2, the number of error bits at the 0th iteration is the same as that of the received codeword.
The oscillation behaviors, the duration of increase and decrease of error bits and that of oscillating bits, and the number of error bits and that of oscillating bits, depend on the
received bits, the LDPC code, EbINO, and so on. Thus, the
oscillation behavior does not necessary correspond to those of Figs. 1 and 2. However, these relations between the oscillating ex-LLRs and the error bits are common to the other short and middle LDPC codes. From Figs. 1 and 2, we can see that when the oscillation happens, the number of error bits keeps increasing and decreasing. We can also see that the increase and decrease of the number of error bits are linked to that of oscillating ex-LLRs. We can also see that when the oscillation happens, the estimated codewords that include more error bits than the received codeword exist in the decoding iterations. When the oscillation happens, the number of error bits does not always decrease iteration by iteration. To improve the decoding error caused by the oscillation, we need to prevent the increase of error bits.

L_ I1VoUn --

uI

0

20

40

6(0

80 100

Iterations

Fig. 2. The number of oscillating ex-LLRs and the number of error bits
versus iteration number of the UMP-BP decoding algorithm with (504, 252)
LDPC code at EbINO = 2.5 dB

is not reliable. By addition, the magnitude of the new ex-LLR becomes smaller than two former ex-LLRs, and the sign of the new ex-LLR is the same as that of the ex-LLR that has larger magnitude of the two. From the computer simulation, we show that for short and middle length LDPC codes, with a simple modification, our proposed decoding algorithms can improve the conventional LLR-BP and UMP-BP decoding algorithms. In particular, we show that the modified UMP-BP decoding algorithm with the low complexity can achieve better BER and BLER than the conventional LLR-BP decoding algorithm.
II. OSCILLATION OF Ex-LLR

III. DECODING ALGORITHM

A. Conventional Decoding Algorithm [51
On the Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel, the initial LLR of the nth bit Fn is derived as follows.

2

(LLR-BP)

n(Yn

(UMP-BP),

(3)

where yn is the nth received bit and j2 is the noise variance.
For the UMP-BP decoding algorithm, we can use 2Yn/ 2 for
the initial LLR. However, using Yn for the initial LLR, the noise variance estimation is not necessary. It is one of the advantages of UMP-BP decoding algorithm. Thus, we use Yn for the initial LLR of the UMP-BP decoding algorithm.
The check node process is performed as follows.
check node process
- LLR-BP

\nt(-l) Lm = 2tanh- 1 n/ G.(m) (4)
- UMP-BP

Figs. 1 and 2 show the oscillation behavior of ex-LLR in the LLR-BP decoding algorithm and UMP-BP decoding algorithm
at EbINo = 2.5 dB with (504, 252) regular LDPC code. In 1468

II sgn(zmnl\ / mill Zmn/

n'CAF(m)\n

n'CAF(m)\n

(5)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:16:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where Lmn is the LLR from the mth check node to the nth difference between the magnitude of the previous ex-LLR and

bit node. ./V(m) is the set of bit nodes that included in the that of the current ex-LLR as the new current ex-LLR. The

mth check node. N\(m)\n is the set of bit nodes excluding check node processes of proposed decoding algorithms are the the nth bit node from .A/(m). In the first iteration, zo is set same as those of the conventional decoding algorithms.

to Fn.
Note that for the LLR-BP and UMP-BP decoding algorithm,

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

the bit node proesses are the same.

Figs. 3 - 6 show the BER and BLER of the conventional

. bit node process

mn Fn + E Ltminw m'CEM (n) \m

zt = Fn +

Lt

mGM(n)

and the proposed decoding algorithms in AWGN channels.

Fig. 7 show the average number of decoding iteration of

the conventional and the proposed decoding algorithms in

AWGN channels for the (1008, 504) regular LDPC code.

(7)

For the normalized and offset BP decoding algorithms, we used normalized factor a = 1.25 and offset factor / =

0.15, respectively [6]. Figs. 3 and 4 show the BER and

where Zn is LLR of a posterior probability. M (n) is the set of BLER of the (504, 252) regular LDPC code, respectively.

check nodes that included in the nth bit node. M (n) \m is the Figs. 5 and 6 show those of the (1008, 504) regular LDPC
set of check nodes excluding the mth check node from M (n). code, respectively. In the simulation, for all the decoding

We make the temporal estimate of the nth bit from Zn. If the algorithms, the maximum numbers of iterations are set to

temporal estimate x satisfies the LDPC parity check equation 1000. The modulation is BPSK. We can see that our proposed

Hx = 0, we regard x as the final estimate and stop the algorithms achieve the better BER and BLER than those of

decoding. If the temporal estimate x does not satisfy the LDPC the conventional decoding algorithms and those of normalized

parity check equation Hx 7& 0, we increment t and restart and offset BP decoding algorithms. From Figs. 1 and 2,

decoding. When the codeword satisfying the LDPC parity we can see that the increase and decrease of the number

check equation is not obtained until the decoding reaches of oscillating ex-LLRs affects the increase and decrease of

the maximum number of decoding iterations, the temporal the number of error bits. Our proposed decoding algorithms

estimate obtained in the final decoding iteration is regarded cannot avoid the oscillation of the ex-LLR perfectly. However,

as a final estimate.

the modification (9) can decrease the number of oscillating

B. Proposed Decoding Algorithm

ex-LLRs and avoid propagating the oscillating ex-LLR. In addition, the modification can also lower the magnitude of

To prevent the oscillation of ex-LLR, we modify the con- the oscillating ex-LLR. In the LLR-BP and UMP-BP decoding

ventional bit node process as follows. Note that since the bit algorithms, since the bit node operation is addition, the bit with

node process of the conventional LLR-BP decoding algorithm low magnitude is likely to be corrected by the other reliable

is the same as that of the conventional UMP-BP decoding bits. Thus, our proposed decoding algorithms achieve better

algorithm, we can apply the same modification to the bit node BER and BLER than the conventional decoding algorithms.

processes of the LLR-BP and UMP-BP decoding algorithms. For short and middle length LDPC codes, the cycles and the

bit node process

oscillation degrade the performance of the decoding. For the

Zmn Fn + E Lmin,

LLR-BP decoding algorithms, the check node operation uses
(8) all ex-LLRs from the bit node connected to that check node.

m'EM4(n) \m

Thus, the ex-LLR is affected by the oscillation with respect to

{ztn(t
I

+ Z/1ti 1

sgn(Iztmn\) 7& sgn(z/tn )

zm

otherwise

not only the sign but also the magnitude. In particular, with respect to the magnitude, the LLR-BP decoding algorithm is affected by the oscillating bit more than the UMP-BP decoding

Zmn and Lmn are derived by the same operation as the algorithm. The proposed LLR-BP decoding algorithm is also

conventional decoding algorithms. Z/mn is ex-LLR of the nth affected by the oscillating bit more than the proposed UMP-

bit propagated to the mth check node in our proposed decoding BP decoding algorithm. Thus, the proposed UMP-BP decoding

algorithm.

algorithm achieves better BLER than the conventional and

(8) is the bit node operation of the conventional LLR-BP and proposed LLR-BP decoding algorithms. The longer the code

UMP-BP decoding algorithms. In the proposed decoding algo- length is, the fewer the number of short cycles is. Thus, the

rithms, after the conventional bit node process is performed, improvements of the proposed decoding algorithms in Figs.

the oscillation of LLR is checked. Following (1), when ex- 5 and 6 are smaller than those in Figs. 3 and 4, and those

LLR in the current iteration zm is different from that in the of the proposed UMP-BP decoding algorithm are smaller

previous iteration z/ n we regard that bit as the oscillating than those of the proposed LLR-BP decoding algorithm. In bit. However, we cannot know which ex-LLR is correct, the the proposed LLR-BP decoding algorithm, the ex-LLR is

previous ex-LLR or the current ex-LLR. In the proposed propagated to more bits than those of the proposed UMP-

decoding algorithm, we regard the sign of the ex-LLR with BP decoding algorithm. In the proposed decoding algorithms,

the larger magnitude the sign of the current estimate, and the since the oscillation bits are modified according to (9), the

1469

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:16:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10-I
l~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~3Pooe UM-B

E

_P>roposed LLR-BP R2.ute

10-

E Proposed UMPBP

E6/NO (dB)

~1~0-~5~~~~1

Fig. 3. BER versus Eb N0 (dB) for (504, 252) regular LDPC code

1L5

2

2.

3

E V0N (dB)

Fig. 4. BLER versus Eb N0 (dB) for (504, 252) regular LDPC code

proposed algorithms need more additions than the conven-
tional decoding algorithms. Note that, however, the additional increase of complexity is not so large compared to the whole
complexity including exponential or tanh calculation of the conventional decoding algorithm. From Fig. 7, for all the decoding algorithms, the average number of iteration is almost _ equivalent. Thus, we can consider that with respect to theX
average decoding iteration, the proposed UMP-BP decoding algorithm is less complex than that of the conventional LLRBP decoding algorithm. In low Eb N0 region, the proposed
UMP-BP decoding algorithm needs more iterations than the-i-i-i-
conventional and proposed LLR-BP decoding algorithms. The check nude prucess of the prupused UMP-BP decuding algu-0 rithm is the same as that of the UMP-BP decoding algorithm. Thus, for the channel error, the proposed UMP-BP decoding algorithm needs many decoding iterations to converge.

0olUMPB
'\i +olaie
Propo sdUMP-BP -----------------------

10U-~3~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~---~~---~'~~--~~~~~~~~~~lo

o04

,

o-<

l06

. . 2. 2.3 2

E VN (dB)

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed the modified LLR-BP and

Fig. 5. BER versus Eb N0 (dB) fur (1008, 504) regular LDPC code

modified UMP-BP decoding algorithms. In the proposed al-

gorithms, to reduce the effect of the oscillating ex-LLR on the ERBl

decoding, we modify the conventional bit node process. For

10iooraie

the oscillating LLR, we add the ex-LLR in current iteration

'=Ofe

to the ex-LLR in the previous iteration. From the computer

10'l

W-PoposedUMLP-BP

simulation, we showed that for short and middle length LDPC

\\_

codes, our proposed decoding algorithm can improve thei

=X

conventional LLR-BP and UMP-BP decoding algorithms. In

10-

<:

particular, we showed that the modified UMP-BP algorithm

;i<

with low complexity can achieve the better BLER than the

10-3

conventional LLR-BP decoding algorithm.

<

REFERENCES

10-4

.9

[1] R. G. Gallager, "4Low density parity check codes," IRE Trans. Inform..

.i

J

Theory, vol. IT-8, pp.21-28, Jan. 1962.

10-5________________

[2] G. Lechner, and J. Sayir, "4On the convergence of log-likelihood values 1.5 1. 1. 21 23 .5

in iterative decoding," Mini-Workshop on Topics in Information Theory,

E,/,

v dB)

Sept. 2002.

[3] G. Lechner, "4Convergence of sum-Product algorithm for finite length

low-density parity-check codes," Winter School on Coding and Infor Fig. 6. BLER versus EbINO (dB) for (1008, 254) regular LDPC code
mation Theory, Feh.2003.

1470

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:16:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

E3 Proposed UMP BP
0 0'IS
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
E,/No (dB)
Fig. 7. Average number of decoding iterations versus EbINO (dB) for (1008,
504) regular LDPC code
[4] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, "Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low density parity check codes based on belief propagation," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol.47, pp. 673-680, May 1999.
[5] J. Chen, and M. Fossorier, "Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes", IEEE, Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, March 2002.
[6] J. Chen, and M. Fossorier, "Density evolution for BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes and their quantized version," IEEE, GLOBECOM 2002 vol. 2, pp. 1378-1382, Dec. 2002.
1471
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:16:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

