DF-04
Structured LDPC Codes with Reversed MTR/ECC for Magnetic Recording Channels. .
T. Kanaoka1 and T. Morita1 1. FUJITSU LABORATORIES, Atsugi, kanagawa, Japan
1. Introduction Structured low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been studied as practical LDPC codes for magnetic recording channels. These codes, such as array codes [1] and eIRA codes [2], enable to construct matrices logically. Their performances, however, are not sufficient for inter-symbol-interference (ISI) channels, especially when the block length becomes short and the code rate becomes high. This is due to the structure of the array codes, which are constructed by single cyclic shift matrices. When multiple-bit errors occur in the channel, they are easily connected through the parity check matrix having many single cyclic shifts, and cause performance degradation as if the matrix had four cycles. In this paper, we propose a system using a random interleaved array LDPC (RIA-LDPC) code combined with a reversed maximum-transition-run (MTR) code / error-correction codes (ECC). The system provides significant improvement in the error-rate floor and water-fall performance in short-block-length and high-rate codes. 2. Random Interleaved Array LDPC Code The proposed parity check matrix H has the form H=[H1 H2], where the sub-matrix H1 is M×K with parity length M and information block length K and the sub-matrix H2 is M×M. The sub-matrix H1 is shown in Fig.1, where k and j are two integers such that 1Ϲk, jϹp where p denotes a prime number. Ip is the p×p identity matrix and α is a p×p permutation matrix representing a single cyclic shift. The p×p matrix ω is a quasi-cyclic matrix defined by the amount of shift g, which is greater than one. The matrix almost randomly interleaves every p columns of H1 and provides better performance used with ISI channels. The sub-matrix H2 is a cyclic shift matrix with a column weight of three (Fig.1). The positions of ones in the first row are carefully chosen so that the inverse matrix H2-1 becomes sparse. For example, when M is 88, H2-1 can be a cyclic matrix with a column weight of five, and thus enables lowcomplexity encoding. The combination of H1 and H2 completes a novel structured LDPC code, which we call a random interleaved array LDPC code. 3. LDPC System with Reversed MTR/ECC Recently, reverse concatenation of high-rate run-length-limited (HR-RLL) codes and ECC is widely used in commercial disk drives. However, the RLL-coded channel produces long error events at a certain probability, which result in error-rate floors at the output of the LDPC decoder. In contrast, MTR codes are able to eliminate all such error events and thus are suitable for LDPC codes. We propose the use of a rate-16/17 quasi-MTR (QMTR) (j=3) code with reverse MTR/ECC concatenation. The block diagram of the proposed system is shown in Fig.2. In the encoding process, one sector data (≈4kbits) encoded by ECC is divided into four blocks and each of them is encoded by the LDPC encoder. Note that it is important for the noise predictive soft-output viterbi algorithm (NPSOVA) to perform path elimination associated with a j=3 constraint of the QMTR code for suppressing all long error events. Also note that the code rate of the MTR code is almost optimal at 16/17 and thus is not necessarily very high.

4. Simulation & Results We performed the simulation for perpendicular magnetic recording channels at a recording density Kp of 1.5 and evaluated the performance of the proposed LDPC system with a sector error rate after ECC (16 symbol corrections). The channel was equalized to a PR(5,6,0,-1) target [3]. In this simulation, parameters of the proposed RIA-LDPC codes were set at N=1309, M=88, g=19, wc=2∼3. As the conventional code, we used the structured code which combined a repeat-accumulator (RA) with an array code (N=1309, M=88, wc=2∼3). As shown in Fig.3, the RIA-LDPC code shows significant improvement in error-rate floor performance over the conventional code with rate-200/201 HR-RLL codes. And then, the proposed RIA-LDPC system concatenated with 16/17 QMTR shows a 1.2dB gain over the HR-RLL concatenated system at SER=10-4 and also shows a no error-rate floor over SER=10-6. The proposed system provides SNR improvement and a low error-rate floor performance in magnetic recording channels. [1] J. L. Fan, Proc. Int. Symp on Turbo Codes., Brest, France, pp.543-546, Sept. 2000. [2] M. Yang, et al., IEEE Trans. Commn., pp.564-571, April 2004. [3] M. Madden, et al., IEEE Trans. Magn., Vol. 40, No. 1, pp.241-246, Jan. 2004.
Fig.1 Sub-matricies H1 and H2.
Fig.2 Block diagram of LDPC system.
Fig.3 Performance of LDPC systems.

INTERMAG 2006

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

297

