Area-Efficient Parallel Decoder Architecture for High Rate QC-LDPC Codes

Zhiqiang Cui and Zhongfeng Wang
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97333, USA { cuizh, zwang} (eecs.oregonstate.edu

Abstract-In this paper, an area efficient partially parallel decoder architecture suited for (Modified) Min-Sum decoding algorithm for general high rate Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check (QC-LDPC) codes is proposed. To reduce the hardware complexity for parallel processing, an efficient data scheduling unit is presented. The optimized partially parallel decoder architecture can linearly increase the decoding throughput with small hardware overhead. Typically, over 30% of memory can be saved with the architecture presented in this paper. Consequently, the proposed approach facilitates the applications of LDPC codes in area/power sensitive high speed communication systems.
I. INTRODUCTION

II. DECODING OF LDPC CODES WITH MIN-SUM ALGORITHM

A. TheRearrangedDecodingProcedureofMin-SumAlgorithm

In the modified Min-Sum decoding algorithm [5], two classes of

computation units, the variables nodes and the check nodes,

iteratively exchange soft messages with each other through the

edges in the Tanner graph. The check-to-variable message and

variable-to-check message updating phases were formulated as the

following:

R(k ax n (k-i) m ki11

sgn(Lnccn n)xmN (C n

ne N(c)\v

neN(c)\v

L(mk) c=EMX(RV)(k) _R(k) + Iv

(2)

Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes are linear block where, R is the extrinsic message from check node c to variable

codes specified by very sparse parity-check matrix H [1]. LDPC codes have attracted considerable attention due to their near

n

cv

node v, Lcv stands for the extrinsic message from variable node v

Shannon limit performance and inherently parallelizable decoding to check node c, IV is the intrinsic message, o is a scaling factor,

scheme. Quasi-Cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes are well suited for and the superscript (k) is used to indicate that the data is generated
hardware implementation because of the regularity in their parity

check matrices. Recently, several classes of QC-LDPC codes [2-4] in the k-th iteration. In the traditional designs, e.g., [7] [8],

have been proposed that can achieve comparable performance with CV and can be alternately stored in the same memory entry. By

that of equivalent random LDPC codes.

extending the idea presented in [10] [11], the modified Min-Sum

decoding algorithm can be reformulated as follows to further reduce
In general, LDPC codes achieve outstanding performance only the memories for extrinsic messages.

with large code word lengths (e.g., N . 2000 bits). Thus, the

memory part normally dominates the overall hardware of a LDPC

R (k) =a X f sgn( S k-l)+n - R(k-l))

codec. Among various LDPC codes decoding algorithms, the

ne N(c)\v

(3)

Belief-Propagation (BP) has the best decoding performance. The

x mi S(k-1) + - R (k-

modified Min-Sum algorithm [5], which doesn't require any

meN(c)\v

knowledge about the channel parameters and offers comparable

(k)

R (k)

(4

decoding performance to BP algorithm, is preferred in low

Sv - m GA (v) mv -

complexity hardware implementation. In this paper, a memory

efficient partially parallel decoder architecture for general high rate B The Performance ofHigh Rate QC-LDPC Codes QC-LDPC codes is proposed, which exploits the data redundancy

of soft messages in the Min-Sum decoding algorithm. A rearranged

In general, for LDPC codes with the same size of H matrix, the

Min-Sum LDPC decoding procedure and the associated partially error floor is significantly lower when the variable node degree is

parallel decoder architecture are proposed to reduce the memory for increased. Fig. 1 shows the Bit Error Rate (BER) and Frame Error

storing the extrinsic soft messages. To facilitate the parallel Rate (FER) of two (4608, 4096) rate-8/9 regular QC-LDPC codes

processing, an optimized data scheduling structure is developed.

that we designed recently using variable node degree 3 and 4,

Min-Sumtrecodingcproceduroefandpper1Sa reraeraTrrahranenggeesddtrMucmtu-rSe uomf

this paper is as follows. decoding procedure and

In t the e

eSrercotrcioconoorIIrIne, ct0Tihoen.7rB5eEspReciatsinvudeslFeyd.ERTinhoetfhmtehoedsiicmfouidleeadtwiMoiint.nh-vIStaurcimaanballbegeonrosideteehnmdefwgrirotehmeaF4isgic.salm1iontrgheaftatchttahoner

performance of high rate QC-LDPC codes are briefly discussed. an order of magnitude lower than that of the code with variable

Section III presents the partially parallel decoder architecture for node degree 3 at SNR=4.5dB. In the traditional design, more

general high rate QC-LDPC codes. Various optimizations to reduce memories are needed to store the extrinsic messages for a code with

the hardware complexity for message updating and parallel larger variable and check degree. In this paper, we propose a

processing are addressed in Section IV. The conclusions are drawn memory efficient partially parallel architecture that only causes

in Section V.

negligible increase of memory size when the density of 1-entries in

the H matrix is increased.

0-7803-9390-2/06/$20.00 ©C2006 IEEE

5107

ISCAS 2006

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:18:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

- FER &=3

-2

iF-~~d~~---E-FFEE'R=Rdddv43-

6

~ :,1,,

.......

E 10 ...... : ............ ............

,CV

l° 4 4 4 12 34 16 18

4

AS2 4A 4~6

Eb/No (dB)

Figure 1. BER/FER performance of the (4608, 4096) QC-LDPC codes.

III. DECODER ARCHITECTU1RE FOR GENERAL HIGH RATE QCLDPC CODES
In general, the parity check matrices H of QC-LDPC codes contain cyclicly shifted identity sub-matrices, zero sub-matrices and compound circulant sub-matrices. Each of the compound matrices consists of 2 superimposed cyclicly shifted identity matrices. In this paper, for simplicity, the cyclically shifted identity matrix and the compound circulant matrix are called weight-I and weight-2 circulant matrix, respectively. The memory efficient architecture for high rate QC-LDPC codes with H matrix containing weight-I circulant matrices and possible zero matrices are discussed first. Then, it is extended for more general cases that H matrix contains a
small portion of weight-2 circulant matrices.

A. Decoder Architecture for HMatrix Consisting of Weight-I Circulant and Possible Zero Sub-Matrices

It can be seen from (1) that the check-to-variable messages R(k)
cv
corresponding to one row of H matrix can be represented with a

magnitude,~~~~ ~ ~se~odsals,antde compressed form which includes four elements, i.e., 1) the smallest

smeacgonintdusdmea,ll2estthmeagsneict.oundde,2s)maantldhle4s)t

magnitude, the signs of

3))ttheeiinddexxoofthhe
all messages. Based

on this observation, a memory efficient serial decoder was proposed

in [6]. The decoding throughput of each tile is less than 5.5Mbps.

Partially parallel decoder architectures, which can achieve a good

trade-off between hardware complexity and decoding throughput,

are preferred in practice.

The decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes with H-i matrix consisting of weight-I circulant matrices and possible zero matrices
is shown in Fig. 2. The R-memory module is used to store the compressed check-to-variable messages. Each S-memory . a.nd Imemory module is used to store the column sum and the intrinsic
messages corresponding to a block column of the H matrix, respectively. The Check-node Processing Unit (CPU) performs the task expressed in (3). Each Variable-node Processing Unit (VPU)
works in both decoding phases. It performs the computation

Snki) n cnRSf-) in the R({) message updating phase and
performs (4) in the colunm sum s(k) updating phases. The decision

and parity equation check unit is introduced for tentative decision and parity check computation. The function of data distributor is to
recover individual check-to-variable messages Rkk) from their

compressed form.

|r

Assuming that the H matrix is a j x K block matrix and all the submatrices in H are txt weight-i circulant matrices, the message updating procedure in the k-th iteration is as follows. In check-to-

variable message R k) updating phase, for each row c, three

messages RC'
[v/t]- th VPU

Svkvikai)theandppaaIthvh,

where v indicated

e

bbNy(ct)he,

are sent to the dashed line to

calculate L). Then, all of the intermediate results calculated by the K VPUs are sent to CPU. Finally, the compressed R(k) messages
for the K block columns are generated and stored into one entry of
the R-memory. In the column sum updating phase, the summation Of R(k) messages for each column of H matrix is accumulated. For

each row c, the individual messages R(k) recovered by the data
distributor are sent to the K VPUs to accumulate S(k) via the path V
indicated by the solid line. At the end of this phase, the final summations of check-to-variable messages, S(k) corresponding to
v
aall ccolumns ofthe H matrix are stored in S-memories.

If H matrix contains zero submatrices, data received by CPUs and VPUs corresponding to zero matrices must be filtered out. Therefore, additional data path for zero matrices are introduced as

the following. When computing R (k) a largest positive value M
determined by the word length is sent to CPU from the inserted
MUXs. According to Min-Sum algorithm, the value Mhas no effect on the computation in the R(k) message updating phase. When
mi
accumulating SV, to avoid adding an undesired data to the
summation, the write enable signal w en for the associated Smemory must be disabled. Apparently, if the H matrix consists of only weight-I matrices, all the MUXs connected to the CPU can be removed.

For a quantitative comparison of the memory size between the
proposed architecture and the traditional designs, e.g., [7-8], let us consider the (4608,4096) (4,36) regular QC-LDPC code mentioned before. Assuming that 6-bit quantization and dual-port memory are

used, the total required memory for the extrinsic messages, intrinsic

messages and estimated codeword is 258k bits in the traditional

designs. The total memory for R-memory, S-memory, I-memory and

toehsvitesirpmaa3pt0ee0rd0.

coofdmeewmoordryiSis16r4ekd'ubccietsd wuistihngthteheprarocphoisteedctaurpeprporaecshe.ntTehdusi,n
The detailed calculation is not given.

B. PartiallyParallelArchitectureforHHMatrixwith Weight-]
Circulant Matrices and Possible Zero Matrices The proposed partially parallel decoder architecture, which
linearly increases the decoding throughput with small hardware

~R~~~m~~~~~~~~ ~ ~~~~R mem,oriy ddaadstriuo

|-K------

---

-

Ij
pair,tyequatioin I l

'V9 ll

len 13meoy

--e s meim(ory|

Figure 2. The Decoder architecture for Hmatrix containing weight-i and possible zero submatrices.

5108
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:18:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1t|ISg~- ~ -E~roverhead,isshowninFig3.Tofacilitatethemultipledataaccesses
per clock cycle in a p-parallel architecture, the data in p adjacent rows or columns are stored into one memory entry. In the R-
memory, check-to-variable messages in p adjacent rows are stored
in one R-memory entry. Similarly, in one S-memory (I-memory) entry, column summations (intrinsic messages) in p adjacent columns are stored in one memory entry. Because one data distributor can only distribute the compressed check-to-variable messages onto one row of H matrix, p data distributors are needed. In Fig. 3, for clarity, we use one symbol (e.g., adder and MUX) to represent p components for parallel processing cases. Because the data stored in the R-memory are in the row order while the data stored in the S-memory and I-memory are in the column order, data scheduling and reverse scheduling units are needed for resolving the data access conflicts. In general, they can be implemented using barrel shifter. An optimized data scheduling (reverse scheduling) unit is proposed in Section IVA.
C. Architecturefor HMtrices with Weight-], Weight-2 Circulant Matrices and Zero Matrices
We next discuss a more general case in which H matrix may contain a small portion of weight-2 sub-matrices. Similar to the method illustrated above, for p-parallel processing, messages corresponding to p adjacent rows (columns) are stored in one memory entry. For each weigh-2 circulant matrix, 2p messages stored in both S-memory and R-memory are accessed at each clock cycle in the both decoding phases. The key issue of partially parallel
architecture for this case is how to schedule the data order for the 2p
messages. For the considered H matrix of high rate QC-LDPC codes, the number of the block columns containing weight-2 circulant matrices is small. By block column permutation, these block columns can be arranged together. Each matrix in these block columns can be decomposed into two submatrices such that each decomposed submatrix is a weight-I circulant matrix or a zero matrix. Consequently, the parallel processing techniques discussed before can be employed.
The non-parallel decoder architecture for LDPC codes with H matrices containing weight-1, weight-2 circulant matrices and zero matrices is shown in Fig. 4. Because the matrix decomposing method is used, a new block row with small number of submatrices is introduced for each block row in the H matrix. Thus, to generate check-to-variable messages from the data corresponding to the two decomposed rows, two CPUs are needed. The CPUb is assigned to the decomposed rows with shorter length. For a block column
containing weight-2 circulant matrix, to recover the two.LCV..

messages at each clock cycle, two VPUs are needed. The second

data distributor is introduced to distribute message RCV onto the
shorter decomposed block rows. The compressed check-to-variable

messages corresponding to one row of H matrix are generated by

the merge unit using the outputs from the two CPUs. To facilitate

distributing the check-to-variable messages from the compressed

form to two decomposed rows, 6 elements in the compressed

message for one row are needed, i.e., the smallest and the second

smallest magnitude, the index ofthe second smallest magnitude and

the sign bits for the two decomposed rows. For one block column

containing weight-2 circulant matrix, two message accumulating

operations are performed each clock cycle in the column sum S v

updating phase. Therefore, 4-port S-memory is needed to support two read and two write operations in the same clock cycle. Because
adjacent memory entries are sequentially accessed, we can also use

a 2-port memory

memory and 4 accesses. In

tbhuifsfewrarye,gisttheers

dtaotsaupwpiodrtthsiomfulSt-amneeomuosryfouirs

doubled. With the matrix decomposing method, an original weight-

1 circulant matrix in the block columns discussed above is

decomposed into a weight-I matrix and a zero matrix. The zero

matrix is put into the shorter decomposed block row. Similar to the architecture presented in Section ILA, for the zero matrix, a maximum magnitude M is sent to CPUb to compute RCV . The
second write enable signal w2_en of S-memory associated to this

block column is disabled such that the undesired data outputted by

VPU2 can not be accumulated to column sum. For a zero block

matrix in the discussed block columns, both of the CPUs receive the value M and both of the write enable signals of S-memory must be disabled.

Because the cyclic propriety is maintained in the decomposed matrices, the partially parallel decoder architecture for this case can be developed using the same method introduced in Section III.B. On the other hand, if most of block columns of the H matrix containing weight-2 circulant matrices, the approach presented in this paper is not suited for area-efficiency. Instead, the architecture proposed in [9] can be employed. There is a special case for the pparallel processing. For a weight-2 circulant matrix, if the
difference between the two cyclic shifting offsets is less than p/2,
the two check-to-variable messages corresponding to two I-entries in one column may need to be added together and accumulated into
the summation in one clock cycle in the column sum updating
phase. Thus, a multiplexer network is needed to select different
structures of VPU. Due to the limited space, it is not discussed in
details.

IRt::mem

=

a I~ tItdotrt d

Isgdatdiestri1butor

It I bIb

o

I
to CPU$1

g

-

I I.,)\i,

U2 IuX

rverse

data l

reverse

data

+

8chvediding schedut ng scheduling Sh Wid~n

+ 1 + 1I +

+ Vg

I

W

I

In_

/I

S

Sm

l~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ l

Figure 3. The partially paralled decoder architecture.

Figure 4. The decoder architecture for H matrix containing weight-2 circulant matrices.

5109
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:18:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IV. OPTIMIZATION ON THE PARTIALLY PARALLEL DECODER ARCmTECTURE
A. The Optimized Data Scheduling (Reverse Scheduling) Unit
The data scheduling (reverse scheduling) unit plays the key role
in the parallel processing architecture. In [10], a component
performing a similar task was implemented with a combination of data concatenation unit and cyclic shifter, which significantly
increases the hardware cost and computation latency. In this paper, an efficient data scheduling unit is proposed by exploiting the structure of LDPC codes. For high rate QC-LDPC codes, the number of non-zero matrices in one block column of H matrix is
very limited, typically around four. It implies that the number of data cyclic shifting patterns in a block column is limited. Hence, a
very simple switching block can be employed for resolving the data access conflicts for each circulant matrix. If there are W non-zero matrices in one block column, a W: I multiplexer will be needed to select one switching block for a circulant matrix from the W
switching blocks for a block column of H matrix.
Fig. 5 shows a data scheduling unit for 4 parallel processing
targeted to a weight-I circulant matrix (shifting offset 7, dimension 4k+1, where k is an arbitrary integer). For the considered matrix size and parallelism level, each S-memory module has k+1 entries. When assessing the messages corresponding to the considered weight-I circulant matrix, the sel signal only changes three times,
i.e., sel "01" for the last entry, sel "11" for the second last entry and sel "00" for all of other entries. The scheduling unit introduces one clock delay from input to output. The data reverse scheduling unit can be designed in a similar way. In the proposed decoder architecture, the two message updating phases are not overlapped. Due to the similarity in the structure of data scheduling unit and reverse scheduling unit, the two components can be combined into one unit. It works alternately in the two message updating phases.
B. The Optimized Data Merge Unit
calcuFFliiaggt..ec66thuseshhtosohmwwea.ltlhaeesrtarcmcmahagigntnieitcetttuuurdreee ooafndtdhttheheoepssotpeicmoiinzddedsmdmaaaltllasetmsatemrmegagegnuuinnitittuudtteo
from the outputs of the two CPUs. On the input side, the data set
a_ml, a_m2, a_I, a_sgn and a_sgn_prod are the output of CPUa,
which represent the smallest and the second smallest magnitude, the index of the second smallest magnitude, the sign bits and the product of sign bits. The data set b_ml, b_m2, b_I, b_sgn and bsgnprod are the output of CPUb in the same meaning. On the output side, the index I_a and I_b are used to control the data distribution for the two decomposed rows, respectively. If the smallest magnitude needs to be distributed to all the positions of a decomposed row, the index value for the decomposed row is set to a value Z, where Z is larger than the number of submatrices in this decomposed row. Otherwise, the index value shows the position to which the second smallest magnitude will be distributed.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, an area efficient partially parallel decoder architecture suited for Min-Sum decoding algorithm for general high rate QC-LDPC codes is proposed. By rearranging the decoding procedure of the Min-Sum algorithm and exploiting the data redundancy of extrinsic messages, over 30% of memory can be reduced compared to the traditional design. To enable parallel processing, a low complexity data scheduling structure is proposed. The approach discussed in this paper facilitates the applications of high variable degree and/or high rate LDPC codes in area/power sensitive high speed communication systems.

11

_DD

12
12 D

13

14

01
0
0| 04
/ eI

Figure 5. The structure of the optimized data scheduling unit.

asiiprnd _ bsgrupr
Z
z
_-i
am2

sgn_ib
D

am
b M2
b ml
.

compare &
\

Figure 6. The structure ofthe merge unit.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, "Low-density parity-check codes," IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] M. P. C. Fossorier, "Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes
from circulant permutation matrices," IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, vvol l. 500, ppp. 17 7888 - - 117993, , A Aug g. 200 04 4. [3] Z. Li and B. V. K. V. Kumar, "A class of good quasi-cyclic low-
density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph," Thirty-Eighth Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, vol. 2, pp. 1990-1994, 2004. [4] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic and S. Lin, "Near-Shannon-Limit QuasiCyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 52, pp. 1038-1042, Jul. 2004. [5] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, "Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 406-414, Mar. 2002. [6] M. Cocco, J. Dielissen, M. Heijligers, A. Hekstra, J. Huisken, "A scalable architecture for LDPC decoding," Automation and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition, vol. 3, pp. 88-93, Feb. 2004. [7] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, "Joint (3, k)-Regular LDPC Code and Decoder/Encoder Design," IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
vol. 52, pp. 1065-1079, Apr. 2004.
[8] Z. Wang, Y. Chen and K. Parhi, "Area-efficient quasi-cyclic LDPC
code decoder architecture," in proc. of ICASSP 2004, vol. 5, pp. 4952, May 2004. [9] Z. Wang and Q. Jia, "Low complexity, high speed decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes," in proc. of IEEE ISCAS'05, Japan, May, 2005.
[10] Y. Chen and D. Hocevar, "A FPGA and ASIC implementation of rate-1/2, 8088-b irregular low density parity check decoder," IEEE GLOBECOM '03, vol. 1, pp. 113-117, Dec. 2003.
[11] M. M. Mansour, N. R. Shanbhag, "High-throughput LDPC decoders," IEEE Trans. on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 11, pp. 976-996, Dec. 2003.

5110
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:18:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

