792

INTERMAG 2006

GQ-07

FPGA-based LDPC Code Evaluation using an Advanced Magnetic Recording Channel Model.
X. Hu1, B. Vijaya Kumar1, L. Sun2 and J. Xie1 1. ECE, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; 2. Agere Systems, Longmont, CO, USA

Abstract - Low density parity check (LDPC) codes have shown near-capacity performance in addi-

tive white Gaussian noise channels. In magnetic recording systems, the readback signals suffer

from various impairments in addition to additive noise. In this paper, we describe an FPGA-based

advanced magnetic recording channel simulator and an LDPC coding system. Major magnetic

recording channel impairments (namely, inter-symbol interference, transition noise, electronic

noise, and media nonlinearities) are included in this model. The LDPC coded system is evaluated down to bit error rate (BER) of 10-11 and frame error rate (FER) of 10-8.

I. ADVANCED MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNEL MODEL

Besides additive white Gaussian noise, various noises and disturbances occur in the magnetic record-

ing system during the writing process and reading process. These impairments can be categorized

into inter-symbol interference (ISI), electronics noise, transition noise, and media nonlinearity.

For longitudinal magnetic recording channel, an isolated magnetic transition response is a Lorentz-

ian pulse characterized by PW50 and pulse amplitude. Inter-symbol interference occurs when the

pulse response extends over multiple symbols. The transition noise comes from the irregular tran-

sitions. The zigzag magnetic boundaries cause the readback signal transitions to shift in time

domain (transition jitter) and cause the distortion of the pulse shape (width variation). To charac-

terize the level of transition noise as well as the additive noise, we defined the signal-to-noise ratio

(SNR) as the ratio of the power of a single pulse and the height of noise power spectral density,

which includes jitter noise, width variation and AWGN.

Media nonlinearities typically include partial erasure (PE) and nonlinear transition shift (NLTS).

When back-to-back transitions occur, the magnetic field generated by the bit cells interferes with

each other, and thus reduces the readback signal amplitude. This phenomenon is called the par-

tial erasure. This effect is modeled by amplitude loss with a PE ratio of r. In addition, during the

writing process, the magnetic field generated by previous written bit cells interferes with the

writing field potentially affecting the location of the transition. This effect is called the nonlin-

ear transition shift (NLTS). The NLTS effect is modeled by the transition shift determined by the

NLTS factor ε.

II.

THE OVERALL SYSTEM AND IMPLEMENTATION ON FPGA

The overall FPGA-based LDPC code evaluation system includes LDPC codec, soft output Viter-

bi algorithm (SOVA) and the advanced magnetic recording channel model, shown in Fig. 1. The bit

sequence after the encoding process is delivered to the magnetic recording channel. Fig. 2 shows

the implementation structure based on the channel model. The data from the channel output are

equalized into certain PR target (e.g., EPR4 in our case). The decoding processor performs the

SOVA-based soft detection of the PR data and the decoding of the LDPC codes, which also features

the channel iterations between the SOVA unit and the decoder[1]. The system was implemented on

a Xilinx Virtex II 8000 FPGA device.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The system including SOVA+LDPC scheme and the channel model is written in VHDL. A quasicyclic LDPC code with column weight 3 is chosen to be the ECC for evaluation and ERP4 is selected to be the PR target. Timing analysis shows that the system can operate up to a clock rate of 40MHZ and the throughput is around 37 Mbit/sec. Fig. 3 shows the BER and FER performance of the system after 25 inner iterations in the LDPC decoder and 2 channel iterations. At a normalized recording density (PW50/T) of 2, the BER reaches 10-8 at SNR level of 17.5 dB. Fig. 4 compares the decoding performance of the system under different channel models including AWGN channel, PR channel, recording channel with and without media nonlinearities. Fig. 5 shows the effect of media nonlinearities (PE and NLTS) on the error correcting performance. When the PE ratio reaches 0.7 or the NLTS level reaches 0.15T, the loss in BER is significant. Fig. 6 shows the BER performance with only 5 inner iterations in the decoder, which increases the guaranteed throughput by 5 compared with 25 iterations in previous simulations. The loss in error correcting performance is around 1 dB. To conclude, we implemented an advanced magnetic recording channel model together with the SOVA+LDPC system. The SOVA+LDPC system shows strong error correcting performance under different levels of channel impairments. The coding behavior of the system under different channel settings is presented. [1] L. Sun, T. Horigome, and B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, “A high-throughput, field programmable gate array implementation of soft output Viterbi algorithm for magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, pp 3081-3083, Jul. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

