Fast convergence algorithm for LDPC Codes
Frank Kienle, T. Lehnigk-Emden, Norbert Wehn Microelectronic System Design Research Group, University of Kaiserslautern
Erwin-Schroedinger-Strasse, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany
Email: {kienlejlehnigk wehn} @eit.uni-kl.de

Abstract- Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes are one of the most powerful codes known today. They are decoded iteratively by a message passing algorithm. There exist many different update schemes of the exchanged messages. The major difference of all update schemes is the convergence speed, i.e. the achieved communications performance for a limited number of iterations.
This paper presents a new decoding algorithm which efficiently utilizes the encoder property of linear encodable LDPC codes. The basic idea is to interpret the LDPC encoder as an encoder with puncturing unit which opens as well the door for hybrid ARQ schemes. The presented new decoding algorithm shows a faster convergence behavior than state of art decoding schemes and it results in a lower error floor.

I-
IN
CN * CN
PN

Pmax
I
,

p3

p2

P -A- - -(\
Permutation (1-1)

1-9- --I

grouping a _,P ,

I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes were introduced by Gallager 1963 [1] and re-discovered in 1996 by MacKay and Neal [2]. LDPC codes are due to their excellent error correction performance considered for future telecommunication standards and are already part of the new DVB-S2 standard
[3] LDPC codes can best be describe by a bipartite graph
(Tanner graph) with so called variable nodes (VN) and check nodes (CN). The standard iterative decoding algorithm is a two-phase decoding algorithm. During each phase only one type of the nodes are active. For example the DVB-S2 standard requires up to 50 iterations to gain the desired communications performance. The problem of this two-phase algorithm is the slow convergence speed, i.e. the reached communications performance for a fixed number of iterations. Recent publications [4] [5] [6] have shown that the convergence speed can be improved when the updated messages of a node are directly passed to the other nodes. The newly updated messages are thus taken earlier into account during the iterative decoding process.
In this paper we present a new decoding algorithm which has a faster convergence speed than state of art decoding algorithms. To derive the new decoding algorithm the encoder of linear encodable LDPC codes is revised. We show that there exist two equivalent encoder schemes with identical output streams, while one encoder scheme provides a final puncturing unit. A further advantage of the encoder structure with puncturing unit is the capability to support hybrid ARQ schemes, where an initial codeword is transmitted and additional punctured bits are sent on request.
The new decoding algorithm interprets the transmitted codeword as a punctured codeword which is efficiently exploited by

Fig. 1. Tanner-graphs of an irregular LDPC code with IN (Information Node), CN (Check Node), PN (Parity Node) and pi (fraction of nodes with degree i )
calculating the joint maximum a posteriori (MAP) probability of several CNs. This differs from standard decoding algorithms which calculate the MAP probability of each CN separately.
This paper is structured as follows. In Sec. II irregular LDPC codes and their encoding structure is presented. The standard decoding algorithms are summarized in Sec. III. In Sec. IV the new decoding algorithm is explained followed by simulation results in Sec. V and the conclusion in Sec. VI.
II. IRREGULAR LDPC CODES
A LDPC code is a linear block code which is defined by a
sparse M x N parity check matrix H. It contains d, ones per column and d, ones per row, called row and column weight respectively. A (dv,d,)-regular LDPC code has uniform row
and column weights, otherwise the code is called irregular. A parity check code can be represented by a bipartite graph
(Tanner-graph). With M check nodes (CN) which correspond to parity check constraints and N variable nodes (VN) representing the data symbols of the codeword. An edge in the graph corresponds to a one entry in the parity check matrix. For systematic (linear) encodable LDPC codes, the VNs can be divided into two parts. The K = N -M information nodes (IN) belong to the information bits and the M parity nodes (PN) represent the transmitted parity bits. This is shown in Fig. 1. The degree distribution p gves the fraction of nodes for
a certain degree [7], p(x) := E2 pix, with Ei Pv 1
and dmax the maximum information node degree. Regarding the check nodes we are only interested in the number of incident edges coming from the information nodes. We refer to this as the check node grouping a. The check node grouping

0-7803-9392-9/06/$20.00 (c) 2006 IEEE 2393

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:15:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

a)

CNft

d

P

11'

1 23

d

\\ | 1

2

3

d-

Fig. 3. 2-state trellis corresponding to a parity check constraint, encoder

b)

which generates an identical trellis.

Fig. 2. Two equivalent encoding schemes: a) with parity check grouping
and 2-state RSC encoder. b) with 2-state RSC encoder and puncturing
unit.
a is as uniform as possible for all CNs, which can be seen as a parity check node regular graph. The resulting code rate is R = N- MN if H is of full rank. The fixed connectivity scheme of the parity nodes results from the encoding scheme which is illuminated in the following.
A. Encoding view
One possibility to realize a linear encoding scheme is shown in Fig. 2a. The encoder contains of a repetition unit which repeats the information bits corresponding to its degree distribution. This expanded sequence is interleaved (II), followed
by a parity grouping, denoted as Ea in the following. This
grouping calculates the parity check sum of a bits (modulo 2). The result is accumulated by a 2-state RSC encoder afterwards. The resulting parity sequence ' and the systematic information u are transmitted. The resulting Tanner-graph of this encoder results in the fixed zigzag connectivity of the parity nodes. This encoder was presented in [8].
It is well known that a parity check can be seen as a terminated 2-state trellis, see Fig. 3. An identical trellis is obtained when using a 2-state RSC encoder. This is shown
in Fig. 3 for a CN of degree d,. The terminating bit of the
trellis corresponds to the trellis state at time step d -1 which corresponds as well to a grouping d, -1
Thus we can replace the grouping Ea of Fig. 2a by a 2-
state RSC encoder. The output of this encoder is the encoder state at the trellis step a. This is fed into the successive 2-state RSC encoder unit.
Thus we can replace the parity check grouping (L:a) and
the accumulator by one accumulator. To obtain identical results of both encoders a puncturing unit has to be established at which the puncturing pattern is defined by the parity grouping a, and vice versa. It is important to note that the encoder structure of Fig. 2b can also be interpreted as an irregular Turbo-Code [9].
B. Parity Check Matrix
The importance of this encoding view can be seen when illuminating the structure of parity check matrices of upcoming standards like DVB-S2 [3] or WiMax 802.16e [10]. All these codes are composed of identity matrices which are cyclic

shifted. One example of such a structured LDPC code (R = 0.5) is shown in the top of Fig. 4 for N = 960 variable nodes and M = 480 check nodes. The size of the permuted identity matrices is P = 40. This principle structure of the parity check matrix reflects as well the DVB-S2 codes. However these codes are composed of identity matrices of size P = 360.
By reordering the rows and columns a band diagonal matrix can be obtained which is although often denoted as staircase matrix, this is shown in the bottom of Fig. 4. Note that the band diagonal placement of degree 2 variable nodes is widely used [1 1] [12] since it guarantees full rank of the parity check matrix H and a linear encoding procedure as seen in Fig. 2. Although the LDPC codes specified by 802.16e can be reordered to obtained a staircase, however, in these codes not all parity nodes are participate in the band diagonal structure.
To summarize the important statements of this section. Whenever we can reorder a given LDPC code to a staircase parity check matrix and thus a zigzag connectivity of the parity nodes, we can utilize an accumulator plus puncturing unit for the encoding process. This opens as well the door for designing LDPC codes capable for puncturing, which can be exploited for example within a hybrid ARQ scheme. Furthermore a decoding algorithm with fast convergence behavior can be established which is presented in the following sections.

Structured paritv check matrix
40

to
0
z CL) 160

200i 0240

8 2 6 0 4 8 2 6 0 4 8 2 6 0 4 8 2 6 0 4 8 2 6S

I
1.
Variable Nodes

s

Reordered LDPC Code

C.) 0~~~~~

1 20
0
200 z
U~
0L 240
40

--0 40 80 120 160 200 240 280 320 360 400 440 480 520 560 600 640 680 720 760 800 840 880 920 960 Variable Nodes

Fig. 4. Example structure of a parity check matrix (i.e. in DVB-S2) in original (top) and reorderd (bottom) view.

2394

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:15:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. STANDARD DECODING ALGORITHMS

Information Nodes

LDPC codes are decoded using a message passing (MP) algorithm [1] which exchanges soft-information iteratively between variable and check node.
The updates of the nodes can be done in a canonical scheduling. In the first step all variable nodes have to be updated and in the second step all check nodes.
The exchanged messages are assumed to be log-likelihood
ratios (LLR). Each variable node of degree d, calculates an
update of message k according to:

Permutation H(H)
E
Parity Nodes Fig. 5. Graph representation of an irregular LDPC codes presented with a punctured trellis representation.

dk

Akc= Ach + EAi.

(1)

i= 1,i7+k

With Ach the corresponding channel probability of the VN and
Ai the LLRs of the incident edges. The check node of degree d, updates the message k accordingly to:

or Uk = 1. The MAP probability in the logarithm domain of input k calculates to:

Ak = log PrUk o AIN, APN}

(3)

Pr{uk 1IAIN, APN}

dc

tanh(Ak/2) I tanh(Ai/2).

(2)

This two-phase MP is the most common applied decoding algorithm for LDPC codes. The major disadvantage of this two-phase update is its slow convergence speed.
Recent publications [4] [5]show that the convergence speed can be improved when processing a subset of check nodes and to pass the newly calculated messages immediately to the corresponding VNs. The VNs updates their outgoing messages. The next CN subset will thus receive newly updated messages which improves the convergence speed. This scheduling was called turbo decoding message passing in [4] and is referred to in the following as turbo MP. To the best of our knowledge the turbo MP is the decoding algorithm with the best convergence speed so far.
For an infinite number of iterations all mentioned decoding algorithms in this paper results in an identical final convergence behavior, assuming the same LDPC code. Note that the error floor can be different.

IV. NEW DECODING ALGORITHM
To derive the new decoding algorithm we revise the Tannergraph view assuming the encoding procedure of Fig. 2b. The expanded and interleaved information bit sequence defines the input of a 2-state trellis determined by the accumulator. The resulting graph view of this encoding scheme is shown in Fig. 5. The check nodes with the fixed zigzag connectivity of the parity nodes (Fig. 1) are replaced by a punctured 2-state trellis. In this example, just every fourth parity bit is available, all other parity bits are punctured out. This corresponds to a
grouping of La=4.
For the decoding process we can again use a two-phase process. In the first phase all INs are active according to Equ. 1. The messages are passed permuted to the 2-state trellis.
In the second phase the messages are calculated via the 2state trellis by applying the well known Log-MAP algorithm [13].
The Log-MAP algorithm computes the maximum a posteriori (MAP) probability for each bit to have been sent as Uk = 0

The LLRs of the information nodes AIN represents the system-

atic input, while the PN messages APN represents the parity

information.

When all a posteriori values A are calculated we pass

back the extrinsic information A"et which is determined by

subtracting the appropriate input messages AIN to avoid a con-

firmation of the own old informtion. Thus A"et is calculated

to:

)ext 'gXAIN

(4)

This extrinsic information principle is known from turbodecoding [14]. Now the next iteration can be started.
The used Log-MAP algorithm across the entire 2-state trellis is not very efficient, since we still use two-phases. One phase for the trellis calculation and one phase to activate the INs. It is more efficient to decode a small section of the trellis, update the information via the INs and then calculate the next section. To process only a section within a trellis is called windowing [15]. The entire trellis is partitioned in smaller sections, while the state metrics at the boundaries are calculated by an acquisition phase with a forward or backward recursion respectively. This increases the computational complexity. However, the acquisition phase can be avoided in our case if the duality between the puncturing and termination condition of the 2-state RSC code is utilized. We know that the parity bit of a 2-state RSC encoder will terminate the trellis in the next time step. Thus this termination condition can be utilized to start the forward or backward recursion when ever a parity node information is available. The corresponding graph representation is shown in Fig. 6. The number of IN edges involved in one trellis section is referred to as section size Z. The number of involved parity nodes in one section corresponds to the number of CNs which are jointly calculated.
The improved decoding algorithm which we call sectionalized message passing (SMP) is sketched in the following: Starting from the INs the corresponding messages are passed to the first trellis section. Using the Log-MAP algorithm the new extrinsic information are calculated and passed back to the participating INs. The output messages of the INs are updated according to Equ. 1. Then the next trellis section is

2395

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:15:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Information Nodes

*. X

O(

first 6 parity bits are punctured out the next parity bit is transmitted and so on. The resulting code rate is R = 0.5.

Permutation (HI) Z=8<

In Fig. 8 all available parity bits are transmitted which corresponds to a very low code rate of R= 0.125. The code was constructed by using the progressive edge growth (PEG)

Tanner-graph algorithm [11].

Parity Nodes

The sectionalized MP uses in both cases a section size of Z = 70 which corresponds to a joint processing of 10 CNs

Fig. 6. Graph representation of an irregular LDPC code presented with trellis for the code rate R = 0.5. The convergence speed of the

sections with a section size of Z = 8.

sectionalized MP is always faster than the turbo MP and the

two-phase MP. In particular for low code rates the difference in

processed. One iteration is finished when all trellis sections have updated their messages. The message passing between the boundaries of two trellis sections is done via a parity node and thus according to a standard variable node of degree two.
The advantage of the sectionalized MP is two fold:
. The convergence speed of this sectionalized MP is faster then the two-phase MP and the turbo MP. The improvement of the convergence speed results from the joint MAP processing of several CNs.
. The sectionalized trellis update supports a high code rate flexibility. Within a trellis section additional parity information can be provided which is then optimally used within the Log-MAP algorithm.
The joint calculation of CNs is always possible if parity nodes can be represented by a band diagonal structure of the parity check matrix as explained in Sec. II-B.
To obtain the fastest convergence speed the size of a section Z should be chosen in a matter that all incident edges are connected to different INs. As long as this can be

the convergence speed is remarkable. For the case R = 0.125 and 10 iterations the turbo MP and two-phase MP the FER did not even start to converge.
Note that for the two-phase MP around 200 iterations are required to achieve the communications performance of the 30 iteration SMP algorithm.
Another important fact is that the error floor could be lowered due to the joint calculation of several CNs. The sectionalized MP has a lower error floor than the turbo MP which has in turn a lower error floor than the two-phase MP.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
LDPC codes uses an iterative message passing algorithm for decoding. Especially for lower code rates many iterations are required to achieve the desired communications performance. In this paper we introduce a new decoding algorithm which considerably reduce the number of required iterations and furthermore results in a lower error floor.

guaranteed each section calculates the true MAP probability of the incoming messages. If the section size Z is chosen to be identical to the grouping a each CN is calculated separately. Thus the resulting sectionalized MP for Z = a would result in the turbo MP of [4].
For an LDPC decoder hardware implementation utilizing the sectionalized trellis decoding a parallel XMAP architecture as shown in [15] becomes mandatory. Note that although high throughput LDPC decoders assuming a fixed CN degree apply a parallel CN implementation [4]. The advantage of the new approach is to implement one XMAP processing block with e.g. Z = 20 which is capable to process variable CN degrees by merging multiple CNs to one trellis section of size Z.
V. RESULTS
Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 shows the communications performance of irregular LDPC codes using different message passing algorithms. The two-phase MP, turbo MP, and the new sectionalized MP. The left frame error rate (FER) curves assume 10 iterations, the right curve 40 and 30 iterations for two-phase MP,turbo MP and sectionalized MP respectively.
100k blocks are simulated over an AWGN channel using the encoding procedure of Fig. 2b. Both codes are in fact the same irregular LDPC code with 1600 bits and an IN degree distribution of
(p3 = 0.52, p4 = 0.24, P5 = 0.08, p9 = 0.04, P31 = 0.12)
In Fig. 7 a puncturing according to a = 7 is applied. The

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1963.
[2] D.J.C. MacKay and R. Neal, "Near Shannon limit performance of LowDensity Parity-Check Codes," Electronic Letters, vol. 32, pp. 16451646, 1996.
[3] European Telecommunications Standards Institude (ETSI), "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) Second generation framing structure,channel coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and other broadband satellite applications; TM 2860rl DVBS2-74r8," www. dvb. org.
[4] M.M. Mansour and N.R. Shanbhag, "High-Throughput LDPC Decoders," IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976-996, Dec. 2003.
[5] D.E. Hocevar, "A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes," in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS '04), Austin,USA, Oct. 2004, pp. 107-112.
[6] G. Colavolpe, "Design and Performance of Turbo Gallager Codes," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 1901-1908, Nov. 2004.
[7] T.J. Richardson and R.L. Urbanke, "The Capacity of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Under Message-Passing Decoding," IEEE Transaction on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599-618, Feb. 2001.
[8] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, "Irregular Repeat-Accumulate Codes," in Proc. 2nd International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2000, pp. 1-8.
[9] B.J. Frey and D.J.C. MacKay, "Irregular Turbocodes," in Proc. of the
37th Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing,
Illinois, USA, 1999. [10] IEEE 802.16, "Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access,"
www . wimaxforum. org.
[11] X.Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.M. Arnold, "Regular and Irregular Progressive Edge-Growth Tanner Graphs," IEEE Transaction on Information Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386-398, jan 2005.

2396

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:15:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10o

77.

.......................

101

...
m. .%
..
...............

102

...............................

1= LU LL.
103

.................. ................

104

..........

10-

X-1 0 iter: two-phase MP
--10 iter: turbo MP
10 iter: sectionalized MP'

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

E b/No

102 03
10'

Fig. 7. Decoding of an irregular LDPC code with different MP algorithms at 10 and 40 (30 SMP) iterations. The code rate is R=0.5 which is obtained by puncturing.

*. r. 0-0. m- ft 1-11 .....-- ---. --l --l --- -10.... 101
102

03

104

10 iter: two-phase MP

0-

in1-iter: turbo MP

* 10 iter: sectionalized MP:::::......

-0.5

0

0.5

E b/No

10o

I MIIAP

jff.

........

-10

..............-.-%--------------------

:::'. "%;.

m. ... ..

i 01'

cc LU LL.

i 0-' k

-.m

.....................................

.. .%

10-4 10-

.. .. .. ..
X 40 iter: two-phase MP
40 iter: turbo M P
30 iter: sectionalized M .....................

-0.5

0

0.5

1

E b/No

w~ith (30 Fig. 8. Decoding of irregular LDPC code

different MP algorithms at 10 and 40

SMP) iterations. The code rate is R==0.125, all available parity bits

are transmitted.

[12] T. Tian, C.R. Jones, J.D. Villasenor, and R.D Wesel, "Selective Avoidance of Cycles in Irregular LDPC Code Construction," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242 1247, Aug. 2004.

[13]

P. Robertson, P. Hoeher, and Villebrun, "Optimal and Sub-Optimal Maximum a Posteriori Algorithms Suitable for Turbo Decoding," European Transactions on Telecommunications (ETT), vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 119 125, March-April 1997.

[14] C. Berrou, "The Ten-Year Old Turbo Codes are Entering into Service,"

11I0- IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 4 1, pp.

1 16, Aug. 2003.

[15] A. Worm, H. Lamm, and N. Wehn, "VLSI Architectures for High-Speed

MAP Decoders," in Proc. 14th International Conference on VLSI Design

(VLSI '01), Bangalore, India, Jan. 2001, pp. 446-453.

2397

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:15:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

