IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 2021

627

Belief Propagation Decoding of Short Graph-Based Channel Codes via Reinforcement Learning
Salman Habib , Allison Beemer , and Jörg Kliewer , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this work, we consider the decoding of short sparse graph-based channel codes via reinforcement learning (RL). Specifically, we focus on low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, which for example have been standardized in the context of 5G cellular communication systems due to their excellent error correcting performance. LDPC codes are typically decoded via belief propagation on the corresponding bipartite (Tanner) graph of the code via flooding, i.e., all check and variable nodes in the Tanner graph are updated at once. We model the node-wise sequential LDPC scheduling scheme as a Markov decision process (MDP), and obtain optimized check node (CN) scheduling policies via RL to improve sequential decoding performance as compared to flooding. In each RL step, an agent decides which CN to schedule next by observing a reward associated with each choice. Repeated scheduling enables the agent to discover the optimized CN scheduling policy which is later incorporated in our RL-based sequential LDPC decoder. In order to reduce RL complexity, we propose a novel graph-induced CN clustering approach to partition the state space of the MDP in such a way that dependencies between clusters are minimized. Compared to standard decoding approaches from the literature, some of our proposed RL schemes not only improve the decoding performance, but also reduce the decoding complexity dramatically once the scheduling policy is learned. By concatenating an outer Hamming code with an inner LDPC code which is decoded based on our learned policy, we demonstrate significant improvements in the decoding performance compared to other LDPC decoding policies.
Index Terms—Reinforcement learning, belief propagation, LDPC codes, optimization.
I. INTRODUCTION
B INARY low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are sparse graph-based channel codes whose rates approach the capacity of symmetric binary input channels [3], [4]. Due to their excellent error correcting performance, they have recently been standardized for data communication in the 5G cellular new radio standard [5], [6]. LDPC codes are decoded via iterative algorithms, such as belief propagation
Manuscript received October 15, 2020; revised March 18, 2021 and April 9, 2021; accepted April 10, 2021. Date of publication April 16, 2021; date of current version June 21, 2021. This work was supported in part by U.S. NSF under Grant ECCS-1711056, and in part by the Combat Capabilities Development Command of the U.S. Army Research Laboratory through Cooperative Agreement under Grant W911NF-17-2-0183. This paper was presented in part at the 2020 IEEE Information Symposium on Information Theory, Los Angeles, CA, USA, [1], and the 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2020 [2]. (Corresponding author: Salman Habib.)
Salman Habib and Jörg Kliewer are with the Helen and John C. Hartmann Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102 USA (e-mail: sh383@njit.edu).
Allison Beemer is with the Department of Mathematics, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire, Eau Claire, WI 54701 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSAIT.2021.3073834

(BP), which operate on the code’s Tanner graph representation [7]. Tanner graphs of LDPC codes are sparse bipartite graphs whose vertex sets are partitioned into check nodes (CNs) and variable nodes (VNs). Typically, iterative decoding on a Tanner graph is carried out via flooding: all CNs and VNs are updated simultaneously [8]. The flooding schedule is computationally intensive compared to sequential scheduling, where nodes are updated serially based on the latest messages propagated by their neighbors. Sequential scheduling problems deal with finding the optimized order of node updates to improve the convergence speed and/or the decoding performance as compared to the flooding scheme.
A sequential CN scheduling scheme, so-called node-wise scheduling (NS) was proposed in [9], where the scheme’s criterion for selecting the next CN depends on residuals, given by the magnitude of the difference between two successive messages emanating from each CN. In NS, all CN to VN messages corresponding to a CN with the highest residual are propagated simultaneously. NS of an iterative decoder can lead to improved performance, as shown in [9]: intuitively, the higher the residual of a CN, the further that portion of the graph is from convergence. Hence, scheduling CNs with higher residuals is expected to lead to faster and more reliable decoding compared to the flooding scheme. However, the computation of provisional messages is necessary for updating CN residuals in real-time, rendering NS more computationally intensive than the flooding scheme for the same total number of messages propagated.
To mitigate the computational complexity inherent in the approach to NS in [9], we propose an RL-based NS (RL-NS) scheme for sequential iterative decoding of short block length LDPC codes suitable for operating in the waterfall region of the bit error rate (BER) versus signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) performance curve. Instead of computing residuals prior to scheduling, RL-NS employs a CN scheduling policy that utilizes an action-value function to determine how beneficial an action is for optimizing the scheduling order, where the optimal scheduling order is the one that yields a codeword output by propagating the smallest number of CN to VN messages. An action is defined here as selecting a single CN to convey its outgoing messages to its adjacent VNs. The scheduling algorithm is modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP) [10], where the Tanner graph is viewed as an environment with m possible actions (CN scheduling operations), and an agent learns to schedule CNs that elicit the highest reward. Repeated scheduling enables the agent to accurately estimate the action-value function.

2641-8770 c 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

628

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 2021

Note that machine learning-assisted BP decoding of linear codes has been addressed in, e.g., [11]–[13], which use deep learning based on neural networks to learn the noise on the communication channel. A deep learning framework based on hyper-networks is used for decoding short block length LDPC codes in [14], where the hidden layers of the network unfold to represent Tanner graphs executing successive message passing iterations. In [15], [16], reinforcement learning (RL) is proposed for constructing polar codes. [15] focuses on BP-based polar code decoding and frames the factor graph selection problem as a multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem. On the other hand, [16] frames the construction of polar codes as a maze traversing game where a chosen path in the maze corresponds to a unique polar code construction. Further, RL was recently applied to hard decision-based iterative decoding in [17]. However, to the best of our knowledge, RL has not previously been successfully applied to soft iterative decoding of LDPC codes in the open literature. Our work also differs from the vast majority of works (including [11]–[14], [17]) in that our decoder is not based on deep learning. In this paper, we propose both model-free and model-based RL strategies for sequential decoding of short LDPC codes targeted for operating in the waterfall region. In the model-free category, we consider both computing Gittins indices (GIs) of CNs and Q-learning for estimating the corresponding action-value functions. For our model-based approach, we employ Thompson sampling (TS).
In the GI scheme, our RL problem is viewed as Markovian MAB problem where each CN (arm) is considered to be an independent bandit process (with independent rewards), leading to a learning complexity that grows linearly with the number of CNs. In the case of TS, CN to VN messages are assumed to be independent and normally distributed, allowing us to sample rewards from a known distribution in each learning step. For our model-free strategy, we first employ a TS-based NS algorithm, where the rewards are sampled from a chi-squared distribution, without learning any action values. Later on, we propose a variant of this approach by incorporating Q-learning. Specifically, to generate action values, rewards are sampled instead of being computed as in standard Q-learning.
Q-learning [18], [19] is a Monte Carlo approach for estimating an action-value function without explicit assumptions on the distribution of the bandit processes [20]. A major drawback of applying Q-learning to the sequential CN scheduling problem at hand is that the learning complexity grows exponentially with the number of CNs. Indeed, a straightforward choice of the underlying state space of the Q-learning problem is the space of vectors of quantized CN values: however, the number of CNs ranges in the hundreds for practical LDPC codes, so that even for a binary quantization of each CN value, the cardinality of the state space is not computationally manageable in the learning process. A multitude of methods for reducing the learning complexity in RL have been proposed in the literature: for example, complexity may be reduced by partitioning the state space (see, e.g., [21], [22]), imposing a state hierarchy (see, e.g., [23]), or reducing dimensionality (see, e.g., [24], [25]).

In this work, we follow an approach similar to these methods in order to reduce complexity, albeit tailored to the problem at hand. Specifically, for Q-learning we propose grouping the CNs into clusters, each with a separate state and action space. While this approach has the potential to make learning tractable, it also assumes independence of the clusters, an assumption that will not hold due to the inevitable presence of cycles in the Tanner graph. In order to mitigate the detrimental effect of clustering on the learning performance, we leverage the structure of the Tanner graph of the code by optimizing the clusters so that dependencies between clusters are minimized. To this end, we define novel graphical substructures in the Tanner graph termed cluster-connecting sets (CCSs), which capture the connectivity between CN clusters, and analyze their graphtheoretic properties. We give general bounds on the size of a CCS, as well as tighter bounds and some exact results for regular and array-based LDPC codes whose performance is simulated. Guided by the properties of CCSs, we propose a novel cluster selection scheme to optimize Q-learning performance.
This paper extends our previous work in [1], [2] in several aspects and presents these novel results in a comprehensive fashion, highlighted as follows:
• We propose a model-based version of RL based on Thompson sampling in addition to model-free methods. This approach has the salient feature that it allows us to incorporate the graph message densities into the model and thus is capable of providing a significant performance improvement.
• We provide an additional graph-theoretic result related to the size of CCSs in array-based LDPC codes, along with the complete proof of Theorem 2, superseding the results in [2].
• Based on the observation that RL scheduling schemes tend to result in isolated bit errors in the decoded codeword estimate, as compared to bursty errors for BP flooding, we also propose a novel code construction with an added high rate outer code. Our results show that with only a minor rate penalty and negligible additional complexity, a low complexity Hamming outer code can significantly improve the performance beyond the gain already observed for RL sequential decoding, but that this outer code is not able to improve on BP decoding via flooding.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Necessary background is given in Section II. In Section III, we discuss the RL-NS scheme in detail. In Section IV we provide the details of CN scheduling policies learned via the model-free and model-based RL methods outlined above. In Section V we introduce CCSs and show how they are related to the dependencies between clusters. A novel cluster optimization scheme based on the detection of cycles is discussed in Section VI. In Section VII we discuss the experimental setup, and analyze numerical results by comparing the proposed RL-based sequential decoding schemes to conventional decoders found in the literature. Section VIII concludes the paper.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HABIB et al.: BP DECODING OF SHORT GRAPH-BASED CHANNEL CODES VIA RL

629

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. LDPC Codes

An [n, k] binary linear code is a k-dimensional subspace of

Fn2, and may parity-check

be defined as the kernel of a (non-unique) binary matrix H ∈ F2m×n, where m ≥ n − k. The Tanner

graph of a linear code with parity-check matrix H is the bipar-

tite graph GH = (V ∪ C, E), where V = {v0, . . . , vn−1} is a set of variable nodes (VNs) corresponding to the columns of

H, C = {c0, . . . , cm−1} is a set of check nodes (CNs) corre-

sponding to the rows of H, and edges in E correspond to the

1’s in H [7]. That is, H is the (simplified) adjacency matrix

of GH. For a subset X of nodes, denote by N (X) the set of all neighbors of X, and define NA(X) = N (X) ∩ A, where A

is some subset of nodes.

LDPC codes are a class of highly competitive linear codes

defined via sparse parity-check matrices or, equivalently,

sparse Tanner graphs [3]. Due to this sparsity, LDPC codes

are amenable to low-complexity graph-based message-passing

decoding algorithms, making them ideal for practical appli-

cations. BP iterative decoding, considered here, is one such

algorithm. Note that critical substructures in the Tanner graph,

such as absorbing sets (ABSs) [26], are capable of producing

decoder failures. We have stated in [1] that sequential schedul-

ing significantly reduces the impact of ABSs on the decoder

performance.

In this work, we present experimental results for two par-

ticular classes of LDPC codes: (j, k)-regular and array-based

(AB-) LDPC codes. A (j, k)-regular LDPC code is defined by

a parity-check matrix with constant column and row weights

equal to j and k, respectively [3]. A (γ , p) AB-LDPC code,

where p is prime, is a (γ , p)-regular LDPC code with addi-

tional structure in its parity-check matrix, H(γ , p) [27]. In

particular,

⎡ II

I

···

⎤ I

H(γ , p) = ⎢⎢⎢⎣I...

σ ...

σ2

···

...

···

σ p−1 ...

⎥⎦⎥⎥,

I σ γ −1 σ 2(γ −1) · · · σ (γ −1)(p−1)

(1)

where σ z denotes the circulant matrix obtained by cyclically left-shifting the entries of the p×p identity matrix I by z (mod p) positions. Notice that σ 0 = I. Each row (resp., column) of sub-matrices of H(γ , p) forms a row (resp., column) group. Observe that there are a total of p (resp., p2) column groups (resp., columns) and γ (resp., γ p) row groups (resp., rows) in H(γ , p). A lifted LDPC code is obtained by replacing the
non-zero (resp., zero) entries of the parity-check matrix with
randomly generated permutation (resp., all-zero) matrices [28].

B. Reinforcement Learning
In an RL problem, an agent (learner) interacts with an environment by taking actions, which alter the state of the environment, and receiving a reward in return for each action. The goal of the agent is to maximize the total reward in a series of actions. Here, the environment is given by the Tanner graph of the code whose state space is modeled as a finite MDP [10],

and the optimized sequence of actions, i.e., the scheduling of
individual CNs, is obtained by employing an action selection
policy learned either by computing GIs, via Q-learning, or
via TS. In the remainder of the paper, define [[x]] {0, . . . , x − 1},
where x is a positive integer. In an environment with m possible actions, let St(0), . . . , St(m−1) represent the m possible states resulting from taking those actions, where each random variable (r.v.) St(j), j ∈ [[m]], can take M possible real values. Let state space S contain all Mm possible realizations of the sequence St(0), . . . , St(m−1), and let the r.v. St ∈ [[Mm]], with realization s represent the index of the realization st(0), . . . , st(m−1). Since each index corresponds to a unique realization, we also refer to St as the state of the environment at time t. If an action (scheduling of a CN) is
modeled as an independent random process, we define a r.v. Sˆt ∈ [[M]], with realization sˆ, as the realization st(j) of any CN j. Let At ∈ [[m]], with realization a, represent the index of an action taken by the agent at time t, and A = [[m]] be an action space, where a ∈ A. Let St+1 represent a new state of the MDP after taking action At, and let s denote its realization. Also, let a r.v. Rt(St, At, St+1), with realization r be the reward yielded at time t after taking action At in state St.

C. Solving the RL Problem by Computing Gittins Indices
In case of GIs, our RL problem can be viewed as a MAB problem with Markovian bandits, where the playing of an arm represents an action and is equivalent to scheduling a CN in our setup. If an m-armed bandit problem, formulated as an MDP, is solved via Markov decision theory, the state space consists of Mm possible state realizations of all the m arms. Consequently, the complexity of solving the MAB via Markov decision theory grows exponentially with the number of arms. On the other hand, if the arms are independent bandit processes, it is clear that the optimal solution to the m-armed bandit problem can be obtained by solving m 1-dimensional optimization problems, leading to an exponential complexity reduction. Hence, for a given arm with index a, one need only compute its action-value function, in this case known as the Gittins index (GI) G(sˆ, a), given by [29]

Eτ,sˆ G sˆ, a = max
pτ ∈P

τ −1 t=0

β

t

Rt

Sˆt, At, sˆ

|Sˆ0 = sˆ, At = a

,

Eτ

τ −1 t=0

β t |Sˆ 0

=

sˆ, At

=

a

(2)

where τ is a r.v. with realizations in {1, 2, . . . , } that gives the number of times the agent plays arm a, pτ is the distribution of τ , P represents the collection of all allowed distributions and is determined by allowed stopping time policies, and 0 < β < 1 is the reward discount rate. The action-value function G(sˆ, a) represents the long-term expected reward for taking action a in state sˆ, indicating how beneficial it would be for the agent to take that action [10], [29]. For the Gittins scheme, the optimal
arm scheduling policy for an agent is given by

πG = arg max G(sˆ, a).

(3)

a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

630

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 2021

D. Solving the RL Problem via Q-Learning
Optimal policies for MDPs can also be estimated via Monte Carlo techniques such as Q-learning [17], [18], [20]. The estimated action-value function Qt(St, At) in Q-learning represents the expected long-term reward achieved by the agent at time t after taking action At in state St. To improve the estimation in each time step, the action-value function is adjusted according to a recursion
Qt+1(s, a) = (1 − α)Qt(St = s, At = a)
+ α Rt(s, a, St+1 = f (s, a))

+ β max Qt f (s, a), a , (4)
a ∈[[m]]

where f (s, a) represents the new state s as a function of s and a, 0 < α < 1 is the learning rate, and Qt+1(s, a) is a future action-value resulting from action a in the current
state s [18, pp. 95–96]. Note that the observed state, which is a collective state St(0), . . . , St(m−1) of all m bandit processes, allows the agent to incorporate any dependencies of the arms,
unlike the Gittins scheme. In Q-learning, the optimal policy for the agent, πQ(τ), in state
s is given by

πQ(τ )

=

arg

max
a

Qτ

(s,

a),

(5)

where τ is the total number of time steps after observing an initial state S0. Although the optimal policy is initially unknown to the agent, with the aid of Q-learning it is possible to recursively determine the policy and the action-value function together via -greedy exploration (see Section IV for details).

E. Solving the RL Problem via Thompson Sampling
TS is widely used for solving RL problems [30]. In this
approach, the environment is represented using a statistical
model which, in each TS step t, predicts the reward Rt and/or the new state St given the current state St and action At. The rewards associated with each action are randomly sam-
pled from a posterior distribution representing the agent’s
prior belief of the expected reward. This randomization allows
the agent to actively explore the environment. Suppose that
the modeled environment generates a new state based on a conditional probability measure p(St = s |At = a), and let θa = Es [Rt|St, a] denote the mean reward (model parameter) for playing a bandit’s arm a, which is initially unknown to the agent. Also, let the agent’s uncertainty about the value of θa be represented using the prior distribution pa = P(θa ∈ R|St, a), where R denotes the set of all possible rewards.
In a typical TS scheme, an estimated mean reward θˆa is randomly sampled from the prior pa, and the action a with the potential of generating the highest expected long-term reward is selected according to a = arg maxa∈A θˆa. The prior distribution pa is then updated based on the knowledge of a and s , and subsequently used for sampling the reward in the next
TS step. Repeated sampling allows the agent to take actions
which are expected to generate high rewards in the long run.

III. RL-BASED NODE-WISE SCHEDULING
The proposed RL-NS is a serial decoding algorithm in which a single message-passing iteration is given by messages sent from a scheduled CN to all its neighboring VNs, and subsequent messages sent from these VNs to their other CN neighbors. Sequential CN scheduling is carried out until a stopping condition is reached, or an iteration threshold is exceeded. The RL-NS decoder applies a scheduling policy based on an action-value function to decide the CN to be scheduled next, avoiding the real-time calculation of residuals.
We define the optimal scheduling order to be the one that yields a codeword output by propagating the smallest number of CN to VN messages. The decoding algorithm informs the imaginary agent of the current state of the decoder, and the reward obtained after performing an action (scheduling a CN). Based on these observations, the agent takes future actions, to enhance the total reward earned, which alters the state of the environment and also the future reward. In this work, the reward Ra obtained by the agent after scheduling CN a is defined as Ra = maxv∈N (a) ra→v, where the residual ra→v is computed according to

ra→v |ma→v − ma→v|.

(6)

Here, ma→v is the message sent by CN a to its neighboring

VN v in the previous iteration, and ma→v is the message that CN a would send to VN v in the current iteration, if scheduled.

The magnitude of the residual diminishes as the BP algo-

rithm converges. Consequently, propagating CN to VN mes-

sages with relatively large residuals first is expected to lead to

faster convergence of the BP algorithm [9]. Note that in our

RL problem, residuals are computed for estimating the action-

value functions only, which is done offline (see Section IV for

details).

An iteration number (resp., iteration threshold max) of the

RL-NS scheme is analogous to a time step t (resp., stopping

time τ ) discussed in Section II. Let x = [x0, . . . , xn−1] and

y = [y0, . . . , yn−1] represent the transmitted and the received

word, respectively, where xi ∈ {0, 1}, yi = (−1)xi + z, and

z ∼ N (0, σ 2). The posterior log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of xi is

expressed

as

Li

=

log

Pr(xi Pr(xi

=1|yi =0|yi

) )

.

The

soft

channel

information

input to the RL-NS algorithm is a vector of LLRs denoted

as L = [L0, . . . , Ln−1]. In the RL-NS scheme, the value

(or state) of CN j at the end of iteration is defined by

sˆ(j) =

n−1 i=0

Hj,iLˆ (i)

,

where

Lˆ (i)

=

c∈N (vi) mc→vi + Li is

the posterior LLR computed by VN vi at the end of iteration

, and boring

mc→vi CN c.

is the message received by VN vi from a neighThe resulting vector Sˆ = Sˆ(0), . . . , Sˆ(m−1), with

realization sˆ = sˆ(0), . . . , sˆ(m−1), represents a “soft-syndrome”

vector of the RL-NS scheme obtained at the end of iteration .

Since we model the NS scheme as a finite MDP, it is nec-

essary to quantize each soft CN state. Let gM(·) denote an

M-level scalar quantization function that maps a real number

to any of the closest M possible representation points set by the quantizer. Let S = S(0), . . . , S(m−1) be the quantized syndrome vector, where a realization s(j) = gM(sˆ(j)). We call S
a quantized soft syndrome for the case M > 2, and a binary

syndrome if M = 2. The state space containing all possible

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HABIB et al.: BP DECODING OF SHORT GRAPH-BASED CHANNEL CODES VIA RL

631

Algorithm 1: RL-NS for LDPC Codes

Input : L, H

Output: reconstructed signal

1 Initialization:

2

←0

3 mc→v ← 0 4 mv→c ← Lv 5 Lˆ ← L

// for all CN to VN messages // for all VN to CN messages

6 Sˆ ← HLˆ

7 foreach a ∈ [[m]] do

8

s(a) ← gM(sˆ(a))

// M-level quantization

9 end

// decoding starts

10 if stopping condition not satisfied or < max then 11 s ← index of S

12 select CN a according to an optimum scheduling policy

13 foreach VN v ∈ N (a) do

14

compute and propagate ma→v

15

foreach CN c ∈ N (v) \ a do

16

compute and propagate mv→c

17

end

18

Lˆ (v) ← c∈N (v) mc→v + Lv // update LLR of v

19

end

20 foreach CN j that is a neighbor of v ∈ N (a) do

21

sˆ(j) ← v ∈N (j) Lˆ (v )

22

s(j) ← gM(sˆ(j))

// update syndrome S

23

end

24

← +1

// update iteration

25 end

Finally, we remark on a decoding error type encountered by the NS scheme which we expect to correct using RL-NS: namely, undetected errors. Undetected errors occur when the Hamming distance between the received and decoded codewords is greater than the distance between the transmitted and received ones. In the RL-NS scheme, the agent attempts to schedule a CN based on its expected residual instead of the immediate one. As a result, the RL-NS scheme employs a more global decoding approach in contrast to the pure NS scheme [9] and is more likely to overcome undetected errors.
IV. LEARNING CN SCHEDULING POLICIES
In our RL problem, the agent’s goal is to estimate, from experience, an optimum CN scheduling policy to be used in Step 12 of Algorithm 1. This task manifests an exploration vs. exploitation trade-off which is typical of any RL framework. To maximize the total reward in the long-run, the agent must schedule CNs that are known to produce high residuals (exploitation). But to discover such CNs, the agent must select CNs that were not scheduled before (exploration). To accommodate this trade-off, we utilize the well-known -greedy exploration scheme [10], [31]. The estimate of the actionvalue function improves as more CNs are scheduled by the agent. In the following, we discuss several RL techniques, both model-free (in Sections IV-A and IV-B) and model-based (in Section IV-C), for learning the action-value function used in RL-NS.

quantized syndromes is represented as S(M). Let S ∈ [[Mm]], with realization s, denote the index of a realization of S , let Sˆ ∈ [[M]], with realization sˆ, represent a quantized CN value, and let an action A ∈ A, with realization a, denote the index of a scheduled CN in iteration . The proposed RL framework for sequential decoding is shown in Fig. 1. The idea is that scheduling a CN updates the state of the environment, namely the Tanner graph of the code, which in turn provides the resulting residual as a reward to the agent. This reward is used to schedule a new CN in the next iteration.
The RL-NS based sequential LDPC decoder is shown in Algorithm 1. The input to this algorithm is a soft channel information vector L and a parity-check matrix H. Note that the CN scheduling policy in Step 12 of Algorithm 1 is equivalent to scheduling the CN with the highest expected residual. Observe that the time complexity for selecting this CN grows linearly with the total number of CNs, as opposed to being zero for flooding BP.
The RL-NS algorithm is dynamic, and depends both on the graph structure and on received channel values: thus, the scheduling order may differ with subsequent transmissions, and will outperform a scheduling order which is fixed in advance. As NS follows a greedy schedule, there exists a non-zero probability that initially correct, but unreliable, bits are wrongly corrected into an error that is propagated in subsequent iterations. In contrast, our RL-NS scheme allows some room for exploration (not just exploitation, as in NS) by scheduling the CN with the highest expected long-term residual, mitigating such a potential error propagation.

A. Estimating the GIs

In this approach, the m CNs are assumed to be m indepen-

dent bandit processes, implying that scheduling a particular

CN does not affect the state of the remaining ones. This

assumption would hold in tree-like Tanner graphs where a

message propagated by a CN to a VN is independent of the

messages computed by all other CNs in the graph. However,

in practice, Tanner graphs contain cycles that induce depen-

dencies between the CN to VN messages. Nonetheless, the GI

approach offers a low-complexity learning task where the size

of the state space observed by the agent increases linearly with

the number of CNs in the underlying graph. Note that in our

problem P(S +1|S , A ) ∈ {0, 1} as the Tanner graph is fixed

and the messages are deterministically computed. We also

apply a specific stopping time policy by selecting an integer

∗ max

∈

{1, 2, . . . , }

with

the

condition

Pr(

max

=

∗max) = 1.

Based on these considerations, (2) is rewritten for our MAB

problem as

G sˆ, a = max ∗ max

max −1 =0

β

R

sˆ, a, sˆ

max −1 =0

β

.

(7)

Since an agent must obtain the GIs via RL, we obtain an average GI, denoted G˜ (sˆ, a), over multiple realizations of L. After computing G˜ (sˆ, a) for all sˆ and a, the optimum CN scheduling policy is πˆG = arg maxa G˜ (sˆ, a).

B. Q-Learning
Q-learning is an adaptive algorithm for computing optimal policies for MDPs [18], [20]. Q-learning does not rely

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

632

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 2021

Fig. 1. Illustration of the RL setting used in this work. In every learning step, a fictitious agent schedules a CN with index a when the state of the environment
is s, and receives reward Ra, which is also the maximum residual of CN a. The state of the environment changes from s to s as the quantized soft-syndrome is updated after scheduling.

on explicit assumptions on the distribution of the bandit

processes, unlike the Gittins scheme where the LLRs ema-

nating from CNs are assumed to be independent. However,

the state space observed by the agent now grows exponen-

tially with m. As a result, the traditional Q-learning approach

suffers from a much greater learning complexity. To overcome

this problem, we propose a novel clustering strategy. A cluster

is defined as a set of CNs with separate state and action spaces.

Let z m represent the size (number of CNs) in a cluster. The

state of a cluster with index u ∈

m z

, is a sub-syndrome

S(u,z) = S(uz), . . . , S(uz+z−1) of the syndrome S , with a state

space Su(M) containing all possible Mz sub-syndromes S(u,z),

where |Su(M)| |S(M)|. Hence, the total number of states that

may be observed by the agent is upper-bounded by

m z

|Su(M)|.

The action space of cluster u is defined as Au = [[z]]. We

will discuss graph-theoretic properties of CN clusters and the

resulting optimization approach in Sections V and VI, respec-

tively. For now, let us assume that a set of CN clusters has been

chosen as a result of this optimization. We denote the set of

CNs belonging to the cluster of index u by Cu = {c1, . . . , cz}.

Smaller clusters lead to reduced complexity, but the larger

the size of the cluster, the greater the ability of the agent

to take into account any dependencies between CN LLRs.

Hence, there exists a trade-off between the ability of clustered

Q-learning to take into account these dependencies, and the

learning complexity: the cluster size should be large enough to

accommodate the dependencies of the CN messages as much

as possible, but not so large that learning is infeasible.

Apart from this trade-off, clustering does not restrict

Q-learning, as the reward obtained by the agent is indiffer-

ent to the size and location of the clusters in the Tanner

graph. Moreover, scheduling a CN in one cluster may affect

the residuals of other CNs distributed across multiple clusters

due to their connection with a common set of VNs. Also note

that in traditional Q-learning, a scheduling operation alters the

state corresponding to the entire syndrome S , whereas in the

clustering approach, only the states of the clusters that are

connected to the neighbors of scheduled CN are affected. As

a result, states of the unaffected clusters may be reused for

estimating future action-values. Based on the considerations

above and noting that decoder iteration is analogous to time

t, (4) can be rewritten for clustered Q-learning as

Q +1(su, au) = (1 − α)Q (su, au)

+ α R (su, au, f (su, au))

+ β max Q (f (su , au ), au ) , (8)
u ,au
where su ∈ [[Mz]] and au ∈ Au are the state and action indices of cluster u, respectively, f (su, au) represents the new state su ∈ [[Mz]] as a deterministic function of su and au, and R (su, au, su) = Rau . In clustered Q-learning, the action in optimization step is selected via an -greedy approach
according to

au =

uniformly random over u and Au w.p. , πQ( ) w.p. 1 − ,

(9)

where the CN scheduling policy is

πQ( ) = arg max Q (su, au).

(10)

au s.t. u∈

m z

Once RL has been accomplished, πQ( max) yields an optimized CN scheduling policy, where max is the maximum number of decoder iterations (learning steps) for a given input of channel information L.
Algorithm 2 gives the method for clustered Q-learning. The input to this algorithm is a set L = {L0, . . . , L|L |−1} containing |L | realizations of L over which clustered Q-learning is performed, a clustering Cu for all cluster indices u, and a parity-check matrix H. This algorithm trains the agent to learn the optimum CN scheduling policy in (10) for a given H, which is later incorporated in Step 12 of Algorithm 1. In each optimization step , the agent performs NS for a given L. As a result, clustered Q-learning can be viewed as a recursive Monte Carlo estimation approach with L being the source of randomness.

C. Thompson Sampling
TS has been applied successfully for RL in finite MDPs (see e.g., [30]). In this work, we show how TS can also be used for sequential decoding of LDPC codes. To accomplish this, we consider two distinct RL schemes which incorporate TS.
In the first approach, we model the decoding environment using a density evolution approach based on Gaussian approximation of the CN to VN messages [32]. The decoding error probability, P , in iteration , computed by this density

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HABIB et al.: BP DECODING OF SHORT GRAPH-BASED CHANNEL CODES VIA RL

633

Algorithm 2: Clustered Q-Learning

Input : L , H, and a clustering Cu for all cluster indices u
Output: Estimated Q max (su, au) for all u 1 Initialization: Q0(su, au) ← 0 for all su, au and u
2 for each L ∈ L do

3

←0

4

Lˆ ← L

5 Sˆ ← HLˆ

6 foreach a ∈ [[m]] do

7

s(a) ← gM(sˆ(a)) // M-level quantization

8 end

9 while < max do

10

schedule CN au according to (10)

11

select u as cluster index of CN au

12

S(u,z) ← s(j1), s(j2), . . . , s(jz)

13

su ← index of S(u,z)

14

foreach VN v ∈ N (au) do

15

compute and propagate mau→v

16

foreach CN c ∈ N (v) \ au do

17

compute and propagate mv→c

18

end

19

Lˆ (v) ← c∈N (v) mc→v + Lv // update LLR

of v

20

end

21

foreach CN j that is a neighbor of v ∈ N (au) do

22

sˆ(j) ← v ∈N (j) Lˆ (v )

23

s(j) ← gM(sˆ(j))

// update syndrome S

24

end

25

su ← index of updated S(u,z)

26

R (su, au, su) ← highest residual of CN au

27

compute Q +1(su, au) according to (8)

28

← +1

// update iteration

29

end

30 end

evolution scheme can be formulated exactly as

⎛ P = Q⎝

⎞ μL + λμ(mc)→v ⎠
2

for regular LDPC codes, VN message m(c→) v, λ is

where μm( c)→v is the mean of the VN degree of the LDPC

the CN to code, and

μL is the mean of the input LLRs. By incorporating Gaussian approximation, we assume that a CN to VN message (m(c→) v)

in NS is independent of the other messages generated by CN

c, and where

normally μ(mc)→v is

distributed the mean

according to N of mc(→) v. Based

(μm( c)→v , on this

2μ(mc)→v ), assump-

tion, the difference ma→v − ma→v, of the successive CN to

VN messages passing along edge c → v, possesses a normal

difference distribution with mean μmc→v − μmc→v and variance 2μmc→v + 2μmc→v . This allows us to employ the MSE residual rc→v = (ma→v − ma→v)2 as a non-central chi-square distributed reward, sampled in each decoding step. We call

the resulting RL approach NS based on TS (NS-TS), shown in

Algorithm 3.

In contrast to the other decoding methods proposed in this

paper, Algorithm 3 directly solves our RL problem without

learning action-values, and hence no clustering is required. In

Algorithm 3: NS Based on TS

Input : L, H

Output: reconstructed signal xˆ

1 Initialization:

2 ←0

3 mv→c ← Lv 4 mc→v ← 0

// for all VNs // for all CNs

// decoding begins

5 while < max do 6 if = 0 then

7

schedule CN a randomly

8 end

9 else

10

schedule CN a with the highest residual

11

end

12 foreach VN v ∈ N (a) do

13

compute and propagate ma→v

14

foreach CN c ∈ N (v) \ a do

15

compute and propagate mv→c

16

foreach edge c → v such that v ∈ N (a) do

17

mc→v ← mc→v

// previous mesg.

18

compute mc→v

// current mesg.

19

update μmc→v and μmc→v

20

δc→v ←

μmc→v −μmc→v

2
// update

2μmc→v +2μmc→v

non-centrality parameter

21

rc→v ∼ χ (1, δc→v)

// sample and

store residual

22

end

23

end

24

Lˆ (v) ← c∈N (v) mc→v + Lv

aposterior LLR

// update

25

end

// hard-decision step

26 foreach VN v do

27

if Lˆ (v) < 0 then

28

xˆ(v) ← 1

29

end

30

else

31

xˆ(v) ← 0

32

end

33

end

34 if Hxˆ = 0 then

35

break

// stopping condition reached

36

end

37

← +1

38 end

Step 21 of Algorithm 3, χ (1, δc→v) denotes the non-central

chi-squared distribution of rc→v non-centrality parameter δc→v

with =(

degree of freedom μmc→v −μmc→v )2,
2μmc→v +2μmc→v

1 and which

is updated in each TS step. The CN with the highest sam-

pled residual rc→v is selected in Step 10. In comparison, the CN selection criteria in NS is based on a calculated rc→v, as

defined in (6). The means computed in Step 19 of Algorithm 3

are taken over the previous ten messages (at most) passed

along the edge c → v. Since no Q-learning is involved,

Algorithm 3 can be used to decode much longer block codes

than considered in this paper, with reasonable computational

complexity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

634

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 2021

Algorithm 4: TS-Based Clustered Q-Learning

Input : L , H, and a clustering Cu for all cluster indices u

Output: Estimated action-value Q max (su, au) for all su and au 1 Initialization: Q0(su, au) ← 0 for all su and au
2 for each L ∈ L do

3

←0

4

μmv→c ← μL

5

mc→v ← 0

6

Lˆ ← L

// for all VNs // for all CNs

7 Sˆ ← HLˆ

8 foreach j ∈ [[m]] do

9

s(j) ← gM(sˆ(j))

// M-level quantization

to obtain S0

10

end

11

while < max do

12

schedule CN au according to (10)

13

select u as cluster index of CN au

14

S(u,z) ← s(j1), s(j2), . . . , s(jz)

15

foreach VN v ∈ N (au) do

16

μmau→v ← φ−1 1 − [1 − φ (μmv→au )]ρ−1

// update sampling parameter

17

sample and propagate mau→v

18

foreach CN c ∈ N (v) \ au do

19

μmv→c ← μL + (λ − 1)μmc→v

20

foreach edge c → v such that v ∈ N (au) do

21

μmc→v ← μmc→v

22

μmc→v ← φ−1 1 − [1 − φ (μmv→c )]ρ−1

23

δc→v ←

μmc→v −μmc→v

2

2μmc→v +2μmc→v

// update non-centrality

parameter

24

rc→v ∼ χ (1, δc→v) // sample and

store residual

25

end

26

end

27

Lˆ (v) ← c∈N (v) mc→v + Lv // update LLR

28

end

29

R (su, au) ← highest residual of CN au

30

compute Q max (su, au) according to (8)

31

foreach CN j that is a neighbor of v ∈ N (au) do

32

sˆ(j) ← v ∈N (j) Lˆ (v )

33

s(j) ← gM(sˆ(j))

// update syndrome S

34

end

35

← +1

36

end

37 end

Second, we propose a novel TS-based clustered Q-learning scheme, shown in Algorithm 4. The inputs to the algorithm are L , H, and a clustering Cu for all cluster indices u. The algorithm outputs the estimated action-values. The mean of the input LLR, μL, and the CN and VN degrees in the corresponding Tanner graph of H, ρ and λ respectively, are used to update the message means propagated in each iteration (see Steps 16, 19, 22). The rewards in this algorithm are sampled from a χ (1, δc→v) distribution in each Q-learning iteration, as shown in Step 24. Unlike Algorithm 3, Algorithm 4 is not a direct decoding scheme. Instead, Algorithm 4 is a model-based RL approach which estimates the action-values via TS for offline

learning of the CN scheduling policy in (10). The policy is then

incorporated in the CN scheduling step of Algorithm 1, result-

ing in a unique RL-NS scheme. Consequently, Algorithm 4 is

the TS counterpart of Algorithm 2.

In contrast to Algorithm 3, the means of the CN to VN

messages in Algorithm 4 are computed based on the Gaussian

approximation of messages (see Steps 16 and 22) by evaluating

the φ function (whose details can be found in [32]), while the

means of the CN to VN messages in Algorithm 3 are computed

eomf Apilrgiocariltlhym. In4diesesda,mthpeleCdNfrotomVNN(μm(mea)sus→avg,e2mμa(mua)→u→vv

in ),

Step 17 whereas

the CN to VN message ma→v in Step 13 of Algorithm 3 is

computed. In other words, Algorithm 3 directly employs NS to

update the non-centrality parameter δc→v, while Algorithm 4 obviates the need for NS by updating δc→v based on a statisti-

cal model of the environment (decoder), providing a significant

reduction in learning complexity with respect to a TS algo-

rithm that would run NS. Nonetheless, Algorithm 4 is still

more complex than Algorithm 2 due to the TS step involved in

Step 24. Note that though Algorithm 3 invokes the NS scheme,

it can still be viewed as a model-based RL approach as the

agent interacts with the environment in real-time to update

(learn) the non-centrality parameter δc→v (see Step 20).

An advantage of the model-based scheme is that it is not

necessary to learn action values to choose the optimum CN

scheduling policy, as shown in Algorithm 3, and hence fairly

long LDPC codes can be decoded. Moreover, TS allows the

agent to actively explore the environment via reward sam-

pling. However, the downside of TS is that once Q-learning

is incorporated, the resulting algorithm (Algorithm 4) is even

more complex than the method used for model-free learning

(Algorithm 2) due to the residual sampling step.

V. CLUSTER-CONNECTING SETS

In clustered Q-learning, the total number of states observed

by the agent is upper-bounded by the number of clusters times

the number of states within each cluster:

m z

|Su(M)|

|S (M) |.

Note that the learning complexity in clustered Q-learning is

O(zM), whereas in standard Q-learning the complexity scales

as O(mM), with cluster size z m. Consequently, clustering

enables a tractable RL task for sequential scheduling of short

LDPC codes.

While clustered Q-learning serves as an approximation for

standard Q-learning, the strategy suffers from a performance

loss due to the existence of dependencies between sepa-

rate clusters. As cluster size increases, the agent can more

accurately take into account any dependencies between CN

log-likelihood ratios (LLRs).

To better analyze this loss in performance, we introduce

a critical sub-structure in the Tanner graph GH of an LDPC code. For a cluster Cu = {c1, . . . , cz} let Cu = C \ Cu be the remaining CNs in the Tanner graph. Let NV (Cu) be the set of all neighbors of Cu in V. For W ⊆ NV (Cu), let NC(W) be the

set of all neighbors of W in C.

Definition 1: Fix a CN cluster Cu, and let W ⊆ NV (Cu). We

say that W is the cluster-connecting set (CCS) corresponding

to Cu if and only if for all v ∈ W, both NCu (v) and NCu (v)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HABIB et al.: BP DECODING OF SHORT GRAPH-BASED CHANNEL CODES VIA RL

635

of size |Cu| = z in G. If |NV (Cu)| = v, then the number of variable nodes in W, the CCS corresponding to Cu, is bounded as follows.

v − kz ≤ |W| ≤ min{jv − kz, v}. j

Fig. 2. Depiction of the (3, 3) CCS (shown using solid red circles) corresponding to cluster Cu (red squares). The dashed edges connect Cu to neighboring VNs (dashed red) not belonging to the CCS. Arrows highlight the cycles incident to the cluster.
are nonempty. If |W| = A, and |NCu (W)| = B, we say that W is an (A, B) CCS.
CCSs induce dependencies between the messages generated by the CNs in Cu and those in Cu. Roughly speaking, the number of edges in a Tanner graph that connect Cu to Cu grows with the size of Cu’s CCS. That is, on average, the larger the size of the CCS corresponding to Cu, the greater the dependence between Cu and Cu. This holds exactly for Tanner graphs in which all VNs have the same degree.
Fig. 2 depicts a Tanner graph GH containing a cluster of CNs Cu whose corresponding CCS, W, is a (3, 3) CCS. Squares (resp. circles) represent CNs (resp. VNs). The three CNs shown using red squares represent Cu, whereas the black squares represent Cu. The VNs in NV (Cu) are represented using red circles. The three VNs of the CCS, W, are represented by solid red circles. Note that the VNs in dashed red circles, belonging to the set NV (Cu)\W, are connected to only Cu, and hence do not belong to the CCS. Observe that there are no cycles in the subgraph induced by W ∪ NCu (W). However, there are three distinct 4-cycles in the subgraph induced by (NV (Cu) \ W) ∪ Cu.
In the remainder of the paper, we will consider Tanner graphs that are connected and contain cycles. We first show that any choice of cluster that is a proper subset of the CNs of a connected Tanner graph has a nonempty CCS.
Proposition 1: Consider a connected Tanner graph with m CNs, and choose a cluster Cu with z < m CNs. Then, the CCS corresponding to Cu is nonempty.
Proof: Consider the set of VNs given by NV (Cu). If every VN in this set is only adjacent to CNs in Cu, then the Tanner graph is not connected. By the contrapositive, we conclude that the CCS corresponding to Cu has at least one element.
In Section VI, we will be interested in optimizing clusters by minimizing the number of edges incident to the corresponding CCSs. However, because (j, k)-regular codes have regular VN degree, the size of a CCS for these classes is a constant multiple of the number of incident edges. Since our simulations in Section VII focus on (j, k)-regular and AB-LDPC codes (a subclass of regular codes), we present here specific results on the size of a CCS for each class.
Theorem 1: Let j, k ≥ 2, and z ≥ 1 be integers. Suppose G is a (j, k)-regular Tanner graph, and let Cu be a cluster of CNs

Proof: It is straightforward to see that there are jv − kz

edges in G that are incident to NV (Cu) but not to Cu. In other words, there are jv − kz edges exiting the subgraph induced

by Cu ∪ NV (Cu). Consider the CCS W, the subset of NV (Cu) comprised of all VNs incident to an exiting edge. The mini-

mum size of W corresponds to the case in which the exiting

edges are concentrated at a few VNs in NV (Cu). That is, |W| ≥ (jv − kz)/j = v − (kz/j) = v − kz/j . On the

other hand, the maximum size of W corresponds to the case

where the exiting edges are spread across as many VNs as

possible: |W| ≤ min{jv − kz, v}. Notice that W = jv − kz when

there is one edge per VN in W exiting the subgraph, but that

this bound will not be tight if any VN in W has more than

one incident exiting edge.

Remark 1: For fixed j, k, and z, the upper and lower bounds

given in Theorem 1 are increasing functions of |NV (Cu)| = v.

In other words, the more neighbors a cluster has, the larger the

maximum possible size of W (and resulting j|W| CCS edges),

and the larger the minimum possible size of W (and j|W|). It is

important to note that we are not claiming that a higher number

of neighbors necessitates a larger CCS. Rather, the shifting

window of possible CCS sizes suggests a trend, even if a strict

increase does not hold. Indeed, we cannot make such a claim,

since subsequent intervals may be overlapping as v increases.

Take, for example, j = 3, k = 6, and z = 5. Then, if v = 11,

|W| ∈ {1, 2, 3}, while if v = 12, |W| ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5, 6}. Thus,

a cluster with 12 neighbors could have fewer CCS elements

than a cluster with 11 neighbors. We also observe that v is

bounded above by kz and below by kz/j, so that |W| is always

bounded below by 1 (in a connected graph with z < m) and

above by kz.

Because they are (3, p)-regular, Theorem 1 gives bounds

on the size of CCSs in (3, p) AB-LDPC codes as well. In

particular, for a cluster of size z, v −

pz 3

≤ |W| ≤ min{3v −

pz, v}. However, given the added structure of an AB-LDPC

code Tanner graph, we may conclude more. We restrict z ≤

p; this is a reasonable assumption, given m = 3p in (3, p)

AB-LDPC codes.

Theorem 2: Consider an AB-LDPC code defined by a

parity-check matrix H(3, p), let Cu be a cluster of size 1 ≤ z ≤ p, and let W be the CCS corresponding to Cu.

(i) If all CNs in Cu belong to the same row group of H(3, p), |W| = zp.

(ii) If all CNs in Cu belong to two row groups of H(3, p), |W| = z(p − a) + a2, where a is the number of CNs in

one of the row groups. (iii) In general, |W| ≥ ((1 + 2p)z − z2)/4.

(iv) If 3 ≤ z < p and every CN in Cu belongs to at least one

6-cycle such that the other two CNs in the 6-cycle also

belong to Cu, |W| ≤ zp − z.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

636

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 2021

Proof:

(i) If all the rows corresponding to the CNs of cluster Cu

are in the same row group, then no two CNs in Cu will have any VNs in common. Hence, each VN in NV (Cu) must also be adjacent to Cu, implying that NV (Cu) is a CCS with |NV (Cu)| = |Cu|p = zp.

(ii) If all the rows corresponding to the CNs of cluster Cu are in the same two row groups, then every VN in NV (Cu) has at most two neighbors in Cu, and hence must be in

W. Since any two CNs falling in different row groups

share exactly one VN, the number of VN neighbors of

Cu is zp − a(z − a), where a is the number of CNs in one row group. Indeed, exactly a(z−a) VNs are counted

twice in zp.

(iii) There are p VN neighbors of each CN c ∈ Cu, no pair of which can share another CN neighbor due to the absence

of 4-cycles in (3, p) AB-LDPC Tanner graphs. Thus, the

number of VNs in NV (c) that have no neighbors outside of Cu is at most (z − 1)/2: each such VN has two other neighbors in the remaining z − 1 CNs of Cu, and all
neighbors of these VNs must be distinct. Thus, there

are at least p − (z − 1)/2 VNs adjacent to c that have

at least one neighbor outside of Cu. This is true for all z choices of c ∈ Cu. Since we may be counting each of

these VNs up to two times with different CNs, there are at least (p − [(z − 1)/2])z/2 = ((1 + 2p)z − z2)/4 VNs

in W.

(iv) In this scenario, at least 2z of the zp edges incident to Cu

are incident to VNs of degree 2 in the subgraph induced

by Cu ∪ NV (Cu). The remaining z(p − 2) edges may

be incident to VNs of degree 1 in the subgraph. Thus,

the number of elements of NV (Cu) is bounded above by

z(p − 2) +

2z 2

=

zp − z.

Since

|W |

≤

|NV (Cu)|,

the

result

follows.

Notice that Theorem 2(iii) holds for all configurations of

CNs, but is only useful if the CNs in Cu span all three row groups of H(3, p) since we have exact results for the other

two cases. This bound, along with that in part (iv), should

be compared with those of Theorem 1. Indeed, we find that

Theorem 2(iii) gives a tighter lower bound for smaller val-

ues of NV (Cu), and Theorem 2(iv) is a tighter upper bound for (a particular type of cluster and) larger values of NV (Cu).

Theorem 2(i) and (ii), as an exact results, give clear improve-

ments on Theorem 1 for row configurations spanning fewer

than all three row groups.

The CNs of the clusters in Theorem 2(i) belong to the same

row group in the corresponding parity-check matrix; if the

rows corresponding to the CNs are consecutive within the row

group, we call them contiguous. Clusters as in Theorem 2(ii)

may also have contiguous CNs. In comparison, the CNs of

the clusters in Theorem 2(iv) cannot all be contiguous, since

a 6-cycle must span three distinct row groups of a H(3, p)

AB-LDPC code [26], [33]. By comparing the result on CCS

size given in Theorem 2(i) with the bound in 2(iv), we see that

choosing CNs that span three row groups and form internal

6-cycles is guaranteed to lower the bound on the size of the

corresponding CCS from the case where we choose CNs all

within a single group. Provided that z > 4, this will also be

an improvement on clusters spanning two groups, as stated in Theorem 2(ii). Observing that the number of edges incident to a CCS W in a (3, p)-regular graph is equal to 3|W|, we conclude that in case of (3, p) AB-LDPC codes, any cluster selection scheme should ensure that clustered CNs are not contiguous, and each cluster contains as many 6-cycles as possible. This is indeed the approach used in Section VI to minimize connectivity of clusters.

VI. CLUSTER OPTIMIZATION
In this section, we leverage the results from the previous
section and propose a cluster optimization strategy, with the
goal of minimizing the number of edges connected to each
CCS in a Tanner graph. Indeed, these edges are responsi-
ble for the propagation of messages between clusters, and
consequently for the resulting dependencies between clusters. Let E(Cu, W) be the set of edges that connect Cu to its
CCS W, E(Cu, W) the set of edges connecting Cu to W, and ζ (Cu) |E(Cu, W)| + |E(Cu, W)| the total number of edges by which Cu is connected to Cu via W. As discussed in the previous section, minimizing ζ (Cu) is equivalent to minimizing the size of a CCS for (j, k)-regular Tanner graphs, since ζ (Cu) = j|W|.
We cluster the set of CNs of a Tanner graph via a greedy iterative process: the z CNs of the first cluster, C1∗, are chosen optimally from the set of all CNs. Each subsequent cluster
is then chosen optimally from the set of remaining check
nodes, with the last cluster consisting of the leftover CNs. Let 1, . . . , u m denote the indices of the clusters. Formally,
z
this multi-step optimization is given by

Ce∗

=

arg min
Ce ⊆C\Ce∗−1 ∪···∪C1∗ ,

ζ (Ce),
|Ce|=z

(11)

where e

∈

1, . . . ,

m z

− 1 denotes the index of the

optimization step, Ce represents a cluster with index e, and Ce∗

denotes the optimal cluster obtained in step e. The final cluster

is obtained automatically, and hence excluded from (11).

Note that the complexity of the optimization in (11) grows

exponentially with m, as we need to search over

m−z(e−1) z

possible cluster choices in each step. To overcome this, we

propose a more computationally feasible cluster optimization

approach based on our observation that the lower bounds in

Theorems 1 and 2 correspond to a maximization of cluster-

internal cycles: in each step, we cluster CNs so that the

subgraph induced by the cluster and its neighbors contains as

many cycles as possible. Such a cluster will in general have

fewer neighbors compared to one that does not induce cycles.

In turn, the maximum possible size of the corresponding CCS

(and the number of exiting edges) will likely be reduced (see

Remark 1). The cluster optimization approach based on cycle

maximization is given by

C˜ e∗ =

arg max

ηκ (Ce),

Ce⊆C\C˜ e∗−1∪...∪C˜ 1∗, |Ce|=z

(12)

where C˜ e∗ denotes a cycle-maximized cluster, and ηκ (Ce) denotes the number of length κ cycles in the graph induced

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HABIB et al.: BP DECODING OF SHORT GRAPH-BASED CHANNEL CODES VIA RL

637

TABLE I OVERVIEW OF THE DECODING SCHEMES USED FOR OBTAINING THE SIMULATION RESULTS

by NV (Ce) ∪ Ce. The possible values of κ depend on the girth of the considered code. Smaller choices of κ yield lower

optimization complexity, as larger cycles are more difficult to

enumerate. In case of LDPC codes, optimized cycle detec-

tion algorithms based on message-passing have complexity of O(gE2), where g is Tanner graph’s girth and E is the total num-

ber of edges [34]. In a (3, p) AB-LDPC code, whose graph

has girth 6, we choose κ = 6. The method for generating

cycle-maximized clusters is presented in [2, Algorithm 3]. Let

T be the total number of κ-cycles in GH. The optimization

complexity of this algorithm depends on T, which is expected

to be much smaller than

m−z(e−1) z

for sparse H. For exam-

ple, in a (3, p) AB-LDPC code, there are only T = p2(p − 1)

6-cycles in the Tanner graph [26].

In Section VII we consider the case where p ≥ 5 and z = 7.

For these parameters and for e = 1, the number of cluster

choices using the optimization in (11) is

γp z

= O(p7) as

opposed to p2(p − 1) using (12).

VII. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
We perform learned sequential decoding by employing cluster-based RL with random and (cycle-)optimized clusters. We then utilize each of these schemes for sequential decoding of random (3, 6)-regular LDPC, (3, 7) AB-LDPC lifted by a factor of 4, (96, 48) MacKay [35], (63, 51) BCH, and a (186, 78) concatenated code with rate 13/31, comprising an outer Hamming code and an inner systematic LDPC code. This is motivated by the observation that the individual bit error after RL based sequential decoding are relatively spread out across the decoded codewords and thus may be “cleaned-up” by an appropriate outer code. Specifically, we consider three (31, 26) Hamming outer codes, and a (186, 93) systematic (and thus irregular) LDPC inner code. In the encoding step, a message vector of length 78 is split into three length 26 vectors. The three resulting Hamming codewords, each of length 31, are then concatenated into a single vector, u = [u0, . . . , um−1], m = 93, and subsequently encoded using the inner systematic LDPC code encoder to generate a codeword x of length n = 186. The LDPC code is decoded via RL based sequential decoding to a length 186 binary vector xˆ = [xˆ0, . . . , xˆn−1], and the systematic portion of this vector is decoded via separate Hamming decoders producing the vector uˆ = [uˆ0, . . . , uˆm−1]. Note that for this concatenated construction the observed BER is given by Pr [uˆj = uj], j ∈ [[m − 1]], whereas for the other codes it is given by Pr [xˆi = xi], i ∈ [[n − 1]].
We use Algorithms 2 and 4 to implement the cluster-based learning approaches mentioned above. The RL-NS schemes resulting from Algorithm 2 (resp., 4) for random and optimized clustering are denoted by QR and QO (resp., QR-TS

and QO-TS), respectively. Note that in Algorithms 2 and 4 the S(u,z) vector is updated as S(u,z) = [s(j1), s(j2), . . . , s(jz)], where CN indices j1, j2, . . . , jz ∈ {0, . . . , m−1} are randomly ordered in the case of random clustering, whereas in optimized clustering, the order depends on the underlying cluster C˜ u∗ obtained via cycle maximization. We compare these two schemes to our other RL-based decoders, one of which is based on computing GIs, while the other is based on Algorithm 3 (NS-TS).
Each element of the state vector Sˆ is quantized using a standard scalar quantization algorithm [36], where a realization sˆ(j) represents the “source signal” to be quantized. Provided that there exists a sufficiently large dataset of source realizations, the quantization algorithm recursively optimizes the boundary and the representation points of the quantizer by minimizing the distortion E[(sˆ(j) − gM(sˆ(j)))2] over the entire dataset. Depending on the code, we generate a dataset comprising 105 realizations of sˆ(j) by randomly scheduling CNs via NS to estimate its distribution.
Although clustering reduces the state-space significantly compared to standard Q-learning, clustered Q-learning is still more complex than estimating GIs. Hence, our choice of code block lengths for the clustered Q-learning schemes are influenced by the run-time complexity of our Q-learning algorithms. We found short codes, with a block length 200 or less, to be suitable for Q-learning on our system with a reasonable cluster size z. For the considered codes, we choose the learning parameters as follows: α = 0.1, β = 0.9, = 0.6, max = 25, and |L | = 1.25 × 106. We choose z = 6 for the MacKay and BCH codes, and z = 7 for the remaining codes, respectively. In addition, M = 8 is chosen for (63, 51) BCH, whereas M = 4 is considered for the other codes. Finally, we compare the performances of our proposed RL methods with standard decoding schemes such as flooding and NS for max = 25.
Note that M directly impacts the accuracy of our Q-learning schemes. A large number of quantization levels would naturally improve the Q-learning accuracy, but the learning complexity grows exponentially with increasing M. The magnitudes of the differences between the CN states at a given iteration diminishes as the decoder approaches convergence. Consequently, a large M ( 4) is necessary to accurately quantize the CN values at high SNR. We found Q-table1 sizes corresponding to a small M to be the most suitable to learn on our system within a reasonable time period.
B. Numerical Results
The BER vs. channel SNR performances in dB of the considered codes using various decoding techniques are shown in Figs. 3 and 4. For clarification of the acronyms used in the
1A Q-table consisting of m/z sub-tables, each of dimension Mz × z, is used to store the action-values learned using Algorithms 2 and 4.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

638

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 2021

Fig. 3. BER results using different BP decoding schemes for a (3, 6)-regular LDPC (left figure) and (3, 7) AB-LDPC code (right figure, code is lifted), with block length n = 196.

Fig. 4. BER results using different BP decoding schemes for a (96, 48) MacKay code (left figure) and (63, 51) BCH code (right figure), with block lengths 96 and 63, respectively.
TABLE II AVERAGE NUMBER OF CN TO VN MESSAGES PROPAGATED IN VARIOUS DECODING SCHEMES FOR A (3, 6)-REGULAR ((3, 7) AB-) LDPC CODE
TO ATTAIN THE RESULTS SHOWN IN FIG. 3

Fig. 5. Performances of a rate 1/2 systematic (186, 93) LDPC (Code 1) and a rate 13/31 concatenated (186, 78) Hamming-LDPC (Code 2) code using the flooding, NS, and QR decoding schemes.
plots, see Table I. The experimental results reveal that RLbased decoding schemes in general are superior to the non-RL decoding schemes in terms of BER performance, thus showing the effectiveness of our learning approach. In the case of the MacKay and BCH codes, we outperform the state-of-the

art hyper-network decoder proposed in [14] for the chosen SNR regime and max = 25. In Tables II and III, we compare the average number of CN to VN messages propagated in the considered decoders to attain the results in Figs. 3 and 4, respectively. In Table II, the numbers without (resp., with) parentheses correspond to the (3, 6)-regular (resp., (3, 7) AB-) LDPC code. On the other hand, in Table III, the numbers without (resp., with) parentheses correspond to the (96, 48) MacKay (resp., (63, 51) BCH) code. We note that, on average, the Q-learning based decoders generate a much lower

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HABIB et al.: BP DECODING OF SHORT GRAPH-BASED CHANNEL CODES VIA RL

639

Fig. 6. Residual bit error distribution for uˆ after decoding 105 transmissions at Eb/N0 = 4 dB using different decoding schemes for a (186, 93) systematic LDPC code (left figure), and a (186, 78) concatenated Hamming-LDPC code (right figure), respectively. These results correspond to the BER values shown in Fig. 5.

TABLE III AVERAGE NUMBER OF CN TO VN MESSAGES PROPAGATED IN VARIOUS DECODING SCHEMES FOR A (96, 48) MACKAY ((63, 51) BCH) CODE TO
ATTAIN THE RESULTS SHOWN IN FIG. 4
number of CN to VN messages when compared to the flooding scheme. Moreover, in contrast to NS, these schemes avoid the computation of residuals in real-time, providing a significant reduction in message-passing complexity for short LDPC codes. Note that the BCH code has a much denser Tanner than those of the other codes. Therefore, the TS results for the BCH code are excluded due to a significantly increased training complexity resulting from the code’s graph density. This is also the reason that the number of CN to VN messages in Table III is much higher for the BCH code as compared to the MacKay code.
The results for the (186, 78) Hamming-LDPC concatenated code (labeled Code 2) are shown in Fig. 5. As a benchmark, we compare its performance to the (186, 93) systematic LDPC code (labeled Code 1) used as the inner code for the (186, 78) concatenated code. The systematic LDPC code has been obtained by converting the parity check matrix of a (3, 6) regular non-systematic LDPC code into reduced row echelon form. For decoding the systematic inner LDPC code, we only implement the QR scheme. The reason is that our cluster optimization and TS approaches are not suitable for systematic LDPC codes, for which the non-systematic portion of the code’s Tanner graph is dense and irregular. The BER of the (186, 93) (inner) LDPC code is computed by detecting the number of erroneous bits in uˆ . Fig. 5 shows the poor performance of BP flooding decoding the (186, 93) systematic LDPC code in isolation, which is due to the existence of

many short cycles in the parity part of its parity check matrix. The (186, 78) concatenated construction significantly outperforms the systematic LDPC code by using RL-NS sequential scheduling with QR clustering. The reason for this surprising behavior is displayed in Fig. 6, which shows the bit error distribution in uˆ for the (186, 93) systematic LDPC (left) and the (186, 78) concatenated code (right). As anticipated, we can see that the outer Hamming code acts as a clean-up code for the inner LDPC code. By comparing the error distribution of the concatenated code to the non-concatenated one, we notice that an outer code significantly reduces the number of bit errors in the systematic portion of the signal reconstructed by the inner LDPC code. Notably, due to the nature of the error distribution seen on the left side of the figure, the concatenated coding scheme is more effective when used in conjunction with RL-based decoding. In particular, the inner LDPC code, decoded via QR, generates a large number of singe-bit errors, and the Hamming outer codes are able to correct these individual errors. On the other hand, the flooding scheme generates burst errors throughout each length-31 decoded block, rendering the Hamming code ineffective. However, these burst errors occur to a lesser extent in the case of NS, resulting in a BER reduction.
VIII. CONCLUSION
We presented several RL-based decoding schemes to optimize the scheduling of BP decoders for short LDPC codes suitable for performing in the waterfall regime. The main ingredient is a new state space clustering approach to significantly reduce the learning complexity. Experimental results show that optimizing the cluster structure by maximizing cluster-internal short cycles provides significant improvements in the decoding performance when compared with both previous scheduling schemes and clustered Q-learning with non-optimized clusters. These gains include lowering both BER and message-passing complexity. We also demonstrate that by concatenating a short outer Hamming code with an inner LDPC code, we significantly improve the error correction capability of our RL-based sequential decoder with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

640

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 2021

only a minor penalty in rate and complexity. As Bayesian
inference over graphical models is at the core of many machine
learning applications, ongoing work includes extending our
RL approach to other applications involving BP-based mes-
sage passing over a factor graph defined by an underlying
probabilistic model.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Habib, A. Beemer, and J. Kliewer, “Learned scheduling of LDPC decoders based on multi-armed bandits,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2020, pp. 2789–2794.
[2] S. Habib, A. Beemer, and J. Kliewer, “Learning to decode: Reinforcement learning for decoding of sparse graph-based channel codes,” in Proc. 34th Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2020.
[3] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[4] D. J. Costello, Jr., L. Dolecek, T. Fuja, J. Kliewer, D. G. M. Mitchell, and R. Smarandache, “Spatially coupled sparse codes on graphs: Theory and practice,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 168–176, Jul. 2014.
[5] S. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 db of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[6] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[7] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 547–553, Sep. 1981.
[8] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[9] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470–3479, Dec. 2010.
[10] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2015.
[11] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and Y. Béery, “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, Feb. 2018.
[12] I. Béery, N. Raviv, T. Raviv, and Y. Béery, “Active deep decoding of linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 728–736, Feb. 2020.
[13] Y. Jiang, H. Kim, H. Asnani, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Deep learning based channel codes for point-to-point communication channels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 2758–2768.
[14] E. Nachmani and L. Wolf, “Hyper-graph-network decoders for block codes,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 2329–2339.
[15] N. Doan, S. A. Hashemi, and W. Gross, “Decoding polar codes with reinforcement learning,” 2020. [Online]. Available: arXiv:2009.06796.
[16] Y. Liao, S. A. Hashemi, J. Cioffi, and A. Goldsmith, “Construction of polar codes with reinforcement learning,” 2020. [Online]. Available: arXiv:2009.09277.

[17] F. Carpi, C. Hager, M. Martalo, R. Raheli, and H. D. Pfister, “Reinforcement learning for channel coding: Learned bit-flipping decoding,” in Proc. 57th Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., 2019, pp. 922–929.
[18] C. J. C. H. Watkins, “Learning from delayed rewards,” Ph.D. dissertation, King’s College, Univ. Oxford, Oxford, U.K., 1989.
[19] C. J. C. H. Watkins and P. Dayan, “Q-learning,” Mach. Learn., vol. 8, nos. 3–4, pp. 279–292, 1992.
[20] M. O. Duff, “Q-learning for bandit problems,” Dept. Comput. Sci., Univ. Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA, Rep. CMPSCI 95-26, 1995.
[21] Ö. S¸ ims¸ek, A. P. Wolfe, and A. G. Barto, “Identifying useful subgoals in reinforcement learning by local graph partitioning,” in Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2005, pp. 816–823.
[22] S. Mannor, I. Menache, A. Hoze, and U. Klein, “Dynamic abstraction in reinforcement learning via clustering,” in Proc. 21st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2004, pp. 71–78.
[23] R. Parr and S. J. Russell, “Reinforcement learning with hierarchies of machines,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 1998, pp. 1043–1049.
[24] S. Bitzer, M. Howard, and S. Vijayakumar, “Using dimensionality reduction to exploit constraints in reinforcement learning,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2010, pp. 3219–3225.
[25] D. Shah and Q. Xie, “Q-learning with nearest neighbors,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 3111–3121.
[26] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[27] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Rel. Topics, 2000, pp. 543–546.
[28] A. Beemer, S. Habib, C. Kelley, and J. Kliewer, “A generalized algebraic approach to optimizing SC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. 55th Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., Oct. 2017, pp. 672–679.
[29] J. C. Gittins, “Bandit processes and dynamic allocation indices,” J. Royal Stat. Soc. B, Methodol., vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 148–163, 1979.
[30] D. Russo, B. V. Roy, A. Kazerouni, and I. Osband, “A tutorial on Thompson sampling,” Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–96, 2017.
[31] J. Vermorel and M. Mohri, “Multi-armed bandit algorithms and empirical evaluation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ECML), 2005, pp. 437–448.
[32] S. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[33] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[34] J. Li, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Improved message-passing algorithm for counting short cycles in bipartite graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2015, pp. 416–420.
[35] D. J. C. MacKay, Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
[36] A. Gersho and R. M. Gray, Vector Quantization and Signal Compression (Engineering and Computer Science), vol. 159. Boston, MA, USA: Springer, 1992.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

