ICASSP 2021 - 2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) | 978-1-7281-7605-5/20/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP39728.2021.9414311

TOWARDS PRACTICAL NEAR-MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD DECODING OF ERROR-CORRECTING CODES: AN OVERVIEW
Thibaud Tonnellier , Marzieh Hashemipour†, Nghia Doan , Warren J. Gross and Alexios Balatsoukas-Stimming†
McGill University, Que´bec, Canada †Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands

ABSTRACT
While in the past several decades the trend to go towards increasing error-correcting code lengths was predominant to get closer to the Shannon limit, applications that require short block length are developing. Therefore, decoding techniques that can achieve near-maximum-likelihood (near-ML) are gaining momentum. This overview paper surveys recent progress in this emerging field by reviewing the GRAND algorithm, linear programming decoding, machine-learning aided decoding and the recursive projection-aggregation decoding algorithm. For each of the decoding algorithms, both algorithmic and hardware implementations are considered, and future research directions are outlined.
Index Terms— Maximum-likelihood decoding, GRAND, linear programming decoding, machine-learning aided decoding, recursive projection-aggregation decoding

1. INTRODUCTION

In 1948 Shannon proved the existence of error-correcting codes that can protect binary messages against corruption by random noise [1]. Since then, the coding theory community has been working to develop codes that realize Shannon’s vision under the constraint of low implementation complexity — leading to the discovery of polar codes [2], which asymptotically achieve the Shannon limit.
A conceptually simple and optimal universal decoding algorithm for any error-correcting code is called maximum likelihood (ML) decoding. Consider an error-correcting code that encodes k message bits into a n bit codeword, which is then transmitted over a noisy channel, resulting in a noisy word y at the receiver. ML decoding compares the noisy word y with each of the 2k possible codewords and selects the one closest to y. In a more mathematical way, by denoting with C the code book, the ML decoder returns:

cˆ = arg max p(y|c).

(1)

c∈C

While the ML decoder is optimal if no a priori information is obtained on the transmitted codeword, the ML decoding

problem is impractical in general because it is computationally intractable [3].

A major advance in coding theory was the discovery of turbo codes [4] and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [5]. The real breakthrough was their low-complexity decoding algorithm, allowing practical transmissions at a fraction of a dB from the Shannon limit. However, it is difficult to design binary LDPC and turbo codes that perform well in the short-tomedium block length regime [6]. Also, their iterative decoders are sub-optimal. These observations make the development of decoding algorithms that approach ML performance—while offering much lower complexity—particularly attractive, especially for short block lengths. Applications of such lengths encompass machine-to-machine communications and remote control links, for example.

One well known universal and near-ML decoder is the

ordered statistic decoding (OSD) algorithm [7]. However, the

core of the algorithm consists of Gauss-Jordan elimination,

whose complexity is cubic in n. Moreover, even if the search

space is drastically reduced compared with the ML decoder,

for OSD of order i, the number of test error patterns—and thus,

the number of distance computation—is given by

i w=0

k w

,

which becomes significant even for small values of i. Thus,

even though OSD is a useful benchmark, research for alterna-

tive solutions is appealing and gaining momentum.

This overview paper presents recent developments in nearML decoding of error-correcting codes. The structure of this document is ordered such that the universality of the reviewed approaches goes from most general to most specialized. In Section 2, the recently proposed family of guessing random additive noise decoders (GRAND) are compared both in terms of decoding performance and in terms of computational complexity. Then, Section 3 reviews linear-programming decoding principles and recent advances in their hardware implementation. In Section 4, novel advances in machine-learning techniques applied to the problem of decoding error-correcting codes is reviewed, with an emphasis on reinforcement learning algorithms. Finally, Section 5 reviews a novel near-ML decoding algorithm for Reed-Muller (RM) codes, which were recently shown to be capacity achieving in certain cases [8].

978-1-7281-7605-5/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

8283

ICASSP 2021

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1: GRAND for linear codes Input: H, G−1, r Output: uˆ
1 e←0 2 while (r ⊕ e) · H = 0 do 3 e ← generateNewErrorPattern()
4 return uˆ = (r ⊕ e) · G−1

2. GUESSING RANDOM ADDITIVE NOISE DECODING

GRAND is a recently proposed maximum likelihood (ML) decoding algorithm [9], that is suitable for decoding any short and high-rate code. Unlike conventional decoders, GRAND is a universal decoder; decoding is not tailored to the structure of a particular code. Instead, the algorithm tries to guess the noise that corrupted a codeword when passing through the transmission channel. The core of the algorithm consists of the generation of test error patterns that are combined with the received word. As soon as this combination results in a valid codeword, the decoder stops. To verify that a word belongs to the codebook, a parity check matrix of the code can be used. Indeed, if H is a parity check matrix of a code and that c is an element of this code, then

c · H = 0.

(2)

Hence, GRAND requires no other condition on the code except the linearity, resulting in the unusual universal decoding property.
Algorithm 1 describes the steps of GRAND decoding given a code of length n and dimension k with k×n generator matrix G and (n − k) × n parity check matrix H such that G · G−1 is the k × k identity matrix, and the received word is r of size n. The output consists of the estimated message uˆ of size k. The algorithm keeps generating new error patterns until the codebook membership condition is met (lines 2-3). Finally, when the condition is fulfilled, G−1 is used to recover the estimated message uˆ (line 4).
The key idea of the GRAND algorithm is to find efficient ways and schedules to generate error patterns, ensuring that they are generated in descending order of likelihood. Moreover, the error patterns have to consider the channel model. Several variants of the GRAND algorithm have been proposed. The original algorithm only considered hard values as its input. Thus, the optimal order is with increasing order of the Hamming weight of the error patterns [10]. Therefore, first the error patterns of Hamming weight one are considered, then those of weight two, and so on. To reduce the overall complexity, GRAND with abandonment (GRANDAB) was also proposed in [9]. In that case, if no valid codeword are found after considering all the error patterns with a Hamming weight less than or equal to AB, the decoder declares a failure.

FER Queries

ABGRAND (AB=3)

OSD2

100 10−1 10−2 10−3 10−4 10−5 10−6 10−7 10−8
01234567

Eb N0

(dB)

(a) : FER

ORBGRAND ML

SGRAND

106

105

104

103

102

101

100 01234567

Eb N0

(dB)

(b) : Queries

Fig. 1. Comparison of different flavours of GRAND, OSD and ML for decoding BCH(127, 106).

It is well known that taking into account soft values improves decoding performance. Symbol reliability GRAND (SRGRAND) characterizes the received symbols into two categories: reliable or unreliable according to a threshold depending on the channel conditions [11, 12]. Compared to GRAND, better decoding accuracy is achieved with reduced complexity. Going further, soft GRAND (SGRAND) incorporates full soft information into the decoder [13], and an efficient way to generate the ML order can be found in [14]. However, despite the simplicity of the algorithm description and straightforward software implementation, hardware realization of SGRAND presents challenges. To alleviate the complexity, ordered reliability bit GRAND (ORBGRAND) has been proposed in [15]. In ORBGRAND, after sorting the received symbols in increasing order of reliability, the error patterns are generated following logistic weight order. Hence, only one sorting step is necessary, and then the same order is always followed.

Fig. 1 compares different flavours of GRAND with OSD of order 2 [7] and ML decoding of a n = 127, k = 106 BCH code. For the Monte-Carlo simulation, a BPSK modulation and an AWGN channel are considered. The ML decoding results are obtained from [16]. One can observe that soft information is required to leverage the full decoding capability of GRAND. While the ORBGRAND algorithm is close to the ML decoding (0.5 dB for a target frame error rate (FER) of 10−5), ML performance is reached via the SGRAND algorithm (Fig. 1(a)). Regarding the decoding complexity as measured by the number of queries (Fig. 1(b)), it can been seen that for values of SNR such that FER < 10−3, GRAND becomes particularly appealing. Indeed, for low error rates, the computational complexity becomes lower than that of the order-2 OSD algorithm which requires 5.67 × 103 queries. On the other hand, the number of queries required for ML decoding is given by 2106, which falls far outside the range of the plot in Fig. 1(b). We note that for the ML and OSD algorithms, a query consists of the calculation of a Euclidean distance, whereas for GRAND

8284
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

a query consist only of a syndrome check. A VLSI architecture for the GRANDAB algorithm has
been presented in [17]. In the high SNR regime, an average throughput of 64 Gbps can be achieved, paving the way for high-speed decoding of soft-information flavours of the GRAND algorithm [18].

3. LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LINEAR BLOCK CODES

It was first observed in [19] that ML decoding of linear block codes can be formulated as an (integer) linear programming problem. Specifically, given a parity-check matrix H, a binaryinput symmetric memoryless channel described by the conditional distribution P (y|x), x ∈ {0, 1}, y ∈ R, and a received vector y, ML decoding is equivalent to solving:

minx γ · x s.t. x · H = 0 mod 2, x ∈ {0, 1}n, (3)

where

γi

=

log

P P

(yi (yi

|xi |xi

=0) =1)

.

The

constraint

x

∈

{0, 1}n

can

be relaxed to x ∈ [0, 1]n, which is linear. Moreover, the

constraint x · H = 0 mod 2 can also be relaxed to a linear constraint.1 Then, (3) becomes a linear program, which

can be solved efficiently. LP decoding has several attractive

properties, such as detectable decoding failures [19], which is

particularly useful for mission-critical applications.

The interest in LP decoding grew when the work of [21]

proposed to use the alternating direction method of multipliers

(ADMM) to solve the relaxed version of (3). The application

of ADMM results in an algorithm with a message-passing

structure that has relatively low computational complexity and

is also more hardware-friendly. The work of [21] provided

convergence guarantees and showed that LP decoding is su-

perior to belief propagation (BP) decoding in the high SNR

regime, where BP decoding often results in an error floor.

Almost all LP decoding hardware implementation attempts

to date have focused on ADMM-based LP decoding. The first

steps towards a hardware implementation were described in

[22, 23]. The most challenging part of ADMM-based LP de-

coding from a hardware implementation perspective is the

so-called step of Euclidean projection onto the parity polytope.

Indeed, there are many recent works that aim to reduce the

complexity and to describe efficient hardware architectures for

this step (e.g., [24, 20, 25, 26] and references therein). Even

though significant advances have been made in the past few

years, there is still significant room for improvement, espe-

cially in the direction of LP decoding hardware architectures

that are competitive with other state-of-the-art decoders in

terms of throughput, resource utilization, and energy efficiency

(cf. [20, Sec. VI] for more specific directions).

1Due to space constraints we skip the details of this relaxation, which can be found in, e.g., [19, Sec. III] or [20, Sec. II].

4. DECODING LINEAR BLOCK CODES WITH MACHINE LEARNING
Machine learning is a set of algorithms that optimizes a parameterized model from data samples, allowing the model to successfully complete a task. With the recent successes in achieving human-level performance in various complex tasks, machine learning techniques have been actively studied to address challenging problems in communications, including the problem of decoding linear block codes.
It was demonstrated in [27] that a fully connected neural network with three hidden layers can achieve a maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding performance for a polar code of size 16. This decoding technique is referred to as one-shot decoding as the neural network decoder (NND) estimates the message sent by passing each hidden layer only once, and the noisy channel log-likelihood ratio (LLR) values are used as the input of the NND. However, the error-correction performance of the NND degrades significantly when the code length increases. This problem is known as the curse of dimensionality [27], which remains an open research problem when designing neural network architectures to decode linear block codes.
Unlike the approach in [27] where a neural network is designed as a model-free decoder, i.e. no domain knowledge is utilized in the design of the network architecture, the authors in [28] unroll the message passing operations of a BP decoder for a BCH code, and introduce trainable weights to the default computations. The unrolling operations transform the factor graph representation of the conventional linear block code to a partially connected neural network representation [28]. It was shown in [28] that the trainable parameters can be optimized using supervised learning techniques to greatly improve the error-correction performance of the code. In [29], the authors proposed a technique to efficiently prune the unimportant edges of the unrolled factor graph of a linear block code at each decoding iteration. The error probability of the decoders proposed in [29] is within 0.27 dB and 1.5 dB of the ML performance, while significantly reducing the decoding complexity. In [30] the authors extend the work in [29] to further improve the error probability of neural BP decoders.
In addition to the main research stream that focuses on using supervised learning algorithms, reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have been recently investigated to decode linear block codes. In [31], given the output channel LLR values of an RM code that do not satisfy the syndrome check, the authors formalize the iterative bit-flipping operations of a noisy codeword as a Markov decision process and use a parameterized bit-flipping model to generate the bit flipping sequence. A neural network with one hidden layer is used to approximate the value functions associated with each bit index of the channel LLRs, i.e. how likely the correct codeword can be obtained by flipping a certain bit index. By using state-ofthe-art Q-learning methods [32, Section 6.5], the RL-based bit-flipping decoder proposed in [31] can achieve the ML error-

8285
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

correction performance for an RM code of length 32, with 16 information bits.
Another work that applies RL techniques to decode linear block codes is presented in [33]. The authors in [33] address the problem of selecting factor-graph permutations of polar codes under BP decoding to significantly improve the errorcorrection performance of the code. Specifically, the factorgraph permutation selection is formalized as the multi-armed bandit problem [32, Section 2.1] in RL and they propose a decoder that acts like an online-learning agent that learns to select the good factor-graph permutations during the course of decoding. By using state-of-the-art algorithms for the multiarmed bandit problem, the proposed decoder in [33] has an error-correction performance gain of around 0.125 dB at the target FER of 10−4, when compared to the approach that randomly selects the factor-graph permutations.
While the model-based decoding algorithm in [28] can be efficiently implemented in hardware [34], the RL-based algorithms in [31, 33] require the parameter optimization to be carried out at the decoder side, which detrimentally affects the decoding complexity. Therefore, future research directions can be carried out to simplify the online-training process to allow a real-time implementation of the RL-based decoders.

5. RECURSIVE PROJECTION-AGGREGATION DECODING OF REED-MULLER CODES

RM codes are linear block codes with a recursive structure

and a large automorphism group that makes them amenable to

projection-based decoding methods [35]. One instance of such

a decoding method, called recursive projection-aggregation

(RPA) decoding, was recently introduced in [36]. The RPA

decoding algorithm has excellent error-correcting performance

for low-rate and short block length RM codes and it achieves

similar performance to ML decoding for second-order and

third-order RM codes.

Let RM(r, m) denote an RM code with order r and length

n = 2m, and rate R =

r i=0
n

(ni )

.

The

RPA

algorithm

for

an

RM(r, m) code decodes a noisy received vector y of length

n in three main steps: projection, recursive decoding, and

aggregation. In the projection step, y is transformed into n−1

distinct vectors of length n/2. In the recursive decoding step,

each of the vectors produced by the projection is recursively

decoded using RPA for RM(r−1, m−1). This procedure is

repeated until RM codes of order r = 1 are reached, which

can be decoded efficiently using the fast Hadamard transform

(FHT) [37]. In the aggregation step, the codewords that are

decoded by the first-order RM code are recursively combined

using per-coordinate majority voting in order to produce an

estimate cˆ of the transmitted codeword c. Several iterations

of the aforementioned steps are performed until there are no

changes in the decoded codeword or until a pre-defined maxi-

mum number of iterations is reached (the authors of [36] set

the maximum number of iterations to Nmax = m/2 ). For the BSC and the AWGN channel, RPA works with
binary and LLR values, respectively.2 The scheduling of operations for the two types of channels is the same, but there are minor differences in the projection and aggregation steps. Specifically, for the BSC the received vector y is binary and the projections consist of binary XOR operations. However, for the AWGN channel, the vector y consists of LLRs and the projections are done using the well-known tanh rule:

LLRo = 2 tanh−1

tanh

LLR1 2

tanh

LLR2 2

. (4)

In the aggregation step for the AWGN channel, majority voting is replaced with a sum of LLR values.
The complexity of the RPA algorithm scales with nr. Although it is practical for low order RM codes (r ≤ 3) with short or medium code length (n ≤ 1024), it has a high complexity for high-order RM codes. For this reason, the authors of [38] proposed a collapsed projection-aggregation (CPA) decoding algorithm, which merges multiple recursion levels into a single step. This is done in such a way that fewer projections, order-one RM decodings, and aggregations are required, while achieving a similar error-correcting performance to RPA decoding. However, this comes at the cost of an increased complexity for the projection step, since more than two bits (or LLRs) are combined at each step. The authors of [38] also introduce recursive puncturing-aggregation (RXA), which is more suitable for high-rate RM codes.
Even though the RPA decoding algorithm and its variants provide very attractive and near-ML error-correcting performance, and although a highly parallel implementation is foreseen, their efficient hardware implementation has only received very limited attention in the literature [39].

6. CONCLUSION
In this overview paper, we reviewed recent developments in near-ML decoding of error-correcting codes. In particular, we discussed algorithmic and hardware implementation aspects of the universal GRAND algorithm, LP decoding of linear codes, ML-aided decoding algorithms, and RPA decoding of RM codes. Finally, we pointed out some interesting research directions for each of these topics.

7. REFERENCES
[1] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell System Technical Journal, 1948.
[2] E. Arikan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacity-achieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, 2009.
2We note that the description of RPA in [36] is done using likelihoods, but these can be converted to the more numerically stable LLRs in a straightforward way.

8286
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[3] E. Berlekamp, R. McEliece, and H. van Tilborg, “On the inherent intractability of certain coding problems (corresp.),” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 384–386, 1978.
[4] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes. 1,” in IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), vol. 2, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[5] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[6] M. C. Cos¸kun, G. Durisi, T. Jerkovits et al., “Efficient errorcorrecting codes in the short blocklength regime,” Physical Communication, vol. 34, pp. 66–79, 2019.
[7] M. P. C. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1379–1396, 1995.
[8] S. Kudekar, S. Kumar, M. Mondelli et al., “Reed–Muller codes achieve capacity on erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 63, no. 7, pp. 4298–4316, 2017.
[9] K. R. Duffy, J. Li, and M. Me´dard, “Capacity-achieving guessing random additive noise decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 4023–4040, 2019.
[10] ——, “Guessing noise, not code-words,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2018.
[11] K. R. Duffy, M. Me´dard, and W. An, “Guessing random additive noise decoding with symbol reliability information (SRGRAND),” arXiv prepint 1902.03796, 2019.
[12] K. R. Duffy, A. Solomon, K. M. Konwar, and M. Me´dard, “5G NR CA-Polar maximum likelihood decoding by GRAND,” in Annual Conf. on Inf. Sciences and Systems (CISS), 2020.
[13] A. Solomon, K. R. Duffy, and M. Me´dard, “Soft maximum likelihood decoding using GRAND,” arXiv 2001.03089, 2020.
[14] A. Valembois and M. Fossorier, “An improved method to compute lists of binary vectors that optimize a given weight function with application to soft-decision decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 456–458, 2001.
[15] K. R. Duffy, “Ordered reliability bits guessing random additive noise decoding (GRAND),” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Proccessing (ICASSP), submitted, 2021.
[16] M. Helmling, S. Scholl, F. Gensheimer et al., “Database of channel codes and ML simulation results,” www.uni-kl.de/ channel-codes, Tech. Rep., 2019.
[17] S. M. Abbas, T. Tonnellier, F. Ercan, and W. J. Gross, “Highthroughput VLSI architecture for GRAND,” in IEEE Workshop on Sig. Proc. Systems (SiPS), 2020.
[18] S. M. Abbas, T. Tonnellier, F. Ercan et al., “High-throughput VLSI architecture for soft-decision decoding with ORBGRAND,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Proccessing (ICASSP), submitted, 2021.
[19] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[20] M. Wasson, M. Milicevic, S. C. Draper, and G. Gulak, “Hardware-based linear program decoding with the alternating direction method of multipliers,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 67, pp. 4976–4991, Oct. 2019.
[21] S. Barman, X. Liu, S. C. Draper, and B. Recht, “Decomposition methods for large scale LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7870–7886, Dec. 2013.

[22] M. Wasson and S. C. Draper, “Hardware based projection onto the parity polytope and probability simplex,” in Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst., Comput., Nov. 2015.
[23] I. Debbabi, B. Le Gal, N. Khouja et al., “Analysis of ADMM-LP algorithm for LDPC decoding, a first step to hardware implementation,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Electron. Circuits Syst. (ICECS), Dec. 2015.
[24] H. B. Thameur, B. Le Gal, N. Khouja et al., “Hardware design of Euclidean projection modules for ADMM LDPC decoding,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Electron. Circuits Syst. (ICECS), Dec. 2018.
[25] F. Gensheimer, T. Dietz, K. Kraft et al., “A reduced-complexity projection algorithm for ADMM-based LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 66, no. 8, Aug. 2020.
[26] K. Kraft, T. Dietz, S. Ruzika, and N. Wehn, “ADMM-based ML decoding: An implementation centric view,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Proccessing (ICASSP), submitted, 2021.
[27] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. t. Brink, “On deep learning-based channel decoding,” in Annual Conf. on Inf. Sciences and Systems (CISS), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[28] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch et al., “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, 2018.
[29] A. Buchberger, C. Ha¨ger, H. D. Pfister et al., “Pruning neural belief propagation decoders,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2020.
[30] A. Buchberger, C. Hager, H. D. Pfister et al., “Improved neural belief-propagation decoding,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Proccessing (ICASSP), submitted, 2021.
[31] F. Carpi, C. Ha¨ger, M. Martalo` et al., “Reinforcement learning for channel coding: Learned bit-flipping decoding,” in Annual Allerton Conf. on Commun., Control, and Computing, 2019.
[32] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
[33] N. Doan, S. A. Hashemi, and W. J. Gross, “Decoding polar codes with reinforcement learning,” IEEE Global Communications Conference (to appear), 2020. [Online]. Available: arXivpreprint2009.06796
[34] W. Xu, X. Tan, Y. Be’ery et al., “Deep learning-aided belief propagation decoder for polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Sel. Topics Circuits Syst., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 189–203, 2020.
[35] E. Abbe, A. Shpilka, and M. Ye, “Reed-Muller codes: Theory and algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. (Early Access), Jun. 2020.
[36] M. Ye and E. Abbe, “Recursive projection-aggregation decoding of Reed-Muller codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 4948–4965, Aug. 2020.
[37] Y. Be’ery and J. Snyders, “Optimal soft decision block decoders based on fast Hadamard transform,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 355–364, May 1986.
[38] M. Lian, C. Ha¨ger, and H. D. Pfister, “Decoding Reed–Muller codes using redundant code constraints,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2020.
[39] M. Hashemipour, K. Goossens, and A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, “Implementation of simplified recursive projection-aggregation decoding for Reed-Muller codes,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Proccessing (ICASSP), submitted, 2021.

8287
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

