IEEE International Conference on Communication information and Computing Technology (ICCICT), June 25-27, 2021, Mumbai, India
Optimized Implementation of LDPC Codes for MF-TDMA Based Satellite Systems

2021 International Conference on Communication information and Computing Technology (ICCICT) | 978-1-6654-0430-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICCICT50803.2021.9510154

Deepika Revankar Manjunath Communication, Product Development
and Innovation Center Bharat Electronics Limited
Bengaluru, India deepikarevankar@bel.co.in

Abstract—The advancements in Satellite Communication with the development of DVB based systems is a bonanza, as it provides a potential solution of supporting large users. To enrich the user experience and to ensure reliable communication across noisy channels, DVB standard incorporates the powerful capabilities of LDPC codes. LDPC codes employ a robust mechanism of Error Detection and Correction, however at the cost of accruing coding complexity. Accordingly, there’s a need to optimize the implementation of LDPC codes to cater the rapidly changing communication configurations and the same can be achieved using Graphic Processing Unit (GPU) that can serve as an efficient platform for the implementation of LDPC Decoder.
Keywords—DVB, LDPC, GPU, MF-TDMA, SoC
I. INTRODUCTION
As Internet has turned out to be the prime requirement of users across the world, Satellite Communication has emerged to be a suitable platform as it offers humungous advantages when compared to radio communication such as it offers larger area of coverage, reliable and high speed Internet connectivity and supports efficient mobility. The introduction of Direct Video Broadcast Satellite Communication (DVB) standard (published and maintained by the European Telecommunications Standard Institute (ETSI)) for communication between Hub and Terminals via satellite link has set a new landmark in this field, as DVB based satellite systems are widely implemented to provide the capability of supporting large number of users need for bandwidth with MF-TDMA frame structure that provides bandwidth-on-demand[1] capability along with dynamic slot allocation modes, providing ample opportunities in achieving high uplink and downlink utilization for burst multimedia traffic. To ensure reliable and efficient communication links, DVB standard incorporates the proven and powerful LowDensity Parity-Check code (LDPC) as inner codes with the concatenation of BCH as outer codes [2, 3].

II. LDPC CODES
For communication designers, the Shannon limit is the Sangraal. Various methods have evolved to implement error correction techniques in order to have channel performance nearer to the Shannon limit. Channel performance closer to Shannon limit in DVB standard is achieved using LDPC codes of Error Detection and Correction. LDPC codes belong to a family of linear block codes having an intrinsic

parity check matrix A parity-check matrix contains fewer number of 1’s when compared to the number of 0’s.During encoding, redundant data called Parity Data are appended to data symbols to detect and correct errors that are introduced by the noise during the data transmission through a channel. LDPC codes are a bonanza as it improves the performance in terms of capacity of MF-TDMA channels closer to Shannon Limit.

A. Functional Description
The representation of a binary LDPC code is presented in the following equation:

H * xT = 0

(1)

where x is a codeword. A scattered parity check matrix of PxB is denoted as H. Here the bit/message nodes and nodes of parity are represented by B and P respectively. The link between each bit node (B) and parity node (P) is represented by a value in H which is not equal to 0 as shown in Fig. 1

As an example, an LDPC code of length 8 and Code Rate= 1/2 can be specified by the following parity check matrix:

b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6 b7 b8

1 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 p1

H=

1 0

1 0

0 1

0 0

0 1

1 0

0 1

1 1

p2 p3

0 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 p4

The same code can be equivalently represented by the bipartite graph in Fig. 1 which connects each bit/message node (B) to nodes of parity (P).

978-1-6654-0430-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:07:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig.1. Bipartite graph of an LDPC code of length 8 and code rate ½
LDPC codes are computed by employing a process that involves repetitive operations of addition and multiplication, where the received encoded message is subjected to the following computation stages :
• Parity-node to Bit-node (PTB) computation stage.
• Bit-node to Parity-node (BTP) computation stage.
• A Parity check stage.
Literatures [4, 5, 6, 7 and 8] illustrate conventional VLSIbased implementation of LDPC codes. Here, the implementation is achieved at higher development costs. To optimize the implementation of LDPC codes, Graphic Processing Unit (GPU) serves as an appropriate alternative which caters high-performance and large scale computing. GPU consists of multiple cores which facilitate massive parallel processing, compared to Central Processing Units (CPUs) [9].
III. INTRODUCTION TO GPGPU
The GPU has evolved as a powerful processor that has the capability of accelerating the speed of calculations. Albeit it was developed to cater processing of graphical data due to its architectural feature of multi cores, computing intensive and parallel computations, it is finding applications in processing of non-graphical entities which involves complex and parallel arithmetic operations. The GPU serves as a an additional processor along with the host CPU and has its own global memory with high bandwidth interconnect. The application runs its parallel parts on GPU via kernels (code). Many threads execute same kernel (SIMT = Single Instruction Multiple Threads). These threads provide instant switching as they offer minuscule creation overhead [9]. General Purpose GPU (GPGPU) is the terminology in practice that is used to refer an application of GPU for processing non graphical entities.
Multiple SDKs are available to program GPGPUs, namely: CUDA, Stream SDK, OpenCL, Rapidmind, HMP and PGI Accelerator. At present CUDA is the predominant SDK used for programming NVIDIA based GPGPU architecture.
A. Architecture of GPGPU
An NVIDIA based GPGPU architecture as shown in Fig. 2 [10] consists of an array of streaming processors capable of high degree of threading. It also comprises of very-highbandwidth memories known as Graphics Double Data Rate

DRAM (GDDR). These memories are referred as Global Memory and cater massive parallel applications. B. Architecture of CUDA
Compute Unified Device Architecture (CUDA) Architecture provides the feature of effective utilization of GPU by dividing it into a hierarchical structure of grids, blocks and threads as shown in Fig. 3 [10]. A grid in GPU consists of multiple blocks which in turn consist of multiple threads. This hierarchical architecture facilitates parallelism in GPU.
As shown in Fig. 3, a thread in GPU has access to the following memories:
1) Global Memory: GDDR is a Global Memory which all threads of different blocks can easily access it for read and write operations. It is slow and un-cached memory requiring a sequential and aligned 16 bytes read and write operations for coalesced read/write.
2) Shared Memory: Each block is provided with a Shared memory which all threads in a block can access it for read and write operations.
3) Registers: Each thread in a block is assigned with a Register. This is the fastest memory available which each thread that caters quick storage and retrieval of data.
Fig. 2. GPGPU Architecture
Fig. 3. CUDA based GPU Architecture

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:07:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IV. IMPLEMENTATION OF LDPC BASED DECODER The NVIDIA based GPU uses CUDA that incorporates the powerful feature of parallel computation. This feature of CUDA is utilized to develop LDPC Decoder of an MF-TDMA system that involves iterative calculations of multiple channels. Fig. 4 depicts a method to implement LDPC decoder in GPU. The encoded message from a channel is received by the DVB based Satellite MODEM. The higher layer processing of this message is performed by CPU present in MODEM. This processed data from CPU is sent to GPU for decoding it. Here, this processed encoded data is subjected to a repetitive procedure by passing the data between nodes of parity and bit nodes. Finally, the hard decision for parity check determines the actual message which is sent to CPU from GPU. A. Implementation of LDPC Decoder in a Multi Core GPU Architecture The LDPC decoding process is divided into four stages: • An Initiation stage that initializes GPU. • Parity node (P) processing stage (Horizontal). • Bit node (B) processing stage (Vertical). • A Hard decision parity check stage. Each stage is computed in a separate and dedicated thread of GPU and the same is depicted in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. A method to implement LDPC decoder in GPU
As shown in Fig. 4 CUDA Kernel 1 performs the initialization stage of GPU. A row computation stage to compute parity check-node to bit-node (PTB) is performed in CUDA Kernel 2. This stage is autonomous in nature which implies that each stage of computation of PTB does not depend on the other. Similar approach is followed for the computation of each bit-node to parity-node (BTP) and the same is performed in CUDA Kernel 3. CUDA Kernel 4 implements the stage of determining the parity using Hard decision algorithm. Thus, the entire process of decoding data is essentially parallel in nature. A slow and un-cached memory GDDR (global memory) is easily accessible to each thread present in a block. In order to avoid race condition between multiple threads while accessing this GDDR, _syncthreads()

function is used. When all the threads in a block have executed _syncthreads(), a thread can proceed with its further execution, thus avoiding memory conflicts.
B. Optimization schemes for implementation of LDPC Decoder in a GPU
To achieve this goal, the implementation scheme incorporates several optimization methods:
• High throughput performance can be achieved by reducing the latency caused due to data transfer between CPU and GPU by using pinned memory that is implemented by using the function cudaHostAlloc(). This function allows GPU threads to have direct access to GDDR memory thereby bypassing the need of CPU. This contributes to increase the speed of computation.
• Implementation of hard decision parity check algorithm where the bit in error is detected by checking the parity, thereby saving computational time.
C. Implementation results
The experimental platform for implementing LDPC decoder consists of the following:
• Four cores, 1.6GHz CPU.
• NVIDIA GeForce MX150 consisting of 2GB of GDDR5 memory and 384 CUDA cores running at 1469MHz.
• CUDA SDK of version 8 (CUDA 8).
The same experiment was also implemented on Xilinx Virtex based development board.
In the above experiments, typical codes from the DVB standards were employed. Here LDPC decoder was implemented for code rate of 1/2. Each frame corresponds to a data size of 16200 bits. CPU time was used to measure the processing time in order to calculate the execution time of each thread.
The following observations were made which is tabulated in TABLE I and TABLE II.

TABLE I. COMPARISION BETWEEN GPU, CPU AND FPGA PERFORMANCE

No. Of Iterations
25 35 45 55 65

GPU

CPU

FPGA

No. Of Frames
10 20 30 40 50

Time required to Time required to Time required to

decode frames decode frames decode frames

(sec)

(sec)

(sec)

0.18

0.23

0.4

0.23

0.3

0.48

0.29

0.37

0.56

0.34

0.44

0.67

0.39

0.51

0.75

TABLE II. THROUGHPUT FOR LDPC DECODER OF RATE ½ IMPLEMENTED USING GPU (NO. OF FRAME = 1)

No. Of Iterations
25 35 45

Throughput (Mbps)
190.3 145.6 79.2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:07:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Price in INR

The graph in Fig. 5 depicts performance comparison of simulation speed of GPU in terms of simulation speed of CPU.
From the information present in TABLE I and Fig. 5, the following observations were made:
• The time required to decode frames by LDPC Decoder implemented in GPU is less when compared to that of CPU and FPGA.
• From Fig. 5, it is observed that GPU outperforms CPU in terms of execution speed. For instance, to perform 25 numbers of iterations, it is observed that GPU is 1.26 times faster than CPU and so on.
• The speed and number of frames handled per sec by LDPC decoder is optimized when implemented in GPU.

Simulation Speed

No. of Iterations Fig. 5. Simulation speed of GPU relative to CPU
Device Fig. 6. Power consumption of various devices

Device Fig. 7. Comparison of prices of various devices
The graph in Fig. 6 depicts the power consumption of various devices in the implementation of LDPC Decoder of code rate 1/2 and data size of 16200 bits. At higher iterations where maximum resources are utilized, it is observed that the power consumed by FPGA is least when compared to other devices, however, the difference in power consumed by GPU and FPGA is minimal. Also, Fig. 7 depicts a comparison of costings of various devices. It can be inferred that the cost of CPU is least when compared to other devices. However, usage of CPU is associated with bottleneck of resources. Also, the difference in price observed between CPU and GPU is nominal. Further, as observed in TABLE I, the latency offered by FPGA and CPU is more when compared to GPU. Thus, a trade-off in terms of power consumption and cost is required to avoid issues related to latency as it affects the overall performance of a Satellite Communication system.
V. CONCLUSION
GPU serves as an optimum platform to implement computationally complex LDPC codes, as it caters large scale and high-performance computations with the feature of parallel processing algorithms. This method of implementing LDPC codes supports the advantages of DVB based Satellite Communication systems that incorporate robust mechanism of error detection and correction along with the advantages of high throughput and flexible implementation.
Further, with the advancements in the VLSI technology, the advantage of System on Chip (SoC) solution comprising of GPU, CPU and FPGA embedded on a single chip can be effectively utilized in designing a Satellite MODEM by implementing LDPC decoder in GPU of SoC. This implementation provides an optimized design solution in terms of power consumption and cost as observed in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 as the power consumed and the cost of a Satellite MODEM comprising of CPU, FPGA and GPU performing different operations is associated with high overall power consumption and high cost when compared to a Satellite MODEM system consisting of SoC which effectively performs multiple operations of data processing on a single chip, thereby reducing the formfactor of the overall system.

Power Consumption (W)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:07:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This deterministic low latency and robust performance can be best used to serve the high bandwidth requirement for Internet services using MF-TDMA systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I would like to thank General Manger (PD&IC) and Chief Technical Officer (Communication) for providing all necessary support and guidance for the project. I would also like to thank Senior Deputy General Managers Sudha Suresh Babu and Nidhi Srivastav for their continuous motivation.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Liu, Y. Gu, H. Zhang, W. Gong, D. Towsley, Application level relay for high bandwidth data transport, in: Proceedings of the First Workshop on Networks for Grid Applications (GridNets), San Jose, CA, 2004
[2] ETSI EN 302 307 V1.2.1 (2009-08) pp. 20-66. [3] ETSI EN 301 790 V1.5.1 (2009-05) pp. 162-165. [4] C. H. Liu, S. W. Yen, C. L. Chen, H. C. Chang, C. Y. Lee, Y. S. Hsu,
and S. J. Jou, "An LDPC decoder chip based on self-routing network for IEEE 802.16e applications," IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits 43(3), pp. 684-694 (2008).

[5] F. Kienle, T. Brack, and N. Wehn, "A Synthesizable IP Core for WIMAX 802.16E LDPC Code Decoding," IEEE 17th International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, pp. 1-5 (2006).
[6] S. Seo, T. Mudge, Y. Zhu, and C. Chakrabarti, "Design and Analysis of LDPC Decoders for Software Defined Radio," Proc. of IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, pp. 210-215 (2007).
[7] X. Y. Shih, C. Z. Zhan, C. H. Lin, and A. Y. Wu, "An 8.29 mm2 52 mW Multi-Mode LDPC Decoder Design for Mobile WiMAX System in 0.13 μm CMOS Process," IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 43(3), pp. 672-683 (2008).
[8] Peter Hailes, Lei Xu, Robert G. Maunder, Bashir M. Al-Hashimi and Lajos Hanzo, “A Survey of FPGA-Based LDPC Decoders” IEEE Communication Surveys & Tutorials, VOL. 18, NO. 2, Second Quarter 2016.
[9] G. Falcao, V. Silva, and L. Sousa, "How GPUs can outperform ASICs for fast LDPC decoding," Proc. of the 23rd international conference on Supercomputing, pp. 390-399 (2009).
[10] AntoninoTumeo and Politecnicodi Milano,“Nvidia Massively Parallel Computing with CUDA”

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:07:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

