3708

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 67, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

Spatially Coupled Generalized LDPC Codes: Asymptotic Analysis and Finite Length Scaling
David G. M. Mitchell , Senior Member, IEEE, Pablo M. Olmos , Michael Lentmaier , Senior Member, IEEE, and Daniel J. Costello, Jr. , Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— Generalized low-density parity-check (GLDPC) codes are a class of LDPC codes in which the standard single parity check (SPC) constraints are replaced by constraints defined by a linear block code. These stronger constraints typically result in improved error floor performance, due to better minimum distance and trapping set properties, at a cost of some increased decoding complexity. In this paper, we study spatially coupled generalized low-density parity-check (SC-GLDPC) codes and present a comprehensive analysis of these codes, including: (1) an iterative decoding threshold analysis of SC-GLDPC code ensembles demonstrating capacity approaching thresholds via the threshold saturation effect; (2) an asymptotic analysis of the minimum distance and free distance properties of SCGLDPC code ensembles, demonstrating that the ensembles are asymptotically good; and (3) an analysis of the finite-length scaling behavior of both GLDPC block codes and SC-GLDPC codes based on a peeling decoder (PD) operating on a binary erasure channel (BEC). Results are compared to GLDPC block codes, and the advantages and disadvantages of SC-GLDPC codes are discussed.
Index Terms— Generalized LDPC codes, spatially coupled codes, iterative decoding thresholds, minimum distance, finite length scaling.
Manuscript received October 29, 2019; revised October 31, 2020; accepted April 2, 2021. Date of publication April 8, 2021; date of current version May 20, 2021. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant ECCS-1710920, Grant OIA-1757207, and Grant HRD-1914635; in part by the European Research Council (ERC) through the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under Grant 714161; and in part by the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and University under Grant TEC2016-78434-C3-3-R (AEI/FEDER, EU). This article was presented in part at the 2010 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, in part at the 2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, in part at the 2015 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, and in part at the 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing. (Corresponding author: David G. M. Mitchell.)
David G. M. Mitchell is with the Klipsch School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003 USA (e-mail: dgmm@nmsu.edu).
Pablo M. Olmos is with the Signal Theory and Communications Department, University of Carlos III in Madrid, 28911 Leganés, Spain (e-mail: olmos@tsc.uc3m.es).
Michael Lentmaier is with the Department of Electrical and Information Technology, Lund University, 22100 Lund, Sweden (e-mail: michael.lentmaier@eit.lth.se).
Daniel J. Costello, Jr. is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA (e-mail: costello.2@nd.edu).
Communicated by L. Dolecek, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2021.3071743. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2021.3071743

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) block codes, with iterative message passing decoding, were introduced by Gallager in 1963 [1] as a class of codes whose decoder implementation complexity grows only linearly with block length, in contrast to maximum likelihood (ML) and maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding methods whose complexity typically has exponential growth. As a result of the low-density constraint on the parity-check matrix H, the minimum distance of LDPC block codes is sub-optimal. However, Gallager showed that regular constructions, where the variable and check node degrees of the Tanner graph representation of H are fixed, maintain linear minimum distance growth with block length, i.e., they are asymptotically good, although their iterative decoding thresholds are bounded away from capacity. Irregular constructions, introduced by Luby et al. in 2001 [2], where the node degrees are not fixed and can be numerically optimized, have capacity-approaching thresholds, but typically involve a large fraction of low degree variable nodes that can preclude linear distance growth and result in problematic graphical objects causing failures in sub-optimal decoders. As a result, irregular codes perform best in the waterfall, or low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), portion of the bit-error-rate (BER) performance curve, while regular codes perform better at high SNRs, i.e., in the error floor region of the BER curve.
Generalized LDPC (GLDPC) block codes, first proposed by Tanner in 1981 [3], are constructed by replacing some/all of the single parity-check (SPC) constraint nodes in the Tanner graph of a conventional LDPC code by more powerful generalized constraint (GC) nodes corresponding to an (n, k) linear block code. The n variable nodes connected to a GC node in the Tanner graph of a GLDPC code are then considered as the code bits of the corresponding (n, k) code, and the sub-code associated with each GC node is referred to as a constraint code. In message passing decoding of GLDPC codes, the constraint codes are decoded using standard block code decoders which, in the case of simple constraint codes such as Hamming codes [4] or Hadamard codes [5], can be ML or MAP decoders. GLDPC codes have many potential advantages compared to conventional SPC/LDPC codes, such as large minimum distance [4], [6], low error floors [7], and fast iterative decoding convergence [8].
Spatially coupled LDPC (SC-LDPC) codes, also known as LDPC convolutional codes, were introduced by

0018-9448 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: SC-GLDPC CODES: ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS AND FINITE LENGTH SCALING

3709

Jimenez-Felstrom and Zigangirov in 1999 [9]. SC-LDPC codes can be viewed as a sequence of LDPC block codes whose graph representations are coupled together over time, resulting in a convolutional structure with block-toblock memory. A remarkable property of SC-LDPC codes, established numerically in [10] and analytically in [11], [12], is that asymptotically their iterative message passing decoding threshold is equal to the MAP decoding threshold of the underlying LDPC block code ensemble under certain conditions, a phenomenon known as threshold saturation. In other words, the (exponential complexity) MAP decoding performance of the underlying block code can be achieved by its coupled version with (linear complexity) message passing decoding.
Spatially coupled LDPC codes with generalized constraints, or spatially coupled generalized LDPC (SC-GLDPC) codes, and related constructions, including braided codes [13], [14], staircase codes [15], and product codes [16], have been investigated in the literature [17]–[24]. In particular, it has been shown that SC-GLDPC codes have good iterative decoding thresholds [17], [22], including excellent performance with hard decision iterative decoding [18], [21], [23], linear growth of minimum distance [19], and robust finite-length scaling performance [24]. We note that most of the existing work in this area can be considered as spatially coupled versions of product codes. Staircase codes, for example, can be seen as a variation of tightly braided block codes where the graphs are deterministic and less sparse. In particular, unlike the GLDPC code ensembles we consider in this paper, such codes get sparser only when the length of the component codes is increased.
Motivated to combine the threshold improvement of spatial coupling with the improved distance properties of generalized constraints, this paper investigates SC-GLDPC codes with linear block codes as generalized constraints and presents both asymptotic (threshold and distance) and finite-length analyses of SC-GLDPC code ensembles. A principle contribution of this paper is to extend the results of [17], [19], [20], [24] and present a unified treatment and analysis of SC-GLDPC codes. We first extend the threshold analysis of protograph-based SCLDPC code ensembles in [10] to GLDPC code ensembles and use this to perform an iterative decoding threshold analysis of SC-GLDPC codes ensembles. This method is used to show numerically that threshold saturation is achieved for SCGLDPC code ensembles, i.e., their thresholds coincide with the maximum a-posteriori (MAP) decoding threshold of the underlying GLDPC block code ensemble.1 This is followed by a minimum distance analysis of terminated and tail-biting SC-GLDPC code ensembles and a free distance analysis of unterminated ensembles, both of which demonstrate that the ensembles are asymptotically good and have large distance growth rates. In order to study the finite-length scaling properties of SC-GLDPC code ensembles, a method to analyze the finite-length scaling behavior of GLDPC block codes over the
1In a recent paper [25], the authors found that, for a particular class of doubly-generalized LDPC codes introduced in [26], in which both variable and check nodes have generalized constraints, no threshold improvement from spatial coupling is observed. However, as we will demonstrate in this paper, threshold improvement is achieved with SC-GLDPC codes.

binary erasure channel (BEC) with peeling decoding (PD) is first introduced. We then extend this approach to study SCGLDPC code ensembles and demonstrate robust finite-length scaling performance.

II. PROTOGRAPH-BASED SC-GLDPC CODES

A protograph [27] is a small bipartite graph that connects
a set of nv variable nodes V = {v1, v2, . . . , vnv } to a set of nc constraint nodes C = {c1, c2, . . . , cnc } by a set of
edges E. The edges connected to a variable node vj of degree ∂(vj) or a constraint node ci of degree ∂(ci) are labeled by evj,a or eci,b, respectively, where a ∈ {1, . . . , ∂(vj)} and b ∈ {1, . . . , ∂(ci)}. If the ath edge associated with vj is the bth edge associated with ci, then evj,a = eic,b.2 In a protographbased GLDPC code ensemble, each constraint node ci can represent an arbitrary block constraint code Ci with parity-check matrix Hci, length nci, and mci linearly independent parity-
check equations where, throughout the manuscript, we use

superscript labels on code parameters in order to distinguish

between different constraint codes. The design rate of the

GLDPC code ensemble is then given by

R=1−

nc i=1

mci

.

(1)

nv

A protograph can be represented by means of an nc × nv

bi-adjacency matrix B, which is called the base matrix of

the protograph. The nonnegative integer entry Bij in row i and column j of B is equal to the number of edges that

connect nodes ci and vj in the protograph. In order to construct ensembles of protograph-based GLDPC codes, a protograph

can be interpreted as a template for the Tanner graph of a

derived code, which is then obtained by a copy-and-permute

or graph lifting operation [27]. In matrix form, the protograph
is lifted by replacing each nonzero entry Bij of B with a
summation of Bij non-overlapping permutation matrices of size M ×M , thereby creating an M nc×M nv constraint matrix H of a GLDPC code. Each row in the ith set of M rows of
H must satisfy the constraints Hci associated with constraint node ci, where the length nci of the ith constraint code equals the sum of the entries in the ith row of B and the constraint applies to the positions in a row of H with non-zero entries.3
Allowing the permutations to vary over all M ! possible choices

results in an ensemble of GLDPC block codes.
Example 1: Fig. 1 displays the protograph of an (nc, nv) = (2, 7)-regular GLDPC block code with base matrix

B=

1111111 1111111

.

(2)

If we suppose both the constraint nodes are (7, 4) Hamming

codes with parity-ch⎡eck matrix

⎤

1001110

Hc = ⎣ 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 ⎦ ,

(3)

0011011

2This way of labeling will be useful for the density evolution equations described in Section III, since it takes into account the order of edges connected to a node and allows one to distinguish among multiple edges between a given pair of nodes.
3Strictly speaking, H is not a parity-check matrix since each row in the ith set of M rows of H corresponds to mci parity-checks. Consequently, we refer to H as a constraint matrix.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3710

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 67, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

Fig. 1. Protograph of a (2, 7)-regular GLDPC block code. The white circles represent generalized constraint nodes and the black circles represent variable
nodes. The labels on the edges indicate the corresponding columns of the parity-check matrix Hc of the generalized constraint code. In this case, both constraints are defined by the same (7, 4) Hamming code, but with different orderings of columns.

where the constraint code length is nc = 7 and the row rank of Hc is mc = 3, then the resulting ensemble has design rate R = 1/7. Note that even though both constraints are defined by the same (7, 4) Hamming code, a different ordering of columns can be used. In Fig. 1, the column of Hc that the variable node is connected to is shown on the edge.

A. Unterminated SC-GLDPC Codes

An unterminated SC-GLDPC code can be described by a

convolutional protograph [28] with base matrix

⎡

⎤

B0

B[0,∞]

=

⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢

B1 ...
Bw

B0
B1 ...
Bw

... ...

⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥ ,

(4)

...

where w denotes the syndrome former memory or coupling

width of the code and the bc × bv component base matrices

Bi, i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , w}, represent the edge connections from the

bv variable nodes at time t to the bc (generalized) constraint nodes at time t + i.4 An ensemble of (in general) time-varying

SC-GLDPC codes can then be formed from B[0,∞] using the

protograph construction method described above with lifting

factor M .5 The decoding constraint length of the resulting

ensemble is given by νs = (w + 1)M bv, the design rate is

given by

R=1−

bc i=1

mci

,

(5)

bv

and at each time instant t the encoder creates a block vt of M bv symbols resulting in the unterminated code sequence v = [v0, v1, . . . , vt, . . .].
Starting from a bc × bv base matrix B of a block code
ensemble, one can construct SC-GLDPC code ensembles with

the same variable and check node degrees as B. This is

achieved by an edge spreading procedure [28] that divides the

4We note that in a series of papers by Kudekar et al. [11], [12], the authors refer to a “smoothing parameter” w which is equal to the syndrome former memory plus one.
5In this paper, we restrict our attention to time-invariant protographs. Consequently, the choice of permutations in the graph lifting stage will determine if the lifted graph is time-invariant or time-varying. A random lifting will typically result in a time-varying graph.

edges connected to each variable node in the base matrix B among w + 1 component base matrices Bi, i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , w}, such that the condition B0 + B1 + · · · + Bw = B is satisfied. We now give some examples of constructing SC-GLDPC code
ensembles. Example 2: For w = 1, we can apply the edge spreading
technique to the (bc, bv) = (2, 7)-regular block code base matrix in (2) to obtain the following component base matrices

B0 =

0000111 1110000

,

(6)

B1 =

1111000 0001111

.

(7)

The convolutional protograph associated with the resulting base matrix B[0,∞] defined in (4) is shown in Fig. 2, where time indices t are shown above the corresponding set (block)
of variable nodes. We choose the upper and lower constraint nodes at each time instant to correspond to the (7, 4) Hamming code with nc = 7, mc = 3, and parity-check matrix Hc from (3). (Note that the labels indicated on the edges correspond to columns of the component parity-check matrix Hc in (3) and that the constraint nodes c1 and c2 represent shortened codes.) After lifting, the constraint length of the resulting SC-GLDPC code ensemble is νs = 14M and the design rate is R = 1/7.
We will refer to this SC-GLDPC code ensemble as Ensem-
ble A7. An extension to the Ensemble A15 representing design rate R = 7/15 SC-GLDPC codes corresponding to the (bc, bv) = (2, 15)-regular all-ones matrix B, (15, 11) Hamming constraint codes with nc = 15 and mc = 4, and w = 1 edge-spreading based on (6) and (7), and to other values of bv = nc, mc, and R, is straightforward.
To illustrate the flexibility of SC-GLDPC code designs,
multiple edges can also be introduced in the block protograph. Example 3: Considering shortened (14, 10) Hamming con-
straint codes with nc = 14 and mc = 4 as an example, where each variable node in a bc × bv = 1 × 7 protograph is connected with a double edge to a single check node. We split the corresponding multi-edge base matrix B = [ 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 ] into

B0 = B1 = 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

(8)

and obtain the protograph of Ensemble B14 with w = 1, bc = 1 check node, and bv = 7 variable nodes at each time instant, a segment of which is illustrated in Fig. 3. From (5) we see that the design rate of Ensemble B14 is R = 1 − 4/7 = 3/7. Puncturing the first protograph variable node at each time instant t results in Ensemble B14,P with design rate R = 0.5.
The protograph-based braided block code (BBC) ensembles
considered in [29] are another example of SC-GLDPC code
ensembles. These can be derived by using the Tanner graph
of a tightly BBC [13] as a protograph. The component base
matrices of such an SC-GLDPC code can be identified as

B0 =

1 1

i 0

0 i

,

Bi =

0 0

0 ei

ei 0

,

(9)

where i = 1, . . . , w, ei = (0, . . . , 0, 1, 0, . . . , 0) is the length w vector with a one at the ith position and zeros

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: SC-GLDPC CODES: ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS AND FINITE LENGTH SCALING

3711

Fig. 2. Convolutional protograph of the (2, 7)-regular SC-GLDPC code ensemble A7. The white circles represent generalized constraint nodes and the black circles represent variable nodes.

R = 7/15, as well as to other values of bv = nc, mc, and R, is straightforward.

Fig. 3. Segment of the w = 1 convolutional protograph defining Ensemble B14 .
elsewhere, 0 is the all-zero vector, and i the all-one vector, of length w. We will use the term Ensemble Cnc when referring to such SC-GLDPC code ensembles based on constraint codes of length nc = 2w + 1.
Example 4: For the (bc, bv) = (2, 7)-regular GLDPC base matrix with (7, 4) Hamming constraint codes and design rate R = 1/7 from Example 1, the convolutional protograph resulting from the tightly BBC construction of (9) with w = 3, nc = 7, and mc = 3, corresponding to Ensemble C7, is illustrated in Fig. 4, where the upper constraint nodes correspond to the “horizontal constraints” and the lower constraint nodes correspond to the “vertical constraints” of the braided construction. Its girth is equal to eight, which follows from the structure of the array and is true for any SC-GLDPC code resulting from a tightly BBC protograph.
Observe that the sum of the component base matrices in (9) is equal to the base matrix B in (2) of the corresponding GLDPC code, i.e., the all-one matrix of dimension bc × bv = 2 × 7. This reflects the fact that the graph in Fig. 4 can be obtained by repeating the GLDPC graph in Fig. 1 and spreading the edges over w = 3 adjacent time instants. An extension to the Ensemble C15, representing SC-GLDPC codes corresponding to the (bc, bv) = (2, 15)-regular all-one base matrix B, (15, 11) Hamming constraint codes, and w = 7 edgespreading based on (9) with nc = 15, mc = 4, and design rate

B. Terminated and Tail-Biting SC-GLDPC Codes

Suppose that we start the SC-GLDPC code with convolu-

tional base matrix defined in (4) at time t = 0 and terminate

it after L time instants. The resulting finite-length base matrix

is then given by

⎡

⎤

B0

B[0,L−1]

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢

B1 ...
Bw

B0
B1 ...
Bw

... ...
...

B0
B1 ...

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

, (10)

Bw (L+w)bc×Lbv

where L is called the coupling length. The matrix B[0,L−1] is then the base matrix of a terminated SC-GLDPC code.

The corresponding terminated convolutional protograph is

slightly irregular, with lower constraint node degrees at both

ends. This is illustrated for the A7 ensemble of Example 2 in Fig. 5. The reduced degree constraint nodes at each end

of the convolutional protograph are associated with short-

ened constraint codes, in which the symbols correspond-

ing to the missing edges are removed. For decoding pur-

poses, such a code shortening is equivalent to fixing these

removed symbols and assigning an infinite reliability to them.

Note that the variable node degrees are not affected by

termination.

The constraint matrix H[0,L−1] of the terminated SCGLDPC code derived from B[0,L−1] by lifting with some factor M has M bvL columns and (L + w)M bc rows. It fol-
lows that the rate of the terminated SC-GLDPC code is

equal to

RL

=

1

−

(L

+

w)bc mc Lbv

−

Δ ,

(11)

where mc denotes the (constant) number of independent parity

checks associated with each constraint code and Δ ≥ 0

accounts for a possible rate increase due to the shortened

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 67, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

Fig. 4. Convolutional protograph of a SC-GLDPC code with (7, 4) Hamming constraint codes, defining Ensemble C7. The nodes are grouped according to the time instant t at which the code symbols, designated by the filled circles, are generated. Edge labels 1, 2, . . . , 7, corresponding to the columns of the
component matrix Hc, are ordered anti-clockwise from the upper left of each constraint node.

Fig. 5. Protograph of the (2, 7)-regular terminated SC-GLDPC code ensemble A7 with coupling length L.

constraint codes.6 If H[0,L−1] has full rank, the rate increase parameter is Δ = 0. However, the shortened constraint

codes at the ends of the graph can cause a reduced rank for

H[0,L−1], which slightly increases RL. In this case, Δ > 0 and depends on both the particular constraint code chosen

and the assignment of edges to the columns of its parity-

check matrix Hc. As L → ∞, the rate RL of the terminated
SC-GLDPC code converges to the design rate R = 1 − bcmc/bv of the underlying GLDPC block code with base matrix B.7

The generalized convolutional base matrix B[0,∞] can also be terminated using tail-biting [30], [31], resulting

in the base matrix of a tail-biting generalized LDPC

(TB-GLDPC) code ensemble. Here, for any λ ≥ w,

the last bcw rows of the terminated matrix B[0,λ−1] are

removed and added λbc × λbv tail-biting

to the matrix

first Bt(bλ)

bcw with

rows to form the tail-biting coupling

length λ

Bt(bλ) ⎡B0

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢BB...w1

B0 ...
Bw−1
Bw

Bw · · · B1 ⎤

...
B0 . . . ... . . . Bw−1

B0 ...

... ...

... Bw

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

.

Bw Bw−1 · · · B0

(12)

6We assume here the simplified case where each generalized constraint code is described by a parity-check matrix Hc with mc independent parity
checks. Under this assumption, the rate formula in (1) for GLDPC block codes becomes R = 1 − bcmc/bv .
7We note here that the (L + w)M bc rows of H[0,L−1] should be viewed as (L + w)bc groups of rows, with M entries in each group, that are decoded according to the same constraint code with mc rows.

Note that, if w = 1 and λ = 1, the tail-biting base matrix is simply the original block code base matrix, i.e., B(tb1) = B. Terminating B[0,∞] in such a way preserves the design rate of the ensemble, i.e., Rλ = 1 − λbcmc/λbv = 1 − bcmc/bv = R, and we see that Bt(bλ) has exactly the same degree distribution as the original block code base matrix B.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: SC-GLDPC CODES: ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS AND FINITE LENGTH SCALING

3713

III. THRESHOLD ANALYSIS OF SC-GLDPC CODES

We assume belief propagation (BP) decoding, with log-
likelihood ratios (LLRs) acting as messages. At every iteration , first all constraint nodes and then all variable nodes are updated. The outgoing messages computed at a constraint node ci toward its bth neighboring variable node at iteration  are then equal to

Lc( )(eci,b) = log

exp Lv( −1)(eci,b )(1/2 − xb )

x∈Cib,0 b =b

− log

exp Lv( −1)(eic,b )(1/2 − xb ) , (13)

x∈Cib,1 b =b

where b, b ∈ {1, . . . , ∂(ci)}, Lv( −1)(eic,b ) is the LLR received at constraint node ci from the variable node connected to eic,b at iteration , and we have partitioned Ci into the sets Cib,0 and Cib,1, corresponding to codewords x = [ x1 x2 · · · x∂(ci) ] ∈ Ci for which xb = 0 and xb = 1, respectively. The message Lc( )(eci,b) corresponds to the bth extrinsic output generated by an optimal a posteriori
probability (APP) decoder for component code Ci, which is computed from the incoming messages Lv( −1)(eci,b ), b = b, to constraint node ci. The incoming messages of the first iteration are initialized by the channel LLRs Lch(vj) of the neighboring variable nodes, i.e., Lv(0)(eci,b ) = Lch(vj ), where vj is the variable node connected to eci,b . The outgoing messages computed at a variable node vj at iteration  are
equal to

Lv( )(ejv,a) = Lch(vj ) +

Lc( )(ejv,a ),

a =a

(14)

where a, a ∈ {1, . . . , ∂(vj)}.

A. Density Evolution for GLDPC Code Ensembles

For transmission over a binary erasure channel (BEC),

the messages that are passed between the nodes represent

either an erasure or the correct symbol values 0 or 1. In this

case, the BP decoder is particularly simple and exact density evolution can be described explicitly. Let q( )(eci,b) denote the probability that the check to variable node message sent along edge eic,b in decoding iteration  is an erasure. Assuming a conventional LDPC code ensemble, where ci corresponds to
an SPC code, this is the case if at least one of the incoming

messages from the other neighboring variable nodes is erased,

i.e.,

q( )(eci,b) = 1 −

1 − p( −1)(eci,b ) ,

(15)

b =b

where the p( −1)(eic,b ), b, b ∈ {1, . . . , ∂(ci)}, denote the probabilities that the incoming messages to ci computed in the previous iteration are erasures. For a GLDPC code ensemble,
where ci corresponds to an arbitrary block code, (15) can be replaced by the general expression

q( )(eci,b) = fbCi p( −1)(eic,b ), b = b ,

(16)

where fbCi is a multi-dimensional input/output transfer function that characterizes the APP decoder that computes the messages

Lc( )(eic,b) corresponding to (13). Note that, for generalized codes, fbCi can be different for each b ∈ {1, . . . , ∂(ci)}, which implies that the ordering of edges can affect the performance

of the ensemble. A method for computing explicit expressions

for the APP decoder output distributions that can be used

in (16) was presented in [32]. This method is based on a

Markov chain analysis of the decoder metrics using a trellis

representation of the block code Ci. The variable to check node message sent along edge ejv,a
is an erasure if all incoming messages from the channel and

from the other neighboring check nodes are erasures. Thus we

have

p( )(ejv,a) = 

q( )(evj,a ),

(17)

a =a

where a, a ∈ {1, . . . , ∂(vj )} and  is the erasure probability of the BEC. The largest channel value  for which (16) and (17) converge, denoted BP, is the threshold of the BP decoder for the GLDPC code ensemble.

B. Bounding MAP Thresholds With BP Extrinsic Information Transfer Functions
The extrinsic probability pBP,extr(vj , ) that a symbol associated with variable node vj remains erased after  iterations of BP decoding can be expressed as

pBP,extr(vj , ) = q( )(evj,a).

(18)

a

Note that here the product is over all incoming messages
to vj and the channel erasure probability  does not appear in the expression but implicitly involved in the calculation of q( )(evj,a). The BP extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) function hBP() [33] is given by the average of pBP,extr(vj, ) over all transmitted variable nodes vj ∈ V , i.e., the average is computed excluding all of the punctured variable nodes.
Example 5: Consider the (2, 7)-regular protograph-based
GLDPC block code ensemble with Hamming component codes of length nc = 7 from Example 1. The BP EXIT function hBP() of this ensemble is shown in Fig. 6. The vertical line indicates the channel value at which the grey area
below the curve is equal to the rate of the ensemble, which forms an upper bound MAP = 0.856 on the threshold of an optimal MAP decoder. This follows from the area theorem [34] and the fact that hBP() can never be below the EXIT function of the MAP decoder. In this case, the calculated BP threshold is given by BP = 0.756, and we see that there exists a large gap between the BP and the MAP thresholds, which indicates the suboptimality associated with BP decoding.8

C. Threshold Saturation of Terminated SC-GLDPC Code Ensembles
Assume now that we start encoding at time t = 0 and terminate after L time instants. As a result we obtain the terminated base matrix B[0,L−1] from (10). These terminated
8A detailed analysis of unstructured irregular ensembles, including results on the tightness of this bound, can be found in [33]. For structured protograph ensembles, this technique has been applied in [35].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 67, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

Fig. 6. BP EXIT function of a (2, 7)-regular protograph-based GLDPC block code ensemble with (7, 4) Hamming component codes.

Fig. 7. BP decoding thresholds as functions of the coupling length L. Ensembles A7 and A15 are shown in comparison to ensembles C7 and C15, respectively. The dotted line indicates the thresholds of the underlying GLDPC
block code ensembles.

SC-GLDPC codes can be interpreted as GLDPC block codes that inherit the structure of convolutional codes. The length of these codes depends not only on the lifting factor M but also on the coupling length L. For a fixed L, the BEC density evolution thresholds BP corresponding to codes with base matrix B[0,L−1] can be calculated using the method described in Section III-A. In Fig. 7, the obtained thresholds for the w = 1 ensembles A7 and A15 are compared with the BBCbased ensembles C7 and C15 for different coupling lengths L. (The larger thresholds and Shannon limits of ensembles C7 and C15 compared to A7 and A15 for small to moderate L is due to the fact that the larger w BBC ensembles C7 and C15 have a larger rate increase parameter Δ than the w = 1 ensembles A7 and A15. This difference vanishes as L → ∞.) The thresholds of all the w = 1 ensembles versus code rate are shown in Fig. 8. Analogously to SC-LDPC codes (see [28]) with SPC constraints, it can be observed that, as L → ∞, the BP thresholds numerically coincide with the upper bounds on the MAP decoding thresholds of the underlying block code ensembles, thus exhibiting the threshold saturation phenomenon (see [10], [11]).
The BP EXIT functions of the terminated codes from ensemble A7 are shown in Fig. 9, where it can be seen that, with increasing L, the BP and the MAP thresholds of the terminated SC-GLDPC code ensembles are converging. Moreover, the MAP thresholds (and hence the BP thresholds) of the terminated SC-GLDPC code ensemble can also be observed to converge to the MAP threshold MAP = 0.856 of the underlying GLDPC block code ensemble with increasing L, demonstrating threshold saturation for the ensemble A7. We note that the converging BP and MAP thresholds of the terminated SC-GLDPC code ensembles implies that, asymptotically, BP decoding of SC-GLDPC codes provides optimal (MAP) decoding performance.
Further, we note that large values of L are realistic in conjunction with sliding window decoders, like those suggested in [36], where decoding delay and storage requirements depend on the window size W , which is independent of the

Fig. 8. BP decoding thresholds versus code rate for different w = 1 SCGLDPC code ensembles and coupling lengths L.
coupling length L (typically W L) of the transmitted code sequences. For shorter values of L, which induce rate loss, BP decoding of terminated SC-GLDPC codes is suboptimal but still provides a flexible adjustment between code rate and threshold (see Fig. 8).
IV. DISTANCE ANALYSIS OF SC-GLDPC CODES
In this section, we first perform an asymptotic minimum distance analysis of terminated and tail-biting SC-GLDPC code ensembles. We then present an approach to bound the free distance growth rate of the unterminated periodically timevarying SC-GLDPC code ensemble from above and below using the minimum distance growth rates of the terminated and tail-biting SC-GLDPC code ensembles, respectively, and provide numerical results. The ensemble free distance growth rate provides a measure of the strength of SC-GLDPC codes and an assessment of their ML decoding performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: SC-GLDPC CODES: ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS AND FINITE LENGTH SCALING

3715

Fig. 9. BP EXIT functions of terminated SC-GLDPC codes from Ensemble A7 for different coupling lengths L.
A. Minimum Distance Analysis of Terminated
SC-GLDPC Codes
From the convolutional protograph with base matrix B[0,∞] in (4), we can form a periodically time-varying M -fold graph cover with period T by applying the graph lifting operation described in Section II to the bc × bv submatrices B0, B1, . . . , Bw in the first T columns of B[0,∞] to form M bc × M bv submatrices H0(t), H1(t + 1), . . . , Hw(t + w), respectively, for t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , T − 1}. These submatrices can then be repeated periodically (and indefinitely) to form a convolutional constraint matrix H[0,∞] such that Hi(t + T ) = Hi(t), ∀i, t. An ensemble of periodically time-varying SC-GLDPC codes with period T , design rate R = 1 − M mcbc/M bv = 1−mcbc/bv,9 and decoding constraint length νs = (w + 1)M bv can then be derived by letting the permutation matrices used to form H0(t), H1(t + 1), . . . , Hw(t + w), for t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , T − 1}, vary over all M ! choices of an M × M permutation matrix.
In [37], Abu-Surra, Divsalar, and Ryan presented a
technique to calculate the average weight enumerator and asymptotic spectral shape function r(δ) for protograph-based GLDPC block code ensembles. The spectral shape function can be used to test if an ensemble is asymptotically good,
i.e., if the minimum distance typical of most members of the ensemble is at least as large as δminn, where δmin is the minimum distance growth rate of the ensemble and n is the block length.10
Example 6: Consider the (2, 7)-regular GLDPC block code protograph with base matrix B from (2) and the generalized constraint nodes shown in Fig. 1. If we suppose the constraint codes to be (7, 4) Hamming codes with parity-check matrix Hc from (3), then the resulting ensemble has design rate R = 1/7, is asymptotically good, and has growth rate δmin = 0.186 [37].
9For simplicity, we again assume here the case that each generalized constraint node ci has mc independent parity checks.
10Suppose that the first positive zero crossing of r(δ) occurs at δ = δmin. If r(δ) is negative in the range 0 < δ < δmin, then δmin is called the minimum distance growth rate of the code ensemble, see [37].

We now consider the associated (2, 7)-regular terminated

SC-GLDPC code ensembles A7 discussed above in Sections II

and III, whose protograph is shown in Fig. 5, with constraints

corresponding to the (7, 4) Hamming code with parity-check

matrix Hc. After termination, the design rate of the ensemble

is given by

RL

=

1

−

6(L

+ 1) 7L

−

2 ,

(19)

where Δ = 2 in this case because the two leftmost (shortened)

constraint nodes in Fig. 2 correspond to shortened codes with rate 1/3, i.e., the number of parity checks in these two constraint nodes is 2, while all the other constraint nodes have mc = 3 parity-checks. These ensembles were shown to

have thresholds numerically indistinguishable from the MAP

threshold of the underlying GLDPC block code ensemble as

L → ∞ in Section III.

The asymptotic weight enumerator corresponding to a ter-

minated or tail-biting convolutional protograph can be deter-

mined by applying the general approach of [37]; however,

we note that a useful conjecture regarding simplification of

the numerical evaluation proposed in [37] cannot be applied

to SC ensembles. This conjecture relies on grouping together

nodes of the same type and optimizing them together, but in

the SC-GLDPC case, nodes from different time instants must

be optimized separately, even if they are of the same type.

Fig. 10 shows the asymptotic spectral shape functions for

the SC-GLDPC code ensembles A7 with coupling lengths L ∈ {7, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20}. Also shown are the asymp-

totic spectral shape functions for random codes with the

corresponding rates RL calculated using (see [1])

r(δ) = H(δ) − (1 − RL) ln(2),

(20)

where H(δ) = −(1−δ) ln(1−δ)−δ ln(δ) is the binary entropy function. We observe that the SC-GLDPC code ensembles A7 are asymptotically good and have relatively large minimum distance growth rates, ranging from about 25% to 65% of the (optimal) random coding growth rates. This indicates that long codes chosen from these ensembles have, with probability near one, a large minimum distance. As L increases, the design rate RL approaches R = 1/7 and the minimum distance growth rate decreases, as was also observed in the case of SC-LDPC codes with SPC constraints (see [28]).

B. Free Distance Analysis of SC-GLDPC Code Ensembles
In Fig. 10 we saw that the minimum distance growth rates of terminated SC-GLDPC codes decrease as the coupling length L increases. However, since SC-GLDPC codes can be decoded as unterminated (no preset coupling length) convolutional codes by employing a sliding window decoder, a more appropriate distance measure for assessing their ML decoding performance is the free distance growth rate of the SC-GLDPC code ensemble. In this section, we first calculate the minimum distance growth rates of TB-GLDPC code ensembles and show that, for sufficiently large coupling lengths, the growth rates coincide with those calculated for the terminated SC-GLDPC code ensembles in Section IV-A. We then show that the growth rates of the TB-GLDPC code ensembles and the terminated

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3716

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 67, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

Fig. 10. Spectral shape functions of design rate RL SC-GLDPC code ensembles A7 and random linear codes of the corresponding rate. Curves from left to right in both groups correspond to L = 20, 18, 16, 14, 12, 10, 8, 7,
respectively.

Fig. 11. Minimum distance growth rates of terminated SC-GLDPC code ensembles and TB-GLDPC code ensembles and calculated upper and lower bounds on the free distance growth rates of the associated periodically timevarying unterminated SC-GLDPC code ensembles.

SC-GLDPC code ensembles can be used to obtain lower
and upper bounds on the free distance growth rate of the
unterminated SC-GLDPC code ensemble, respectively.
1) Minimum Distance Analysis of TB-GLDPC Code Ensem-
bles: We now consider terminating the protograph in Fig. 2
as a TB-GLDPC code with coupling length λ. Unlike the previous termination technique, this results in a (2, 7)-regular protograph with design rate Rλ = 1/7 for all λ. The minimum distance growth rates δˇm(λi)n of the TB-GLDPC code ensembles are presented in Fig. 11 alongside those corresponding to the terminated SC-GLDPC code ensembles δˆm(Lin) . We observe that the TB-GLDPC growth rates remain constant at δˇm(λi)n = 0.186 (the growth rate of the original GLDPC block code ensemble δmin) for λ = 1, 2, . . . , 8, and then begin to decay to zero as λ → ∞. Also, as a result of the convolutional structure,
we observe that the TB-GLDPC and SC-GLDPC growth rates coincide for L, λ ≥ 10. This is the same behavior observed for TB-LDPC and SC-LDPC codes with SPC constraints [38].
2) Free Distance Bounds for SC-GLDPC Code Ensembles:
Now consider an ensemble of periodically time-varying unterminated SC-GLDPC codes with rate R = 1 − bcmc/bv and period T constructed from a convolutional protograph with base matrix B[0,∞] (see (4)) as described in Section II-A. Using a modification of the proof techniques in [38], [39],
we can show that the average free distance of this ensemble
is bounded below by the average minimum distance of an
ensemble of TB-GLDPC codes derived from the base matrix Bt(bλ) (see (12)) with coupling length λ = T . Here, we show that the average free distance of the unterminated SC-GLDPC
ensemble can also be bounded above by the average minimum
distance of the ensemble of terminated SC-GLDPC codes derived from the base matrix B[0,L−1] (see (10)) with coupling length L = T .
Theorem 1: Consider a rate R = 1−bcmc/bv unterminated, periodically time-varying SC-GLDPC code ensemble with
syndrome former memory w, decoding constraint length

νs = M (w + 1)bv, and period T derived from B[0,∞]. Let d(mLi)n be the average minimum distance of the terminated SC-GLDPC code ensemble with block length n = M bvL
and coupling length L. Then the ensemble average free distance df(rTe)e of the unterminated SC-GLDPC code ensemble is bounded above by dm(Li)n for termination factor L = T , i.e.,

d(frTe)e ≤ dm(Tin) .

(21)

Proof : There is a one-to-one relationship between
members of the periodically time-varying unterminated SC-
GLDPC code ensemble and members of the corresponding
terminated SC-GLDPC code ensemble with coupling length L = T . For any such pair of codes, every codeword x = [ x0 x1 · · · xMbvL−1 ] in the terminated SC-GLDPC code can also be viewed as a codeword x[0,∞] = [ x0 x1 · · · xMbvL−1 0 · · · ] in the unterminated code. It follows that the free distance df(rTe)e of the unterminated code cannot be larger than the minimum distance d(mTin) of the terminated code. The ensemble average result d(frTe)e ≤ dm(Tin) then follows directly.
Since there is no danger of ambiguity, we will henceforth
drop the overline notation when discussing ensemble average
distance measures.
3) Free Distance Growth Rates of SC-GLDPC Code Ensem-
bles: For unterminated SC-GLDPC codes, it is natural to
define the free distance growth rate with respect to the decod-
ing constraint length νs, i.e., as the ratio of the free distance dfree to νs. By bounding df(rTe)e using (21), we obtain an upper bound on the free distance growth rate as

δf(rTee)

=

df(rTe)e νs

≤

δˆm(Tin) T (w + 1)

,

(22)

where δˆm(Tin) = dm(Tin) /n = d(mTin) /(M bvT ) is the minimum distance growth rate of the terminated SC-GLDPC code ensemble

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: SC-GLDPC CODES: ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS AND FINITE LENGTH SCALING

3717

with coupling length L = T and base matrix B[0,T −1]. Further, using a similar argument to that presented in [38], we have

δf(rTee)

≥

δˇm(Tin) T (w + 1)

,

(23)

where δˇm(Tin) is the minimum distance growth rate of the TB-

GLDPC code ensemble with tail-biting coupling length λ = T

and base matrix Bt(bλ). The free distance growth

rate

δf(rTee)

that

we

bound

from

above using (22) is, by definition, an existence-type lower

bound on the free distance of most members of the ensemble,

i.e., with high probability a randomly chosen code from the ensemble has minimum free distance at least as large as δf(rTee)νs as νs → ∞.
4) Numerical Results: As an example, we consider once

more the (2, 7)-regular SC-GLDPC code ensemble A7 with memory w = 1 and design rate R = 1/7 depicted in Fig. 2.

For this case, we calculate the upper bound on the free distance

growth rate of the periodically time-varying unterminated SCGLDPC code ensemble as δf(rTee) ≤ δˆm(Tin) T /2 using (22) for coupling lengths L = T ≥ 7. Fig. 11 displays the minimum distance growth rates δˆm(Lin) of the terminated SC-GLDPC code ensembles defined by B[0,L−1] for L ∈ {7, 8, 10, 12, . . . , 20}
that were calculated using the technique proposed in [37] and

the associated upper bounds on the unterminated SC-GLDPC

code ensemble shown are the

growth rates δf(rTee) ≤ minimum distance

δˆm(Tin) T /2 for growth rates

L = T . Also δˇm(λi)n of the

TB-GLDPC code ensembles defined by base matrix Bt(bλ) for

λ ∈ {1, 2, 4, . . . , 20} and the associated lower bounds on the

unterminated SC-GLDPC code ensemble growth rates δf(rTee) ≥ δˇm(Tin) T /2 for λ = T calculated using (23).

We observe that the calculated TB-GLDPC code ensemble

minimum distance growth rates δˇm(λi)n remain constant for λ =

1, . . . , 8 and then start to decrease as the coupling length λ

grows, tending to zero as λ tends to infinity. Correspondingly, as λ exceeds 8, the lower bound calculated for δf(rTee) levels off at δf(rTee) ≥ 0.805. The calculated terminated SC-GLDPC code ensemble minimum distance growth rates δˆm(Lin) are larger for small values of L (where the rate loss is larger) and decrease

monotonically to zero as L → ∞. Using (22) to obtain an upper bound on δf(rTee) we observe that, for T ≥ 10, the upper
and lower bounds coincide, indicating that, for these values of the period T , δf(rTee) = 0.805, significantly larger than the minimum distance growth rate δmin = 0.186 of the underlying
GLDPC block code ensemble.11 In addition, we note that, at the point where the upper and lower bounds on δf(rTee) coincide, the minimum distance growth rates for both termina-

tion methods also coincide. Recall that the TB-GLDPC code

ensembles all have rate 1/7, wheras the rate of the SC-GLDPC

code ensembles is a function of the coupling length L given

by (19). Although we have demonstrated the approach only

11Note that the free distance growth rate may also be calculated with respect to the encoding constraint length νe, which corresponds to the maximum number of transmitted symbols that can be affected by a single nonzero block
of information digits. As a result of normalizing by the decoding constraint length, it is possible to have free distance growth rates larger than 0.5. For further details, see [38].

for ensemble A7, the general technique can be used to bound the free distance growth rate above and below for any regular or irregular periodically time-varying protograph-based unterminated SC-GLDPC code ensemble, thus allowing for the evaluation and comparison of different SC-GLDPC code designs from the perspective of minimum distance.
While large free distance growth rates are indicative of good ML decoding performance, when predicting the iterative decoding performance of a code ensemble in the high SNR region other graphical objects such as trapping sets, pseudocodewords, absorbing sets, etc., come into effect. Based on results from the SPC case [38], we would expect SCGLDPC codes with large minimum/free distance growth rates to also have large trapping set growth rates, indicating good iterative decoding performance in the high SNR region.
V. FINITE-LENGTH ANALYSIS OF GLDPC BLOCK AND SC-GLDPC CODES
To analyze the finite-length performance of LDPC codes over the BEC, a decoding method called peeling decoding (PD) can be employed [40]. PD is a simple algorithm that is initialized by removing all of the correctly received variable nodes, as well as their attached edges, from the Tanner graph of H after BEC transmission. The algorithm then iteratively removes degree-one check nodes from the graph, along with their attached variable nodes and edges. We now describe an extension of PD to GLDPC block and terminated SC-GLDPC codes, referred to as generalized peeling decoding (GPD).
A. Type Vectors and Initialization of GPD
Recall that
E = {ejv,a | j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , nv}, a ∈ {1, 2, . . . , ∂(vj)}} = {eci,b | i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , nc}, b ∈ {1, 2, . . . , ∂(ci)}}
represents the set of edges in a given protograph. In the Tanner graph of a resulting lifted constraint matrix H (resp. H[0,L−1]), we say that a particular edge is of type ejv,a if it connects a variable node and a constraint node that are copies of the two nodes that edge ejv,a connects in the protograph. For a variable node v in the Tanner graph of H (resp. H[0,L−1]), we also define the variable node type by a binary |E|-dimensional vector tv, where each entry is a “1” iff a particular edge type is connected to variable node v. Similarly, for a constraint node c, we define its type by a binary |E|-dimensional vector tc. We denote the set of variable and constraint node types in the Tanner graph of H (resp. H[0,L−1]) by Ftv and Ftc , respectively. Note that the sets Ftv and Ftc are determined from the connectivity of the protograph, as will be illustrated in Example 7 below. Finally, we let Ltv and Rtc represent the number of variable and constraint nodes of type tv and tc in H (resp. H[0,L−1]), respectively.
The details of the GPD algorithm are presented in Section V-B. We first discuss GPD initialization, which is identical to PD initialization: the correctly received variable nodes of H (resp. H[0,L−1]) and their attached edges are removed from the graph. After initialization, the residual graph contains constraint nodes with types that are not included in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3718

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 67, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

Ftc, the set of constraint node types in the original graph, but the set of variable node types Ftv remains the same. We now define D(tc) as the set of constraint node types that can appear in the graph of H (resp. H[0,L−1]) after GPD initalization when a constraint node of type tc ∈ Ftc loses one or more edges. The extended set of all possible constraint node types
which are present in the residual graph after GPD initialization is then given by F tc = tc∈Ftc D(tc).
Example 7: To illustrate the type vectors, consider the (2, 7)-regular GLDPC block code protograph of Example 1. In this case, if we order the protograph edges as
(ec1,1, ec1,2, . . . , e1c,7, ec2,1, ec2,2, . . . , ec2,7),
then the type vector for c1 is tc1 = (1, 1, . . . , 1, 0, 0, . . . , 0) ∈ Ftc and the type vector for c2 is tc2 = (0, 0, . . . , 0, 1, 1, . . . , 1) ∈ Ftc .12 Both vectors are of length |E| = 14, the number of edges in the protograph, and have weight nc = 7, the length of the constraint code. In any lifted graph with lifting factor M , there are precisely M copies of each edge, variable node, or constraint node of a
given type, where the types are defined from the protograph
as described above. Corresponding to each of the constraint node types in this example, 27 = 128 residual types can
appear in the graph when edges are removed. Thus, in total, F tc contains 256 constraint node types.
According to the above definitions, the expected degree
distribution (DD) of the residual graph after initialization can
be expressed as follows:

Ltv (0) = Ltv ,

Rtc (0) =

Rtc |tc|(1 − )|tc|−|tc|,

tc ∈Ftc

tc ∈D(tc )

(24) (25)

for tv ∈ Ftv and tc ∈ F tc , where Ltv (0) (resp. Rtc (0)) represents the number of variable (resp. constraint) nodes of
type tv (resp. tc) after GPD initialization and |tc| (resp. |tc|) is the weight of the vector tc (resp. tc).

B. Decodable Constraint Nodes and the GPD
In general, each constraint node type in the protograph B (resp. B[0,L−1]) of a GLDPC code can be associated with a different constraint code. Let Ctc be the constraint code associated with the constraint nodes in the base matrix B (resp. B[0,L−1]) of type tc ∈ Ftc . By extension, each constraint node in the graph of H (resp. H[0,L−1]) is associated with a constraint code according to its type. After GPD initialization,
the type of a given constraint node can be modified from tc to tc, where |tc| < |tc|, and we say that tc is the input erasure pattern seen by the constraint code Ctc . The question now is if, by decoding the constraint code Ctc associated with a constraint node of type tc in the residual graph using a given decoding algorithm, for instance ML decoding or some suboptimal algorithm, we are able to recover the |tc| variables still connected to the constraint node. In general, for each
12The ordering of the protograph edges (which can affect the entries of the type vector) does not matter provided that we use a consistent ordering for all node types.

constraint code Ctc, only a subset of input erasure patterns can be decoded. This subset is denoted by A(tc) ⊂ D(tc). If a constraint node in the residual graph is of type tc ∈ A(tc), then we say it is a decodable constraint node and tc a decodable constraint node type. For example, if all the constraint codes are SPCs, then only constraint node types
with input erasure patterns containing exactly one erasure are decodable. However, if the constraint code is a (7, 4) Hamming code with ML decoding, then all input erasure patterns with
one and two erasures and some input erasure patterns of weight
three are decodable.
The set of all decodable constraint node types is defined as A =. ∪tc∈Ftc A(tc) ⊂ F tc . Given the discussion above, the GPD algorithm can now be seen as a straightforward
extension of PD for LDPC codes to GLDPC codes. After
the graph is initialized, GPD chooses one constraint node at
random from the graph that is decodable. This constraint node,
all connected variable nodes, and all attached edges are then
removed from the graph. GPD continues in this way until there
are no further constraint nodes that can be removed from the
graph, which corresponds to a decoding failure, or until there
are no variable nodes left in the graph, which corresponds to
successful decoding.

C. Expected Graph Evolution

We now define the normalized DD at time τ as

τ

=.

 n,

rtc (τ )

=.

Rtc (τ ) , n

ltv (τ )

=.

Ltv (τ ) , n

(26)

where  is the GPD iteration index, Rtc (τ ) (resp. Ltv (τ )) is the number of constraint (resp. variable) nodes in the graph

of type tc (resp. tv) at time τ , and n = M bv (resp. M bvL) is the block (resp. termination) length.

In [41], it is shown that if we apply PD to elements of an

LDPC code ensemble, then the expected DD of the sequence

of residual graphs can be described as the solution of a set

of differential equations. This analysis is based on a result

on the evolution of Markov processes due to Wormald [42].

Furthermore, the deviation of the process w.r.t. the expected

evolution decreases exponentially fast with the LDPC code

block length, and this result was used in [40] to analyze

the finite-length BEC performance of LDPC block codes.

This methodology has been extended to unstructured GLDPC

codes in [43] and also to spatially coupled codes with split-

component codes [23], which can be consider as a particular

sub-class of SC-GLDPC codes. In a similar way, we can

investigate the finite-length BEC performance of GLDPC

codes constructed from protographs by analyzing the statistical

evolution of the normalized DD in (26) during the decoding

process. As shown in [40], ltv (τ ), denoted by rˆtc (τ )

the and

expected ˆltv (τ ),

value of rtc respectively,

(τ ) and can be

computed as the solution to the following system of differential

equations

∂ˆltv (τ ) = ∂τ 1
E Ltv τ + n

− Ltv (τ ) {ˆltv (τ ), rˆtc (τ )}tv ∈Ftv ,tc∈Ftc ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: SC-GLDPC CODES: ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS AND FINITE LENGTH SCALING

3719

∂rˆtc (τ ) = ∂τ

1

E Rtc

τ+ n

(27)
− Rtc (τ ) {ˆltv (τ ), rˆtc (τ )}tv ∈Ftv ,tc∈Ftc , (28)

i.e., the derivative of rˆtc (τ ) w.r.t. τ in (28) can be evaluated by computing the variation in the number of constraint nodes of type tc with GPD iteration given that the normalized DD at time τ is at its mean {ˆltv (τ ), rˆtc (τ )}tv∈Ftv ,tc∈Ftc .13 A similar interpretation holds for (27). Further, the solutio√n to (27) and (28) is unique and, with probability 1 − O(e− n), any
particular realization of the normalized DD in (26) deviates from its mean by a factor of less than n−1/6 for the initial
conditions

rˆtc (0) = E[rtc ( = 0)] = E[Rtc ( = 0)]/n, (29) ˆltv (0) = E[ltv ( = 0)] = E[Ltv ( = 0)]/n, (30)

which can be computed from (24) and (25) [40]. The actual computation of the expectations in (27) and (28) is described in [20]. The GPD threshold is defined as the maximum value of  for which the expected fraction of decodable constraint nodes

aˆ(τ ) =.

rˆtc (τ )

(31)

tc ∈A

is positive for any τ ∈ [0, ), where aˆ(τ ) is the mean of the random process

a(τ ) =.

rtc (τ ).

(32)

tc ∈A

Finally, we can compute the expected fraction of variable nodes in the graph at any time τ , denoted by vˆ(τ ), as

vˆ(τ ) =.

lˆtv (τ ).

(33)

tv ∈Ftv

In addition to characterizing the asymptotic behavior, i.e., to computing the GPD threshold ensemble, the solution to the system of equations given by (27) and (28) can be used to determine the quantities needed to assess the finite-length performance of GLDPC block and terminated SC-GLDPC codes. We refer to critical points as the points in time for which aˆ(τ ) has a local minima. As shown in [40], the average (over the ensemble of codes) error probability is dominated by the probability that the process a(τ ) survives, i.e., does not go to zero around the critical points. Therefore, characterizing the critical points and the expected fraction of decodable constraint nodes in the graph at those points in time are the parameters needed to determine the GLDPC block or terminated SC-GLDPC code finite-length performance, and they can be computed from (27) and (28).

Fig. 12. Evolution of the expected fraction of decodable constraint nodes aˆ(τ ) in the residual graph during iterations of the GPD for the (2, 7)-regular GLDPC block code ensemble with (7, 4) Hamming constraint codes and an
ML decoder. The dotted curves represent simulated trajectories computed for = 0.69 with lifting factor M = 4000.

D. Numerical Results: GLDPC Block Codes
With the tools described above, we can now investigate
the asymptotic and finite-length performance of GLDPC code ensembles. We start by considering the uncoupled (2, 7)regular GLDPC block code ensemble from Example 1.
Example 8: Consider the (2, 7)-regular GLDPC block code ensemble of Example 1. Assume that a (7, 4) Hamming code is associated with each of the two constraint nodes and that
the constraint codes are decoded using ML decoding. The design rate of this ensemble is R = 1/7. All constraint node types with one or two erasures can be decoded, as well as
some constraint node types with three erasures. Fig. 12 shows
the evolution of the expected fraction of decodable constraint nodes aˆ(τ ) versus the expected fraction of variable nodes vˆ(τ ) in the graph for different  values.14 We also include a set of 10 simulated trajectories of a(τ ) for  = 0.69 to demonstrate that they concentrate around the predicted mean. Note first that aˆ(τ ) has a single critical point at vˆ(τ ∗) ≈ 0.43. Indeed, we can compute the threshold ∗ as the maximum value of  for which the minimum is exactly zero, and in this case we obtain ∗ ≈ 0.7025.
The finite-length error probability is dominated by the statistics of a(τ ) around τ ∗. Following [40], for each n and  pair, we can estimate the finite-length error probability as

PBlock = Pr(a(τ ) = 0, v(τ ) > 0) ≈ Q

aˆ(τ ∗) ,
Var[a(τ ∗)] (34)

where aˆ(τ ∗) is the expected value of a(τ ) at τ ∗ and Var[a(τ ∗)] represents its variance. aˆ(τ ∗) was computed using numerical

13This result, based on Wormald’s theorem [42], requires certain conditions on the random sequence of GLDPC Tanner graphs during GPD to be met. We do not include the proof that these conditions are met, but an equivalent proof for unstructured GLDPC codes can be found in [43].

14Note that the time variable τ runs backwards in this figure (right to left), in the sense that small values of τ correspond to vˆ(τ ) on the right, where
the graph still contains a relatively large fraction of variable nodes, whereas large values of τ correspond to small values of vˆ(τ ) on the left.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 67, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

Fig. 13. Simulated performance (solid lines) and estimated performance using (35) (dashed lines) for the (2, 7)-regular GLDPC block code ensemble with (7, 4) Hamming constraint codes and an ML decoder.

integration of the system of differential equations in (27)-(28), and Var[a(τ ∗)] was estimated using Monte Carlo simulation.15

Also in [40], the authors showed that the ratio of the expected

number of tion at the

cdreitgirceael-poonientcoapnpstrroaxinimt naotedleysstcoaltehseasstaαn√danr(d∗d−evia)-,

where α is a scaling parameter that only depends on the DD.

In the GLDPC case, simulated trajectories for a(τ ) suggest

that the same scaling holds and that the performance for any

pair (n, ) can be estimated as

PBlock ≈ Q α√n(∗ − ) .

(35)

After computing aˆ(τ ∗)/ Var[a(τ ∗)] for a given (n, ) pair,

we estimate α by equating the arguments in (34) and (35),

so that

α = √n(1∗ − )

aˆ(τ ∗) .
Var[a(τ ∗)]

(36)

For the (2, 7)-regular GLDPC block code ensemble with (7, 4) Hamming constraint codes and an ML decoder, we thus obtain α = 1.8024. In Fig. 13, we plot the simulated performance versus (35), where we observe that the estimate is very accurate for a sufficiently large lifting factor.

E. Numerical Results: SC-GLDPC Codes
We now investigate the asymptotic and finite-length performance of a terminated version of the coupled A7 SC-GLDPC code ensemble from Example 2.
Example 9: Following a similar procedure as in Example 8, we now analyze the finite-length behavior of terminated SC-GLDPC codes. In Fig. 14, we show the evolution of the expected fraction aˆ(τ ) of decodable check nodes during iterations of the GPD for a terminated version of the A7 SCGLDPC code ensemble of Example 2 (corresponding to the
15Var[a(τ ∗)] can be obtained from the solution of the covariance evolution system of differential equations, first presented in [40] for LDPC code ensembles

Fig. 14. Evolution of the expected fraction of decodable constraint nodes aˆ(τ ) in the residual graph during iterations of the GPD for the terminated (2, 7)-regular A7 SC-GLDPC code ensemble with coupling lengths L = 50, 100, and 150, (7, 4) Hamming constraint codes, and an ML decoder. The dotted curves represent simulated trajectories for L = 150 and lifting factor M = 1000.
GLDPC block code ensemble of Example 1) with coupling lengths L = 50, 100, and 150, lifting factor M = 1000, and a channel parameter  = 0.75. Also included is a set of simulated decoding trajectories of a(τ ), computed for L = 150. Unlike the GLDPC block code, the expected evolution aˆ(τ ) displays a constant critical phase that corresponds to a decoding wave traveling towards the central positions of the graph. Further, the critical value aˆ(τ ∗) during such a phase does not depend on L, and the length of the critical phase is roughly proportional to L. The threshold ∗ is given by the maximum value of  for which the critical value is exactly zero, and in this case we obtain ∗ = 0.8.16 Similar effects were first described in [44] for (non-generalized) terminated SC-LDPC codes.
As also suggested in [44], using simulated decoding trajectories we should observe that Var[a(τ )] is fairly flat during the critical phase and that the covariance CoVar[a(τ ), a(ξ)] decays exponentially fast with |τ − ξ|, with a rate of decay that we denote by θ. Fig. 15 demonstrates that this is indeed the case. In Fig. 15(a), we show the empirical variance of the process a(τ ) computed from 500 simulated trajectories with L = 100 and M = 2000. In Fig. 15(b), we show the empirical covariance CoVar[a(τ ), a(ξ)] of the process obtained from the same set of simulations, where the covariance is normalized by Var[a(ξ)] so that the maximum value is equal to one. Observe that an exponentially decaying function provides an accurate estimate of the normalized covariance, in which the parameter θ = 0.87 was obtained by a least squares fit. Based on this
16The threshold ∗ = 0.8 computed here for GPD differs from the value ∗ ≈ 0.85 obtained earlier for the terminated A7 ensemble with L = 150 (see Fig. 8) due to a difference in the method of decoding the constraint codes (ML decoding in this example vs. BCJR decoding in Fig. 8). If we change the component decoder from blockwise ML to bitwise MAP (BCJR), the scaling law in (37) that predicts the finite-length performance of the SC-GLDPC code will be the same, but with different scaling parameters.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: SC-GLDPC CODES: ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS AND FINITE LENGTH SCALING

3721

Fig. 15. Simulated trajectories of the terminated (2, 7)-regular A7 SC-GLDPC code ensemble: (a) empirical variance of the process a(τ ) computed from 500 simulated trajectories with L = 100 and M = 2000, and (b) empirical covariance CoVar[a(τ ), a(ξ)] of the process a(τ ) obtained from the same set of
simulations, where the covariance is normalized by Var[a(ξ)] so that the maximum value is equal to one.

evidence, the survival probability of the a(τ ) process during

the critical phase follows a scaling law of the same form as

the one proposed in [44], and thus the block error probability

PBlock can be estimated as

⎛

⎞

PBlock ≈ 1 − exp ⎜⎜⎜⎝− 2π θ

√ α M(

L
∗− )

Φ(z

)e

1 2

z2

dz

⎟⎟⎟⎠ ,

(37)

0

where Φ(z) is the c.d.f. of the standard Gaussian distribution, N (0, 1), L is the len√gth of the critical phase, and, as in the uncoupled case, α M (∗ − ) corresponds to the ratio of the expected number of decodable constraint nodes during the critical phase to the standard deviation of a(τ ). Both θ and α are parameters that depend on the underlying GLDPC block code and the edge spreading. Given the results in Fig. 14 and Fig. 15, we estimate that α ≈ 5.66.
Fig. 16 shows a comparison between the simulated performance (solid lines) and estimated error probability using (37) (dashed lines) for the terminated A7 SC-GLDPC code ensemble with L = 50 and (7, 4) Hamming constraint codes decoded with ML decoding. We again note that, as the lifting factor M increases, the performance estimate becomes very accurate.17 We also show the corresponding results for the uncoupled (2, 7)-regular GLDPC block code ensemble of Fig. 1 with ML-decoded (7, 4) Hamming constraint codes and comparable lifting factors. Besides the advantage enjoyed by
the SC-GLDPC codes in decoding threshold, we see that they
also exhibit better finite-length scaling behavior than GLDPC

17An improved scaling law for terminated SC-LDPC codes over the BEC was recently presented in [45], where the decoding process is modeled as two independent Ornstein-Uhlenbeck processes. Such an approach should also improve the performance estimate for terminated SC-GLDPC codes.

Fig. 16. Simulated performance (solid lines) and estimated performance (dashed lines) for the (2, 7)-regular GLDPC block code and the terminated (2, 7)-regular A7 SC-GLDPC code ensembles with M = 500 and M = 1000.
block codes, in the sense that their performance converges more quickly to the threshold.
VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Generalized LDPC (GLDPC) codes can offer significant performance improvements when compared to LDPC codes with SPC constraints at the expense of an increase in decoding complexity (depending on the particular constraint codes and decoders chosen), albeit with the advantage of a typically smaller number of message passing iterations. In this paper, we presented a comprehensive study of spatially coupled generalized LDPC (SC-GLDPC) codes, including both asymptotic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 67, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

and finite-length analyses. Specifically, terminated SC-GLDPC code ensembles were shown to numerically achieve threshold saturation with near-capacity iterative decoding thresholds, thus assuring SC-GLDPC codes of having better waterfall performance than their underlying GLDPC block codes. They were also shown to be asymptotically good and to possess large minimum distance growth rates, thus assuring them of also having excellent error floor performance. Finally, terminated SC-GLDPC codes were shown to outperform their GLDPC block code counterparts in the finite length regime. Based on these results, we believe SC-GLDPC codes are an attractive choice for applications requiring excellent performance throughout the entire range of decoded error rates with a limited number of decoding iterations.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, 1963.
[2] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[3] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[4] M. Lentmaier and K. S. Zigangirov, “On generalized low-density paritycheck codes based on Hamming component codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 248–250, Aug. 1999.
[5] G. Yue, L. Ping, and X. Wang, “Generalized low-density parity-check codes based on Hadamard constraints,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1058–1079, Mar. 2007.
[6] J. J. Boutros, O. Pothier, and G. Zémor, “Generalized low density Tanner codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Vancouver, BC, Canada, Jun. 1999, pp. 441–445.
[7] G. Liva, W. E. Ryan, and M. Chiani, “Quasi-cyclic generalized LDPC codes with low error floors,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 49–57, Jan. 2008.
[8] I. P. Mulholland, E. Paolini, and M. F. Flanagan, “Design of LDPC code ensembles with fast convergence properties,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Black Sea Conf. Commun. Netw. (BlackSeaCom), May 2015, pp. 53–57.
[9] A. J. Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[10] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.
[11] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.
[12] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec. 2013.
[13] A. J. Felström, D. Truhachev, M. Lentmaier, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Braided block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2640–2658, Jun. 2009.
[14] W. Zhang, M. Lentmaier, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, “Braided convolutional codes: A new class of turbo-like codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 316–331, Jan. 2010.
[15] B. P. Smith, A. Farhood, A. Hunt, F. R. Kschischang, and J. Lodge, “Staircase codes: FEC for 100 Gb/s OTN,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 110–117, Jan. 1, 2012.
[16] Y.-Y. Jian, H. D. Pfister, K. R. Narayanan, R. Rao, and R. Mazahreh, “Iterative hard-decision decoding of braided BCH codes for highspeed optical communication,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Atlanta, GA, USA, Dec. 2013, pp. 2376–2381.
[17] M. Lentmaier and G. P. Fettweis, “On the thresholds of generalized LDPC convolutional codes based on protographs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Austin, TX, USA, Jun. 2010, pp. 709–713.
[18] Y.-Y. Jian, “On the analysis of spatially-coupled GLDPC codes and the weighted min-sum algorithm,” Ph.D. dissertation, Texas A&M Univ., College Station, TX, USA, 2013.

[19] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “On the minimum distance of generalized spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Istanbul, Turkey, Jul. 2013, pp. 1874–1878.
[20] P. M. Olmos, D. G. M. Mitchell, and D. J. Costello, “Analyzing the finite-length performance of generalized LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Hong Kong, Jun. 2015, pp. 2683–2687.
[21] Y.-Y. Jian, H. D. Pfister, and K. R. Narayanan, “Approaching capacity at high rates with iterative hard-decision decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 5752–5773, Sep. 2017.
[22] C. Hager, H. D. Pfister, A. G. I. Amat, and F. Brannstrom, “Density evolution for deterministic generalized product codes on the binary erasure channel at high rates,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 63, no. 7, pp. 4357–4378, Jul. 2017.
[23] L. M. Zhang, D. Truhachev, and F. R. Kschischang, “Spatially coupled split-component codes with iterative algebraic decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 205–224, Jan. 2018.
[24] D. J. Costello, D. G. M. Mitchell, P. M. Olmos, and M. Lentmaier, “Spatially coupled generalized LDPC codes: Introduction and overview,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Hong Kong, Dec. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[25] A. D. Yardi, I. Andriyanova, and C. Poulliat, “EBP-GEXIT charts over the binary-input AWGN channel for generalized and doubly-generalized LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2018, pp. 496–500.
[26] Y. Wang and M. Fossorier, “Doubly generalized LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2006, pp. 669–673.
[27] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, USA, INP Prog. Rep. 42-154, Aug. 2003.
[28] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[29] M. Lentmaier, B. Nöthen, and G. P. Fettweis, “Density evolution analysis of protograph-based braided block codes on the erasure channel,” in Proc. Int. ITG Conf. Source Channel Coding, Siegen, Germany, Jan. 2010, pp. 1–6.
[30] G. Solomon and H. C. A. Tilborg, “A connection between block and convolutional codes,” SIAM J. Appl. Math., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 358–369, Oct. 1979.
[31] H. Ma and J. Wolf, “On tail biting convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-34, no. 2, pp. 104–111, Feb. 1986.
[32] M. Lentmaier, M. B. S. Tavares, and G. P. Fettweis, “Exact erasure channel density evolution for protograph-based generalized LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seoul, South Korea, Jun. 2009, pp. 566–570.
[33] C. Méasson, A. Montanari, and R. L. Urbanke, “Maxwell construction: The hidden bridge between iterative and maximum a posteriori decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5277–5307, Dec. 2008.
[34] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. T. Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.
[35] E. Paolini, M. Varrella, M. Chiani, B. Matuz, and G. Liva, “Lowcomplexity LDPC codes with near-optimum performance over the BEC,” in Proc. 4th Adv. Satell. Mobile Syst., Aug. 2008, pp. 274–282.
[36] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[37] S. Abu-Surra, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Enumerators for protograph-based ensembles of LDPC and generalized LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 858–886, Feb. 2011.
[38] D. G. M. Mitchell, A. E. Pusane, and D. J. Costello, “Minimum distance and trapping set analysis of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 254–281, Jan. 2013.
[39] D. Truhachev, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, “Distance bounds for periodically time-varying and tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 4301–4308, Sep. 2010.
[40] A. Amraoui, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength scaling for iteratively decoded LDPC ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 473–498, Feb. 2009.
[41] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[42] N. C. Wormald, “Differential equations for random processes and random graphs,” Ann. Appl. Probab., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1217–1235, Nov. 1995.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITCHELL et al.: SC-GLDPC CODES: ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS AND FINITE LENGTH SCALING

3723

[43] Y. Liu, P. M. Olmos, and T. Koch, “A probabilistic peeling decoder to efficiently analyze generalized LDPC codes over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 4831–4853, Aug. 2019.
[44] P. M. Olmos and R. L. Urbanke, “A scaling law to predict the finitelength performance of spatially-coupled LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 3164–3184, Jun. 2015.
[45] R. Sokolovskii, F. Brännström, and A. I. G. Amat, “A refined scaling law for spatially coupled LDPC codes over the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Visby, Sweden, Aug. 2019, pp. 1–5.
David G. M. Mitchell (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from The University of Edinburgh, U.K., in 2009. From 2009 to 2015, he was a Post-Doctoral Research Associate and a Visiting Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, USA. Since 2015, he has been an Assistant Professor with the Klipsch School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Mexico State University, USA. His research interests lie in the area of digital communications, with emphasis on error control coding and information theory. He currently serves as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY.
Pablo M. Olmos was born in Granada, Spain, in 1984. He received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in telecommunication engineering from the University of Sevilla, in 2008 and 2011, respectively. He has held appointments as a Visiting Researcher with Princeton University, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Notre Dame University, École Nationale Supérieure de l’Électronique et de ses Applications (ENSEA), and Nokia-Bell Labs. He is currently an Associate Professor with University Carlos III of Madrid. His research interests include approximate inference methods for Bayesian machine learning to information theory and digital communications. A detailed CV and list of publications can be accessed at http://www.tsc.uc3m.es/~olmos.

Michael Lentmaier (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Dipl.-Ing. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Ulm, Germany, in 1998, and the Ph.D. degree in telecommunication theory from Lund University, Sweden, in 2003. He then worked as a Post-Doctoral Research Associate with the University of Notre Dame, USA, and the University of Ulm. From 2005 to 2007, he was with the German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Communications and Navigation, Oberpfaffenhofen, where he worked on signal processing techniques in satellite navigation receivers. From 2008 to 2012, he was a Senior Researcher and a Lecturer with the Vodafone Chair Mobile Communications Systems, TU Dresden, where he was heading the Algorithms and Coding Research Group. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical and Information Technology, Lund University, which he joined in January 2013. His research interests include design and analysis of coding systems, graph-based iterative algorithms, and Bayesian methods applied to decoding, detection, and estimation in communication systems. He was awarded the Communications Society and Information Theory Society Joint Paper Award in 2012 for his paper “Iterative Decoding Threshold Analysis for LDPC Convolutional Codes.” He served as an Editor for IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS from 2010 to 2013, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2014 to 2017, and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 2017 to 2020.
Daniel J. Costello, Jr. (Life Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.E.E. degree from Seattle University, Seattle, WA, USA, in 1964, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA, in 1966 and 1969, respectively.
He joined the Illinois Institute of Technology as a Faculty Member in 1969. In 1985, he became a Professor of electrical engineering at the University of Notre Dame and from 1989 to 1998, he served as the Department Chair. He has more than 400 technical publications in his field, and in 1983 he coauthored a popular textbook entitled Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, the 2nd edition of which was published in 2004. His research interest includes digital communications, with special emphasis on error control coding and information theory.
Dr. Costello served 18 years as a member of the IEEE Information Theory Society Board of Governors. In 1986, he was the President of the IT Society BOG. He received the Humboldt Research Prize from the German Government in 1999, the Third-Millennium Medal from the IT Society in 2000, the Aaron D. Wyner Distinguished Service Award from the IT Society in 2013, and the IEEE Leon K. Kirchmayer Graduate Teaching Award in 2015. In 2000, he was named the Leonard Bettex Professor of electrical engineering at Notre Dame. He was a co-recipient of the Donald G. Fink Prize Paper Award in 2009 and the joint IT Society/COM Society Prize Paper Award in 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:10:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

