ICC 2021 - IEEE International Conference on Communications | 978-1-7281-7122-7/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICC42927.2021.9500536

Optimal Placement of Read Thresholds for Coded NAND Flash Memory
Yishen Yeh, Arman Fazeli, and Paul H. Siegel University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
{y3yeh, afazelic, psiegel}@ucsd.edu

Abstract— Recent advances in the flash memory technology call for more efficient error-correction codes (ECCs) than the conventional, yet very popular, ones such as BCH codes. The ability to make multiple voltage reads allows one to estimate soft values at the time of decoding, which in turn makes softdecision ECCs such as LDPC codes a suitable candidate for implementation in flash memories. On the other hand, fully utilizing the potential of soft decision based codes demands higher precision memory sensing, which introduces a tradeoff between the read latency and the error probability. In this paper, we explore and compares two approaches to optimize the positioning as well as the number of read (word-line) voltages for a specified program/erase (PE) cycle.
In the first approach, we aim for selecting those read thresholds that maximize the mutual information (MMI) of the equivalent discrete memoryless channel. By utilizing conventional optimization methods such as the gradient descent (GD), we are able to find the optimal read locations for any number of read probes. Our simulation results show that ∼ 20 reads are effective. Next, we redesign our optimization problem to take the LDPC code structure into account. To do so, we use discretized density evolution (DDE) as a proxy for bit error rate (BER), which serves as our cost function in the GD search. To overcome the problem of local minima, we propose a two-step optimization: MMI for coarse optimization, followed by DDE for fine optimization. Simulation results confirm the effectiveness of this method. 1
I. INTRODUCTION
Flash memories are used widely in multi-media and consumer device storage systems for their capability of storing large quantities of data without having to maintain power (non-volatility). They use the charge (or voltage levels) stored in floating-gate cells to represent data symbols. The naming of flash memories corresponds to the number of bits per symbols represented by this charge, e.g., singlelevel-cell (SLC), multi-level-cell (MLC) and triple-levelcell (TLC) corresponds to two levels, four levels and eight levels. However, as technologies continue to scale down, NAND flash memory continues to require stronger error correction codes (ECCs) to maintain data storage integrity [1]. For the longest time, BCH codes with hard-decision decoding (HDD) have been the dominant choice as ECCs in flash memory. As industry has continued to push the technology-scaling envelope, soft-decision decoders (such as the Chase BCH decoders [2] [3]) have been developed for BCH codes to prolong their viability and to forestall the
1Some parts of these results are also available in Yishen Yeh’s M.Sc. thesis, Optimization of Read Thresholds in NAND Flash Memory for LDPC Codes, University of California, San Diego.

introduction of more complex ECCs requiring iterative softdecision decoding. However in recent years, BCH codes, even with soft-decision decoding, have been found to be insufficient and an alternative choice has been required.
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are well-known for their superior error performance at higher block-lengths [4] and have become the main choice of ECCs in flash memories nowadays. The decoding gains from employing soft-decision LDPC codes compared with traditional HDD BCH codes are shown in [5]. However, to fully exploit the advantage of soft-decision decoding, one demands a higher precision of memory sensing in the floating-gate transistors that feed the soft information to the ECC decoders with the trade-off of memory read latency. Approaches such as rank modulation that eliminate the need for discrete cell levels have been discussed in [6] [7]. In this paper, we consider the architecture of applying a constant voltage throughout a word-line. In such an architecture, the same set of voltages are applied on the entire line at once, which prevents tuning these voltages according to the quality of first reads. This illustrates why one has to optimize both the placement and the number of these read voltages in advance. In [8], the optimization of read threshold positions that maximizes the mutual information (MMI) of the NAND flash discrete equivalent channel is proposed. Another approach, in [9], uses density evolution (DE) as a tool to analyze the error probability of the channel of flash memory channel, which serves as the cost function in the optimization problem.
Our approach to this problem is twofold. First, search for the optimal threshold positions that Maximizes the Mutual Information (MMI) of the degraded channel as was first described in [8] . However, we use the gradient descent algorithm, which allows us to perform this optimization with no concern about how large the number of read voltages is.
Afterwards, we will discuss the refinement of read thresholds using a density evolution approach, extending the ideas in [9]. We introduce a new quantization method (the split ratio quantization (SRQ)) on top of the standard quantizations to compensate for the fluctuations in the BER curves. We also discuss the discretized DE [10] method in detail. We wrap up with a discussion of our simulation results.
II. READ THRESHOLD AND CHANNEL CAPACITY
A. Channel Model
A channel model for a flash memory can be viewed as a simplified representation of the underlying physical mechanisms which induce errors in stored data. For simplicity,

978-1-7281-712A2u-7th/2o1ri/z$e3d1l.i0ce0n©se2d02u1seIElimEEited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:13:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1: Read voltage thresholds and voltage distributions for an MLC NAND flash memory with m = 6 read thresholds.

in this section, we will consider an MLC NAND flash and model the NAND flash channel fluctuations as an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). Other technologies for flash memories propose other types of noise to be modelled [18].
We define the relationship between the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and the noise variance of the channel σ2 (for simplicity in writing) with:

SNR

=

10

log10

Es σ2

(dB)

(1)

where Es =

4 i=1

µ2i

/4

denotes

the

energy

per

sym-

bol. Let {f11, f10, f00, f01} denote the probability den-

sity functions of Gaussian random variables centered at

{µ1, µ2, µ3, µ4} = {−3, −1, 1, 3}(V) as shown in Figure 1. These functions represent the conditional densities of the

read signal given the programmed cell level. The variance

of each of these conditional densities is set equal to the noise variance σ2. In practice, flash memory channel quality

is often measured in terms of the number of program/erase

(P/E) cycles, rather than as an SNR value. Therefore, channel

error-rates are usually plotted as a function of P/E cycle

count. However, in this paper, we will consider performance

as a function of SNR. In order to convert between the two

channel quality measures, one can use results in [11], where

a model is developed that accurately predicts changes in the

threshold voltage distribution as the number of P/E cycles

increases. The model can be used to establish a one-to-one

correspondence between SNR and an equivalent number of

P/E cycles.

Assume that there are m read thresholds γ¯

{γ1, . . . , γm} that divide the voltages into m + 1 regions {R1, . . . , Rm+1}. Performing voltage reads at all these thresholds allows the decoder to narrow down the stored

voltage to one of these regions. For each region, the channel

likelihood ratios are computed as

ch MSB

=

ln

Ri (f01(ν) + f00(ν))dν , Ri (f10(ν) + f11(ν))dν

(2)

ch LSB

=

ln

Ri (f10(ν) + f00(ν))dν , Ri (f11(ν) + f01(ν))dν

which are then fed to the decoder. For the special case

of m = 6, we define the notion of gaps. Suppose we

set the thresholds initially at positions [γ1, γ2, ..., γ6] = [−2, −2, 0, 0, 2, 2]. The gaps are defined as the shifts in the

read voltage thresholds away from these initial positions. A

positive gap corresponds to a decrease in voltages for odd

thresholds and an increase for even thresholds (see Figure 1).

For example, if all gaps equal 0.4(V), the read thresholds will be [γ1, γ2, ..., γ6] = [−2.4, −1.6, −0.4, 0.4, 1.6, 2.4].
B. Maximizing Mutual Information
Mutual information is a measure of the mutual dependence between the two random variables. It quantifies the amount of information obtained about one random variable through observing the other and can be used as a proxy for the capacity of the memory storage channel. For MLC with m = 6 reads, X ∈ {µ1, µ2, µ3, µ4} denotes the channel input random variable and Y ∈ {R1, · · · , R7} denote the channel output random variables after voltage read quantization. The mutual information can be given by [8], [12]:

I(X; Y ) = H(Y ) − H(Y |X)

where H(·) denotes the entropy function [12]. By assuming a uniform distribution over the source, we can reduce the problem of maximizing the channel capacity to simply minimizing the conditional entropy H(Y |X).
Constraining ourselves to the MLC scenario, given a specified SNR value and a fixed number of read thresholds m, we use gradient descent (technically ascent since we are maximizing the mutual information) algorithm to adjust the read thresholds to the position where it would give us the maximum mutual information. With the cost function g(µ¯, σ2, γ¯) = I(X; Y ), which we write as g(γ¯) when the input parameters µ¯ and σ2 are fixed, each step of the gradient descent algorithm can be described as

γ¯(l+1) = γ¯(l) + δ · ∇g(γ¯(l)),

(3)

where δ is the step size (usually denoted by µ in the literature, but renamed here to avoid confusion with our voltage means µi), γ¯(l) denotes the vector of read thresholds at iteration l and ∇(·) denotes the gradient operation. In program simulations, the gradient is obtained by choosing two points at distance ε apart along the read voltage dimension and taking the slope, where ε → 0. We continue with this equation to update the position of read thresholds until the increase in cost function g(γ¯) per iteration no longer exceeds a certain amount. We call this incremental gain the termination criterion, denoted as ζ.
C. Simulation Results
In this section, we discuss our simulation results. We set number of reads m = 6, step size δ = 0.5, gradient distance ε = 1 × 10−3 and ζ = 1 × 10−8. As shown in Figure 2, we can graphically visualize the evolution of mutual information achieved during each gradient descent iteration as well as how the read threshold positions are adjusted until the mutual information gain per iteration ∂g < ζ. We see that the algorithm quickly converges even with randomly selected initial threshold positions (no symmetry constraint). One observation we make here is that the final positions seem to have equal gaps. This observation holds for all m = 6 cases with accuracy within 10−3 volts. This allows us to assume equal gaps for the read thresholds and verify the correctness of our algorithm by conducting an exhaustive search across all gaps for different SNR values.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:13:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3: MMI for m = [2, 30] and SNR = [10, 15](dB).

labeling for MLC NAND flash memory (or MLC-SCL), that uses the following mapping of distribution means to symbols:

X ∈ {µ1, µ2, µ3, µ4} ≡ {11, 10, 01, 00}

(4)

It allows both MSB and LSB channels to be symmetric and can be extended to the TLC case, in which the labeling sequence becomes

Fig. 2: The evolution of mutual information (left figure) and read thresholds (right figure) throughout gradient descent iteration for m = 6, SN R = 10 (dB). The maximum mutual information attained is 1.5147.
1) Higher Number of Reads: For the special case m = 6 reads that we have simulated, the results showing that optimal positions should be placed around the intersection points of the probability density functions are intuitive. However, this qualitative behavior is not observed when going beyond m = 6 reads. For example, with m = 30 reads, the read thresholds are more densely distributed around the center and gradually spread out towards the outer thresholds. This makes intuitive sense since errors are prone to exist where probability density functions overlap the most, therefore requiring more precise soft information.
Additionally, as displayed in Figure 3, the simulation results show the maximum achievable mutual information for a practical range of SNRs and number of reads. We conclude that after m = 20 reads, mutual information gain per additional read is below 0.05% and thus ∼ 20 reads attains near optimal performance.
2) Symmetric Channel Labeling: Provided with the equivalent DMC, we see that when we look at the MSB channel and the LSB channel individually, not only do they have different crossover probabilities, but also their symmetry properties differ. In particular, the MSB channel is symmetric, whereas the LSB channel is asymmetric. This will preclude the use of conventional density evolution on the LSB channel in the future sections. Thus, we employ a new labeling, which we will refer to as the symmetric channel

{ 111 , 110 , 101 , 100 , 011 , 010 , 001 , 000 }. (5)
This specific labeling method can also be found in [13] where they refer to it as the natural order (NO) labeling. Our findings shows that under MLC-SCL, the LSB channel is more degraded than the MSB channel.
III. READ THRESHOLD AND LDPC CODES
In this section, we approach the problem by using density evolution as an analytical method of refining the read threshold positions in order to achieve the minimum BER, as shown in Figure 4. This approach was proposed in [9], where authors used a brute force search to identify the optimal read thresholds for use with an LDPC code. In an attempt to reproduce the results in [9], we developed the soon-tobe proposed alternative algorithmic approach to the problem and systematically explored several technical issues that arise in the application of density evolution in this context. We will discuss the individual components of our approach in succession from a system point of view.
Let us denote the read signal noise variance by σ2. It serves as an input to the channel quantizer, where the finite discrete channel LLR pmfs, denoted by p(ch), are computed using a split-ratio quantization method (to be discussed). We estimate the bit error rate (BER) via expressions in the discretized density evolution (DDE) of LDPC codes [10], and implement a gradient descent algorithm to minimize it by gradually adjusting the read placements. This process is repeated until it reaches the near-optimal positions, i.e. when the gradient computed is close to zero, indicating that a local minimum has been reached.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:13:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 4: Read threshold optimization using density evolution.

A. Discretized Density Evolution
In [10], an improved implementation of density evolution is developed called the discretized density evolution (DDE) which is able to model the exact behavior of discretized sumproduct decoding on quantized AWGN channels. The input to the DDE are the channel LLR pmfs which are dictated by both SNR (i.e., noise variance σ2) and the position of read thresholds γ. We use the MLC NAND flash scenario, 2 bits (MSB and LSB) per symbol, while using the symmetric channel labeling (SCL) as discussed in Section II-C.2. The LLRs, which are computed according to (2), represent the messages being passed along the edges of the graph during the belief propagation decoding.
We point out, once again, that the channels observed by LSB and MSB are different. Hence, they should be analyzed separately. It turns out that under symmetry assumptions, the LSB channel has a significantly worse error performance, which makes it the bottleneck in our optimization of the BER. Hence, we focus our discussion solely on the LSB.

B. Split Ratio Quantization

The first step is quantization. As we know, the core of density evolution revolves around keeping track of the LLR densities at the check nodes (CNs) and variable nodes (VNs). However for hardware implementations and computer simulations, we could never store continuous and unbounded data without some modifications. Thus the quantization is used regularly to convert continuous LLR pdfs into discrete and finite LLR pmfs. For a message w, the standard quantization generates the quantized message Q(w) = wˆ, defined as:


 

w ∆

+

1 2

· ∆,

if

w

≥

∆ 2



wˆ ≡ Q(w) =

w ∆

−

1 2

· ∆,

if

w

≤

∆ 2

(6)



0,

otherwise

where ∆ is the quantization interval. The pmf value P (w)

associated with w is then assigned to Q(w). However, in

our DDE implementation, we observed fluctuations in the

DDE output due to the use of this quantization. Therefore,

we introduced a modified quantization method, which we

call split ratio quantization (SRQ), whereby the pmf value

associated to w is split between adjacent quantization points

in inverse proportion to the distance of w to those points.

The original data point is at position w with value P (w). The

quantized pmf under SRQ has two components at positions

Ql(w) and Qr(w)

with

values

Pl(w)

=

b (a+b)

P

(w)

and

Pr (w)

=

a (a+b)

P

(w),

respectively.

The

variables

a

and

b

are the distance from the original data point to the nearest

left and right quantization points, respectively.

The effect of this method can be observed in Figure 5

where we show the LSB channel pmfs before and after

applying SRQ. Figure 5a displays the LLR pmfs for gaps

= 0.349, 0.350, 0.351, 0.352. The LLR pfs for gaps = 0.349

and 0.350 are almost identical and hence visually overlap-

ping. The same goes for gaps = 0.351 and 0.352. However,

the location of the non-zero peak differs between these two

groups. We believe that this sharp transition between the gap

= 0.350 and the gap = 0.351 is the source of the observed

fluctuations. After applying SRQ, as shown in Figure 5b, the

transition is smoothed out and fluctuations are significantly

reduced. Use of this method will become important later on

when we implement gradient descent on top of this, because

even the slightest fluctuations will result in the creation of

local minima traps and prevent us from converging to the

desired global minimum.

C. Finite LLR-pmf Operations
With the quantization method established for the discretized LLR pmfs, we now need to address the issue of representing the pmfs using only a finite number of values. We follow the recommendation of [14] where we only store the LLR range of ∆[−N, N ]Z. We use p to denote this pmf of length 2N + 1. If we convolve two such pmfs, pa and pb, the size of these pmfs are usually really large, therefore the use of an efficient convolution method is a must. We use the FFTbased convolution where the output pmf pc = pa⊗ pb = IFFT FFT{pa}FFT{pb} of length 4N + 1 is supported on ∆[−2N, 2N ]Z. This pmf pc can be divided into three parts: ∆[−2N, −(N + 1)]Z, ∆[−N, N ]Z and ∆[N + 1, 2N ]Z. The first part (∆[−2N, −(N + 1)]Z) can be neglected if the pmfs are symmetric (in the sense of [14]) and if (N + 1)∆ is sufficiently large, which are both satisfied in our case. It is recommended that the probability mass on the last part be stored either at ∆N or separately; we choose the first approach. This method allows us to store the convolution on multiple finite pmfs with the same vector length as the inputs, which in turn allows us to perform multiple rounds of density evolution without running out of memory.

D. Discretized Density Update

The core of DDE is updating the discretized LLR densities, i.e., the finite LLR pmfs discussed previously. In [14], the continuous VN and CN update rule under BP decoding are discussed. Those rules can be converted to the discrete version [10]. We can describe the DDE update rule as:

pc(l+1) = ρ p(ch) ⊗ λ(pc(l)) ,

(7)

where pv and pc are the pmfs of VNs and CNs respectively, pc(0) is a unit impulse at LLR = 0. Here, λ and ρ denote the variable node and the check node distributions, respectively [14]. It is then easy to show that the corresponding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:13:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) Before SRQ.

(a) ∆N = 25.

(b) After SRQ.
Fig. 5: The effect of SRQ in smoothing of the LLR density transitions in the LSB channel for ∆ = 0.05.

probability of error at iteration l, can be expressed as

0

Pe(l) =

pv(l)[k].

(8)

k=−N

E. Pre-computing R-List

In [10], the authors defined the R-operation, which produces a new pmf from two input pmfs. This is a key computational element of DDE. However, computing it each time this operation is called requires O(n3) computational complexity since we have to run a 3-layered for-loop of indices k, i and j, where each index runs over the interval ∈ [0, 2N +1]. This can be done in a more efficient manner by pre-computing all the 3-tuple indices that satisfy

(i, j) : k∆ = R(i∆, j∆)

(9)

and storing them in a list, which we refer to as the R-List. Figure 6 shows all the 3-tuple indices that satisfy equation (9), which form a surface. Therefore, in exchange for some additional memory, we can reduce the dimensionality of the computation space from three to two, which allows us to compute DE iterations much faster.

F. Read Threshold Optimization
Now that the DDE process has been fully explained, we can define a function g(·), which takes µ, ∆N, λ(x), ρ(x), µ, σ2, and as input parameters, uses the computational tricks

(b) ∆N = 50.
Fig. 6: Illustration of the 3-tuple indices that satisfy equation (9) for ∆ = 0.05 and different values of ∆N .

described earlier, and outputs the estimated BER after iterations of message passing. For simplicity, we denote this function by g(γ) since the rest of the input parameters remain constant throughout the entire optimization lifetime. Once again, we use the gradient descent to continuously update the read threshold positions according to

γ(t+1) = γ(t) + δ · ∇g γ(t) ,

(10)

as we did for MMI-based optimization. Here, δ is the step size. We use t to indicate gradient descent iterations, which is not to be confused with l, the message passing iterations. The gradient is calculated as before, i.e. by picking a small offset value ε and calculating the slope of Pe when each element in γ is offset by ε.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section we apply our DDE-based threshold optimization method to two QC-LDPC codes. The first is a (3, 4)regular QC-LDPC code of length n = 36 and L = 9 (see [15]), which we refer to as "Code A". The second one is an irregular QC-LDPC code of length n = 1944, rate 2/3 and L = 81 used in the 802.11n Wi-Fi standard [16], which we refer to as "Code B". We first present results for Code A and then make several observations pertaining to the choice of parity-check matrix, the advantage of DDE over MMI, the initialization of the read thresholds, and the BP performance with more iterations. Finally, we present DDE results for Code B and compare them to the MMI results.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:13:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I: Simulation parameters.

Parameter µ ∆ ε δ N ζ
R (# of BP/DDE iterations)

Value [-3, -1, 1, 3](V)
0.05 1 × 10−3
0.1 800 1 × 10−14
2

We observed that the DDE optimization approach does indeed perform better than the MMI approach in the midSNR regions (as shown in Table II), but only by a very small amount. The final read threshold positions given by DE eventually converge back to the thresholds given by MMI in high-SNR regions.
When implementing the DDE-GD approach, it is possible for the GD solver to get stuck in a local minimum. To overcome this problem, we propose a two-stage optimization method: First, we use the gradient descent method to maximize the mutual information, as discussed earlier. Then, we take these read threshold placements as the initial values for the DDE-GD method. By doing so, we can guarantee that we can achieve a better BER than that of the MMI method. It is consistent with our simulation results as we do always end up at the global minimum using this 2-step method. We point out that the cost of being trapped at a wrong local minimum is very high. The performance comparison between the global minimum and the secondary local minimum can be found in [17].

B. Simulation Results for Code B
Finally, we implemented DDE-based read threshold optimization for Code B and evaluated the resulting performance under BP decoding. We find that the optimal threshold positions differ from those found for Code A, as well as those found by MMI-based optimization [17]. This verifies our conjecture that, in contrast to the MMI approach, the DDE approach is indeed code-dependent. It provides read threshold positions that take into account the structure of the Tanner graph of the LDPC code and performs better than the MMI optimization approach, which is independent of any code properties.

Fig. 7: A display of evolution of error probability (left figure) and read threshold placements (right figure) during the gradient descent iterations in optimizing read threshold placement using DDE criterion for MLC-SCL LSB channel with Code A, SNR = 13(dB), m = 6, R = 2 with equal initial gap.
A. Simulation Results for Code A
The simulation parameters are shown in Table I if not otherwise specified. We use Code A in most of our simulation studies of the MLC-SCL LSB channel because it is a regular code with a sparse degree distribution, thereby requiring fewer computations and less run-time. We choose to work with the LSB channel because it is more degraded. However, our simulations can easily be adapted for the MSB channel by simply changing the channel LLR densities provided as input to the DDE. Figure 7 depicts the evolution of error probability and read thresholds in gradient descent iterations.

C. Empirical Optimization for TLC
Up to this point, our results suggest that although the DDEbased approach gives the set of read thresholds that yields better performance, the performance gain is insignificant when comparing with the complexity of the DDE process and therefore not suitable for practical purposes. Having established that MMI-based optimization method is sufficient for practical use, we therefore apply this to the TLC NAND flash with empirically measured voltage distributions for various P/E cycles. The hardware limit for maximum quantization is 800 quantization points. Figure 8 depicts the MMI attained in comparison with the maximum MI possible. In simulations, we also used another QC-LDPC code of length 8192 and rate 0.94 which is a more practical choice for NAND flash memories. As expected, a significant improvement in BER was gained by going from m = 7 to m = 14 reads.
V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge and thank Yi Liu for many insightful discussions and the Center for Memory Recording Research (CMRR) at UC San Diego for providing the lab data.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:13:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE II: BER performance comparison with BP decoding between optimal threshold positions given by MMI and DE methods. Results are shown for m = 6, R = 2 using (3,4)-QCLDPC code (Code A).

BER (BP)

Optimization Criteria MMI DE

12 6.6096 × 10−3 6.5611 × 10−3

SNR(dB)

13

14

1.4631 × 10−3 2.428 × 10−4

1.4196 × 10−3 2.399 × 10−4

15 3.195 × 10−5 3.188 × 10−5

Fig. 8: MMI attained for different PE cycles and different number of read thresholds m.

[13] P. Huang, P. H. Siegel, and E. Yaakobi, “Performance of multilevel flash memories with different binary labelings: a multi-user perspective,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2336–2353, 2016.
[14] T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory, Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[15] A. Kalsi, A. Bajpai, L. Wuttisittikulkij, and P. Kovintaewat, “A base matrix method to construct column weight 3 quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with high girth,” In proceedings of International Conference on Electronics, Information, and Communications (ICEIC), pp. 1–4, 2016.
[16] IEEE Standard 802.11-2016 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.11-2012), pp. 1–3534.
[17] Y. Yeh, “Optimization of Read Thresholds in NAND Flash Memory for LDPC Codes,” M.Sc. Thesis, University of California, San Diego, 2020.
[18] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai. Read and write voltage signal optimization for multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash memory. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 64(4):1613–1623, 2016.

REFERENCES
[1] E. F. Haratsch, “NAND Flash media management algorithms,” in Flash Memory Summit, 2017.
[2] X. Zhang, J. Zhu, and Y. Wu, “Efficient one-pass Chase soft-decision BCH decoder for multi-level cell NAND flash memory,” in proceedings of IEEE International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS), pp. 1–4, 2011.
[3] X. Zhang, “An efficient interpolation-based Chase BCH decoder,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 212–216, 2013.
[4] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp.619–637, 2001.
[5] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng, “LDPCin-SSD: making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. FAST, 2013.
[6] F. Zhang, H. D. Pfister, and A. Jiang, “LDPC codes for rank modulation in flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2010, pp. 859–863.
[7] A. Jiang, M. Schwartz, and J. Bruck, “Error-correcting codes for rank modulation,” in Proc. International Symposium on Information Theory, 2008, pp. 1736–1740.
[8] J. Wang, K. Vakilinia, T. Chen, T. Courtade, G. Dong, T. Zhang, H. Shankar, R. Wesel, “Enhanced precision through multiple reads for LDPC decoding in flash memories,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 880–891, 2014.
[9] C. Duangthong, W. Phakphisut, and P. Supnithi, “Read voltage optimization in MLC NAND flash memory via the density evolution,” In Proc. 26th International Conference on Telecommunications (ICT), 2019, pp. 361–365.
[10] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58– 60, 2001.
[11] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Error characterization, mitigation, and recovery in flash-memory-based solid-state drives,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1666–1704, Sept. 2017.
[12] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, Wiley Series in Telecommunications and Signal Processing), 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:13:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

