Asynchronous Design for Precision-Scaleable Energy-Efficient LDPC Decoder

Jingwei Xu, Tiben Che, Ehsan Rohani and Gwan Choi Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Texas A&M University College Station, Texas 77840
Email: {xujw07, ctb47321, ehsanrohani, gchoi}@tamu.edu

Abstract—This paper presents a low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoder design that uses scalable-precision calculation (SPC) and asynchronous circuit techniques to reduce power consumption. The decoder configures the computation precision to minimize circuit-level switching necessary for given target biterror rate (FER). The asynchronous circuit approach guarantees the completion of each compute-and-forward phase at necessary voltage levels. The voltage level is scheduled to ensure completion of minimum necessary decoding iterations. The proposed scheme is studied for the specific application of IEEE 802.16e to reduce the power consumption at a given target FER. The proposed design is evaluated on Nangate 45nm library. The results show that the proposed asynchronous design results in 51% reduction in terms of power consumption compared with full-precision decoding mode.
Index Terms—LDPC; low-power design; precision-scalable; asynchronous circuits; voltage scaling design.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check codes [1], [2] are powerful errorcorrecting codes that perform very close to the Shannon limit and are used in many communication standards such as IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX) [3], DVB-S2 and IEEE 802.11n (WiFi). LDPC performance is significantly affected by the decoding algorithm. Excellent LDPC performance is achieved by soft decoding typically with the sum-product (SP) algorithm. The algorithm operates by iteratively passing a posteriori probability or log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages along the edges of a factor graph [4], which involves check-node update and variable-node update. In practice, the variants of SP algorithm such as min-sum (MS), offset min-sum (OMS) algorithms are used to be implemented for avoiding overflow and efficient hardware implementation.
LDPC decoder is first implemented in hardware using fully-parallel architecture by [5]. However, fully-parallel LDPC decoder suffers from a lot of aspects such as complex interconnect issues to access the memory, inefficient logic utilization.To efficiently address those problems, [6] proposes an improved architecture which utilizes the value-reuse property of the OMS algorithm with layer decoding. For an exploration of the low-power design on the existing LDPC architectures, [7] proposes LDPC decoder equipped with the dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS) technique. In [7], the decoder is designed to run at minimum clock frequency and supply voltage to meet latency requirements by estimating the necessary number of iterations. The synchronous circuits have to assure that the critical path in the design does not

violate the time limitation imposed by the clock frequency. Although DVFS technique enables the low-power operation of the LDPC decoder, it requires the strictly accurate voltage and frequency controls to make sure that the completion time of synchronous circuits do not violate the limitation of the clock frequency. [8] proposes a design with an adaptive wordwidth mechanism to reduce the power consumption by optimizing the datapath in the hardware. Without dynamically scaling voltage and frequency, the power reduction is relatively moderate in [8]. Scaling voltage and frequency helps significantly reduce the power consumption though, it introduces difficulties on the coordination between voltage and scaling to avoid time violation.
Fortunately, the natures of asynchronous circuits overcome the problems mentioned in DVFS technique and make asynchronous circuits a efficient method to do low-power design [9]. Asynchronous circuits has recently received increasing attentions also because of its high operation speed, omission of clock distribution related problems, and robustness with respect to variations in supply voltage [10]. An asynchronous baseband processor framework design for satellite communication is proposed in [11] to mitigate the radioactive interference. [12] proposes a fully parallel LDPC decoder with the asynchronous circuits. Since the check nodes in a fully-parallel have substantially various transmission delays at each iteration, [12] proposes to utilize asynchronous techniques to speed up the interleaver of the LDPC decoder so as to enhance the logic utilization.
In this paper, we propose a precision-scalable based LDPC decoder facilitated by the asynchronous circuits technique. First, a set of precision-adaptive calculation units are proposed to premise the flexibility of the decoder in precision. Furthermore, to get the optimal quantization scheme in terms of performance at each precision, the impacts of various quantization schemes are presented. To target a given decoding performance in terms of FER, the moderation of the necessary precision and circuits delays are evaluated by the SPICE simulations; and the corresponding power reduction is derived.
This paper is organized as follows: An overview of our proposed system is given in the Section II. After studying the decoding performance of the proposed system in Section III, Section IV provides the details of the implementation. Then we show the simulation results and normalized power reduction in the Section V. Finally, the paper is concluded in the Section VI.

,(((



$VLORPDU

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

 





 



 


 

 



 

 



 



 






Fig. 3. Asynchronous circuits data path model


  


 


Fig. 1. The overview system flow of proposed LDPC decoder



 



 

 

 

 

 

 



 



 


 

 




 




   


   

 

Fig. 2. Generic LDPC decoding data flow graph

II. PROPOSED SYSTEM
Fig. 1 shows the overview system for the proposed LDPC decoder. The LDPC decoder is composed by the check nodes units (CNU) and variable nodes units (VNU) which iteratively refine the received bit stream. In the proposed system, the LDPC decoder consists of precision-scalable units which are designed in asynchronous circuits as delay variously depending on the precision of the calculation in use. The control model is introduced here to determine the pair of necessary computation precision and voltage supply, for a given decoding fidelity, according to the interference strength. Different with the conventional synchronous precision-scalable design, eventdriven asynchronous circuits allow not to dynamically scale the operating frequency along with voltage scaling. To accommodate the precision scalability, the modifications of CNU and VNU are presented in this paper.

A. LDPC Decoding Flow
The basic data flow chart of LDPC decoder is given in Fig. 2. In literature there are different algorithms on how to propagate the belief through the check nodes and variable nodes. In practice, min-sum algorithm and its variants are popular for its simplified operation on belief propagation (BP). In this paper, min-sum algorithm is taken as the example to

be applied on our precision-adaptive decoder design in asynchronous circuits. Noticeably, although min-sum algorithm is taken to be implemented in our paper, the design flow could be extended to apply any other BP LDPC decoding algorithms.

When to update the check nodes at ith iteration, for each
variable node Vn and the set of its neighboring variable nodes m ∈ M (n), the message sent from variable nodes to check nodes, Qinm, could be presented as:

Qinm = yn +

Rm (i)n.

(1)

m ∈M (n)\m

Rm (i)n is the message sent from check nodes Sm to variable node Vn. It is updated in the other phase of variable nodes
update by the following equation:

Rm (i)n = (

sign(Qni m)) n ∈Nm(imn)\m(Qin m) (2)

n ∈N (m)\m

In this paper, those computations above are implemented in a way that the precision is reconfigurable so that only necessary bits of precision will be used to compute Qni m and Rm (i)n on the fly. The details of the implementation will be presented in the Section IV.

B. Asynchronous Circuits
In synchronous circuits, significant effort on design, performance and timing must be given to ensure correct registerto-register data forwarding. Especially for DVFS technique, when the voltage scaling, frequency scaling needs be carefully scheduled to avoid any flaws in the clock-driven data forwarding paths. Asynchronous circuits are unlike the synchronous circuits that consist of registers and combination logic, driven by a global clock. On the contrary, in asynchronous circuits, data forwarding from the input to the output ports are controlled by handshaking between receiving and forwarding units via acknowledgement signals. The processing-flow model of asynchronous circuits is shown in Fig. 3. The REQ signal from previous stage informs the next stage that the new data is ready. Then the combinational logic (CL) circuit commences to compute. After the combinational computing, the control module (CTL) generates an ACK signal and send it back to the previous module to inform that current computing cycle is complete and it is ready to receive new data.
In this paper, the combinational logic for the VNU and CNU are designed with the scalability of the precision. Under different configurations of the precision, the combinational logic costs different amount of resources in terms of voltage or time to complete computations. Due to the nature of the clock-free asynchronous circuits, the voltage could be scaled down for low-precision calculations so as to reduce the power consumption. The details on how the precision impacts the decoding performance and precision-scalable units implementation are discussed in the remaining of this paper.


Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

 

 

8 bits 6 bits 4 bits







 












10−1





FER

10−2

10−3

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

SNR [dB]

Fig. 4. FER performances for different word lengths

III. IMPACTS OF PRECISION ON DECODING PERFORMANCE
In this section, we present how the performance is affected by the different selections of the precision and what parameters have impacts on the performance along with the adjustment of the precision. In our case, the clipping scheme is chosen to optimize the FER performance. All simulation results are based on the 16QAM 4 × 4 MIMO wireless transmission with 2304 code size and 1/2 coding rate LDPC codes in IEEE 802.16e standard.
To obtain the decoding performances with different precisions, we exhaustively search the best clipping window for each number of precision. We found that with reserving more signifcant bits in the LLR, the FER curve drops more earlier under lower SNR. However, the clipping window to reserve more signifcant bits also results in a relatively higher error floor. With shifting the LLR clipping window to contain more least signifcant bits (LSBs), the FER curves do not drop until a relatively high SNR is given. The clipping window with more LSBs needs higher SNR to achieve a given target FER decoding performance though, it mitigates the effect of error floor.
This impact could be explained as following. With limited precision, the details of LLR are lost with clipping window with more MSBs to achieve low error floor. Although LSBs keep more details of the LLR, the clipping window with more LSBs obscures the confidences of the LLR so as to result in degraded performance when SNR is relatively low.
In this paper, the optimal clipping window is determined based on the error floor below the FER of 10−3. If we move the clipping window to least significant side, the first window which gives no error floor before FER dropping to 10−3 is recognized as the optimal clipping window.
To derive the optimal clipping parameters for the proposed precision-scalable LDPC decoder, the performances of the min-sum LDPC decoder with different precisions are simulated. For each precision, the optimal clipping scheme is derived by the methoed mentioned in the previous. Fig. 4

Fig. 5. Asynchronous precision-scalable VNU design
shows the optimal decoding performances of the proposed LDPC decoder with precisions of 8, 6 and 4 bits. As shown in the figure, under the given circumstance, within 3 dB difference on the SNR the necessary precision of the LLR could be reduced from 8-bit to 4-bit for a given FER target.
In the following, to utilize the reduction on necessary precision, the details how the precision-scalable LDPC decoder is implemented are given.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROPOSED SYSTEM
As aforementioned, the decoding procedure is operated by the iterations between two basic computation units, VNUs and CNUs. In this section, the two units with the precision reconfigurablility are implemented with consideration of the asynchronous circuits.
A. Variable Node Units
The variable node units with precision-scalability is presented first. Each VNU has multiple inputs and the same number of outputs. Without losing the generality, Fig. 5 shows a VNU with 3 inputs and outputs. The inputs are fed the values from the outputs of the CNUs. The VNU generates the outputs by the summations of the input values except the value from the corresponding input with same index, as described in (1). The number of inputs is as many as 7 in the standard LDPC matrix. To reduce the complexity of the VNU, usually the VNU is designed to sum all inputs together first and then subtract the input value from the summation for the corresponding output. This algorithm is implemented by a adder tree which sums all inputs first and multiple adders to subtract the inputs.
The precision scalability is augmented by designing a precision-reconfigurable adder. As Fig. 5 shows, the carry-in for each full adder is gated by a control signal. The control signal could gate each specific carry-in signal. Therefore, the precision of adder is adjusted by enabling the specific number of full adders by the control signals. Thus the critical path is reduced for less precision requirement operation. In the asynchronous fashion, there is no clock to constraint the completion. Each stages passes the data to the neighbor by the asynchronous protocol. With different precisions, the delays of the unit are adjusted without any overhead on the clock configuration. Therefore, asynchronous circuits offer more feasibility of the scalability than conventional synchronous circuits.
B. Check Node Units
Compared with the VNU, CNU is of greater complexity to execute (2). The CNU also contains multiple inputs and outputs. Each output of the CNU is the minimum values out of


Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the all inputs except the corresponding input with same index. An efficient way to complete the computation is first to sort out all the inputs to get the minimum and second minimum (submin) values. Subsequently the inputs are compared with the min and sub-min value to determine which to be propagated to the output. Fig. 6 shows the architecture of the CNU. The critical path of the CNU is marked by the dashed line in the figure, which consists of the absolute value calculation, a sorting unit and a comparator.
In the first operation, the 2’s complementary number is translated to sign-magnitude number. Then the magnitude values are passed to the sorting units to get the minimum and sub-minimum values out of all of the magnitudes. Finally, the minimum and sub-minimum values are selected in the comparator for each output. From the figure, it is shown that the critical path mainly contains the sorting units and a comparator. And sorting unit could be made by multiple comparators. Therefore, to reduce the completion time of the CNU in lower precision, we proposed the precision-scalable comparator for the comparator as well as the sorting operator.
To accommodate the scalability of the precision, the bit comparator units (BCUs) is introduced as the single units in the comparators. As Fig.7 shows, the proposed comparator is composed by multiple BCUs which are concatenated together. The most right BCU corresponds to the MSB, while the left most one is for LSB. For a certain number of precision, the necessary number of BCUs are clipped out by the precision control signal. The critical path of the proposed comparator starts from the right to the left. Since the values after absolute operation are unsigned, each BCU plays role on determine which value of the inputs is greater by checking if two bits are same are not. Also the BCU needs notify the BCU in the next level if the comparison is done. If the comparison is done by the previous stage BCU, the subsequent BCUs output the results correspondingly.
The details of the BCU is also given in the figure. Inputs a and b are the two bits of the operators. They are compared by a XOR gate to determine if comparison between the two bits is done in this stage. The ack input is used to acknowledge the BCU that the comparison is done by the previous BCU. The winner input indicates which number has the greater value.
Distinct with conventional comparator, since we utilize the asynchronous technique here, the comparator proposed here is not only equipped with ability of precision reconfiguration, it is also designed to get the result as soon as possible by checking from MSB to LSB. If the comparison is done earlier in more significant bits, the critical path for the following BCUs is reduced, so that the computation could be completed earlier without the clock constraints.
In the following, the evaluations of the proposed method in terms of computation latency, voltage scaling and power reduction are given.
V. SETUP AND SIMULATION
To evaluate the proposed method, we first synthesize the precision-scalable computation units by Synopsys Design Compiler on Nangate 45nm library. The original design without precision reduction is referenced as the baseline design. For timing analysis of the proposed method, the critical paths under different precision configurations are extracted by Synopsys Primetime and evaluated by the Synopsys Hspice.



 


    

  
 

 

Fig. 6. Asynchronous precision-scalable CNU design










 










    

 











 










Fig. 7. Proposed asynchronous comparator

A. Timing Analysis of the proposed units
First of all, the delays of the proposed units with different precision configurations are evaluated by the SPICE simulation. And the results are shown in the Fig. 8. As the figure shows, the latency of the computation units are substantially affected by the number of bits involved in the computation. To utilize the time reduction of the lower-precision computation in high-SNR situations, the supply voltage could be tuned down without losing throughput. Because the asynchronous circuits applied, overhead of frequency control is dismissed as we mentioned above. The results voltage scaling is discussed in the following subsection.
B. Voltage Scaling
Here we examined the necessary voltage supplies for computations under different precision without losing the throughput. VNU is taken as an example here to illustrate the voltage scaling. Fig. 9 shows the latency over the supply voltage of VNU with different precisions. The baseline latency is referenced as the 8-bit full precision. To achieve the same latency, lower voltage supplies are sufficient for those lower-precision computations according to the curves. And the voltage scaling points are indicated as the necessary voltage supply for different precisions.
C. Comparisons with full-precision decoding
According to the supply voltages reductions examined above, we derived the normalized power reduction to the LDPC decoder running at full precision by the power, P ∝


Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

































Fig. 8. Units delays for different precisions
























  

  
 
  




Fig. 9. Voltage Scaling to align processing latency








 




 
   
 
  
 





! 





 
 













Fig. 10. Normalized power reduction compared with fixed precision LDPC decoder

Vd2d. Fig. 10 shows the relatively power consumption compared with full 8-bit precision LDPC decoder. With high SNR environments, 4-bit precision LDPC decoder could be taken to do decoding for a given target transmission reliability with only cost of 49% power consumption as the full-precision running

decoder.
Noticeably, the specific algorithm and simulation environment are set in this paper though, the method presented in this paper is algorithm independent and could be applied into any other specific cases.
VI. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, we explored the feasibility and effect of the precision-scalable energy-efficient LDPC decoder equipped with the asynchronous techniques. The IEEE 802.16e is taken as the background for the design in this paper. To design a solid precision-scalable LDPC decoder, the impacts of LLR clipping on the performance of different precision computations are also studied. To get an optimal performance, we found the clipping schemes should be carefully taken for calculations with different precisions. Furthermore, the basic units in the LDPC decoder, VNU and CNU are explored and modified as precision-reconfigurable. A series of experiments and derivation are deducted to show that the proposed LDPC decoder is able to operate with 4-bit precision, half of the normally used precision under higher SNR to achieve 51% power reduction.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Information Theory, IRE Transactions on, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] D. J. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, 1999.
[3] IEEE 802.16 Working Group and others, “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks, Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access Systems,” IEEE Std, vol. 802, pp. 16–2004, 2004.
[4] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb 2001.
[5] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mw 1-gb/s 1024-b, rate1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, 2002.
[6] K. K. Gunnam, G. S. Choi, M. B. Yeary, and M. Atiquzzaman, “VLSI architectures for layered decoding for irregular LDPC codes of WiMax,” in Communications, 2007. ICC’07. IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2007, pp. 4542–4547.
[7] W. Wang, E. Kim, K. K. Gunnam, and G. S. Choi, “Low-power vlsi design of ldpc decoder using dynamic voltage and frequency scaling for additive white gaussian noise channels,” Journal of Low Power Electronics, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 303–312, 2009.
[8] T. Mohsenin, H. Shirani-mehr, and B. M. Baas, “LDPC Decoder with an Adaptive Wordwidth Datapath for Energy and BER Cooptimization,” VLSI Des., vol. 2013, pp. 7:7–7:7, Jan. 2013. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/913018
[9] T. Lin, K.-S. Chong, J. S. Chang, and B.-H. Gwee, “An ultra-low power asynchronous-logic in-situ self-adaptive system for wireless sensor networks,” Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 573–586, 2013.
[10] J. Spars and S. Furber, Principles Asynchronous Circuit Design. Springer, 2002.
[11] E. Rohani, J. Xu, T. Che, M. Rahman, G. Choi, and M. Lu, “Asynchronous baseband processor design for cooperative mimo satellite communication,” in Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS), 2014 IEEE 57th International Midwest Symposium on. IEEE, 2014, pp. 833–836.
[12] N. Onizawa, V. C. Gaudet, and T. Hanyu, “Low-energy asynchronous interleaver for clockless fully parallel ldpc decoding,” Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 1933–1943, 2011.


Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

