IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

885

Overclocking NAND Flash Memory I/O Link in LDPC-Based SSDs
Kai Zhao, Jiangpeng Li, Jun Ma, Rino Micheloni, and Tong Zhang

Abstract—Due to the increasingly significant process variation and gradual Flash memory cell wear-out, the worst-case-oriented error correction code (ECC) in solid-state drives (SSDs) is mostly underutilized throughout the entire lifetime. Error-prone overclocking of Flash memory chip I/O links can trade such ECC underutilization for opportunistically improving SSD speed performance, and its effectiveness strongly depends on how well the ECC decoding can handle the overclocking-induced I/O link errors. As SSDs are quickly adopting low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, this brief concerns LPDC-based overclocked SSDs. Experiments with 20-nm NAND Flash memory chips reveal unique bit error characteristics of the overclocked I/O link, based upon which this brief develops solutions that can leverage the error characteristics to improve LDPC decoding performance. Results show that the developed techniques can reduce LDPC code decoding power consumption by 60% and reduce the decoding failure rate by over two orders of magnitude.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, overclocking, solid-state drives.
I. INTRODUCTION
F LASH-BASED solid-state drives (SSDs) must employ powerful error correction codes (ECCs) to ensure the target program/erase (P/E) cycling endurance and data retention time. Meanwhile, to support random page accessibility, NAND Flash memory manufacturers fabricate enough redundant memory cells in each physical page geared to the worst-case raw storage reliability. Due to the significant process variation and gradual Flash memory cell wear-out, the worst-case-oriented ECC redundancy is mostly underutilized over the entire SSD lifetime. A recent work [1] presented a design strategy that trades such underutilized error correction strength for improving runtime SSD speed performance. The key is to leverage the residual error correction strength to enable error-prone overclocking of Flash memory chip I/O link. Its effectiveness heavily depends on how well the ECC decoding can mitigate the I/O link errors. Nevertheless, with the objective of demonstrating its practical feasibility and potential benefits on system
Manuscript received April 24, 2014; revised July 13, 2014; accepted August 12, 2014. Date of publication August 22, 2014; date of current version November 1, 2014. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant 1162152. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor J. G. Delgado-Frias.
K. Zhao and T. Zhang are with Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (e-mail: zk448210@gmail.com).
J. Li and J. Ma are with Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.
R. Micheloni is with PMC-Sierra, 20871 Vimercate, Italy. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this brief are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2014.2350377

speed performance, the prior work [1] did not investigate how overclocking-induced bit errors can be possibly better handled by ECC decoding.
This brief aims to address this issue for SSDs using lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes. It is evident that SSDs are quickly adopting LDPC codes to achieve stronger error correction strength [2], [3]. The key of this work is to cohesively exploit the soft-decision decoding nature of LDPC code and unique characteristics of overclocking-induced I/O link errors. We first implemented an experimental hardware platform with 20-nm multilevel per cell (MLC) NAND Flash memory chips, based upon which extensive measurements were carried out and unique characteristics of overclocking-induced I/O link errors have been observed. Accordingly, two design techniques are developed, which leverage such unique I/O link error characteristics to improve LDPC code decoding performance in the presence of overclocking-induced I/O link errors. This can bring two benefits: 1) reducing the average number of LDPC code decoding iterations, which can lead to a lower decoding energy consumption and higher decoding throughput, and 2) improving the tolerance to overclocking-induced errors, which can lead to a lower data retransfer rate in the presence of aggressive overclocking. The experiments with 20-nm Flash memory chips and LDPC decoding simulations show that the proposed design techniques can reduce the LDPC decoding energy consumption by 60% and reduce the data retransfer rate by over two orders of magnitude.
II. BACKGROUND
This section briefly reviews the rationale and basic idea of Flash memory chip I/O overclocking. With the technology scaling, the error characteristics of Flash memory dramatically vary under different P/E cycles and retention time. To show these effects, experiments were carried out on 8192 pages randomly chosen from 20-nm MLC NAND Flash memory chips, and Fig. 1 shows the measurement results. Fig. 1(a) shows the average raw bit error rate (BER) with respect to P/E cycling. With 1000 P/E cycles and a two-day retention, the average raw BER is only 6 × 10−5. In comparison, the average raw BER increases to 2 × 10−3 with 5000 P/E cycles and a 30day retention. Fig. 1(b) shows the raw BER variations among different pages for the two cases. The raw BER of the best and worst pages is marked in Fig. 1(a).
Since ECC should ensure the data storage integrity under the worst-case scenario, the above results clearly show that the worst-case-oriented error correction strength is underutilized for most of the time. Meanwhile, as the industry keeps pushing

1549-7747 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/imwiwtewd.itoee: eY.oonrgs/epiuUbnliivc.atDioonwsn_lsotaadneddarodns/Jpuunbeli2ca4t,i2o0n2s6/raigt h1t7s:/4in2d:0e6x.UhtTmCl ffroormmIEoEreEinXfpolromrea.tiRone.strictions apply.

886

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 2. Operational flow diagram when applying error-prone memory I/O link overclocking.

Fig. 3. Overclocked NAND Flash read channel model.

Fig. 1. Measurement results of (a) raw BER versus data retention time under different P/E cycles and (b) per-page bit errors histogram of 20-nm MLC NAND Flash memory chips.
the NAND Flash memory I/O specs [4], it aims to achieve virtually error-free data transfer (e.g., BER of 10−15 and below) like in conventional design practice. Fundamentally different from other high-speed data links, the data being transferred through NAND Flash memory I/O are protected by strong ECCs. The underutilized error correction strength in SSDs makes it practically feasible and desirable to apply unconventional errorprone overclocking to improve the system speed performance, where the ECC explicitly handles the errors from both memory cells and I/O links [1].

in which the parameters vary with P/E cycling. However, the I/O link errors cannot be modeled as BSC. Each NAND Flash memory die contains two or four independent planes, and each plane has its own page registers that serve as the starting point for the Flash-to-controller data transfer. Given the 8-bit memory chip I/O and assuming two planes per memory die, there are essentially 16 separate signal paths. Aggressive I/O link overclocking can exceed the designed 1→0 and/or 0→1 driving capability of the circuitry on the 16 signal paths, leading to data transfer bit errors with unequal probabilities of 1→0 and 0→1 error patterns. In addition, due to their different onchip routing, these 16 signal paths may respond to the overclocking differently. Therefore, the overclocked data transfer paths should be modeled as parallel binary asymmetric channel (BAC), as shown in Fig. 3.

III. PROPOSED TECHNIQUES ON ENHANCING LINK ERROR MITIGATION
Fig. 2 shows the operational flow diagram for implementing the error-prone Flash memory I/O link overclocking [1]. Clearly, if I/O link errors can be more effectively mitigated by the ECC decoding, it can 1) reduce the data retransfer rate and hence enhance the SSD speed performance and 2) reduce the decoding iteration number, leading to a lower decoding energy consumption and higher decoding throughput. However, the prior work [1] primarily focused on the data storage systemlevel design and evaluation without considering how to improve

A. Overclocking-Aware LLR Calculation

LDPC code decoding is a probability-based message-passing process, and its input is the estimated log-likelihood ratio (LLR) for each bit [5], [6]. Let x = {xk} and y = {yk} represent the original and received data sequences, the LLR for the kth bit is expressed as

LLR(xk )

=

log

p(xk p(xk

= =

0|yk 1|yk

) )

.

From the law of total probability

the effectiveness of mitigating I/O link errors. To improve the effectiveness on mitigating I/O link errors, an
overclocked Flash read channel model is proposed, as shown in Fig. 3. Since the Flash memory manufacturers apply various circuit fine-tuning and even on-chip data randomizer to equalize the probabilities of 1→0 and 0→1 errors from Flash memory

LLR(xk )

=

log

p(xk p(xk

= =

0, 1,

yk ) yk )

= log

1 i=0

p(xk

=

0,

yk ,

vk

=

i)

1 i=0

p(xk

=

1,

yk ,

vk

=

i)

cells, NAND Flash memory cell data storage can be modeled where vk denotes the data that are read out from the Flash as a binary symmetric channel (BSC), as shown in Fig. 3, cell array and to be transferred to the SSD controller. Since bit

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:42:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHAO et al.: OVERCLOCKING NAND FLASH MEMORY I/O LINK IN LDPC-BASED SSDs

887

Fig. 4. Illustration of interplane codeword interleaving.

errors from the Flash cell array and data transfer path occur independently as

LLR(xk) = log

1 i=0 1 i=0

p(yk , p(yk ,

vk vk

= =

i)p(vk i)p(vk

= =

i, i,

xk xk

= =

0) .
1)

Because of the binary symmetric Flash model, p(vk = 0) = p(vk = 1) and p(xk = 0) = p(xk = 1), and

Fig. 5. Measured I/O link raw BER under overclocking.
in one plane. This design technique is particularly feasible for applications that dominantly involve coarse-grained data access and hence access multiple codewords from different planes

LLR(xk) = log

1 i=0 1 i=0

p(yk |vk p(yk |vk

= =

i)p(vk i)p(vk

= =

i|xk i|xk

= =

0) .
1)

Since each overclocked signal line has its own individual error characteristics, the conditional probability p(yk|vk = i) for each signal path should be different as well. Let pm (l)(yk|vk = i) denote the probabilities associated with the lth overclocked signal line from the mth Flash memory plane. Moreover, under
different numbers of P/E cycles, the conditional probability p(vk = i|xk = j) for the Flash read channel also varies, i.e., it should be written as p(vk = i|xk = j, c), where c denotes the P/E cycling number. Taking these two issues into account, the
overclocking-aware LLR can be calculated as

LLR(xk) = log

1 i=0
1 i=0

p(ml) (yk |vk pm (l) (yk |vk

= =

i)p(vk i)p(vk

= =

i|xk i|xk

= =

0, c) .
1, c)

concurrently.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATIONS A hardware platform is implemented to measure the overclocked I/O link error characteristics using 20-nm MLC NAND Flash memory chips. Based upon the measurement results, extensive simulations are carried out to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed design strategies.
A. Experiment Setting
The hardware platform is built based upon an Altera Stratix IV GX FPGA PCIe development board connected with a mezzanine board holding several 20-nm MLC NAND Flash memory chips. Because our purpose is to measure the data transfer I/O link error characteristics under overclocking, fresh

Apparently, such overclocking-aware LLR calculation strategy Flash memory chips were used in the experiments in order to

can provide more accurate estimation of LLR information and, eliminate the impact of errors from Flash memory cells. Each

hence, the LDPC code decoding performance.

memory die contains two planes. The Flash memory chips are

ONFI 2.2 compliant and support a synchronous data transfer

B. Interplane Codeword Interleaving

rate up to 166 MB/s as specified by the datasheet. The FPGA device handles all the Flash memory interface and commands

Different planes on each Flash memory die have their own data path to the chip I/O. Therefore, under the same I/O link overclocking, data transfer from various planes can behave differently and hence have different I/O link error characteristics, as experimentally demonstrated later in Section IV. To maximize data write throughput, modern SSDs aim to write data to all the planes within the same die concurrently. Even some latest NAND Flash memory chips require the concurrent write to all the planes. Intuitively, given n planes on each memory die, if each ECC codeword is evenly distributed among

and can configure the Flash memory I/O link clock frequency. The FPGA reads data from Flash memory chips and transfers the data through PCIe interface to the host PC for bit error statistics analysis.
In the experiments, a set of random data is first programmed into some blocks in the Flash memory chip at the normal data rate of 166 MB/s. Then, the data are read out and transferred from the Flash memory chip to the FPGA device at various data rates beyond 166 MB/s to characterize the impact of overclocking on the Flash-to-controller data transfer.

n physical pages in the n planes, the I/O link errors can reach a

more uniform distribution among different ECC codewords and hence improve the LDPC code decoding performance. This is

B. Measurement Results

conceptually similar to the interleaving scheme being widely 1) Raw BER of Overclocked I/O Link: Fig. 5 shows the

used in data communication systems [7]. Such interplane code- measured I/O link raw BER of the two planes under different

word interleaving is illustrated in Fig. 4: Each physical page can clock frequencies. Very few link errors were captured when

accommodate two codewords. After interleaving, each code- the Flash-to-controller data transfer rate is below 237.5 MB/s.

word is partitioned into two segments, each of which is stored The I/O link bit errors become increasingly noticeable as the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:42:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

888

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 6. Histograms of the I/O link per-page error statistics under the overclocking of 275 MB/s. The two separate regions correspond to the two different planes.

Fig. 7. Statistics of measured I/O link bit errors on different I/O bit lines.

data transfer rate further increases. The I/O link BER reaches over 10−3 at the overclocked transfer rate of 275 MB/s. ECCs in modern SSDs can readily handle BERs over 5 × 10−3 and even close to 10−2. Hence, the overclocked I/O transfer rate

can be set as at least 275 MB/s, leading to an over 60% higher

I/O throughput given the specified 166 MB/s I/O throughput.

Therefore, the measurement results reveal a promising potential

of using error-prone I/O link overclocking to improve the sys- Fig. 8. Statistics of error patterns for the two planes. tem speed performance. Fig. 5 also clearly reveals different I/O

link error characteristics between two different planes. Further shows the measurement results under the overclocked I/O

investigation was carried out to exam the difference of I/O link transfer rate of 275 MB/s. The results suggest that plane 0 is error characteristics among different blocks within the same subject to significant uneven probabilities of 1→0 and 0→1 plane, and no noticeable difference was observed. Each plane error events, i.e., over 90% I/O link errors are 1→0 errors.

has its own page register, and all the memory blocks within In comparison, the two error events have almost the same

the same plane share the same I/O circuitry, whereas different probabilities (i.e., around 50%) for plane 1.

planes have different I/O circuitry that may respond to I/O

overclocking differently. This may explain the difference of measured overclocking-induced I/O link error characteristics

C. Simulation Results

between the two difference planes.

Based on the above measurement results, simulations were

2) Per-Page Error Characteristics: Each page of user data carried out to quantitatively evaluate the effectiveness of the

is protected by an individual ECC codeword that is capable of proposed design strategies.

ensuring the overall data storage integrity in the presence of the 1) Overclocking-Aware LLR Calculation: The measure-

worst-case Flash memory raw storage reliability. Therefore, the ment results presented in Section IV-B are used to set the

I/O link error statistics of each individual page is as important parameters of the BAC channel model of overclocked I/O links.

as the overall average I/O link raw BER. Fig. 6 shows the his- In particular, the channel model explicitly takes into account

tograms of measured I/O link errors per page when overclock- of both the error probability difference across planes and data ing the Flash-to-controller I/O link throughput to 275 MB/s. transmission lines and 1→0 versus 0→1 errors asymmetry.

There are two separate distribution peaks in the histograms, Regarding the BSC Flash read channel model, its parameters

each of which is associated with one plane. Inside one plane, vary with P/E cycling. Hence, further measurements were car-

the variation of error statistics per page is insignificant.

ried out to estimate the BSC channel model parameters under

3) Variation Among Data Transmission Lines: NAND Flash different P/E cycles. Accordingly, the overclocking-aware LLR

memory chips have an 8-bit I/O interface, where each bit is can be quantitatively calculated as discussed in Section III-A.

transferred through one single-ended wire. As pointed above, As pointed out in Section III-A, such overclocking-aware LLR

the memory chip I/O connects to the page registers of the calculation can reduce the LDPC code decoding power con-

two planes through different on-chip circuitry, which leads to sumption and reduce the data retransfer rate (i.e., decoding

different I/O link BERs of the two different planes. In addition failure rate). In this brief, a rate-8/9, length-1 kB quasi-cyclic

to the different BERs, our experiments show that the eight data LDPC code is used as a test vehicle, where the column weight

I/O lines also have different error characteristics. Fig. 7 shows of the code parity check matrix is 4. Based upon the simulation

the measurement results at the data transfer rate of 275 MB/s results on the average number of decoding iterations, Fig. 9

for plane 0 and plane 1, respectively. For plane 0, the error shows the estimated decoding power consumption reduction

rate largely varies among the eight lines, whereas the error rate compared with the conventional design practice that does not

remains almost the same for plane 1. Meanwhile, plane 0 is leverage the unique error characteristics of the overclocked I/O

subject to a much higher BER than plane 1 as discussed above. link to improve LDPC code decoding performance. Fig. 10

4) Error Patterns: This study further examined the I/O link compares the data retransfer rate of the proposed design straterror pattern statistics, i.e., the probabilities of 1→0 and 0→1 egy and conventional design practice. Since Flash memory raw

error events, for different I/O lines and different planes. Fig. 8 storage reliability gradually degrades with P/E cycling, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:42:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHAO et al.: OVERCLOCKING NAND FLASH MEMORY I/O LINK IN LDPC-BASED SSDs

889

Fig. 9. Estimated LDPC code decoding power consumption reduction when using the overclocking-aware LLR calculation.

Fig. 11. Estimated LDPC code decoding power consumption reduction when using both techniques.

Fig. 10. Simulated LDPC code decoding failure rate when using the overclocking-aware LLR calculation.
percentage of overclocking-induced I/O link errors gradually

Fig. 12. Simulated LDPC code decoding failure rate when using both techniques.

reduces among the total errors to be handled by LDPC code decoding. Hence, the advantage of the proposed design strategy over conventional design practice is the highest at the early Flash memory lifetime and gradually drops with P/E cycling. As shown in the figures, at the early Flash memory lifetime, the proposed design strategy can reduce the power consumption by 40% and decoding failure rate by up to 114.7 times, i.e., two orders of magnitude, whereas at the late lifetime, it can only reduce the decoding failure rate by 5.8 times and cannot achieve noticeable power saving.
2) Interplane Codeword Interleaving: Simulations were carried out to evaluate the effectiveness of using codeword

I/O links, which are observed from experiments with 20-nm MLC NAND Flash memory chips. The first technique is to dynamically adjust the LLR calculation to improve LDPC code decoding performance, based upon the link error characteristics and Flash memory wear-out dynamics. The second technique is to apply interplane codeword interleaving to more uniformly distribute the errors of overclocked I/O links among different LDPC codewords. Results show that the developed techniques can reduce LDPC code decoding power consumption by 60% and reduce the decoding failure rate by two orders of magnitude.

interleaving to further improve the LDPC code decoding performance. It is clear that codeword interleaving is orthogonal to the overclocking-aware LLR calculation, and hence, they can be used together. Figs. 11 and 12 show the simulation results on decoding power consumption reduction and decoding failure rate, respectively. Because of the significant difference of link error characteristics between the two planes, as shown in our measurement results, the use of interplane codeword interleaving can largely improve the performance, as clearly shown in Figs. 11 and 12.
V. CONCLUSION
This brief has presented two design techniques to enhance the LDPC code decoding for LDPC-based overclocked SSDs. They are directly motivated by unique characteristics of overclocked

REFERENCES
[1] K. Zhao et al., “Over-clocked SSD: Safely running beyond Flash memory chip I/O clock specs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. HPCA, 2014, pp. 536–545.
[2] X. Hu, “LDPC codes for Flash channel,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit, Santa Clara, CA, USA, Aug. 2012.
[3] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Yanagihara, and K. Takeuchi, “Over-10×-extendedlifetime 76%-reduced-error solid-state drives (SSDs) with error-prediction LDPC architecture and error-recovery scheme,” in Proc. IEEE ISSCC, Feb. 2012, pp. 424–426.
[4] Open NAND Flash Interface Specification. [Online]. Available: http://www. onfi.org/
[5] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[6] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[7] B. Lu, X. Wang, and K. Narayanan, “LDPC-based space-time coded OFDM systems over correlated fading channels: Performance analysis and receiver design,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 74–87, Jan. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:42:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

