QUASI-CYCLIC LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON DECODER OPTIMISED PROGRESSIVE EDGE GROWTH FOR SHORT BLOCKS
C. T. Healy and R. C. de Lamare
Department of Electronics, University of York, York, UK

ABSTRACT
A novel construction for quasi-cyclic (QC) regular and irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes based on a modification of the QC Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) algorithm is presented. Edge placement of the PEG-based algorithm is enhanced by use of the sum-product algorithm in the design of the parity-check matrix. The proposed algorithm is highly flexible in block length and rate, in particular when compared with algebraic constructions. The codes constructed by the proposed methods are tested in the AWGN channel and performance improvements are achieved. The proposed QC-LDPC codes provide an inherent trade-off between code performance and encoding/decoding complexity.
Index Terms— Channel coding, Low-density parity-check codes, Iterative decoding
1. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are a class of capacity approaching codes first introduced by Gallager [1]. Key developments leading to practical implementations of LDPC codes include the bipartite graph known as the Tanner graph [2] and the fact that decoding with complexity linear in code length is achievable by means of the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [3]. Irregular LDPC codes, which have a parity-check matrix with varying row and column weights were introduced by Luby et al. [4] and found to perform excellently. Richardson et al. [5] then developed density evolution (DE), an analytical tool for optimising the degree distribution which defines the row and column weights of the irregular parity-check matrix.
A notable limitation of DE for codes of more practical short and medium lengths is the assumption that the decoding neighbourhood of a given variable node (VN) is tree-like [5]. While this assumption is true for codes of infinite length and approximately holds for large block length codes, at short to medium lengths it is not verified. At these lengths short cycles found in the graph of the code have significant negative effect on code performance as a result of their impact on the independence of messages passed in SPA decoding. A number of approaches exist which attempt to lessen the effects of these short cycles. The concept of approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) [6] emphasises the importance of connectivity between short cycles in how they effect code performance. A particularly useful tool in constructing codes with excellent performance is the progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm [7]. This is a greedy edge placement construction algorithm which maximises the length of the cycle created at each edge placement. The PEG algorithm is particularly suited to the design of LDPC codes with short block lengths. It is flexible in length and rate and may be applied, through modifications, to construct codes with particular beneficial structure such as irregular repeat accumulate (IRA) codes [8] which allow efficient encoding and the PEG-Root-Check LDPC codes for the block

fading channel [9], towards which the authors contributed.
The ability to decode LDPC codes with complexity linear in code length is due to the sparsity of the parity-check matrix. In general the generator matrix of an LDPC code is not sparse so encoding is more costly due to the required matrix multiplication. Quasicyclic (QC) LDPC codes allow low-complexity encoding as well as decoding [10]. The generator and parity-check matrices have an imposed structure which may be exploited such that encoding may be performed with shift registers [11] and decoding with SPA decoder may be further parallelised.
In [12] the PEG algorithm is used to construct QC-LDPC codes with improved performance over random QC constructions. The proposed algorithm, termed QC-DO-PEG, relies on the concept of using the decoder to improve the design of the code. This concept was developed previously in [13] for unstructured LDPC codes. This leads leads to overall improved graph connectivity and to an improvement in BER performance.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we formulate the problem and provide the necessary background on QC-LDPC codes and the PEG algorithm. In Section 3 the proposed code design algorithm is presented and in Section 4 the simulation results are given. Section 5 provides concluding remarks.

2. PROBLEM STATEMENT

The goal was to design cost effective LDPC codes for short block lengths. QC-LDPC codes allow linear encoding complexity by use of shift registers but suffer particularly at short block lengths from short cycles. The QC-PEG algorithm uses the tree expansion of the original PEG algorithm to choose the placement positions of the QC sub-matrices in the parity-check matrix of the code in order to increase the girth of the code. The proposed QC-DO-PEG algorithm further improves performance by using the SPA decoder in code construction to optimise edge placement. Essential concepts and notation in QC-LDPC codes and the PEG algorithm are outlined in the following.
QC-LDPC parity-check matrices (PCMs) are structured as

⎡

⎤

A1,1 A1,2 · · · A1,t

HQC

=

⎢⎢⎣⎢

A2,1 ...

A2,2 ...

··· ...

A2,t ...

⎥⎥⎦⎥ ,

(1)

Ac,1 Ac,2 · · · Ac,t

each Aa,b is a Q × Q matrix, either a circulant permutation matrix or a null matrix. In [12] the position of and the first entry in each Aa,b is determined by a modified PEG algorithm which operates on every Q-th column. The remaining entries in Aa,b are found by cyclic shift. In the proposed algorithm the sub-matrix positions
and entry positions within the sub-matrix are determined by the PEG

978-1-4673-0046-9/12/$26.00 ©2012 IEEE

2989

ICASSP 2012

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:40:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

based tree expansion in combination with our proposed decoder optimisation.
In the PEG algorithm and its modification for constructing QCLDPC codes, the neighbourhood to depth l of a VN vj is the set of all CNs in the tree expanded from VN vj with l levels and is denoted Nvlj . The set of all CNs which are not in the neighbourhood of vj at depth l is then denoted Nvlj . The QC-PEG algorithm expands the tree from vj to depth l such that either the cardinality of Nvlj stops increasing or Nvlj = 0 but Nvl+j 1 = 0. In the second case a cycle will be created, and this cycle will have the greatest length possible under the current graph setting.
Dv is defined as the degree sequence of weights of the columns of sub-matrices. Nvmjw,l is the set of CNs in Nvlj which have minimum weight under the current graph setting.
3. PROPOSED QC-DO-PEG CODE DESIGN

Length

Rate

H

Dv

PEG Tree Expansion

ccand = Nvmj w,l(p) Apos,j = Ishift

⎡

Hcand

=

⎢⎣

· ·

· ·

· ·

···

... Apos,j

⎤ ⎦⎥

...

Achosen,j

DOPEG comparison of candidate codes

Fig. 1. Block Diagram of the QC-DO-PEG Construction

With high regularity the QC-PEG algorithm provides a set of candidate check nodes Nvmjw,l with cardinality greater than 1. In this case a CN is chosen at random from this set of minimum weight CNs and the rest of the edges in the sub-matrix are placed by a downward cyclic shift of the first column defined by this choice. In the proposed QC-DO-PEG algorithm the decoder optimisation is used to make a choice when there is more than one CN in the set Nvmjw,l, each corresponding to a distinct circulant permutation matrix in a particular position with a particular cyclic shift in the first column. An intermediate code is constructed for each candidate circulant permutation matrix and the performance of these codes is compared by encoding and operating the SPA decoder in the presence of AWGN for a given number of message vectors and over a given range of signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). The intermediate code with best graph connectivity will provide the best performance. The candidate sub-matrix corresponding to this code is then chosen for placement and the algorithm progresses to the next set of edges for placement. By optimising the connectivity of the cycle created at each placement, the code which is constructed by this method has better overall graph connectivity.
From the set Nvmjw,l the goal is to identify the CN which provides the best performance. For each cg ∈ Nvmjw,l, g = 1 : Length(Nvmj w,l), the candidate code is described by Hcand.:

Hcand. = Bcurr.,1 Bcurr.,2 · · · Bcurr.,j−1 Bcand. (2)
The Q · c × Q matrices Bcurr.,b, b = 1 : j − 1 are the columns of sub-matrices of the code under the current graph setting, exluding the column of interest.

⎡

A1,j

⎤

Bcand.

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣

...
Acircposg ,j ...

⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

(3)

Ac,j

The Aa,j , a = 1 : c / (circposg) are the sub-matrices of the column of interest under the current graph setting. Acircposg,j is the sub-matrix specified by cg. It has a ”1” entry in the position shiftg in its first column, subsequent columns are downward cyclic shifts of
this column. The indices circposg and shif tg are given by:

circposg = g/Q ,

(4)

shiftg = ((g − (circposg − 1) · Q − 1) mod Q) + 1 (5)

The performance of each candidate code is then tested by encod-

ing randomly generated message vectors and decoding in the pres-

ence of AWGN over a range of values of SNR.

3.1. Calculation of Metric of Convergence
For each candidate code, the soft-output bit log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) of the decoder are given by

L(Ti) = L(si) + L(rji),

(6)

j∈Ci

where L(si) is the channel output LLR for the coded bit si and L(rji) is the LLR passed from CN j to VN i in a half-iteration of the SPA algorithm. Ci is the set of CNs connected to VN i. Our goal is to produce a convergence metric CVM for each candidate node CN

cg, g = 1,. . . , X, where X is the cardinality of the set Nsmj w,l. We define the Z × X matrix:

YN

D(h, g) =

(w · |L(Ti)|) ,

(7)

t=1 i=1

w=

1 if sgn(L(Ti)) = si

−1 otherwise

·

(8)

where N is the length of the candidate codeword, Y is the number
of message vectors transmitted for each candidate code at each SNR point and h indicates the SNR point, h = 1, . . . , Z and Z is the total number of SNR points. The convergence metric CVM(g) for candidate CN cg is then the overall average sum for each candidate at each SNR point.

3.2. Pseudocode for the QC-DO-PEG Algorithm
In Algorithm 1 the pseudocode for the proposed code construction algorithm is presented. The · operator indicates the smallest integer greater than the value it operates on. The Length( . ) function is the cardinality of the set it operates on.
From Algorithm 1, it can be seen that the proposed construction differs from the QC-PEG algorithm in steps 21 and 22. Step 21 will be the major contributor to the increase in complexity. This step involves a matrix inversion to derive the candidate encoder, and for each test message transmitted a matrix multiplication and use of the SPA decoder. These steps are required for each candidate at each edge placement. As a reference, for the codes presented in Fig. 2 the MATLAB tic/toc functions returned construction times of approximately 3 seconds and 348 seconds for the QC-PEG and

2990
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:40:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

QC-DO-PEG constructions, respectively. For this reason the construction method is viable for short to medium length codes only. While this may seem to be an excessive increase in complexity, it should be noted that code construction is in most cases carried out off-line and in transmission the codes cost no more in terms of complexity than a QC-PEG code or any QC-LDPC code with the same block length and sub-matrix size.

4. SIMULATION RESULTS

We consider irregular rate R

=

1 2

codes with maximum VN degree

8, from the variable node degree distribution

λ1(x) = 0.2703x + 0.2973x2 + 0.4324x7,

(9)

which was derived from the DE optimal degree distribution pre-

sented in [5] Table II, subject to the constraint imposed by the QC

structure of the codes to be generated and the additional constraint

that the number of weight-2 variable nodes be less than the total

number of check nodes. This last constraint ensures that no cycles

exist which are composed entirely of weight-2 nodes, a particularly

damaging scenario in terms of performance under SPA decoding.

BPSK modulation over the AWGN channel was considered. The

log-domain SPA decoder was used in the receiver and at least 80

block errors were gathered per point in each BER plot. For compar-

ison, a random irregular QC-LDPC construction and the QC-PEG

construction of [12] were used. The random construction consists of

randomly choosing both sub-matrix position and the position of the

first entry within the sub-matrix. The code produced then had length

4 cycles removed, as is standard practice with randomly generated

codes.

In Fig. 2 the BER performance of codes of length 256, rate R =

1 2

and

with

sub-matrix

size

Q

=

8

is

compared.

In

Fig.

3

the

BER

performance of codes of length 512, R

=

1 2

and with sub-matrix size

Q = 16 is compared. For both Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, as expected, the

two PEG-based constructions outperform the random construction

by a considerable margin. This is due to the large number of short

cycles in the graph of the random QC code and the fact that there

is no restriction on cycles formed of only weight-2 variable nodes.

It is seen that the two PEG-based codes perform almost exactly as

well in the low SNR region. The benefits of decoder optimisation in

the QC-DO-PEG are seen in the error floor region of the plots. Since

the cycles created by the QC-PEG and QC-DO-PEG are, on average,

of equal length this gain is a result of the improved connectivity of

cycles in the graph of the QC-DO-PEG code. This is consistent with

the results presented in [6] concerning error floor performance.

For the QC-DO-PEG as for the QC-PEG code it was found that

BER performance improved as the sub-matrix size decreased, with

the limiting case of Q = 1 corresponding to the original PEG al-

gorithm. This provides a trade-off between code performance and

encoding/decoding complexity, with smaller Q allowing more free-

dom in the QC-PEG and QC-DO-PEG to produce better performing

codes and larger Q restricting the gains of the PEG tree expansion

while lowering encoding and decoding complexity.

5. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper a construction method for regular and irregular QCLDPC codes was presented. The codes generated by this method outperform those of [12] which were shown to perform favourably when compared to both randomly and algebraically constructed LDPC codes. The QC-LDPC codes generated by this method are

Algorithm 1 QC-DO-PEG

1. for j = 1 : t do

2. for k = 1 : Dv(j) do

3.

if k == 0

&

j

>

N 2

then

4.

Choose candidate cind at random from the set Nvmj w,l.

5.

for m = 0 : Q − 1 do

6.

circpos = ind/Q

7.

shift = ((ind − (circpos − 1) · Q + m − 1)

mod Q) + 1

8.

Place

edge

in

the

position

(c((circpos−1)·Q)+shif t, vj·Q+m)

9.

end for

10.

else

11.

Expand the tree from the VN vj to depth l s.t. Nvlj stops

expanding or Nvlj = 0 but Nvlj = 0.

12.

if j < c + 1 then

13.

Choose candidate cind at random from the set

Nvmj w,l.

14.

for m = 0 : Q − 1 do

15.

circpos = ind/Q

16.

shift = ((ind − (circpos − 1) · Q + m − 1)

mod Q) + 1

17.

Place

edge

in

the

position

(c((circpos−1)·Q)+shif t, vj·Q+m)

18.

end for

19.

else

20.

for p = 1 : Length(Nvmj w,l) do

21.

Form the PCM Hcand. as H under the cur-

rent graph setting with a circulant permutation

matrix in the position defined by its first en-

try (ccand., vj·Q+1) where ccand. = Nvmj w,l(p). Use Hcand. to encode, decode in the presence of
AWGN using log-domain SPA decoder with soft

output. Compute convergence metrics CVM as

described in Section 3.1.

22.

Identify CN cind = arg max(CVM(g)).

g

23.

for m = 0 : Q − 1 do

24.

circpos = ind/Q

25.

shift = (1+(ind−(circpos−1)·Q+m−1)

mod Q) + 1

26.

Place edge in the position

(c((circpos−1)·Q)+shif t, vj·Q+m)

27.

end for

28.

end for

29.

end if

30.

end if

31. end for

32. end for

2991
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:40:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BER BER

10−2 10−3 10−4

QC − Random QC−PEG QC−DO−PEG

10−5

10−6

10−7

10−8

10−9

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

SNR (dB)

Fig. 2. Performance of codes of length 256, rate 1/2, Q = 8

10−1

QC − Random

QC−PEG

10−2

QC−DO−PEG

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

SNR(dB)

Fig. 3. Performance of codes of length 512, rate 1/2, Q = 16

capable of more efficient encoding than unstructured LDPC codes while remaining more flexible in length and rate than those codes produced by algebraic constructions. The construction method presented is more computationally costly than that presented in [12] but this cost is seen to provide definite improvement in BER performance. For this improvement there is no extra cost in the implementation of these codes over the previous QC-PEG codes.
6. REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 20, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[3] D.J. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399– 431, Mar. 1999.
[4] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” Proc. 29th Annual ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, pp. 150–159, 1997.
[5] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density paritycheck codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619– 637, Feb. 2001.
[6] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[7] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 2005.
[8] Junfeng Hu and Hailin Zhang, “Construction of short block length ira codes based on modified ipeg algorithm,” in Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing, 2008. WiCOM ’08. 4th International Conference on, oct. 2008, pp. 1 –4.

[9] A.G.D. Uchoa, C. Healy, R.C. de Lamare, and R.D. Souza, “Design of LDPC codes based on progressive edge growth techniques for block fading channels,” Communications Letters, IEEE, vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 1221 –1223, november 2011.
[10] M.P. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[11] Zongwang Li, Lei Chen, Lingqi Zeng, S. Lin, and W.H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71 – 81, jan. 2006.
[12] Zongwang Li and B.V.K.V. Kumar, “A class of good quasicyclic low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” Signals, Systems and Computers, 2004. Conference Record of the Thirty-Eighth Asilomar Conference on, vol. 2, pp. 1990– 1994, nov. 2004.
[13] C.T. Healy and R.C. de Lamare, “Decoder-optimised progressive edge growth algorithms for the design of LDPC codes with low error floors,” Communications Letters, IEEE, to appear.

2992
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:40:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

