IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2012

1825

Construction of One-Coincidence Sequence Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes of Large Girth
Jen-Fa Huang, Chun-Ming Huang, and Chao-Chin Yang

Abstract—One approach for designing the one-coincidence sequence (OCS) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes of large girth is investigated. These OCS-LDPC codes are quasi-cyclic, and their parity-check matrices are composed of circulant permutation matrices. Generally, the cycle structures in these codes are determined by the shift values of circulant permutation matrices, and the existence of cycles in the corresponding Tanner graph is governed by certain cycle-governing equations (CGEs). Therefore, finding the proper shift values is the key point to increase the girth of these codes. In this paper, we provide an effective method to systematically find out the CGEs for these codes of girth 6, 8, and 10, respectively. Then, one less computation-intensive algorithm is used to generate the proper shift values for constructing the OCS-LDPC codes of large girth. Simulation results show that significant gains in signal-to-noise ratio over an additive white-Gaussian noise channel can be achieved by increasing the girth of the OCS-LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Cycle-governing equations (CGEs), girth, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, one-coincidence sequence (OCS), quasi-cyclic (QC).
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were originally invented by Gallager [1] and resurrected in the mid1990s with the work of MacKay and Neal [2] and Alon and Luby [3]. Based on methods of construction, LDPC codes can be divided into two categories: random codes [1]–[4] and structured codes [5]–[11], [14]. It is well known that the performance of randomly constructed LDPC codes closely approaches the Shannon limit for the additive white-Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [4]. However, the lack of mathematical structure in the parity-check matrices of the random LDPC codes leads to increased encoding complexity and prohibitively large storage requirements [5]. These drawbacks of random LDPC codes can be overcome by using the structured LDPC codes, but at the expense of performance degradation. This performance loss may
Manuscript received February 13, 2009; revised September 27, 2011; accepted September 28, 2011. Date of current version February 29, 2012. This work was supported in part by the Kun Shan University under Project Grant NSC 98-2221-E-168-004-MY3 from the National Science Council, and in part by the Advanced Optoelectronic Technology Center, National Cheng Kung University, under Project Grant NSC 100-2221-E-006-157 from the National Science Council of Taiwan.
J.-F. Huang is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan (e-mail: huajf@ee.ncku.edu.tw).
C.-M. Huang is with the Chung-Shan Institute of Science and Technology, Lungtan 325, Taiwan (e-mail: iamandy@seed.net.tw).
C.-C. Yang is with the Department of Electro-Optical Engineering, Kun Shan University, Tainan 71003, Taiwan (e-mail: ccyang@mail.ksu.edu.tw).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2011.2173246

be attributed to that structured LDPC codes introduce various

constraints on the set of code parameters influencing the perfor-

mance of belief propagation decoding [12].

Structured codes can be divided into two main categories. The

first category is based on finite geometries [5], [6] and the other

category is based on the circulant permutation matrices [7]–[9].

Generally, a -regular LDPC code is defined as a code rep-

resented by a parity-check matrix in which each column has

weight and each row has weight . In this paper, we focus

our attention on classes of LDPC codes, which are derived from

the one-coincidence sequence (OCS) families [8]. These LDPC

codes are quasi-cyclic (QC), and their parity-check matrices are

composed of circulant permutation matrices. For brevity, these

QC-LDPC codes are named OCS-LDPC codes in the rest of this

paper.

Recently, to improve the performance, several classes of

structured LDPC codes with moderate and large value of girth

have been proposed [9]–[16]. In [9], Fossorier first derived

the simple necessary and sufficient conditions for a family of

QC-LDPC codes to have girth larger than 6 or 8. Subsequently,

codes with larger girth were constructed with the aid of com-

puter search strategies, which relies on randomly generating

the integers until the conditions of theorem are met. In [15],

conditions for girth 4, 6, 8, and 10 in Tanner (3, 5) QC-LDPC

codes are expressed in a simple polynomial equations in the

15th root of unity in . Theoretically, the conditions for other

Tanner

QC-LDPC codes with

can also be

analyzed. However, since there is no general formula, all the

polynomial equations have to be derived again when the value

of or changes.

In [10], one QC-LDPC code of large girth is constructed by

modifying the progressive edge growth (PEG) graph with a QC

constraint. To construct a PEG QC-LDPC code with circulant

size

, the variable nodes and check nodes are first di-

vided into small groups with each group has nodes. Then,

for each variable node group, it expands the tree originating in

the first variable node in the group up to depth under the

current graph setting such that the cardinality of stops in-

creasing but is less than the size of check nodes, or

but

. Here denotes the set of all check nodes

reached by a tree spreading from the variable node with depth

, and is the complementary set of . When multiple choices are possible, the algorithm selects the candidate that has the smallest degree under the current setting. Next, the edges

of other variable nodes in the same group can be determined

by the circulant constraint. Subsequently, one PEG QC-LDPC

code with girth

can be obtained through exhaustively

searching for the optimum sets.

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:39:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1826

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2012

In [12], one approach to design the array codes of large girth

is by selecting certain block-row and block-column labels from

the original parity-check matrix to avoid the short cycles. In

general, the existence of cycles in the Tanner graph of an array

code is governed by certain cycle-governing equations (CGEs).

Therefore, one array code with girth can be constructed by se-

lecting suitable block-row and block-column labels, which do

not contain solutions to the CGEs for cycles less than . By

fixing the block-row labels (e.g.,

in [12]), the CGEs

for array codes of different girth are obtained via an exhaustive

computer-aided analysis. Next, one algorithm is used to find the

block-column labels that contain no solutions to these CGEs.

By this way, an array code of large girth can be constructed.

However, these found CGEs cannot be directly applied to other

different block-row labels. In other words, the previous proce-

dure must be done again when the block-row labels change.

Though, the aforementioned methods can be used to design

specific QC-LDPC codes of large girth, but they are not efficient

enough due to the lack of general expression. In this paper, we

propose an efficient method for increasing the girth of the circu-

lant-permutation-matrix-based LDPC codes, such as the Tanner

LDPC codes [7], array codes [17], and OCS-LDPC codes [8].

Since the cycle structures in these LDPC codes are determined

by the shift values of circulant permutation matrices, finding the

proper shift values is the key point to increase the girth of these

codes. The proposed method can be separated into two steps.

First, one algorithm based on the graphic method is used to sys-

tematically find out all the common CGEs for these LDPC

codes of different girth. Second, one less computation-intensive

algorithm is used to generate the proper shift values for con-

structing these codes of large girth. For clarity of exposition,

the OCS-LDPC codes with column-weight 3 are used as an ex-

emplification. Several OCS-LDPC codes of different girth and

code rates are constructed. Simulation results show that a signif-

icant performance improvement, over the AWGN channel, can

be obtained by increasing the girth of the OCS-LDPC codes.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II

introduces the construction of the OCS-LDPC codes. Three dif-

ferent OCS families are presented, and each OCS family deter-

mines a particular family of QC-LDPC codes. In Section III,

we first introduce a graphic method to systematically find out

all the cycles. Then, the relationship between the cycles and the

CGEs is presented. Finally, an effective algorithm is used to gen-

erate the proper shift values for constructing the OCS-LDPC

codes of large girth. Section IV shows the simulation results

of the OCS-LDPC codes of different girth and different code

rates. These simulation results are also compared with competi-

tive codes of similar code rates. Section V concludes the paper.

First, we construct two sequences,

and

, where the ranges of and depend on

the OCS family. Note that

and

if . In

general, the parity-check matrix of the OCS-LDPC codes can

be represented as follows:

...

...

...

...

(1)

where is a identity matrix with rows cyclically shifted

to the right by positions. Hence, the resulting , which has

ones in each column and ones in each row, represents one

-regular LDPC code of block length

. Due to linear

dependence among the rows of , the code rate is

.

The shift value of the

th identity matrix inside can

be calculated from

by fixing some parameters,

where

is the generating equation of the OCS family.

Notice that each OCS family has its unique generating equation

and determines a particular family of QC-LDPC codes.

In the following, three different OCS families are presented.

1) Modified Welch–Costas (MWC) Sequences: Let be a

prime, and is the primitive element of

. One OCS family

modified from the Welch–Costas sequences [18] is proposed,

and its generating equation is shown in (2) at the bottom of the

page, where

, and

.

2) Quadratic Congruential Sequences: We have proposed a

class of QC-LDPC codes from the quadratic congruential se-

quences in [8]. Here, is a prime, and the generating equation

for the quadratic congruential sequences is

(3)

where

, and , , ,

.

3) Shifted Prime (SP) Sequences: Let be a prime. The gen-

erating equation for the SP sequences [19] can be represented

as

(4)

where , ,

. In fact, the QC-LDPC

codes derived from the SP sequences can be viewed as array

codes if is zero.

Since the cycles of short length may degrade the performance

of LDPC codes, it is necessary to ensure that the Tanner graph

of the LDPC codes is free of cycles of length 4. As in [9], a

cycle of length in a QC-LDPC code is expressed as a block

sequence:

II. CONSTRUCTION OF OCS-LDPC CODES

In this section, we introduce a simple method to design

the

-regular QC-LDPC codes from the OCS families.

(5)

where

stands for the th row and th column block

of , and the semicolon between

and

can

mod

mod

(2)

mod

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:39:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF ONE-COINCIDENCE SEQUENCE QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES OF LARGE GIRTH

1827

be considered as the block

. Certainly,

and

for (5) to become a valid block sequence for a cycle.

In addition, the necessary and sufficient condition for the ex-

istence of the cycle of length can be represented as [9]

h) if i) if

, ,

,

, and

(15)

,

, and

(6)

(16)

where

,

and

. In the following, we

prove that the OCS-LDPC code is free of cycles of length 4.

Theorem: The Tanner graph of the proposed parity-check

matrix has a girth greater than or equal to 6.

Proof: Let be the calculating result of any four shift

values in as follows:

(7)

where

,

and

,

.

From (6), it is well known that the necessary and sufficient

condition for the existence of the cycle of length 4 is .

1) For constructed by the MWC-OCS family:

a) if

,

and

,

Because is the primitive element of

,

,

and

, the values of

obtained from (8), (9), (10), (11), (12), (13), (14), (15),

(16) will never be equal to zero. Therefore, the girth of the

MWC-OCS type of LDPC code is greater than or equal to

6.

2) For constructed by the QC-OCS family:

(17)

Since

,

and

,

(17) will never be zero. So the girth of the QC-OCS type

of LDPC code is greater than or equal to 6.

3) For constructed by the SP-OCS family:

(18)

b) if

,

c) if

,

d) if

,

,

, and , and
, and

Because

,

, (18) will never be zero. The

girth of the SP-OCS type of LDPC code is greater than or

(8)

equal to 6.

From the previous discussion, we prove that the girth of the

, parity-check matrix constructed from these three OCS fami-

lies is greater than or equal to 6.

Example 1: A (3, 5) MWC-OCS Family of LDPC

(9) Code.

: Let

,

. First, we con-

, struct two sequences

and . Note that

and are randomly selected from GF(181), and

,

(10)

if

. By using (1) and (2) with fixed parameters

,

, we can form the following parity-check matrix:

(19) (11)

e) if and

,

,

f) if

,

,

and

, where

is a 181 181 identity matrix with rows shifted

cyclically to the right by positions. is a 543 905 ma-

trix and describes a (3, 5)-regular LDPC code with code rate

(12)

. (By using Gaussian elimination,

we know that has a rank of 541).

,

III. OCS-LDPC CODES OF GIRTH 8, 10, AND 12

(13) In this section, we propose a strategy for constructing the

OCS-LDPC codes of girth larger than 6. It can be separated

g) if

,

,

, and

into two parts: First, we provide a method to systematically

find out all the CGEs of a

OCS-LDPC code with a given

(14) girth. Second, a less computation-intensive algorithm, such as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:39:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1828

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2012

Fig. 1. Relation between the cycles, loops, and types of one group.

the greedy search algorithm, is used to generate the proper se-

quences

and

for con-

structing the OCS-LDPC codes of large girth.

P5): In one group, the CISs of the th loop of each type are the same. It means that

A. Relation Between the Cycles, Loops, and CGEs

First, we classify the cycles into distinct groups, types and

loops based on the row index sequences (RISs) and column

index sequences (CISs), as shown in Fig. 1. Here, we use

and

to represent the RIS and CIS of the loop belonging

to the th type in group , respectively. The lengths of

and

are both if the length of the cycle is .

Let and denote the RISs of any two cycles. A loop can

be viewed as the set of equivalent cycles, and any two cycles are

said to be equivalent if their RISs satisfy either of the following

two conditions.

P1): Two cycles are equivalent if their RISs are reversed

and cyclically shifted:

for

, and

.

P2): Two cycles are equivalent if their RISs are cyclically

shifted:

for

,

and

.

The relationship between the loops and types in the same

group is defined as follows:

P3): A group consists of different types whose RISs can

be calculated from another. The RISs of the loops be-

longing to any two different types satisfy the following

property:

(22)

In addition, we observe that some loops of one type are

column-permuted versions of each other. These loops have the

same RIS but different order of the CIS. Without loss of gener-

ality, we define the loop with

and

as the basic loop. If a basic loop passes through distinct

columns, this basic loop has

different column-per-

muted loops in the same type. Notice that the value of equals

to the number of different elements in

.

Example 2: Is One Basic Loop With RIS

and CIS

: In this case, the basic loop passes

three distinct columns (i.e.,

). Therefore, by permuting

the order of , the other

column-permuted loops

in the same type can be obtained. The RISs and CISs

of these loops are

,

,

,

,

,

, respectively.

Therefore, by using (6), we can derive one CGE

from one loop as

(23)

where

,

, and

.

(20) For brevity, (22) is rewritten as

P4): Loops which have a common RIS, but different CIS

are grouped in one type. Their RISs are the same:

(24)

(21) where

.

Therefore, we can use

,

to rep- Because all the loops can be classified into basic loops and

resent the RISs of these types in group . Since

column-permuted loops, the CGE derived from the basic loop is

can be used to generate the other

sequences as men- named basic cycle-governing equation (BCGE) hereafter. Then,

tioned in P3, we define

as the root sequence of group by permuting the order of the CIS, the other

CGEs,

.

that are derived from the column-permuted versions of this basic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:39:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF ONE-COINCIDENCE SEQUENCE QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES OF LARGE GIRTH

1829

loop, can be obtained. In a word, each BCGE has

per-

muted versions of CGEs.

Furthermore, from P3 and P5, we know that the CGEs derived

from the loops of any two different types in one group,

and

, have the relationship shown in (25) at the bottom

of the page, where

,

and

.

B. Finding Out the CGEs of a

OCS-LDPC Code

Here, we provide an algorithm to find all the CGEs of the

OCS-LDPC code as follows. First, we calculate the root

sequences of different groups. Second, the CISs are calculated

to find the basic loops of the first type in each group. Then, from

P3 and P5, the basic loops of the other

types can be

calculated through the basic loops of the first type. Finally, these

found basic loops can be converted to the BCGEs by using (24).

Then, by permuting the order of the CISs of these BCGEs, all

the CGEs can be obtained.

In the following, the CGE search algorithm is described in

detail:

Step 1. Calculating the Root Sequences of Different Groups:

Let

be the root sequence of the group , and it can be

found by the following.

a) Let

, for

b) We can obtain the other

elements of

by

selecting

for

, where

and

.

c) Eliminate the root sequences which are cyclically shifted

or reverse shifted versions of another root sequence, as

described in P1 or P2. The root sequences which satisfy

P3 describing the different types of one group, also will

be omitted.

d) Let

and

denote two different root sequences,

which only pass through two rows. Eliminate the root se-

quence

if

for

,

and

.

Example 3: Finding the Root Sequences in a

OCS-

LDPC Code of Girth 8: First, let

. The girth of

the code is 8, so the length of

is 4.

1) From and , we can obtain the following sequences:

,

,

,

,

and

.

2) From P3 and P1, we know that

is

the reverse shifted versions of

. Thus,

should be eliminated. Similarly,

and

can also be omitted.

3) From , since

for

,

is omitted.

Therefore, for a

OCS-LDPC code of girth 8,

we find two root sequences,

and

.

Step 2. Finding Out All the Basic Loops of the First Type: As

stated previously, a loop can be represented by the RIS

and CIS

. A loop can also be understood as a series of

directed links. The row index of the origin of a link is defined

by

, and the row index of the destination is

, where

and

. The CIS

describes the order of the columns which a loop passes

through.

For a given root sequence, the basic loops of the first type can

be found through the following graphic method:

a) We draw squares which are arranged in rows and

columns. One link connects two squares in the same

column. The square which is the origin of one directed

link will be drawn black and the destination white. A black

square cannot be the destination of another link and a

white square cannot be the origin of another link.

b) Let

,

. We can obtain the

other

elements of

by selecting

for

, where

and

.

Obeying these rules, all possible basic loops of the first type

can be found. Then, from P3 and P5, the basic loops of the other

types can be obtained. Note that some columns may not

be used when setting the links. Since the resulting graph looks

like the chessboard of the game Othello, we use Othello graph

to denote the graph generated by the algorithm in the rest of this

paper.

Step 3. Deriving the CGEs From the Found Loops: Finally,

these found basic loops can be converted to the BCGEs by using

(24). Then, by permuting the order of the CISs of these BCGEs,

all the CGEs of the

OCS-LDPC code with a given girth

can be obtained

Therefore, for one OCS-LDPC code with a given girth,

all the CGEs can be efficiently obtained through the CGE search

algorithm. Actually, from the Othello graph, we observe that

five special cases occur while generating the CGEs for the OCS-

LDPC codes. In the following, these special cases are described

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:39:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(25)

1830

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2012

Case 3: The loops satisfying the following conditions will have the same CGEs.
a) is even. b) The links of the corresponding Othello graphs only pass
through two rows. c) The RISs and CISs of these loops satisfy both P3 and P5,
respectively. Here, we show an example to explain the Case 3 in detail. Fig. 2(f) and (g) shows the Othello graphs of two different loops satisfying the aforementioned conditions. By using (4) and (24), the corresponding CGEs are

Fig. 2. Othello graphs of some loops, which satisfy the conditions of one of those five special cases.

in detail and the SP-OCS family of LDPC codes is used as an

exemplification.

Case 1: In one group, for a given basic loop in type #0, we

can obtain the other

basic loops of different types from P3

and P5. Total BCGEs can be obtained from these basic loops,

and each BCGE has its permuted versions of CGEs. However,

the CGEs derived from each of these BCGEs are the same, if

the basic loop in type #0 satisfies the following conditions:

a) The number of different rows, which are origins of the

links, is equal to half of the girth.

b)

, for

.

Here, we give an example satisfying the conditions in Case

1 as follows. For a given root sequence (0, 1, 2), Fig. 2(a)–(c)

shows the Othello graphs of the basic loops in type #0, #1, and

#2 of one group, respectively. In this case, Fig. 2(b) and (c) can

be also viewed as the column-permuted version of Fig. 2(a). It

means that the BCGE derived from the basic loop in type #1

or #2 is equivalent to one of the CGEs, which are just column-

permuted version of the BCGE of type #0. Since the CGEs of

type #0 include the BCGEs of the other two types, the BCGEs

of type #1 and #2 can be omitted.

Case 2: The loops that only pass through two different rows

and two different columns can be omitted.

An example is shown in Fig. 2(d) and (e). The CGEs derived

from these two loops are

Because

if , these two CGEs can be simplified

to

. These two CGEs are the same and only related to the

sequence

.

Case 4: In one group, the BCGEs are only related to the

sequence

, if the basic loops satisfying the

following conditions:

a) is even.

b) The links of the corresponding Othello graphs only pass

through two columns.

In the following, an example is used to demonstrate the Case

4. Fig. 2(h) and (i) shows the Othello graphs of two different

basic loops satisfying the above conditions. By using (4) and

(24), the corresponding BCGEs are

Since

if , these two BCGEs are only related to

the sequence

, and their permuted versions

of CGEs can be omitted. This is because that the BCGE and its

permuted versions of CGEs are the same.

Case 5: The

OCS-LDPC code has girth at most 10, if

the basic loop satisfying the following conditions:

a)

and

.

b) The Othello graph is composed of two discrete

four-cycle-loops. Notice that no common rows and

columns are shared between these two four-cycle-loops.

Here, we show an example to explain the Case 5 in detail.

Fig. 2(j) and (k) shows the Othello graphs of two different loops

satisfying the aforementioned conditions. The corresponding

CGEs are

(26)

Since

and

,

if , these two CGEs will never

have solutions and can be omitted.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:39:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(27)

HUANG et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF ONE-COINCIDENCE SEQUENCE QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES OF LARGE GIRTH
TABLE I BCGES FOR THE (3; k) OCS-LDPC CODES OF GIRTH 6, 8, AND 10

1831

Because

and

if

and

, we know

that the values of

in (25) and (26)

are all constants, where , , ,

. Thus, both (26)

and (27) have one incongruent solution, respectively.

Note that the aforementioned five cases also apply to the

MWC-OCS and QC-OCS families of LDPC codes.

C. Constructing the OCS-LDPC Code of Large Girth

To construct one OCS-LDPC code of girth , all the CGEs

for girth less than must have no solutions. Therefore, the se-

quences

and

can be

designed as follows.

Step 1: First, we select an arbitrary sequence

, which must contain no solutions

to the CGEs satisfying the conditions in Case 4. Then,

all the CGEs for girth less than can be simplified to Fig. 3. Othello graphs of the basic loops for the (3, k) OCS-LDPC code of girth the equations, which are only related to the sequence 8.

.

Step 2: A greedy search algorithm is used to generate the 1)

: Only one group with root sequence (0, 1, 2)

sequence

, which contains no solutions is obtained from the CGE search algorithm. From the Othello

to all these equations.

graph, only one basic loop with

and

In general, a typical greedy search algorithm starts with an

is found in type #0. Because this basic loop satisfies

initial seed sequence that satisfied the given constraints, and the conditions in Case 1, only one BCGE for girth 6 is listed in

progressively extends the sequence by adding new terms that Table I.

continue to maintain the constraints. The length of the seed 2)

: Through the CGE search algorithm, we ob-

sequence is

, where is the least number of variables serve that the loops of the

OCS-LDPC code of girth 8 can

among the CGEs. Because the desired girth for one QC-LDPC be classified into two groups. The root sequences of these two

code is at least 6, the least number is 3. It means that the groups are (0, 1, 0, 1) and (0, 1, 0, 2), respectively. From the

length of the seed sequence is 2 (e.g.,

). Through the Othello graphs, we know that both group #0 and group #1 have

greedy search algorithm, the sequence

can three basic loops in type #0 as shown in Fig. 3. From P3 and P5,

be quickly obtained. Subsequently, the OCS-LDPC codes of total eighteen basic loops can be obtained. However, Fig. 3(a)

large girth can be easily constructed from these two sequences, satisfies the conditions in Case 2, Fig. 3(b) and (c) satisfies the

and

.

conditions in Case 3. Therefore, only 11 BCGEs for girth 8 are

D. Example: Constructing the Large Girth

OCS-LDPC Codes of

listed in Table I.

3)

: Similarly, only one group with root se-

quence (0, 1, 0, 1, 2) is observed in this case. From the Othello

Obeying the aforementioned steps, the

OCS-LDPC graphs, six basic loops are found in type #0 as shown in Fig. 4.

codes of large girth can be easily constructed. For clarity, Thus, from P3 and P5, total 18 BCGEs for girth 10 can be ob-

we take the OCS-LDPC codes with column-weight 3 as an tained and listed in Table I.

exemplification. First, we utilize the CGE search algorithm to Each BCGE has

permuted versions of CGEs, where

find the BCGEs for the

OCS-LDPC code of girth 6, 8, equals to the number of different elements in . Therefore,

and 10, respectively.

by permuting the order of the CISs of the BCGEs in Table I, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:39:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1832

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2012

Fig. 4. Othello graphs of the basic loops for the (3, k) OCS-LDPC code of girth 10.

m ; m ; ; m n ; n ; ; n SEQUENCES f

TABLE II

...

g AND f

...

g USED FOR CONSTRUCTING THE OCS-LDPC CODES OF DIFFERENT VALUES OF GIRTH

CGEs for the

OCS-LDPC code of girth 6, 8, and 10 can Example 4: A (3, 5) QC-OCS Family of LDPC Codes With

be obtained.

,

: Because the desired girth is 8, the gener-

To construct one

OCS-LDPC code with girth , the ated sequences must have no solutions to the CGEs for girth 6.

sequences

and

must have no From Table I, we know that the BCGE for girth 6 is

solutions to the CGEs for girth less than . Here we first select

one arbitrary sequence

, which has no solutions

(28)

to the CGEs satisfying the conditions in Case 4. For simplicity,

the seed sequence

is set to the smallest two integers of By using (3) and

,

the OCS family. Then, the sequence

can be as

, (28) can be rewritten

quickly generated through the greedy search algorithm. Because many solutions can be found through the algorithm, we only list

(29)

the sequence

, where

for

Here, we select the sequence

.

and is the minimum integer greater than .

Thus, (29) becomes

Notice that all the OCS-LDPC codes used in this paper are

constructed by fixing the parameters

,

(30)

in (2)–(4). In the following examples, some OCS-LDPC codes,

that have the same size of identity matrix

but different Notice that this BCGE has

permuted versions of

girth (8, 10, and 12), are presented.

CGEs as follows:

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:39:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF ONE-COINCIDENCE SEQUENCE QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES OF LARGE GIRTH

1833

Fig. 5. BER performances for the OCS-LDPC codes, PEG QC-LDPC code, and random LDPC code.
TABLE III ESTIMATED MINIMUM DISTANCES OF THE (3, 5)-REGULAR OCS-LDPC CODES USING THE ANC APPROACH

,

,

for these OCS-LDPC codes are listed in Table II. These results

, and

.

are compared with competitive codes [2], [5], [6], [10] of sim-

The seed sequence

is set to

. Through ilar rates and block lengths for a binary phase-shift keying mod-

the greedy search algorithm, we obtain the sequence ulated AWGN channel with SNR

. In all cases, the iter-

.

ative sum–product algorithm (SPA) is used for decoding, and

Example 5: A (3, 5) SP-OCS Family of LDPC Codes With

,

: It is known that the generated sequences must

have no solutions to the CGEs for girth 6 and 8, respectively. Be-

cause the sequence

is one solution of

the CGE for girth 8, it can not be used in this case. Thus, we set

the sequence

to

. Similar to Example 4,

all the necessary CGEs can be obtained from the BCGEs listed

in Table I. The seed sequence is

. Through the

algorithm, the sequence

is obtained.

the maximum number of decoding iterations is 50. The SPA de-

coder stops when either a valid codeword is found or the max-

imum number of decoding iterations is reached.

Fig. 5 shows the performance curves for OCS-LDPC codes

of different values of girth. The prime modulus used for con-

struction of these codes is

. For comparison, a random

LDPC code [2] and the PEG QC-LDPC code [10] are also con-

structed. All these codes are (3, 5)-regular LDPC codes with

length

and code rate of about 0.4. In this figure,

it can clearly observe that the superior improvement in water-

fall performance can be achieved by increasing the girth of the

Example 6: A (3, 5) MWC-OCS Family of LDPC Codes OCS-LDPC codes. As girth increases to 12, the BER curves

With

,

: First, we set the sequence of these three OCS-LDPC codes perform as well as the PEG

. To construct a MWC-OCS family QC-LDPC code and approach to that of the random LDPC code.

of LDPC codes of girth 12, the generated sequences must have The BER performances of the QC-OCS and SP-OCS LDPC

no solutions to the CGEs for girth 6, 8, and 10, respectively. codes are almost the same. For

, the MWC-OCS

Similarly, the necessary CGEs can be obtained from the BCGEs LDPC codes outperform the QC-OCS and SP-OCS LDPC

listed in Table I. The seed sequence

is set to

. codes. We conjecture that the OCS-LDPC codes constructed

Then, the sequence

is from the MWC family have larger minimum distance than that

obtained from the algorithm.

from the QC and SP families. To verify this point, we adopt the

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

approximately nearest codewords (ANC) approach in [20] to compute the minimum distances of these OCS-LDPC codes.

In this section, we present the simulation results of various Table III shows the estimated minimum distances of these

OCS-LDPC codes with different block lengths and rates. The codes using the ANC approach. It is shown that the QC-OCS

sequences

and

used and SP-OCS LDPC codes with the same values of girth have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:39:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1834

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2012

Fig. 6. Comparison of OCS-LDPC codes with random LDPC code and PEG QC-LDPC code.

Fig. 7. BER performances for the random LDPC code, PEG QC-LDPC code, OCS-LDPC codes, and BIBD-LDPC code.

the same minimum distances. The MWC-OCS LDPC codes All these LDPC codes have column-weight 4, row-weight 7,

have larger minimum distance than the QC-OCS and SP-OCS code length

, and code rate of about 0.4. It is shown

LDPC codes for

. As girth increases, the minimum that the SP-OCS and QC-OCS LDPC codes perform slightly

distances of these three OCS-LDPC codes can achieve the better than other codes when SNR is low or equal to 2.25 dB.

upper bound of

[9].

When SNR is large than 2.25 dB, the performances of these

From the simulation results, we observe that the PEG LDPC codes are almost the same. Further, we do not see any

QC-LDPC code and OCS-LDPC codes show error floors at evidence of the error floor problem, because these codes have

high SNRs. In this case, these error floors are dominated by the larger minimum distances (through the ANC approach, we ob-

trapping sets, where

is the minimum distance serve that the estimated minimum distances of these (4, 7)-reg-

of the code [21]. Note that a general

trapping set is a ular LDPC codes are at least 80).

set of variable nodes which induce a subgraph with exactly Fig. 7 depicts the bit error plots for different OCS-LDPC

odd-degree check nodes [22]–[25]. For a regular LDPC codes, random LDPC code, PEG QC-LDPC code and balanced

code with column-weight 3, an

trapping set is a direct incomplete block design (BIBD) LDPC code [6]. The OCS-

successor of

trapping set [24], [25]. Therefore, one LDPC codes, PEG QC-LDPC code and random LDPC code are

effective way to improve the error floor problem is constructing (3, 10)-regular LDPC codes with code length 6130 and code

LDPC codes with larger minimum distance [7].

rate of about 0.7. The BIBD-LDPC code has column-weight

Fig. 6 compares the BER performances of the OCS-LDPC 3, row-weight 12, code length 7324, and code rate of about

codes to the PEG QC-LDPC code and the random LDPC code. 0.75. When the girth is 6, it can observe that the MWC-OCS

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:39:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF ONE-COINCIDENCE SEQUENCE QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES OF LARGE GIRTH

1835

Fig. 8. Comparison of OCS-LDPC codes with random LDPC code and EG-LDPC code.

LDPC code performs best and followed by the BIBD-LDPC

V. CONCLUSION

code. The BER performances of SP-OCS and QC-OCS LDPC codes are worse than that of other codes, which may be due to their small minimum distances. As girth increases, the sharp improvement in BER curves of the OCS-LDPC codes can be observed. When the desired girth is 10, the PEG QC-LDPC code and the OCS-LDPC codes are found to perform as well as the random LDPC code.
Fig. 8 shows the performance comparison of OCS-LDPC codes, random LDPC code and the LDPC code based on Euclidian geometry (EG) [5]. The OCS-LDPC codes and random LDPC code are (3, 15)-regular LDPC codes with code length 4065 and code rate of about 0.8. The EG-LDPC code has column-weight 64, row-weight 64, code length 4095, and code

In this paper, one straightforward and effective method for constructing the circulant-permutation-matrix-based LDPC codes of large girth is presented. The proposed method can be separated into two steps. First, we provide a CGE search algorithm based on the Othello graph to systematically find out all the CGEs for these codes. Then, through the greedy search algorithm, the OCS-LDPC codes of large girth can be easily constructed. From the simulation results, we show that the girth of the OCS-LDPC code is an important factor in determining its performance. As girth increases, the sharp improvement in waterfall performances of the OCS-LDPC codes can be achieved.

rate of about 0.822. As can be seen in this figure, when the girth

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

is 6, the EG-LDPC code outperforms the SP-OCS and QC-OCS LDPC codes for SNR greater than 3.75 dB. As girth increases to 8, the BER curves of the OCS-LDPC codes are lower than that of the EG-LDPC code. The SP-OCS and QC-OCS LDPC codes show error floors at high SNRs, possibly because their small minimum distances. In contrast, the MWC-OCS LDPC code has a good minimum distance and its performance is

The authors would like to thank M. Rüngeler (RWTH Aachen, Germany), who spent his DAAD/NSC Summer Institute Program 2008 at NCKU, Taiwan, for his valuable discussions and for providing us Matlab programs to verify parts of the proposed algorithm.
REFERENCES

superior to that of the random LDPC code.

From the simulation results presented in Figs. 5–8, we ob-

serve that the MWC-OCS LDPC codes outperform the QC-OCS

and SP-OCS LDPC codes for

. This is because that the

MWC-OCS LDPC codes have larger minimum distance than

the QC-OCS and SP-OCS LDPC codes. As girth increases, the

BER curves of these three OCS-LDPC codes are almost the

same, because the minimum distances of these codes can be en-

larged by increasing the girth. In addition, we can clearly ob-

serve that the superior improvement in waterfall performance

can be achieved by increasing the girth of the OCS-LDPC codes.

The OCS-LDPC codes of large girth are found to perform as

well as the random LDPC code. This provides the concrete ev-

idence in support of that the girth of the LDPC codes is an im-

portant factor in determining its performance.

[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1645, 1996.
[3] N. Alon and M. Luby, “A linear time erasure-resilient code with nearly optimal recovery,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1732–1736, Nov. 1996.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[5] Y. Kou et al., “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[6] B. Ammar et al., “Construction of low-density parity-check codes based on balanced incomplete block designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1257–1268, Jun. 2004.
[7] R. M. Tanner et al., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:39:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1836

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 3, MARCH 2012

[8] C. M. Huang et al., “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes from quadratic congruences,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 313–315, Apr. 2008.
[9] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[10] L. Zongwang and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. 38th Asilomar Signals, Syst. Comput., 2004, vol. 2, pp. 1990–1994.
[11] W. Yige et al., “Construction of high-girth QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, 2008, pp. 180–185.
[12] O. Milenkovic et al., “Shortened array codes of large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3707–3722, Aug. 2006.
[13] J. M. F. Moura et al., “Structured low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 42–55, Jan. 2004.
[14] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[15] S. Kim et al., “On the girth of Tanner (3,5) quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1739–1744, Apr. 2006.
[16] K. Jon-Lark et al., “Explicit construction of families of LDPC codes with no 4-cycles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2378–2388, Oct. 2004.
[17] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 553–556.
[18] Z. Kostic and E. L. Titlebaum, “The design and performance analysis for several new classes of codes for optical synchronous CDMA and for arbitrary-medium time-hopping synchronous CDMA communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 2608–2617, Aug. 1994.
[19] C. C. Yang, “Optical CDMA passive optical network using prime code with interference elimination,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 516–518, Mar.–Apr. 2007.
[20] X.-Y. Hu, M. P. C. Fossorier, and E. Eleftheriou, “On the computation of the minimum distance of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Paris, France, Jun. 2004, vol. 2, pp. 767–771.
[21] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[22] D. J. C. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” presented at the presented at the 2nd Irish Conf. Math. Found. Comput. Sci. Inf. Technol. (Electron. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci.), Galway, Ireland, Jul. 2002, vol. 74.

[23] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[24] B. Vasic, S. Chilappagari, D. Nguyen, and S. Planjery, “Trapping set ontology,” in Proc. 47th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Sep. 2009, pp. 1–7.
[25] N. D. Viet et al., “Structured LDPC codes from permutation matrices free of small trapping sets,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, 2010, pp. 1–5.
Jen-Fa Huang received the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 1981 and 1985, respectively. Since 1991, he has been a Faculty Member of the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, where he is currently an Adjunct Professor at the Institute of Computer and Communication Engineering and at the Institute of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering. Prior to 1991, he was with MPB technologies, Montreal, QC, Canada, in the Optical Communication Laboratories working on the TAT-9 transatlantic undersea lightwave transmission project. His current research interests include optical communications, all-optical data networking, and fiber-grating-based optical sensors.
Chun-Ming Huang received his B.S. degree from the Department of Electrical Engineering at the National Cheng Kung University in 2000, and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Institute of Computer and Communication Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan, in 2005 and 2009, respectively. Currently, he is with Chung-Shan Institute of Science and Technology, Lungtan, Taiwan, R.O.C., as an Assistant Scientist. His major interests are mainly in the areas of error control codes and optical communications.
Chao-Chin Yang received the B.S. degree in communication engineering from National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C. and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1996 and 2004, respectively. In August 2004, he joined the Faculty of Kun Shan University, Tainan, Taiwan, R.O.C., where he is now an Associate Professor in the Department of Electro-Optical Engineering. His major interests are in multiuser optical communications, radio over fiber networks and optical system designs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:39:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

