2025 4th International Conference on 6G Networking (6GNet) | 979-8-3315-5141-4/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/6GNET68413.2025.11314138

Quasi-Cyclic Gradient Learning: A Method to improve performance of 5G QC-LDPC Codes

1st Emmanuelle BODJI 2nd Emmanuel BOUTILLON 3rd Bruno JAHAN

4th Christophe JEGO

Orange Innovation

Universite´ Bretagne Sud,

Orange Innovation

University of Bordeaux,

Universite´ Bretagne Sud,

LabSTICC UMR 6285

France

Bordeaux INP, IMS Laboratory,

LabSTICC UMR 6285

France

bruno.jahan@orange.com

UMR CNRS 5218

France

emmanuel.boutillon@univ-ubs.fr

France

emmanuelle.bodji@orange.com

christophe.jego@ims-bordeaux.fr

Abstract—The use of neural networks is advancing across several fields, particularly in digital communications. However, in the domain of error-correcting codes, the prevailing consensus is that Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools can, at best, match the performance of existing methods without offering any significant simplifications or improvements. As a result, the initial enthusiasm for AI-based approaches in this area has substantially declined. Recently, however, it has been demonstrated that gradient descent can be used to guide the optimization process for the code construction of unstructured Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes.
In this paper, we extend and generalize this method to also optimize Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes (QC-LDPC). More specifically, we propose to apply the new method directly to the base protograph structures of QC-LDPC codes standardized in the fifth generation (5G) New Radio (NR) framework. Experimental results reveal that, for small protograph matrices, the proposed optimization process achieves significant coding gains, with improvements of up to 1.2 dB in signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at a target frame error rate (FER) of 10−2.
Index Terms—LDPC matrices, 5G NR, FER performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for 5G standard [1], [2] offer efficient flexibility in terms of coding rate and code size. This is due to their hierarchical construction, in which the final parity-check matrix (H) is obtained by expanding a base matrix by a factor Zc. This type of matrix is known as quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) [3]. While 5G codes perform well for large messages (more than 1,000 bits), they are significantly less efficient for small message sizes. Actually in the 5G standard, the parity-check matrices dedicated to small messages contain a high number of short cycles. These matrices generate particular topological structures [4], such as trapping and absorbing sets, that strongly impair the convergence of iterative decoding algorithms, such as Belief Propagation (BP) [5]. In this article, we refer to these structures as penalizing topological structures (PTS).
There is extensive literature on the optimization of LDPC codes for short block lengths. This literature contains two complementary aspects: the construction of codes, in particular parity-check matrices and decoding algorithms. Our work primarily focuses on the first aspect. Regarding decoding, the normalized min-sum algorithm is applied for the experimentations [6]. Existing literature on short LDPC codes can be grouped into two main directions: classical methods, which

are based on detailed knowledge of PTS [6] and agnostic methods. In the last one, for example, [7] studies a genetic optimization algorithm. Our primary interest lies in predictive model approaches, specifically those based on neural networks. These approaches rely on the fact that the decoding algorithm can be viewed as a differentiable computational graph, on which gradient backpropagation can be applied to learn effective codes. Although this domain remains relatively unexplored, notable references include [8], which introduces Gradient Quantization LeArning Belief Propagation (GQLABP). While [8] reports promising performance improvements, the resulting parity-check matrices (H) lack inherent structural properties. In particular, they do not preserve the quasi-cyclic organization required in the 5G standard.
This article introduces a novel, agnostic approach to build high-quality QC-LDPC codes for short block lengths. The proposed method, derived from GQLA-BP, is based on the iterative improvement of the parity-check matrix (H). To do this, the main idea is to leverage gradient information propagated through the decoding computation graph during an iterative process. In practice, the graph is modeled as a recurrent neural network (RNN). A block-wise aggregation process is applied to optimize the matrix while preserving its quasi-cyclic structure. Thanks to this original approach, more efficient matrix families are generated to satisfy the same constraints as those in 5G. Thus, backward compatibility is ensuring, while exhibiting significantly improved performance. Additionally, the obtained matrices are less dense and consequently less complex to process during the decoding step.
The article is structured as follows: firstly, in Section I, an introduction to LDPC codes and their preliminary concepts are provided. Then, in Section II, a previous work on the application of RNNs to LDPC codes is discussed. Moving on to Section III, a method for improving LDPC codes for 5G standard is detailed. Finally, the experimental results in terms of decoding performance are provided in Section IV.
II. LDPC CODE AND QC-LDPC CODE IN 5G
The Belief Propagation algorithm (or sum-product algorithm) relies on the exchange of messages between variable nodes (information bits) and check nodes in a Tanner graph, which can be represented as a parity-check matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:19:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

979-8-3315-5141-4/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE

136

H. Following notations are considered: λj denotes the log-

likelihood ratio (LLR) coming from the channel for bit bj,

and h(i, j) ∈ {0, 1} is the element in position i, j of the

matrix H. A value h(i, j) = 1 indicates a connection between

variable node j and check node i. Li→j denotes the message

from check node i to variable node j and Lj→i denotes the

message from variable node j to check node i. During an

initialization step, the messages Li→j are set equal to λi.

Then, each decoding iteration consists in updating the check

nodes (1), followed by updating the variable nodes (2), as

given below:





Li→j = 2h(i, j) tanh−1 

h(i′, j) tanh Lj′→i  , (1) 2

 i′,i′≠ i



Lj→i = h(i, j) λj +

h(i, j′) · Li′→j  .

(2)

j′,j′≠ j

Once all iterations are completed, the a posteriori probability (APP) Li of bit bj is computed as follows:

Lj = λj + h(i, j)Li→j .

(3)

i

The estimated binary decision is 0 if Lj > 0, and 1

otherwise. From Lj, the probability pj that the bit bj equals

1 is determined as pj

=

1 1+eLj

.

This

formulation

of

BP

includes also the zero multiplicative coefficients of matrix the

H, which is not the most efficient (and usual) way to describe

the algorithm. However, this representation is required for the

the remainder of the article.

The 5G standard [1] defines two binary protograph matrices, called Base Graphs (BG), denoted by BG1 and BG2. The first one, BG1, is applied to large blocks, while the second

one is designed for small blocks and low code rates. In this article, we apply the optimization method to BG2, as this base

graph is specifically used for small code sizes in the 5G LDPC standard. By focusing on BG2, the target of code lengths

and expansion factors are relevant for resource-constrained

scenarios, where memory usage is critical. This base matrix

is subdivided into sub-matrices, where the information part

contains kb columns. It corresponds, after an expansion by

a factor Zc, to the kb × Zc information bits of the code. In practice, the possible values of kb are 6, 8, 9, and 10.

The 5G standard is structured into subsets of expansion

factors, with each subset is associated with a base matrix BM. For a subset of expansion factors, the matrix BG2 is associated with a base matrix BM taking its values in {−∞, 0, 1, . . . , Zmax − 1}. If BG(i, j) = 0, then BM (i, j) = −∞. The expansion is performed from the all-zero Zc × Zc matrix. If BG(i, j) = 1, then the expansion is performed from the Zc × Zc identity matrix after a right circular column shift of BM (i, j) mod Zc.
Thus, a matrix BG of size m × n generates a matrix H of size (M, N ) = (mZc, nZc). The construction of a matrix H of size 3 × 6 with Zc = 3 is illustrated in Figure 1. In this example, the protograph BG of size 1 × 2 is extended by the expansion factor to form H, that will be employed during the

decoding process.

10
BG

−Z−c−=−→3

2 −∞
BM





001000

−Z−c−=−→3 1 0 0 0 0 0

010000

H

Fig. 1. Construction example of a matrix H.

III. AUTOENCODER-BASED MATRIX CONSTRUCTION

The equations of messages updating (2, 1,and APP com-

putation (3) are all differentiables functions of coefficients

h(i, j). Is it thus possible to represents it iterations of a

LDPC decoder as a fully connected graph with differentiable

functions, as shown in Figure 2. In this graph, all connections

are associated with a multiplicative factor equal to h(i, j),

which can be regarded as the weight of a synapse in a

neural network. The decoding correctness can be characterized

by the Binary Cross Entropy (BCE) defined as BCE =

−

1 N

N j=1

(bj

log(pj

)

+

(1

−

bj

)

log(1

−

pj

)),

with

bj

is

the

transmitted bit and pj is the probability that it equals 1.

A simplified representation of the optimization process of

an LDPC matrix proposed in [8] is shown in the Figure 2.

This method is called GQLA-BP and consists in iteratively

improving the parity-check matrix H through a sequence of

matrices Ht, t = 0, 1, . . . , tmax. Each step is composed of two phases: a learning phase (or search for the STPs of Ht) based on the gradient algorithm. It is followed by a matrix

modification phase in order to improve matrix Ht+1.

The learning phase is carried out from the all-zero code-

word, into which Ne random errors are injected among the N bits of the codeword. The value of Ne is an essential parameter. Indeed, if Ne is too small, the message is directly decoded and

no decoding error remains on which to ”learn”. In contrast,

if Ne is too large, the decoder does not converge and instead

introduces an additional error. In that case, the gradient cannot

exhibit any useful tendency. With an all-zero codeword, the

BCE

then

resumes

to

BCE

=

−

1 N

N j=1

log(1

−

pj

).

The gradient computation aimed at reducing the BCE is

backpropagated layer by layer using the gradient algorithm

to assess how to modify the synaptic weights (the values

h(i, j)) in order to improve decoding accuracy. The gradient

values associated with the same branch are accumulated over

batches of 32 noisy words. The process is iterated until at least

one element exceeds the initial threshold s. With a standard

gradient algorithm, the connection Ht(i, j) would be updated as Ht+1(i, j) = Ht(i, j) − Gt(i, j) to minimize the cost

function.

As the coefficients are limited to the set {0, 1}, such a

transformation cannot be performed. However, one can note

that if Ht(i, j) = 1 and Gt(i, j) is positive with large magnitude, this suggests changing the coefficient Ht+1(i, j) from 1 to 0. Symmetrically, if Ht(i, j) = 0 and Gt(i, j)

is negative with large magnitude, this suggests changing the

coefficient Ht+1(i, j) from 0 to 1. The principle and details

of this algorithm are given in [8].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:19:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
137

This method proves effective for small-sized H matrices. However, it does not consider the constraints inherent to the structure of 5G LDPC codes. To address this issue, we propose integrating the QC structure of the code into the matrix optimization process.
Fig. 2. Representation of one iteration of the GQLA-BP algorithm
IV. QUASI-CYCLIC GRADIENT LEARNING A. Description of Quasi-Cyclic Gradient Learning
In this section, the proposed Quasi-Cyclic Gradient Learning (QCGL) algorithm is detailed. It is a major improvement upon GQLA-BP that, by construction, preserves the quasicyclic structure of the parity-check matrix.
Starting from a QC-LDPC matrix H, the update of Ht at iteration t does not necessarily preserve the QC structure of the code. To maintain it, the update has to be performed directly on the pair (BGt, BMt). Only the following three types of modifications between (BGt(i, j), BMt(i, j)) and (BGt+1(i, j), BMt+1(i, j)) are supported:
(0, −∞) → (1, d) (Creation: lines 6, 7 of Algorithm 1). (1, a) → (1, d) (Modification: line 9 of Algorithm 1). (1, a) → (0, −∞) (Removal: lines 11, 12 of Algorithm 1).
(4) The gradient matrix is estimated using a batch of 32 codewords. This ensures accurate gradients while reflecting the diversity within the batch. The operation is repeated 1000 times to aggregate sufficient results and reveal the PTS. Indeed, it has been experimentally shown that the empirical mean of each gradient stabilizes below 1000 iterations. This choice ensures that the information given by the gradient is meaningful and exploitable. The quasi-cyclic structure of the final matrix H implies that an PTS is duplicated Zc times along the diagonals of 1’s within its constituent blocks. Once the matrix G is obtained, it is therefore natural to subdivide it into sub-matrices of size Zc × Zc, for each sub-matrix, the gradient results are then accumulated along the Zc diagonals. The result is a tensor GD (Diagonal Sum of Gradients), whose

element GD(i, j, k) is equal to the sum of the gradients on the kth diagonal of block (i, j) of G, namely
Zc −1
GD(i, j, k) = G(iZc + l, jZc + ((l + k) mod Zc)). (5)
l=0
By first analyzing small-size QC-LDPC codes in which PTS were introduced intentionally, we observed their impact on the generated matrix GD. These observations provide a basis to identfying strategies for exploiting the information contained in GD in order to improve (BGt, BMt).
The algorithm applied at one iteration to perform the transformation (BGt, BMt) into (BGt+1, BMt+1) based on GD is presented in Algorithm 1. The first step consists in identifying the position (i0, j0, k0) of GD corresponding to the most significant factor for a diagonal state change: transition from 0 to 1 if the gradient is negative, or from 1 to 0 if the gradient is positive. Once the block (i0, j0) is selected, the modification that minimizes the cost function can be performed.
The algorithm proceeds as long as the cost function decreases. The optimization with the QCGL algorithm is stopped when all values in GD reach a steady state. In other words, when the values along the diagonals of each block in GD are of the same order of magnitude, any modification applied to the base matrix BM would only degrade performance. At this point, the minimum of the cost function has been reached. The final performance is then evaluated by a standard Monte Carlo simulation.

Algorithm 1 One iteration of QCGL algorithm

Require: GD, BGt, BMt 1: if GD reach a steady state then 2: Break

3: else

4: (i0, j0, k0) = arg max{|GD(i, j, k)|}
i,j,k

5: if BGt(i0, j0) = 0 then

6:

BGt+1(i0, j0) ← 1

7:

BMt+1(i0, j0) ← k0

8: else

9:

BMt+1(i0, j0) ← arg min{GD(i0, j0, l)}

l

10:

if ∃ t′ < t such that BMt+1 = BMt′ then

11:

BGt+1(i0, j0) ← 0

12:

BMt+1(i0, j0) ← −∞

13:

end if

14: end if

15: end if

16: return BGt+1, BMt+1

An example of the computation of the tensor GD for Zc = 3 is detailled in Figure 3. The computation is performed using a biased base matrix BMt where the first two columns contain a cycle of length 4. In the figure, each diagonal within the submatrices is highlighted with a specific color in the gradient matrix Gt. The sum of the elements along each diagonal is then calculated in the tensor GD. As shown in Figure 3, the maximum value of GD, 87.1, is highlighted in bold. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:19:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
138

Fig. 3. Representation of one iteration of the QCGL algorithm

corresponding block BMt(1, 1) is selected to be modified. Thus, the value of BMt(1, 1) is replaced by position of the minimum within the same block, -57.6, which is underlined in the tensor GD. The analysis reveals that any alternative modification of this block would have produced a new cycle of length 4. It enables to illustrate the algorithm’s ability to make optimal decisions based on the provided gradient information.
B. QCGL algorithm execution on GPU device
Running the neural decoder on a GPU provides computational efficiency, yet it involves substantial memory resources. During the decoding stage, a large computational matrix is generated, whose dimensions scale as O(N 3). The size of this matrix is computed as M atsize = M 2×N ×Zc3×Batch. For the case of BG2, the formula becomes: M atsize = 91728 × Zc3 × Batch. As a result, storage becomes impractical as the matrix size increases. In practice, the proposed approach is therefore restricted to relatively small values of Zc (e.g., 2 or 4) with batch sizes of 32. They result in matrices of size 23,482,368 bits and 187,858,944 bits, respectively. It should be noted that each bit is represented using 16-bit floating point (float16) format, resulting in an actual memory usage approximately 16 times larger than the raw bit count, i.e., about 375.7 MB and 3.0 GB for Zc = 2 and Zc = 4 with a batch size of 32, respectively. For Zc = 8, the maximum batch size can be reduced to 3, which permits execution on a GPU with 16 GB of memory. The 5G LDPC matrix standard supports expansion factors up to Zc = 384. At such scales, applying the proposed algorithm becomes impossible. This is due to the enormous memory requirements for storing the corresponding matrices on a GPU, which would exceed 5,000 TB.
However, as demonstrated in [9], the base matrix associated with a given expansion factor can be efficiently derived from the base matrix of one of its divisors. This approach offers a practical solution to extend the proposed QCGL matrices with an expansion factor Zc to matrices with expansion factors kZc, thus covering all the range values of a given Information Length Set (ILS) of the 5G standard. This task is beyond the scope of the paper and will be studied later.
C. Optimization with a Random Approach
To evaluate the effectiveness of the QCGL method and the usefulness of gradient information, the obtained matrices

are compared together and with matrices generated from a random approach.The comparisons with randomly generated matrices are conducted in order to validate the significance of the proposed approach. The procedure for generating random is described in Algorithm 2. At step t: a) a randomly selection of Nm = 10 positions (it, jt) to be modified (Nm is the number of modifications performed at each step t), b) the values BM (i, j) are replaced by new values randomly chosen from the set {−∞, 0, 1, . . . , Zc − 1}. Nm = 10 is selected as the number of allowed modifications because it offers a tradeoff: too many changes would alter the matrix undesirably, while too few would have little impact and require much more time to assess the effects. A Monte Carlo simulation is then carried out to evaluate the FER called perf(A) in Algorithm 2. If the modification improves performance, it is kept; otherwise, it is discarded. This procedure is repeated for a duration equivalent to that of the QCGL optimization process. For a fair comparison, a runtime limit of T = 3 hours is defined for executing the random algorithm. Indeed, the optimization with the QCGL method requires approximately the same amount of time for the exact same matrix.

Algorithm 2 Random

Require: BG, Zc, Nm, T 1: t = 0 2: Evaluate perf(BG)

3: while t < T do

4: A ← BG with Nm modifications 5: Evaluate perf (A) 6: if perf(A) is greater than perf(BG) then

7:

BG ← A

8: perf(BG) ← perf(A) 9: end if

10: end while

11: return BG

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The decoding performance evaluation of the different matrices was carried out. The messages are generated randomly, encoded, and modulated using a BPSK mapping. The simulation is performed over a Bi-AWGN channel, and the decoder

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:19:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
139

is based on the Layered Normalized Min-Sum algorithm [9], [10] with a normalization factor α = 0.7. The target number of erroneous frames is set to 100, with a maximum of 107 frames. Performance is evaluated, for each Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), in terms of Frame Error Rate (FER). AFF3CT [11] is used for the analysis of the different simulations. AFF3CT is an Open-source software (MIT license) dedicated to the Forward Error Correction simulations.
The performances of matrices generated by the two optimization methods, namely QCGL and the random approach, are compared with each other, as well as with matrices from the 5G standard.These matrices are shown in Figure 4 and are labeled QCGL, Random, and Standard, respectively. The experiment was conducted for Zc = 2, kb = 6, a number of iterations I = 5, Nm = 10, and a duration T = 3 hours. Performance results for the three types of matrices are depicted in Figure 4. Both Random and QCGL matrices outperform the standard 5G matrices. However, the performance of Random is lower than that of QCGL, with a difference of about 0.6 dB at a FER of 10−2. Experimental results highlight the substantial contribution of the QCGL approach in optimizing LDPC matrices for the 5G standard.
To provide a more comprehensive assessment of the gain from the proposed approach, the performances of the QCGL matrix are compared to the Standard matrix for Zc = {2, 4, 8}, kb = {6, 10}, and I = 5. Performances obtained for this second experiment are given in Figure 5. A significant gain of 1.2 dB at a FER of 10−2 is observed for Zc = 2 and kb = 6. Moreover, the gains for the QCGL matrix when kb = 10 remain significant across the different values of Zc.
In terms of computational complexity of the decoding process, the number of connections in the QCGL matrices decrease from 198 to 188 for BG2, kb = 10, corresponding to a reduction of about 5%. It should be noted that this reduction contributes not only to faster decoding process but also to lower energy consumption.
Fig. 4. Comparison of the matrix performances improved using the QCGL method and a random approach for BG2 with Zc = 2, kb = 6, and I = 5.

Fig. 5. Comparison of the matrix performances improved by QCGL and 5G standard matrices for BG2 with Zc = {2, 4, 8}, kb = {6, 10}, and I = 5.
VI. CONCLUSION
This article presents a novel method for optimizing quasicyclic matrices using an autoencoder-based gradient learning approach. The proposed QCGL method enables, on one hand, to improve the performance of 5G matrices (up to 1.3 dB gain at a FER of 10−2 for small-size matrices) while preserving their structure to ensure backward compatibility. On the other hand, a beneficial side effect should be highlighted: the QCGL-optimized matrix has 5% fewer connections than the original 5G matrix, leading to a proportional reduction in computational complexity of the decoding process.
REFERENCES
[1] 3GPP, “Study on New Radio Access Technology Physical Layer Aspects,” tech. rep., 3GPP, 2017.
[2] 3GPP, “Study on scenarios and requirements for next generation access technologies,” tech. rep., 3GPP, 2017.
[3] J. Bae and A. A. et al, “An overview of channel coding for 5G NR cellular communications,” APSIPA Transactions on Signal and Information Processing, vol. 8, no. 1, 2019.
[4] T. Richardson, “Error floors of ldpc codes,” in Proceedings of the annual Allerton conference on communication control and computing, vol. 41, pp. 1426–1435, The University; 1998, 2003.
[5] F. Kschischang and B. F. et al., “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, 2001.
[6] F. Marco and T. A. et al, “Thresholds of absorbing sets under scaled minsum ldpc decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 6643–6651, 2019.
[7] A. Elkelesh and E. et al, “Decoder-in-the-loop: Genetic optimizationbased ldpc code design,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 141161–141170, 2019.
[8] D. Louis-Adrien, L. Quentin, and L. Guillaume, “Learning linear block codes with gradient quantization,” 2025.
[9] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, 2004. SIPS 2004., pp. 107–112, 2004.
[10] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “An efficient message-passing schedule for LDPC decoding,” in 2004 23rd IEEE Convention of Electrical and Electronics Engineers in Israel, pp. 223–226, 2004.
[11] A. C. et al, “Aff3ct: A fast forward error correction toolbox!.” Elsevier SoftwareX (Volume: 10), October 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:19:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
140

