7822

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

Iteration and SDA-Driven LDPC Decoding Latency Reduction for 3-D TLC NAND Flash Memory

Debao Wei , Member, IEEE, Yongchao Wang , Dejun Zhang, Huqi Xiang , and Liyan Qiao , Member, IEEE

Abstract—To enhance the reliability of 3-D TLC NAND flash memory, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have become widely adopted. However, as the number of read, program or erasures increases, the raw bit error rate (RBER) of read data in flash memory chips also rises, leading to the challenge of increased LDPC decoding latency. To address this, an idea of utilizing the decoding correct probability of LDPC to reduce latency is proposed. First, by analyzing the encoding method of TLC NAND flash memory, a single direction characterization error model based on the correlation between individual pages is constructed. Next, through experimental validation, the feasibility of using the number of iterations as an indicator of decoding correct probability is demonstrated, leading to the proposal of a low-overhead and high-performance Iterative Alternative Correct Probability Optimization (IACPO) scheme. Leveraging the fact that LDPC decoding exhibits a high success probability within a specific range of read data, the existence of successful decoding area (SDA) is confirmed through a large number of real experiments, and the distribution characteristics of SDA in TLC NAND flash memory are analyzed. Finally, the Utilizing LDPC Decoding Correct-Probability Optimization (ULDCO) scheme to further optimize latency is proposed. This scheme uses SDA to improve the probability of correct data reading, particularly in the middle and later stages of flash memory life, in combination with the IACPO scheme. Experimental results show that the proposed IACPO and ULDCO schemes are not only generally applicable but also achieve significantly iterative latency reduction by 73.43% and 81.51%, respectively, compared to traditional schemes, with negligible storage and computation overhead. These results clearly demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed schemes in reducing iteration latency.
Index Terms—TLC NAND flash memory, LDPC codes, decode correct probability, successful decoding area, iteration.
I. INTRODUCTION
W ITH advancements in bit density and stacking technology [1], [2], the cost of per-bit storage in 3-D NAND flash memory has significantly decreased [3], making it widely adopted across various fields [4]. While these technological improvements have lowered production costs, they
Received 18 February 2025; revised 30 April 2025; accepted 17 May 2025. Date of publication 29 May 2025; date of current version 1 December 2025. This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province under Grant LH-2023F015, in part by the Aeronautical Science Foundation of China under Grant JZJJX20210009, and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant HIT.NSFJG202209. This article was recommended by Associate Editor X. Fong. (Corresponding author: Liyan Qiao.)
The authors are with the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150080, China (e-mail: weidebao@hit. edu.cn; 22b305017@stu.hit.edu.cn; 24S005098@stu.hit.edu.cn; 23S105150@ stu.hit.edu.cn; qiaoliyan@hit.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2025.3572100

have also introduced challenges related to reduced reliability [5], [6]. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, known for their exceptional error correction capabilities, performance approaching the Shannon limit [7], low decoding complexity [8], and ability to significantly enhance data reliability [9], have become a standard error correction method for improving flash memory reliability. However, as flash memory usage increases, the raw bit error rate (RBER) of the read data inevitably rises, resulting in increased LDPC decoding latency [10].
To reduce the decoding latency of LDPC, numerous scholars have proposed effective optimization strategies. Literature [11] introduces a dynamic read retry strategy that leverages the inherent error characteristics of flash memory and an optimal read voltage offset model. This approach significantly reduces the number of read retries during LDPC decoding, thereby lowering latency. In literature [12], a log likelihood ratio (LLR) optimization algorithm is presented, utilizing the error characteristics among the most significant bit (MSB), central significant bit (CSB), and least significant bit (LSB) pages within the same word line of flash memory to accelerate the iterative convergence of LDPC decoding. Literature [13] proposes using the proportion of error-prone cells between states in flash memory to predict the required number of sensing levels in a given region, effectively reducing data read latency during LDPC decoding. Literature [14] addresses the high error rates in the overlapping areas of adjacent states in flash memory by proposing a non-uniform sensing strategy, which effectively decreases LDPC latency. Lastly, literature [15] identifies discrepancies between the theoretical and measured threshold voltage models of flash memory and proposes an offset read voltage method. This technique adjusts the read voltage, resulting in a significant reduction in LDPC decoding latency.
The above strategies have successfully reduced the latency of LDPC codes in flash memory to a certain extent. However, these approaches primarily focus on the inherent characteristics of flash memory and fail to fully exploit the potential advantages of LDPC codes when applied to flash memory. To address this gap, this paper focuses on the intrinsic properties of LDPC codes, leveraging their potential in 3-D triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash memory to propose strategies that effectively minimize LDPC decoding latency.
This paper aims to reduce the latency of unreliable pages in 3-D TLC NAND flash memory. By examining the inherent characteristics of LDPC codes, two key features that influence

1549-8328 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: ITERATION AND SDA-DRIVEN LDPC DECODING LATENCY REDUCTION

7823

the decoding correct probability are identified. The first feature is that experimental results verify a high probability of correct decoding when the number of decoding iterations is lower than the predefined maximum. The second feature is that when the RBER of the read data falls within the LDPC decoding range, there exists the successful decoding area (SDA) capable of achieving a very high decoding success rate. These two features leverage the strengths of LDPC codes in flash memory, and when combined with the specific characteristics of flash memory, they can significantly reduce decoding latency. This approach overcomes the limitations of traditional methods that rely solely on flash memory characteristics for optimization.
In this paper, the coding method of TLC NAND flash memory is analyzed, develop an error model with single direction characterization, and apply iterative characterization of LDPC decoding correct probability to propose a novel Iterative Alternative Correct Probability Optimization (IACPO) scheme that offers low overhead and high performance. To further enhance data reading accuracy in the middle and later stages of flash memorys life, the SDA characterization is also analyzed, demonstrating its effectiveness in improving decoding accuracy. Building on the IACPO scheme, an innovative Utilizing LDPC Decoding Correct-Probability Optimization (ULDCO) scheme is proposed. The outstanding performance of both schemes is validated through extensive actual flash chip tests.
The main contributions made in this paper are as follows:
(1) By thoroughly analyzing the asymmetric dependencies between MSB, CSB, and LSB pages, an error model for single direction characterization of CSB and LSB pages by MSB pages in TLC NAND flash memory is constructed. This model eliminates redundant multidirectional complexity and serves as a cornerstone for advanced decoding optimization.
(2) A groundbreaking fusion of iterations and decoding correct probability through extensive actual experiments is established. By integrating this discovery with the single direction characterization error model, the lightweight IACPO scheme that slashes iterative latency by up to 73.43% compared to the traditional scheme is proposed.
(3) Capitalizing on LDPC’s inherent ability to decode accurately within specific parameters, we have conducted comprehensive experiments to affirm the presence of SDA in TLC NAND flash memory. And the exhaustive analysis of SDA’s distribution patterns provides valuable insights into its behavior and potential applications in enhancing decoding processes.
(4) Recognizing the challenge of maintaining data reliability in flash memory chips during their middle and later life stages, we have harnessed the power of SDA to augment the likelihood of correct data reading. By integrating this approach with the proven IACPO scheme, the ULDCO scheme is introduced, which represents a step-change in latency optimization. Backed by a series of rigorous experiments, the ULDCO scheme demonstrates an significant reduction in iterative latency by up to 81.51% compared to the traditional scheme, underscoring its effectiveness and broad applicability in enhancing NAND flash memory performance.

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of each state in 3-D TLC NAND flash memory.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II outlines the characteristics of LDPC applications in NAND flash memory, and reviews related work on read latency optimization. Section III presents the motivation for this paper. Section IV introduces the proposed optimization scheme, derived from an analysis of the error model for single direction characterization and the SDA in NAND flash memory. Section V provides experimental results, comparing the proposed schemes reliability, latency performance, generality, and overall overhead. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
This section begins with the fundamentals of 3-D TLC NAND flash memory. Next, it provides a detailed explanation of the working process of LDPC codes in 3-D NAND flash memory. Finally, related work aimed at reducing LDPC latency in flash memory are analyzed.
A. Characterization of 3-D TLC NAND Flash Memory
3-D NAND flash memory typically consists of both floating gate [16] and charge trap types [17], with a broad range of applications. Flash chips are composed of multiple blocks, with each block consisting of several word lines [18]. A block is the smallest erase unit in flash memory, while a word line is the smallest read and program unit [19]. Word line contains multiple pages; for instance, in TLC NAND flash memory, a word line includes MSB, CSB, and LSB pages [20]. Each page consists of multiple cells, and data is stored by controlling the electrons in these cells. Flash memory has evolved from single-level cell (SLC) to multilevel cell (MLC), triple-level cell (TLC), and quad-level cell (QLC) [21], [22] [23], with each cell type storing an increasing number of data bits. Currently, TLC NAND flash memory is widely used, and therefore, this paper primarily focuses on this type.
Fig. 1 illustrates the schematic diagram of the different states in TLC NAND flash memory, showing that there are eight distinct states. For the Micron B16A TLC NAND flash chip, the corresponding code for each state is also depicted in Fig. 1. As shown, each state contains data bits from the MSB, CSB, and LSB pages, with only one data bit differing between adjacent states. During data reading, a sense level can be applied to the region between two neighboring states. The sense levels, denoted as V1 to V7 in Fig. 1, are applied between each state during the read process. The value of the stored data can be determined based on the sensing level interval in which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7824

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

often employed, which involves adjusting the sense level and repeating the read operation [27]. However, this approach inevitably increases the read latency. Additionally, a high RBER in the read data can further raise the decoding latency of LDPC codes. Therefore, minimizing the latency of LDPC decoding in flash memory is crucial for enhancing the overall read performance.

Fig. 2. Coding and decoding process of LDPC in TLC NAND flash memory.
the data resides. For example, for the CSB page, if the code word lies between V2 and V6, the value is 0, otherwise, it is 1.
NAND flash memory inevitably undergoes multiple program and erase (P/E) cycles during its lifespan. As the number of P/E cycles increases and data retention interference occurs, the threshold voltage of each state may shift, resulting in an increase in the RBER of the read data. To enhance data reliability, efficient error correction codes are commonly employed. In the case of TLC NAND flash, LDPC codes are frequently used for optimization.
B. LDPC Codes in 3-D NAND Flash Memory
LDPC codes offer excellent error correction performance and are commonly used in flash memory to improve data reliability [24]. These codes consist of two main components: encoding and decoding [25]. Fig. 2 illustrates the detailed process of applying LDPC codes in TLC NAND flash memory. When data is to be stored, it is first encoded, with the encoded data comprising both data bits and check bits. The number of frames to be stored in each page is then determined based on the capacity of each page in the flash chip. For different types of flash chips, the number of frames corresponds to the amount of data that can be stored in each word line. Each frame represents a unit of encoded data for instance, FM1 to FMk on the MSB page in Fig. 2 stores k frames of data. Once the data is encoded and written to the flash chip, the encoding and writing process is complete.
Data written to flash memory is distributed across different states. During storage, the data is subjected to various disturbances within the flash memory, causing the threshold voltage of each state to shift [26]. During the read process, the data is accessed using read voltages Vread1 to Vread7, which are applied between neighboring states. However, the read data may experience bit flips compared to the original written data. The complete data read and write process is finalized by decoding the read data to recover the original information.
In some cases, data read using Vread1 to Vread7 may not be successfully decoded. In such instances, a read retry is

C. Related Work
In 3-D NAND flash, an increased number of read retries and decoding iterations significantly raises the latency of LDPC codes. Efforts to reduce LDPC latency can generally be categorized into two main approaches. The first approach focuses on minimizing read retries, such as by constructing more accurate threshold voltage distribution models [28], [29] [30] or developing optimized read strategies based on threshold voltage offset characteristics [11], [31], [32], [33], [34]. However, many of these methods involve substantial storage and computational overhead. For instance, the method proposed in [13] predicts the final number of sensed levels by analyzing error variations across individual states in NAND flash memory, thereby reducing unnecessary read retries and effectively lowering read latency. Nonetheless, this approach requires calculating the error-prone ratio for elements between states and storing the final sensed levels for various scenarios, resulting in considerable overhead.
The second approach focuses on optimizing the LLR values of the LDPC code to accelerate iterative convergence and reduce latency. Improving the accuracy of LLR values requires external information, which can be enhanced by leveraging the characteristics of NAND flash memory [12], [35] or by incorporating additional data to better capture these characteristics [6], [36]. However, these methods often suffer from high storage overhead. For example, the method described in [12] analyzes the error patterns across pages in NAND flash memory and proposes an LLR optimization strategy that accelerates the convergence of LDPC decoding iterations. However, this approach requires storing decoding data for multiple pages, leading to certain limitations.
The existing methods for reducing latency in NAND flash memory often involve substantial computational and storage overhead. Furthermore, these approaches primarily focus on leveraging the inherent characteristics of flash memory to reduce latency while overlooking the potential of exploiting the properties of the LDPC code itself in conjunction with the flash memory. This work will shift the focus to the characteristics of the LDPC code, proposing an efficient latency reduction strategy by integrating these features with NAND flash memory.
III. RESEARCH MOTIVATION
3-D NAND flash memory can reduce LDPC latency by decreasing both the number of decoding iterations and the number of read retries. However, most methods that optimize LLR to reduce iterations rely on external information, while approaches that minimize read retries are based on the threshold voltage offset characteristics of the flash memory. Both

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: ITERATION AND SDA-DRIVEN LDPC DECODING LATENCY REDUCTION

7825

Fig. 3. Relationship between the number of iterations and decoding success probability under different P/E cycles and 270 days retention conditions.

Fig. 4. Decoding results for 1200 P/E cycles and 30 days retention with different offsets.

strategies typically focus on the threshold voltage distribution and error characteristics between states of the flash memory. In contrast, LDPC codes have primarily been used for error correction, and their inherent characteristics have not been fully leveraged.
LDPC codes known for their high performance in error correction [37], possess several distinctive features. LDPC decoding is performed through iterative processes to correct erroneous bits [38]. To evaluate the bit error rate (BER), the decoded data is typically compared with the encoded data. However, in practical applications, it is not feasible to know the encoded data in advance. Fig. 3 presents simulation plots illustrating the relationship between the number of iterations and the probability of successful decoding, considering different P/E cycles and 270 days retention at room temperature. The maximum number of iterations is set to 20. As shown in Fig. 3, when decoding is successful, the number of iterations is consistently below the upper iteration limit. In contrast, when decoding fails, the number of iterations reaches the maximum limit. Therefore, the number of iterations can serve as a reliable indicator of successful decoding probability, when combined with the characteristics of flash memory, can be used to optimize latency.
LDPC decoding success operates within a specific range, meaning that all read data can be successfully decoded if the RBER of the read data is below a certain threshold [39].

Consequently, in flash memory, successful decoding is not limited to data read at the optimal read reference voltage. If the read voltage Vk in Fig. 1 satisfies the condition in Eq. (1), where the RBER of the read data falls within the range for successful LDPC decoding, the corresponding area is considered the “SDA”. In Eq. (1), Vnk and Vmk are the read reference voltages at the maximum offset that can be successfully decoded on the left and right sides of Vk in Fig. 1. k is the seven different overlapped regions. Fig. 4 illustrates the decoding results of the read reference voltage at different offsets, based on 1200 P/E cycles and 30 days of retention at room temperature. The offsets in the horizontal coordinates of Fig. 4 represent the relative position shifts compared to the initial reference voltage reading. For example, ‘offset 7’ indicates a step of 7 units from the initial position. The results for one read reference voltage from each of the LSB, CSB, and MSB pages are shown in Fig. 4, with similar results for other Vk. LSB-V4 in Fig. 4 corresponds to V4 in Fig. 1, and it can be observed from Fig. 4 that all offsets within the range of 19 to 21 allow for successful decoding. Similarly, CSBV2 and MSB-V3 each exhibit an SDA. Thus, the SDA can serve as a reliable indicator for the success probability of LDPC decoding, which can be leveraged to further reduce latency.

Vnk ≤ Vk ≤ Vmk (k = 1, 2, · · · , 7)

(1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7826

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 6. Schematic of the error model for single direction characterization by utilizing the MSB page.

Fig. 5. RBER of the MSB, CSB, and LSB pages for 600, 800, 1000, 1200, and 1400 P/E cycles with 60, 90, or 270 days retention.
IV. PROPOSED LATENCY REDUCTION SCHEME
In this section, an error model with single direction characterization is initially developed. Subsequently, the IACPO scheme is introduced, leveraging the relationship between the number of iterations and the probability of successful LDPC decoding. Following this, the SDA in flash memory is analyzed in detail. Finally, the ULDCO scheme is proposed, utilizing the characterization of the probability of correct LDPC decoding.
A. Error Models for Single Direction Characterization
Each word line in TLC NAND flash memory consists of LSB, CSB, and MSB pages. While each page can be read independently, they are interrelated to some extent. In this section, the error characteristics of page types are analyzed, with the decoded data from MSB pages used to optimize the other pages. Additionally, the feature of a very high correct decoding rate when the number of LDPC iterations is below the predefined maximum is leveraged. This feature serves as a parameter to estimate the probability of correct decoding for the MSB page, thereby reducing read latency.
Fig. 5 presents the simulation results of the RBER for MSB, CSB, and LSB pages under 600, 800, 1000, 1200, and 1400 P/E cycles, with retention time of 60, 90, and 270 days. The figure clearly illustrates significant differences in the RBER among the three page types. Due to the inherent characteristics of the Micron B16A flash memory chip used in the test, the LSB page exhibits the highest RBER, while the CSB and MSB pages display relatively lower RBER. This elevated RBER notably impacts latency performance. Therefore, this paper primarily focuses on reducing the latency of the non-reliable LSB page.
Since MSB and CSB pages exhibit low RBER, they are more likely to be decoded successfully. Furthermore, based on the coding method of the Micron B16A chip used in this paper, it was observed that the MSB page is directly linked to the data of both the LSB and CSB pages. As a result, the MSB page is chosen as the foundation for establishing the error model.
Fig. 6 illustrates the single direction characterization error model developed using the MSB page. As shown, when the

MSB page is set to 1, it encompasses four states: ER, P3, P4, and P7. Specifically, when the MSB page is in the ER or P7 states, the CSB page corresponds to 1. Furthermore, due to the susceptibility of cells in neighboring states to shifts, cells across states are more stable [35]. For instance, even if a cell in the P6 state (CSB page) shifts to the P7 state, the P6 state remains 1. As a result, the CSB page is still accurately interpreted as 1. A similar property holds true when the MSB page is in the P3 or P4 states.
When the MSB page is 0, it encompasses four states: P1, P2, P5, and P6. In this case, when the MSB page is in the P1 or P2 state, the LSB page corresponds to 1. Even if shifts occur, such as ER transitioning to P1, P2 to P1, P1 to P2, or P3 to P2, the LSB page is still reliably judged as 1. Similarly, for the P5 and P6 states, the same outcome applies. The above describes the single-direction characterization of the error model based on MSB page data. Specifically, this approach uses the decoding data of the MSB page to confirm the LSB or CSB page data in a single direction. And the proposed single-direction characterization error model remains applicable to TLC NAND flash memory using other encoding methods. It is just necessary to select the decoded data of the appropriate page based on the corresponding encoding method as the basis for single direction confirmation of the correctness of other pages data.
B. Design of Proposed IACPO Scheme
In the previous section, a single direction characterization error model was proposed, allowing the data of the LSB or CSB page to be inferred solely from the data of the MSB page. This model leverages the inherent characteristics of TLC NAND flash memory. However, the model’s accuracy relies on the assumption that the MSB page data is correct. Traditional methods cannot preemptively determine whether decoding is accurate, and if erroneous MSB page data is used, the inferred results will inevitably be incorrect. To address this limitation, this work fully utilizes the decoding characteristics of LDPC, enabling the prediction and utilization of the correct decoding probability to improve reliability.
As shown in Fig. 3, it is observed that when the number of LDPC decoding iterations remains below the set maximum limit, the probability of correct decoding is nearly 100%. However, when the number of iterations reaches the maximum limit, the likelihood of decoding errors significantly increases.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: ITERATION AND SDA-DRIVEN LDPC DECODING LATENCY REDUCTION

7827

[12]. Fig. 8 presents the average number of decoding iterations per page for different β values, calculated by averaging results from three randomly selected data sets: 600 P/E cycles with 90 days of retention, 800 P/E cycles with 270 days of retention, and 1400 P/E cycles with 360 days of retention. As shown
in the figure, the number of decoding iterations reaches a minimum when β is set to 1.5. Therefore, this paper adopts β = 1.5 for all experiments.

Fig. 7. The overall flowchart of the IACPO scheme.

Fig. 8. Effect on average decoding iterations per page for different parameters of β.

Therefore, the MSB page data can be used in the single direction characterization error model if its iteration count satisfies Eq. (2). In this equation, IterMSBi represents the iteration count for the i-th data, IterMAX denotes the maximum iteration limit, and L is the maximum amount of data stored in the MSB page.

IterMSBi < IterMAX (i = 1, 2, 3, · · · , L)

(2)

Fig. 7 illustrates the overall flowchart of the proposed IACPO scheme. As shown in Fig. 7, decoding is first performed, and the decoding result is then recorded. The iteration here is just a result value of the LDPC decoding process, i.e., the number of iterations required for LDPC to decode one frame of data. Then the next step involves determining whether the MSB page data equals 1. If it does, the CSB page is optimized; otherwise, the LSB page is optimized. Since the CSB page typically exhibits a low RBER, this scheme generally does not prioritize its optimization. Instead, the focus is placed on improving the reliability of the LSB page.
When the MSB page data is not 1, Eq. (2) is first applied to make a judgment. If the condition is met, Eq. (3) is used to adjust the size of LLRLSB, where LLRLSB represents the original LLR of the LSB page, LLRLSB is the adjusted value. β is a constant factor, and its value is set based on the literature

Algorithm 1 Workflow of the IACPO Scheme

Input: Reading data of the MSB, CSB, and LSB pages

Output: Decoded bits of the MSB, CSB, and LSB pages

1: Decode the reading data of the MSB page

2: Record the number of iterations per frame in LDPC

decoding result of MSB page and output the decoding

result

3: Start decoding CSB and LSB pages, i denotes data bits,

j denotes number of frame 4: if MSBi = 1 then 5: Start decoding CSB page

6: if the number of iterations in the j-th frame correspond-

ing to MSBi is less than the set maximum iteration then

7:

LLRCSB = LLRCSB + β × LLRCSB

8:

Decode

9:

Output CSB page decoding result

10: else

11:

LLRCSB remain unchanged

12:

Decode

13:

Output CSB page decoding result

14: end if

15: else

16: Start decoding LSB page

17: if the number of iterations in the j-th frame correspond-

ing to MSBi is less than the set maximum iteration then

18:

LLRLSB = LLRLSB + β × LLRLSB

19:

Decode

20:

Output LSB page decoding result

21: else

22:

LLRLSB remain unchanged

23:

Decode

24:

Output LSB page decoding result

25: end if

26: end if

The adjusted LLR is then input for decoding, and the final output is generated. If Eq. (2) is not satisfied, the decoding proceeds without modifying LLRLSB, and the final result is output as is. Algorithm 1 provides a detailed workflow of the proposed IACPO scheme.

LLRLSB = LLRLSB + β × LLRLSB

(3)

C. SDA in TLC NAND Flash Memory
In the previous section, the number of iterations was utilized to characterize the probability of correct LDPC decoding, enabling effective adjustment of LLR values to accelerate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7828

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 9. Schematic diagram for analyzing SDA characteristics in TLC NAND flash memory.

decoding convergence and reduce latency. To further minimize latency, this section focuses on characterizing LDPC decoding using the SDA.
As shown in Fig. 4, when the RBER of the read data falls within the error correction capability of LDPC, successful decoding is achieved, indicating that LDPC decoding exhibits SDA characteristics. Fig. 9 provides a schematic diagram illustrating the analysis of SDA characteristics in TLC NAND flash memory. From Fig. 9, it is evident that when one voltage reads one situation, for example, only 600 P/E cycles and 30 days retention is read. If the threshold voltage distribution at this time is as shown in (a) in Fig. 9, then the lowest RBER can be obtained by applying the V1 to V7 sense levels, i.e., the error cells at each read voltage are just the shaded part of the overlapped area.
When the read voltages differ from V1 through V7, the number of error cells inevitably increases. (b) in Fig. 9 illustrates the P2 and P3 states, which exhibit the minimum number of errors RBERmin as defined in Eq. (4) when read with V3. In this scenario, NUMblue represents the number of error cells in the blue region, while NUMred corresponds to the error cells in the red region, both occurring during the read operation with V3.

RBERmin = NUMblue + NUMred

(4)

When reading with Vn3 or Vm3, the respective RBER values are given in Eq. (5). Here, NUMgreen represents the number of error cells in the new green region when reading with Vn3, and NUMorange represents the number of error cells in the new orange region when reading with Vm3. If RBERVn3 and RBERVm3 satisfy Eq. (6), then the region between Vn3 and Vm3 is identified as the SDA region, where RBERsu is the maximum RBER that can be successfully decoded by the LDPC.

(

RBERVn3 = NUMgreen + NUMblue + NUMred

(5)

RBERVm3 = NUMorange + NUMblue + NUMred

RBERVn3 ≤ RBERsu and RBERVm3 ≤ RBERsu

(6)

In (c) of Fig. 9, the situation is similar to (a) when reading two scenarios with two separate voltages. However, differences

arise when both scenarios are read with a single voltage. As

shown in (b) of Fig. 9, if SDAcase1 is present in Case1 (solid line: 600 P/E cycles and 30 days retention) and SDAcase2 is present in Case2 (dashed line: 600 P/E cycles and 360 days

retention), then the read voltage located in the overlap region,

SDAoverlap, can successfully read both cases. For instance, Case1 and Case2 are read using V5i , located within SDAoverlap in Fig. 9 (d). At this point, the error cells for both cases are
distributed in the blue and red regions surrounding V5i , though the total error count slightly exceeds the sum of these two

regions. The excess arises from the blue region associated with

the P5 state of Case1 and the red region associated with the
P4 state of Case2. If the RBER for Case1 and Case2 read by V5i satisfies Eq. (7), it indicates that V5i can successfully read both Case1 and Case2.

h

i

MAX RBERcVa5ise1 , RBERcVa5ise2 ≤ RBERsu

(7)

Fig. 10 illustrates the measured offsets for successful decoding under varying P/E cycles and retention times. The vertical

axis represents the read voltages V1 to V7 of TLC NAND flash memory, denoted as MSB1 to MSB7. In each graph, ’-1’ cor-

responds to 30 days retention, while ’-2’ represents 360 days retention. As observed in Fig. 10, overlapping offset regions exist for different retention times under the same P/E cycle,

confirming the presence of SDAoverlap based on measured data. This occurs because, for the same P/E cycle, the RBER of

the read data increases as the retention time grows, which in turn causes the offset to increase. In this situation, as long as the P/E cycle is close and the retention time falls within

the range defined by the simulation parameters, the SDAoverlap offset can be used to read the data. Since the process employs LDPC decoding, which is effective within a certain range,

the reliability of the read data can be significantly improved.

Therefore, a strict linear relationship between the intervals is

not necessary.

However, exceptions exist where SDAoverlap is absent; for instance, LSB4 at 1400 P/E cycles shows no SDAoverlap between the 30 days and 360 days retention cases. In these conditions without overlap offsets, the center of the two cases is used as the read offset. Subsequent test results have also

demonstrated that excellent performance gains can still be

achieved under these conditions. Despite these exceptions,

SDAoverlap is observed in most scenarios, enabling successful reading of multiple cases using a single read voltage.

D. Design of Proposed ULDCO Scheme
SDAoverlap leverages the property that LDPC decoding success occurs within a specific range, where the probability of correct decoding is exceptionally high. To address the challenge of unreliable MSB page decoding in the IACPO scheme during the middle and later stages of flash memory’s lifetime, this section introduces the ULDCO scheme. This approach reads data using the read reference voltage within the SDAoverlap region, thereby reducing the RBER of the read data.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: ITERATION AND SDA-DRIVEN LDPC DECODING LATENCY REDUCTION

7829

Fig. 10. The measured offsets for successful decoding with different P/E cycles and retention times.
TABLE I READ INDEX TABLE IN DIFFERENT AREAS

Fig. 11. The overall flowchart of the proposed ULDCO scheme.
As a result, LDPC decoding has a high probability of success, significantly enhancing overall decoding performance.
Fig. 11 presents the overall flowchart of the proposed ULDCO scheme, which comprises two main components: the offline process and the online process. The offline process involves identifying the SDAoverlap and constructing the Read Index Table. First, specific P/E cycles and retention time ranges are selected for testing. The selection of this range is not fixed and can be adjusted based on the characteristics of the chip and the specific requirements. For each chosen P/E cycles, two boundary retention time ranges are tested, for instance, at 1400 P/E cycles, retention times of 30 days and 360 days are tested.
Next, the optimal read reference voltage is determined, and the read voltage is offset incrementally around this value. The offsets corresponding to successful decoding are identified and recorded. This is performed during the offline process, meaning the online read process does not require extensive read operations to determine the optimal read voltage. The range of successful decoding offsets is then analyzed to calculate the SDAoverlap, and the central value of the overlap region is selected as the read offset for that dataset. If there is no SDAoverlap exists, the midpoint between the maximum and minimum offsets is used as the read offset. This process

results in the creation of the Read Index Table shown in Tab. I. It is generated during the offline process, and the online read process simply involves a direct lookup.
This experiment utilizes the Micron B16A chip, which has a maximum P/E cycle of 1500. To analyze performance during the middle and later stages of the chip’s lifespan, experiments were conducted at 600, 1000, and 1400 P/E cycles, with these cycles used as examples. Retention times were also varied, and examples of 30 days and 360 days are presented. It is important to note that Tab. I allows for flexible parameter ranges to be set according to the characteristics and specific needs of the flash memory chip. The table illustrates that the center value of the SDAoverlap varies slightly across different cases. The above steps outline the process for constructing the Read Index Table.
The online process handles the actual data reading. First, the P/E cycles and retention time range for the read operation are determined, which can be obtained from the host controller of the flash memory [34]. Using this information, the appropriate read offset is then determined by referencing the Read Index Table established in the offline process. For example, in the case of 665 P/E cycles and 70 days retention, the relevant entry falls within the first column of Tab. I, ensuring the retention time is within range. The P/E cycles value is then matched to the closest group for selection.
Next, the MSB page decoding is performed using the read data. If decoding fails, a soft decision read is attempted; otherwise, the IACPO scheme is executed, completing the decoded output. Algorithm 2 provides a detailed workflow diagram of this process. In the subsequent test chapters, it

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7830

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

Algorithm 2 Workflow of the ULDCO Scheme

1: Getting the P/E cycles and retention time of the read data

from the host control

2: Find the range located in the Read Index Table based on

the P/E cycles and retention time

3: Determine the offset of each read voltage

4: Start read

5: Decode MSB page

6: if Decode successful for some frames then

7: Start the IACPO scheme

8: if reading successful then

9:

Output decoding result

10: else

11:

return READ FAILURE

12: end if

13: else

14: return READ FAILURE

15: end if

Fig. 12. The physical drawing of the self-developed test platform.
is demonstrated that the proposed scheme achieves successful decoding in most cases while significantly reducing latency, eliminating the need for high-latency soft decision reads.
V. TEST RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS This section begins with a brief overview of the test platform, followed by a comparison and analysis of the reliability performance of the proposed scheme. It then demonstrates how the proposed scheme significantly reduces read latency. To validate the general applicability of the scheme, tests and analyses are conducted across different chips. Finally, the computational and storage overhead of the proposed scheme is assessed.
A. Flash Memory Test Platform In this section all the measured data are done by utilizing
a self-developed test platform developed by our group [40]. Fig. 12 is the physical diagram of this test platform. The platform is developed based on ZYNQ-7000 SOC, which can realize the function of read, program or erase on flash memory chips, and can also be customized with algorithms to complete high-speed testing of flash memory characteristics. In this section, the test platform will be utilized to conduct

Fig. 13. Architecture diagram of the proposed scheme in the flash controller.
comprehensive testing on the Micron B16A chip, a 64-layer architecture with 1,008 available blocks per LUN and 1,500 P/E cycles endurance, in order to obtain valuable real-world characterization data for subsequent reliability analysis.
Since the proposed scheme is implemented within a flash controller, it can benefit flash controller manufacturers. Fig. 13 illustrates the architecture of the proposed scheme within the flash controller. When intervention is required, the P/E cycles and retention times are first determined. The Read Index Table is then queried to identify the appropriate read voltage, after which the Read Engine executes the read command. The read data is decoded by the ECC Engine, and the IACPO scheme is applied based on the decoding result from the MSB page to complete the ULDCO scheme.
B. Reliability Performance Improvement Analysis
Reliability is a critical factor in evaluating the feasibility of a scheme. For data read from NAND flash memory, the success of LDPC decoding determines the scheme’s reliability. In this experiment, the test chips unreliable page is the LSB page, which exhibits a high RBER and is typically not decodable by traditional schemes. Therefore, this section primarily analyzes the BER comparison before and after LDPC decoding of the LSB page as a measure of reliability. The experimental data are derived from real measurements of the Micron B16A chip. The LDPC code length is 18,432, with a code rate of 8/9. The decoding method used is the minimum sum algorithm, and the maximum number of decoding iterations is set to 40.
Fig. 14 presents a comparison of BER across different schemes, considering various P/E cycles and retention times. The Arrhenius model was applied for high-temperature acceleration testing to simulate room-temperature retention time. Since the proposed scheme is primarily aimed at the middle and later stages of flash memory life, tests were conducted at 600, 800, 1000, 1200, and 1400 P/E cycles, with retention times of 60, 90, and 270 days at room temperature. The black curve in Fig. 14 represents the RBER of the read data. “BER-Traditional” refers to the BER after reading and decoding the data using the traditional scheme. “BER-IACPO scheme” shows the result after decoding with the proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: ITERATION AND SDA-DRIVEN LDPC DECODING LATENCY REDUCTION

7831

Fig. 14. Comparison of BER for different schemes with different P/E cycles and retention times.

Fig. 15. Decoding success probability of various schemes at different word lines with different P/E cycles and retention times. (The number at the top indicates the percentage of successful decoding for the scheme).

IACPO scheme. “BER-ULDCO scheme” indicates the result after decoding with the ULDCO scheme, and “BER-EMAL scheme” represents the result after decoding with the classical latency reduction scheme proposed in [12].
Fig. 14 shows the average BER across the entire block tested in the flash memory. As seen in the figure, the traditional scheme reduces the RBER to some extent, but the decoded results still contain numerous errors. The EMAL scheme further decreases the BER significantly compared to the traditional scheme, although a small amount of BER remains in the cases with 90 and 270 days retention times, where the RBER is high. In contrast, the proposed IACPO and ULDCO schemes successfully decode the read data in all cases, demonstrating that the proposed scheme significantly reduces the BER. This highlights the effectiveness of the proposed scheme in improving the reliability of read data.
Fig. 14 evaluates the overall reliability of the various schemes in terms of blocks, while Fig. 15 assesses the probability of successful decoding from the perspective of individual word lines. As shown in Fig. 15, the proposed IACPO and ULDCO schemes achieve a 100% decoding success rate with a 60 days retention time. In contrast, the traditional scheme has a maximum success rate of 83.33% and a minimum of 72.58%. The EMAL scheme, while demonstrating good reliability, achieves a maximum success rate of 96.77% and a minimum of 95.43%, but still falls short of complete decoding success.

For the 90 and 270 days retention cases, the trends are similar. Notably, in the case of 1400 P/E cycles and 270 days retention, the proposed scheme improves the decoding success rate by 38.17% compared to the traditional scheme, highlighting the exceptional reliability performance of the proposed method.
C. Latency Performance Reduction Analysis
The application of LDPC codes in NAND flash memory can significantly enhance reliability. However, LDPC faces substantial latency issues when dealing with high RBER. Therefore, evaluating the latency reduction performance of the proposed scheme in flash memory is crucial, as it serves as an important metric to fully demonstrate its advantages.
The proposed ULDCO scheme addresses this by building the Read Index Table offline, avoiding any additional read latency during the online read process. Furthermore, the scheme does not involve complex computational processes, resulting in negligible additional latency overhead. As such, only the latency of the online reading process requires analysis. Additionally, in typical flash memory usage, soft decision sensing is often unnecessary, and hard decision sensing levels can be utilized instead [11]. Hard decision sensing involves applying a sense level once in the overlap region of each state [41]. Thus, for the same number of sense levels (i.e., hard decision reads), the number of iterations becomes the primary

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7832

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 16. Comparison of the number of iterations in a page for different schemes with different P/E cycles and retention times.
TABLE II PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT SCHEMES

indicator for assessing the latency reduction achieved by the scheme.
Fig. 16 presents a comparative analysis of the average number of iterations per page for each scheme, considering different P/E cycles and retention times. Since the flash chip used in this experiment stores up to 7 frames of data per page, the maximum number of iterations per page is 280.
As shown in Fig. 16, the iteration counts for the proposed IACPO and ULDCO schemes are significantly lower than those of both the traditional and EMAL schemes in all cases. The ULDCO scheme outperforms the IACPO scheme in every scenario, owing to its improved read data reliability. Specifically, the proposed ULDCO scheme, with 1000 P/E cycles and 270 days of retention, achieves a maximum reduction of 81.51% in the number of iterations compared to the traditional scheme. The proposed IACPO scheme, with 1000 P/E cycles and 90 days of retention, achieves a maximum reduction of 73.43%. Furthermore, both the ULDCO and IACPO schemes reduce iteration latency by approximately 20% compared to the EMAL scheme [12], demonstrating the excellent latency reduction performance of the proposed schemes. Additionally, the studies in [6] and [35] were compared with traditional schemes based on iterations. This is identical to the evaluation metrics and comparison benchmarks of the proposed scheme in this paper, allowing for a direct performance comparison. Tab. II presents a comparison of iteration reductions between the proposed ULDCO and the other schemes. As shown in the table, the proposed ULDCO scheme demonstrates significant performance improvements over the other schemes.
D. Generalizability Analysis
For flash memory chips of the same type produced by the same manufacturer, different batches typically exhibit similar characteristics due to the consistent production process. The ULDCO scheme proposed in this paper involves building a

Fig. 17. Comparison of latency reduction of the proposed scheme on different batches of flash chips.
Read Index Table. This table is tested on a specific flash chip. Therefore, it is important to assess whether the scheme is universally applicable across different chips. In contrast, the proposed IACPO scheme does not rely on the inherent characteristics of the flash memory, making it suitable for application with any model of flash memory chip.
Fig. 17 compares the latency reduction performance of the proposed scheme across different batches of flash chips. Chip 2 is the test chip for the proposed scheme, where the Read Index Table is measured on this chip, while Chip 1 and Chip 3 are Micron B16A chips from different batches than Chip 2. Using the Read Index Table built with Chip 2, this paper also randomly selects P/E cycles and retention times to demonstrate the broad applicability of the proposed scheme. Specifically, Chip 1 was tested with 665 P/E cycles and 71 days of retention, Chip 3 was tested with 1257 P/E cycles and 211 days of retention, and Chip 2 was tested with 1000 P/E cycles and 60 days of retention.
To clearly demonstrate the latency reduction performance of the proposed scheme, the iteration latency of the traditional scheme is set as 100% of the reference standard in Fig. 17. As shown in the figure, both the proposed IACPO and ULDCO schemes significantly reduce iteration latency compared to the traditional scheme, outperforming the EMAL scheme on all chips. Furthermore, the proposed ULDCO scheme on Chip 3 achieves a maximum reduction of 75.26% in iteration latency compared to the traditional scheme, with a performance improvement of 27.29% over the EMAL scheme. This highlights that the proposed IACPO and ULDCO schemes are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: ITERATION AND SDA-DRIVEN LDPC DECODING LATENCY REDUCTION

7833

not only broadly applicable but also effectively reduce latency, offering excellent performance.
E. Overhead Analysis
The IACPO and ULDCO schemes proposed in this paper primarily address two aspects: storage and computation overhead. Therefore, the analysis of these schemes will focus on these two factors separately.
Firstly, the IACPO scheme does not require building a Read Index Table, resulting in minimal storage overhead. Only the number of iterations for each frame in each page of data needs to be stored during decoding. In this experiment, seven frames of data can be stored per page, meaning only seven additional bits need to be stored during decoding. Given that the storage capacity of the Micron B16A used in this experiment is 256 GB, the storage overhead is 7/238, which is negligible. Regarding computational overhead, the proposed IACPO scheme is even more minimal, requiring only one comparison and one multiplication. Therefore, both the storage and computational overhead of IACPO scheme are negligible.
Next, the ULDCO scheme, which involves an additional process of building a Read Index Table than the IACPO scheme, is discussed. However, this process occurs during the offline phase and does not contribute to latency. Only one additional Read Index Table needs to be stored, occupying 21 bits of data. With the added number of iterations stored during the online process, the total storage overhead amounts to 28/238, which is still extremely low. Even if the Read Index Table is expanded to enhance the applicable range and accuracy, the storage overhead remains negligible. As for the computational overhead, the ULDCO scheme requires only two comparisons and one multiplication, making the computational overhead similarly negligible. In conclusion, both the IACPO and ULDCO schemes achieve significant latency reduction with virtually no impact on storage and computational overhead.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a method to reduce latency in 3-D TLC NAND flash memory by leveraging the decoding correct probability of LDPC. By analyzing the relationship between the coding methods of individual pages in TLC NAND flash memory, a single direction characterization of the error model is thus established. Based on the results of actual experiments, the feasibility of using the number of iterations as a characterization of the decoding correct probability is demonstrated, and the IACPO scheme is proposed by combining the constructed error model. In order to further improve the correct probability of data reading in the middle and late stages of flash memory life, the existence of SDA is demonstrated with real measurement data, and its distribution characteristics in flash memory are analyzed. Building on this, a further optimized ULDCO scheme is proposed in combination with the IACPO scheme. The experimental results show that both schemes are generally applicable on different chips. The IACPO scheme reduces iterative latency by 73.43% compared to the traditional scheme under 1000 P/E cycles

and 90 days of retention, while the ULDCO scheme reduces latency by 81.51% under 1000 P/E cycles and 270 days
of retention. Both schemes also achieve approximately 20%
better performance than the EMAL scheme, with minimal and
negligible storage and computation overhead. Therefore, the proposed optimization scheme offers a promising technical
approach for the future advancement of high-speed, low-
latency flash memory technology.
REFERENCES
[1] Y.-H. Hsiao, H.-T. Lue, W.-C. Chen, B.-Y. Tsui, K.-Y. Hsieh, and C.Y. Lu, “Ultra-high bit density 3D NAND flash-featuring-assisted gate operation,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 1015–1017, Oct. 2015.
[2] L. Yin, Y. Li, X. Zhang, X. Zhai, and G. Han, “An efficient dynamic threshold voltage detection scheme for improving 3-D NAND flash reliability,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 529–543, Dec. 2024.
[3] H. Feng, D. Wei, S. Gu, Z. Piao, Y. Wang, and L. Qiao, “Random flip bit aware reading for improving high-density 3D NAND flash performance,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 2372–2383, May 2024.
[4] S. Chung et al., “Process improvements for 7th generation 1Tb quadlevel cell 3D NAND flash memory in mass production,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), May 2023, pp. 1–4.
[5] Y. Lv, L. Shi, L. Luo, C. Li, C. J. Xue, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Tail latency optimization for LDPC-based high-density and low-cost flash memory devices,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 544–557, Mar. 2022.
[6] B. Zhang et al., “Monitor units assisted LDPC decoding algorithm based on page BER variation of 3D NAND flash memory,” Microelectron. Rel., vol. 147, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 115034.
[7] M. Eroz, F.-W. Sun, and L.-N. Lee, “An innovative low-density paritycheck code design with near-Shannon-limit performance and simple implementation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 13–17, Jan. 2006.
[8] Q. Huang, M. Zhang, Z. Wang, and L. Wang, “Bit-reliability based low-complexity decoding algorithms for non-binary LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 4230–4240, Dec. 2014.
[9] W.-C. Wang, C.-C. Ho, Y.-C. Li, L.-C. Chen, and Y.-M. Chang, “Reaping both latency and reliability benefits with elaborate sanitization design for 3D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 72, no. 11, pp. 3029–3041, Nov. 2023.
[10] Y. Wang, D. Wei, M. Liu, H. Feng, and L. Qiao, “EBDN: Entropybased double nonuniform sensing algorithm for LDPC decoding in TLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1914–1918, Jun. 2024.
[11] M. Ye et al., “Achieving near-zero read retry for 3D NAND flash memory,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Architectural Support Program. Lang. Operating Syst., Volume 2, Apr. 2024, pp. 55–70.
[12] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020.
[13] Y. Du, Y. Gao, S. Huang, and Q. Li, “LDPC level prediction towards read performance of high-density flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Comput.Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 3264–3274, Oct. 2023.
[14] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[15] Q. Li et al., “Characterizing and optimizing LDPC performance on 3D NAND flash memories,” ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1–26, Sep. 2024.
[16] K. Sakuma, H. Kusai, S. Fujii, and M. Koyama, “Highly scalable horizontal channel 3D NAND memory excellent in compatibility with conventional fabrication technology,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 1142–1144, Sep. 2013.
[17] M.-K. Jeong et al., “Characterization of traps in 3D stacked NAND flash memory devices with tube-type poly-Si channel structure,” in IEDM Tech. Dig., Dec. 2012, pp. 9.3.1–9.3.4.
[18] D. Wei, Y. Wang, H. Feng, H. Xiang, and L. Qiao, “LLD: Lightweight latency decrease scheme of LDPC hard decision decoding for 3-D TLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 71, no. 10, pp. 4611–4623, Oct. 2024.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7834

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

[19] E.-K. Jang, I.-J. Kim, C. A. Lee, C. Yoon, and J.-S. Lee, “Analysis of residual stresses induced in the confined 3D NAND flash memory structure for process optimization,” IEEE J. Electron Devices Soc., vol. 10, pp. 104–108, 2022.
[20] L. Long, J. Huang, C. Gao, D. Liu, R. Liu, and Y. Jiang, “ADAR: Application-specific data allocation and reprogramming optimization for 3D TLC flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1824–1837, Jun. 2022.
[21] S. Kayser and P. H. Siegel, “Constructions for constant-weight ICI-free codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2014, pp. 1431–1435.
[22] E. Yaakobi, J. Ma, L. Grupp, P. H. Siegel, S. Swanson, and J. K. Wolf, “Error characterization and coding schemes for flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops, Dec. 2010, pp. 1856–1860.
[23] M. Fukuchi, S. Suzuki, K. Maeda, C. Matsui, and K. Takeuchi, “BER evaluation system considering device characteristics of TLC and QLC NAND flash memories in hybrid SSDs with real storage workloads,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Daegu, South Korea, May 2021, pp. 1–4.
[24] A. Dehghan and A. H. Banihashemi, “On the tanner graph cycle distribution of random LDPC, random protograph-based LDPC, and random quasi-cyclic LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 4438–4451, Jun. 2018.
[25] Y. Nakamura, Y. Bandai, Y. Okamoto, H. Osawa, H. Aoi, and H. Muraoka, “A study on nonbinary LDPC coding and iterative decoding system in BPM R/W channel,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 3566–3569, Oct. 2011.
[26] H. Feng, D. Wei, Y. Wang, Y. Song, Z. Piao, and L. Qiao, “Lightweight read reference voltage calibration strategy for improving 3-D TLC NAND flash memory reliability,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 370–379, Sep. 2023.
[27] Q. Li et al., “Shaving retries with sentinels for fast read over high-density 3D flash,” in Proc. 53rd Annu. IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Microarchitecture (MICRO), Jul. 2020, pp. 483–495.
[28] Y. Li, G. Han, S. Huang, C. Liu, M. Zhang, and F. Wu, “Exploiting metadata to estimate read reference voltage for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 9–17, Feb. 2023.
[29] M. Jia, Y. Kong, X. Zhan, M. Zhang, F. Wu, and J. Chen, “Optimal program-read schemes toward highly reliable open block operations in 3-D charge-trap NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 4797–4807, Nov. 2022.
[30] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Read and write voltage signal optimization for multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1613–1623, Apr. 2016.
[31] Q. Li et al., “Read latency decrease schemes based on check node error rate for 3D NAND flash memories,” Microelectron. Rel., vol. 136, Sep. 2022, Art. no. 114596.
[32] Q. Li et al., “Optimal read voltages decision scheme eliminating read retry operations for 3D NAND flash memories,” Microelectron. Rel., vol. 131, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 114509.
[33] Y. Du, D. Zou, Q. Li, L. Shi, H. Jin, and C. J. Xue, “LaLDPC: Latencyaware LDPC for read performance improvement of solid state drives,” in Proc. MSST, Jul. 2017, pp. 1–11.
[34] Q. Li, L. Shi, Y. Cui, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting asymmetric errors for LDPC decoding optimization on 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 475–488, Apr. 2020.
[35] X. Yu et al., “Interleaved LDPC decoding scheme improves 3D TLC NAND flash memory system performance,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 4191–4204, Nov. 2023.
[36] Y. Li, G. Han, C. Liu, M. Zhang, and F. Wu, “Exploiting the singlesymbol LLR variation to accelerate LDPC decoding for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 5146–5150, Dec. 2023.
[37] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[38] I. B. Djordjevic and B. Vasic, “Nonbinary LDPC codes for optical communication systems,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 2224–2226, Oct. 10, 2005.
[39] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, X. Zhang, N. Zheng, and T. Zhang, “LDPCin-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. 11th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), Sep. 2013, pp. 243–256.
[40] D. Wei, Y. Gong, L. Qiao, and L. Deng, “A hardware–software codesign experiments platform for NAND flash based on Zynq,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Embedded Real-Time Comput. Syst. Appl., Jun. 2014, pp. 1–7.

[41] M. Zhang, F. Wu, Q. Yu, and C. Xie, “PEAR: Unbalanced inter-page errors aware read scheme for latency-efficient 3D NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 49–58, Mar. 2024.
Debao Wei (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT) at Weihai, Weihai, China, in 2009 and 2011, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from HIT, Harbin, China, in 2016.
He has been an Associate Research Fellow and a Ph.D. Supervisor with the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, HIT. His research interests include highly reliable storage systems, embedded data processing systems, and flight test systems.
Yongchao Wang received the B.S. degree from Henan University (HENU), Kaifeng, China, in 2018, and the M.S. degree from Harbin Engineering University (HEU), Harbin, China, in 2021. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin.
His research interests include coded modulation technology and highly reliable storage systems.
Dejun Zhang received the B.S. degree from Harbin Institute of Technology at Weihai, Weihai, China, in 2024. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China.
His research interests include NAND flash memory reliability automated test systems.
Huqi Xiang received the B.S. degree from Harbin Institute of Technology at Shenzhen (HITSZ), Shenzhen, China, in 2023. She is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin, China.
Her research interests include reliable NAND flash memory systems and error correction coding.
Liyan Qiao (Member, IEEE) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin, China, in 1996, 1998, and 2005, respectively.
He has been a Professor and a Ph.D. Supervisor with the Automatic Test and Control Department, HIT, since 2009. His current research interests include data acquisition technology, massstorage data record technology, and test information processing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

