2022 IEEE 96th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2022-Fall) | 978-1-6654-5468-1/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/VTC2022-Fall57202.2022.10013051

Enhanced Informed Dynamic BP Decoding Scheduling Strategies for 5G NR LDPC Codes

Tofar C.-Y. Chang Dept. of Electrical Eng. National Taipei University of Technology
Taipei, TAIWAN tofar@ntut.edu.tw

I-Hsiang Lee MediaTek Inc. Hsinchu, TAIWAN i-hsiang.lee@mediatek.com

Pin-Han Wang MediaTek Inc. Hsinchu, TAIWAN Pin-han.Wang@mediatek.com

Jian-Jia Weng Dept. of Electrical Eng. National Taiwan Ocean University
Keelung, TAIWAN jjweng@mail.ntou.edu.tw

Yu T. Su Dept. of Electrical and Computer Eng. National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, TAIWAN ytsu@nycu.edu.tw

Abstract—We present an enhanced informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) strategy to avoid propagations of unreliable messages in the residual belief-propagation (RBP) algorithm for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. To reduce the resource needed for updating the degree-one variable nodes (VNs) in an RBP-based algorithm for decoding 5G New Radio (NR) LDPC codes, we further introduce a process consisting of several simple procedures for managing the resource consumption. Simulation results demonstrate that our RBP algorithm based on the proposed IDS strategy outperforms existing RBP-based algorithms at the early decoding iterations. By using our degreeone VN resource managing approach, the performance of both the proposed and the existing decoders is significantly improved in decoding the 5G NR codes.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, belief-propagation decoding, informed dynamic scheduling, decoding resource management, 5G NR.
I. INTRODUCTION
It has been shown that low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes provide capacity-approaching performance when the belief propagation (BP) algorithm is used for decoding. Due to their excellent error-correcting capability, LDPC codes have been considered as the channel codes in several wireless communication standards such as IEEE 802.11ac (WiFi) [2], IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX) [3], and the 3GPP 5G New Radio (NR) specification [4].
For the conventional BP algorithm, all the variable-tocheck (V2C) messages are updated simultaneously, so are all check-to-variable (C2V) messages propagated. Such a fullyparallel updating scheme, which is called flooding scheduling, often need many decoding iterations to achieve the required error-rate performance. To have better decoding efficiency and performance, the standard sequential scheduling (SSS) [11] and informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) strategies have been introduced. It has been shown that some IDS-assisted BP algorithms do yield impressive performance improvement against those using the SSS or flooding scheduling.

The first IDS-aided BP decoder, the residual belief propagation (RBP) algorithm, determines the updating order of the C2V messages based on the C2V residuals, which is defined as the difference between the previous C2V message value and its precomputed update value. It offers impressive performance at the first few iterations but fails to yield satisfactory converged performance. This might due to the fact that the RBP decoding process tends to focus on a small part of nodes/edges of the code graph and thus deprive some erroneous decisions of the opportunities to be corrected. To remedy this greedy behavior in RBP decoding, several related modified decoding strategies have been proposed in the literature [5]–[10]. Among these improved (or we called RBP-based) algorithms, the silentvariable-node-free (SVNF) RBP algorithm introduced in [6] can not only yield quite nice performance but provide almost best performance-complexity tradeoff.
Most IDS strategies, as just mentioned, aim at reducing the negative effects brought about by the greedy approach and encouraging the propagation of reliable information. On the other hand, we must also pay attention to the cases when erroneous messages were spread. Our extensive computer simulations reveal that sometimes the unreliable messages can be spread via the dynamic scheduling used. It is therefore necessary that an IDS strategy can also prevent or suspend the propagation of unreliable messages.
In each update, the RBP algorithm forwards the C2V message with the maximum residual. A check node (CN) may send messages to its connected variable nodes (VNs) several times but between two consecutive C2V messages sent by the same CN, there might be no new information received by this CN. As no updated V2C message is received, the two C2V messages are generated from the same set of V2C messages. A large C2V residual sometimes implies that the associated VN or the related V2C message might carry unreliable information [9]. Hence, if the C2V message with the maximum residual is sent by the associated CN, this CN should stop delivering

978-1-6654-54A6u8t-h1o/2ri2z/e$d3l1ic.0e0ns©ed20u2s2e IliEmEitEed to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:35:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

new C2V messages until it obtains new V2C information to avoid forwarding V2C information.
In this paper, we propose what we call the update-beforepropagate RBP (UBPRBP) algorithm. After a CN sends its C2V message in UBPRBP algorithm, this CN will temporarily stay muted until it can receive new information from its connecting VNs; no C2V message can be delivered as the associated CN is set muted. Simulation results show that compared with the RBP algorithm, our algorithm can provide better decoding performance with lower computational complexity.
Furthermore, we found that the LDPC codes used in the 5G NR specification contain many degree-1 VNs. It is observed that the C2V messages associated with the degree-1 VNs are more likely to be updated than the other edges if an IDS decoder is applied. However, this would reduce the decoding efficiency since a degree-1 VN can only provide its intrinsic channel information to the connected CN. As a result, we propose a scheme to remedy this shortcoming. With our method, all degree-1 VN can only be updated at the end of the iteration; when an edge linking to a degree-1 VN is selected, the passing of the C2V message will be performed by one of the other edges linking to the same CN instead. Simulation results show that our degree-1 VN handling process would significantly improve the performance of the RBP-based algorithms when decoding the NR LDPC codes.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. A brief review of the RBP algorithm is given in Section II, and the UBPRBP algorithm is also presented in the same section. Section III illustrates the proposed degree-1 VN handling process. Simulation results are shown in Section IV, and the conclusion remarks are drawn in Section V.
II. THE PROPOSED UBPRBP ALGORITHM
A binary (N , K) LDPC code C of rate R = K/N is defined by an M × N parity-check matrix H = [Hmn], where the columns and rows respectively represent the VNs and CNs on the associated Tanner graph and M is the number of rows in the H. It is assumed that the BPSK modulation is used and a binary codeword u = (u0, u1, · · · , uN−1) is mapped to the transmitted sequence x = (x0, x1, · · · , xN−1) where xn = 1 − 2un for 0 ≤ n < N and transmitted over a zero-mean AWGN channel with noise variance σ2. We also denote the corresponding received noisy codeword and the decoded decision vector as y = (y0, y1, · · · , yN−1) and uˆ = (uˆ0, uˆ1, · · · , uˆN−1), respectively.
Let Lm c2v→n be the C2V message from cm, the mth CN, to vn, the nth VN, Lvn2→c m present the V2C message from vn to cm, and Ln be the total log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of vn. We define M(n) = {m|Hmn = 1} as the index set of CNs linked to vn and N (m) = {n|Hmn = 1} as the index set of VNs connected to cm. We further denote the set M(n) with cm excluded by M(n) \ m and similarly the set N (m) with vn excluded by N (m) \ n. For BP decoding algorithms, the

V2C messages sent from vn to cm, where m ∈ M(n), can be computed by

Lnv2→c m

=

2yn σ2

+

Lcm2v′→n,

(1)

m′∈M(n)\m

and the C2V messages delivered from cm to vn for each n ∈ N (m) are updated by





Lcm2v→n = 2 tanh−1 

tanh

1 2

Lvn2′c→m

 (.2)

n′∈N (m)\n

The total LLR of vn is

Ln

=

2yn σ2

+

Lcm2v→n,

(3)

m∈M(n)

and the decision is obtained via uˆn = sgn(Ln), where sgn(·) denotes the sign function defined by sgn(a) = 1 if a ≥ 0 and sgn(a) = −1 otherwise.

A. The RBP Algorithm

The RBP algorithm can be viewed as the first IDS-aided
decoder which decides the message updating order by pre-
dicting the possible benefit brought by sending a message. In
the RBP algorithm, the residual of a C2V message, denoted by Rmc2v→n, is defined as the difference between its current and precomputed values:

Rmc2v→n = |Lˆm c2v→n − Lm c2v→n|,

(4)

where Lˆm c2v→n is the precomputed version of Lm c2v→n. The C2V residual is thought of as a metric for measuring how far a

message is from convergence [5], and the C2V message with

the maximum residual will be selected for propagation in each

message update in the RBP algorithm.

At the beginning of the RBP decoding, each C2V message

((LLˆ cm cm22vv→ →nn ))

is initialized to 0, is generated via

and (2).

the precomputed C2V message Then, the residual of a C2V

message Rmc2v→n is computed by (4). Denote cm∗ and vn∗ as

the CN and VN corresponding to the message conveying the

maximum residual, respectively. As cm∗ and vn∗ are identified,

the C2V message Lcm2v∗→n∗ would be replaced by Lˆm c2v∗→n∗ and

propagated, and m∗ would thus

then the V2C be updated by

m(1e)s.sTagheesn,LLˆvn2ci∗c→ 2→vji

,i∈ and

M(n∗) \ Ric→ 2vj for

all j ∈ N (i) \ n∗, i ∈ M(n∗) \ m∗ will be calculated before

the next C2V message selection. The above procedures will be

repeated until the stopping criterion is satisfied, that is, a valid

codeword is obtained/the maximum iteration (or updated edge

number) is reached. Generally, an iteration would be counted

after E C2V messages are propagated, where E is the number

of edges on the code graph corresponding to H.

B. Update-before-Propagate RBP Algorithm
Recently, the related works have suggested several effective strategies to prevent the greedy phenomenon and have reliability messages can be passed as soon as possible during decoding. However, the prevention of the unreliable message propagation is rarely addressed in the literature. Through our

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:35:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

experiments, we observed that a CN can propagate its C2V
messages multiple times before it receives new information
from the linked VNs. As a VN associated with the largest C2V
residual indicates that the decision of this VN is possibly un-
reliable, propagating multiple C2V messages from a CN with
no V2C information update between the message propagations
would have the unreliable VNs send unreliable messages to
the other VNs linked to the same CN. A simple example is
given as follows. Consider that an all-zero codeword is sent
and we are at the beginning of the decoding, where all V2C messages are initialized as 2yn/σ2. Assume a CN, say c0, has three linked VNs, say v0, v1, and v2 respectively, and only v0 has negative channel reliability value, i.e., 2y0/σ2 < 0. Suppose the residual R0c2→v 0 is the maximum and thus the corresponding C2V message is selected to propagate for the first message update. If in one of the future updates, R0c2→v 1 becomes the maximum residual but v0 has not received C2V messages from its connected CNs except for that from c0, the incorrect information of v0 would be incorporated in the C2V message Lc02→v 1 and pass to v1.
To suppress the potential error propagations illus-
trated above, we propose the update-before-propagate RBP (UBPRBP) algorithm. Let OM = {0, 1, . . . , M − 1} and ON = {0, 1, . . . , N − 1}. Denote S as the group of unmuted CNs, and Q(m) is the VN index which corresponds to the largest C2V residual associated with cm. The UBPRBP algorithm is described in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 UBPRBP Algorithm

1: Initialize all Lm c2v→n = 0 and Lnv2→c m = 2yn/σ2. Let S ← OM .
2: Generate all Lˆcm2v→n by (3) and compute all Rmc2v→n by (4) 3: Let Q(m) ← arg maxn Rmc2v→n|n ∈ N (m) ∀m ∈ S 4: Find (m∗, n∗) = arg max(m,Q(m)){Rmc2v→Q(m)|m ∈ S}
and let Lm c2v∗→n∗ ← Lˆcm2v∗→n∗ 5: Propagate Lm c2v∗→n∗ and set Rmc2v∗→n∗ = 0 6: Let S ← S\m∗
7: for every i ∈ M(n∗)\m∗ do

8: 9:

Generate Compute

aLˆncid→ 2vpj raonpdaguaptedaLtevn2∗Rc→ic→ i2vajn∀djle∈t

S N

←S∪ (i)\n∗

{i}

10: Find Q(i) = arg maxj Ric→ 2vj |j ∈ N (i)

11: end for

12: if Stopping condition is not satisfied then

13: Go to line 4

14: end if

In Algorithm 1, all the largest residuals associated with the unmuted CNs (Rmc2v→Q(m) for all m ∈ S) would be compared for selecting the maximum one, and the C2V mes-
sage corresponding to the chosen maximum residual would be
delivered. A C2V message sent, the corresponding CN will be temporary muted (removed from S) until any one of its linked VNs receives updated information from other connected CNs
and regenerates the V2C message to this CN. The stopping
condition is set as the maximum iteration is reached or a valid

codeword is obtained at the end of each iteration. Compared with the conventional RBP algorithm, the
UBPRBP algorithm requires less computation efforts for the residual comparisons. This is because each CN’s associated largest C2V residual is found in advance (lines 3 and 10 of Algorithm 1) and only the largest residual values of unmuted CNs (those in S) will be compared for the edge selection (line 4).
III. PROPOSED PROCESS FOR UPDATING DEGREE-ONE VNS FOR IDS STRATEGIES
The LDPC codes specified for the 5G NR have some characteristics which are rarely seen over the LDPC codes used in the other communication standards. One of the characteristics is the appearance of degree-1 VNs on the code graph, which is designed for supporting a higher level of flexibility for the incremental-redundancy hybrid automatic-repeat-request (IRHARQ) schemes [4].
Through our simulations, we found that the degree-1 VNs can be selected and updated more frequently than the other VNs when IDS strategies are applied in decoding. One of the proper explanations for this phenomenon is given as follows. Based on the density evolution for LDPC codes with BP decoding [14], we know that the VN LLR magnitudes will expand as the iteration count increases and so do the V2C messages. For a degree-1 VN, however, the V2C message it sends would always be the channel reliability value (2yn/σ2). Suppose the degree of VN vn is one and cm is its onlyconnected CN. After the message-passing decoding is performed a few iterations, the magnitudes of the V2C messages Lnv2′→ c m for n′ ∈ N (m) \ n might rapidly grow while Lnv2→c m remains unchanged. Since the magnitude of a C2V message Lcm2→ v a computed by (2) is usually dominated by the smallest magnitude of the V2C messages Lav2′→c m, a′ ∈ N (m) \ a. It could be predicted that the C2V messages’ magnitude (either for the propagated or precomputed versions) Lm c2→ v n′, n′ ∈ N (m) \ n would be dominated by |Lnv2→c m| = |2yn/σ2| and hence delivery of these C2V messages would be eliminated since the associated residuals can be quite small. By contrast, the residual of Lcm2→ v n might be larger than C2V messages due to the continuous updates of Lnv2′→ c m n′ ∈ N (m) \ n. As a result, the C2V message related to a degree-1 VN would have a higher opportunity of being selected and updated than the other C2V messages linked to the same CN. Consuming much decoding resource on updating the degree-1 VNs, however, would result in low decoding efficiency because these nodes can only provide its intrinsic channel information to the connected CN.
For the IDS strategies we introduce a process to reduce the efficiency loss caused by the appearance of the degree-1 VNs. The proposed degree-1 VN (D1VN) processing scheme works based on following guidelines: 1) all degree-1 VNs would be updated only once in each iteration, and the updating is performed at end of each iteration; 2) in one iteration, the C2V messages associated with the degree-1 VNs can participate the message selection once only; 3) while the C2V

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:35:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

message going to propagate is associated with degree-1 VN, the propagation would be skipped and executed by another C2V message associated with the same CN. The purpose of the first two guidelines is to prevent the decoding resource being frequently occupied by certain nodes. The last one is aimed at maintaining the propagation of new messages since a large C2V message residual may indicate that the VNs linked to this CN have received renewed information from other connected CNs and thus might have crucial update on their reliability.
In Algorithm 2, we present the RBP decoding algorithm which is assisted with our D1VN processing scheme. As a degree-1 VN is allowed to join the selection for just one time in an iteration, we use F (n) to label if a degree-1 VN, vn, has participated in the selection. F (n) = T (True) indicates the C2V message/residual has been considered in the current iteration; otherwise F (n) = F (False). d(n) in Algorithm 2 denotes the VN degree of vn.

Algorithm 2 RBP Algorithm with D1VN Processing Scheme

1: Initialize all Lm c2v→n = 0 and Lnv2→c m = 2yn/σ2. Set F (j) = F ∀j ∈ ON and the edge counter η = 0.
2: Generate all Lˆcm2v→n by (3) and compute all Rmc2v→n by (4) 3: Find (m∗, n∗) = arg max(m,n){Rmc2v→n|n ∈
N (m) and F (n) = F, m ∈ OM } 4: if d(n∗) = 1 then
5: Find n′ = arg maxn Rmc2v∗→n|n ∈ N (m∗)\n∗ 6: Set F (n∗) = T and then n∗ ← n′

7: end if

8: Let Lm c2v∗→n∗ ← Lˆcm2v∗→n∗ ; propagate Lm c2v∗→n∗ and set Rmc2v∗→n∗ = 0.
9: for every i ∈ M(n∗)\m∗ do

10: Generate and propagate Lnv2∗c→i 11: for every j ∈ N (i)\n∗ and F (j) = F do

12:

Compute Lˆci→ 2vj and update Ric→ 2vj

13: end for

14: end for

15: η ← η + 1.

16: if η = E − E1 then
17: Set F (n) = F for all n ∈ ON 18: Generate and propagate Lcm2v→n and then set Rmc2v→n =
0, where m ∈ M(n), n ∈ ON and d(n) = 1.

19: end if

20: if Stopping condition is not satisfied then

21: Go to line 3

22: end if

For each iteration of Algorithm 2, we initialize F (n) = F for all VNs, and F (n) would always keep unchanged if d(n) > 1. For each message selection, only the C2V messages connecting to “F”-labeled VNs would be compared, and the one with the maximum residual will be sent. However, once a message associated with a degree-1 VN is chosen, the propagation of this C2V message will be postponed to the end of the current iteration, and the C2V message which is from the same CN and has the second maximum residual will be delivered instead. Furthermore, the corresponding F (n) would

be set as T and temporary excluded from the selection until the next iteration begins. As only E C2V messages can be sent in one iteration, the above procedures will be repeated E−E1 times, where E1 is the number of degree-1 VNs. While propagating E − E1 C2V messages, it would simultaneously send the degree-1 VNs the messages provided by their linked CNs in Algorithm 2.
The D1VN processing scheme can also be adopted to the UBPRBP algorithm (Algorithm 1) for decoding the 5G NR LDPC codes. The D1VN processing scheme assisted UBPRBP algorithm is described in Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 3 UBPRBP with D1VN Processing Scheme

1: Initialize all Lcm2v→n = 0 and Lnv2→c m = 2yn/σ2. Set F (j) = F ∀j ∈ ON , S = OM and the edge counter
η = 0. 2: Generate all Lˆm c2v→n by (3) and compute all Rmc2v→n by (4) 3: Let Q(m) ← arg maxn Rmc2v→n|n ∈ N (m) ∀m ∈ S 4: Find (m∗, n∗) = arg max(m,Q(m)){Rmc2v→Q(m)|F (Q(m)) =
F, m ∈ S} 5: if d(n∗) = 1 then 6: Find n′ = arg maxn Rmc2v∗→n|n ∈ N (m∗)\n∗ 7: Set F (n∗) = T and then n∗ ← n′

8: end if 9: Let Lcm2v∗→n∗ ← Lˆm c2v∗→n∗ ; propagate Lcm2v∗→n∗ and let
Rmc2v∗→n∗ = 0 10: Let S ← S\m∗ 11: for every i ∈ M(n∗)\m∗ do

12: Generate and propagate Lnv2∗c→i and let S ← S ∪ {i} 13: for every j ∈ N (i)\n∗ and F (j) = F do

14:

Compute Lˆci→ 2vj and update Ric→ 2vj

15: end for

16: Let Q(i) ← arg maxj Ric→ 2vj |j ∈ N (i), F (j) = F 17: end for

18: η ← η + 1.

19: if η = E − E1 then
20: Set F (n) = F for all n ∈ ON 21: Let S′ ← {m|d(Q(m)) = 1, m ∈ S} and S ← S\S′

22: Generate and propagate Lcm2v→n, then set Rmc2v→n = 0, where m ∈ M(n), n ∈ ON and d(n) = 1.

23: end if

24: if Stopping condition is not satisfied then

25: Go to line 4

26: end if

Note that after updating the degree-1 VNs at the end of each iteration, the unmuted CNs whose Q(m)’s are degree1 VNs should be set muted, and other CNs would remain their mute/unmute states unchanged. Such setting is aimed to have CN mute/unmute states can satisfy the key concept of the UBPRBP decoding–once a CN propagates a message, it will be set muted and wait for the new incoming V2C information to activate itself.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:35:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1: FER performance of the RBP [5], SVNF-RBP [6] and UBPRBP Fig. 3: FER performance of various RBP-based algorithms for decoding the

algorithms for decoding the (1944,972) WiFi code.

(1848,616) 5G NR code

Fig. 2: BER and FER convergence performance of the RBP [5], SVNFRBP [6] and UBPRBP algorithms for decoding the (1944,972) WiFi code; SNR=1.75 dB

Fig. 4: FER convergence performance of various RBP-based algorithms for decoding the (1848,616) 5G NR code; SNR=1 dB

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we compare the proposed algorithms with the original RBP algorithm [5] and the SVNF-RBP algorithm [6], which is one of the best-performed IDS algorithms in the literature. Two codes are adopted in our simulations: one is the (1944,972) code used in IEEE 802.11 (WiFi) standard, and the other is the (1848,616) codes used for 5G NR, which is constructed base on the Base Graph (BG) I [4] with lift size Z = 28. Note that following the instructions in [4], the NR code is a punctured code generated from a length-1904 mother code, and the punctured bits are the VNs corresponding to the first two columns in the BG I. Also, there are 1176 degree-1 VNs in this code. For all algorithms we present, one iteration will be counted after E C2V messages are propagated.
Fig. 1 shows the frame error rate (FER) performance of the RBP, SVNF-RBP, and the UBPRBP algorithms in decoding

the WiFi code. The results of 2 and 5 iterations are both presented in the figure. It can be seen that the UBPRBP decoder achieves about 0.4 dB and 0.2 dB gains against the RBP and SVNF-RBP decoder at FER ≈ 10−1 when the iteration count is 2. At the 5th iteration, our UBPRBP algorithm outperforms the RBP decoder about 0.1 dB at FER ≈ 10−3. What presented in Fig. 2 are the BER and FER convergence performance of the IDS algorithms in decoding the WiFi code at SNR (Eb/N0)=1.75 dB. We find that the UBPRBP algorithm is able to outperform the SVNF-RBP decoder when the iteration count ≤ 7; the SVNF-RBP algorithm can yield better performance after performing more iterations.
Fig. 3 plots the FER performance of the RBP, SVNF-RBP, and the UBPRBP algorithms in decoding the 5G NR code, and in Fig. 4 we depict the FER convergence performance of these algorithms at SNR=1 dB. The results similar to that in decoding the WiFi code could be found in the figures:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:35:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 5: FER performance of RBP [5], s-RBP-D1, and RBP-D1VN algorithms for decoding the (1848,616) 5G NR code
UBPRBP algorithm can yield superior performance than the SVNF-RBP algorithm in early decoding iterations but would be interior the SVNF-RBP algorithms as the iteration number increases. The FER performance curves of combining the RBP, SVNF-RBP, and the UBPRBP algorithms with our proposed degree-1 VN processing scheme, which are respectively denoted by RBP-D1VN, SVNF-RBP-D1VN, and UBPRBPD1VN, are also presented in Figs. 3 and 4. We see that with the D1VN processing scheme, the RBP-D1VN would have a 0.4 dB gain against the original RBP decoder at FER ≈ 10−1 when the iteration count is 2, and the SVNF-RBPD1VN also gains 0.15 dB improvement in comparison with SVNF-RBP decoder. Also, the UBPRBP-D1VN achieves 0.25 dB gain against the UBPRBP decoder in the same iteration and targeted FER. Furthermore, it can be found from Fig. 4 that the UBPRBP-D1VN algorithm is able to outperform all the competitors at all iterations observed and the performance of the RBP decoder is impressively improved after the degree-1 VN processing scheme is adopted– the RBP-D1VN algorithm could not only significantly outperform the original RBP algorithm but surpass the SVNF and even the SVNF-D1VN algorithms.
In addition, to verify the effectiveness of the step used in the D1VN processing scheme that propagating a substitute C2V message instead of the original selected one as it is associated with a degree-1 VN, we compare the performance of the original RBP and proposed RBP-D1VN algorithms with that of a modified RBP which processes the degree-1 VNs with a simple manner. In this modified RBP, denoted by sRBP-D1 in the figure, all the edges connected to degree-1 VNs would not participate the residual comparison during whole decoding process and will be updated at the end of each iteration. The simulation results are presented in Fig. 5, and it could be seen although the modified RBP decoder could yield better performance compared with the original RBP algorithm because it limits the updates of the degree-1 VNs, the RBP-

D1VN algorithm is still the most effective decoder among the three algorithms.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present the UBPRBP algorithm, which adopts a new IDS strategy, for decoding LDPC codes. For the UBPRBP algorithm, we introduce the concept of setting the CNs just delivering C2V messages muted to mitigate the propagations of unreliable messages. Experimental results show that in comparison with the RBP algorithm and the SVNF algorithm, the proposed UBPRBP algorithm yields superior performance at the early stage of decoding. The D1VN processing scheme is also presented in this paper. As the D1VN processing scheme incorporated, the RBP-based algorithms are able to release the decoding resource unreasonably occupied by the degree-1 VNs and hence distribute the resource more effectively while decoding the 5G NR LDPC codes. Simulation results indicate that the RBP-D1VN, SVNF-RBP-D1VN, and UBPRBP-D1VN algorithms would significantly outperform their corresponding original versions in decoding the 5G NR LDPC codes, and the UBPRBPD1VN algorithm is the best-performing one among these three decoders.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-density parity-check codes, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications—Amendement 4: Enhancements for Very High Throughput for Operation in Bands Below 6 GHz, IEEE Standard 802.11ac, 2013.
[3] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Part 16: Air Interface for Broadband Wireless Access Systems, IEEE Standard 802.16-2009, 2009.
[4] 3GPP, “Technical specification (TS) 38.212. 5G; NR; Multiplexing and channel coding (Release 15),” July, 2018.
[5] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2007, pp. 923–937.
[6] H.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Ueng, S.-M. Yeh, and W.-Y. Weng, “Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886-896, Mar. 2013.
[7] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, K. Cai, and G. Han, “Low-complexity beliefpropagation decoding via dynamic silent-variable-node-free scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 28-31, Jan. 2017.
[8] H. Zhang and S. Chen, “Residual-decaying-based informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 23656-23666, 2019.
[9] X. Liu, Z. Zhou, R. Cui, and E. Liu, “Informed decoding algorithms of LDPC codes based on dynamic selection strategy,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1357-1366, Apr. 2016.
[10] T. C.-Y. Chang, P.-H. Wang, J.-J. Weng, I.-H. Lee, and Y. T. Su, “Belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes with variable node–centric dynamic schedules,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 50145027, Aug. 2021.
[11] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes”, in Proc. IEEE Workshop SIPS, 2004, pp. 107-112.
[12] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209-213, Feb. 2005.
[13] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, ”Design of Low-Density Parity Check Codes for 5G New Radio,” in IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28-34, March 2018.
[14] S.-Y. Chung, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation”, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657-670, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:35:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

