IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 69, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022

3643

Hybrid Stochastic LDPC Decoder With Fully Correlated Stochastic Computation
Shuai Hu , Kaining Han, Member, IEEE, Fujie Wang, and Jianhao Hu , Member, IEEE

Abstract— The ultra-low hardware consumption feature of stochastic decoding has made it a potential candidate for the implementation of low-density parity-check(LDPC) decoders. However, the existing stochastic LDPC decoders still suffer from performance degradation and relatively high decoding cycles caused by the correlation among stochastic bit streams. In this paper, we propose Hybrid Stochastic(HS) decoding, which achieves high performance, high throughput, and high hardware efficiency by jointly using our proposed novel stochastic check node(CN) and Two’s Complement(TCS) variable node(VN) to realize Min-Sum Algorithm(MSA) and its enhancements. Fully correlated stochastic bit streams are used to entirely eliminate the indeterminacy caused by the correlation, which results in high performance and fast convergence and inherits the low complexity of stochastic decoders at the same time. We demonstrate the HS decoding by designing a (2048,1723) decoder in a 65 nm process, which achieves the highest Bit-Error-Ratio(BER) performance, highest throughput, and top hardware efficiency among existing stochastic LDPC decoders. We also demonstrate that HS decoding can achieve excellent decoding performance for different code rates and lengths 5G New Radio(NR) LDPC codes. Thus, HS decoding can be adopted in wide applications.
Index Terms— LDPC code, hybrid stochastic decoder, fully correlated stochastic.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY Parity-Check (LDPC) code is a class of linear block codes originally proposed by Gallager in 1960’s [1] and rediscovered by Mackay and Neal in 1997 [2] to have near-capacity performance. LDPC code is defined by a sparse parity-check matrix which can be represented by a bipartite graph, called Tanner graph, by mapping its rows and columns to check nodes (CNs) and variable nodes (VNs), respectively. Then LDPC code can be iteratively decoded on this graph structure using Belief-Propagation (BP) algorithm [3] to achieve high decoding performance. The parallel nature of the BP algorithm makes LDPC decoders have the potential to provide high-throughput decoding. LDPC decoders can be implemented by fully parallel or partially
Manuscript received 7 April 2022; revised 24 May 2022; accepted 26 May 2022. Date of publication 8 June 2022; date of current version 30 August 2022. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62001277. This article was recommended by Associate Editor J. Di. (Corresponding author: Kaining Han.)
The authors are with the National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Communications, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu 611731, China (e-mail: 201911220502@ std.uestc.edu.cn; hkaining2014@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSI.2022.3179282.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2022.3179282

parallel schemes. A fully parallel LDPC decoder instantiates all the VNs and CNs to maximize the throughput. While a partially parallel decoder only instantiates a portion of them to trade off the hardware consumption and the throughput. Generally, Fully parallel LDPC decoders are suitable for applications with high-speed requirements and moderate code length, such as the 10GBASE-T standard [4], while partially parallel LDPC decoders are considered when the code length is extremely long and/or when the hardware resources are limited. The partially parallel scheme is also used to offer the flexibility to support different code rates and lengths in the applications such as the 5G New Radio (NR) standard.
The main challenge in the implementation of LDPC decoders is the complex calculations in VNs and CNs. In practice, BP algorithm is usually implemented as Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) [5], which can be further simplified as Min-Sum Algorithm (MSA) [6]. However, the CN updating of MSA still requires significant computing and storage resources to find the first two minimum values among input messages [7]. A large amount of publications are devoted to reducing the complexity of CN updating of MSA. In [8], the values are converted to time domain and a time-domain (TD) based minimum value finder is proposed to sequentially find the first two minimum values. Similarly, the author in [9] encodes the values by pulse width and proposes a parallel structure to find the first two minimum values simultaneously. These parallel-serial conversions of values can significantly reduce the computational complexity and memory storage of the CN at the cost of longer decoding latency. The complexity of CN updating of MSA can also be reduced by employing an approximate second minimum value [10]. In [11], a probabilistic second minimum value is used in CN updating of MSA, which achieves minor performance loss and relatively low complexity.
Stochastic decoding [12], inspired by stochastic computation developed in the 1960s [13], is considered to have the potential to provide low complexity LDPC decoding. In stochastic LDPC decoders, messages are represented by independent stochastic bit streams and the updating of the BP algorithm can be realized by the basic logic gate circuits. Besides, stochastic LDPC decoder also benefits from the low complexity of routing since only two wires are required for each interconnection between CNs and VNs. However, stochastic LDPC decoders usually suffer from nonnegligible performance loss compared with BP algorithm due

1549-8328 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:34:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3644

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 69, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022

to unavoidable correlation among stochastic bit streams. The convergence speed of stochastic LDPC decoders is also slower than the BP algorithm due to the randomness of stochastic bit streams. To alleviate these problems, probability tracers, such as Edge Memory (EM) [14] and Tracking-forecast Memory (TFM) [15], are employed in each outgoing edge of stochastic VNs to improve decoding performance. Node-wise probability tracers, such as Majority-based tracking forecast memory (MTFM) [16] and the check-to-variable (C2V) based [17] probability tracer are proposed to further reduce the complexity of stochastic VNs. Delayed stochastic (DS) decoder entirely eliminates probability tracers [18] but results in big performance loss. In [19], bit-flipping based postprocessing is proposed to reduce the decoding cycles. To avoid complex and inaccurate stochastic VNs, Relax Half-Stochastic (RHS) [20] decoder combines stochastic CNs and TCS VNs through transforming messages between probability and loglikelihood ratio(LLR) domain, which leads to extra hardware consumption and calculation errors.
Apart from the performance degradation and low convergence, the stochastic LDPC decoder also has design challenges in practical applications. Firstly, stochastic LDPC decoder is not suitable for partially parallel designs, such as layered decoding [21] and multi-length and multi-rate compatibility [22], because it’s infeasible to store internal messages represented by long stochastic bit streams. Secondly, stochastic VNs become difficult to converge when the degree of VNs are extremely small, which limits the application of stochastic LDPC decoder for LDPC codes with low degree VNs, such as low rate 5G NR LDPC.
In this paper, we propose Hybrid-Stochastic (HS) decoding algorithm to solve the aforementioned issues. The HS decoding, which is based on MSA instead of BP algorithm, jointly uses a proposed novel stochastic CNs and TCS VNs to simultaneously inherit the low complex CN and interconnections of the stochastic decoder and the simplicity and accuracy of TCS VN. Therefore, the HS decoder can achieve both high decoding performance and high hardware efficiency. In HS decoding, all messages are processed in the LLR domain to avoid extra complexity and precision loss caused by calculation domain transformation. We achieve this by employing a new stochastic CN design that precisely realizes CN updating of MSA. A stochastic message, composed of a sign bit and a stochastic bit, is used to represent a LLR value in each cycle and serially exchanged between our stochastic CNs and TCS VNs. Several stochastic messages are together used to improve the updating accuracy of each decoding iteration. The proposed stochastic CN is based on fully correlated stochastic bit streams, which entirely eliminates the indeterminate impact of correlation and provides high calculation precision and fast convergence. Besides, Sobol sequences are used as the random number sequence (RNS) to further speed up the convergence. Based on this, a tailored RNS generation method is proposed to realize the Offset Min-Sum (OMS) [23] algorithm, called HS-OMS. HS-OMS achieves higher performance with respect to MSA-based HS decoding with the same hardware structure and even shorter bit stream length. Moreover, the HS decoding is feasible for partially parallel designs because short bit

streams in each iteration are converted to small bit-width binary numbers in VNs and can be stored with little memory. The performance of HS decoding can also be guaranteed for any degree VNs due to the use of a SPA-based VN updating. To demonstrate the proposed algorithm, an HS decoder for a (2048,1723) LDPC code from 10GBASE-T is implemented with a 65 nm CMOS technology process to compare performance and hardware efficiency with existing works. The proposed decoder achieves the best decoding performance and throughput among existing stochastic LDPC decoders with comparable hardware efficiency. To further verify the performance of HS decoding for LDPC codes with different degree distributions, simulation for 5G NR codes with different code rates and lengths is performed and HS decoding achieves a Bit-Error-Ratio (BER) performance within 0.2dB with floatpoint (FP) OMS algorithm.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
1) We present the HS decoding algorithm, which jointly uses a novel stochastic CNs and TCS VNs to provide low complexity and high performance decoding. We also propose a tailored RNS generation method to realize OMS algorithm based on HS decoding to further improve decoding performance.
2) We apply the HS-OMS to decode a (2048,1723) LDPC code. The simulation results shows that the HS-OMS can achieve an excellent decoding performance with highest BER performance and smallest decoding cycles among existing stochastic LDPC decoders. The HS-OMS is also verified in 5G NR LDPC code with different code rates and lengths and achieves a BER performance within 0.2dB with FP OMS algorithm.
3) We implement a HS decoder for (2048,1723) LDPC code with a 65 nm CMOS technology process, which achieves the highest throughput among existing works with comparable hardware efficiency.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a brief review of LDPC decoding algorithms and correlated stochastic computation. The hybrid stochastic decoding algorithm including novel CN and VN updating schemes is presented in Section III. Section IV provides the enhancements for our decoding algorithm. The results of decoding performance and hardware complexity are given in Section V. Finally, Section VI is the conclusion.
II. LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM AND STOCHASTIC COMPUTATION
In this section, we firstly review various BP-based algorithms for LDPC decoding, including SPA, MSA, and OMSA, in Section II-A, then the preliminaries for stochastic computation are introduced in Section II-B.
A. Review of LDPC Decoding Algorithm
LDPC codes are usually decoded by BP-based algorithms to provide high decoding performance. In BP decoding, probability messages are iteratively exchanged and updated by CNs and VNs to reach an agreement about the true values of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:34:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: HYBRID STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER WITH FULLY CORRELATED STOCHASTIC COMPUTATION

3645

Fig. 1. Tanner graph of LDPC code.

Fig. 2. (a) Structure of stochastic number generator, (b) stochastic to binary converter.

received symbols from the channel. In practice, probability messages are usually transformed to the LLR domain to
obtain more implemented friendly updating rules, where the multiplications are replaced by additions and the normalization
is eliminated. The resultant algorithm is called Sum-Product
Algorithm (SPA). For a binary (N, K ) LDPC code defined by a M × N sparse
parity check matrix H, let a VN vn corresponds to the n-th column of H which represents a received symbol from channel n, and a CN cm corresponds to the m-th row of H which represents the m-th parity-check equation, then this LDPC code can be represented by a Tanner graph, as shown in 1.
In Tanner graph, the degree of CN and VN are denoted as
dc and dv , respectively. The set of neighboring VNs of cm is denoted as N (m), and the set of neighboring CNs of vn is M(n). The message from cm to vn is represented by pm→n and the message from vn to cm is represented by qn→m. llrn denotes the LLR message from channel n and sn represents the posterior message of vn. For the case of Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) modulation over an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel, X is the transmitted random vector and Y is the received random vector, then llrn is calculated by:

llrn = log

Pro(Y(n) = yn|X(n) = −1) Pro(Y(n) = yn|X(n) = +1)

=

2 yn σ2

,

(1)

where yn is the received value of channel n and σ 2 is the

variance of the channel noise. llrn ≥ 0 corresponds to bit “0”

and llrn < 0 to “1”. In the initialization step of SPA, qn→m

and sn is initialized by llrn. Then pm→n is updated in CN by:

⎛

⎞

pm→n

=

2tanh−1

⎝
n

tanh( qn →m

∈N (m)\n

2

)⎠ .

(2)

The VNs receive the updated messages from CNs and calculate qn→m and sn by:

qn→m = llrn +

pm →n ,

(3)

m ∈M(n)\m

and

sn = llrn +

pm→n ,

(4)

m∈M(n)

respectively. sn is used to generate the hard decision of X(n). The hard decisions of the decoder are checked by H in every decoding iteration and once all the check equations are

satisfied or the number of iterations exceeds the maximum

decoding iteration, the decoding will terminate and output the

final posterior messages. Otherwise, the VNs send qn→m to

CNs and the next iteration begins.

CN updating of SPA has complex multiplications and hyper-

bolic functions. To simplify the calculation in CNs, MSA was

proposed to approximate (2) by:

⎛

⎞

pm→n

=

⎝
n

sign(qn
∈N (m)\n

→m )⎠ ×
n

∈Nmi(nm)\n(|qn

→m |)

(5)

The min-sum approximation causes a non-negligible decoding

performance degradation, thus various improved algorithms

have been proposed to overcome this issue. One of the most

effective and computationally efficient approaches is the Offset

Min-Sum (OMS) algorithm [23] which replaces (5) by:

⎛

⎞

pm→n = ⎝

sign(qn →m )⎠

n ∈N(m)\n

× max min (|qn →m |) − β, 0 , (6)
n ∈N(m)\n
where β is the offset factor. OMS with properly selected β can yield decoding performance close to or even better than that of SPA.

B. Review of Stochastic Computation
Stochastic computation (SC) was introduced in the 1960s, which implements complex computing functions by simple logic gate circuits. In SC, the values are represented by stochastic bit streams called stochastic numbers (SNs). Let a capital letter X denote an SN with probability value x, then each bit in X has a probability x to be ‘1’. SNs can be generated by a stochastic number generator (SNG), as shown in Fig. 2(a). The probability value x represented by a k-bit binary number is compared with a random number with uniform distribution in [0, 1]. The random number is generated by a random number generator (RNG) at each clock. Then the output of the comparator is the corresponding SN X. SNs generated by this method can only represent probability values in [0, 1], so this representation method is called unipolar coding. To represent negative values, an extra sign bit can be added for each SN or using bipolar coding (See [24] for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:34:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3646

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 69, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022

Fig. 3. AND gate behaviors as (a) a multiplier with independent inputs and (b) a minimizer with fully correlated inputs.
Fig. 5. Example of fully correlated SNs generation.
TABLE I EXAMPLES OF DIFFERENT STOCHASTIC LOGIC
CIRCUITS WITH DIFFERENT SCC
Fig. 4. Distribution of bits for SCC definition.

more details). SNs can be converted back to binary numbers by a counter, as shown in Fig. 2(b).
Computations in SC are processed by passing SNs through logic circuits clock by clock. For example, an AND gate behaves as a multiplier when the input SNs are independent, as shown in Fig. 3(a).
The correlation among input bit streams significantly affects the output. Different from the standard definition of correlation for random variables, correlation in stochastic computation, referred to as stochastic computation correlation (SCC) [25], is defined by the distribution of bits “1” and “0” of the input streams. For two l-bit SNs X and Y , as shown in Fig. 4, the number of overlapping “1” bits is a, the number of overlapping “1” bits in X and “0” bits in Y is b, the number of overlapping “0” bits in X and “1” bits in Y is c and the number of overlapping “0” bits is d, then the SCC is defined as:

S C C⎧( X ,

=

⎪⎨ l
⎪⎩

·

Y) min(a

+

ad − bc b, a + c) −
ad − bc

(a

+

b)(a

+

c)

(a + b)(a + c)−L · max(a − d, 0)

ad > bc Other wi se.
(7)

According to the definition of SCC, SCC = 0 means the two stochastic bit streams are independent, SCC = 1 means they have maximum similarity, and SCC = −1 means minimum similarity. For the same stochastic computation logic, input streams with different SCC result in different outputs. For example, an AND gate behaves as a multiplier when input SNs are independent while behaves as a minimizer when input SNs are fully correlated, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The fully correlated inputs can be generated by using the same RNS in the SNG, as shown in Fig. 5.
Table I shows more examples of the function of different stochastic logic circuits with different SCC.

III. HYBRID STOCHASTIC DECODING
Stochastic decoding provides an attractive approach to implement the complex CNs and interconnections

hardware efficiently. However, the unavoidable correlation among stochastic bit streams leads to complex designs for VNs and decoding performance degradation. To entirely eliminate the effect of correlation in stochastic decoding and have implementation-friendly structures in both CNs and VNs, we propose the hybrid stochastic(HS) decoding in this section. The overall process of HS decoding is firstly described in SectionIII-A, then the detailed decoding processes of HS decoding, including preprocessing of LLRs, the structure of CNs and VNs, are introduced in Section III-B, III-C and III-D, respectively.
A. Overall Architecture of HS Decoding
Different from existing stochastic decoding algorithms, HS decoding processes LDPC decoding based on MSA, instead of BP, where all messages are processed in the LLR domain. To be noticed, RHS [20] decoding processes messages in the LLR domain in VNs and messages in the probability domain in CNs, so a transformation step is required between CNs and VNs, which brings extra hardware consumption and calculation error, while the calculation domain is consistent in HS decoding. An SN and a sign bit are jointly used to represent an LLR value in stochastic representation, which is called a stochastic message. From now on, messages in binary representation are denoted by small letters, such as p, while are denoted by sign(p) and P in stochastic representation to avoid confusion.
Fig. 6 depicts the overall block diagram of HS decoding. The HS decoding includes two main processing modules, the “min” module, corresponding to CN updating of MSA, and the “sum” module, corresponding to VN updating of MSA. In one decoding iteration, the “sum” modules receive LLRs in binary representation from channels and stochastic messages

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:34:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: HYBRID STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER WITH FULLY CORRELATED STOCHASTIC COMPUTATION

3647

Fig. 6. Overall block diagram of HS decoding.

which have a range of (−∞, ∞). So we need to prepare LLRs

for stochastic representation. LLRs from channel, specifically

denoted by llrn,ch , are firstly saturated by:

⎧

⎨⎪α

llrn,ch > α

llrn,sat = ⎪⎩l−lrαn,ch

llrn,ch < −α other wi se,

(8)

to limit the range of LLRs in [−α, α], where α is called a scaling factor. In practice, LLRs with too large absolute values have little influence to decoding performance and are usually saturated by a maximum value to save bit-width in fix-point representation. We follow a similar approach to select proper scaling factor. LLRs are then scaled by:

of the last iteration from their adjacent “min” modules. The outputs of the “sum” modules are in binary representation and are converted to stochastic messages by SNGs. Then these stochastic messages are sent to the “min” modules serially to perform CN updating. The outputs of the “min” modules are still in stochastic representation and are sent back to the “sum” modules to attend the next iteration. In the first iteration, stochastic messages from the “min” modules are initialized by all-zero streams. To be noticed, the “sum” modules and the “min” modules process messages simultaneously, that is, after the “sum” modules output the results of the last iteration, stochastic messages for this iteration are generated by SNGs clock by clock and the “min” modules can process these stochastic messages serially. The “sum” modules also receive these stochastic messages serially and output the result for this iteration as soon as the stochastic messages for this iteration are all generated. So the number of clocks for one iteration is the same as the length of the SNs. The conversion of messages only happens in VNs, where stochastic messages are converted to binary representation by the “sum” module and are converted back to stochastic representation by SNGs. Therefore, the messages exchanged between VNs and CNs are all in stochastic representation, thus only 2 wires are needed for each message. Messages in binary representation excluding sign bits are sent into SNG to generate SNs. The same RNS is used for all SNGs in one iteration to generate fully correlated SNs, as shown in Fig. 5.
As shown in Fig. 6, the HS decoding actually has the same decoding structure as MSA except for different representation and processing methods of messages. Therefore, the HS decoding is compatible with the design schemes of MSA, such as partially parallel designs, which will be explained in Section. III-D. The enhanced technologies of MSA can also be efficiently applied in the HS decoding, as explained in Section. IV-B.
B. Preprocessing LLRs From Channel for Stochastic Representation
In traditional stochastic decoding, messages are in probability domain, which naturally fall in the representation range of SNs. While in HS decoding, messages are in LLR domain,

llrn = llrn,sat /α.

(9)

Since the calculations in MSA are all linear operations, scaling LLRs will not influence the decoding performance. After scaling, llrn has a range of [−1, 1], which is the same as the representation range of a stochastic message. The scaled LLRs are then quantized and sent into the “sum” modules.

C. Structure of the “mi n” Module in HS Decoding
The “min” modules receive the messages in stochastic representation and update the messages according to equation (5). The calculations in (5) can be divided into two parts, one for calculating sign bit, the other for calculating magnitude. Since the stochastic messages are also represented by a sign bit and an SN, it’s natural to implement the equation (5) separately. Fig. 7(a) illustrate the general structure of the “min” module in HS decoding. It is divided into two parts, where the “sign” module corresponds to the calculations for sign bit and the “mag” module corresponds to the calculations for magnitude.
Let sign bit “0” denote sign “+1” and sign bit “1” denote sign “−1”, the multiplications among sign bits can be simply realized by XOR gates. Besides, the calculation for sign bits can be implemented by a broadcast structure to save hardware consumption, as shown in Fig. 7(b). Interestingly, this structure is the same as the CN structure in a traditional stochastic decoder, but they actually have different functions. Specifically, this structure is used to calculate sign bits in HS decoding, while it is used to calculate probability values for CN updating in the traditional stochastic decoder.
According to Table I, an AND gate is functionally equal to a minimum functionally of two input SNs if they are fully correlated. In fact, an n-input AND gate finds the minimum value among all inputs if they are all fully correlated. Therefore, AND gates can be used to calculate the magnitude part in equation (5), Fig. 7(c) shows the general implementation structure for magnitude calculations. Generally, a degree dc CN need dc (dc − 1)-input AND gates. Fig. 8 depicts the implementation of a degree-3 CN. The outputs of the “min” modules are still in stochastic representation and are sent back to the “sum” modules.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:34:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 69, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022

Fig. 7. Block diagram of the “min” module for a degree-dc CN in HS decoding. (a) Overall structure. (b) Sign bit calculation module. (c) Magnitude
calculation module.

Fig. 9. (a) Implementation of parallel adder in the “sum” module for a degree-6 VN in HS decoding. (b) Implementation of S2T adder.

in Fig. 9(b).

Fig. 8. Implementation of the “min” module for a degree-3 CN in HS decoding.
D. Structure of the “sum” Module in HS Decoding
Messages received by the “sum” modules are in stochastic representation and need to be converted to binary numbers so that the additions in equation (3) can be applied directly by using TCS adders. Typically, a counter is used as a stochasticto-binary converter to get the number of bits “1” in an SN, as shown in Fig. 2(b). However, when the following operation is addition, it’s more efficient to firstly add them in each cycle by using a parallel adder and then accumulate the results. We follow the same approach of the parallel adder for the design of the “sum” modules in HS decoding. Fig. 9(a) gives the implementation of the parallel adder for a degree-6 VN. In the first stage of the parallel adder, we employ S2T adders to add two stochastic messages representing the values in {−1, 0, 1}. The results are TCS numbers in {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2}. The S2T adders are realized by logic gate circuits according to Boolean equation (10), which is derived according to truth table. The implementation of S2T adder is shown

sum[2] = sign( p1)P1 P2 + sign( p2)P2 P1

+sign( p1)sign( p2)P1 P2

sum[1] = sum[2] + sign( p1)sign( p2)P1 P2

sum[0] = P1 P2 + P2 P1

(10)

The broadcast structure is also used to improve hardware efficiency, so the output for each outgoing edge is obtained by subtracting the accumulated result of the corresponding input stream from the accumulated result of the parallel counter. Fig. 10 depicts the functional block diagram of a degree-dv VN in HS decoding.
The HS decoding also has a good compatibility with the partially parallel design. Different from conventional stochastic decoding, where the internal messages are implicitly represented by long stochastic bit streams. In HS decoding, short stochastic bit streams are used in each iteration, which are converted to small bit-width TCS numbers by the “sum” module. Therefore, the outputs of the “sum” modules can be stored by much smaller memory compared with conventional stochastic decoders, which make it feasible to efficiently support flexible partially parallel designs.

IV. ENHANCEMENTS OF HS DECODING
In this section, we propose two enhanced technologies for HS decoding by exploring the generation method of RNS. As aforementioned, an SN represents a probability value in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:34:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: HYBRID STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER WITH FULLY CORRELATED STOCHASTIC COMPUTATION

3649

Fig. 10. Block diagram of the “sum” module for a degree-dv VN in HS decoding.

the respect to expectation and is generated by comparing its probability value with an RNS. Thus, the properties of SNs, as well as the calculation results of SC, are significantly affected by the generation method of RNS. In Section III, we have proposed HS decoding which uses identical RNS to generate SNs. In this section, we further explore the generation method of RNS to reduce decoding latency and improve decoding performance. In Section IV-A, we employ the Sobol sequence as RNS to significantly reduce decoding latency. Based on this, a tailored RNS generation method is proposed in section IV-B to realize a high-performance implementation of OMS in HS decoding.

Fig. 11. Convergence speed of SNs generated by different RNS.

A. Sobol Sequence as RNS
Typically, an SN is modeled as a Bernoulli sequence, so the corresponding RNS should be generated from a uniform distribution in [0, 1]. However, it will take too many cycles for a Bernoulli sequence to converge to its expectation, thus leading to a low precision for short-length SNs. Recently, it has been found that specially designed RNS can significantly speed up the convergence of SNs. In [26], The Sobol sequence is introduced to improve the calculation precision of SC circuits. Sobol sequence is a kind of low discrepancy sequence which tries to generate a uniformly distributed sequence. That means all numbers of a Sobol sequence are uniformly distributed in [0, 1]. To generate a uniformly distributed sequence, the number located in the most sparse part in [0, 1] is generated in every cycle. Please see [26] for more details about Sobol sequence.
According to the generation process of the Sobol sequence, if the bit stream length is a power of 2, then the Sobol sequence is absolutely uniform. The SNs generated by this Sobol sequence will exactly converge to their expectations. Fig. 11 shows the convergence speed of SNs generated by different RNS, where LFSR sequence represents RNS generated by linear feedback shift register(LFSR) and Uniform sequence represents RNS generated from a uniform distribution. The simulated LFSR sequence has a maximum period of 63 (26 − 1). As shown in Fig. 11, the Sobol sequence has the smallest Root-Meas-Square Error (RMSE) for the same stream length, which means that the SNs generated by the Sobol sequence can achieve higher representation accuracy with shorter bit stream length in each iteration.

Fig. 12. Performance comparison of different RNS.
Although Sobol sequence has a fast convergence speed, it’s hard to satisfy the independent condition for traditional SC, which limits the wide application of it. While in HS decoding, fully correlated condition can be easily satisfied by using the same Sobol sequence. To verify the decoding performance of HS decoding using Sobol sequence as RNS, we apply the above three RNSs in HS decoding to decode a (2048, 1723) LDPC code from 10GBASE-T, Fig. 12 shows the decoding performance comparison with different RNSs. The simulated LFSR sequence has a maximum period of 63 (26 − 1). As shown in Fig. 12, the HS decoding with Sobol sequence can achieve a comparable performance even with extremely short length SNs, while the LFSR can only achieve high performance when the length of SNs reach the maximum period of it. The decoding performance of the uniform sequence improved slowly with length increasing.
B. OMS Scheme for HS Decoding
As introduced in Section II-A, OMS can significantly improve the decoding performance of MSA at the cost of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:34:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3650

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 69, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022

only one extra subtraction for each outgoing message from CNs. While in this section, we will realize OMS in HS decoding without any extra hardware consumption. The core operation of OMS is to subtract a constant offset factor from the absolute value of each outgoing message in CNs, as shown in equation (6). In SC, an absolute value is represented by an SN, so we need to invert several bit ‘1’s in SN to ‘0’s to finish such subtractions. However, this operation will definitely cost extra consumption since we need to decide which bits should be inverted and invert them. Luckily, in HS decoding, the fully correlative property of input SNs and the property of Sobol sequence bring us a chance to finish the subtractions before the generation of corresponding bit ‘1’s. In other words, we have already inverted these bit ‘1’s when we generate them. Let lS denotes the complete length of the SNs, β is the corresponding normalized offset factor(β ∈ [0, 1]), then the number of bit ‘1’s we should subtract from an SN is:

Fig. 13. Example of saturated subtraction for OMS in HS decoding.

lβ = [lS · β],

(11)

where [•] denotes the round operation. The subtraction in

equation (6) is saturated by 0, so if the number of bit ‘1’s

in an SN, denoted as lN , is smaller than lβ , then all bit ‘1’s should be inverted to ‘0’. If lN is bigger than lβ , then lβ of bit ‘1’s should be inverted to ‘0’. When SNs are processed in

a data flow manner, a counter is required to decide whether

enough bit ‘1’s have been inverted to guarantee that at least

lβ bit ‘1’s of an SN are set to ‘0’s. It will be more efficient if we are able to know which lβ bits should be ‘0’s in advance so that we can generate them as bit ‘0’s directly. The selected

lβ bits which are supposed to be set as ‘0’s should satisfy two rules:

• If lN ≥ lβ , then all selected lβ bits are ‘1’s. • If lN < lβ , then all lN bit ‘1’s should be include in the
selected lβ bits.

To satisfy the above two rules, the selected bits should

have higher probabilities to be ‘1’s than others. The two rules

above can be easily satisfied in HS decoding since all SNs

are generated by using the same RNS, the smaller the value

of the variable in the sequence is, the higher the probability

that each bit in SNs to be ‘1’ is, so does the AND result of

them. If we use the Sobol sequence as RNS to generate SNs,

then the bits in SNs corresponding to the lβ smallest values in the Sobol sequence are supposed to be ‘0’, or we can just

delete them directly so that shorter SNs are processed. To be

noticed, the implicit complete length of SNs is still lS, so the calculation precision is unaffected.

Fig. 13 gives an example of the saturated subtraction in

HS decoding. The complete length of SNs is 8, the nor-

malized offset factor

is

1/8, so lβ

=

[8

·

1 8

]

=

1

bit ‘1’

should be subtracted. Obviously, the SN bits corresponding

to 0 in the Sobol sequence are deleted, while the implicit

complete length of SNs is unchanged, so AND gate can output

the correct result of minimization followed by a saturated

subtraction.

Fig. 14 shows the decoding performance of our proposed

HS-OMS compared with HS-MSA and FP MSA and OMS. The normalized offset factor β = 1/8, so 2 or 1 bit will be

Fig. 14. Comparison of BER decoding performance of HS-MSA, HS-OMS with FP MSA and OMS.
eliminated when the l = 16 or 8 respectively for HS-OMS. As shown in Fig. 14, both HS-MSA and HS-OMS achieve decoding performance close to that of FP MSA and OMS, respectively. While benefiting from the performance improvement of the OMS algorithm, HS-OMS achieves a much better decoding performance compared with HS-MSA. To be noticed, HS-OMS has the same decoding process as that of HS-MSA with even shorter SNs to be processed in each iteration, so HS-OMS can obtain this performance gain with no extra calculation complexity and lower decoding latency. Therefore, we will only consider HS-OMS in the following section to compare its performance and hardware consumption with existing stochastic LDPC decoders
In this section, we have demonstrated that HS decoding can realize OMS, which is an improved algorithm of MSA, with even lower hardware resources. In fact, HS decoding can realize various improved algorithms of MSA efficiently. For example, Normalized Min-Sum (NMS) [27] is another effective enhanced technology of MSA that compensates the approximate error of MSA by normalizing the minimum values by a normalization factor greater than one, which is equivalent to multiplying the minimum values by a constant smaller than one. This operation can be easily realized in HS decoding by shortening the actual length of SNs proportionally according to the value of the normalization factor.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:34:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: HYBRID STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER WITH FULLY CORRELATED STOCHASTIC COMPUTATION

3651

Fig. 15. The decoding performance of the proposed decoder and state-of- Fig. 16. The ADCs of the proposed decoder and state-of-the-art works. the-art works.

V. PERFORMANCE AND HARDWARE COMPLEXITY
A. Performance Comparison
To demonstrate the decoding performance of HS decoding, we apply it to decode a (2048,1723) LDPC code from the 10GBASE-T standard. LLRs from channels are saturated and scaled by scaling factor α = 6 and quantized by 5 bits including sign bit. The complete length of SNs lS = 16 or 8. The offset factor β = 0.125, so the actual length of SNs l = 14 or 7. The totally number of cycles in one decoding process is calculated by Ncyc = l · Niter , where Ncyc and Niter represent the average totally number of decoding cycles and average decoding iterations, respectively. The maximum number of decoding iteration is set to 20 and the decoding process will be stopped as soon as the right code is found or the process exceeds the maximum decoding iteration.
Fig. 15 shows the BER performance of HS-OMS compared with existing LDPC decoders, including four stochastic decoders with stochastic VNs [16]–[19] and two LDPC decoder with SPA-based VNs [11], [20]. Benefiting from the accuracy calculation in both CNs and VNs, HS-OMS achieves the best BER performance among all other LDPC decoders, which is within 0.1dB with that of the FP OMS decoding. According to Fig. 15, adjusting l from 7 to 14 can bring about 0.05dB performance gain, but takes about 2 times decoding cycles and more hardware consumption.
Apart from BER performance, the decoding latency is another important performance metric, which determines the throughput, as well as the decoding energy per bit of the decoder. We use the average decoding cycles (ADC) to evaluate the decoding latency of the stochastic LDPC decoder. Fig. 16 shows the ADC performance of HS-OMS compared with existing stochastic LDPC decoders. As shown in Fig. 16, the ADC of HS-OMS is strongly affected by the length of SNs we use. HS-OMS decoder with l = 14 SNs requires about 2 times ADC with that of HS-OMS decoder with l = 7 SNs, and they are both smaller than that of other stochastic decoders in low SNR region, which means that HS decoding has

a smaller decoding latency than previous stochastic decoders in low SNR region. As for the high SNR region, since the ADC of HS decoding decreases slower than that of other stochastic decoders, the ADC of HS-OMS decoder with l = 14 SNs is similar to that of other stochastic decoders, but the ADC of HS-OMS decoder with l = 7 SNs is still the smallest. Since l = 14 brings trivial performance gain and significant large decoding latency, we will use l = 7 in the following synthesis.
B. Hardware Complexity Comparison
To demonstrate the hardware complexity of HS decoding, we apply it to implement a (2048,1723) LDPC decoder. Fig.17 shows the overall block diagram for the proposed decoder. The decoder is implemented in fully parallel manner. In the implementation, a pre-processing unit is used to accomplish the preprocessing step described in Section III-B. The prepared LLR messages are stored in the channel LLR registers. The RNG is responsible for generating tailored Sobol sequence, which is shared by all Variable Node Units (VNUs). Each VNU consists of a “sum” module shown in Fig.10 and six SNGs. The adders in accumulator and subtracter are all saturated by 5 bits. This will not influence the decoding performance according to our simulation results. The Check Node Unit (CNU) is the same as that shown in Fig.7. When one iteration ends, the sign bits of the results of the accumulators are sent to early determination unit as decoded word. The early determination unit terminates the decoding process when all check equations are satisfied or when the maximum number of iteration reaches. In order to obtain high operating frequency, a pipeline is added between CNU and VNU, as shown in Fig.17, to cut off the critical path. As a result, the critical path of the whole design appears in the xor gate network in CNU, which is short enough to support a clock frequency of 750 MHz. The design include three pipeline stages. The pipeline between CNU and VNU is realized by first-in-first-out (FIFO) registers to support the decoder to be able to decode three frames simultaneously. So the actual decoding latency for one frame is the same as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:34:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 69, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022

Fig. 17. Block diagram for the proposed decoder architecture.
TABLE II COMPARISON WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART (2048, 1723) LDPC DECODERS

the ADC in Fig. 16. Therefore, the throughput of the decoder is calculated by:
Throughput = Clock Frequency × Code Length . (12) Ncyc
The proposed (2048,1723) decoder is synthesized with 65 nm CMOS technology. Table II shows the hardware consumption of the proposed LDPC decoder compared with existing works. The LDPC decoders being considered include four stochastic LDPC decoders equipped with probability tracers, [16]–[19] and two LDPC decoders with traditional VNs [11], [20]. Benefiting from the precise calculation in both CNs and VNs, HS-OMS achieves BER = 10−7 at the smallest Eb/N0 = 4.25dB while other decoders achieve BER = 10−7 at around or higher than Eb/N0 = 4.4dB. We calculate the throughput and Throughput-Area Ratio (TAR) at 4.4dB, which is regarded as a working point, to compare throughput and hardware efficiency with existing works. Benefiting from small ADC and high clock frequency, the proposed design achieves the highest throughput among all decoders.

Our design also achieves a top TAR among existing LDPC decoders. Although [18] and [17] have 11% and 28% higher TAR, respectively, our design has above 0.15dB BER performance gain at BER = 10−7 and 66.7% and 38.7% higher throughput than them. RHS only reports its throughput at 5.5dB, which is far from our working point, so we cannot compare throughput and hardware efficiency with it directly. But our design outperforms it with BER performance, area, and clock frequency.
C. Performance of 5G NR LDPC Codes
To further verify the performance of HS decoding for different code lengths and rates, we apply it to decode LDPC codes from the 5G NR standard with different code rates. When the code rate of 5G NR LDPC codes is high, most VNs have degree 3 or below, while when the code rate becomes low through the expansion of the parity-check matrix, a large number of degree 1 VNs are added into the parity-check matrix. These low-degree VNs make it difficult for the traditional stochastic LDPC decoders to converge. Therefore, 5G NR LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:34:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: HYBRID STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER WITH FULLY CORRELATED STOCHASTIC COMPUTATION

3653

Fig. 18. BER performance of HS decoding for 5G NR LDPC codes with K = 8448 and code rates of 0.32, 0.5, and 0.81. Iteration = 20.

selected as the same as Section V-C except for the max number of iterations, which is set as 10. For l = 15 in each iteration, the memory for each internal message is 5 bits. Fig. 19 shows the BER performance comparison of row-layered HS decoding. The row-layered HS decoding can achieve a close BER performance to that of FP OMS, which demonstrates that the HS decoding works well in partially parallel designs.

Fig. 19. BER performance of row-layered HS decoding. Iteration = 10.
codes with different code rates can also test the adaptability of HS decoding to codes with low-degree VNs. Fig. 18 shows the BER performance of HS decoding compared with FP OMS for 5G NR LDPC codes with K = 8448 and code rates of 0.32, 0.5, and 0.81, where the ratios of VN degree 1 are 0.6,0.4 and 0.04, respectively. The scale factor α = 8 and normalized offset factor β = 0.0625 and l = 16 − 1 = 15 is used. As shown in Fig. 18, HS-OMS can achieve excellent decoding performance for different code rates and lengths 5G NR LDPC codes, which is very close to that of FP OMS. For code rate 0.81, HS-OMS achieves almost the same BER performance as FP OMS. Although the performance degradation increases with code rate becomes low and the number of low degrees VNs increases, HS-OMS still offers BER performance within 0.2dB with that of FP OMS, which demonstrates that HS decoding works well for low-degree VN LDPC codes.
D. Performance of Row-Layered HS Decoding
To verify the performance of HS decoding when applying to partially parallel designs, we apply it to decode a 5G NR LDPC code in a row-layered schedule. All parameters are

VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a hybrid stochastic decoding algorithm for LDPC codes. The proposed decoder achieves an excellent decoding performance and high throughput. A novel stochastic CN structure is proposed to process fully correlative stochastic messages in the LLR domain, thus eliminating the indeterminate impact of correlation. Coupled with traditional VNs, HS decoding is supposed to provide better decoding performance than stochastic decoders while maintaining its low complexity. Based on HS decoding, Sobol sequences are used to further improve decoding latency and HS-OMS are proposed to achieve better decoding performance with smaller ADC. Compared to existing works, the proposed decoder provides a better BER performance, throughput, and TAR.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, p. 1645, Aug. 1996.
[3] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linkoping Univ., Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[4] IEEE P802.3an (10GBASE-T) Task Force. (2005). [Online]. Available: http://www.ieee802.org/3/an/
[5] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[6] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[7] Q. Lu, Z. Shen, C.-W. Sham, and F. C. M. Lau, “A parallel-routing network for reliability inferences of single-parity-check decoder,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Technol. Commun. (ATC), Oct. 2015, pp. 127–132.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:34:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3654

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 69, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022

[8] M.-R. Li, C.-H. Yang, and Y.-L. Ueng, “A 5.28-Gb/s LDPC decoder with time-domain signal processing for IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 592–604, Feb. 2017.
[9] K. Cushon, C. Leroux, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “A minsum iterative decoder based on pulsewidth message encoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 893–897, Nov. 2010.
[10] J. M. Català-Pérez, J. O. Lacruz, F. García-Herrero, J. Valls, and D. Declercq, “Second minimum approximation for min-sum decoders suitable for high-rate LDPC codes,” Circuits, Syst., Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 5068–5080, Nov. 2019.
[11] C.-C. Cheng, J.-D. Yang, H.-C. Lee, C.-H. Yang, and Y.-L. Ueng, “A fully parallel LDPC decoder architecture using probabilistic minsum algorithm for high-throughput applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 2738–2746, Sep. 2014.
[12] A. Rapley, C. Winstead, V. Gaudet, and C. Schlegel, “Stochastic iterative decoding on factor graphs,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Rel. Topics. Princeton, NJ, USA: Citeseer, 2003, pp. 507–510.
[13] B. R. Gaines, “Stochastic computing systems,” in Advances in Information Systems Science. Boston, MA, USA: Springer, 1969, pp. 37–172.
[14] S. S. Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Fully parallel stochastic LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 5692–5703, Nov. 2008.
[15] S. S. Tehrani, A. Naderi, G.-A. Kamendje, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Tracking forecast memories in stochastic decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., Apr. 2009, pp. 561–564.
[16] S. S. Tehrani, A. Naderi, G.-A. Kamendje, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Majority-based tracking forecast memories for stochastic LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 4883–4896, Sep. 2010.
[17] Y.-L. Ueng, C.-Y. Wang, and M.-R. Li, “An efficient combined bitflipping and stochastic LDPC decoder using improved probability tracers,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 65, no. 20, pp. 5368–5380, Oct. 2017.
[18] A. Naderi, S. Mannor, M. Sawan, and W. J. Gross, “Delayed stochastic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 5617–5626, Nov. 2011.
[19] D. Wu, Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, Y. L. Ueng, and X. Zeng, “Strategies for reducing decoding cycles in stochastic LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 873–877, Sep. 2016.
[20] F. Leduc-Primeau, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Relaxed half-stochastic belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1648–1659, 2013.
[21] C.-W. Sham, X. Chen, W. M. Tam, Y. Zhao, and F. C. M. Lau, “A layered QC-LDPC decoder architecture for high speed communication system,” in Proc. IEEE Asia Pacific Conf. Circuits Syst., Dec. 2012, pp. 475–478.
[22] C.-Y. Lin, L.-W. Liu, Y.-C. Liao, and H.-C. Chang, “A 33.2 Gbps/ITER. Reconfigurable LDPC decoder fully compliant with 5G NR applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2021, pp. 1–5.
[23] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
[24] A. Alaghi and J. P. Hayes, “Survey of stochastic computing,” ACM Trans. Embedded Comput. Syst., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1–19, May 2013.
[25] A. Alaghi and J. P. Hayes, “Exploiting correlation in stochastic circuit design,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Int. Conf. Comput. Design (ICCD), Oct. 2013, pp. 39–46.
[26] S. Liu and J. Han, “Energy efficient stochastic computing with Sobol sequences,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), Mar. 2017, pp. 650–653.
[27] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.

Shuai Hu received the B.E. degree from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in 2017. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electronic and communication engineering with the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu, China. His research interests include artificial intelligence (AI) and VLSI design.
Kaining Han (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees in communication systems from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu, China, in 2014 and 2019, respectively. From 2017 to 2018, he was a Visiting Scholar with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, collaborated with Prof. W. J. Gross. Since 2021, he has been an Assistant Professor with the National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Communications, UESTC. His research interests include high-speed low-power DSP technology with VLSI and stochastic computing-based system designs.
Fujie Wang received the B.S. degree in electronic and information engineering from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in 2019, where he is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with the National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Communications. His main research interests include channel decoding algorithms and hardware implementation of wireless communication algorithms.
Jianhao Hu (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees in communication systems from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC) in 1993 and 1999, respectively. From 1999 to 2000, he was a Post-Doctoral Researcher at the City University of Hong Kong. From 2000 to 2004, he served as a Senior System Engineer at the 3G Research Center, University of Hong Kong. He has been a Professor with the National Key Laboratory, UESTC, since 2005. His research interesting area include high-speed DSP technology with VLSI, NoC, and software radio.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:34:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

