A Wiring-Efficient, High-Throughput Low Density Parity Check Decoder Design
Radivoje Zarubica, Stephen G. Wilson Charles E. Brown Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Virginia Charlottesville, VA 22904

Abstract
A high-throughput 1020-bit rate-1/2 Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) decoder design is proposed that matches the coding gain of current LDPC decoders. The decoder features wiring-efficient code design and an unwrapping technique that allows us to trade between size and the throughput of a decoder.
1 Introduction
Error correcting codes are widely used in modern communications systems to detect and correct errors introduced during a transmission over a channel. Error correcting relies on transmitting the data in an encoded form, such that the redundancy introduced by the coding allows a decoding device at the receiver to detect and correct errors. There are two leading families of error correcting codes: Turbo codes and Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes. Both of them come very close to the bounds predicted by Shannon’s theory. LDPC codes were first introduced by Gallager in the 1960’s but because of the limited technology of the time, they didn’t get much attention until 1993, about the time of the introduction of Turbo codes. In the last decade of the twentieth century, there was a lot of research involving Turbo codes and LDPC codes. Even though they have similar performance on paper, differences are significant in their hardware implementation. Since Turbo codes are very hard to parallelize, they benefit less from hardware implementation. On the other hand VLSI technology has reached the point where large blocklength LDPC codes can be implemented in hardware [3]. With the standardization of LDPC codes for the satellite digital broadcasting standard (DVBS2), and 10Gb/s Ethernet, efficient VLSI implementation of these codes has become all the more important.

2 Background
Given k message bits, an LDPC encoder constructs a codeword of length n(n > k) code bits, yielding a code with rate=k/n. The coding scheme relies on n− k possibly overlapping subsets of the code bits such that the parity of each subset in any codeword is even. These subsets are described by a (n − k) × n matrix H = [hij ], such that hij = 1 iff the i-th subset has bit j in it. The H matrix is called the parity check matrix of the code and for LDPC codes is very sparse, hence the name ”low density parity check” codes. The H matrix defines the set of possible codewords, hence it defines the error correcting capability of a LDPC code.
The parity check matrix can be visualized as a bipartite graph, referred to as the Tanner graph of the code. Check nodes correspond to n − k parity checks and variable nodes correspond to n bits of the codeword that is transmitted. A variable node is connected to a check node if the bit corresponding to it participates in the parity check operation of the check node. For better visualization we say that a variable node j is connected to a check node i iff hij = 1. A Tanner graph of a short (10,5) code is shown on the following figure, [5].
check nodes
degree=6

degree=3

variable nodes

Figure 1: Tanner graph for (10,5) example code, [5]

Our goal is to design 1020-bit, rate-1/2 regular code. The H matrix of that code has dimensions 510×1020 which means that the Tanner graph has 510 check nodes and 1020

1

1-4244-0350-2/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE

818

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:13:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

variable nodes. Since the code needs to be regular, we need to make sure that there are six ones in each row and three ones in each column. This means that each check node is connected to six variable nodes and each variable node is connected to three check nodes. The H matrix of a randomly generated 1020 bit, rate-1/2 LDPC code is shown in Figure 2.

All these six messages are different and we need separate connections for these messages.

check node

Figure 2: Parity check matrix of a randomly-generated 1020 bit, rate-1/2 code. Density is less than apparent, density≈ 0.006
Connecting 10 variable nodes with 5 check nodes is not difficult, but designing a decoder with 1020 variable and 510 check nodes can be a very complicated wiring task and in this paper we will give some solutions to the problem.

variable node

variable node operation
inverse variable node operation
check node operation
inverse check node operation

Figure 3: Standard architecture of the decoder [1]

3 Previous work
Until recently, the major focus of research has been on design of long codes and software implementation of LDPC decoders. With the increasing demand for high-throughput decoders, hardware implementation of LDPC decoder has been gaining attention.
In the first published implementation of an LDPC decoder [2], the authors describe a high-throughput LDPC decoder implementation. Each node in the graph was implemented as a separate functional unit. The decoder used soft decision inputs (4-bit precision for each message leaving check nodes and 4-bit precision for each message leaving variable nodes). They report that routing congestion was the determining factor in the area of the chip (50%), and also mention that because of the line capacitance attached to a large number of long nets the resulting decoder had a maximum clock rate of 64 MHz, which allowed the throughput of 1Gb/s, assuming 64 iterations in decoding. The wiring architecture of the decoder is shown on Figure 3, where we see that there are six messages leaving each check node.

Interesting work in the sense of reducing the interconnection complexity is [1], that introduces the broadcasting technique. This technique allows reduction of the total number of check-to-variable interconnect wires by 40%.
The broadcasting technique uses simple reordering of the operations inside of the decoder, where inverse check node operations are moved from the check node to a corresponding variable node. This technique is shown on Figure 4. In this case we can see that there is only one message from each check node1. We call this one-way broadcasting. We went a step further and developed two-way broadcasting, where the broadcasting scheme is applied to both variable and check nodes. This is shown on Figure 5. In this case we are able to reduce the number of wires that leave variable nodes, but this option is not just a simple reordering, requiring additional memory and extra inverse operation elements.
1It is possible that the number of bits/edge may increase however

2

819
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:13:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

check node

variable node

variable node operation
inverse variable node operation
check node operation
inverse check node operation

Figure 4: Architecture of the decoder with one-way broadcasting [1]

4 Wiring-efficient Code Design
Our goal is to design an LDPC decoder that will have the same coding gain as the best decoder built for moderate block lengths, yet has reduced interconnection complexity. Since most soft decision decoders built so far have block length of n ≈ 1000, we decided to design the decoder of block length n = 1020. For this moderate block length, randomly-designed regular codes perform almost as well as highly irregular codes and in some regions, such as the high SNR region, even outperform them (irregular codes have higher error floor).
Our starting point in the layout design was same as in [4] where we try to minimize the height (number of horizontal wires used to connect the Tanner graph of the code) of the layout while maintaining the performance of the code. The authors in [4] used the adjusted Progressive Edge Algorithm, and were able to design a code that had height of interconnections equivalent to 1208 horizontal lines (604 horizontal lines for check-to-variable connections and 604 horizontal lines for variable-to-check connections), while connecting 1024 variable nodes with 512 check nodes. A drawback of their code was performance loss of about 0.7 dB compared to the design in [2].
First, we decided to apply one-way broadcasting from check to variable nodes because we are able to decrease interconnection height at no extra hardware cost. Figures 6 and 7 show the example (10,5) code without and with oneway broadcasting, respectively.

Figure 6: LDPC decoder layout, (10,5) code without broadcasting

Figure 5: Architecture of the decoder using two-way broadcasting

Figure 7: LDPC decoder layout, (10,5) code with broadcasting

3
820
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:13:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

After we decided to use one-way broadcasting, we need to design a code that would minimize interconnection height and at the same time exploit use of broadcasting.
In order to minimize layout height we need to minimize the number of wires that run horizontally. One way to do so is to use one horizontal wire position for multiple connections. This implies that check nodes and their corresponding variable nodes need to be grouped closer together. What this means in H matrix terms is that 1’s in the H matrix need to be more clustered around the diagonal.
We designed a code that performs as well as the code in [2] and have height of interconnections equivalent to 690 horizontal lines (400 lines for variable-to-check connections and 290 lines for check-to-variable connections).
The following describes our method. We start with an empty H matrix, and then place three 1’s in the top left corner (first row). Every successive row is a two-position cyclic shift of the previous row. When we come to the bottom of the H matrix we have placed half of the 1’s. What we need to do next is to place the rest of the 1’s as close to diagonal as possible, making sure that there are always six 1’s in each row and three 1’s in each column (regular code). What we did was make a row vector whose elements were randomly-permuted numbers from 1 to 510. Then we take the first element of the vector and if the number is greater then 255 we place a 1 in one of the columns on the right side of the H matrix, in the row given by that number, otherwise we place a 1 in one of the columns on the left side of the H matrix, in the row given by that number. In order to fill the entire matrix we need to repeat this procedure two more times. The H matrix of our code is shown in Figure 8. Note, 1’s are clustered around the diagonal part, which is made out of three 1’s in each row. Performance of our code is shown in Figure 9.
Figure 8: The H matrix of the designed code

100

10−1

Cut=400 Code Blanksby et al.

10−2

Block Error Rate

10−3

10−4

10−5

0

1

2

3

4

5

Eb/N0 (dB)

Figure 9: Performance of the designed code and that of the design in [2]

5 Pipelining for Higher Throughput
In order to realize throughput of, say, 10 Gb/s we employ unwrapping of the decoder. This technique is shown in Figure 10. Instead of bringing the messages back from the check nodes to the variable nodes we replicate the decoder and send messages ”forward” to an identical VLSI structure. As we can see from Figure 10 on every clock cycle we can input new channel messages at the bottom of the decoder and propagating messages from bottom to top would be equivalent to iterating the same message. In order to decide how many times we need to replicate the decoder to obtain a certain throughput we need to know the number of iterations that we want to perform. If we write

Niterations = R · L

(1)

where R is the number of decoder replicas and L is the number of times that we recirculate messages in the decoder stack, then the throughput is

T = (fclock/L) · n

(2)

where T is the throughput, fclock is the clock frequency, and n is the number of message bits.
Assuming one-way broadcasting allows us to clock our decoder at 100 MHz [1], we can achieve throughput of 10

4

821
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:13:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Gb/s if L = 10. This means, if we want to perform 50 iterations, the number of replicas of the decoder R needs to be 5.

check-to-variable connections check nodes
variable-to-check connections variable nodes

0.13 mm 1 mm 0.18 mm 1 mm

12 mm

data flow
Figure 10: Unwrapping of the decoder
6 Results
Replicating of the decoder makes sense only if we can greatly reduce the area needed for one stage of the pipeline. By applying the special graph design and broadcasting we were able to minimize the area needed for one stage of the pipeline, and interconnection height decreased from 1208 wire widths in [4] to 690 wire widths for our code.
In order to compare the predicted size of our decoder to others we will first choose a VLSI technology. If we choose 0.18µm technology, as in [2] the height of variableto-check interconnections would be about 0.18 mm, and the height of check-to-variable interconnections would be about 0.18 mm. In [2] the area needed only for interconnections is reported to be 50% of the entire area of the chip, which implies that variable and the check nodes use the other 50% of 48 mm2. We will assume that the area needed for check nodes is equal to the area needed for variable nodes, which is 48 mm2 The layout of a one stage of the decoder is shown in Figure 11.
After replicating this five times we would get the decoder that has approximate size of 12 mm × 12 mm. This means that by increasing the size of the decoder by less than three times, relative to [2], we would be able to build the decoder that is ten times faster.

Figure 11: One stage of the decoder
References
[1] A.C.Carusone A. Darabiha and F.Kschischang. MultiGbit/sec low-density parity-check decoders with reduced interconnect complexity. IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems ICAS, 5:5194 – 5197, May 2005.
[2] A.J. Blanksby and C.J. Howland. A 690mW, 1Gb/s, 1024b, Rate–1/2 Low-Density Parity-Check Decoder. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 37(3):404–412, March 2002.
[3] T.J. Richardson D. Proietti, I.E. Telatar and R.L. Urbanke. Finite-length analysis of LDPC codes on the BEC. IEEE Tran. on IT, 48(6):1570–1579, June 2002.
[4] A. Prakash M. Mohiyuddin, A. Aziz and W. Wolf. Synthesizing interconect-efficient low density parity check codes. Design Automation Conference, pages 488 – 491, 2004.
[5] W.E.Ryan. An introduction to LDPC codes. www.ece.arizona.edu/ ryan.

5

822
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:13:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

