A PROCESSOR BASED MULTI-STANDARD LOW-POWER LDPC ENGINE FOR MULTI-GBPS WIRELESS COMMUNICATION
Meng Li, Frederik Naessens, Min Li, Peter Debacker, Claude Desset, Praveen Raghavan, Antoine Dejonghe, Liesbet Van der Perre ∗
IMEC, Leuven, Belgium

ABSTRACT
The design of multi-Gbps LDPC decoder has become a hot topic in recent years as the demand of the transformation towards 4G. In this paper, we describe an energy efficient multi-Gbps LDPC decoder engine based on ASIP using Target tool suite. The ASIP core can be configured as half-layer paralleled or quarter-layer paralleled decoding, which offers a good trade-off between the throughput and power/area efficiency when compared to the state-of-art fully paralleled ASIC based multi-Gbps LDPC decoder. When the ASIP core is instantiated for 802.11ad, it achieved a throughput up to 5.3 Gbps at 5 iterations with a latency of less than 150 ns and a record energy efficiency of 4.3 pJ/bit/iteration in 40G TSMC technology for the coding rate 13/16, showing to be competitive versus published ASIC solutions.
Index Terms— software define radio, ASIP, multi-gigabit communication, LDPC, layer decoding
1. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, existing and emerging mobile communication networks are posing high requirements and flexibility. On the other hand, the user demands of multiple applications to be supported on a single portable device which calls for future wireless devices to be multi-standards. Those pave the way for Software Defined Radio (SDR). Majority of works aim to provide enough recongurability to support multiple standards on a single device target the channel decoding [1] [2].
Recently, as the demand of the transformation towards 4G telecommunication network, multiple standards are trying to push their throughput higher towards Gbps. The DVB-T2 standard is considering to use higher order MIMO plus higher order constellation to provide higher throughput. When the 802.11ac and 802.11n are configured with high MIMO spatial streams and high-density modulation, the throughput will be boosted above 1 Gbps. In the meanwhile, multi-gigabit data rate standards working at the 60 GHz band, such as IEEE 802.11ad for the gigabit-wireless local area networks (WLAN) and IEEE 802.15.3c for the wireless personal area
∗thanks to Andre Bourdoux for the work of matlab platform, including transmitter, channel and inner receiver

networks (WPAN), are almost ready for the market. Hence, the design of multi-Gbps LDPC decoder has become a hot topic in recent years. However, designing a LDPC decoder with multi-gigabit throughput while maintaining low power consumption and low area which is suitable for mobile device is a big challenge.
There exists multi-dimensional design space for multigigabit LDPC decoder, such as decoding scheduling, optimization of check node simplification, parallelism extension, pipeline stage optimization, frame level pipeline, etc. To design a high throughput decoder, the designer should consider multi-dimensional optimization and the optimization heavily depends on the constraints (performance, power or area) which is dedicated to certain application. Among all the aspects of design space, the parallelism of the decoder and the decoding scheduling highly impact the throughput.
For the architecture-aware (AA) LDPC codes, a fully paralleled LDPC decoder can reach the highest throughput. However as the parallelism increases, the routing congestion problem prohibits an efficient design and results in a large decoder with low area utilization, poor timing and power due to the presence of long interconnections. A row-based partial paralleled architecture is a good alternative to reduce the routing congestion problem while increasing the throughput when compared to a block serial decoding in which the check node and bit node parallelism is equal to the size of quasi-cyclic sub-matrix.
The current multi-gigabit LDPC decoders [3],[4],[5] apply a row-based scheme [6] by extending the bit node parallelism to the code length while keeping the check node parallelism the same as the size of the sub-matrix, which achieves high throughput while reducing complexity compared to a fully paralleled architecture. Half-row-based layer LDPC decoder [7] offers a good trade-offer between the throughput and power/area efficiency, in which the parallelism of bit node process is only half of the code length and the parallelism of check node process is kept the same as row-based LDPC decoder.
In this work, we proposed an energy efficient multiGbps LDPC decoder engine based on Application-Specific Instruction-Set processor (ASIP) using Target tool suite[8]. The parallelism of the ASIP core is configurable, such as

978-1-4799-0248-4/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

1254

GlobalSIP 2013

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:15:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

half-layer or quarter-layer parallel, which leaves freedom of the customer to choose an optimal trade-off between the throughput requirement and power/area efficiency. In the meanwhile, it offers other flexibility, such as: LLR quantization, check node update scheme, maximum iteration number. When the ASIP core is instantiated for the 802.11ad standard, it achieved a throughput up to 5.3 Gbps at 5 iterations with a latency of less than 150 ns and a record energy efficiency of 4.3 pJ/bit/iteration for the coding rate 13/16 in 40G TSMC technology, showing to be competitive versus published ASIC solutions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we review the layer decoding for AA LDPC codes and explain the row-based and half-row-based layer decoding. Section 3 details the architecture of the LDPC decoding engine and how it is instantiated for the 802.11ad and the 802.11ac standard. The implementation results are shown in section 4. Finally the conclusion of our work is drawn in section 5.
2. THE LAYER DECODING ALGORITHM
A LDPC code is a linear block code defined by an M × N sparse parity check matrix H. The parity check matrix of an architecture-aware (AA) LDPC code is described as an Mb × Nb based matrix Hb, with Mb = M/z and Nb = N/z, where N is the code length, M is the number of parity checks and z is the size of sub-matrix which is either a zero matrix or a permutation of rows of an identity matrix. This type of AA-LDPC codes can be decoded by partial paralleled Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) with layer scheduling, in which the parallelism of the bit node and check node function unit is equal to the size of sub-matrix, because a group of information can be calculated and pass between bit nodes and check nodes by passing through permutation network simultaneously.
The decoding procedure is as follows: the posterior information vector Qn with size of z is initialized with input llrn and the extrinsic information vector rmn is initialized with zeros. The posterior vector Qn is stored based on column order while the extrinsic information vector rmn is stored based on row order. Each iteration consists of Mb sub-iteration. During each sub-iteration, the posterior Qn information passes through a permutation network with a shifting value m,n equaling to P (m, n), where P (m, n) is the shifting value indicated in the base matrix. The check nodes utilize the a priori information, which is achieved by subtracting the extrinsic information from the posterior information, to calculate the updated extrinsic information by using SPA or simplified Min-sum [9] algorithm. Afterwards, the updated extrinsic information is added to the a priori information. Finally, the posterior information passes through the permutation network again with a shifting value τm,n equaling to z−P (m, n) and saved back to memory.

Algorithm 1 layer decoding Initialization: Qn = llrn; rmn = 0 Decoding: for t = 1, .., tmax {iteration } for m = 1, .., Mb { sub-iteration} Check node processing
mn
qmn = |Q|n − rmn rmn = f (qmk) , k ∈ N (m)\n Bit node processing Qn = qmn + rmn , n ∈ N (m) |Q|n = Qτnmn Hard decision according to |Q|n
2.1. The row-based and half-row-based layer decoding
In order to achieve high throughput, the parallelism of the check node function unit (CFU) can be expanded. The stateof-art solution [6] for multi-Gbps LDPC decoder is row-based layer decoding, in which the parallelism of bit node function unit (BFU) is equal to the code length while the check node parallelism is equal to the size of sub-matrix. Hence for each layer decoding(sub-iteration), the CFU gets all the related a priori information qmn simultaneously and the calculation of extrinsic information rmn can be finished in one cycle.
Different from row-based layer decoding, the parallelism of BFU of a half-row-based layer decoder [7] is equal to the half of the code length. In this case, during each layer decoding(sub-iteration), the extrinsic information calculation is divided into two phases. In the first phase, the CFU gets half of the related a priori information. In the second phase, the CFU gets another half of the related a priori information and the extrinsic information calculation can be completed only in the second phase.
3. MULTI-GBPS DECODER ENGINE BASED ON ASIP
3.1. Architecture of core engine
The top level architecture of the proposed decoding engine is described in Fig. 1. The core of this decoding engine consists of eight slices and one cross slice. Each slice contains barrel rotation block, addition and subtraction, which takes charge of a priori and posterior information calculation. The cross slice model consists of min/sign block and output block, which takes charge of the minimum calculation, sign extraction and extrinsic information calculation. The posterior memory acting as the LLR input memory as well, is assigned as external memory. The rest memories are assigned as internal flip-flops. The corresponding instruction sets are indicated in Fig. 3. Instruction encoding has a total width of 213 bits, consisting of one scalar slot, eight slots for load-

1255
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:15:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

rotate-subtract, eight slots for output-add-store, one slot for minimum search and sign extraction and one slot for output computation. From a high-level point of view the architecture can be described as a 19-way SIMD processor.

init_asm(); iter_first_asm(); for(int i=0;i<(NITER-1);i++) chess_unroll_loop(*) {
iter_asm(); } iter_back_asm();
Fig. 4. Firmware template

The proposed top level architecture can support layered LDPC decoding with normalize Min-Sum and
Fig. 1. Top level architecture of decoder engine Offset Min-Sum. The novelty of the proposal is half-layer parallel decoding, which achieves a good trade-
off between throughput and power efficiency when compared to the SOA fully layer paralleled multiGbps decoder.
FlexBibailistye: d on the depicted architecture, a mapping schedule
of la1y.) eCruerredntlyL, tDhisParcChitedctuereccoandsiunppgort i8s02.1s1hadoawnd n802i.1n1acFstiagnd.a2rd.s anIdncanthbeiaspplmiedaopn other high throughput LDPC decoders, such as 802.16e, 802.15.3c (60GHZ as well).
ping2.s) cThheenudmubelreofopanraellelicsmanis pcrolgeramamrlayble otobmseeet rdivffeerentththerouhghapultfr-elqauiyremeerntpfoar argaivlelnel deco3d.) iTsnthagnedqauriadnn.tizawtiohn iocf ihnputt hLLeR iss pcrohgeramdmualbele, fcroomn7sbiitssttos4 boitsf. pipelined input and 4o.)uTthpe uchtecsk tnaodge eup,dawtinigtahlgoarithcmoismprobgrianmemdablem, noirnmiamlizeuMmin-SsumeaorrOcfhfsetaMnind-Susmigton
achieve optimal performance for dedicated standard.
extra5.c) tTihoenco.dinFg roaterisaprosgiranmgmlaeble.layer decoding the cycle count for a block and OUTPUT block, which takes charge of getting the minimum, the second minimum and total
single layer decoding is equal to 5 cycles. In case of decoding Architescitgunreofdeeascchrilapyteior na:ndTgheenecroartiengdethceoedxitnrginseinc gininfoermcaotniosnis. tsFoorfa8sisnlgicleeslayweor rdkeicnogdining pthaeracyllcelel aconudntcross slice consecutive layers, the number of cycles is equal to 4, since models.forEaascinhgleslliacyeercdoencosdisintsg iosfeqbuaarlrteol5rcoytcalteiso.n block, addition and subtraction, which takes charge of
getting Sthpeecipfirciaotrioinn:fSourrmpaastsiiongn paonwdert,haerepaoasntdetrhiororuignhfpourtmofaktinoonw.n dTehdeicactreodsfsixseldi-cfuenmctioodneiml cpolenmseinstastiofnsM, IN/Sign
there is one cycle overlap between two layers. the multi-standard layered LDPC decoding engine achieved a throughput up to 7.6 Gbps at 3 iterations with a latency of less than 90 ns and a record energy efficiency of 4 pJ/bit/iteration in 40G TSMC technology for the 802.11ad standard.

0

Load Load Load Load Load Load Load Load

ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT

1 Load Load Load Load Load Load Load Load ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT

MIN

2

MIN 2nd

MIN COMB / SIGN OVERALL

3

OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD

4

OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP Load Load Load Load Load Load Load Load ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT

5

Load Load Load Load Load Load Load Load ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT ROT

MIN

6

MIN 2nd

MIN COMB / SIGN OVERALL

7

OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD

8 OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP OUTP ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD ADD

Fig. 2. Mapping schedule example for 2 consecutive layers

3.2. Firmware programming
The LDPC 802.11ad decoding firmware is C like codes, which is describe in Fig.4. The reason adding first iteration and the back rotation at the beginning and the end of main iteration comes from the choice for a single rotation engine [7]. The actual programming is done in C with inline assembly for each of the different components as listed above.

3.3. Instantiate for 802.11ad mode
Based on the throughput requirement of 802.11ad and the property of its parity check matrix, all the eighth slices are fully utilized, which results to a half-row-based layer decoding. Since the cycles number for each layer decoding has been optimized as 4 cycles as illustrated before, the number of cycles per iteration increases as the coding rate becomes lower. From the standard definition there are possibilities to decode two layers in parallel for the coding rate mode 1/2 and 5/8. Since the number of the non-zero sub-matrix in the compressed layers is smaller than eight, one layer decoding of the sparse layer can be mapped to one half layer decoding. Then two of those sparse layers without overlap can be compressed as one layer with high density, which allows further reducing the cycle count in these modes. The number of cycles for each iteration before layer compression and after layer compression are shown in Table 1. From BER point of view the performance is not influenced.

Mode
1/2 5/8 3/4 13/16

Number of Layers 8 6 4 3

Cycles per iteration
33 25 17 13

virtual Number of Layers 4 4

Cycles per iteration
20.67 19.67
17 13

Table 1. Average cycles per iteration

3.4. Instantiate for 802.11ac mode
The decoder engine can be configured to support different code lengths with different coding rates. It offers two parallelism schemes: 8 or 4 slice instance (either performing 1/3 or 1/6 of a layer in parallel) to provide a wide range of throughput requirement. The number of cycles for each iteration and correspond throughput for coding rate 5/6 is shown in Table 2.

Mode clock frequency[MHz] Average cycles per 1 iter Throughput[Gbps per 1 iter]

Z=81 coding rate 5/6

500

25.3

40.3

38.37 24.10

Table 2. 802.11ac instance dimensioning

1256
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:15:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

INSTRUCTION DECODING

scalar slot

Load-rot-sub slots #slices

Output-add-store slots #slices

Min slot Sign slot

Fig. 3. Instruction sets for ASIP core

4. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

The proposed flexible LDPC decoder based on ASIP which has been instantiated both for©tIMhEeC 280103 /2C.O1N1FIaDEdNTaIAnL d the 802.11ac standard is implemented by 40G CMOS technology, which is a performance oriented technology having low default voltage and fast speed. The corresponding results of the ASIP implementation for the two instantiation and an ASIC implementation as reference are listed in Table 3.
All of the implementations are using layer decoding with min-sum check node update algorithm. The throughput listed below for the 802.11ad is achieved at the coding rate 13/16 and for the 802.11ac is achieved at the coding rate 5/6. The total power of the ASIP implementation includes the core engine, the data memory and program memory. Power estimation is based on a physical synthesis netlist.

Standard block size Quantization Throughput(Gbps at 5 it) Area (mm2) Total power (mW ) Energy efficiency (pJ/bit/it)

ASIP based 8 slice

802.11ad 802.11ac

42

81

5

4

5

5.3 5.3

7.67

0.216 0.196 0.71

135.5 114.7 355.4

5.1 4.3

9.27

ASIC based 802.11ad [7]
42 5 5.6 0.16 99
3.53

Table 3. Implementation results with 40G technology at 500MHz with a supply voltage at 0.9V

5. CONCLUSION
An energy efficient multi-Gbps LDPC decoder engine based on ASIP is proposed, which can be instantiated for all the modes of the 802.11ad and the 802.11ac standards. Using configurable partial layer paralleled architecture, it offers a good trade-off between the throughput and power/area efficiency when compared to the state-of-art fully paralleled ASIC design and shows to be competitive versus published ASIC solutions with equivalent half-row-based architecture.

6. REFERENCES
[1] Y. Sun and J. Cavallaro, “A flexible LDPC/turbo decoder architecture,” 2008.
[2] F. Naessens, P. Raghavan, L. Van der Perre, and A. Desset, “Unified C-programmable ASIP architecture for multi-standard viterbi, turbo and LDPC decoding,” 2008.
[3] M. Weiner, B. Nikolic, and Z. Zhang, “LDPC decoder architecture for high-data rate personal-area networks,” in Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2011 IEEE International Symposium on, may 2011.
[4] Z. Chen, X. Peng, X. Zhao, Q. Xie, L. Okamura, D. Zhou, and S. Goto, “A 6.72-Gb/s 8pJ/bit/iteration IEEE 802.15.3c LDPC decoder chip,” in Integrated Circuits (ISIC), 2011 13th International Symposium on, dec. 2011.
[5] S. Hung, S. Yen, C. Chen, H. Chang, S. Jou, and C. Lee, “A 5.7Gbps row-based layered scheduling LDPC decoder for IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” in Solid State Circuits Conference (A-SSCC), 2010 IEEE Asian, nov. 2010.
[6] S. Philipp, W. Christian, W. Norbert, and A. Matthias, “LDPC decoder architecture for high-data rate personalarea networks,” in Hindawi Publishing, February 2012.
[7] M. Li, F. Naessens, P. Debacker, P. Raghavan, C. Desset, M. Li, A. Desset, and L. Van der Perre, “An area and energy efficient half-row-paralleled layer LDPC decoder for the 802.11ad standard,” in SIPS Conference, 2013, 2013.
[8] “http://www.retarget.com,” .
[9] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M.P.C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” aug. 2005, vol. 53.

1257
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:15:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

