IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

7761

Spatially Coupled Ensembles Universally Achieve Capacity Under Belief Propagation
Shrinivas Kudekar, Tom Richardson, Fellow, IEEE, and Rüdiger L. Urbanke

Abstract—We investigate spatially coupled code ensembles. For transmission over the binary erasure channel, it was recently shown that spatial coupling increases the belief propagation threshold of the ensemble to essentially the maximum a priori threshold of the underlying component ensemble. This explains why convolutional LDPC ensembles, originally introduced by Felström and Zigangirov, perform so well over this channel. We show that the equivalent result holds true for transmission over general binary-input memoryless output-symmetric channels. More precisely, given a desired error probability and a gap to capacity, we can construct a spatially coupled ensemble that fulfills these constraints universally on this class of channels under belief propagation decoding. In fact, most codes in this ensemble have this property. The quantifier universal refers to the single ensemble/code that is good for all channels but we assume that the channel is known at the receiver. The key technical result is a proof that, under belief-propagation decoding, spatially coupled ensembles achieve essentially the area threshold of the underlying uncoupled ensemble. We conclude by discussing some interesting open problems.
Index Terms—Belief propagation (BP), capacity-achieving codes, channel coding, convolutional low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, iterative decoding, LDPC codes, spatial coupling, spatially coupled codes, threshold saturation.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Historical Perspective
E VER since the publication of Shannon’s seminal paper [1] and the introduction of the first coding schemes by Hamming [2] and Golay [3], coding theory has been concerned with finding low-delay and low-complexity capacity-achieving schemes. The interested reader can find an excellent historical review in [4]. Let us just briefly mention some of the highlights before focusing on those parts that are the most relevant for our purpose.
Manuscript received April 28, 2012; revised January 17, 2013; accepted March 26, 2013. Date of publication September 05, 2013; date of current version November 19, 2013. This work was supported in part by the U.S. Department of Energy, in part by Los Alamos National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-06NA25396, and in part by NMC via the NSF collaborative Grant CCF-0829945 on “Harnessing Statistical Physics for Computing and Communications.” R. L. Urbanke was supported by the European project STAMINA 265496. This paper was presented at the 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
S. Kudekar and T. Richardson are with Qualcomm, Bridgewater, NJ 08807 USA (e-mail: skudekar@qti.qualcomm.com; tomr@qti.qualcomm.com).
R. L. Urbanke is with the School of Computer and Communication Sciences EPFL, Lausanne, Vaud, Switzerland (e-mail: ruediger.urbanke@epfl.ch).
Communicated by E. Arıkan, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2013.2280915

In the first 50 years, coding theory focused on the construction of algebraic coding schemes and algorithms that were capable of exploiting the algebraic structure. Two early highlights of this line of research were the introduction of the Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) codes [5], [6] as well as the Reed–Solomon (RS) codes [7]. Berlekamp devised an efficient decoding algorithm [8], and this algorithm was then interpreted by Massey as an algorithm for finding the shortest feedback-shift register that generates a given sequence [9]. More recently, Sudan introduced a list decoding algorithm for RS codes that decodes beyond the guaranteed error-correcting radius [10]. Guruswami and Sudan improved upon this algorithm [11] and Koetter and Vardy showed how to handle soft information [12].
Another important branch started with the introduction of convolutional codes [13] by Elias and the introduction of the sequential decoding algorithm by Wozencraft [14]. Viterbi introduced the Viterbi algorithm [15]. It was shown to be optimal by Forney [16] and Omura [17] and to be eminently practical by Heller [18], [19].
An important development in transmission over the continuous input, band-limited, additive white Gaussian noise channel was the invention of the lattice codes. It was shown in [20]–[24] that lattice codes achieve the Shannon capacity. A breakthrough in bandwidth-limited communications came about when Ungerboeck [25]–[27] invented a technique to combine coding and modulation. Ungerboeck’s technique ushered in a new era of fast modems. The technique, called trellis-coded modulation (TCM), offered significant coding gains without compromising bandwidth efficiency by mapping binary code symbols, generated by a convolutional encoder, to a larger (nonbinary) signal constellation. In [28] and [29], Forney showed that lattice codes, as well as TCM schemes, might be generated by the same basic elements and the generalized technique was termed coset-coding.
Coming back to binary linear codes, in 1993, Berrou et al. [30] proposed turbo codes. These codes attain near-Shannon limit performance under low-complexity iterative decoding. Their remarkable performance leads to a flurry of research on the “turbo” principle. Around the same time, Spielman in his thesis [31], [32] and MacKay and Neal in [33]–[36], independently rediscovered low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and iterative decoding, both introduced in Gallager’s remarkable thesis [37]. Wiberg showed [38] that both turbo codes and LDPC codes fall under the umbrella of codes based on sparse graphs and that their iterative decoding algorithms are special cases of the sum-product algorithm. This line of research was formalized by Kschischang et al. who introduced the notion of factor graphs [39].
The next breakthrough in the design of codes (based on sparse graphs) came with the idea of using irregular LDPC codes by

0018-9448 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7762

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Luby et al. [40], [41]. With this added ingredient, it became pos-

sible to construct irregular LDPC codes that achieved perfor-

mance within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit when transmitting

over the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise channel, see

Chung et al. [42]. The development of these codes went hand in

hand with the development of a systematic framework for their

analysis by Luby et al. [43], [44] and Richardson and Urbanke

[45].

A central research topic for codes on graphs is the interaction

of the graphical structure of a code and its performance. Turbo

codes themselves are a prime example how the “right” structure

is important to achieve good performance [30]. Further impor-

tant parameters and structures are, the degree distribution (dd)

and in particular the fraction of degree-two variable nodes, mul-

tiedge ensembles [46], degree-two nodes in a chain [47], and

protographs [48], [49].

Currently, sparse graph codes and their associated iterative

decoding algorithms are the best “practical” codes in terms of

their tradeoff between performance and complexity and they are

part of essentially all new communication standards.

Polar codes represent the most recent development in coding

theory, see Arıkan, [50]. They are provably capacity achieving

on binary-input memoryless output-symmetric (BMS) channels

(and many others) and they have low decoding complexity.

They also have low error floors due to a minimum distance that

increases like the square root of the blocklength. The simplicity,

elegance, and wide applicability of polar codes have made them

a popular choice in the recent literature. There are perhaps only

two areas in which polar codes could be improved.

First, for polar codes, the convergence of their performance

to the asymptotic limit is slow. “Calculations” suggest that, for

a fixed desired error probability, the required blocklength scales

like , where is the multiplicative gap1 to capacity and

where depends on the channel and has a value around 4,

[51], [52]. This scaling can be proved rigorously if, instead of

looking at the block error probability, we consider the sum of the

Battacharyya parameters of the “unfrozen” channels as perfor-

mance measure [53]. Note that random block codes under MAP

decoding have a similar scaling behavior but with

. This

implies a considerably faster convergence to the asymptotic be-

havior. The value 2 is a lower bound for for any system be-

cause the variations of the channel themselves imply that

.

The second aspect is universality: the code design of polar

codes depends on the specific channel being used, and the same

design cannot simultaneously achieve capacity over a nontrivial

class of channels (under successive cancellation decoding).

Let us now connect the content of this paper to the previous

discussion. Our main aim is to explain the role of a further struc-

tural element in the realm of sparse graph codes (besides the pre-

viously discussed examples), namely that of “spatial coupling.”

We will show that this coupling of graphs leads to a remarkable

change in their performance. Ensembles designed in this way

combine some of the nice elements of polar codes (specifically

the fact that they are provably capacity achieving under low

complexity decoding) with the practical advantages of sparse

graph codes (the codes are competitive already for moderate

lengths). Perhaps most importantly, it is possible to construct

1This means that we are transmitting at a fraction

of capacity.

universal ensembles for the whole class of BMS channels. Here, universality refers to the fact that the same ensemble is good for a whole class of channels, assuming that at the receiver we have knowledge of the channel.
B. Prior Work on Spatially Coupled Codes
The potential of spatially coupled codes has long been recognized. Our contribution lies therefore not in the introduction of a new coding scheme, but in clarifying the mechanism that make these codes perform so well.
The term spatially coupled codes is coined in [54]. Convolutional LDPC codes (more precisely, terminated convolutional LDPC codes), introduced by Felström and Zigangirov in [55], and their many variants belong to this class. Why do we introduce a new term? The same effect has been shown to hold in many other graphical models, most of them outside the realm of coding. To name just one prominent example, spatial coupling has found success in the field of compressed sensing [56]–[59]. The term “spatial coupling” is perhaps then somewhat more generally applicable.
There is considerable literature on convolutional-like LDPC ensembles. Variations on the constructions, as well as some analysis, can be found in Engdahl and Zigangirov [60], Engdahl et al. [61], Lentmaier et al. [62], as well as Tanner et al. [63].
In [64] and [65], Sridharan et al. consider the density evolution (DE) analysis for convolutional LDPC ensembles and determine thresholds for the BEC. The equivalent results for general channels are reported by Lentmaier et al. in [65] and [66]. This DE analysis is in many ways the starting point for our investigation. By comparing the thresholds to the thresholds of the underlying ensembles under MAP decoding (see e.g., [46]), it quickly becomes apparent that an interesting effect must be at work. Indeed, in a recent paper [67], Lentmaier and Fettweis follow this route and independently formulate the equality of the belief propagation (BP) threshold of convolutional LDPC ensembles and the MAP threshold of the underlying ensemble as a conjecture.
A representation of convolutional LDPC ensembles, in terms of a protograph, is introduced by Mitchell et al. [68]. The corresponding representation for terminated convolutional LDPC ensembles is introduced by Lentmaier et al. [69]. A variety of constructions of LDPC convolutional codes from the graph-cover perspective is shown by Pusane et al. [70].
A pseudocodeword analysis of convolutional LDPC codes is performed by Smarandache et al. [70]–[72]. Such an analysis is important if we want to understand the error-floor behavior of spatially coupled ensembles.
In [73], Papaleo et al. investigate the performance of windowed decoding of convolutional LDPC codes on the BEC. Note that the complexity of this decoder is independent of the chain length, an important practical advantage. Luckily, it turns out that the performance under windowed decoding, when measured in terms of the threshold, approaches the “regular” (without windowed decoding) threshold exponentially fast in the window size, see [74], [75]. This means that we see most of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7763

the benefits of the threshold saturation phenomenon already at correctly. Therefore, we have shown that the block error prob-

small window sizes. This has important practical implications. ability, averaged over the ensemble and the channel realization,

The scaling behavior of spatially coupled ensembles, i.e., the relationship between the chain length, the number of variables per section, and the error probability is discussed by Olmos and

decreases exponentially fast in the blocklength to 0. Since this is true for any channel parameter below the BP threshold our claim is proved.

Urbanke [76].

D. Prior Results for General Binary-Input Memoryless

C. Prior Results for the Binary Erasure Channel

Output-Symmetric Channels As pointed out in Section I-B, BP thresholds for transmis-

It was recently shown in [54] that, for transmission over the sion over general BMS channels were computed by means of a

BEC, spatially coupled ensembles have a BP threshold that is numerical procedure by Lentmaier et al. [66]. Further, in [78]

essentially equal to the MAP threshold of the underlying uncou- (conjectured) MAP thresholds for some LDPC ensembles were

pled ensemble. Further, this threshold is also essentially equal to computed according to the Maxwell construction. Comparing

the MAP threshold of the coupled ensemble. This phenomena these two values, we can check empirically that, also for trans-

is called threshold saturation in [54] because the BP threshold mission over general BMS channels, the BP threshold of the

takes on its largest possible value (the MAP threshold). This coupled ensemble is essentially equal to the (conjectured) MAP

significant improvement in the performance is due to the spatial threshold of the underlying ensemble. Indeed, recently both [79]

coupling of the underlying code. The “sections” of the code that and [80] provided further numerical evidence that the threshold

have already succeeded in decoding can help their neighboring, saturation phenomenon also applies to general BMS channels.

less fortunate, sections in the decoding process. In this manner, For typical sparse graph ensembles the MAP threshold is

the information propagates from the “boundaries,” where the not equal to the Shannon threshold, but the Shannon threshold

bits are known perfectly toward the “middle.” In a recent paper can only be reached by taking a sequence of such ensembles

[67], Lentmaier and Fettweis independently formulate the same (e.g., a sequence of increasing degrees). There are some notable

statement as a conjecture and provide numerical evidence for exceptions, such as MN ensembles or HA ensembles. Kasai

its validity. They attribute the observation of the equality of the and Sakaniwa take this as a starting point to investigate in [81]

two thresholds to G. Liva.

whether by spatially coupling such ensembles it is possible to

It is shown in [68], [71], [72], and [77] that if we couple com- create ensembles that are universally capacity achieving under

ponent codes whose Hamming distance grows linearly in the BP decoding.

blocklength, then also the resulting coupled ensembles have this

property (assuming that the number of “sections” or copies of the underlying code is kept fixed). The equivalent result is true for stopping sets.

E. Spatial Coupling for General Communication Scenarios, Signal Processing, Computer Science, and Statistical Physics

This implies that, for transmission over the BEC, the block The principle underlying the good performance of spatially

BP threshold is equal to the bit BP threshold. Although this im- coupled ensembles is broad. It has been shown to apply to

plication is well known in the community, it might never have a variety of problems in communications, computer science,

been recorded formally. For the convenience of the reader, let signal processing, and physics. Some concrete examples

us therefore quickly outline its proof.

are, the threshold saturation effect (dynamical/algorithmic

More precisely, we want to show that if we are transmitting threshold of the system being equal to the static or conden-

below the BP threshold (which is by definition the threshold sation threshold) of coupled graphical models, observed for

below which the bit error probability vanishes) then the block rateless codes by Aref and Urbanke [82], for channels with

error probability also vanishes if we increase the blocklength. memory and multiple access channels with erasure by Kudekar

Hence, for a particular code family, consider the sequence of and Kasai [83], [84], for CDMA channels by Takeuchi et al.

ensembles of increasing length. Assume that for this family the [85], for relay channels with erasure by Uchikawa et al. [86],

minimum stopping distance is lower bounded by , where is for the noisy Slepian–Wolf problem by Yedla et al. [87], and

the block length and

. Assume that we operate below the for the BEC wiretap channel by Rathi et al. [88]. Uchikawa et

BP threshold of the family. Then, we know from DE that there al. recently show an improvement of the BP threshold when

is a finite integer , so that after DE iterations the expected era- one considers transmission over the unconstrained AWGN

sure fraction is below , lets say. Further, by standard concen- channel using low-density lattice codes [89]. Further, Yedla

tration results, we know that for a randomly chosen code from et al. demonstrate the universality of spatially coupled codes

the ensemble of length the probability that the undecoded frac- in the 2-user binary input Gaussian multiple-access channel

tion of erasures after iterations is above is upper bounded by and finite-state ISI channels such as the dicode-erasure channel

for some strictly positive . Now note that for the BEC and the dicode channel with AWGN [90], [91]. In addition,

the number of still erased bits is monotonically decreasing in the in [90] they show that for a fixed rate pair, spatially coupled

number of iterations and that this set converges to a stopping set. ensembles universally saturate the achievable region (i.e., the

Hence, if at any point in the decoding process the fraction of era- set of channel gain parameters that are achievable for the fixed

sures drops below , and if the particular code has a fractional rate pair) under BP decoding. Similarly, in [91] they provide

stopping set distance of at least , then by definition of the stop- numerical evidence that spatially coupled ensembles achieve

ping set distance the final set of erasure must be the empty set. the symmetric information rate for the dicode erasure channel

This implies that in this case we decode the whole codeword and the dicode channel with AWGN.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7764

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

In signal processing and computer science, spatial coupling achieve capacity over this class of channels. More precisely,

has found success in the field of compressed sensing [56]–[59]. for each

there exists a coupled ensemble that achieves

In [56], Kudekar and Pfister use sparse measurement matrices at least a fraction

of capacity universally, under belief

with suboptimal verification decoding and show that spatial propagation decoding, over the whole class of BMS channels.

coupling boosts thresholds of sparse recovery. In [58] and [59], The qualifier “universal” is important here. Even stronger, not

Krzakala et al., as well as Donoho et al. show that carefully de- only can we make the bit error probability vanish, but we can

signed spatially coupled dense measurement matrices achieve design codes with vanishing block error probability.

the best possible recovery threshold, i.e., the one achieved Although we can empirically observe the threshold satura-

by the optimal decoder. Thus, the phenomena of threshold tion phenomenon for a wide choice of codes on graphs (LDPC

saturation is also demonstrated in this case. This development codes, turbo codes, MN codes, and so on), we state and prove

is quite remarkable.

the main result only for regular LDPC ensembles. This keeps

The authors of [58] offer the following insightful interpreta- the exposition manageable.

tion. Imagine a physical system which can be in two different energy configurations. Assume that the system starts out in the G. Outline

higher energy configuration. In the long run, we expect the system to tend to the lower energy state, but for some systems this transition might take a long time. In this case the higher energy state is called metastable, e.g., a diamond is a metastable state of carbon and will eventually take on the lower energy state of graphite. Another example is water. Assume that it is very pure and contained in a very smooth container. In this case, even if we cool it below zero degrees Celsius, it will remain in this supercooled state for several hours before freezing. But if we insert a small nucleus into supercooled water then, emanating from this small starting point, supercooled water will start freezing and this process will spread throughout the system until the whole water in the container is in the frozen state. This process is called the nucleation process.
The analogy to spatially coupled systems and the threshold saturation phenomenon is straightforward. MAP decoding corresponds to the lower energy state and BP decoding to the higher energy state. The boundary condition corresponds to the nucleus which allows the system to go from the high-energy state to the low-energy state. Finally, the structure induced by the spatial coupling makes it possible for the nucleation process to sweep through the whole system unabated.
For the so-called random -SAT problem, random graph coloring, and the Curie–Weiss model, spatially coupled ensembles are investigated by Hassani et al. [92]–[94]. Further spatially coupled models were considered by Takeuchi and Tanaka [95]. In all these cases, the threshold saturation phenomenon is observed. This suggests that it might be possible to use spatial coupling as a proof technique to study difficult theoretical problems in this area. The idea is to study difficult problems such as the existence of the static threshold by studying the dynamical threshold of a chain of coupled models instead. The latter

In Section II, we briefly review regular LDPC ensembles and their asymptotic (in the blocklength) analysis. Much of this material is standard and we only include it here to set the notation and to make the paper largely self-contained. The two most important exceptions are our in-depth discussion of the Wasserstein distance and the so-called area threshold, in particular (the negativity) Lemma 27.
In Section III, we review some basic properties of coupled ensembles. Using simple extremes of information combining techniques, we will see in Section III-G that coupling indeed increases the BP threshold significantly, even though these simple arguments are not sufficient to characterize the BP threshold under coupling exactly.
We state our main result, specifically that the BP threshold of coupled ensembles is essentially equal to the area threshold of the underlying component ensemble, in Section IV. We also discuss how we can easily strengthen this result to apply to individual codes rather than to ensembles, and how this gives rise to codes which are universally close to the Shannon capacity under BP decoding for the whole class of BMS channels.
We end in Section IV-E with a discussion of what challenges still lie ahead. In particular, spatial coupling has been shown empirically to lead to the threshold saturation phenomenon in a wide class of graphical models. Rather than proving each such scenario in isolation, we want a common framework to analyze all such systems.
Many of the proofs are relegated to the appendixes. This makes it possible to read the material on two levels—a casual level, skipping all the proofs and following only the flow of the argument, and a more detailed level, consulting the material in the appendices.

might in fact be an easier problem. Indeed, it was shown in [96] that the MAP threshold of some simple uncoupled ensembles

II. UNCOUPLED SYSTEMS

stays unchanged under spatial coupling. Therefore, in order to determine the MAP threshold of these uncoupled ensembles it is natural to study the MAP threshold of the coupled versions (and these MAP thresholds are presumably equal to the BP thresholds of the coupled versions).

A. Regular Ensembles

Definition 1 (

-Regular Ensemble): Fix

,

,

, and so that

. The

-regular

LDPC ensemble of blocklength is defined as follows. There

are variable nodes and check nodes. Each variable node

F. Main Results and Consequences

has degree and each check node has degree . Accordingly, each variable node has sockets, i.e., places to connect an

We show that, for transmission over general BMS channels, edge to, and each check node has sockets. Therefore, there

coupled ensembles exhibit the threshold saturation phenom- are in total variable-node sockets and the same number of

enon. Choosing regular component ensembles of fixed rate and check-node sockets. Number both kinds from 1 to . Con-

increasing degrees, this implies that coupled ensembles can sider the set of permutations on

. Endow this

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7765

set with a uniform probability distribution. To sample from the -regular ensemble, sample from and connect the vari-
able to the check node sockets according to the chosen permutation. This is the configuration model of LDPC ensembles. It is inspired by the configuration model of random graphs [97, Sec. 2.4].

B. Binary-Input Memoryless Output-Symmetric Channels

Throughout we will assume that transmission is taking place

over a BMS channel. Let denote the input and let be the

output. Further, let

denote the transition

probability describing the channel. An alternative characteriza-

tion of the channel is by means of its so-called -distribution,

denote it by . More precisely, is the distribution of

A useful characterization of degradation, see [98], [46, Th.

4.74], is that

is equivalent to

(1)

for all

that are nonincreasing and concave on . In

particular, this characterization implies that

for

if

is either the Battacharyya or the entropy func-

tional. This is true since both are linear functionals of the distri-

butions and their respective kernels in the -domain are de-

creasing and concave, see [46]. An alternative characterization,

see [46], in terms of the cumulative distribution functions

and

is that for all

,

(2)

A BMS channel family

is said to be ordered (by

degradation) if

implies

. (The reverse order

is also allowed but we generally stick to the stated

conditioned that

.

Given , we write , , and to denote the corresponding

distribution, the distribution, and the cdf in the -do-

main, respectively, see [46, Sec. 4.1.4].

Typically, we do not consider a single channel in isolation

but a whole family of channels. We write

to denote

the family parameterized by the scalar . Often it will be more

convenient to denote this family by , i.e., to use the family

of -densities which characterize the channel family. If it is

important to make the range of the parameter explicit, we will

write

.

Sometimes it is convenient to use the natural parameter of

convention.)

We say that an -density is symmetric if

.

We recall that all densities which stem from BMS channels are

symmetric, see [46, Secs. 4.1.4, 4.1.8, and 4.1.9]. All densities

which we consider are symmetric. We will therefore not men-

tion symmetry explicitly in the sequel.

A BMS channel family

is said to be smooth for all

continuously differentiable functions

so that

is

bounded, the integral

exists and is a continu-

ously differentiable function with respect to , see [46, Defini-

tion 4.32].

The three fundamental channel families

,

the family, e.g., for the three fundamental channels, the BEC,

, and

are all complete, ordered,

the binary symmetric channel (BSC), and the binary additive smooth, and symmetric.

white-Gaussian noise channel (BAWGNC), the corresponding

channel families are given by

,

, and C. MAP Decoder and MAP Threshold

. Other times, it is more convenient to use

a common parameterization, e.g., we will write

to

denote a channel family where

denotes the element in

the family of entropy .

Assume that we are given a channel family

.

We say that the family is complete if

,

, and for each

there exists a pa-

rameter so that

. Here

is the entropy

functional defined in Section II-D.

Let

denote the transition probability associated

with a BMS channel and let

denote the transition

The bit maximum a posteriori (bit-MAP) decoder for bit

finds the value of which maximizes

. It minimizes

the bit error probability and is optimal in this sense. The block

maximum a posteriori (block-MAP) decoder finds the code-

word which maximizes

. It minimizes the block

error probability and is optimal in this sense.

Definition 2 (MAP Threshold): Consider an ordered and

complete channel family . The MAP threshold of the

-regular ensemble for this channel family is denoted by

and is defined by

probability of another BMS channel . We then say that is

degraded with respect to if there exists a channel

so that

where

is the conditional entropy of the trans-

mitted codeword , chosen uniformly at random from the

code, given the received message

, and where the expec-

tation is with respect to the

-regular ensemble.

Discussion: Define

, where

We will use the notation

to denote that is degraded with

is the MAP estimate of bit based on the ob-

respect to (as a mnemonic think of as the erasure probability servation . Note that by the Fano inequality, we have

of a BEC and replace with ).

. Assume that we are transmitting

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

above

so that

.2

Then,

In other words, if we are transmitting above the MAP threshold,

then the ensemble average bit-error probability is lower

bounded by

, a strictly positive constant. This ensemble

is therefore not suitable for reliable transmission above this

threshold.

In general, we cannot conclude from

that the average error probability is small.3 But for the codes

we consider we will see that below

we can indeed decode

correctly with high probability, which justifies the choice of our

definition.

The reader might wonder why we did not start with an op-

erational interpretation of the MAP threshold as the channel

parameter below which a MAP decoder can decode with high

probability. As pointed out above, for the codes we consider the

given definition is in fact equivalent to the operational one. But

in addition our definition has the advantage that the conditional

entropy connects directly to the quantities which appear in our

analysis, in particular to the generalized EXIT curve.

D. Belief Propagation, Density Evolution, and Some Important Functionals

In principle, one can investigate the behavior of coupled en-

sembles under any message-passing algorithm. We limit our in-

vestigation to the analysis of the BP decoder, the most pow-

erful local message-passing algorithm. We are interested in the

asymptotic performance of the BP decoder, i.e., the performance

when the blocklength tends to infinity. This asymptotic per-

formance is characterized by the so-called DE equation [45].

Definition 3 (Density Evolution): For , the DE equation

for a

-regular ensemble is given by

As mentioned, all distributions associated with BMS channels are symmetric and symmetry is preserved under DE, see [46, Ch. 4] for details. There are a number of functionals of densities of interest to us. The most important functionals are the Battacharyya, the entropy, and the error probability functional. For a density , these are denoted by , , and , respectively. Assuming is an -density, they are given by

We end this section with the following useful fact. The proof

can be found in Appendix A.

Lemma 4 (Entropy Versus Battacharyya): For any -density

,

.

E. Extremes of Information Combining and the Duality Rule

When we are operating on BMS channels, the quantities ap-

pearing in the DE equations are distributions. These are hard

to track analytically, unless we are transmitting over the BEC.

Often we only need bounds. In these cases extremes of informa-

tion combining ideas are handy, see [99]–[103], [46, p. 242].

Lemma 5 (Extremes of Information Combining): Let

denote either or and let

. Let

and

denote -densities from the families

and

,

respectively, so that

. Then, for any

and any so that

i)

,

ii)

.

Equality holds if and only if

or

.

Discussion: Although the extremes of information com-

bining bounds are only stated for pairs of distributions, they

naturally extend to more than two distributions, e.g., we claim

that

. To see this, let

be any set of distributions so that

. Then,

we can use Lemma 5 repeatedly to conclude that

Here, is the -density of the BMS channel over which trans-

mission takes place and is the density emitted by variable

nodes in the th round of DE. Initially, we have

, the

delta function at 0. The operators and correspond to the

convolution of densities at variable and check nodes, respec-

tively, see [46, Sec. 4.1.4].

2We have

for all

, lets say. Further, for

,

is strictly positive unless the channel is trivial. The claim follows by taking the

minimum of all of the bounds for

as well as the bound for

.

3This is possible if we have the slightly stronger condition . In this case

The same remark and the same proof technique applies to the other cases.
Lemma 6 (Duality Rule—[46, p. 196]): For any and .
Note: We give a simple proof of this identity at the end of the proof of Lemma 53.

, so that

. The last step in

the previous chain of inequalities follows since under MAP decoding the error

probability conditioned that we observed is equal to

.

An alternative way to prove this is to realize that

represents a

BMS channel with a particular entropy and to use extremes of information

combining to find the worst error probability such a channel can have. The

extremal channel in this case is the BEC.

F. Fixed Points, Convergence, and BP Threshold We say that the density is a fixed point (FP) of DE for the -regular ensemble and the channel if
(3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7767

More succinctly, when the underlying ensemble is understood

from the context, we say that

is a FP.

One way to generate a FP is to set

and to run DE,

as stated in Definition 3. We call such a FP a FP of forward DE.

The resulting FPs are the “natural” FPs since they have a natural

operational meaning—if we pick sufficiently long ensembles,

these are the FPs which we observe in simulations when we run

the BP decoder.

Definition 7 (Weak Convergence): We say that a sequence

of distributions converges weakly to a limit distribution ,

if for the corresponding cumulative distributions in the -do-

main, call them , and for all bounded and continuous func-

tions

on

we have

An equivalent definition is that

converges to

at

points of continuity of

.

A simple proof of the following lemma can be found at the

end of Section II-I.

Lemma 8 (Convergence of Forward DE—[46, Lemma 4.75]:

The sequence

of distributions of forward DE converges

weakly to a symmetric distribution.

Lemma 9 (BP Threshold): Consider an ordered and complete

channel family . Let

denote the distribution in the th

round of DE when the channel is . Then, the BP threshold of

the

-regular ensemble is defined as

In other words, the BP threshold is characterized by the

largest channel parameter so that the forward DE FP is trivial.

We have just seen that the FPs of forward DE are important

because they characterize the BP threshold. But there exist FPs

that cannot be achieved this way. Let us review a general method

of constructing FPs. Assume that, given a channel family ,

we need a FP which has a given error probability , entropy

, or Battacharyya parameter . Such FPs can often be

constructed, or at least their existence can be guaranteed, by a

procedure introduced in [78]. Let us recall this procedure for the

case of fixed entropy.

Consider a smooth, complete, and ordered family

and

the

-regular ensemble. Let us denote by the ordinary

DE operator at fixed channel . Formally,

(4)

For any , call it

, we define the DE operator at fixed entropy , as
(5)

for a solution

to exist (when the family is complete)

is that

(see Theorem 6 in

[78]).

Definition 10 (DE at Fixed Entropy ): Set

. For

, compute

.

Discussion: It can be shown that if the above procedure gives

rise to an infinite sequence, i.e., if

is well-defined at each

step, then this sequence has a converging subsequence. In fact,

in practice one observes that the sequence itself converges. The

computation of the convolutions is typically done numerically

either by sampling or via Fourier transforms as in ordinary DE.

Due to the monotonicity of

in , the value of

can be efficiently found by a bisection method. The procedure is

halted when some convergence criterion is met—e.g., one can

require that (a properly defined) distance between and

becomes smaller than a threshold.

Any FP of the above transformation , i.e., any such that

, is also a FP of ordinary DE for the channel with

. Furthermore, if a sequence of densities such that

converges (weakly) to a density , then is a

FP of , with entropy .

G. BP Threshold for Large Degrees

What happens to the BP threshold when we fix the design

rate

and increase the degrees? The proof of

the following lemma, which uses basic extremes of information

combining arguments, can be found in Appendix B.

Lemma 11 (Upper Bound on BP Threshold): Consider

transmission over an ordered and complete family

of

BMS channels using an

-regular degree distribution

(dd) and BP decoding. Let

be the design rate and

let

denote the BP threshold. Then,

In particular, by increasing while keeping the rate fixed, the BP threshold converges to 0.

H. Wasserstein Metric: Definition and Basic Properties

In the sequel, we will often need to measure how close various

distributions are. Sometimes it is convenient to compare their

entropy or their Battacharyya constant. But sometimes a more

general measure is required. The Wasserstein metric is our mea-

sure of choice. The proof of the following lemma can be found

in Appendix C.

Definition 12 (Wasserstein Metric—[104, Ch. 6]: Let and

denote two -distributions. The Wasserstein metric, de-

noted by

, is defined as

where

is the solution of

. Whenever no

such value of exists,

is left undefined. Since, for a given

(6)

, the family

is ordered by degradation,

is a

nondecreasing function of . As a consequence the equation where

denotes the class of Lipschitz continuous

cannot have more than a single solution. Further- functions on

with Lipschitz constant 1.

more, by the smoothness of the channel family ,

Discussion: In the sequel, we will say that a function

is continuous as a function of . Notice that

: if is

as a shorthand to mean that it is Lipschitz contin-

the channel is noiseless the output density at a variable nodes is uous with constant . If we want to emphasize the domain, then

noiseless as well. Therefore, a necessary and sufficient condition we write e.g.,

. Why have we defined the metric in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

the -domain? As the next lemma shows, convergence in this

metric implies weak convergence. Since all the distributions of

interest are symmetric, it suffices to look at the -domain in-

stead of the -domain. To ease our notation, however, we will

formally write expressions like

, i.e., we will allow the

arguments to be e.g., -distributions. It is then implied that the

metric is determined using the equivalent -domain represen-

tations as defined above.

Lemma 13 (Basic Properties of the Wasserstein Metric): In

the following, , , , and denote -distributions.

In the domain, we have the following expressions for

and (compare this to the expressions in the domain

given in Section II-D),

and for

and any distribution

.

vii) Regularity with respect to : The Wasserstein metric

satisfies the regularity property

, so that

Further,

viii) Regularity with respect to DE: Let

denote the DE

operator for the dd

and the channel . Then,

, with

where

is the binary

entropy function. See [104], [105] for more details on metrics

for probability measures.

i) Alternative definitions:

ix) Wasserstein bounds Battacharyya and entropy:

ii) Boundedness:

.

iii) Metrizable and weak convergence: The Wasserstein

metric induces the weak topology on the space of prob-

ability measures on

. In other words, the space

of probability measures under the weak topology is

metrizable and convergence in the Wasserstein metric is

equivalent to weak convergence (see [104, Th. 6.9]).

iv) Polish space: The space of probability distributions on

metrized by the Wasserstein distance is a complete

separable metric space, i.e., a Polish space, and any mea-

sure can be approximated by a sequence of probability

measures with finite support, i.e., distributions of the form

, where

,

, and

. Further, the space is compact. (See [104, Th.

6.18].)

v) Convexity: Let

. Then,

In general, if

, then

vi) Regularity with respect to : The Wasserstein metric sat-

isfies the regularity property

,

so that

x) Battacharyya sometimes bounds Wasserstein:

Discussion: Perhaps the most useful property of the Wasserstein metric is that it interacts nicely with the operations of variable-and check-node convolution. This is the essence of properties (vi), (vii), and (viii). For example, it is easy to see why property (viii) might be useful: given that two distributions and are close, it asserts that after one iteration of DE these two distributions are again close. Indeed, as we will see shortly, depending on the Battacharyya parameter of the starting distributions the distance might in fact become smaller, i.e., we might have a contraction.

I. Wasserstein Metric and Degradation

When densities are ordered by degradation, the Wasserstein

metric inherits some additional properties. The proof of the fol-

lowing lemma can be found in Appendix D.

Lemma 14 (Wasserstein Metric and Degradation): In the fol-

lowing and denote -distributions.

i) Wasserstein versus Degradation: Let

. Let and

denote the corresponding -domain cdfs. Define

. Note that

can be seen as a measure of how much is degraded

with respect to since it is the average of the nonnegative

integrals

(cf. (2)). Then,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7769

Furthermore,

and for any symmetric densi-

ties such that

,

.

ii) Entropy and Battacharyya bound Wasserstein distance:

Let

. Then,

and

.

iii) Continuity for ordered families: Consider a smooth

family of -distributions

ordered by degradation

so that

is continuous with respect to

.

Then, the Wasserstein metric is also continuous in .

Discussion: Property (i) is particularly useful. Imagine a se-

Fig. 1. Left: The BP EXIT curve of the

-regular ensemble

when transmitting over the BEC. The curve has a characteristic “C” shape.

Right: The construction of the MAP threshold from the BP EXIT curve. The

dark gray area is equal to the design rate of the code.

quence of distributions

ordered by degradation, i.e.,

. Then,

and we know from [46] Rather than plotting itself it is convenient to plot the EXIT

that

is nonnegative since it is value

. This is the locally best estimate of

the “average” of the nonnegative integrals

.

Now note that

is additive and that

. From

these two facts, we can conclude that there must exist an index

,

, so that

. More generally, we

can conclude for any

that there must exist an index

,

, so that

. This follows by upper bounding the average of all these

such distances. More precisely, we consider the

sum

, then write each

as the sum

a bit based on the internal messages only, excluding the direct

observation. For this choice the resulting curve is usually called

the BP EXIT curve, see [106], [107] and [46, Secs. 3.14 and

4.10]. It is the EXIT curve since the estimate is a BP esti-

mate. And it is the BP EXIT (where the E stands for “extrinsic”)

curve since the estimate excludes the received value associated

with this bit.

The FP equation is

, which we

can solve for to obtain

. Dividing by

we obtain the re-

sult. By property (i) this implies “closeness” also in the Wasser-

(7)

stein sense. In other words, in a sequence of distributions ordered by degradation we are always able to find a subsequence of distributions which are “close” in the Wasserstein sense.

Using (7) we can write down the parametric characterization of the BP EXIT curve

As an exercise in using the basic properties of the Wasserstein

distance, let us give a proof of Lemma 8.

Proof: Since we are considering a sequence of distribu-

tions obtained by forward DE, we have

for

.

Therefore, the quantities

are nonnegative and they

are additive in the sense that

.

Further,

is upper bounded by 1. It follows that forms

a Cauchy sequence with respect to

and hence also with

respect to

. This in turn implies that

converges with

respect to

and this convergence is equivalent to weak con-

vergence. Finally, symmetry can be tested in terms of bounded

continuous functionals and weak convergence preserves such

functionals.

This curve is shown in the left-hand side in Fig. 1 for the (3,

6)-regular ensemble and has a typical shape. In fact, one can

show that, in this case, for

(the BP threshold)

there is only one FP at

corresponding to perfect decoding;

for

there are two FPs, one is at

and

the other is the FP corresponding to forward DE; and for

there are exactly three FPs of DE, one of the FPs is

at

and the remaining two FPs are strictly positive, one of

which is stable, denoted by , whereas the other is unstable,

denoted by

. The stable FP is the FP which is reached by

forward DE. For details see Lemma 60.

J. GEXIT Curve

A quantity which will appear throughout this paper is the

value of the unstable FP when transmitting over BEC

.

As we have discussed in the preceding section, FPs of DE We denote this FP by

. More precisely,

is the smaller

play a crucial role in the asymptotic analysis, e.g., the BP nonzero solution of

. Note that

threshold is characterized by the existence/nonexistence of a depends on the degrees, but we drop this dependence from the

nontrivial FP of forward DE for a particular channel.

notation for the ease of exposition.

An even more powerful picture arises if instead of looking at Discussion: The above example raises the following two

a single FP at a time we visualize a whole collection of FPs. In questions: 1) We have a large degree of freedom in selecting

order to visualize many FPs at the same time, it is convenient to the projection operator. Which one is “best”? 2) From the

project them, e.g., given the FP pair

we might decide to above example, we see that the set of FPs forms a smooth

plot the point

in the 2-D unit box

. curve. Indeed, for the BEC it is not hard to see that the only

Example 15 (BP Exit Curve for BEC): Note that for the BEC, FPs are the ones on the curve together with all the FPs of the

erasure probability is equal to Battacharyya parameter, and also form

, where is any element of the family of BEC

equal to entropy. Even though all these parameters are equal in channels and

corresponds to erasure value of 0. Is this

this case, our language will reflect that we are plotting entropy. picture still valid for general channel families?

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

In the remainder of this section, we address the first question,

i.e., we will discuss a particularly effective choice of the projec-

tion operator. In the next section, we will address the question

of the existence and nature of this curve for the general case,

presenting some partial results.

A good choice for the projection operator for general chan-

nels is the GEXIT functional [78]. For the BEC this coincides

with the EXIT functional that we saw in example 15. For the

general case take a FP

and define

. Then,

Fig. 2. BP GEXIT curve for the

-regular ensemble and

transmission over the BAWGNC. Each point on the curve corresponds to a FP

of DE. The two figures show the FP density as well as the input

density for two points on the curves (see inlets).

where we think of as fixed with respect to . In other words,

measures the ratio of the change in entropy of

(the entropy of the variable node estimate under BP decoding)

versus the change of entropy of the channel as a function of

.

Discussion: Note that if the parameterization in is Lips-

chitz, i.e., if for some positive constant ,

, then the derivative

exists almost every-

where. Furthermore, in this case also

is Lipschitz

and hence differentiable almost everywhere. This follows since

by (the Duality Rule in) Lemma 6, for

,

. We then have

. Let

us integrate the area which is enclosed by this curve. We call the

corresponding integral the GEXIT integral. For our particular

case, it is given by

Perhaps surprisingly, the result stays valid for general channels

as we will discuss in Section II-L. This property is one of the

main ingredients in our proof.

Without loss of generality assume that the parametrization is

such that

increases in . The claim then follows since

both terms on the left are nonnegative (due to degradation), so

that in particular the first term is upper bounded by

,

Note that, given and , the GEXIT functional

can be expressed in the form

, where

is the so-called GEXIT kernel. In the -domain, this kernel is

given by

i.e., it is Lipschitz. This formulation also shows that the numer-

ator is no larger than the denominator (so that the ratio exists)

and that the GEXIT value is upper bounded by 1 (and is non-

negative).

We get the GEXIT curve by plotting

for a family of FPs

. This is shown in Fig. 2 for the

(8)

(3, 6)-regular ensemble assuming that transmission takes place For a proof of the following see [46, Lemma 4.77]. over the BAWGNC. In the last section, we have already ex- Lemma 16 (GEXIT for Smooth and Ordered Channels): For a

plained how we can construct in the general case FPs by a nu- smooth, ordered, channel family

,

, as a function of

merical procedure. To plot Fig. 2, we have used this procedure to get a complete family of FPs for all entropies from 0 to 1. In each of the two pictures of Fig. 2, there is a small black dot.

, exists, is continuous, nonnegative, nonincreasing, and con-

cave on its entire domain. Further

and

.

We remark that the above lemma also holds when

is

This dot marks a particular FP and the two small inlets show the piecewise linear.

corresponding distribution of the channel as well as the message distribution emitted at the variable nodes, call it . For a K. Existence of GEXIT Curve

detailed discussion, we refer the reader to [46], [78].

As we briefly discussed above, for the BEC it is trivial to see

Why do we use this particular representation? As we will dis- that the BP GEXIT curve indeed exists. But for general BMS

cuss in detail in Section II-L, assuming this curve indeed exists channels, this is not immediate. The aim of this section is to

and is “smooth,” the area which is enclosed by it is equal to show the existence of the BP GEXIT curve for at least a subset

, the design rate of the ensemble.

of the parameters.

This is easy to see for the BEC. To simplify notation, denote The casual reader who is already convinced of this fact by

the GEXIT value in this case by

, where is the erasure the numerical evidence presented in the previous section is ad-

probability, is the FP for this channel parameter, and

vised to skip this section. The executive summary is as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7771

The characteristic shape of the GEXIT curve of a regular en-

semble with

is a “C” as shown in Fig. 2. Using extremes

of information combining bounds, we will be able to prove the

existence and smoothness of a portion of the upper branch. The

higher the degrees, the larger the portion is which can be estab-

lished rigorously.

Much of the looseness of our general conditions is due to the

looseness of the extremes of information combining bounds in

this part of the proof. Therefore, if more sophisticated methods

can establish the existence of the GEXIT curve under less re-

strictive conditions then this will directly strengthen our main

result.

Let us first recall the following lemma which was stated and

proved in a slightly weaker form in [108]. For the convenience

of the reader, we reproduce the proof in Appendix E.

Lemma 17 (Sufficient Condition for Continuity): Assume

that communication takes place over an ordered and complete

family

, where

, using the dd pair

.

Then, for any

, there exists at most one density

so that

forms a FP that fulfills

(9)

Furthermore, if such a density exists, then it coin-

cides with the forward DE FP. Finally,

is Lips-

chitz continuous with respect to

. More precisely,

if two FPs

and

satisfy the condition

for some

, then

(10)

The following lemma states that, at least for sufficiently large

entropies, the family of BP FPs is well behaved.

Lemma 18 (Continuity for Large Entropies): Assume that

communication takes place over an ordered and complete

family

, where

, using the dd pair

.

Consider the set of FP pairs

obtained by applying

forward DE to each channel . Let

TABLE I

TOP BRANCHES OF GEXIT CURVES ARE LIPSCHITZ CONTINUOUS FROM

INDICATED CHANNEL ENTROPY UNTIL 1 THE NUMBERS ,

,

, AND

ARE COMPUTED ACCORDING TO LEMMA 18.

THE FINAL NUMBER IS A UNIVERSAL UPPER BOUND, VALID FOR ALL

BMS CHANNELS AND IT WAS COMPUTED ACCORDING TO LEMMA 19

corresponding entropy. Further,

for all

.4

Table I shows the resulting bounds for various regular dds

and various channels. These bounds were computed as follows.

For a fixed dd pair

, we first computed numerically.

This is easy to do since we know that there is a unique solu-

tion of the equation

in . Further,

,

, and

. We can therefore find this unique solution effi-

ciently via bisection. Once is found, we find the corresponding

Battacharyya parameter of the channel by computing . Fi-

nally, we can convert this into an entropy value via the appro-

priate function

, e.g., for the family of BSC channels

we have

.

Although it is easy and stable to compute the above lower

bound on the entropy numerically, it will be convenient to

have a universal and analytic such lower bound. This is accom-

plished in the following lemma, whose proof can be found in

Appendix E.

Lemma 19 (Universal Bound on Continuity Region): Assume

that communication takes place over an ordered and complete

family

, where

, using the dd pair

with

and

. Let be defined as in Lemma 18. Con-

sider the set of FP pairs

which is derived by applying

forward DE to each channel . Then, the family

,

where

Let be the unique solution in

of the equation

is Lipschitz continuous with respect to the Battacharyya pa-

rameter of the channel. Also,

, where

is the quantity introduced in Lemma 18, and

(11)

, so that tends to zero when tends to infinity.

Then, the family

Finally, we also have , with

, satisfies (9), is Lips-

chitz continuous with respect to the Battacharyya parameter

of the channel, where

is the function which maps

4Note that we have made the dependence on the channel family,

the Battacharyya constant of an element of the family to the in the notation of

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(12)
, explicit

7772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

for all

, where

is a positive constant depending

only on , .

Table I lists these universal upper bounds for the indicated

dds.

The following corollary follows immediately from Lemma

17, property (ii) of Lemma 14, and property (ix) of Lemma 13.

Corollary 20 (Continuity of Entropy): Let be a smooth

BMS channel family and let

denote a forward DE

FP pair with channel entropy

, where

is the value defined in Lemma 18. Then, for

we have

where is the Lipschitz constant defined in Lemma 17. The proof of the following lemma can be found in
Appendix F. Lemma 21 (Entropy Product Inequality): Given and ,

Proof: The GEXIT functional is defined as

where we define

. We will find it more con-

venient to parameterize the densities using

.

Let us define

We claim that

is continuous in both its arguments. Note

that

and, correspondingly, we define

. To show continuity of in the first compo-

nent note that

as

by the

smooth channel family assumption. To show continuity of in

the second component consider

.

By (the entropy product inequality) Lemma 21, property (iii),

we have

from which we obtain

where

and where the cumulative distributions

are used to define

and

and the

kernel

is as given in (8). Note that we use

to

denote the derivative i) Bound on Kernel

. The following bounds apply.

where to obtain the inequalities above we have used (vi), (vii),

and (ix) of Lemma 13 and (ii) of Lemma 14. To obtain the last

inequality above, we make use of the fact that

and Lemma

17. This shows that is continuous in its second argument. It

follows, in particular, that is continuous in . Since the Bat-

tacharyya parameter is a bounded functional and the channel

family is smooth, we have

is continuous in . Conse-

quently, is continuous in .

ii) Bound for partially degraded case: Let be degraded with respect to the density and let be such that . Then,
iii) Bound for fully degraded case: Let be degraded with respect to the density and let be degraded with respect to the density . Then,

L. Area Theorem

In Section II-J, we introduced the GEXIT curve associated

with a regular ensemble, see e.g., Fig. 2. In Section II-K, we

then derived conditions which guarantee that this curve indeed

exists and is continuous in a given region. We will now discuss

the GEXIT integral, which is the area under the GEXIT curve.

In order to derive some properties of this integral, we will first

introduce GEXIT integrals in a slightly more general form be-

fore we apply them to ensembles.

Definition 23 (Basic GEXIT Integral): Given two families

and

, the GEXIT integral

is defined as

Corollary 22 (Continuity of the BP GEXIT Curve): Let

be a smooth BMS channel family and let

denote a for- Discussion: In the above definition, and some definitions

ward DE FP pair with channel entropy

, below, we need regularity conditions to ensure that the integrals

where

is the value defined in Lemma 18. Then, exist. Rather than stating some general conditions, we will

is continuous with respect to .

discuss and verify them in the specific cases, e.g., one case we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7773

will discuss is if the channel family is smooth and is a following lemma, whose proof can be found in Appendix H,

polynomial in with “coefficients” which are fixed densities. gives a characterization of this property.

Definition 24 (GEXIT Integral of Code): Consider a binary Lemma 27 (Negativity): Let

be an approximate FP of

linear code of length , whose graphical representation is a tree. the

-regular ensemble of design rate

. More

Assume that we are given an ordered family of channels

. precisely, assume that

and that for some fixed

Assume that when all variable nodes “see” the channel the

,

. Let

distribution of the resulting extrinsic BP message density at the

th variable node is , then the GEXIT integral associated with

the th variable node is

.

Discussion: Note that the distribution is the best guess we can make about bit given the code constraints and all ob-

For

, if

servations except the direct observation on bit . This is why

, then

.

we have called the distribution the extrinsic message density. Discussion: In other words, for sufficiently high degrees,

Note further that we have assumed that the graphical structure

is strictly negative for all with entropies in the range

of the code is a tree. Therefore, BP equals MAP, the optimal

. For

and

fixed and tending to infinity

such estimator.

this is easily seen since

converges to 1 exponentially

The GEXIT integral applied to an ensemble is just the integral fast in and so converges to

. More effort is

under the GEXIT curve of this ensemble.

needed to show the validity of the statement for “small” values

Definition 25 (GEXIT Integral of Ensemble): Consider the of , i.e., values which are functions of and are of order

-regular ensemble and assume that

is a family

or smaller.

of FPs of DE. Define

. Then,

Discussion: Note that threshold for a code of rate

corresponds to the Shannon .

Discussion: In the preceding lemma, we introduced

the notion of an approximate FP of DE: we say that

is a -approximate FP if for some

we have

.

Discussion: Note that

has been used to denote sev-

eral quantities. Although, the notation is overloaded, it will M. Area Threshold

hopefully not cause confusion. Thus, to summarize, we use The most important goal of this paper is to show that suitable

to denote the GEXIT functional for a given pair of coupled ensembles achieve the capacity. The preceding (nega-

densities (which depend on the parameter ),

to tivity) Lemma 27 is an important tool for this purpose. But we

denote the integral of the GEXIT functional from to , and will in fact prove a refined statement, namely we will determine

finally we specialize it to a

regular ensemble with the the threshold for fixed dds. This threshold is the so-called area

notation

.

threshold and it was first introduced in [78] in the context of the

In the sequel, it will be handy to explicitly evaluate the Maxwell construction.

integral. The proof of the following lemma is contained in Definition 28 (Area Threshold): Consider the

-regular

Appendix G.

ensemble and transmission over a complete and ordered channel

Lemma 26 (Evaluation of the GEXIT Integral): Assume family

. For each

, let be the forward DE

that communication takes place over an ordered, complete, and FP associated with channel . The area threshold, denote it by

piecewise smooth family

, using the degree-distribution

, is defined as

pair

. Let

be the FP family of forward DE.

Set

,

, where

is the

quantity introduced in Lemma 18. Then,

where

is equal to , which is given in Lemma 26,

evaluated at the FP , when transmitting with the

-reg-

ular ensemble.

where

Note that all

and that

for

. Therefore, the set over which we

take the supremum is nonempty and

. Also note that we have made the dependence

of the area threshold on the channel family and the dd explicit.5

Discussion: Note that this GEXIT integral has a simple Table II gives some values for

for various

graphical interpretation; it is the area under the GEXIT curve dds and channels.

as, e.g., shown in the right-hand picture of Fig. 1. The condition Recall that the GEXIT integral has a simple graphical in-

ensures that this curve is well defined and terpretation—it is the area under the GEXIT curve, assuming

integrable.

of course that both the curve and the integral exist. The area

We have just seen that the value of a GEXIT integral of an ensemble is determined by the expression . We will soon see that it is crucial to describe the region where is negative. The

5We keep the explicit notation of

and

in

the statements of the lemmas and theorems but drop it in the proof for the ease

of exposition.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7774

TABLE II NUMERICALLY COMPUTED AREA THRESHOLDS FOR
SOME DDS AND CHANNELS

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 4. Area threshold for the (3, 6)-regular ensemble and transmission over the BAWGNC. This upper bound is given by the entropy value where the dark gray vertical line hits the -axis. Numerically, the upper bound is at a channel entropy of roughly 0.4792. For comparison, the BP threshold is at a channel entropy of roughly 0.4291.

Fig. 3. Area threshold for the (10, 20)-regular ensemble and transmission over

the BSC. We have

. For comparison, the BP threshold is at a

channel entropy of roughly 0.2528.

Fortunately, if we fix the rate then for all dds of sufficiently

high degree this interpretation applies.6

Lemma 29 (Area Threshold Approaches Shannon): Consider

a sequence of

-regular ensembles of fixed design rate

and with

tending to infinity.

Assume that

and that

, where

is defined in

Lemma 18. Then, for any BMS channel family

threshold is therefore that channel parameter

such that the GEXIT integral from

to 1 is equal

to

, the design rate.

Consider, e.g., the case of the (10, 20)-regular dd depicted

in Fig. 3. From Lemma 19, we know that the GEXIT curve is

Lipschitz continuous at least in the range

. An ex-

plicit check shows that

, so that

.

Furthermore,

and, for fixed rate

and increasing degrees, the sequence of the area thresh-

olds

converges to the Shannon threshold

universally over the whole

class of BMS channel families.

Proof: Note that

, where is

We know that for

the expression

the universal upper bound on in Lemma 19. Thus,

corresponds to the area under this GEXIT curve between and

1. This expression is therefore a decreasing function in , or

equivalently,

is an increasing function in . Using bisec-

tion, we can therefore efficiently find the area threshold and we

is fulfilled for sufficiently large degrees. Let us begin with the lower bound on . Consider any
. Let be the corresponding BP

get

. Note that for this case the area threshold has FP. Clearly,

. Suppose that

the interpretation as that unique channel parameter so that

the enclosed area under the GEXIT curve between and 1 is

equal to

. This is obviously the reason for calling the for any

. Then, from the (Negativity)

area threshold.

Lemma 27 it follows that

and hence

The same interpretation applies to any dd

and any

. Now suppose that

BMS channel where the area threshold

is such

that the GEXIT curve from

up till 1 exists and

is integrable. Empirically, this is true for all regular dds and all

BMS channels but in some cases our bounds are too weak to

ascertain this.

Consider, e.g., the case of the (3, 6) ensemble and transmis-

sion over the BAWGNC, see Fig. 4. From Table I, we are as-

sured that this curve exists and is smooth at least in the range

(the left boundary in the Negativity lemma).

Since

, we know from Corollary 20 that

is a contin-

uous function with respect to with

. Thus, from

the mean value theorem, there must exist a channel entropy

such that

lies within the interval prescribed by

the Negativity lemma, which implies that

. Now, either

, in which case we are done, or

. But it is easy to compute the curve numerically

. In the latter case, we consider

over the whole range and this curve is seemingly smooth everywhere. We can hence numerically compute the area threshold in

any

such that

. From

this case and we get

. Obviously

,

6It is known that the MAP threshold approaches the Shannon threshold as

i.e., this is one of those cases where our analytic bounds are too weak to guarantee the smoothness of the curve all the way down to the area threshold.

the degrees become large. Since the area threshold is always lower bounded by the MAP threshold and upper bounded by the Shannon threshold it follows that also the area threshold approaches the Shannon threshold in this case. Lemma 29 quantifies this convergence.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7775

degradation, we must have

, hence

also pled ensemble is close to that of the original one. A proof of the

must belong to the interval given by the Negativity Lemma 27. following lemma can be found in [54].

We can now use the previous argument to show that also in this Lemma 30 (Design Rate): The design rate of the ensemble

case

.

, with

, is given by

Let us now consider the upper bound. From above arguments,

since

, the BP GEXIT integral from to 1 is given by

Lemma 26. If we combine this with the definition of the area

threshold, i.e., the expression in Lemma 26 is nonpositive at There is an entirely equivalent way of describing a spatially

, we get that the BP GEXIT integral at the area threshold is coupled ensemble in terms of a circular construction. By equiva-

at least equal to

. Now, note that the BP GEXIT curve is lent, we mean that the local coupling structure remains the same

always upper bounded by 1 and so the integral from to 1 can

be at most equal to

. Putting things together, we have that

.

Let us prove the last claim of the lemma. We want to show

as in the previous definition. Note that the circular ensemble is what in the convolutional LDPC literature is known as the tail-biting ensemble [109].
Definition 31 (Circular Ensemble): Given an

that at the area threshold

. Recall that the

area threshold was defined as the supremum over all so that

is less than or equal to zero. Therefore, all we need

ensemble, we can associate it to a circular ensemble. This cir-

cular ensemble has

extra sections, all of whose vari-

able nodes are set to zero. To be concrete, we assume that the

to show is that

is continuous as a function of

around .

Note that is strictly larger than . Thus, from Corollary

20 we conclude that the Wasserstein distance

is

sections are numbered from

, where the sec-

tions in

are the sections of the original ensemble and

the sections in

are the extra sections. In

this new circular ensemble, all index calculations (for the con-

continuous with respect to . Our claim now follows since is the entropy of a finite weighted sum of convolu-
tions (check and variable) of and from Lemma 13 we know

nections) are done modulo

and indices are mapped

to the range

. For all positions in the range

the channel is

, and con-

that convolutions as well as the entropy operator are continuous sequently,

. For all “regular” positions

with respect to the Wasserstein metric.

the associated channel is the standard channel . This circular

ensemble has design rate equal to

.

III. COUPLED SYSTEMS

Discussion:

A. Spatially Coupled Ensemble

i) Note that the check nodes lie within a window of the boundary variable nodes. Nevertheless, it is convenient

Our goal is to show that coupled ensembles can achieve ca-

to define the range of the check nodes from

. In

pacity on general BMS channels. Let us recall the definition of

this way, if we increase the window size, the picture does

an ensemble which is particularly suited for the purpose of anal-

not need to be changed. It is just that in this case more of

ysis. We call it the

ensemble. This is the ensemble

check nodes at the boundary get connected.

we use throughout the paper. For a quick historical review on ii) The justification for using uniform and independent (with

some of the many variants see Section I-B.

respect to where in the window they are connected to)

The variable nodes of the ensemble are at positions

,

connections on both the variable and check node side can

. At each position there are variable nodes,

.

be found in [54]. Briefly, if the connections from the vari-

Conceptually, we think of the check nodes to be located at all in-

able node side are chosen uniformly and independently,

teger positions from

. Only some of these positions ac-

then the induced distribution at the check node side also

tually interact with the variable nodes. At each position there are

converges to the one where edges are chosen uniformly

check nodes. It remains to describe how the connections

independently as the number of variable nodes per section

are chosen. We assume that each of the connections of a vari-

goes to infinity. More precisely, if we consider any finite

able node at position is uniformly and independently chosen

number of edges and let the system size grow then the

from the range

, where is a “smoothing”

distribution for these edges converges to the one where

parameter. In the same way, we assume that each of the con-

edges are chosen independently and uniformly. So when-

nections of a check node at position is independently chosen

ever we consider a finite number of iterations of DE then

from the range

. A detailed construction of this

we can assume this simple distribution.

ensemble can be found in [54].

iii) The circular ensemble construction has the advantage that

For the whole paper, we will always be interested in the limit

it is completely symmetric. More precisely, there is no

when tends to infinity while as well as , , and stay

boundary in the circular ensemble. We will see later that

fixed. In this limit, we can analyze the system via DE, simpli-

this simplifies some of the ensuing proofs.

fying our task.

iv) As we will see, it is the global structure which helps

Not surprisingly, spatially coupled ensembles inherit many

all the “individual codes” to perform so well—individ-

of their properties from the underlying ensemble. Perhaps most

ually they can only achieve their BP threshold, but to-

importantly, the local connectivity is the same, i.e., the variable

gether they reach their MAP performance. Here by “in-

and check degree distributions are the same as for the under-

dividual codes” we mean the underlying uncoupled stan-

lying uncoupled ensemble. Further, the design rate of the cou-

dard LDPC codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7776

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

B. Density Evolution for Coupled Ensemble

Let us describe the DE equations for the

en-

semble. In the sequel, densities are -densities. Let denote the

channel and let denote the density which is emitted by vari-

able nodes at position . Throughout the paper,

denotes an

-density with all its mass at and represents the perfect de-

coding density. Also, denotes an -density with all its mass

at 0 and represents a density with no information.

Definition 32 (DE of the

Ensemble): Let ,

, denote the average -density which is emitted by variable

nodes at position . For

we set

. In

words, the boundary variable nodes have perfect information.

For

, the FP condition implied by DE is

(13)

Define

Note that

, where the right-hand

side represents DE (without the effect of the channel) for the

underlying

-regular ensemble. Also define

Finally, using property (vi) of Lemma 13

C. Fixed Points and Admissible Schedules

Definition 34 (FPs of Density Evolution): Consider DE for

the

ensemble. Let

. We call

the constellation (of -densities). We say that forms a FP

of DE with channel if fulfills (13) for

. As a

short hand, we say that

is a FP. We say that

is a

nontrivial FP if

for at least one

. Again,

for

,

.

Definition 35 (Forward DE and Admissible Schedules): Con-

sider forward DE for the

ensemble. More pre-

cisely, pick a channel . Initialize

. Let

be the result of rounds of DE. This means that

is

generated from by applying the DE (13) to each section

,

We call this the parallel schedule.

More generally, consider a schedule in which in step an

As before we see that

denotes the EXIT value

of DE for the underlying

-regular ensemble. It is not

hard to see [46] that both

as well as

are monotone with respect to degrada-

tion in all their arguments ,

.

More precisely, if we degrade any of the densities ,

arbitrary subset of the sections is updated, constrained only by

the fact that every section is updated in infinitely many steps.

We call such a schedule admissible. We call the resulting

sequence of constellations.

Lemma 36 (FPs of Forward DE): Consider forward DE for

the

ensemble. Let denote the sequence of con-

stellations under an admissible schedule. Then, converges

, then (respectively ) is to a FP of DE, with each component being a symmetric -den-

degraded. We say that (respectively ) is monotone in sity and this FP is independent of the schedule. In particular, it

its arguments.

is equal to the FP of the parallel schedule.

Lemma 33 (Sensitivity of DE): Fix the parameters

Discussion: In practice, it might be easier or more efficient

and and assume that

,

. to implement a schedule other than the parallel one. It is then

Then,

comforting to know that the result is not sensitive to the exact

schedule we are using and that there is no loss in performance

as long as the schedule is admissible. This is why we are stating

the above lemma.

Proof: Consider first the parallel schedule. We claim that

Proof: For

, define

and

. Set

and

. Then,

using properties (v) and (vii) of Lemma 13 we see that

the vectors are ordered, i.e.,

(the

ordering is sectionwise and is the vector of

). This is

true since

, whereas

. It now follows by induction on the

number of iterations and the monotonicity of the function

that the sequence is monotonically decreasing. More pre-

Using once again property (v) of Lemma 13

cisely, we have

. Hence, from [46, Lemma 4.75],

we conclude that each section converges to a limit density

which is also symmetric. Call the limit . Since the DE

equations are continuous it follows that is a FP of DE (13)

with parameter . We call

the FP of forward DE.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7777

That the limit (exists in general and that it) does not depend

on the schedule follows by standard arguments and we will be

brief. The idea is that for any two admissible schedules the cor-

responding computation trees are nested. This means that if we

look at the computation graph of schedule lets say 1 at time

then there exists a time so that the computation graph under

schedule 2 is a superset of the first computation graph. To be

able to come to this conclusion, we have crucially used the fact

that for an admissible schedule every section is updated infin-

itely often. This shows that the performance under schedule 2 is

at least as good as the performance under schedule 1. Since the

roles of the schedules are symmetric, the claim follows.
D. Entropy, Error and Battacharyya Functionals for Coupled Ensemble
Definition 37 (Entropy, Error, and Battacharyya): Let be a constellation. Let denote either the (entropy),

Fig. 5. BP GEXIT curves of the ensemble

for

,

8, 16, and 32 and transmission over the BAWGNC (left) and the BSC

(right). The BP thresholds are

,

,

,

. The light/dark

gray areas mark the interior of the BP/MAP GEXIT function of the underlying

(3, 6)-regular ensemble, respectively.

(error probability), or (Battacharyya) functional defined in

Section II-D. We define the (normalized) entropy, error, and Battacharyya
functionals of the constellation to be

where

was introduced in Section III-B, and

is the

(normalized) GEXIT function of the constellation .

Fig. 5 shows the result of this numerical computation when

transmission takes place over the BAWGNC (left-hand side)

and the BSC (right-hand side). Note that the resulting curves

look similar to the curves when transmission takes place over

the BEC, see [54]. For small values of the curves are far to

E. BP GEXIT Curve for Coupled Ensemble

the right due to the significant rate loss that is incurred at the boundary. For around 10 and above, the BP threshold of

We now come to a key object, the BP GEXIT curve for the each ensemble is close to the area threshold of the underlying

coupled ensemble. We have discussed how to compute BP (3, 6)-regular ensemble, namely 0.4792 for the BAWGNC and

GEXIT curves for uncoupled ensembles in Section III-E. For 0.4680 for the BSC (see the values in Table II). The picture

coupled ensembles the procedure is similar.

suggests that the threshold saturation effect which was shown

In Section III-C, we have seen that for coupled systems FPs analytically to hold for the BEC in [78] also occurs for general

of forward DE are well defined and that they can be computed BMS channels.

by applying a parallel schedule. This procedure allows us to The aim of this paper is to prove rigorously that the situation

compute some FPs.

is indeed as indicated in Fig. 5, i.e., that the BP threshold of

But we can also use DE at fixed entropy, as discussed in coupled ensembles is essentially equal to the area threshold of

Section II, to compute further FPs (in particular unstable ones). the underlying uncoupled ensemble.

More, precisely, fix the desired average entropy of the constella-

tion, call it . Start with the initialization

, the vector

of all . In each iteration proceed as follows. Perform one

round of DE without incorporating the channel, i.e., set

F. Review for the BEC

Let us briefly recall the main result of [54] which deals

with transmission over the BEC. Let

and

denote the BP threshold and the MAP

threshold of the

ensemble. Also, let

Now find a channel

, assuming it exists, so that after denote the MAP threshold of the underlying

-regular

the convolution with this channel the average entropy of the LDPC ensemble. Then, the main result of [54] states that

constellation is equal to . Continue this procedure until the

constellation has converged (under some suitable metric).

Assume that we have computed (via the above procedure) a

complete family

of FPs of DE, i.e., a family so that

for each

, there exists a parameter so that

. Then, we can derive from it a BP GEXIT

curve by projecting it onto

Also, (see [46]) as ,

, with the ratio

fixed,

. Thus, with increasing degrees,

ensembles under BP decoding achieve the

Shannon capacity for the BEC.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7778

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

G. First Result

Before we state and prove our main result (namely that cou-

pled codes can achieve capacity also for general BMS channels),

let us first quickly discuss a simple argument which shows that

spatial coupling of codes does have a nontrivial effect.

First consider the uncoupled case. We have seen in Lemma

11 that when we fix the design rate

and increase the

degrees the BP threshold converges to 0. What happens if we

couple such ensembles? We know that for the BEC such ensem-

bles achieve capacity. The next lemma asserts that this implies

a nontrivial BP threshold also for general BMS channels.

Lemma 38 (Lower Bound on Coupled BP Threshold): Con-

sider transmission over an ordered and complete family

of BMS channels using a

ensemble and BP de-

coding.

Let

denote the corresponding

BP threshold and let

denote the corre-

sponding BP threshold for transmission over the BEC. Then,

(14)

In particular, for every

there exists a

with

fixed, so that

and a dd pair

Combining the above result with Lemma 4 we conclude that

the BP threshold of the coupled ensemble is at least

. In summary, for general BMS channels and regular ensem-

bles of fixed rate and increasing degrees, their uncoupled BP

threshold tends to 0 but their coupled BP threshold is lower

bounded by a nonzero value. We conclude that coupling changes

the performance in a fundamental way. In the rest of the paper,

we will strengthen the above result by showing that this nonzero

value is in fact the area threshold of the underlying ensemble and

as the degrees become large the threshold tends to (the Shannon

threshold)

.

IV. MAIN RESULTS

A. Admissible Parameters

In the sequel, we will impose some restrictions on the param-

eters. Rather than repeating these restrictions in each statement,

we collect them once and for all and give them a name.

Definition 40 (Admissible Parameters): Fix the design rate

of the uncoupled system. We say that the parameters

and are admissible if the following conditions are fulfilled

with

:

i)

,

,

ii)

Proof: We use the bounding technique introduced by

Khandekar in his PhD thesis to derive lower bounds on the thresholds of uncoupled ensembles, see [110].
Consider DE of the coupled ensemble [cf. (13)]. Applying the Battacharyya functional, we obtain

iii)
where iv)

,

v)

, .
, is the bound stated in Lemma 18,
,

vi)

,

We say that the ensemble

is admissible if the pa-

(15) where we use the multiplicative property of the Battacharyya functional at the variable node side.
Using the linearity of the Battacharyya functional and extremes of information combining bounds for the check node convolution ([46, Ch. 4]) we obtain

rameters

and are admissible. If we are only concerned

about the conditions on

, then we will say that

is admissible.

Discussion: Conditions (i), (ii), and (iii) are fulfilled if we

take the degrees sufficiently large. Conditions (iv), (v), and (vi)

can all be fulfilled by picking a sufficiently large connection

width .

Why do we impose these conditions? At several places we

use simple extremes of information combining bounds and these

(16)

The preceding set of equations is formally equivalent to the DE

equations for the same spatially coupled ensemble and the BEC.

Therefore, if

then the DE recursions,

initialized with must converge to

, which implies (14).

Further, from [54] we know that for sufficiently large de-

grees

, with their ratio fixed, and with sufficiently

large,

approaches

arbitrarily closely (see

the discussion in the preceding section), which proves the final

claim.

Example 39 ((3, 6) Ensemble and BSC ): Let us specialize

bounds are loose and require, for the proof to work, the above

conditions. We believe that with sufficient effort these bounds

can be tightened and so the restrictions on the degrees can be

removed or at least significantly loosened. We leave this as an

interesting open problem.

Numerical experiments indicated that for any

and

the threshold saturation phenomenon happens, with

a “wiggle-size” which vanishes exponentially in .

Note that the above bounds imply the following bounds

which we will need at various places:

vii)

,

to the case of transmission over the BSC using (3, 6)-regular viii)

.

ensemble. Then, we have

. Using the above In particular, (vii) follows from (i) and (viii) is a consequence

argument and solving for in

, we conclude of the positivity of in (ii).

that by a proper choice of and

we can transmit reliably Instead of condition (iii) above, we can impose the

at least up to an error probability of 0.067.

stronger but somewhat easier to check condition

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7779

, where is the upper bound stated in Lemma 19, or even further strengthen the
condition to
(cf. Lemma 19). The last condition can be easily checked to be satisfied for sufficiently large degrees.
Finally, note that one could simplify the above bounds, e.g., there are three separate lower bounds on stated. But rather than compressing them into a single bound we keep them separate. The reason is simple. These bounds are the consequence of restrictions in various places in the proof. None of these bounds are expected to be tight. They are typically the consequence of applying simple extremes of information combining bounds. Therefore, if at any point, better bounds are found for a particular part of the proof it is then easy to replace the corresponding line in the statement. Also, we hope that this way it is easier to follow the main proof since it makes it more transparent what restriction follows from what part of the proof.

B. Main Result

Theorem 41 (BP Threshold of the

Ensemble):

Consider transmission over a complete, smooth, and ordered

family of BMS channels, denote it by , using the admis-

sible ensemble

. Let

and

denote the corresponding BP and MAP

threshold. Further, let

denote the design rate of

this ensemble and set

. Finally, let

denote the area threshold of the underlying

-regular en-

semble and the given channel family. Then,

(17)
(18) where

the MAP threshold of the coupled ensemble in terms of

the area threshold of the underlying ensemble.

It is not hard to see that the BP GEXIT curve is the same

for both the

-regular ensemble and the circular en-

semble (when all sections have the standard channel). In-

deed, forward DE (see Definition 35) converges to the

same FP for both ensembles. Consider the circular en-

semble and let

. The conditional entropy when

transmitting over the BMS channel with entropy is at

least equal to

minus the area under the BP EXIT

curve of . Indeed this can be obtained by using the

same arguments as in the proof of [46, Th. 4.174]. Thus,

for the circular ensemble we have

Note that the above integral

is evaluated at

the BP FPs. From Lemmas 19 and 29, the BP FP densi-

ties exist and the GEXIT integral is well defined for

all

. Here, the entropy is normalized by

, where is the length of the circular ensemble

and denotes the number of variable nodes per section.

Note that is kept finite and

when

.

Assume that we set

consecutive sections of the

circular ensemble to 0 in order to recover the original en-

semble. As a consequence, we “remove” an entropy (de-

grees of freedom) of at most

from the cir-

cular system. The remaining entropy is therefore positive

(and hence we are above the MAP threshold of the cou-

pled ensemble) as long as

. From Lemmas 26 and 29, we have

, so that the condition be-

comes

. For

all channels with

we have

.

For a derivation of this statement, we refer the reader to

the proof of part (vi) of Theorem 47. This implies that

. Putting things

together, we obtain

Note that

depends only on the dd

and

but is universal with respect to the channel family thermore,

. Fur-

We remark that the estimate

is quite

pessimistic and that one might hope to be able to replace

(19)

by a constant.

ii) The lower bound on

expressed in

Discussion:

(17) is the main result of this paper. It shows that, up to

i) The bound

is trivial and only listed for com-

a term which tends to zero when tends to infinity, the

pleteness. Consider the upper bound on

stated in

BP threshold of the coupled ensemble is at least as large

(18). Start with the circular ensemble stated in Defini-

as the area threshold of the underlying ensemble. Empir-

tion 31. The original ensemble is recovered by setting the

ical evidence suggests that the convergence speed with

consecutive positions in

to 0. Define

respect to is exponential. Our bound only guarantees a

. We first provide a lower bound on the con-

convergence speed of order

.

ditional entropy for the circular ensemble when transmit- Let us summarize. In order to prove Theorem 41, we “only”

ting over a BMS channel with entropy . We then show have to prove the lower bound on . Not surprisingly, this

that setting

sections to 0 does not significantly de- is also the most difficult to accomplish. The remainder of this

crease this entropy. Overall this gives an upper bound on paper is dedicated to this task.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7780

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

C. Extensions

In Theorem 41, we start with a smooth, complete, and ordered

channel family. But it is straightforward to convert this theorem

and to apply it directly to single channels or to a collection of

channels. The next statement makes this precise.

Corollary 42

Universally Achieves Capacity):

The

ensemble is universally capacity achieving

for the class of BMS channels. More precisely, assume we are

given

and a target rate . Let denote the set of BMS

channels of capacity at least . To each

associate the

family

, by defining

Proof: Note that according to (iv) in Lemma 13 the space

of distributions endowed with the Wasserstein metric is

compact, and hence so is . Hence, there exists a finite set

of channels, denote it by

, so that each channel in

is within a (Wasserstein) distance at most from the set .

We will fix the value of shortly.

Let us modify the set so that

is not only close to

but is also “dominated” by it. For each

, define

where

is the supremum of all so that

. If no such

exists then set

. We claim that for any so that

,

.

Then, there exists a set of parameters

so that

In other words, we claim that

any

(cf. (2)).

for

For

,

, the max-

imum possible, and hence this integral is at least as large as

Since for each

the associated family

is or-

dered by degradation, this implies that we can transmit with this

ensemble reliably over each of the channels in

at a rate of

at least

, i.e., arbitrarily close to the Shannon limit.

Proof: Fix the ratio of the degrees so that

. Note that for each

the

constructed family

is piecewise smooth, ordered, and

complete. By applying Theorem 41 to each such channel

family, we conclude that for admissible parameters (i.e., as long

as we choose the degrees and the connection width sufficiently

large) the threshold of the ensemble

for the given

channel family is at least

, where

is the area threshold and

is a

universal quantity, i.e., a quantity which does not depend on the

channel family and which converges to 0 when tends to in-

finity. Further, we know from Lemma 29 that the area threshold

approaches the Shannon threshold uniformly

over all BMS channels for increasing degrees. By our choice of

the Shannon threshold is

.

Therefore, by first choosing sufficiently large degrees

,

and then a sufficiently large connection width , we can ensure

that the BP threshold is at least

. Finally, by choosing

the constellation length sufficiently large, we can ensure

that the rate loss we incur with respect to the design rate the

underlying ensemble is sufficiently small so that the design rate

of the coupled ensemble is at least

.

Corollary 43 (Universally Capacity Achieving Codes): As-

sume we are given

and a target rate . Let

denote

the set of BMS channels of capacity at least . Then, there ex-

ists a set of parameters

of rate at least

with

the following property. Let

be an element of

with blocklength , where we assume that only goes over the

subsequence of admissible values. Then,

. Consider therefore the range

.

In this case,

In (a) we use the definition of

that for

we have

. To obtain (b), we use

. Finally, in (c) we use the alternative definition of the Wasserstein distance in Lemma 13.
Further,

In other words, any density which was close to is still close to

. We have therefore the set

of channels which “cover”

and “dominate” the set of channels

in the sense that for

every

there exists an element

so that

and

. This implies in particular that

, where in the last

step we use the relation between the Wasserstein distance and

entropy given by (ix) in Lemma 13, also we assumed that we

fixed so that

. In other words, all channels in

have capacity at least

.

From Corollary 42 we know that, given a set of channels from

, there exists a set of parameters

which

has rate at least

and BP threshold at least

universally for the whole family. Since each element of

is an element of

this ensemble “works” in particular for

In other words, almost all codes in length are good for all channels in .

of sufficient

all channels

and these channels “dominate” all channels

in

in the sense that for element of

there is an

element of

which is degraded with respect to .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7781

For each element , we know by standard concentration the-

orems that “almost all” elements of the ensemble have a bit error

rate of the BP decoder going to zero [45], [46]. Since the “al-

most all” means all but an exponentially (in the blocklength)

small subset and since we only have a finite number of channel

families, this implies that almost all codes in the ensemble work

for all the channels in the finite subset. But since the finite subset

dominates all channels in

this implies that almost all codes

Fig. 6. Proper one-sided FP

semble

with

. We have

section is equal to

.

with free boundary condition for the en-

and the channel

AWGNC

. The height of the vertical bar at

work for all channels in this set.

Let us make one last remark before we proceed to prove the

main theorem is that we can further strengthen our conclusion

to assert the existence of universal capacity achieving codes

whose block error (and not just bit error) probability is arbi-

trarily small. From the above statements we know that, below

the Shannon capacity, there exists a coupled ensemble such that

the BP decoder can correct all but an arbitrarily small fraction of

the bits with high probability. How can we correct all bits with

high probability? One way to proceed is to first use the standard BP decoder to
decode until we have reached a sufficient small bit error probability. At this point, we can switch to the bit-flipping decoder to clean the residual errors [32], [46]. Such a bit-flipping decoder is guaranteed to succeed if i) the number of residual errors is sufficiently small, and ii) if the graph is an expander with expansion exceeding three-quarters. The first condition is fulfilled by design. Regarding the second condition, it is known that a code chosen uniformly at random from an ensemble whose minimum variable-node degree is at least five is an expander with expan-

Fig. 7. Unimodal FP of the

ensemble

for the BAWGNC with

(channel entropy

). The

constellation has entropy equal to 0.2. The bottom figure plots the entropy of

the density at each section. Notice the small values toward the boundary, a fast

transition, and essentially constant values in the middle. The top figure shows the

actual densities at sections , , , 0. Notice that for densities toward the

boundary the mass shifts toward the “right,” indicating a high reliability. Also

plotted in the middle figure relating to section 0 is the BP forward DE density

of the (3, 6)-regular ensemble at

. The density is right on the top of

the density at section 0 of the coupled-code ensemble, i.e., these two densities

are visually indistinguishable. The density in section is also “close” to the

density at section 0. Thus in the flat part, the densities become close to the BP

density of the underlying ensemble.

sion at least four-fifths with high probability. Therefore, indeed

with high probability, this strategy will succeed to correct all errors. Instead of switching the decoder one can in fact also use the arguments of [111] and apply the expansion arguments directly to the BP decoder. This requires however that one suitably clips both the received as well as the internal messages.
Another way to show that the block error probability can be made arbitrarily small, is to expurgate the code [112], i.e., one can preassign the bits, which do not have tree-like neighborhoods, to a known value. The fraction of such bits are vanishing when the blocklength goes to infinity. Thus, by sacrificing a negligible amount in rate, one can ensure all the bits are decoded correctly.

nontrivial and nondecreasing one-sided FP (with any boundary

condition). As a short hand, we then say that

is a proper

one-sided FP. Fig. 6 shows an example.

Definition 46 (One-Sided Forward DE and Schedules): Sim-

ilar to Definition 35, one can define one-sided forward DE by

initializing all sections with and by applying DE according

to an admissible schedule.

There are two key ingredients of the proof. The first in-

gredient is to show that any one-sided spatial FP which is

increasing, “small” on the left, and “not too small” and “flat” on

the right must have a channel parameter very close to the area

threshold . This is made precise in (the Saturation) Theorem

47.

D. Proof of Main Result—Theorem 41

We start by proving some basic properties that any spatial FP

has to fulfill. Since we are considering a symmetric ensemble (in

terms of the spatial arrangement), it will be useful to consider

“one-sided” FPs.

Definition 44 (FPs of One-Sided DE): We say that is a

one-sided FP (of DE) with channel if (13) is fulfilled for

with

for

. We say that the FP has

a free boundary condition if

for

. We say that it

has a forced boundary condition if

for

. Lastly,

we say that it has an increasing boundary condition if

for , where , for , are fixed but arbitrary symmetric

densities.

The second key ingredient is to show the existence of a such

a one-sided FP

. Fig. 7 shows a typical (two-sided) such

example. This existence proof is accomplished in (the existence)

Theorem 48. Once these two theorems have been established,

the proof of our main theorem is rather short and straightfor-

ward.

Theorem 47 (Saturation): Fix

and let

be

admissible, with

, in the sense of conditions (ii), (iii),

(v), (vi), (vii), and (viii) of Definition 40. Let

be a proper

one-sided FP on

, with forced boundary condition, so

that for some

,

, and

the

following conditions hold.

i) Constellation is close to

“on the left”:

Definition 45 (Proper One-Sided FPs): We say that is non-

decreasing if

for

. Let

be a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7782

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

ii) Constellation is not too small “on the right”:

Then,

Here

is a function which can be made ar-

bitrarily small by choosing sufficiently small, sufficiently

large, and and sufficiently large compared to . (This im-

plies of course that the constellation length is also chosen

sufficiently large.) More precisely,

The proof of Theorem 47 can be found in Appendix J.

Discussion: Note that we do not give an explicit bound on

the function

. This is because, as we will

see in the proof of Theorem 41, the BP threshold of the coupled

ensemble is a decreasing function of the constellation size ,

which decreases with increasing constellation size. Hence, in

order to get a bound on the performance it suffices to consider

the worst case, namely when tends to infinity. This worst-case

performance is captured by

.

The proof of the following Theorem 48 is contained in

Appendix K.

Theorem 48 (Existence of FP): Fix

and let

be admissible in the sense of conditions (i), (ii), (iii),

(iv), (v), (vi) in Definition 40 with

. Let

be

a smooth, ordered, and complete channel family.

In the sequel,

is a positive constant which de-

pends on the ensemble but not the channel or the channel family

and

is a positive constant which depends on and ,

but not on the channel , the channel family, or .

For any

and

, there ex-

ists a proper one-sided FP

on

with parameters

and with forced boundary condition so that the fol-

lowing conditions are fulfilled:

i) Constellation is close to

“on the left”: Let

channel is not constrained a priori but is part of the construc-

tion. However, it will soon become clear that the entropy of the

channel is tightly bounded as a consequence of the Saturation

Theorem 47.

Proof of Theorem 41: We are ready to prove the remaining

statement of our main theorem, i.e., (17). Let

and

be admissible in the sense of conditions (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v),

(vi) in Definition 40 and set

. We want to show that

, where recall that

.

First note that is a decreasing function of . This follows

by comparing DE for two constellations of increasing size and

verifying that DE of the larger constellation “dominates” (in

the sense of degradation) DE of the smaller constellation. In

the ensuing arguments, we will take advantage of this fact—if

we can lower bound the threshold for a particular constellation

size then we will have automatically lower bounded also the

threshold for all smaller constellation sizes. This is convenient

since at several steps we will need to pick “sufficiently” large,

where the restrictions on the constellation size stem from our

use of simple extremes of information combining bounds.

Choose a channel, call it , from the channel family

with

. We will show that for any admissible ensemble

, where is chosen “sufficiently large,” the for-

ward DE process converges to the trivial FP. By our remarks

above concerning the monotonicity of the threshold in terms of

, this implies that for Any length , DE converges to the trivial

FP, hence proving our main statement.

As stated in Theorem 47,

is the limit of

when first and tend to infinity and

then tends to zero. We claim that, for the fixed parameters

, for any

there exist , ,

, sufficiently

large, so that

(20) (21)
(22)

(23) (24)

where

and

are the constants given in

Theorem 48. To fulfill (24), as discussed in Theorem 47,

Then,

for

.

ii) Constellation is not too small “on the right”: Let

is a continuous function in its parameters

which converges to

if we let tend to 0 and let

and tend to infinity. Therefore, by choosing sufficiently

small, and and sufficiently large we fulfill (24). By a

proper such choice we also fulfill (21) and the first inequality of

(23). Now note that increasing loosens all above conditions.

Then,

for

.

In particular, for any

and , ,

, by choosing

Discussion: In other words, the theorem says that for any

sufficiently large we fulfill (20), (22), and the last two

fixed

and

, if we pick sufficiently large, we inequalities of (23). We have now fixed all parameters.

can construct a FP constellation which is small on the left for Let

be the proper one-sided FP on

whose

a linear fraction of the total length and reasonably large on the existence is promised by Theorem 48. Indeed, from the above

right, also for a linear fraction of the total length. Note that the arguments, we satisfy all the hypotheses of Theorem 48. Recall

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7783

that the resulting FP has a forced boundary condition, i.e., it channel on , call the result

, and let denote the

is a FP with

for

. Also, it fulfills conditions

(i) and (ii) of Theorem 48. Furthermore, from (21)–(23), and

since

is a proper one-sided FP with forced boundary

condition, we satisfy all the conditions of Theorem 47. Thus,

we conclude that

. Here we

remark that, from (24) and since the channel family is ordered

by degradation,

.

Next, create from the FP

on

the constellation

limit, which is a FP. We have

,

, since

for

and

for

and DE preserves the ordering. Therefore, com-

bining with previous arguments,

, for all

. Let , For some

, Denote the max-

imum of the Battacharyya parameter over all sections of .

From extremes of information combining, we have

on

by appending to , densities on the right

which are part of the constellation and by defining

for

(forced boundary condition). Note that this redefined

constellation

is not a FP since it does not fulfill the FP

equations for the positions

. Initialize DE with ,

i.e., set

. Apply forward DE to with the channel

as chosen previously (cf. (24)). Call the resulting constellation,

after steps of DE, .

We claim that for all

, is spatially monotonically

The last inequality implies that

since

is excluded. From property (x) of Lemma 13 we conclude that

, for all

. In

other words,

, as claimed.

E. Conclusion and Outlook

increasing, i.e.,

, for all

, and that is We have shown that we can construct low-complexity coding

monotonically decreasing as a function of , i.e.,

. schemes, which are universal for the whole class of BMS chan-

To prove the first claim recall that

, which is mono- nels, by spatially coupling regular LDPC ensembles. Thus, we

tonically increasing and has forced boundary condition on the resolve a long-standing open problem of whether there exist

right. But DE preserves the monotonicity so that for every

low-density parity-check ensembles that are capacity-achieving

,

, for all

.

using BP decoding. These ensembles are not only attractive in

Consider now the second claim. Assume we run one step of an asymptotic setting but also for applications and standards be-

DE on with the channel . Then for

,

cause they can easily be designed to have both good thresholds

by construction. For

,

.

In other words, for each

the constellation is de-

creasing. It is therefore also decreasing if we run one step of DE

with the channel

. As a consequence, since DE preserves

the order imposed by degradation, we must have

for all

. Thus, the process must converge to a FP of DE

with forced boundary condition. Call this resulting FP .

We claim that

. Assume to the contrary that this is

not true. Then, we can apply Theorem 47 to

to ar-

rive at a contradiction. Let us discuss this point in detail. Since

for all we must have

for all

. Combined with the fact that

for

,

we conclude that

is a proper one-sided FP on

with forced boundary condition. Furthermore, from (20)–(23)

we see that

satisfies all hypotheses of Theorem 47. More

precisely, by assumption the constellation is large for the last

sections, i.e.,

. Hence, from the

choice of as given by (23) we must have

(thus we satisfy condition (ii) Constellation is not too small

“on the right”, of the saturation Theorem 47). From the con-

struction of ,

and from (22), it is clear that

(thus we also satisfy condition (i) Constella-

tion is close to

“on the left”, of the saturation Theorem

47). As a consequence, from the Theorem 47 we conclude that

. But this contradicts our ini-

tial assumption on

[cf. (24)].

We are now ready to prove our main claim. Consider a cou-

pled ensemble on

with parameters

. More

precisely, the coupled ensemble has sections from

with

fixed to

. Initialize all sections in

to . Call this constellation . Run forward DE with the

and low error floors. In addition, these ensembles are universal in the sense that the same ensemble is good for the whole class of BMS channels, assuming that the channel is known at the receiver. In fact, we have shown the stronger statement that almost all codes in such an ensemble are good for all channels in this class.
Let us discuss some open questions. Maxwell conjecture: As a byproduct of our proof, we know that the MAP threshold of coupled ensembles is essentially equal to the area threshold of the uncoupled ensemble. In addition, we know that the MAP threshold of the uncoupled ensemble is also upper bounded by the area threshold. The Maxwell conjecture states that in fact the MAP threshold of the uncoupled ensemble is equal to the area threshold. So if one can establish that the MAP threshold of the uncoupled ensemble is at least as large as the MAP threshold of the coupled ensemble, then the Maxwell conjecture would be proved. A natural approach to resolve this issue is to use interpolation techniques and it is likely that the Maxwell conjecture can be proved in a way similar as this was done in [93] for other graphical models. Indeed, first results along these lines can be found in [96]. Convergence speed: As discussed previously, we only give weak bounds on the speed of convergence of the ensemble to the Shannon capacity (as a function of the degrees, the constellation length , as well as the coupling width ). Numerical evidence suggests much stronger results. Settling the question of the actual convergence speed is both challenging and interesting. Lifting of restrictions: Our results apply only to sufficiently large degrees, whereas numerical calculations indicate that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7784

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

the threshold saturation effect happens also for small de-

grees. The weakness of the bound is a consequence of the

fact that at many places we have used simple extremes of

information combining bounds. With sufficient effort it is

likely that we can extend the proof to many dds that are

currently not covered by our statement.

General ensembles: In a similar vein, we restricted our in-

vestigation to regular ensembles to keep things simple, but

the same technique also applies, in principle, to irregular or

even structured ensembles. Again, depending on the struc-

ture of the underlying ensemble, more or less effort might

be required to derived the necessary bounds.

Wiggle size: Perhaps the weakest link in our derivation

is the treatment of the connection width . In our cur-

rent statements has to be chosen large. Empirically, even

small values, such as the extreme case

give already

excellent results as long as the degrees are not too large

and, by increasing , the convergence to the area threshold

happens exponentially fast. How to derive practically rel-

evant bounds for such small values of is an important

open problem.

Scaling: More generally, from a practical point of view, we

need a firm understanding of how the performance of such

codes scale in each of the parameters in , , , , as

well as . Only then will it be possible to design codes in

a principled fashion. First steps in this direction have been

made in [76].

Practical issues: Further important topics are, the design

of good termination schemes that mitigate the rate-loss, a

systematic investigation of how structure in the intercon-

nection pattern, as well as the codes influences the perfor-

mance, and how to optimally choose the scheduling (e.g.,

windowed decoding) to control the complexity of the de-

coder [79].

General models: As was discussed briefly in the introduc-

tion, the threshold saturation phenomenon has been em-

pirically found to hold in a large variety of systems. This

suggests that we should formulate a general theory rather

than find a separate proof for each of these cases. An el-

egant statistical physics inspired approach using potential

functions was presented in [113] and [114]. It works for

many finite-dimensional systems. An alternative approach

which mimics EXIT charts and which works for all 1-D

systems can be found in [115].

APPENDIX A ENTROPY VERSUS BATTACHARYYA—LEMMA 4
The following bounds can be proved by using [116, Lemma II.1], and Rolle’s theorem.
Lemma 49 (Bounds on Binary Entropy Function): Let . Then, for
,
(25)
(26)

Proof of Lemma 4: Let denote the density in the -domain. Then,

This proves that bound, we have

lower bounds

. For the upper

APPENDIX B UPPER BOUND ON BP THRESHOLD—LEMMA 11
Proof: We use ideas from extremes of information combining. We get an upper bound on the BP threshold by assuming that the densities at check nodes are from the BSC family and that densities at variable nodes are from the BEC family.
Let represent the entropy of the variable-to-check message and let denote the entropy of the channel. Applying the entropy functional to the DE equation, we obtain

To obtain the last inequality, we have used the fact that for a BSC

channel of entropy (hence flip probability equal to

)

we have

(cf.

[46, Example 4.135]). Hence, if for any

the reverse

inequality holds then DE will not converge to the perfect de-

coding FP.

The preceding condition is equivalent to saying that in order

for DE to succeed, we must have

for all

. We can rewrite this as

(27) where

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7785

We want to show that cannot be too large, i.e., we are

looking for an upper bound on . Note that any value of gives

a bound. Choose

. Then,

and step (ii) follows by explicitly writing the variable node convolution in the -domain. In step (iii), we defined

APPENDIX C BASIC PROPERTIES OF THE WASSERSTEIN METRIC—LEMMA 13
Proof: i) Alternative Definitions: The equivalence of the basic def-
inition (cf. Definition 12) and the first alternative description is shown in (6.2) and (6.3) in [104]. The equivalence of the first and second alternative descriptions is shown in [117]. ii) Boundedness: Follows directly from either of the two alternative descriptions. iii) Metrizable and Weak Convergence: See [104, Th. 6.9]. iv) Polish Space: See [104, Th. 6.18]. v) Convexity: We have

vi) Regularity with respect to : Let be

.

Without loss of generality, assume that

. Indeed,

since we consider the difference of densities, subtracting

a constant does not affect the integral. Define

for

by setting

for

.

Then,

is

and also

.

Let

and

be the -domain represen-

tation. Thus,

is characterized by

To obtain this equivalent formulation of the integral in

step (iii), we make use of the symmetry conditions of

-densities and the implied relationship between and

densities for

,

(28)

We claim that

is

(as a function ).

This will settle the proof of the lemma. Notice that

is a linear combination of four functions. Let us consider

a generic term. Writing

explicitly, we have

In (i), we use the Lipschitz continuity of and

to obtain the first term. We use

to obtain

the second term in (i). Indeed, since is

and

we must have

. Also, in the above expression, we can

replace

by

.

Now we sum over all possible and divide by 4 to

obtain

Since

, we have

Let us consider the other term. We split the sum into two

parts, one sum over

and the other over

. We

have

In step (i), we use the construction of

along with

the relation between and domains given by (28).

We defined

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7786
Adding the two we get the total contribution

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013
This yields

Putting everything together we obtain

To get a good bound on

for

consider

in terms of

and observe that7 Hence,

viii) Regularity with respect to DE: Follows from properties

(vi) and (vii).

ix) Wasserstein bounds Battacharyya and entropy: Let be

a positive function on

and let be a concave

decreasing function on . Then, for any

,

vii) Regularity with respect to : Let

be

.

Let

and

be the -domain represen-

tation

Before proving the inequality, let us use it to establish

the stated bounds. Set

. Then,

and

. Now, for the Bat-

tacharyya bound let

and note

where (a) follows since in the -domain, check-node

convolution corresponds to a multiplication of the values.

Because

,

.

Hence,

We obtain

Above, the relation between the Battacharyya and error

parameters can be obtained via extremes of information

combining (see [46, Lemma 4.65]). Let us focus on the

last part. To get a good bound on

in terms of

for

, consider

and observe that

For the entropy case, we set argument as above yields

. The same

We prove the stated inequality. Let us define

where

. For each with equality at

we have . Hence,

7As a side remark, note that this representation generalizes the familiar

equality

for real numbers.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7787

This yields
x) Battacharyya sometimes bounds Wasserstein: Since the cumulative -distribution of is equal to 1 on , the maximum possible value, we have

and

uniformly. Furthermore,

and

converges to

from below. By

taking unions of intervals as necessary, we can find an

increasing sequence

such that on

we have

for odd and

for even. The sequence of points is strictly

increasing except possibly for the last pair which may

coincide at 1. Define

Similarly, since the cumulative 0 on , we have

(29) -distribution of is

(30)

APPENDIX D WASSERSTEIN METRIC AND DEGRADATION—LEMMA 14

Proof:

i) Wasserstein versus degradation: Let be a function of

bounded total variation on . (This implies that has

left and right limits.) Note that we include

and

in the definition of total variation, which we de-

note by

. Define

. We

claim that if

then

where

if

. Note that

. We have

We claim in addition that

The desired result then follows from Jensen’s inequality:

Now, note that

This claim implies statement (i) by setting

and noting that, in this case,

. More precisely, applying integration

by parts to the definition of

we obtain

It is straightforward to show that for odd , we have and for even we have

where

. Indeed, for odd we have

for all

with

equality at

. Hence,

We now prove the claim. Let be the set of points in

, including the endpoints, where

.

Note that is closed and we may assume

on . The

complement of is a collection of disjoint open intervals such that is either strictly positive or strictly negative in

which gives

each interval. Consider the subset of intervals on which

is strictly negative. Without loss of generality, we may

take this collection to be finite. Indeed, suppose there

are countably infinitely many such intervals

Define an approximation by setting

for

and

otherwise. Then,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7788
The argument for even is similar. We obtain

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Thus, using

we obtain

Defining write

for notational convenience, we can

This yields

For the final inequality first note that

. Let

. It follows that

and the proof is complete.

ii) Entropy and Battacharyya bound Wasserstein: Let us first

focus on the inequality between the Wasserstein distance

and the Battacharyya parameter. From point (i), using the

relationship between

and

, we have

iii) Continuity for Ordered Families: Assume that

.

From point (ii), we know that

and the continuity follows from the continuity of the Battacharyya parameter for smooth channel families.

In order to obtain the desired inequality between the Wasserstein distance and the Battacharyya parameter, we consider an alternative formulation of the Battacharyya parameter and the entropy functional. Using integration by parts twice we obtain

APPENDIX E SUFFICIENT CONDITION FOR CONTINUITY—LEMMA 17, CONTINUITY FOR LARGE ENTROPIES—LEMMA 18, UNIVERSAL
BOUND ON CONTINUITY REGION—LEMMA 19
Lemma 50 (Bound on ): Consider two -densities . Then, for any degree distribution ,

Proof: Let be a density and let be distributed according to the corresponding -distribution. By Jensen’s inequality, (31) we have
and

where we have introduced the notation Taylor expansion

. The gives

Using

and

we obtain

where is positive for each . The functionals

have the

important (Fourier) property

, see [118].8

Since is convex and increasing for

, we have

8We introduced here only the even moments, since only these are needed. The odd moments are multiplicative as well.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7789

. Also, we have that random variable with range

is decreasing in since is a a contradiction since

. Indeed, here we first specialize

. Hence,

Lemma 51 to regular degree distributions. Then, we define

. Further from (9) we

then see that

. The above argument shows that there can

be at most one FP with this property and that this FP must be

the forward DE one.

Let us now prove Lipschitz continuity, cf. (10). Under our

hypotheses, the two FPs and are the BP FPs for chan-

nels and satisfying (9) with

away from 1. Con-

sider therefore the respective BP sequences (starting with )

,

. For each , (respectively ) is de-

graded with respect to (respectively ), and therefore sat-

isfies the condition (9), since the latter does. Furthermore, as-

suming without loss of generality

, we have

.

Let

. Since DE is initialized with ,

we have

. By applying Lemma 51, we obtain

and therefore,

Lemma 51 (Bound on Derivative of ): Consider two

-densities

. Let

and let and

denote the two corresponding channels from an ordered family

. Set

for

, 2. Then, for any dd pair

The thesis follows by taking the Proof of Lemma 18: For

limit. define

(33)

where Proof: First, since . Second, since , . This implies that
bounded by inequality, we obtain

.

, and for all ,
is upper . Using the triangle

Note that

and that is continuous.

Assume that we run forward DE with the channel and that

, for some

. We then claim that for the

resulting FP ,

. To see this, let

denote the

sequence of densities obtained via forward DE with

.

Using the Battacharyya functional on the DE equations and

then extremes of information combining bounds, we see that

Note that if

then

(32)

To complete the proof, the first term above is bounded using

Lemma 50.

Proof of Lemma 17: Denote by the BP FP for the

channel and notice that any other FP for the same channel

is necessarily upgraded with respect to , i.e.,

. In-

deed,

. By applying the DE operator, we deduce that

, where is the density after iterations of BP. By

taking the limit

, we obtain

. We conclude that

if does not satisfy (9) then neither can any other FP for the

same channel.

Assume on the other hand that satisfies (9) and that there

exists a distinct FP for the same channel, necessarily upgraded

The induction is anchored by noting that

since

we assumed that

. In summary, for each

,

(33) gives us the lower bound

for the FP of forward

DE with the channel

. Another way of interpreting

(33) is that it gives us an upper bound on

if we fix

.

According to Lemma 17, the GEXIT curve is Lipschitz con-

tinuous (in the Battacharyya parameter) at the FP

if

with respect to , also satisfying (9). Call this density . In this

(34)

case,

Note that (33) as well as (34) (if we interpret the inequality as

an equality) give rise to curves in the

space. In-

serting (33) into (34) gives us the points where these two curves

cross. If we set

, message the resulting expression,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7790

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 8. Consider the (3, 6)-regular ensemble. The -shaped curve on the right

is given by (33). This curve has two branches. The top branch gives a tighter

bound and pairs

generated by DE must lie above this branch.

The second curve, given by (34), denotes the region (above the curve) where

there can be at most one FP. The GEXIT curve for the BEC is shown as a dashed

curve. The portion of this GEXIT curve starting at (1, 1) which is contained in

the gray area is guaranteed to be smooth.

and set it to 0, we get (11). As shown in the subsequent Lemma

52, (11) has a unique positive solution in (0, 1) (i.e., the two

curves only cross once),

after this solution, and

is an increasing function above this solution. The situation

is shown in Fig. 8.

Inserting this solution back into (33) gives us a value of

so that for all channels with larger Battacharyya constant the

densities generated by forward DE are nontrivial (follows from

positive unique solution of

), together with the cor-

responding channels they satisfy (9) (follows from

beyond the unique solution), and are Lipschitz continuous (fol-

lows from combining the previous assertion and Lemma 17).

This insertion is equivalent to evaluating at

.

Let us finish the proof by showing that

for

all

. Indeed, from extremes of information combining we

have

We conclude that in the region

there is exactly one so-

lution, call it : there is at least one since

, whereas

(since is the posi-

tion where

is maximized); and there is only one solution

since in

,

is strictly decreasing, whereas

is in-

creasing.

In the region,

there can be no further solution

since

,

, and

is convex

whereas

is concave.

Note that

starts at 0, then increases until it reaches its

maximum, and then decreases back to 0, which it reaches at

. Let be the largest value within

so that

(we will verify shortly that this is well defined). Since

but

for all

, it is clear that

. Note

that is obtained from . Recall that we want to show that

is increasing for

. We will show the stronger state-

ment that is increasing for

. This is equivalent

to showing that

is increasing in this range. Note that

, where

and

for

. The factor can be written as

,

where

. This polynomial has two sign changes and

hence by Descarte’s rule of signs at most two positive roots.

It follows that

has at most two roots for

. Since

and

, there must be exactly one root of in

and once the function is positive, it stays so within .

It therefore suffices to prove that

. By definition of

, we have

. We therefore have

, where

where above we have replaced

. This preceding in-

equality implies that either

or

.

From the above discussion, we know that for

the densities

generated by forward DE are nontrivial, hence

.

Lemma 52 (Unique Zero): For

let

A quick check shows that

for

.

The proof will be complete if we can show that

. We do this in two steps. We claim that

, where

, and

that see the first,

. The second claim is immediate. To

Then, there is a unique solution of

in the interval

(0, 1), call it . Further, is increasing for

.

Proof: Set

and

, multiply the

equation by

and set

. This gives the equiv-

alent equation

, where

, and

.

The function

is i) decreasing and strictly convex for

, ii)

, iii)

. The function

is i) increasing for

, ii) decreasing

This shows that that the maximum of in is above 1 and

so is well defined. Since further, is a unimodal function

and was defined to be the largest value of

so that

it follows that

, as claimed.

for

, iii) concave for

,

Proof of Lemma 19: Let , , and be as defined

and iv)

. Note that

since we in Lemma 18. We will provide an upper bound on the unique

assumed that

.

solution of

. Notice that

represents the DE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7791

It remains to show that this bound converges to 0 when we

fix the rate and let the degrees tend to infinity. To simplify our

notation, let

and

. We have

Fig. 9. Consider the (3, 6)-regular ensemble. Figure shows the curves ,

, and

(light gray). The curves are shown only in the range

.

Note that goes out of the unit box. However, we are only interested in

in the

region. From the figure we see that

intersects at 0,1 and

. Further, the figure also shows all the key points (where

),

(where

) and

(where

and

, 1). From

the figure, we also see that the points are ordered as

.

where (a) is obtained by using the following sequence of inequalities:

equations for a BEC with parameter

. Therefore, we know

that

implies

. See Fig. 9 for an illustration.

We claim that and

intersect only at one point

in . Indeed

,

is equivalent to

Since

, whereas

, we conclude that for

,

.

We further claim that

. Let us assume this for a

moment. Then, we have

for

. We

conclude that the unique solution of

in

is

upper bounded by . In other words,

.

Let us now prove

. Indeed, since

, all we need

to show is that

.9 For

one can verify the validity of the claim directly. In general, we

have

Let us now prove (12). We accomplish this by the following

assertions:

i) For

we have

.

ii)

is decreasing for

.

iii)

.

iv)

.

Assuming the assertions above are true, let us show (12). Indeed,

combining (iii) with (i) and (ii) we obtain

where the last inequality follows since

. Since

, we can refine the above statement to

. Indeed, the first inequality above is strict unless

,

which implies that

. Hence, it must

follow that

.

We finish the proof of the first claim by showing that

.

Note that

, where recall that

is the

function which maps the Battacharyya constant of an element

of the family to the corresponding entropy. Thus, we have

. The proof is now complete by observing that

,

due to the monotonicity of the function for

, as shown

in Lemma 52. Thus, from Lemma 17 we conclude the first claim.

Using (iv) we conclude the proof.

Let us now prove each of the assertions above. We start with

(iv). From previous arguments, we have

. Further,

which implies

. Combining we

get

. From the definition of it is clear that

depends only on

. To prove assertion (iii), we

use the following bound obtained via extremes of information

combining:

Using the definition of and , we obtain assertion (iii).

Let us now prove assertion (ii). From previous arguments, we

have that is decreasing for

. Combining with the fact

that is increasing over its entire domain and

we get

that

is decreasing for

. Finally, let us prove the

assertion (i). Recall, from arguments given in the beginning of

the proof of Lemma 18, that if

(cf. (33)) then

9Recall that for the BEC (1), the DE equation is given by

. Furthermore, there are 3 FPs namely, 0,

(unstable) and 1

(stable). Finally, we have that

if and only if

or

. See [46, Ch. 3] for more details.

. Consequently, since

we must have

. From degradation, we thus

have

for all

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7792

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

APPENDIX F ENTROPY PRODUCT INEQUALITY—LEMMA 21 By definition, we have
with the kernel as given in the statement. Differentiating, we have

where to obtain the second inequality we combine the upper

bound on

derived above with the alternative repre-

sentation of

as given in (31). To obtain the last inequality

we split

into two intervals, one from

and one

from

. In the first interval, using

for

, we can upper bound the integral by

In the second interval we have

Integrating by parts twice for each dimension, we see that

Combining the two bounds above we get the claim.

This proves the alternative representation of this integral.

To prove the bound (i), we will use the following two bounds:

a)

for all

,

and b)

for all

,

. Simple

algebra shows that indeed the above two bounds are true. Let us

use these to prove bound (i). We have

APPENDIX G EVALUATION OF GEXIT INTEGRAL—LEMMA 26
For the proof of Lemma 26, it will be handy to have the following two lemmas available.
Lemma 53 (Entropy of Single Parity-Check Code): Consider a single-parity check code of length . Let denote a codeword, chosen uniformly at random from this code. Let denote the result of passing the th component of , call it , through the BMS channel with density . Then,

This bound

immediately gives rise to the claim (iii): the right-hand side

factorizes and excluding the constant

, each factor is

just the Battacharyya kernel in this representation [

is the second derivative of

, the Battacharyya kernel

in the -domain, cf. (31)]. Note that we can use the upper

bound on

to obtain (iii) since by (2), the differences

and

are nonnegative.

It remains to prove the claim (ii). We claim that if

then

. The second

bound is immediate since

so that

. To see that the difference

is less than we have

Proof: Let

be uniform random bits and let

denote their parity. Suppose is transmitted through the BMS

channel with density . Let the received vector be .

The entropy of the single parity-check code is

. By symmetry, we have

. Now

, but we also have

. This proves the stated result.

Now consider the channel that transmits one copy of a bit

through the channel with density and another copy through a

channel with density . The entropy of the combined channel

is

. This is equivalent to a single parity-check code of

length two. Hence,

now have

. We which proves (the Duality Rule of) Lemma 6.

Lemma 54 (Entropy of General Tree Code): Let

denote a bipartite tree with variable nodes

, check nodes , and edges . Note that represents a

binary linear code of length with

codewords. Let

be chosen uniformly at random from

the set of codewords and let

be the result

of sending ,

, through the BMS channel .

Let index the variables, index the checks,

denote

the checks neighboring a variable , and

denote the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7793

variables neighboring a check . For

, let

be

the density flowing from variable to check and

be the

density flowing from check to variable . Since is a tree,

these quantities can be computed via DE. Then,

(35)

Proof: We proceed by induction. If all variable nodes are Fig. 10. Computation tree of height 2 for (2, 4)-regular LDPC ensemble.

leaf nodes then the tree represents a parity-check code of length

. One can check that in this case the expression is identical

to the expression given in Lemma 53. This case represents our

anchor. We now use induction on the number of “internal” vari-

able nodes. If there is at least one internal variable node split the

tree into two trees. More precisely, without loss of generality let

variable node 1 be internal. Pick one of its neighboring check

nodes, call it . Generate two trees from the original tree by cut-

ting the edge

. In the (sub)tree which contains the variable

node 1, replace the original channel with

. In the

(sub)tree which contains the check node , attach a new vari-

able node to check node and associate it to the channel

.

We claim that the sum of the entropies of the two smaller

trees is equal to the entropy of the original tree plus the extra

term

. To see this, compute the entropy in each

case by conditioning first on variable 1. This is equivalent to

applying the chain rule of entropy. For the original tree, we get

.

If we apply the same technique to each of the two smaller trees

respect to and then integrate again over between 0 and 1.

Note all these operations are well defined and the fundamental

theorem of calculus is valid for this class of channel families.

An explicit check of the derivative now shows that these inte-

grals are exactly the GEXIT integrals associated with the

variable nodes.

We summarize, if we are given a tree code and channel fam-

ilies which are polynomial functions in the scalar parameters

then the sum of the GEXIT integrals is equal to the change of

the entropy of the tree code.

Corollary 55 (Entropy of Tree Code): Consider the

-regular computation tree of height 2 (see e.g., Fig. 10).

This tree represents a code of length

containing

codewords. Let be chosen uniformly at random

from the set of codewords and let be the result of sending

the components of through independent BMS channels. The

root node goes through the BMS channel and all leaf nodes

are passed through the BMS channel . Then,

and add the two expressions we get exactly the same expression,

except that the term

appears twice (since the variable

(36)

node 1 appears in both trees).

Now apply to each of the two derived trees the entropy for- where

.

mula (35). It is valid by induction hypothesis since each of the

Remark 56: We stress that in Corollary 55,

need not

parts has strictly fewer internal variable nodes. Sum the two form a FP pair. Thus, will be different from , in general. We

expression and subtract from this

. Noting that will use the above expression when and are “close” (in the

, we can confirm that this Wasserstein sense), i.e.,

forms an approximate FP pair.

gives exactly rise to the expression (35), confirming the validity This will allow us to give an estimate of the entropy of the tree

of this expression.

code.

In the sequel the following alternative way of interpreting the

Proof of Lemma 26: Note first that the integral

above result will be useful. Some rewriting shows that the above

is well defined—we assumed that

,

expression is also the sum of all GEXIT integrals associated which implies that we are integrating over a continuous func-

with the variable nodes when the BMS channel family as- tion (cf. Corollary 22). It remains to show that the value of this

sociated with variable is

,

, integral is indeed

, as claimed.

. Let us show this in more detail. Let

be the To evaluate the integral, we consider the code corresponding

channel flowing along edge

when the parameter is , and to the

-regular computation tree of height 2 as in Corol-

use the same notation for

. Note that all these channels lary 55. Let be chosen uniformly at random from the set of

have the form

, for some fixed constants codewords and assume that the component corresponding to the

, fixed densities , and some strictly positive integers and root node is sent through the channel , whereas all components

. This is easily verified by induction by checking that for both corresponding to the leaf nodes are sent through the channel .

operations under DE this form stays preserved and that the chan- Let be the received word. Since

is, by assumption, a

nels associated with the variable nodes have this form. In the ex- FP family, the density flowing from any check node into the root

pression (35), replace the “static” channels , , and

node is

and so the total density seen by the root

by their corresponding channel “families” parametrized by , variable node (excluding the observation of the variable node

i.e., by ,

, and

. Now take the derivative with itself) is . Therefore, the GEXIT integral associated with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7794

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

the root of this tree code is the desired integral. We will eval-

uate this integral by first determining the sum of the GEXIT

integrals associated with this tree and then by subtracting from

it the GEXIT integrals associated with the leaf nodes.

In the sequel, we will perform manipulations, such as writing

a total derivative as the sum of its partial derivatives or writing

a function as the integral of its derivative. In a first pass, we will

assume that all these operations are well defined. In a second

step, we will then see how to justify these steps by approxi-

mating the desired integrals by a series of simple integrals.

Label the variable nodes of the tree with the set

so that the root has label 1. Note that by assumption

, so that the entropy of the first component of , call it

, is . The entropy of the remaining components, call them ,

, are all equal and take on the value

. So we imagine that all components are parameterized by

. Also,

and

for all .

From Definition 23, we have

Note that

It remains to justify the previous derivation. We proceed as

follows. Instead of working with

, we will work with

a simpler family which is piecewise linear and “close” to the

original family. Because it is piecewise linear, the operations are

simple to justify. Because it is “close” to the original family, the

result is “close” to what we want to show. By taking a sequence

of such families which approximate the original family closer

and closer, we obtain the desired result.

Let us start by constructing a piecewise linear family, call it

, which approximates the original family

. Con-

sider the channel family and sample it uniformly in with

a spacing of . To be precise, pick the samples (from the orig-

inal family) at , for an appropriate range of integers . By a

suitable choice we can ensure that

for some

.

In general,

will not be of the form . This means that

the last sample is not lying on the lattice. But we can ensure that

also for the last sample the “gap” (in entropy) is at most .

This is all that is needed for the proof. Hence, for notational

convenience, we will ignore this issue and assume that all sam-

ples have the form .

Construct from this set of samples, a channel family by con-

structing a piecewise linear interpolation of consecutive sam-

ples, call the result . Note that since the entropy functional

is linear, this construction leads to a family so that

.

Further, is ordered and piecewise smooth. We claim that

(37)

The left-hand side evaluates to

The last equality is obtained by using Corollary 55 for the two

endpoints and recalling that we set

.

Let us consider the leaf node contributions. By symmetry,

these contributions are all identical. If we focus on a single

check node, then again due to symmetry, the GEXIT integrals

of all leaf nodes is the same. But the sum of all the GEXIT inte-

grals is equal to the change in entropy of a single parity-check

code of length . Thus, using Lemma 53, we see that the inte-

gral of any single GEXIT integral is equal to

where

and

is a suitable interpolation factor.

In the last step, we have made use of (v) in Lemma 13, the

convexity property of the Wasserstein distance, and the fact that

consecutive samples have an entropy difference of (at most) .

Further, since they are ordered, i.e.,

, an

entropy difference of at most implies a Wasserstein distance

of at most

(cf. (ii) of Lemma 14).

To each

corresponds a FP , call it . Take the col-

lection

. Since this collection is ordered, we can construct

from it an ordered and piecewise smooth family via a linear in-

terpolation of consecutive samples in the same manner as we

have done this for the channel family. We have

Combining all these statements, we obtain

(38) Step (i) follows from Lemma 14, property (ii). In step (ii), we

made use of the fact that

, so that ac-

cording to Lemma 17,

. In step (iii), we used once more Lemma 14,

property (ii). Now consider the distance

. We have

The last inequality above follows from considering the same steps as before, since the densities are ordered and each of them
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7795

are FPs at channels with entropy difference at most

that

is a FP family, hence we can write

. Recall

Using the same line of reasoning as in in the proof of Corollary

22, we see that therefore for each ,

. Since

is piecewise linear, the

integrand is bounded. It follows by Lebesgue’s dominated con-

vergence theorem that also the integral of this quantity over

converges to 0 when is taken to 0. Let us do this more pre-

cisely. Since the family is piecewise linear, for the th interval

we have

In words,

forms an approximate FP family. Above,

we have used properties (v) and (vi) of Lemma 13.

Let us now apply the family

to the depth-2 tree.

More precisely, we consider the depth-2 tree code where the root

node is passed through the channel and the leaves are passed through the channel . We claim that all GEXIT integrals are

well defined and that their sum is indeed the difference of the

entropies. Indeed, this follows because we are essentially in the

setting of Lemma 54.

If

were a true FP family then the GEXIT integral of

the root node would be equal to

. This follows by the

same steps which we used in our initial casual derivation: once

we know that all integrals exist and add up to the total change in the entropy of the tree code, all that is needed to draw this

conclusion is to observe that for a true FP family we can use a

symmetry argument to compute the value of each leaf GEXIT

integral.

However,

is only an approximate (in the Wasserstein

distance) FP family. But we know that by making suffi-

ciently small, we can make the approximation arbitrarily good.

It is intuitive that by taking a sequence of such approximations

which converges to a true FP family the limiting value of the

GEXIT integral of the root node should again be

.

Let us show this more precisely.

We have already established that the sum of the individual

GEXIT integrals is equal to the total change of the entropy of

the tree code. This change only depends on the endpoints but not

on the chosen path. In particular, the endpoints for

and

are the same.

Therefore, we only need to prove that each leaf GEXIT integral has a value which approaches (38) when approaches

0. We know that this would be true if all the messages entering

check nodes were and so the GEXIT integral was

. But the actual GEXIT integral is

,

where is the density flowing from the “interior” of the tree

into a leaf node. Let us now show that

In fact, let us show that

where

is the derivative of the Battacharyya functional of

the channel family at some entropy

. To

obtain the last expression, we use the Mean value theorem since

is a smooth family. Furthermore, since the Battacharyya

parameter is a bounded functional and the channel family is

smooth, the derivative of the Battacharyya parameter is a contin-

uous function over a closed interval and hence bounded. Hence,

using the Lebesgue dominated convergence theorem we con-

clude that the integral goes to zero as

.

The only thing which remains to be done is to prove that the

GEXIT integral of the root node when we use the linearized

family converges to the true GEXIT integral when we let

tend to 0. We will do this in several steps by considering the

chain of integrals

i)

,

ii)

,

iii)

,

iv)

,

and by showing that the value of consecutive such integrals is

arbitrarily close. Here, is a family which is piecewise con-

stant on each segment, taking on the value of its left boundary.

First note that all the integrals are well defined, being the inte-

grals over continuous functions, respectively. That the integrals

in (i) and (ii) are close follows by the same line of arguments

as we just used above. The same idea applies to prove that the

integrals (iii) and (iv) are close to each other. Finally, the value

of (ii) and (iii) is in fact equal. This is true since is in fact

constant on each segment and agrees with at the end-

points of the segments.

Note that for any

we have

APPENDIX H NEGATIVITY—LEMMA 27

We prove Lemma 27 by showing the following slightly stronger statement.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7796

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Lemma 57: Let gree distribution
Define

be an -density and consider a de-

such that

.

, and

, where

.

i) Assume that is a -approximate FP, i.e.,

, for some channel and

. Then, if

,

.

ii) For

,

.

Proof: Set

. Let us first characterize the area

in an alternative form. We have

For the -distributions and let and be the associated distributions. Following the lead of L. Boczkowski [118],
write

In (a), we used the bound

so that

. Consider step (b). Set

. Then,

In step (c), we substituted the upper and lower bounds on

for the first and second expression, respectively. Also, in the last

inequality, we have

since we assumed

that

.

Let us summarize. If

and if

then

. Let us drop

the condition

. Define

and assume instead that . Then,

(39)

In step (a) we have used the Taylor expansion of

,

where

,

. Note that

and that

. Most importantly, as mentioned in the proof of

Lemma 50, the moments are multiplicative under . This

implies that for

,

, e.g., for

two distributions and we have

The one-before last step follows since if

then

and so we can apply the previous

procedure. Indeed, from property (ix) of Lemma 13 we have

, where in the last in-

equality we use the bound on as given in the hypothesis of the

lemma. Since we assume

, it is not hard to

check that

which justifies the last step in the

above inequality.

For

,

where in the first equality we use that in the -domain the

check node operation is simply a multiplication.

Assume at first that

and

that

for some channel . Define

. Then,

In (a) we upper bound

by

,

, and note that

. In (b), we use

(this is true since is decreasing for each fixed

as

a function of ) and that

is increasing. Step (c) is a con-

sequence of the bound

, see [118].

Step (d) uses the following lower bound on

. Set

. From extremes of informa-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7797

tion combining we know that we get the lowest entropy (at the check-node side) if we assume that is a BSC density. Therefore,

where

. Note that the

terms in the expansions of and with

are

identical. Therefore, if we consider

,

these terms cancel. We can upper bound the difference

by the Battacharyya constant of all those terms of the

expansion of which correspond to

, i.e.,

Consider finally step (e). We know that

, and so in

particular

. Combining this with (27) and

we conclude that

.

APPENDIX I SPACING OF FPS-LEMMA 58 AND TRANSITION LENGTH OF
FPS—LEMMA 62

If we are given a proper one-side FP (with any boundary con-

dition) then consecutive elements of the FP cannot be too dif-

ferent from each other. This is made precise in the following

lemma.

Lemma 58 (Spacing of FP): Let

be a proper one-

sided FP on

,

with any boundary condition.

i) For

ii) Let

denote the weighted average,

. Then, for any

,

If we are interested in the Wasserstein distance instead, we can proceed in an almost identical fashion. The only difference is that in the last sequence of inequalities we use the convexity property (v) and the boundedness property (ii) of (the Wasserstein metric) Lemma 13. ii) Using the convexity property (v) of (the Wasserstein metric) Lemma 13 and canceling common terms, we obtain

Discussion: Each of these two claims states that consecutive

distributions are “close” either with respect to the Wasserstein

distance or the Battacharyya parameter. Further, the difference

is either for the distributions themselves or for their averages.

Proof:

i) To simplify notation, for

fixed, let

. Writing the DE equa-

tions explicitly,

The proof for the Battacharyya parameter proceeds in an iden-

tical fashion and uses the linearity of the Battacharyya param-

eter.

Lemma 59 (Basic Bounds on FP): Let

be a proper

one-sided FP on

,

with any boundary condition.

Let

denote the Battacharyya parameter of the den-

sity of the th section. Then, for all

,

Note that the expressions for and are similar. The only difference is that contains whereas contains . Rewrite both expressions in the form

Proof: For all

where

,

. Now expand as well as

Since the Battacharyya parameter is multiplicative in and linear

,

, and

in the form

Further, recall from Lemma 5, property (ii), and the ensuing

discussion, that

, so that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7798

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Combining, we obtain

Let

,

. Since

,

is convex. Let

. Then, by Jensen’s inequality,

Consider transmission over a BMS channel . Let be ad-

missible in the sense of property (iv) of Definition 40. Let

be a proper one-sided FP on

with any boundary condi-

tion. Let

denote the Battacharyya parameter of the

density associated with the th section and define

.

Then, there exists a positive constant

which depends

on and , but not on nor the channel , so that for any

which proves the claim.

Lemma 60 (Basic Properties of

, [54]): Con-

sider the

-regular ensemble with

and let

, where

is the BP threshold the

regular ensemble when transmitting over the BEC. Define

.

i) For

,

has exactly three solutions, one

of them being 0 and the other two denoted by

and

with

. Further,

for all

and

for all

.

ii)

and

;

for

.

iii) There exists a unique value

so that

, and there exists a unique value

so that

. Further,

is

decreasing in

.

iv) Let

. The quantity

is nonnegative and depends only on the channel param-

eter and the degrees

.

v) For

,

.

vi) For

,

.

vii) Let and denote the universal lower bounds, given in

the previous part, on

and

, respectively. If we

draw a line from 0 with slope , then

lies below

this line for

.

viii) For

we have

Proof: Throughout the proof, we set

and we

write for

.

Note first that we have to prove the statement only for

. This is true since we have defined

to coincide

with

for

and since further the function ,

which we use to bound the process, is strictly decreasing as a

function of . Hence, in the sequel our language will reflect the

fact that we have

.

i) The number of sections such that

is at

most

. If

then the number of sec-

tions in this part is 0. Hence, without loss of generality

assume

. Let be the smallest index so that

. If

then the claim is triv-

ially fulfilled. Assume therefore that

.

From the monotonicity of and the fact that is in-

creasing,

This implies As a consequence, we obtain

(40)

Remark 61: The function

is the DE equation for the

-regular ensemble when transmitting over the BEC. The

two nonzero solutions,

and

represent the unstable

and the stable FPs of DE. In the following, we will be using ex-

tremes of information combining techniques to relate the Bat-

tacharyya parameters via .

In Fig. 6, we see that within a few sections the constellation

changes from reliable sections (toward the boundary) to sections

which all have more or less the same reliability. In other words,

this transition happens quickly. This is made precise in the fol-

lowing lemma.

Lemma 62 (Transition Length): Let

be the BP

threshold for transmission over the BEC using the

-reg-

ular (uncoupled) ensemble. For

, let

be

the smaller of the two strictly positive roots of the equation

, where

. For

, define

.

This is equivalent to

. More

generally, using the same line of reasoning,

, as long as

.

We summarize, the total distance we have to cover is

and every

sections we cover a distance of at least

as long as we have not surpassed . Therefore,

after

sections, we have either passed

or we must be strictly closer to than

. Hence, to

cover the remaining distance we need at most

extra sections. The total number of sections needed is

therefore upper bounded by

,

which, in turn, is upper bounded by

. The

final claim follows by bounding

with 1 and

by .

ii) Number of sections such that

is at most

. Let us define

. From Lemma 59,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7799

inequality over all sections from

Writing

in terms of the

. Summing this

to

we obtain

and rearranging terms

We summarize, the total distance we have to cover is

and every

steps we cover a distance of at least

as long as we have not surpassed

. Allowing

for

extra steps to cover the last part, bounding again

by , bounding

by 1 and replacing

and

by their universal lower bounds, proves the claim.

Let us summarize (41)

Without loss of generality, we can assume that there exists

a section so that

(we know from point

(i) that we must reach this point unless the constellation is too

short, in which case the statement is trivially fulfilled). Con-

sider sections

, so that in addition

. If no such exists then there are at most

points in the interval

, and the statement is

correct a fortiori.

Our plan is to use (41) to lower bound

. This means, we need a lower bound for

. Since by assumption

,

it follows that

, so that every contribution in the

sum

is positive (cf. Lemma 60 (i)). Further,

by (the Spacing) Lemma 58,

. Hence,

APPENDIX J SATURATION—THEOREM 47

Before we proceed to prove the Saturation theorem, we intro-

duce a key technical element required in the proof, a family of

spatial (approximate) FPs. This is the content of Definition 63

and Theorem 64. Then, Theorem 65 shows that the GEXIT in-

tegral of this family depends only on its end points. Combined

with the Negativity Lemma 27 this imposes a strong constraint

on the channel value of the spatial FPs, culminating in the proof

of the Saturation theorem.

Definition 63 (Interpolation): Let

,

10,

denote an increasing one-sided constellation on

for the

parameters

. Let

and let

.

The family (of constellations) for the

-en-

semble, based on

, is denoted by

.

We start by defining the channel value for the family. We set

.

Each element is symmetric with respect to the spatial index

and the components are indexed by

. Hence, it suffices

to define the constellations in the range

and then we set

for

. As usual, we set

for

. For

and

define

where for

,

Let us explain how we obtain the last inequality. The basic idea

is to use Lemma 60 part (iv), to get

and then

bound the sum by an integral over an appropriate interval. More

precisely, we first claim that there must exist a section with

between

and

. Indeed, suppose on the con-

trary that this was not true. Let

be the smallest section

number such that

. Clearly, such a exists. In-

deed, since

, it follows that

.

Since

, we must have

. This

implies that

. Using (the Spacing)

Lemma 58 we conclude that

. Hence,

. Using the universal lower bound on

, we get

, a contradiction to the hypothesis of the lemma. Fi-

nally, according to Lemma 60 part (iv),

for

, which implies the inequality. Combined with

(41) this implies that

Discussion:

i) Notice that in the above definition when approaches ,

then

.

ii) In the definition above, we keep the channel constant

across the sections and over . In other words, the channel

remains constant for all the constellations in the family.

We denote the two partitions in the interpolation as

phases, e.g.,

corresponds to Phase I and

corresponds to Phase II.

iii) The above interpolation might look complicated. But

there is a straightforward interpretation. Think of

one-sided constellations. We are interested in a con-

stellation of size .

10This means that the channel belongs to the family of BMS channels. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7800

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

In Phase I, the basic idea is to “move” the constellation to

the right and at each point in time to “chop off” the overhanging

parts both on the left and on the right. We do this until the left

most section of is at position . If were a continuous

function, i.e., suppose we had a continuum of sections, then this

would be all we need to do. But is discrete, so in order to get

a continuous interpolation we interpolate between two consec-

utive elements of . This mimics the “wave effect” we men-

tioned in the beginning. In Phase II, the residual constellation is

uniformly brought down to

in each section.

In the next lemma, we show that if we have an interpolated

family constructed via the above definition, then the resulting

family is a family of approximate FPs.

Lemma 64 (Interpolation Yields Approximate FP Family):

Let

,

, denote an increasing one-sided con-

stellation on

with free or forced boundary condition for

the parameters

and let

. Assume that

fulfills the following conditions, for some

.

i) Constellation is close to

“on the left”:

Phase I: Think of and as fixed,

.

Define

and

. Set

. With these conventions, we want to bound

Using the convexity property (v) of (the Wasserstein metric) Lemma 13, it is sufficient to bound

separately. The two bounds are identical and their derivation is also essentially identical. Let us therefore concentrate on the first expression. We use the properties mentioned in Lemma 13. Using first the triangle inequality and then the regularity properties (vi) and (vii) as well as the convexity property (v), we upper bound the first expression by

ii) Constellation is flat “on the right”

Also,

.

iii) Constellation is approximate FP: for

,

Let

denote the family as described in Definition

63. Then, this family is an approximate FP family. More pre-

cisely, for

and

i)

and

are ordered by degradation, increasing,

and piecewise linear,

ii)

for

and for all and

iii) for any

and any

(42)

Discussion: For the boundary

and in the middle

the interpolation does

not in general result in an approximate FP. Fortunately, this does

not cause problems. We will see in Theorem 65 that each section

gives only a small contribution to the GEXIT integral. If we

choose sufficiently large then we can safely ignore a fixed

number of sections.

Proof:

i) That

and

are ordered by degradation, in- where to obtain the first inequality we use the approximate na-

creasing, and piecewise linear follows by construction. ture of to bound the second term.

ii) In the same way, that

for

and Phase II: In this regime, we interpolate the “tail” of the orig-

for all also follows by construction.

inal constellation uniformly to

. From the assumption of

iii) It remains to check that the family so defined constitutes the lemma, we have

. Since is increasing we

an approximate FP family. Since the family, by definition, must have

for

. Lemma

is symmetric around the section 0, we check only for the 13, property (iii), then implies that

for

sections belonging in

.

all

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7801

Again, think of and as fixed,

. Lemma 26. In fact, from the Lemma 26 we see that, graphically,

Set

and

. Then,

this is equal to the area under the BP GEXIT curve of the un-

derlying ensemble between the two end points.

Proof: Let us consider the circular ensemble which is as-

sociated with

(see Definition 31). As defined in

the statement of the lemma, for

, the channel “seen”

at position is

. For the remaining sections

, we impose the “natural” condition

.

As a consequence, for these positions

.

Since

as well as

are piecewise linear, all GEXIT

where to obtain the penultimate inequality, we use Lemma 33 to

bound the distance of

to

, since

is

always an FP of DE) and the second expression is the distance

of

to

, which is bounded using the previous

arguments.

Next, we show that if we have an approximate family of

FPs, then the area under the GEXIT integral associated with

the family depends only on the “end points” of the interpolated

family.

Theorem 65 (Area Theorem for Approx. FP Family):

Let

denote an approximate FP family for the

ensemble. More precisely,

i)

and

are ordered by degradation, increasing,

and piecewise linear11,

ii)

for

and for all ,

iii)

for

,

iv)

for

, and

v) for all

and

integrals are well defined (see the proof of Lemma 26). Conse-

quently,

is well defined.

Instead of determining

, directly, let us deter-

mine the equivalent quantity associated with the circular en-

semble, i.e., we include the

extra positions

. Since for all “extra” positions the associated channel is

constant, and so the additional integrals are zero, the numerical

value of these two GEXIT integrals is in fact identical (as long

as we do not normalize them by their respective lengths).

We will now derive upper and lower bounds for the GEXIT

integrals for the given approximate FP family. Recall: for

we have a

-approximate (in the Wasserstein metric) FP family. For

all

we know is that the channel is a monotone function of .

Finally, for

the channel is frozen to

“perfect.”

Let us start by deriving a lower bound.

Boundary: For

the GEXIT integral is nonnegative. Thus, in this

regime, we get a lower bound by setting each GEXIT integral

to 0 (cf. Lemma 16).

Define

Interior: Consider the GEXIT integrals for .

Technique: Rather than evaluating these integrals directly

we use the technique introduced in [108], i.e., we consider

the computation tree of height 2 rooted in node as shown

where gral introduced in Definition 23. Let

is the GEXIT inte-

in Fig. 10 for the specific case

. More pre-

cisely, there are check nodes connected to this root vari-

able node and

further variable nodes connected to

each such check node. So in total there are check nodes

in this tree and

variable nodes. We call the

starting variable node, the root and all other variable nodes,

Then,

is well defined and

leaves. By symmetry, it suffices to consider one branch of

this computation tree in detail. Let ,

,

denote the position of a particular check node. We assume

that the choice of is done uniformly over this interval. Let

where

,

,

, denote the position

of the th variable node attached to this check node, and

let the index of the root node be 0. For the leaf nodes, we

assume again a uniform choice of over the allowed in-

Discussion: In other words, the theorem says that for any family of spatial FPs which start and end at a constant (over all sections) FP, the GEXIT integral is given by the end points and is close to the difference of the expression introduced in

terval. Note that, without loss of generality, we have set the

position

for the root variable node. For each compu-

tation tree assign to its root node the channel , whereas

each leaf variable node at position “sees” the channel

. Note that for our model of the tree, the distribution

11In fact, we will apply this theorem to the family given in Definition 63.

(averaged over this choice) which flows into the root node

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7802

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

is exactly

, as required for the com-

putation of

.

Let us describe the basic trick which will help us to accom-

plish the computation. We will first determine the sum of

all GEXIT integrals associated with such a tree. From this,

we will then subtract the GEXIT integrals associated with

its leaf nodes. This will give us the GEXIT integral associ-

ated with the root node, which is what we are interested in.

More precisely, we use (37). The left-hand side of this

equation gives us the contribution of the overall tree and

the right-hand side contains the GEXIT integral of the root

node plus the GEXIT integrals of the leaf nodes. For the

current case, we stress that all the operations (integrals of

derivatives and partial derivatives) in (37) are well defined

and further the total derivative is equal to the sum of the

partial derivatives, since the family we consider is piece-

wise linear.

Contributions from overall tree: recall that for

,

and

.

Consider first the case

and

. From Corollary 55, we know that

the conditional entropy

of the tree code is given

by

Every check node has connected variable nodes, where

each variable node is picked with uniform probability and

independently from the range

and the choice

of the variables is i.i.d. (note that the connections are

taken on the circular ensemble).

Contributions from checks in the range

: check

nodes in this range might see some frozen channels or

channels which do not form approximate FPs. Hence, we

upper bound all GEXIT integrals associated with check

nodes in this range by 1 (cf. Lemma 16). The number of

such integrals is

.

Contributions from checks in the range

: check nodes in this range only

see channels which are approximate FPs and none of the

channels are frozen. There are

such

integrals. Let us determine the contribution for each such

integral. Since we consider an average over all possible

computation trees, the (average) density entering a check

node is equal for all the leaf nodes (there are

such

densities). Let us call this density . If we focus on a check

node at position , this density is equal to

where

. Define

as

. Now recall that

Then (dropping the subscripts for a moment),

However, the density entering the check node, at position , from the root node will be different from , since we do not have a family of true FPs. Call this density . This density is equal to

Since we assumed that we have an approximate FP family

and due to the convexity of the Wasserstein metric, we

conclude that

. Let us define

. From Lemma 53, we have that

is the

GEXIT integral of a leaf node if we had a true FP. Since we

Exactly the same argument tells us that the entropy of such

a tree for

is, up to a possible error of size

,

equal to

. We conclude the difference of the total

have an approximate FP, each such integral can be upper

bounded by

, call it

.

We derive this as follows. We want to bound the difference

entropy of such a tree is lower bounded by

, call this

.

Contributions from leaves: We need to find the contribu-

tions of GEXIT integrals associated with all the leaf nodes

of each such tree rooted at a position

where

and

. Since the

. The exact such sum is

family,

is piecewise linear, we use (37) (applied in

difficult to determine. But we only need an upper bound

this case to the single parity-check code), Lemma 53, and

to derive a lower bound on the overall GEXIT integral.

symmetry to conclude that

Note that GEXIT integrals are nonnegative. Hence, let us

. Since the family

is piecewise linear and or-

compute the sum of GEXIT integrals of leaf nodes of all

dered by degradation, we can reparameterize the GEXIT

computation trees, whether they are rooted in a position

integrals with the Battacharyya parameter which we de-

or not.

note by

. Thus,

By symmetry, this contribution is easy to determine. More

precisely, consider the following equivalent procedure.

Pick a check node at position ,

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7803

To see the last inequality, using (ii), Lemma 21 we have

where

. Since

and

,

we obtain

, which

gives us the bound. The last expression can be further upper

bounded (using (vii), Lemma 13) by

.

Accounting: Putting everything together, we have

these GEXIT integrals corresponds to computation trees

whose root is in the range

. We can, therefore, subtract all their contri-

butions, which are obtained by arguments similar to those

used in the lower bound. There are

such integrals and the contribution for each such integral is

at least

. Here, the last term takes into account

the approximate FP nature of the channels and was de-

fined in the arguments for obtaining the lower bound.

Accounting: We have

where

where

Proof of Theorem 47: Rather than deriving the bound

Let us derive an upper bound in the same manner.

for all values of the parameters, we are

Boundary: For

only interested in the behavior of this bound for values of

the GEXIT integrals are at most 1. This gives a tending to 0 and values of and tending to . Hence, in

contribution of

. As usual, for

the the sequel, nothing is lost by assuming at several spots that

GEXIT integral is 0 and does not contribute to the area.

is “sufficiently” small and and are “sufficiently” large

Interior: Consider the GEXIT integrals for

(consequently is also sufficiently large). This will simplify

.

our arguments significantly.

Technique: We use the same procedure as beforehand. But Let

denote the proper one-sided FP on

with

this time we need a lower bound of the GEXIT integrals of forced boundary condition which fulfills the stated conditions

the leaf nodes.

for some

and

and

. We

Contributions from overall tree: As before, the overall con- prove the claim in several steps, where in each step we assert

tribution of each tree is equal to

plus an further properties that such a FP has to fulfill.

error term of absolute value equal to

.

Contributions from leaves: The idea is the same as before

and as before, we will consider the computation from the

point of view of check nodes. As before, we split the contri-

bution in two regimes,

Constellation is almost flat and not too small “on the

right”: Recall that by assumption

so that

for

. Using the same reasoning

as in the discussion at the end of Lemma 14, we can conclude

that there exists an

such that

and

.

for all

and ,

. From part (i)

Contributions from checks in the range

of Lemma 14, we conclude that

: Check nodes for all

. Clearly, the right-hand side

in this range might see some frozen channels or channels can be made arbitrarily small by picking sufficiently larger

which are not approximate FPs. Since we are looking for an than

.

upper bound, we set the contribution of such check nodes Constellation can be made exactly flat and not too small

to be 0.

“on the right”: Create from

the increasing constella-

Contributions from checks in the range

tion

on

with free boundary condition in the

: As we discussed before, check following way:

nodes in this range only see channels which are approxi-

mate FPs and none of the channels are frozen. Further, all

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7804

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

The graphical interpretation is simple. We replace the “almost”

flat part on the right plus the extra part on the right which might

not be flat with an exactly flat part. To simplify our subsequent

notation, we set

and from above arguments note that

. Hence,

for all

.

Constellation is approximate FP: Note that by going from

to no component in

is changed by more than

a distance

. Therefore, if we run DE on the

modified components it is clear that in this range the output must

still be close to the original output. More precisely, we have for

every

,

is 0 since the channel remains

constant throughout the interpolation.

Computing GEXIT Integral—Theorem 65: We now compute

the GEXIT integral associated with

by first ap-

plying Lemma 64 and then Theorem 65.

More precisely, from the previous arguments we satisfy all

the hypotheses of Lemma 64. This allows us to conclude that the

FP family constructed above is

approximate

FP [cf. (42)] if is chosen sufficiently large. Furthermore, since

the starting (

for all sections

) and ending

constellations (

for all sections

) are

flat, we satisfy all the hypotheses of Theorem 65 from which we

conclude that the GEXIT integral is upper bounded by

.13

Flat region has entropy not much smaller than : From part

(viii) Lemma 60, we obtain

where to get the penultimate inequality we first replace by

, since is a true FP, and then

to obtain the last inequality we apply Lemma 33. Since can

be made arbitrarily small by choosing sufficiently large, this

verifies the approximate FP nature for

. Let

us now focus on

. Note that since

,

we can use the above argument in particular for

.

For this choice of all involved densities,

,

are equal to . Therefore, the previous argument shows that

(43)

where in the last step we have used condition (vii) in Definition 40. We conclude that
(44) We now proceed by contradiction. Let us assume that
. Choosing large enough we can make the right-hand side of (43) smaller than . Hence, we obtain

But for

all components of are equal to and so the

approximate FP nature of is also verified for

.

Since

, we conclude that is an

approximate FP. Note that by choosing large enough, we can In the last step, we assumed without loss of generality that is

make a -approximate FP.

chosen sufficiently small. The inequality then follows from the

From FP to FP family: From the approximate FP

on condition (v) in Definition 40. This, together with (44), guaran-

we create the approximate FP family

on tees that we satisfy the hypothesis of (the Negativity) Lemma

as described in Definition 63.

27. Hence, we conclude that

. From condition (vi)

Before proceeding, let us give a brief outline of what lies ahead. We will compute the GEXIT integral of the above constructed family in two ways. The first way is to apply the basic definition of the GEXIT integral. This is the content of the next section. Since the channel is kept constant, the GEXIT integral equals zero. Next, we will use the fact that the family is an

in Definition 40

.

Hence, for a sufficiently small and a sufficiently large , this

leads to the conclusion that the GEXIT integral

, a contradiction to the previous computation. As a consequence, we must have

approximate FP family. This will put strong conditions on the channel value of the family. Specifically, if the channel entropy

(45)

is not close to the area threshold, then the GEXIT integral must be strictly negative, which would contradict the previous computation that gave us zero, proving our main statement. This is the content of the remaining sections. We now go to the details.
Computing GEXIT Integral—Definition 23:12 Using the basic definition of the GEXIT functional in Definition 23, we conclude that the GEXIT integral associated with

The flat region is close to : We will now show that is

close to

, the BP FP when transmitting over the channel

using the underlying

-regular ensemble. In the sequel,

we will denote

by . To do this, we will first bound

the Wasserstein distance between and , where is defined

to be equal to

. Thus, to bound the distance between

and we bound the distances

and

. Note from

12The GEXIT integral as defined in Definition 23 does not require the families to form a FP pair. In the current computation, the channel is kept constant and hence the integral is trivially zero. In the next section, we will use the fact that the interpolated family forms an approximate FP family. This gives an alternative way of computing the GEXIT integral. The consistency of these two computations imposes a strong constraint.

the previous part we have that and hence the distance between and can be made arbi-
trarily small by taking sufficiently large. Let us now bound

13Note that

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7805

. First, we show that arbitrarily small. Indeed,

can be made

(46)

where to get the last inequality we have used the approximate FP

nature of [cf. (43)] and the (sensitivity) Lemma 33. Since can

be made arbitrarily small, we can make the distance

as small as desired.

Run forward DE, with the channel , starting from

,

, and

, respectively. Let

,

, and

,

. Recall

that

is the DE operator for the

-regular ensemble

when transmitting over the channel . We will choose the value

of shortly. Then,

where in the last inequality we use

combined with the condition (ii) in

Definition 40 to get

. From (46), we know that we can

make

as small as we want by choosing sufficiently

large.

Let us now bound the two terms containing Battacharyya

parameters. Note that in each iteration the distance of the re-

spective Battacharyya constants decreases by a factor of at least

. In-

deed, from Lemma 51,

For the first inequality, we again use . Above we have also used and
now have

for all . We

In the last step we use that

, since

and

DE preserves degradation. Similarly, we use

. There-

fore, we can upper bound the Wasserstein distance in terms

of the difference of the respective Battacharyya constants ac-

cording to (ii), Lemma 14.

Choose

. We then claim that

for all

. Let us prove this claim immediately. From construction,

we have

. Next, we claim that

for

. Before we prove this

claim, we apply it immediately to conclude that

To prove the intermediate claim we argue inductively that

For the first inequality, we use condition (ii) in Defini-

tion 40 combined with

. For the second inequality, we use condition (iii) in Definition 40 combined with

and Lemma

18. Further notice that the left-hand side of the first inequality

is smaller than condition (ii) in Definition 40 which only

depends on

. Also, from Lemma 19 we see that the

left-hand side of the second inequality is bounded away from

1 by a constant which depends only on , . Thus, we can

bound the sum of the two Battacharyya terms by

with

The induction is completed by verifying that Indeed, from the monotonicity of the spatial FP,

. , we obtain

and furthermore is bounded away from one by a constant

which depends only on , . Consequently,

can be

made arbitrarily small by increasing .

Putting everything together, we conclude that by choosing ,

sufficiently large,

can be made as small as desired.

is close to : From Theorem 65, we have

(47)

Let us now bound the distance

for

.

Since these elements are derived by DE we can use our bounds

on how the Wasserstein distance behaves under DE (cf. (viii),

Lemma 13) to conclude that

, where

. To obtain we have

used

for all

to get

. Continuing with above inequality, it is not hard to see that

we get

. This gives a bound of

From above arguments, we have

hence

Using the formula for given in Lemma 26 and properties (vii) and (ix) given in Lemma 13 we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Recall that

. Combining, we obtain

Further the BP GEXIT value for all channels between and

is lower bounded by

. To show this, we first note

that from conditions (iii) and (viii) in Definition 40 we satisfy

the hypotheses of Lemma 29. Hence, from Lemma 29 we have

. Also, from (45) we have

.

Then, for any

we have

(cf. Lemma 18). Thus, we conclude that

for any

. Denoting

we have

have a proper FP and

(because is by assumption

admissible in the sense of condition (iv) in Definition 40).

Hence, by applying (the Transition Length) Lemma 62 we con-

clude that the number of sections with Battacharyya parameter

bounded between and

is at most

, where

is the constant defined in Lemma 62. Since the

Battacharyya parameter of the constellation is

, we

have

This implies that

. Using property

(x) of (the Wasserstein metric) Lemma 13, we conclude that for

all

,

.

Constellation is not too small “on the right”: Let be as

defined previously. Again, since the Battacharyya parameter of

the constellation is equal to

we have

To obtain (a) we use and form a FP pair. This implies that

, since

where on the right-hand side above we have replaced the sections with value greater than by the maximum value of 1.

This implies that

. Thus, if we define

as the number of sections with Battacharyya parameter at

least equal to

, we must have

. The last inequality follows

since condition (vii) in Definition 40 implies that

. This

implies that for the BP GEXIT integral we obtain

where we used

to obtain the above expression.

It remains to show the existence of the proper FP itself, with

Since and are both greater than , from Lemma 26 we Battacharyya parameter of the constellation equal to

.

have

We use the Schauder FP theorem in a strong form recently

proved by Cauty [119]: this theorem states that every contin-

uous map from a convex compact subset of a topological

where the last equality follows since 29).
Putting everything together we obtain

(cf. Lemma

vector space to itself has a FP. Recall that a topological vector space is a vector space
over a topological field (most often the real or complex numbers with their standard topologies) which is endowed with a

topology such that vector addition

and scalar mul-

tiplication

are continuous functions.

Let

(where denotes the norm). Note

that is a real normed vector space and hence a topological

vector space. Let denote the space of probability measures on

APPENDIX K EXISTENCE OF FP—THEOREM 48

endowed with the Wasserstein metric. Note that

,

where we represent elements of by their cumulative distribu-

tion functions. Note that the topology on induced by coin-

Proof: Before proceeding to the main part of the proof, cides with our choice (cf. second alternative definition in part (i)

let us show that if we assume that there exists a proper FP on of Lemma 13). Also, on the topology induced by the Wasser-

, with forced boundary condition on the right and

stein metric is equivalent to the weak topology. Since

is a

on the left

and with Battacharyya parameter of the complete separable metric space, so is , see [104, Th. 6.18].

constellation (cf. Definition 37) equal to

, then the de- Since

is compact, so is , see [104, Remark 6.19].

sired properties (i) and (ii) mentioned in the statement of the A Cartesian product of a family of topological vector spaces,

theorem follow.

when endowed with the product topology, is a topological vector

Constellation is close to

“on the left”: Let be the space. Hence,

, endowed with the product topology, is a

largest integer so that for all

,

. We topological vector space.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7807

Let be the subset

Discussion: As we discussed above, we think of the elements

of as cumulative distribution functions. In particular, these are

the cdfs in the so-called domain. In the sequel, rather than

only referring to cdfs it will often be more convenient to write

down the distributions or distributions , directly.

is nonempty: Setting all elements of equal to

gives an element in this

space.

is convex: Let

with -distributions given by

and , respectively. Let

for some

. Since

is a linear operator, we see that

Also, using (2), we see that

for all

.

Hence,

.

is closed: Consider a sequence

of elements of

and assume that this sequence converges in the Wasserstein

metric to a limit, call it

. We need to show that

,

i.e., we claim that is closed. In this respect, recall from our dis-

cussion above that

and that on

the topology

induced by the Wasserstein metric is the weak topology.

From [46, Lemma 4.25], we know that each component of

is a symmetric distribution. It therefore remains to

shows that i)

, and ii)

for all

. Both claims follow from the fact

that we can encode the above properties in terms of continuous

functions and that continuous functions preserve the properties

under limits.

Let us show this in detail. We begin with (i). Consider the

sequence

. We have

By assumption, the sequence

converges in the sense of

the Wasserstein metric. Therefore, from property (iii) of Lemma

13, for all

,

for

all

such that

is continuous at (in other words,

weak convergence is equal to convergence in distribution). This

implies that for all

so that from (48) we conclude that

is compact: Note that is a closed subset of

, which

is compact since it is the product of compact spaces. Hence,

is compact as well.

Recall that we want to apply the Schauder FP theorem in

order to show the existence of a FP of DE. So let us define an

appropriate map. Unfortunately, we cannot simple use the DE

equations as they are. To see why, note that there can be ele-

ments in so that after one round of DE (without the channel)

the entropy of the constellation has decreased. In this case, we

cannot hope to find a channel to bring the entropy back to its

required value. We therefore have to define the map in a more

careful way.

Definition of Map : In order to show (via Schauder’s

FP theorem) that contains a FP of DE we need to exhibit

a continuous map which maps into itself. Our first step is

to define a map, call it

, which “approximates” the DE

equation and is well suited for applying the FP theorem. The

final step in our proof is then to show that the FP of the map

is in fact a FP of DE itself.

The map

is constructed as follows. For

, let

be the map

where Define

for

, and where

as

for .

Now note that

is a bounded and continuous func-

tion on

. Therefore, (weak) convergence of

s.t.

to

implies (weak) convergence of

to

.

otherwise.

Let us show (ii). From (2),

for all

is equivalent to . We have

In other words, if

is “too large,” upgrade it by an appro-

priate channel . If, on the other hand,

is “too small”

then we take a convex combination with . In the preceding

expressions, terms like

denote componentwise prod-

ucts, i.e., the result is a vector of densities, where the th com-

ponent is the result of multiplying the th component of

with the scalar

. Further, is a shorthand for

.

(48)

It remains to specify the components of

. Note that

. Further, we require that its components

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7808

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

are increasing and that they are all either 0 or 1, except pos-

sibly one, i.e.,

has the form

,

where

, and

. This defines the vector

uniquely. Pictorially, we can think of this map in the following

way. We start at component

. We take an increasing

convex combination with until the overall Battacharyya con-

stant is equal to

. If this is not sufficient, then we set

and repeat this procedure with component

, and so on. To apply Schauder’s theorem, we need

to show that the map is well defined and continuous.

Map

is well defined: First consider the case

. In this case

. Since

the Battacharyya parameter is a strictly increasing and contin-

uous function of the channel,14 there exists a unique

such that

. Note also that

is mono-

tone (spatially) since is monotonic (as a function of its

arguments) and is monotone. Consequently,

is monotone. Further, from the multiplicative property of

the Battacharyya parameter at the variable node, we get that

. It follows that in

this case

.

Consider next the case

. If we choose

then we get a Battacharyya parameter of 1. Further, the

increase in the Battacharyya parameter is continuous. Hence,

there exists an so that the resulting constellation has Bat-

tacharyya constant equal to

. Also, by construction the

resulting constellation is monotone. This shows that also in this

case

. In both the cases above, the map maintains the

symmetric nature of the -distributions.

We summarize, maps into itself. Note that in the defi-

nition of the map , the two intervals of definition consists of

composition of continuous maps. Hence, within each interval

the map is continuous. Most of the work is required to show

that the map is continuous near the boundary of the intervals.

In the rest of the proof, we will use the notation

to denote the Wasserstein distance between

two constellations and .

Continuity of Map : We will show that for every

and for any

, there exists a

such that if

and

, then

. Note that if

then

i)

,

;

ii)

,

;

iii)

if

and

.15

Assertion (i) is equivalent to Lemma 33 since if

then a fortiori

,

. Assertion (ii) follows from assertion

(i) by applying property (ix) of Lemma 13. To see assertion (iii), we write

The last inequality follows from assertion (ii) and

. Recall that the channel

family is ordered by degradation. We can therefore apply

property (ii) of Lemma 14 to prove our claim.

Choosing as a function of and using assertion (ii) above,

we can therefore assume that either

and

or

and

. In the first case,

Let us now focus on the second case. Let denote the

largest integer in

such that

is nonzero. Clearly,

if

, then

, else we set

.

Similarly, let be the corresponding index in

. Let us

denote

and

. Note that

,

w.l.o.g. we can assume that

. With this, we can upper

bound

by

(49)

Above we have used that for

we have

. In the case

, the terms in the interval

collapse to

.

Let us first consider the case when

. Note that

. This implies that if we

replace the Wasserstein distance by the Battacharyya parameter

in (49) the expression evaluates to 0. Then, writing the term

as

we obtain

14That the Battacharyya parameter is continuously followed since the channel family is smooth. Further, since the Battacharyya kernel is strictly concave and the channel family is ordered by degradation, the Battacharyya parameter is strictly increasing.

15We abuse notation slightly to denote the channel associated with

by

, respectively, rather than denoting them by the standard parameter-

ization .

where above we use

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(50)

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7809

We now continue with (49). We use Lemma 13 and (50) to get the upper bound

Consider hence the case

. We will

, (x) of show that it leads to a contradiction. Recall that in this case

(51)

Finally, using assertions (i) and (ii) above we get that

and that

for

and

for

.

Given a density we say that it has a “BEC component”

of if contains a delta at 0 of “weight” (i.e., contains a

mass of at ). In the sequel, we will think of as the erasure

probability of a binary erasure channel.

Let be the vector of BEC components corresponding to

. Since

we know that has some

nontrivial components in

, and by definition of the right

boundary,

for

. Also,

for

. We

claim that for

,

For the case when

, we have

(52)
Let us prove this claim immediately. Extract the BEC component from both the left hand as well as the right-hand side of (51). This gives

(53)

W.l.o.g. we can assume

. This implies

. Hence, from (ii) of Lemma 14 we can bound

the second Wasserstein distance above by the difference of the

Battacharyya parameters. Further,

The first Battacharyya difference on the right-hand side can be

bounded by

. For the second dif-

ference, we again use the fact that

to obtain

Combining everything with the assertions (i) and (ii), in this case we obtain

where we wrote as a shorthand for

and

de-

notes the weight at . To see the second step, i.e., to see that

, let denote the

density at the output of the check nodes when the input is .

Let denote the (BEC) density at the output of the check nodes

when the input is . Some thought shows that is also the BEC

component of . In other words, at check nodes the BEC

component evolves according to DE—we get an erasure at the

output of a check node if and only if at least one of the incoming

messages is an erasure. At variable nodes we only get a bound.

If all inputs to a variable node are erasures then the output is also

an erasure, but this is only a sufficient condition. Thus, (53) is

proved. If

, then

and (52) is true. If

, then

, where the second step

follows from (53).

Before we delve into the details of the final steps of this proof

let us outline the basic idea. If (53) was an equality then we

would have created a FP for

which is “small” on the

left. Such a FP cannot exist. The final idea is to show that even

though (53) is an inequality, it is easy to derive from this initial

constellation a constellation which indeed is a FP, leading to the

desired contradiction.

Extend the constellation by

sections on the right, with values equal to 1, and let denote

this constellation. We claim that has at least

Existence of FP of

via Schauder: We can invoke

Schauder’s FP theorem to conclude that

has a FP in ,

call it .

Existence of FP of DE

: Let us show that as a conse- sections on the left with Battacharyya value between 0 and

quence, DE itself has a FP

with the desired proper- where

is the constant of Lemma 62 and only depends

ties.

on the dd.

If

, then

To prove this claim, we consider our original (before we

with

. Hence indeed,

is a FP of DE. extracted the BEC components) which was the FP obtained by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7810

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Schauder’s theorem. We claim that has at least segments

. Let us prove the claim that is increasing. Indeed,

on the left with Battacharyya constant at most , where

for

,

, for

,

(since

is an FP in that region) and for

,

(since is an FP with free

boundary condition and hence replacing the boundary with 1

can only increase the value under DE). Again, from the mono-

tonicity of DE we have that in . Since is increasing

Let us explain each of the terms on the right. There are

segments to start with, which explains (a). At most

sections on the right can have a Battacharyya value of

or larger (since

). This accounts for the (b)

and proper we conclude that , since
under iterations of DE. Since

exists and is proper. Further, and the ordering is preserved
, we claim that

term. Finally, all sections , with

, must

be sections where fulfills the actual FP equations, i.e., these

cannot be sections where the map

“pushes” the constel-

lation up to . More precisely, we must have

for

. Indeed, from construction, starting

from the rightmost section, each section is increased all the way

up to before we move on to the next section on the left.

Since the constellation has Battacharyya parameter equal

there must exists at least

sec-

tions, from the right, with Battacharyya parameter greater than

. Indeed, this can be obtained by considering the sections

of and then using

. More precisely,

since the sections

of form a proper FP, if we let

denote the number of sections with Battacharyya parameter less

than , then we get

. Since

to

we conclude that for

we get

and

we must have

, which is a true FP of DE for combining with the transition length Lemma 62, we get the ex-

the channel . Therefore, for these sections we can apply (the pression for . Further, from the previous discussion, there are

Transition Length) Lemma 62 and conclude that there are at at least values below on the left. Thus, it is not hard to see

most

such sections which have Battacharyya value that we can simultaneously choose

,,

,

,

between and

. This is the term (c).

such that

The claim now follows since the BEC component is

upper bounded by the corresponding Battacharyya parameter,

.

Now consider a further constellation on

. We

set

for all

. For

we set

to the FP of forward DE according to Lemma 22 in [54], where We summarize,

is a proper one sided FP of DE for

the length of the constellation is taken to be

,

, with forced boundary condition and

and

and

. More precisely, Lemma 22 in [54] says

that if we run forward DE, with free boundary condition, when

transmitting over the BEC with

and

coupled ensemble, then for large enough length, the one-sided

FP of forward DE must be proper (nontrivial and increasing) and

we can lower bound the Battacharyya parameter of the resulting

FP. By our choice of this FP (on

) has Battacharyya

parameter at least

. Now since

we

have

. This implies that

. But we know from Theorem 47 that

such a FP, , must have a channel value close to

,

the area threshold of

-regular ensemble when transmit-

ting over BEC. More precisely, applying Theorem 47 we con-

clude that the entropy of the channel of

must be less than

. Since

16

we conclude that by choosing small enough and , , large

enough,

can be made arbitrarily small and

hence the channel of

is strictly less than 1, leading to a

. Thus

. Clearly,

(componentwise).

Apply forward DE, when transmitting through BEC with

, to both constellations with a forced boundary condi-

contradiction since we started with

. This contradiction

tells us that we cannot have

when we

apply the Schauder theorem. Hence, the FP must be a true FP

of DE.

tion. More precisely, we have for all

and

.

We keep

, and

fixed, for all

and

and for

both the constellations have sections

fixed to

. Recall that is equal to on

and

equal to 1 for the sections

. Because of (52), we have

. From the monotonicity of the DE operator, we

conclude that the sequence is decreasing and since it is

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank H. Hassani, S. Korada, N. Macris, C. Méasson, and A. Montanari for interesting discussions on this topic and H. Hassani for his feedback on an early draft. S. Kudekar would like to thank M. Chertkov, C. Méasson, J. Johnson, R. Pfitzner, and V. Chandrasekaran for their encouragement and B. Ecke for hosting him in the Center for

bounded from below it must converge. Call this limit . We claim that the sequence is increasing in and since it is bounded from above it must converge. Call this limit

16For transmission over the BEC using a

-regular ensemble, from

Theorem 3.120 in [46] we know that

. Further the

MAP threshold is upper bounded by the Shannon threshold, .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7811

Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL),
where most of his work was done. S. Kudekar would like to
acknowledge his grandfather, S. Rajguru, who believed in the
pursuit of knowledge above everything else.
REFERENCES
[1] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 27, pp. 379–423, Jul./Oct. 1948.
[2] R. W. Hamming, “Error detecting and error correcting codes,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 147–160, 1950.
[3] M. J. E. Golay, “Notes on digital coding,” Proc. IRE, vol. 37, pp. 657–657, Jun. 1949.
[4] G. Forney and D. Costello, “Channel coding: The road to channel capacity,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 95, no. 6, pp. 1150–1177, Jun. 2007.
[5] A. Hocquenghem, “Codes correcteurs d’erreurs,” Chiffres, vol. 2, pp. 147–156, 1959.
[6] R. C. Bose and D. K. Ray-Chaudhuri, “On a class of error-correcting binary group codes,” Inf. Control, vol. 3, pp. 68–79, Mar. 1960.
[7] I. S. Reed and G. Solomon, “Polynomial codes over certain finite fields,” SIAM J., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 300–304, Jun. 1960.
[8] E. R. Berlekamp, Algebraic Coding Theory. Walnut Creek, CA, USA: Aegean Park Press, 1984.
[9] J. Massey, “Shift-register synthesis and BCH decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 122–127, Jan. 1969.
[10] M. Sudan, “Decoding Reed-Solomon codes beyond the error-correction diameter,” presented at the Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, USA, 1997.
[11] V. Guruswami and M. Sudan, “Improved decoding of Reed-Solomon and algebraic-geometry codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 1757–1767, Sep. 1999.
[12] R. Kötter and A. Vardy, “Algebraic soft-decision decoding of Reed-Solomon codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 2809–2825, Nov. 2003.
[13] P. Elias, “Coding for noisy channels,” IRE Int. Convent. Record, pp. 37–46, Mar. 1955.
[14] J. M. Wozencraft, Sequential decoding for reliable communication Research Lab. Electron, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1957, Tech. Rep. 325.
[15] A. J. Viterbi, “Error bounds of convolutional codes and an asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 260–269, Apr. 1967.
[16] G. D. Forney, Jr., Review of random tree codes NASA Ames Res. Centre, , Contract NAS2-3637, NASA CR73176, Dec. 1967.
[17] J. K. Omura, “On the Viterbi decoding algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-15, no. 1, pp. 177–179, Jan. 1969.
[18] J. A. Heller, Short constraint length convolutional codes Jet Propulsion Lab., California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA, Space Prog. Summary 37-54, 1968.
[19] J. A. Heller, Improved performance of short constraint length convolutional codes Jet Propulsion Lab., California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA, Space Prog. Summary 37-56, 1969.
[20] R. de Buda, “The upper error bound of a new near-optimal code,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-21, no. 4, pp. 441–445, Jul. 1975.
[21] R. de Buda, “Some optimal codes have structure,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 893–899, Aug. 1989.
[22] H. A. Loeliger, “Averaging bounds for lattice and linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1767–1773, Nov. 1997.
[23] R. Urbanke and B. Rimoldi, “Lattice codes can achieve capacity on the AWGN channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 273–278, Jan. 1998.
[24] U. Erez and R. Zamir, “Achieving 1/2 log(1+snr) on the AWGN channel with lattice encoding and decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2293–2314, Oct. 2004.
[25] G. Ungerboeck, “Channel coding with multilevel/phase signals,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-28, no. 1, pp. 55–67, Jan. 1982.
[26] G. Ungerboeck, “Trellis-coded modulation with redundant signal sets—Part I: Introduction,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. CM-25, no. 2, pp. 5–11, Feb. 1987.
[27] G. Ungerboeck, “Trellis-coded modulation with redundant signal sets—Part II: State of the art,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. CM-25, no. 2, pp. 12–21, Feb. 1987.
[28] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Coset codes—Part I: Introduction and geometrical classification,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1123–1151, Sep. 1988.

[29] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Coset codes—Part I: Introduction and geometrical classification,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1152–1187,
Sep. 1988. [30] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit
error-correcting coding and decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun., Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070. [31] D. A. Spielman, “Linear-time encodeable and decodable error-cor-
recting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1723–1731,
Nov. 1996. [32] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[33] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[34] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[35] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999 [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/abstracts/mncN.html
[36] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, C. Boyd, Ed., “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” in Proc. Cryptography Coding, Berlin, Ger-
many, 1995, pp. 100–111. [37] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA,
USA: MIT Press, 1963. [38] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. disserta-
tion, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden, 1996. [39] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and
the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001. [40] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001. [41] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Analysis of low density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” in Proc. 30th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput., 1998, pp. 249–258. [42] S.-Y. Chung, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001. [43] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001. [44] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput., 1997, pp. 150–159. [45] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001. [46] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008. [47] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. J. McEliece, “Coding theorems for turbolike codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Sep. 1998, pp. 201–210. [48] J. Thorpe, K. Andrews, and S. Dolinar, “Methodologies for designing LDPC codes using protographs and circulants,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, USA, Jun. 2004, pp. 238–238. [49] D. Divsalar, C. R. Jones, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Protograph based LDPC codes with minimum distance linearly growing with block size,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 2005, pp. 1152–1156. [50] E. Arıkan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009. [51] S. Hassani, K. Alishahi, and R. Urbanke, “On the scaling of polar codes—Part II: The behavior of un-polarized channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2010, pp. 879–883. [52] S. Korada, A. Montanari, E. Telatar, and R. Urbanke, “An empirical
scaling law for polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2010, pp. 884–888. [53] A. Goli, S. Hassani, and R. Urbanke, “Universal bounds on the scaling
behavior of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2012, pp. 1957–1961. [54] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via
spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7812

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

[55] A. J. Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 2181–2190, Sep. 1999. [56] S. Kudekar and H. D. Pfister, “The effect of spatial coupling on com-
pressive sensing,” presented at the Allerton Conf. Commun., Control,
Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, 2010. [57] Y. Sato, K. Kasai, and K. Sakaniwa, “Compressed sensing via node-
based verification recovery with band sparse matrices,” presented at the 34th Symp. Inf. Theory Applications, Ousyuku, Iwate, Japan, 2011. [58] F. Krzakala, M. Mézard, F. Sausset, Y. F. Sun, and L. Zdeborová, “Statistical-physics-based reconstruction in compressed sensing,” Phys. Rev. X, vol. 2, p. 021005, May 2012 [Online]. Available: http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.2.021005 [59] D. Donoho, A. Javanmard, and A. Montanari, “Information-theoretically optimal compressed sensing via spatial coupling and approximate message passing,” CoRR vol. abs/1112.0708, 2011. [60] K. Engdahl and K. S. Zigangirov, “On the theory of low density convolutional codes I,” Probl. Peredachi Inf., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 295–310, 1999. [61] K. Engdahl, M. Lentmaier, and K. S. Zigangirov, “On the theory of low-density convolutional codes,” in Proc. 13th Int. Symp. Appl. Algebra, Algorithm Error-Correcting Codes, London, U.K., 1999, pp. 77–86. [62] M. Lentmaier, D. V. Truhachev, and K. S. Zigangirov, “To the theory of low-density convolutional codes—Part II,” Probl. Inf. Transmiss., no. 4, pp. 288–306, 2001. [63] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridhara, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr. , “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004. [64] A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. S. Zigangirov, “Convergence analysis of a class of LDPC convolutional codes for the erasure channel,” presented at the Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2004. [65] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010. [66] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Terminated LDPC convolutional codes with thresholds close to capacity,” CoRR vol. abs/cs/0508030, 2005. [67] M. Lentmaier and G. P. Fettweis, “On the thresholds of generalized LDPC convolutional codes based on protographs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Austin, TX, USA, Jun. 2010, pp. 709–713. [68] D. G. M. Mitchell, A. E. Pusane, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Asymptotically good LDPC convolutional codes based on protographs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Toronto, CA, USA, Jul. 2008, pp. 1030–1034. [69] M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Approaching capacity with asymptotically regular LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 13, 2009, pp. 173–177. [70] A. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. Vontobel, and J. D. J. Costello, “Deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from LDPC block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2577–2598, Feb. 2011. [71] R. Smarandache, A. Pusane, P. Vontobel, and J. D. J. Costello, “Pseudo-codewords in LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, USA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1364–1368. [72] R. Smarandache, A. Pusane, P. Vontobel, and J. D. J. Costello, “Pseudocodeword performance analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2577–2598, Jun. 2009. [73] M. Papaleo, A. Iyengar, P. Siegel, J. Wolf, and G. Corazza, “Windowed erasure decoding of LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Cairo, Egypt, Jan. 2010, pp. 78–82. [74] A. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. Siegel, J. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G.
Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2011.
[75] A. Iyengar, P. Siegel, R. Urbanke, and J. Wolf, “Windowed decoding of spatially coupled codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Aug. 2011, pp. 2552–2556.
[76] P. Olmos and R. Urbanke, “Scaling behavior of convolutional LDPC ensembles over the BEC,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Aug. 2011, pp. 1816–1820.
[77] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and C. Jones, “Constructions of protograph LDPC codes with linear minimum distance,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, USA, Jul. 2006.
[78] C. Méasson, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “The generalized area theorem and some of its consequences,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 4793–4821, Nov. 2009.

[79] S. Kudekar, C. Measson, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation on BMS channels via spatial coupling,” presented at the Int.
Conf. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Sep. 2010. [80] M. Lentmaier, D. G. M. Mitchell, G. P. Fettweis, and D. J. Costello,
Jr., “Asymptotically good LDPC convolutional codes with AWGN
channel thresholds close to the Shannon limit,” in Proc. Sixth Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Brest, France, Sep. 2010. [81] K. Kasai and K. Sakaniwa, “Spatially-coupled MacKay-Neal codes and Hsu-Anastasopoulos codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Aug. 2011, pp. 747–751. [82] V. Aref and R. Urbanke, “Universal rateless codes from coupled LT codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Oct. 2011, pp. 277–281. [83] S. Kudekar and K. Kasai, “Threshold saturation on channels with memory via spatial coupling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory,
Aug. 2011, pp. 2562–2566. [84] S. Kudekar and K. Kasai, “Spatially coupled codes over the multiple
access channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Aug. 2011, pp.
2816–2820. [85] K. Takeuchi, T. Tanaka, and T. Kawabata, “Improvement of BP-based
CDMA multiuser detection by spatial coupling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Aug. 2011, pp. 1489–1493. [86] H. Uchikawa, K. Kasai, and K. Sakaniwa, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes for decode-and-forward in erasure relay channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Aug. 2011, pp. 1474–1478. [87] A. Yedla, H. Pfister, and K. Narayanan, “Universality for the noisy Slepian-Wolf problem via spatial coupling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Aug. 2011, pp. 2567–2571. [88] V. Rathi, R. Urbanke, M. Andersson, and M. Skoglund, “Rateequivocation optimal spatially coupled LDPC codes for the BEC wiretap channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 5, 2011, pp. 2393–2397. [89] H. Uchikawa, B. Kurkoski, K. Kasai, and K. Sakaniwa, “Threshold improvement of low-density lattice codes via spatial coupling,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput., Netw. Commun., 2, 2012, pp. 1036–1040. [90] A. Yedla, P. Nguyen, H. Pfister, and K. Narayanan, “Universal codes for the Gaussian MAC via spatial coupling,” in Proc. 49th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Sep. 2011, pp. 1801–1808. [91] P. Nguyen, A. Yedla, H. Pfister, and K. Narayanan, “Threshold saturation of spatially-coupled codes on intersymbol-interference channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2012, pp. 2181–2186. [92] S. H. Hassani, N. Macris, and R. Urbanke, “Coupled graphical models and their thresholds,” presented at the IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Dublin, Ireland, Sep. 2010. [93] S. H. Hassani, N. Macris, and R. Urbanke, “Thresholds saturation in spatially coupled constraint satisfaction problems,” Dec. 2011 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1112.6320 [94] S. H. Hassani, N. Macris, and R. Urbanke, “Chains of mean-field models,” J. Statist. Mech.: Theory Exp., vol. 2012, no. 02, p. P02011, 2012 [Online]. Available: http://stacks.iop.org/1742-5468/2012/i=02/ a=P02011 [95] K. Takeuchi, T. Tanaka, and T. Kawabata, “A phenomenological study on threshold improvement via spatial coupling,” IEICE Trans. Fund. Electron., Commun. Comput. Sci., vol. E95, pp. 974–977, 2012. [96] A. Giurgiu, N. Macris, and R. Urbanke, “How to prove the Maxwell conjecture via spatial coupling: A proof of concept,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2012, pp. 458–462. [97] B. Bollobás, Random Graphs. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2001. [98] G. Hanoch and H. Levy, “The efficiency analysis of choices involving risk,” Rev. Econ. Stud., vol. 36, pp. 335–346, 1969. [99] S. Huettinger and J. B. Huber, “Design of “multiple-turbo codes” with transfer characteristics of component codes,” presented at the Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., Princeton, NJ, USA, Mar. 2002. [100] S. Huettinger and J. B. Huber, “Information processing and combining in channel coding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Turbo Codes Relat. Top., Brest,
France, Sep. 2003, pp. 95–102. [101] I. Land, P. Hoeher, S. Huettinger, and J. B. Huber, “Bounds on infor-
mation combining,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Turbo Codes Relat. Top., Brest,
France, Sep. 2003, pp. 39–42. [102] I. Sutskover, S. Shamai, and J. Ziv, “Extremes of information com-
bining,” presented at the Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput.,
Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003. [103] I. Sutskover, S. Shamai, and J. Ziv, “Extremes of information com-
bining,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1313–1325, Apr.
2005. [104] C. Villani, Optimal Transport, Old and New. New York, NY, USA:
Springer-Verlag, 2009, vol. 338.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: SPATIALLY COUPLED ENSEMBLES UNIVERSALLY ACHIEVE CAPACITY UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION

7813

[105] V. M. Zolotarev, Modern Theory of Summation of Random Variables. Utrecht, The Netherlands: VSP, 1997.
[106] S. t. Brink, “Designing iterative decoding schemes with the extrinsic information transfer chart,” AEU Int. J. Electron. Commun., vol. 54, pp. 389–398, Dec. 2000.
[107] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. T. Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel property,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.
[108] C. Méasson, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “Maxwell construction: The hidden bridge between maximum-likelihood and iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5277–5307, Dec. 2008.
[109] M. B. Tavares, K. S. Zigangirov, and G. P. Fettweis, “Tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2007, pp. 2341–2345.
[110] A. K. Khandekar, “Graph-based codes and iterative decoding,” Ph.D. dissertation, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA, 2002.
[111] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Expander graph arguments for message-passing algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 782–790, Feb. 2001.
[112] M. Lentmaier, D. Truhachev, K. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “An analysis of the block error probability performance of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3834–3855, Nov. 2005.
[113] A. Yedla, Y.-Y. Jian, P. S. Nguyen, and H. D. Pfister, “A simple proof of threshold saturation for coupled scalar recursions,” CoRR vol. abs/ 1204.5703, 2012.
[114] A. Yedla, Y.-Y. Jian, P. S. Nguyen, and H. D. Pfister, “A simple proof of threshold saturation for coupled vector recursions,” CoRR vol. abs/ 1208.4080, 2012.
[115] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Wave-like solutions of general one-dimensional spatially coupled systems,” CoRR vol. abs/ 1208.5273, 2012.
[116] G. Wiechman and I. Sason, “Parity-check density versus performance of binary linear block codes: New bounds and applications,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 550–579, Feb. 2007.
[117] S. S. Vallender, “Calculation of the Wasserstein distance between probability distributions on the line,” Theor. Probability Appl., vol. 18, pp. 784–786, 1973.
[118] L. Boczkowski, “Extended extremes of information combining,” CoRR vol. abs/1201.6046, 2012.
[119] R. Cauty, “Solution du problème de point fixe de Schauder,” Fundam. Math., no. 170, pp. 231–246, 2001.

Shrinivas Kudekar obtained his bachelor in electrical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, India in 2003. He received his Masters and Ph.D. degrees from the School of Computer and Communication Sciences from EPFL, Switzerland in 2009. After spending a year and half as a postdoctoral research associate at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, he joined the systems group at Qualcomm Research in New Jersey, US where he is currently working on next-generation wireless communication technologies. He is a co-recipient of the 2013 IEEE Information Theory Society Best Paper Award. His research interests include graphical models and their analysis, wireless communications and coding theory.
Tom Richardson (S’01–SM’02–F’07) is Vice President of Engineering and the Head of Systems Group at Qualcomm’s New Jersey Research Center. He came to Qualcomm through its acquisition of Flarion Technologies, a wireless startup spun out of Bell Labs in 2000, where he was Vice President and Chief Scientist. He was awarded his Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering in 1990 from MIT, after which he worked for 10 years at the Bell Labs’ Mathematical Sciences Research Center. He is co-author, with Ruediger Urbanke, of “Modern Coding Theory” a book on iterative coding. He is a co-recipient of the 2002 and 2013 Information Theory Society Best Paper Award and the 2011 IEEE Kobayashi award. He is an IEEE fellow and a member of National Academy of Engineering.
Ruediger L. Urbanke obtained a Dipl. Ing. degree from the Vienna University of Technology, Austria in 1990 and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in Electrical Engineering from Washington University in St. Louis, MO, in 1992 and 1995, respectively. From 1995 to 1999, he held a position at the Mathematics of Communications Department at Bell Labs. Since November 1999, he has been a faculty member at the School of Computer & Communication Sciences (I&C) of EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. His research focuses on the analysis and design of iterative coding schemes, and more broadly on the analysis of graphical models and the application of methods from statistical physics to problems in communications. From 2000–2004 he was an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY and he is currently a Distinguished Lecturer of the Information Theory Society. He is a recipient of a Fulbright Scholarship, and a co-recipient of the 2002 and 2013 IEEE Information Theory Society Paper Award and the 2011 Koji Kobayashi Award “for developing the theory and practice of transmitting data reliably at rates approaching channel capacity.” He is also a co-author of the book Modern Coding Theory published by Cambridge University Press.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:14:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

