4816

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

A Revolving Iterative Algorithm for Decoding Algebraic Cyclic and Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes
Keke Liu, Student Member, IEEE, Shu Lin, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Cyclic and quasi-cyclic algebraic LDPC codes constructed based on finite fields, finite geometries, and combinatorial designs can achieve excellent performance in terms of error rate, error floor and rate of decoding convergence with iterative decoding. However, the relatively high density of the parity-check matrix of an algebraic cyclic or quasi-cyclic LDPC code makes the hardware implementation complexity of the decoder quite large, which may be a critical issue in practical applications. This paper presents an effective reduced-complexity algorithm for decoding algebraic cyclic and quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on the block cyclic structure and cyclic grouping of the rows of their parity-check matrices. The decoding of a code is carried out based on a single small submatrix of the parity-check matrix of the code in a revolving manner. The proposed decoding algorithm significantly reduces the hardware implementation complexity and the size of memory required to store information.
Index Terms—Cyclic code, quasi-cyclic code, LDPC code, block cyclic structure, revolving iterative decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
E VER since their rediscovery in the late 1990’s, LDPC codes [1] have become a research focus and a great deal of research effort has been expended in design, construction, decoding, structural analysis and practical applications of these codes. Many LDPC codes have been adopted as the standard codes for various next generations of communication systems. Applications of these codes to data storage systems are now being seriously investigated.
There are several categories of constructions of LDPC codes. One such construction is the algebraic construction using mathematical tools, such as finite geometries, finite fields and combinatorial designs [2]-[15]. Algebraic construction, in general, results in cyclic or quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes. Encoding of cyclic and QC-LDPC codes can be easily implemented with simple registers [14], [15]. Extensive studies and simulation results show that algebraic cyclic and QC-LDPC codes can achieve excellent overall performance in terms of error rate, error floor and rate of decoding convergence with iterative decoding (i.e., the average number of decoding iterations required for iterative decoding to converge).
Manuscript received October 18, 2012; revised March 22 and June 21, 2013. The editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was A. Ramamoorthy.
This research was supported by NSF under the Grant CCF-1015548 and gift grants from LSI and SanDisk. The material in this paper was presented in part at the Information Theory and Applications Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2013, and at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Istanbul, Turkey, Jul. 2013.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA (e-mail: {kkeliu, shulin, ghaffar}@ucdavis.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2013.091213.120791

Although algebraic cyclic and QC-LDPC codes enjoy the merits mentioned above, they do have a serious disadvantage, namely, the large hardware decoder implementation complexity in terms of the number of message processing units, the number of wires required to connect the message processing units and the size of memory required for storing messages. This large decoder hardware implementation complexity is mainly caused by the relatively high density and a large number of redundant rows in the parity-check matrix of an algebraic cyclic or a QC-LDPC code. The large decoder implementation complexity is a critical issue in practical applications. In this paper, we address this critical issue.
Let GF(q) be a field with q elements where q is a power of a prime. A q-ary LDPC code is given by the null space of a sparse parity-check matrix H over GF(q). If H is a single sparse circulant or a column of sparse circulants over GF(q), the null space of H gives a q-ary cyclic LDPC code. If H is an array of sparse circulants over GF(q) of the same size, its null space gives a QC-LDPC code. If H has constant column and row weights, its null space gives a regular q-ary LDPC code, otherwise its null space gives an irregular q-ary LDPC code. If q = 2, an LDPC code is said to be binary.
In this paper, we present an effective reduced-complexity algorithm for decoding algebraic cyclic and QC-LDPC codes, binary and non-binary. This decoding algorithm is devised based on the block cyclic structure and a cyclic grouping of the rows of the parity-check matrix H of a cyclic or a QCLDPC code. The decoding of a code is carried out based on a single small submatrix of the parity-check matrix of the code in a revolving manner. The proposed decoding algorithm significantly reduces the hardware implementation complexity and the size of memory required to store information. Furthermore, if an algorithm to update the reliabilities of the decoded symbols is properly chosen, the computational complexity can be reduced as well. Since the decoding revolves around a single submatrix of the parity-check matrix of a code, we referred to the decoding as a revolving iterative decoding (RID).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present a general RID-algorithm (RIDA) for decoding cyclic LDPC codes and analyze the complexity of an RIDdecoder. In Section III, a scaled min-sum (MS) algorithm (MSA) [15], [16] is incorporated into the RID to update the reliabilities of the decoded symbols at each decoding iteration. This combination of the RID and the MSA is called the revolving MS (RMS)-algorithm (RMSA). The hardware and computational complexities of the RMSA are analyzed. Section IV presents a method to put the parity-check matrix

0090-6778/13$31.00 c 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:11:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: A REVOLVING ITERATIVE ALGORITHM FOR DECODING ALGEBRAIC CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

4817

of a binary QC-LDPC code, an array of circulants, into a different array with block cyclic structure for decoding using the general RIDA and the RMSA presented in Sections II and III. In addition, in Sections III and IV, comparisons of special cases of the RIDA with other well known decoding schemes, such as the layered and the staggered decoding schemes [17]-[24], are made in terms of decoding complexity and performance. Section V is concerned with the RID for non-binary QC-LDPC codes. The min-max algorithm (MMA) [25] is incorporated into the RID to update the reliability information at each decoding iteration. Section VI concludes the paper with some remarks.

its disadvantages. It increases the density of the parity-check matrix and the number of rows of the parity-check matrix that the decoding is based on. As a result, its decoder requires a larger number of check-node (CN) processing units, a large number of wires to connect the CN processing units and the variable-node (VN) processing units for message exchanges, and more memory units for storing messages. Of course, it also increases the number of computations for decoding. The RIDA presented in this section is devised to not only mitigate these decoder complexity problems but also take full advantage of the row redundancy to maintain the good performance of an FG-LDPC code.

II. REVOLVING ITERATIVE DECODING OF BINARY CYCLIC B. Cyclic Grouping of the Rows of the Parity-Check Matrix

LDPC CODES

of a Cyclic LDPC Code

A. Preview of Algebraic Cyclic LDPC Codes

In this paper, we only consider cyclic LDPC codes for

Algebraic cyclic LDPC codes were introduced in 2001 [2]. These codes are constructed from finite geometries, such as Euclidean and projective geometries over finite fields. For each Euclidean or each projective geometry, a cyclic LDPC code can be constructed. The parity-check matrix H of an Euclidean geometry (EG)-LDPC code is constructed based on the lines not containing (or passing through) the origin of the geometry [2], [14], [15]. The parity-check matrix H is simply the incidence matrix of the lines not passing through the origin and the non-origin points of the geometry. For a projective geometry (PG)-LDPC code, its parity-check matrix is simply the incidence matrix of all the lines and all the points of the geometry [14], [15]. Cyclic EG- and PG-LDPC codes are referred to as finite geometry (FG)-LDPC codes. In a recent paper [12], the class of cyclic FG-LDPC codes was expanded into a much larger class of cyclic FG-LDPC codes. From a single finite geometry, a family of cyclic FG-LDPC codes can be constructed. This expanded class of FG-LDPC codes was proved to perform well with iterative decoding in terms of coding gain, error-floor and rate of decoding convergence.
Among the binary cyclic FG-LDPC codes, the codes constructed based on two-dimensional Euclidean or projective geometries form the most important subclass of cyclic FG-

which the parity-check matrix Hcyc of each code is a single circulant. For a circulant constructed from a finite geometry,

no two rows have more than one place where they both have 1-

components [2], [14]. Such structure is referred to as the rowcolumn (RC)-constraint which ensures that the Tanner graph

[27] of the circulant has a girth of at least 6 and the minimum

distance of the cyclic LDPC code given by the null space of

the circulant is at least equal to its column weight plus one

[2], [14].
Consider a cyclic LDPC code Ccyc given by the null space of an n × n circulant Hcyc with both column and row weight equal to γ. Let rank(M) denote the rank of a matrix M. Then, rank(Hcyc) ≤ n. Here we assume that rank(Hcyc) < n (true for cyclic FG-LDPC codes). Let h0, h1, ..., hn−1 denote the rows of Hcyc. Let l be a positive integer with 1 ≤ l ≤ n. For i ≥ 0, we form a sequence of submatrices of Hcyc, (Hi)i=0,1,..., each consisting of l consecutive rows of Hcyc (including l consecutive end around rows in case n is not
divisible by l, i.e., some rows, say x, at the bottom of the circulant and some rows, say l − x, at the top of the circulant),

where

Hi =

h(Til)mod n hT(il+1)mod n · · ·

h(Til+l−1)mod n

T
, (1)

LDPC codes. For each such cyclic FG-LDPC code, its parity- where ’a mod b’ denote the remainder of the division of a

check matrix is a single n×n circulant over GF(2). For a cyclic
EG-LDPC code constructed based on a two-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG(2,q) over GF(q), n = q2 − 1, while for a
cyclic PG-LDPC code constructed based on a two-dimensional projective geometry PG(2,q) over GF(q), n = q2 + q + 1. For q = 2s, the rank of an EG-circulant is 3s −1, while the rank of

by b. For i ≥ 0, Hi is an l × n submatrix of Hcyc. All the submatrices in the sequence (Hi)i=0,1,... have the same rank. If rank(H0) = rank(Hcyc) = r, then the null space of H0 (or Hi with i ≥ 0) gives the same code Ccyc as the entire parity-check matrix Hcyc. If l > r, then each submatrix Hi contains l − r redundant rows. The parameter l is called the

a PG-circulant is 3s + 1 [2], [14], [15]. Therefore, for a two- grouping size.

dimensional EG-LDPC code of length n = 4s − 1, its paritycheck matrix has 4s − 3s redundant (dependent) rows, and for a two-dimensional PG-LDPC code of length 4s + 2s + 1, its parity-check matrix has 4s − 3s + 2s redundant rows. For

To illustrate the cyclic grouping of the rows of Hcyc, we use a simple example for which n = 7 and Hcyc consists of 7 rows, denoted by h0, h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6. Suppose we choose grouping size l = 3. Then, the cyclic grouping of the

s > 3, the parity-check matrices of both types of cyclic FGLDPC codes have large row redundancies.
Large row redundancy of the parity-check matrix of an FGLDPC code not only helps to make the iterative decoding of the code converge fast but also pushes its error-floor down [2], [11], [12], [15], [26]. Large row redundancy of the paritycheck matrix of an FG-LDPC code has its merits but it also has

rows of Hcyc results in the following sequence of submatrices (Hi)i=0,1,..., where the first submatrix H0 consists of the first 3 rows h0, h1, h2 of Hcyc, the second submatrix H1 consists of the next 3 rows h3, h4, h5 of Hcyc, the third submatrix H2 consists of the 3 end-around rows h6, h0, h1 and the next submatrix H3 consists of the rows h2, h3, h4. Continuing the cyclic grouping of the rows of Hcyc in this manner, we find

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:11:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4818

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

that H6 consists of rows h4, h5, h6 and H7 = H0. Hence, the sequence (Hi)i=0,1,... consists of 7 different submatrices.
Based on the cyclic structure of Hcyc and the construction of the sequence (Hi)i=0,1,... of the submatrices of Hcyc, we readily see that, for i > 0, the submatrix Hi can be obtained from the first submatrix H0 by cyclically shifting all the rows of H0 to the right il positions. This structure is referred to as
the block cyclic structure. This block cyclic structure allows us
to decode the code Ccyc based on the submatrix H0 of Hcyc

with shift operations. For this reason, we refer to the decoding
process as a revolving iterative decoding (RID). In the case
for which rank(H0) = rank(Hcyc), we can compute the syndrome of the decoded word z at the end of each decoding
iteration based on H0 rather than Hcyc and check whether z · HT0 is equal to 0. Recall that any c = n/l consecutive submatrices in the sequence (Hi)i=0,1,2,... cover all the rows of Hcyc. This implies that c = n/l RID iterations based on H0 cover all the message exchanges between all the CN and

alone in a revolving manner. Furthermore, we can also see all the VN processing units.

that any c = n/l consecutive submatrices in the sequence Consider the special case for which l is a factor of n. Let

(Hi)i=0,1,... cover all the rows of Hcyc. In the case for which l is a factor of n, any c = n/l consecutive submatrices in the sequence (Hi)i=0,1,... form a partition of Hcyc.

c = n/l. As pointed out earlier, the submatrices H0, H1, . . . , Hc−1 in the sequence (Hi)i=0,1,2,... form a partition of the Hcyc. In this case, c RID iterations based on H0 are equivalent
to one iteration of the conventional iterative decoding based

C. A General Revolving Iterative Decoding Algorithm
The decoding of the cyclic code Ccyc based on its entire parity-check matrix Hcyc can be carried out in terms of the consecutive submatrices in the sequence (Hi)i=0,1,2,... For i ≥ 0, the i-th decoding iteration is defined as the information updating process based on the submatrix Hi and passing the updated information to the next submatrix Hi+1 as input

on the entire parity-check matrix Hcyc using either the SPA or the MSA [15] in the sense that all the rows in Hcyc are involved exactly once in the decoding process. An extreme case is that l = 1. For this case, H0 is simply a single row of Hcyc. The decoder consists of only a single CN and γ (the row weight of Hcyc) VN processing units, which are used repeatedly in a sequence of iteration-shift operations. For this special case, it is clear that n RID iterations based on H0

for decoding. Let Imax be the preset maximum number of iterations such that Imax ≥ c = n/l . Label the decoding iterations from 0 to Imax − 1. For 0 ≤ i < Imax − 1, at the completion of the i-th decoding iteration based on Hi, we pass the updated reliability information of the received symbols to Hi+1 based on which we carry out the (i + 1)-th iteration. At the end of each iteration, a hard-decision vector z is formed
based on the reliabilities of the decoded symbols. Then, we compute the syndrome of z, s = z · HTcyc. If s = 0, z is a codeword in Ccyc and we stop the decoding process, otherwise the decoding process continues until either a codeword in Ccyc is found at the end of a certain iteration or the preset number
of iterations Imax is reached.
Using the block cyclic structure of the submatrices in the sequence (Hi)i=0,1,2,..., the decoding of Ccyc as described above can be carried out by using only the first submatrix H0 in the sequence. The decoding process begins with initial symbol reliability information as input. For i > 0, at the completion of the (i − 1)-th decoding iteration, the reliability
vector of the decoded word is cyclically shifted to the left l
positions. This left-shifted reliability vector with (or without)
the channel information is used as input to carry out the ith decoding iteration based on H0. Note that using the leftshifted reliability vector at the completion of the (i − 1)-th
decoding iteration as the input to the i-th decoding iteration based on H0 is equivalent to carrying out the i-th decoding iteration based on the submatrix Hi of Hcyc using the (unshifted) output reliability vector of the (i − 1)-th decoding iteration based on the submatrix Hi−1 as the symbol reliability

are equivalent to one decoding iteration based on the entire parity-check matrix Hcyc in the decoding process.
D. Hardware Complexity of an RID-Decoder
Note that the number of 1-entries in Hcyc is nγ and the number of 1-entries in H0 is lγ. The average column weight of H0 is lγ/n. In a hardware implementation of an RIDdecoder, the number of CN processing units and the number of wires required to connect the CN and the VN processing units are l/n of those needed for an iterative decoder implemented based on the entire parity-check matrix Hcyc. Even though the number of VN processing units required for an RIDdecoder is still the same, the number of wires connected to each VN processing unit is l/n (on average) of that connected to a VN processing unit of an iterative decoder based on Hcyc. If the chosen parameter l is much smaller than n, the hardware complexity of an RID-decoder will be greatly reduced compared to that of an iterative decoder (using the same reliability updating algorithm) implemented based on Hcyc. In a latter section, we will show that the RIDA also reduces the size of memory required to store information.
The above proposed RIDA not only significantly reduces the hardware implementation complexity of the decoder of a cyclic LDPC code but also allows us to take full advantage of the large row redundancy of Hcyc to maintain the good error performance of the code.
E. RID-Based Algorithms

information input. At the completion of each iteration, a hard- The RID can be incorporated with any known reliability

decision vector z is formed. Compute the syndrome s of z updating algorithm, such as the SPA, the MSA and their

based on Hcyc. If s = 0, z is a codeword in Ccyc and decoding variations, the min-max and others (binary and nonbinary)

stops, otherwise the decoding process continues until either a for reliability updating in each decoding iteration. This allows

codeword in Ccyc is found at the end of a certain iteration or us to develop various types of RID-based iterative decoding the preset number of iterations Imax is reached. The entire algorithms to provide us a wide spectrum of decoder architecdecoding process simply revolves around H0 in conjunction tures, decoder complexities and performance requirements. If

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:11:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: A REVOLVING ITERATIVE ALGORITHM FOR DECODING ALGEBRAIC CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

4819

the RID is used in conjunction with an appropriate algorithm for reliability updating, the number of memory units required to store information for message exchanges and the computational complexity can be greatly reduced as well with no or a small performance loss.

information F(i) based on R(i) as follows: for 0 ≤ j < n,

Fj(i) = Rj(i)+ λatten
t∈N (j)

sign Rj(i)
j ∈M(t)\j

× min{|Rj(i)| : j ∈ M (t) \ j} , (2)

III. A REVOLVING MIN-SUM ALGORITHM

else, (i.e., for i mod f = 0), compute the updated reliability information F(i) based on y(i) as follows: for 0 ≤ j < n,

The MSA is the most commonly used reliability updating algorithm because it mainly uses real number additions for updating the reliabilities of the decoded code symbols in each decoding iteration. This greatly reduces the computational complexity. If properly scaled, it can perform as well as (or close to) the SPA. In this section, we present an RIDbased algorithm in which a scaled MSA is used for reliability updating in each iteration for decoding cyclic LDPC codes. This algorithm is referred to as a revolving MSA (RMSA). Simulations results will show that decoding a cyclic LDPC code using the RMSA based on the submatrix H0 performs just as well as decoding the code using the MSA based on the entire parity-check matrix Hcyc.
A. The RMSA
Let y = (y0, y1, ..., yn−1) be the soft-decision received vector at the output of the receiver detector. We assume that the symbols of a codeword in C are transmitted over a binary AWGN channel with BPSK signaling. Let H0 = [ht,j ]0≤t<l,0≤j<n. For 0 ≤ j < n and 0 ≤ t < l, let N (j) = {t : 0 ≤ t < l, ht,j = 1} and M (t) = {j : 0 ≤ j < n, ht,j = 1}, respectively. The notation (i) denotes the i-th iteration. Let Imax be the maximum number of iterations to be performed such that Imax ≥ c = n/l . For 0 ≤ i < Imax, let R(i) = (R0(i), R1(i), . . . , Rn(i−) 1) denote the reliability information vector at the beginning of the ith iteration, let F(i) = (F0(i), F1(i), . . . , Fn(i−)1) denote the updated reliability information vector at the end of the ith iteration, and let y(i) = (y0(i), y1(i), . . . , yn(i−) 1) denote the shifted version of y at the beginning of the i-th iteration. Let λatten denote the attenuation factor for a scaled MS-based reliability information updating. We label the iterations from 0 to Imax − 1. Let f be a positive integer such that we include channel information for information update every f iterations. As will be shown in the latter examples, f should be chosen such that f iterations of the RMSA cover all the rows in Hcyc in the decoding process. Also, a larger f can improve the performance in the case that the grouping size l is relatively small.
With the above definitions and notations, the RMSA is formulated as follows:
RMSA Step 1. (Initialization) Set i = 0. For 0 ≤ j < n, set yj(0) = yj and Rj(0) = yj. Step 2. (Iteration) Carry out the following i-th iteration: (1) If i mod f = 0, compute the updated reliability

Fj(i) = yj(i)+ λatten
t∈N (j)

sign Rj(i)
j ∈M(t)\j

× min{|Rj(i)| : j ∈ M (t) \ j} , (3)

(2) Form the hard decision vector z based on F(i) and compute its syndrome s = z · HT . If s = 0, go to Step 3. If s = 0 go to Step 2-(3).
(3) If i = Imax − 1, stop decoding and declare a decoding failure. Otherwise, cyclically shift F(i) and y(i) by l positions to the left to obtain R(i+1) and y(i+1), respectively, set i ← i + 1 and return to Step 2-(1) to begin another iteration.
Step 3. Cyclically shift z to the right by il positions to make it corresponding to the transmitted codeword and output the shifted z as the decoded codeword.
Using the RMSA for decoding of a cyclic LDPC code, a VN sends out the same message to all its adjacent CNs in each decoding iteration. This is similar to the staggered decoding schedule investigated in [17], [18]. However, there are two major differences between these two decoding schemes and their decoder architectures. In the staggered decoding schedule, all the CNs corresponding to all the rows of the entire parity-check matrix are partitioned into subsets. These subsets of CNs are processed in a sequence of steps. However, in the RMS decoding, only one subset of CNs corresponding to l consecutive rows of the entire parity-check matrix (l can be an arbitrary integer with 1 ≤ l ≤ n) is used to implement the decoder. Basically, the staggered decoding is based on all the submatices in a partition of the entire parity-check matrix of an LDPC code. However, the decoding using the RMSA is based on only a single submatrix of the entire parity-check matrix. This significantly reduces the hardware implementation complexity in terms of the number of CN processing units and the number of wires required to connect the CN and the VN processing units. Furthermore, for every specific number of iterations of the RMSA, the channel information is used for reliability updating, which improves the error performance without increasing the computational complexity, only at the expense of storing the channel information. But in the staggered decoding, channel information is used only in the initialization of the decoding.
As described in the RMSA, at the completion of every f iterations, the channel information is used for the information update. Based on our simulation results, we find that if the grouping size l is relatively small compared with the total number of rows of Hcyc (say, l/n ≤ 1/10), f should be chosen such that, for every f iterations, each row of Hcyc should be involved in information update more than once.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:11:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4820

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

However, if l is a relatively large number, we should choose f distance of the code is exactly 65 [2], [14], [15] and the girth

such that, for every f iterations, each row of Hcyc should not of its Tanner graph is 6. For fair comparison, we adopt 6-bit

be involved in information update more than once. Using this quantization for both the MSA and the RMSA in simulations.

guideline of choosing f , we always minimize the performance The bit and block error performances (denoted by BER and

loss compared to the MSA based on the entire parity-check BLER, respectively) of this code decoded using the scaled

matrix Hcyc. Since the RMSA use the channel information to MSA with a scaling factor λatten = 0.25 which optimizes update the reliability more often than the staggered decoding, the performance of the MSA based on HEG,cyc with 5, 10
the RMSA should perform better than the staggered algorithm. and 50 iterations are shown in Fig. 1(a). It shows that the

This will be demonstrated in Examples 1 and 3.

performance curves cluster together. The bit-error performance

gap between 5 and 50 iterations is within 0.2 dB and the

B. Analysis of RMS-Decoder Complexity

performance curves with 10 and 50 iterations of the scaled MSA almost overlap with each other. HEG,cyc has 262,080

The hardware complexity of an RMS-decoder for a cyclic 1-entries. To implement the MSA-decoder of this code, we

LDPC code implemented based on the submatrix H0 is the need 4095 VN processing units, 4095 CN processing units, same as that of an RID-decoder based on H0 analyzed and 262,080 wires connecting them.

in Section II.D. In the following, we analyze the size of Now we decode this code using the proposed RMSA. We

memory required to store information for message passing and choose l = 819 which is a factor of 4095. Let c = 4095/819 =

computational complexity for an RMS-decoder and compare
them to those of an MS-decoder whose implementation is based on the entire parity-check matrix Hcyc.
Recall that the parity-check matrix Hcyc is an n×n circulant with both column and row weights equal to γ. For memory
size analysis, we assume that each real number (RN) message
is quantized and represented by b bits for both types of
decoders. The RMS-decoder needs nb binary memory units (BMUs) to store y and nb BMUs to store F(i). R(i) can share memory units with F(i) and we do not need extra BMUs to store y(i). In addition, each CN in the Tanner graph of H0 requires 2(b−1) BMUs to store the two smallest magnitudes of

5. Partition HEG,cyc into five 819 × 4095 submatrices H0, H1, H2, H3, H4, each consisting of 819 consecutive rows of HEG,cyc and having the same rank 728 as HEG,cyc. Each submatrix has 91 redundant rows and its null space gives the same (4095,3367) cyclic EG-LDPC code CEG,cyc. We also choose a scaling factor λatten = 0.25 which optimizes the performance for the RMSA based on the submatrix H0, and choose f = 5. With f = 5, we include channel information
for information update every 5 iterations (corresponding to 1 decoding iteration based on HEG,cyc). The bit and block error performances of the code decoded with 25, 50 and
250 RMS iterations are shown in Fig. 1(b). Note that 25,

the messages of its adjacent VNs, log2 γ BMUs to store the 50 and 250 RMS iterations based on H0 are equivalent to index of the smallest magnitude of the messages of its adjacent 5, 10 and 50 MSA iterations based on HEG,cyc. With the VNs, and γ BMUs for the signs of the messages of its adjacent RMS-decoding, every 5 consecutive iterations cover all 4095

VNs. Since the Tanner graph of H0 has l CNs, the total rows of HEG,cyc (i.e., cover 4095 CNs’ message processing number of BMUs required is l[2(b − 1) + log2 γ + γ] + 2nb. operations) and hence all the 3367 redundant rows are used
The RMS-decoder only needs l/n as many memory units to to help the decoding to converge. From Fig. 1(b), we see

store CN messages as the MS-decoder, which results in a great that the performance curves cluster together and decoding reduction in memory size. Table I shows the memory sizes (in converges fast. At the bit error performance of 10−6, the bit

terms of the numbers of BMUs) required for the RMS- and error performance gap between 50 and 250 RMSA iterations

the MS-decoders.

is very small, about 0.05 dB, while the bit error performance

For computational complexity comparison between the two gap between 25 and 250 RMSA iterations is less than 0.2

types of decoders, we use the sorting algorithm in [28, Sec. dB. From Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(b), we see that the MSA

5.3.3] to find the two smallest magnitudes. Let δ be the least with 50 iterations based on the entire parity-check matrix

common multiple of l and n. Then, it is fair to compare HEG,cyc performs slightly better than the RMSA with 250 the computational complexity of δ/n iterations of the MS- iterations based the submatrix H0 of HEG,cyc (less than 0.1 decoder with δ/l iterations of the RMS-decoder. For the MS- dB). The small performance loss of the RMSA compared to

decoder, when computing the VN-to-CN messages, each VN the MSA mainly results from the fact that in the RMSA,

processing unit needs to subtract the previously received CN each VN sends the same message to all of its adjacent CNs.

message from the total reliability value of the VN, which could However, the large row redundancy of the entire parity-check

result in more RN additions. Table I shows the numbers of RN matrix and the strategy that we use the channel information

additions required for δ/l iterations of the RMS-decoder and for information update every f iterations allow us to reduce

δ/n iterations of the MS-decoder.

the performance loss. Also included in Fig. 1(b) are the bit

Example 1: Consider the (4095,3367) cyclic EG-LDPC and block error performances of the code decoded with the 6-

code CEG,cyc given in Example 10.1 of [15, Chapter 10,
p. 434]. This code of length 4095 and dimension 3367 is
constructed from the two-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG(2, 26) over GF(26). The parity-check matrix HEG,cyc of this code is a 4095×4095 circulant with both column and row weights equal to 64. The rank of HEG,cyc is 36 − 1 = 728. Hence, HEG,cyc has 3367 redundant rows. The minimum

bit quantized staggered decoding with 50 iterations based on the entire parity-check matrix HEG,cyc. For fair comparison, each iteration of the staggered decoding is divided into 5 steps corresponding to submatrices H0, H1, H2, H3, H4, respectively. We see that the RMSA with 250 iterations based on H0 outperforms the staggered decoding with 50 iterations based on HEG,cyc.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:11:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: A REVOLVING ITERATIVE ALGORITHM FOR DECODING ALGEBRAIC CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

TABLE I COMPLEXITY COMPARISONS BETWEEN THE MS- AND THE RMS-DECODERS FOR CYCLIC LDPC CODES

# of BMUs # of RN additions

RMS
l[2(b − 1) + log2 γ + γ] + 2nb δ(2γ + log2 γ − 2)

MS
n[2(b − 1) + log2 γ + γ] + 2nb δ(3γ + log2 γ − 2)

4821

100 MS 5 BER

MS 5 BLER

MS 10 BER

10−1

MS 10 BLER

MS 50 BER

MS 50 BLER

Shannon Limit

10−2

100 MS 50 BER

MS 50 BLER

RMS 20475 (l=1) BER

10−1

RMS 20475 (l=1) BLER

RMS 204750 (l=1) BER

RMS 204750 (l=1) BLER

10−2

BER/BLER

BER/BLER

10−3

10−3

10−4

10−4

10−5

10−5

10−6

10−6

10−7

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Eb/N0(dB)

(a)

10−7

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

E /N (dB) b0

BER/BLER

100 RMS 25 BER

RMS 25 BLER

RMS 50 BER

10−1

RMS 50 BLER

RMS 250 BER

RMS 250 BLER

staggered BER

10−2

staggered BLER

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Eb/N0(dB)

(b)

Fig. 1. The error performance of the (4095,3367) EG-LDPC code with the MS- and the RMSAs with l = 819. 6-bit quantization is used for all the simulation.

Hardware implementation of the RMS-decoder requires
4095 VN processing units, 819 CN processing units, and
52,416 wires connecting them, which is the number of 1entries in H0. We see that the numbers of CN processing units and wires connecting the CN processing units to the VN processing units needed for decoding CEG,cyc using the RMSA based on H0 are 1/5 of those required for decoding the code using the MSA (or the staggered decoding) based on the entire parity-check matrix HEG,cyc. Based on simulations, we find that at Eb/N0 = 4.0dB, the RMS-decoder requires less than a half as many RN additions per decoding process as the MS-decoder. And the RMS-decoder has an up to 69.6% memory saving compared to the MS-decoder.

Fig. 2. The error performance of the (4095,3367) EG-LDPC code with the RMSA based on a single row. 6-bit quantization is used for all the simulation.
Example 2: Consider the (4095,3367) cyclic EG-LDPC code given in Example 1. Suppose we choose l = 1, an extreme case. In this case, H0 consists of only one single row of HEG,cyc. With this choice of l, we decode the code based on the top row of the parity-check matrix HEG,cyc of the code. The RMS-decoder consists of only one CN processing unit, 64 VN processing units and 64 wires to connect the VN processing units to the single CN processing unit. There is a huge reduction in hardware implementation complexity compared to the MS-decoder based on the entire paritycheck matrix HEG,cyc. Suppose we adopt 6-bit quantization of message for the RMSA and choose f = 16380, which means we include channel information for information update every 16380 iterations (corresponding to 4 iterations based on HEG,cyc). The bit and block error performances of the code decoded using the RMSA with 20,475 and 204,750 iterations (corresponding to 5 and 50 MSA iterations based on HEG,cyc, respectively) using a scaling factor λatten = 0.25 are shown in Fig. 2. Again, we see that the decoding using the RMSA converges fast, and the performance gap between 20,475 and 204,750 iterations is negligible. Also included in Fig. 2 is the bit and block error performances of the code decoded using the 6-bit quantized MSA with 50 iterations based on HEG,cyc also using a scaling factor λatten = 0.25. We see that the RMSA with 20,4750 iterations (corresponding to 50 iterations based on HEG,cyc) performs only less than 0.2 dB away from the MSA with 50 iterations based on HEG,cyc at the BER of 10−6. Based on the analysis in Section III.B, we find that the RMS-decoder has an up to 87% memory saving compared to the MS-decoder. For this special case, the small error performance loss is more than compensated by the huge reduction in complexity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:11:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4822

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

IV. REVOLVING ITERATIVE DECODING OF QC-LDPC
CODES
The parity-check matrix Hqc of a QC-LDPC code Cqc is typically defined and constructed as an array of circulant matrices, mostly an array of circulant permutation matrices (CPMs) and zero-matrices (ZMs), [2], [3], [5], [7]-[15], [29]. This form does not have the block cyclic structure for revolving iterative decoding based on a single submatrix of Hqc. However, Hqc can be put into a form with block cyclic structure for revolving iterative decoding based on a single submatrix.

positions to the right. Hence, the submatrices H0, H1, . . . , H6 form a cyclic partition of the permuted matrix Hqc,perm.
Note that the null space of Hqc,perm also gives a QCLDPC code Cqc,perm in the sense that cyclically shifting each codeword K positions to the right is also a codeword [14], [15]. Cqc,perm is combinatorially equivalent to the QC-LDPC code Cqc. Cqc,perm can be obtained by permuting the code symbols of each codeword in Cqc using the permutation πcol.
The array Hqc,perm in the form given by (4) has the exact
block cyclic structure needed for decoding the QC-LDPC code
Cqc,perm based on the top submatrix H0 of Hqc,perm alone using the general RIDA presented in Section II.C. To make it

more flexible for decoder architecture design, we can group

A. Quasi-Cyclic Parity-Check Matrix with Block Cyclic Structure

Consider a QC-LDPC code Cqc given by the null space of a J × K array of e × e circulant matrices Hqc. (For an algebraically constructed QC-LDPC code Cqc [8]-[15], e is a factor of q − 1, where q is the number of elements of a

finite field GF(q) and q is a power of a prime. In most cases,

e = q − 1.) Label the rows and columns from 0 to Je − 1 and

0 to Ke − 1, respectively. Define the following two mappings:

πrow : i → J × (i mod e) + i/e for 0 ≤ i < Je and πcol : i → K × (i mod e)+ i/e for 0 ≤ i < Ke. Then πrow

and πcol define a permutation of the rows and a permutation of the columns of Hqc, respectively. If we first permute the rows of Hqc based on πrow and then permute the columns of Hqc based on πcol, we obtain an e × e array Hqc,perm of J × K matrices as follows:

⎡ H0 ⎤ ⎡ A0 A1 · · · Ae−1 ⎤

Hqc,perm = ⎣⎢

H1 ...

⎦⎥ = ⎢⎣

Ae−1 ...

A0 ...

··· ...

Ae−2 ...

⎦⎥ ,

He−1

A1 A2 · · · A0

(4)

where Ai, 0 ≤ i < e, is a J × K matrix over GF(2). The array Hqc,perm consists of e row blocks H0, H1, . . . , He−1. Each row block consists of a row of e J × K matrices and

the submatrices of Hqc,perm in a way similar to that presented in Section II.B. For i ≥ 0 and 1 ≤ l ≤ e, form a sequence of matrices (Hqc,perm,i)i=0,1,..., each of size J l × Ke, where

Hqc,perm,i =

H(Til)mod e H(Til+1)mod e · · · HT(il+l−1)mod e

T
,

(5)

which is a submatrix of Hqc,perm and consists of l consecutive row blocks of Hqc,perm in cyclic order. From the construction, we readily see that any c = e/l consecutive submatrices

in the sequence (Hqc,perm,i)i=0,1,... cover all the row blocks of Hqc,perm. In the case for which l is a factor of e, any c = e/l consecutive submatrices in (Hqc,perm,i)i=0,1,... form a partition of Hqc,perm. For i ≥ 0, the submatrix Hqc,perm,i
can be obtained by cyclically shifting the rows of the first

submatrix Hqc,perm,0 ilK positions to the right. This block cyclic structure allows us to decode the code Cqc,perm based on the submatrix Hqc,perm,0 alone using the RIDA.

The RMSA presented in Section III.A can be applied to

decode Cqc,perm without any change. The analysis of the

decoder hardware and computational complexities is the same

as that given in Sections II.D and III.B. Table II gives these

complexities of the RMS-decoder for a QC-LDPC code whose

parity-check matrix has column and row weights, γ and ρ,

respectively.

is a J × Ke submatrix of Hqc,perm. From (4), we see that each row block is the cyclic-shift of the row block above it K B. A Special Case and Its Comparison with the Layered positions to the right and the first row block is the cyclic-shift Decoding of QC-LDPC Codes

of the last row block K positions to the right. For 0 ≤ i < e,
the submatrix Hi can be obtained from the first submatrix H0 by cyclically shifting all the rows of H0 iK positions to the right. The submatrices H0, H1, . . . , He−1 in (4) form a cyclic partition of the permuted matrix Hqc,perm.
To illustrate the matrix transformation of Hqc and cyclic partition of Hqc,perm, we use an example for which e = 7, J = 4 and K = 8. In this case, Hqc is a 4 × 8 array of 7 × 7 circulants. (This array is constructed using the method
given in [11].) Permuting the rows and columns of Hqc based on πrow and πcol, respectively, we obtain a 7 × 7 circular array Hqc,perm of 4 × 8 matrices of the form given by (4) which consists of 7 row blocks, denoted by H0, H1, ..., H6, respectively, each consisting of 7 matrices of size 4 × 8. For

Consider the special case for which l = 1 and Hqc,perm,i = Hi for 0 ≤ i < e. Then, the RID of Cqc,perm is carried out based on the top row block H0 of Hqc,perm alone. In this case, if each column in H0 has a weight of at most 1, the RID is similar to (but not the same as) the layered decoding of QC-
LDPC codes [20], in the sense that one decoding iteration based on the submatrix Hqc,perm,0 in the RID is similar to one sub-iteration at one layer in the layered decoding. In the layered decoding, the parity-check matrix Hqc of a QC-LDPC code is in a form of an array of CPMs and/or ZMs of the same size, say e × e. Suppose Hqc consists of J row blocks, each consisting of a certain number of CPMs and a certain number of ZMs. These J row blocks form a partition of Hqc. The decoding sub-iteration carried out at each layer is based

i > 0, the row-block Hi can be obtained by cyclically shifting the row block Hi−1 8 positions to the right or by cyclically shifting the row block H0 8i positions to the right. The first row block H0 can be obtained by cyclically shifting H6 8

on a separate row block of Hqc and performed by a set of e CN processing units. One decoding iteration based on the entire parity-check matrix Hqc consists of J sub-iterations performed in a sequence of J layers. Each layer processes the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:11:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: A REVOLVING ITERATIVE ALGORITHM FOR DECODING ALGEBRAIC CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

4823

received messages using the CNs of the Tanner graph of the Hqc(J, K) gives a QC-LDPC code of length K(q − 1). In the

code that correspond to one row block of CPMs and/or ZMs. following example and Example 4 given in Section V, binary

Two subsets of CNs processed in two layers in one iteration and non-binary codes are constructed based on Latin squares.

are non-overlapping, and all the subsets of CNs, corresponding Example 3: Consider the RMS decoding of the (4032,3304)

to all the layers in one iteration, form a partition of all the QC-LDPC code Cqc given in Example 3 of [11] constructed CNs in the Tanner graph of the code. A layered decoder based on the Latin square using GF(26), whose parity-check

based on Hqc consists of Je CN processing units. However, matrix is a 64 × 64 array Hqc of 63 × 63 CPMs and ZMs, a corresponding RID-decoder based on the permuted matrix with the ZMs lying on the main diagonal of the array. It is a

Hqc,perm consists of only J CN processing units (a reduction 4032×4032 matrix with both column and row weights equal to

of factor e). We may view the RID with l = 1 as decoding 63. The rank of this matrix is 728. The code Cqc has minimum

with one layer (or one-layer decoding).

distance at least 64.

In order to make a complexity comparison between the Permuting the rows and columns of Hqc based on πrow and layered-MS- and the RMS-decoders, we also analyze the πcol, respectively, we obtain a 63 × 63 circular array Hqc,perm complexity of the layered-MS-decoder. Let n = eK be the of 64 × 64 matrices of the form given by (4) which consists of

length of the codeword in Cqc. For memory size, we assume 63 row blocks, each consisting of 63 permutation matrices of that each RN message is quantized and represented by b bits size 64 × 64. Each row-block is a 64 × 4032 matrix. The null

for both types of decoders. The layered-MS-decoder needs nb BMUs to store the reliability values of the decoded symbols. In addition, each CN in the Tanner graph of Hqc requires 2(b−1) BMUs to store the two smallest magnitudes of the messages of its adjacent VNs, log2 ρ BMUs to store the index of the smallest magnitude of the messages of its adjacent VNs, and

space of Hqc,perm gives a QC-LDPC code Cqc,perm which is combinatorially equivalent to Cqc. Hqc,perm has the block cyclic structure which allows us to decode it using the RMSA. Choose l = 18. Then Hqc,perm,0 is a 1152 × 4032 matrix.
In the following simulation, we adopt 6-bit quantization for
all the algorithms. Suppose we decode the code based on the

ρ BMUs for the signs of the messages of its adjacent VNs. Since the Tanner graph of Hqc has Je CNs, the total number of BMUs required is Je[2(b − 1) + log2 ρ + ρ] + nb. Table II shows the memory size comparison between the RMS- and
the layered-MS-decoders.

submatrix Hqc,perm,0 using the RMSA with 175 iterations (equivalent to 50 iterations based on Hqc,perm) and based on the entire matrix Hqc,perm using the MSA with 50 iterations, respectively. We choose λatten = 0.25 for both the MSA
and the RMSA, which optimizes the error performance for

The computational complexity comparison between the both algorithms. For the RMSA, we choose f = 4. The bit

layered-MS- and the RMS-decoders for QC-LDPC codes is and block error performances of this code decoded using the

very similar to that between the MS- and the RMS-decoders MSA with 50 iterations and the RMSA with 175 iterations for cyclic LDPC codes described in Section III.B. Let δ be the are shown in Fig. 3(a). We see that, at the BER of 10−6, the

least common multiple of l and e. Then it is fair to compare RMSA with 175 iterations performs only less than 0.05 dB

the computational complexity of δ/e iterations of the layered- away from the MSA with 50 iterations. Also included in Fig.

MS-decoder, and δ/l iterations of the RMS-decoder. Table 3(a) are the performance curves of the code decoded with 17

II also shows the numbers of RN additions required for δ/l and 35 iterations (roughly equivalent to 5 and 10 iterations

iterations of the RMS-decoder and δ/e iterations of the layered based on Hqc,perm) of the RMSA, which are very close to

MS-decoder. For l = 1, δ is then equal to e.

the performance curve of the code with 175 iterations of the

RMSA (within 0.2 dB).

C. Simulation Results
A large class of QC-LDPC codes can be constructed using Latin squares based on finite fields [11]. An array is called a

Now we consider the extreme case for which l = 1. In
this case, the RMS decoding of Cqc,perm is based on one row block of Hqc,perm, i.e., H0 which consists of a row of 63 permutation matrices of size 64 × 64. This case is

Latin square of order m if each row and each column contains equivalent to one-layer decoding. However, a typical layered

every element of a set of m elements exactly once. Latin decoding based on the entire parity-check matrix Hqc must

squares can be constructed from finite fields [11]. The Latin process 64 different layers based on 64 different row blocks

square constructed from the field GF(q) is of order q. From of CPMs/ZMs in Hqc. We choose f = 252 for the RMSthis Latin square, an RC-constrained q ×q array Hqc of CPMs decoder, and choose λatten = 0.25 for both the RMS-decoder and ZMs of size (q −1)×(q −1) can be constructed [11]. This and the layered-MS-decoder, which optimize the performance

array is a q(q − 1) × q(q − 1) matrix with both column and of both the MSA and the RMSA. Based on the analysis given

row weights equal to q − 1. The null space of this array gives in Section III and IV, we find that the RMS-decoder can

a QC-LDPC code of length q(q − 1) with minimum distance save 84.4% in memory compared to the layered-MS-decoder.

at least q. For q = 2s, the rank of Hqc is equal to 3s − 1 [11].
In this case, the null space of Hqc gives a QC-LDPC code with the following parameters: (1) length n = 2s(2s − 1); (2) dimension k = 4s − 3s − 2s + 1; and (3) minimum distance

Also, based on simulations, we find that, at Eb/N0 = 4.0dB, the RMS-decoder has 30% saving of RN additions per de-
coding process compared to the layered-MS-decoder. The RMS-decoder requires only 64 CN processing units compared

at least 2s. Hqc has 4s − 3s − 2s + 1 redundant rows. For to 4032 CN processing units required by the layered-MSs > 3, the number of redundant rows in Hqc is very large. decoder. Furthermore, the number of wires required to connect For two positive integers J and K with 1 ≤ J, K ≤ n, let the CN processing units and the VN processing units in an

Hqc(J, K) be a J × K sub-array of Hqc. The null space of RMS-decoder is much less than that required by a layered-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:11:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4824

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

TABLE II COMPLEXITY COMPARISONS AMONG DIFFERENT TYPES OF DECODERS FOR QC-LDPC CODES

# of BMUs # of RN additions

RMS
Jl[2(b − 1) + log2 ρ + ρ] + 2nb Jδ(2ρ + log2 ρ − 2)

layered-MS
Je[2(b − 1) + log2 ρ + ρ] + nb Jδ(3ρ + log2 ρ − 2)

MS
Je[2(b − 1) + log2 ρ + ρ] + 2nb Jδ(3ρ + log2 ρ − 2)

BER/BLER

100 MS 50 BER

MS 50 BLER

RMS 175 (l=18) BER

10−1

RMS 175 (l=18) BLER

RMS 35 (l=18) BER

RMS 35 (l=18) BLER

RMS 17 (l=18) BER

10−2

RMS 17 (l=18) BLER

Shannon Limit

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Eb/N0(dB)

(a)

BER/BLER

100 layered−MS 50 BER

layered−MS 50 BLER

RMS 3150 (l=1) BER

10−1

RMS 3150 (l=1) BLER

staggered BER

staggered BLER

10−2

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Eb/N0(dB)

(b)

Fig. 3. The error performance of the (4032,3304) QC-LDPC code decoded with the RMS-, the layered-MS-, and the MSAs. 6-bit quantization is used for all the simulation.

V. REVOLVING ITERATIVE DECODING OF NON-BINARY QC-LDPC CODES
A non-binary QC-LDPC code is given by the null space of an array of circulants of the same size over a non-binary field, say GF(q). There are several classes of non-binary QCLDPC codes constructed based on finite geometries, finite fields and experimental designs [9], [15], [30]-[34]. Paritycheck matrices of the QC-LDPC codes in these classes are mostly arrays of α-multiplied CPMs and/or ZMs [15], [32], where α is an element in GF(q) whose order equals the size of the circulants. An α-multiplied CPM over GF(q) of size e × e where e is factor of q − 1 is a matrix for which each row consists of only one nonzero element in GF(q), each row is the right cyclic-shift of the row above it multiplied by α and the first row is the right-cyclic shift of the last row multiplied by α [15], [32], [33]. In this section, we apply the RIDA to decode these algebraic non-binary QC-LDPC codes.

A. Non-Binary Parity-Check Matrices in Block Cyclic Form

Consider a QC-LDPC code Cqc,q over GF(q) given by the

null space of a J × K array Hqc,q of α-multiplied CPMs

and/or ZMs of size e × e, where α is an element in GF(q)

with order e, and q = 2r is a power of 2. Permute the rows

and columns of Hqc,q with the row and column permutations,

πrow and πcol, defined in Section IV, respectively. This results

in an e × e array Hqc,q,perm of J × K matrices over GF(q)

as follows:

⎡

⎤

H0

Hqc,q,perm=⎢⎣⎢⎢

H1 ...

⎥⎥⎥⎦

⎡ He−1

⎤

A0

A1 · · · Ae−1

=⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢

αAe−1 α2 Ae−2
...

αA0 α2Ae−1
...

··· ··· ...

αAe−2 α2Ae−3
...

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥, (6)

αe−1A1 αe−1A2 · · · αe−1A0

where Ai with 0 ≤ i < e is a J × K matrix over GF(q). The

array Hqc,q,perm consists of e row blocks H0, H1, . . . , He−1.

MS-decoder. All the above advantages of the RMS-decoder Each row block Hi consists of a row of e J ×K matrices over

over the layered-MS-decoder are gained at the expense of only GF(q) and is a J ×Ke submatrix of Hqc,q,perm. For 0 ≤ i < e,

about 0.1 dB performance loss as shown in Fig. 3(b).
Also included in Fig. 3(b) are the bit and block error performances of the code decoded with the staggered decoding with 50 iterations based on the entire permuted array Hqc,perm. For fair comparison, each iteration of the staggered decoding is divided into 63 steps corresponding to 63 row blocks in Hqc,perm, respectively. We see that the RMSA with 3150 iterations based on H0 outperforms the staggered decoding with 50 iterations based on Hqc,perm.

if we multiply each row of the i-th row block Hi of Hqc,q,perm by α−i, we obtain an array Hq∗c,q,perm with exactly the same form as the array given in (4). The null space of Hq∗c,q,perm gives a q-ary QC-LDPC code Cq∗c,q which is combinatorially equivalent to the q-ary QC-LDPC code Cqc,q given by the null
space of the array Hqc,q. Then, we can construct a sequence of submatrices, (Hq∗c,q,perm,i)i=0,1,..., of H∗qc,q,perm with the same approach as defined in (5), and decode the q-ary QCLDPC code Cq∗c,q with the RIDA using the first submatrix H∗qc,q,perm,0 of the sequence (H∗qc,q,perm,i)i=0,1,....

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:11:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: A REVOLVING ITERATIVE ALGORITHM FOR DECODING ALGEBRAIC CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

4825

B. A Revolving Min-Max Algorithm
Any algorithm devised for updating the reliabilities of
received code symbols can be incorporated into the RIDA
for decoding a q-ary QC-LDPC code. One such algorithm
suitable for hardware implementation is known as the min-
max (MM) algorithm (MMA) [25]. The RID in conjunction
with the MMA is referred to as the revolving MM (RMM)-
algorithm (RMMA).
Before we formulate the RMMA, we need to define some notations. Let n = eK be the length of the codeword. Let a1, a2, ..., aq denote the q elements in GF(q). For 0 ≤ j < n, let Pj = Pj,a1 , Pj,a2 , ..., Pj,aq T be the a priori information vector of the received symbol zj in the received word z, where Pj,a = log(Pr(zj = wj |channel))/ log(Pr(zj = a|channel)) and wj is the most likely symbol for zj. Let H∗qc,q,perm,0 = [ht,j ]0≤t<Jl,0≤j<n. For 0 ≤ j < n and 0 ≤ t < J l, let N (j) = {t : 0 ≤ t < Jl, ht,j = 0} and M (t) = {j : 0 ≤ j < n, ht,j = 0}, respectively. For a ∈ GF(q), 0 ≤ t < Jl and j ∈ M (t), let σt(,ij),a denote the message with respect to a sent from the t-th CN to j-th VN in the i-th iteration. Let L(t|zj = a) denote the set of sequences of symbols over GF(q) (vj )j ∈M(t)\j , such that j ∈M(t)\j ht,j vj + ht,jzj = 0. Let Rj(i) = Rj(i,a) 1 , Rj(i,a) 2 , ..., Rj(i,a) q T denote the a posteriori information vector of the j-th VN at the beginning of the i-th iteration, whose components correspond to the a posteriori information of zj = a1, a2, ..., aq, respectively. Let Fj(i) = Fj(,ia)1 , Fj(,ia)2 , ..., Fj(,ia)q T denote the a posteriori information vector of the j-th VN at the end of the i-th
iteration, whose components correspond to the a posteriori information of zj = a1, a2, ..., aq, respectively. Let f be a positive integer such that we include channel information P = [P0, P1, ..., Pn−1] for information update every f iterations. Let λatten denote the attenuation factor for a scaled MM-based reliability information updating. Also, we define the following matrices: F(i) = F(0i), F1(i), ..., F(ni−) 1 and
R(i) = R(0i), R1(i), ..., R(ni−) 1 . RMMA Step 1. (Initialization) Set i = 0 and R(0) = P.
Step 2. (Iteration) Carry out the following i-th iteration: (1) For each a ∈ GF(q), 0 ≤ t < Jl and t ∈ N (j), update σt(,ij),a

σt(,ij),a

=

(vj )j

min
∈M(t)\j ∈L(t|zj =a)

j

max
∈M (t)\j

Rj(i),vj

(7)

(2) (Updating F(i)) Compute F(i) as follows:

(a) For each a ∈ GF(q) and 0 ≤ j < n, define

⎧

⎪⎨⎪⎪ Fj,(ai) = ⎪⎩⎪⎪

Rj(,ia) + λatten · t∈N (j) σt(,ij),a if i mod f = 0
P(j+ilK)mod n,a + λatten · t∈N (j) σt(,ij),a if i mod f = 0

(8)

(b) For each a ∈ GF(q) and 0 ≤ j < n,

(3) Make the hard decision vector z(i) = (z0(i), z1(i), ..., zn(i−) 1), where zj(i) = arg mina Fj(,ia) for 0 ≤ j < n, and compute the syndrome s(i) = z(i) · HqTc,q,perm of z(i). If s(i) = 0, go to Step 3. Otherwise, go to Step 2-(4).
(4) If i = Imax − 1, stop and declare a decoding failure. Otherwise, cyclically shift F(i) by lK columns to the left to obtain R(i+1), set i ← i + 1 and return to the beginning of
Step 2. Step 3. Cyclically shift z(i) to the right by ilK positions to
make it corresponding to the transmitted codeword and output the shifted z(i) as the decoded codeword.
Example 4: In this example, we consider a Latin square W of order 16 over GF(24) constructed based on equation (12) in
[11]. If we carry out the non-binary 15-fold array dispersion of W defined in [33], we obtain a 16 × 16 array Hqc,q of 15 × 15 α-multiplied CPMs and ZMs, where α is a primitive element of GF(24). The null space of Hqc,q gives a 16-ary (240,160) QC-LDPC code Cqc,q. We perform column and row permutations on Hqc,q based on πrow and πcol. This results in a 15 × 15 α-multiplied cyclic array Hqc,q,perm of 16 × 16 matrices over GF(24) in the form given by (6), which consists of 15 row-blocks denoted by H0, H1, ..., H14. Each row-block consists of 16 matrices, each of which is a permutation matrix with every row multiplied by a specific element in GF(24). For 0 ≤ i < 15, multiplying the row-block Hi by α−i, we obtain a 15 × 15 cyclic array H∗qc,q,perm of 16 × 16 matrices with exactly the same form as given by (4). The null space of H∗qc,q,perm gives a 16-ary (240,160) QC-LDPC code Cq∗c,q which is combinatorially equivalent to Cqc,q. We choose the grouping size l = 4, then Hq∗c,q,perm,0 is a 64 × 240 matrix over GF(24). Suppose we decode the Cq∗c,q using the RMMA with 187 iterations based on Hq∗c,q,perm,0 (almost equivalent to 50 iterations based on the entire array Hqc,q,perm) and the MMA with 50 iterations based on the entire array Hqc,q,perm. We choose the scaling factor λatten = 0.375 for both the MMA and the RMMA, which optimizes the performances for both algorithms. For the RMMA, we choose f = 4.
The symbol error and block error performances of this code
decoded with the RMMA with 187 iterations and the MMA
with 50 iterations are shown in Fig. 4. We see that the RMMA with 187 iterations based on H∗qc,q,perm,0 performs basically the same as the MMA with 50 iterations based on Hqc,q,perm. Since the number of rows in Hq∗c,q,perm,0 is only 4/15 of that in Hqc,q,perm, the RMM-decoder only requires 4/15 as many CN processing units and wires as the MM-decoder. Moreover,
using an approach similar to that in Section III.B, we find that the RMM-decoder can save up to 65% memory units
compared to the MM-decoder. For computational complexity, based on the simulations, we see that at Eb/N0 = 3.8dB, the RMMA only requires about a half of the RN additions per
decoding process compared to the MMA.
Besides the MMA, the RID can be combined with any
simplified algorithm for updating symbol reliability, such as
the simplified MSA proposed in [35] or the extended MS
(EMS) algorithm proposed in [36].
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND REMARKS

Fj(,ia)

=

Fj,(ai)

−

min
a∈GF (q)

Fj,(ai).

In this paper, we presented a reduced-complexity revolving iterative decoding (RID) algorithm for decoding algebraic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:11:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4826

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

100 MM 50 BLER

MM 50 SER

10−1

RMM 187 BLER

RMM 187 SER

10−2

SER/BLER

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

E /N (dB)
b0

Fig. 4. The SER and BLER performances of (240,160) QC-LDPC code over GF(24) with the MM- and the RMMAs, where SER stands for symbol error
rate.

cyclic and QC-LDPC codes, binary and non-binary. This algorithm is devised based on the block cyclic structure and cyclic grouping of the rows of the parity-check matrices of cyclic and QC-LDPC codes and can be incorporated with any known reliability updating algorithm for iterative decoding. Using the RIDA, the decoding of a code is carried out based on a small properly chosen submatrix of the parity-check matrix of the code to be decoded in a revolving manner. The proposed RID significantly reduces the hardware implementation complexity, the memory size and computational complexity. The merits of the proposed RID may enhance the applications of algebraic cyclic and QC-LDPC code in communication and data storage systems.
The RID can be applied to decoding of irregular LDPC codes. However, the RID of irregular codes suffers a larger performance loss compared to conventional decoding based on the entire parity-check matrix. Therefore, how to devise or modify the RID to reduce the performance loss deserves further investigation.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[3] H. Tang, J. Xu, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On algebraic construction of Gallager and circulant low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1269–1279, Jun. 2004.
[4] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–596, Feb. 2005.
[5] Y. Y. Tai, L. Lan, L. Zheng, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Algebraic construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for the AWGN and erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1765–1774, Oct. 2006.
[6] J. Xu, L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of regular and irregular LDPC codes: geometry decomposition and masking,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 121–134, Jan. 2007.
[7] N. Kamiya, “High-rate quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes derived from finite affine planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1444–1459, Apr. 2007.

[8] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels: a finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2429–2458, Jul. 2007.
[9] S. Song, B. Zhou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A unified approach to the construction of binary and nonbinary quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on finite fields,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 84–93, Jan. 2009.
[10] J. Kang, Q. Huang, L. Zhang, B. Zhou, and S. Lin, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: an algebraic construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1383–1396, May 2010.
[11] L. Zhang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: an algebraic construction, rank analysis, and codes on Latin squares,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3126–3139, Nov. 2010.
[12] Q. Huang, Q. Diao, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Cyclic and quasicyclic LDPC codes on constrained parity-check matrices and their trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 2648–2671, May 2012.
[13] Q. Diao, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A matrix-theoretic approach for analyzing quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 4030–4048, Jun. 2012.
[14] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Prentice Hall, 2004.
[15] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[16] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[17] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “High-throughput low density parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., pp. 3019–3024.
[18] E. Liao, E. Yeo, and B. Nikolic, “Low-density parity-check code constructions for hardware implementation,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., pp. 2573–2577.
[19] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst.. vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[20] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Workshop on Signal Process. Syst., pp. 107–112.
[21] K. K. Gunnam, G. S. Choi, M. B. Yeary, and M. Atiquzzaman, “VLSI architectures for layered decoding for irregular LDPC codes of WiMax,” in Proc. 2007 IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., pp. 4542–4547.
[22] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol 53, no.2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[23] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial messagepassing schedules for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol 53, no. 11, pp. 4076–4091, Nov. 2007.
[24] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “High-throughput layered decoder implementation for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 985–994, Aug. 2009.
[25] V. Savin, “Min-Max decoding for non binary LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2008 IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, pp. 960–964.
[26] Q. Diao, Y. Y. Tai, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Trapping set structure of finite geometry LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2012 IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, pp. 3088–3092.
[27] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[28] D. E. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, vol. 3, 2nd ed. Addison-Wesley, 1998.
[29] M. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[30] L. Zeng, L. Lan, Y. Y. Tai, and S. Lin, “Dispersed Reed-Solomon codes for iterative decoding and construction of q-ary LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2005 IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., pp. 1193–1198.
[31] L. Zeng, L. Lan, Y. Y. Tai, B. Zhou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of non-binary cyclic, quasi-cyclic and regular LDPC codes: A finite geometry approach,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 378–387, Mar. 2008.
[32] L. Zeng, L. Lan, Y. Y. Tai, S. Song, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Constructions of nonbinary quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: a finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 545–554, Apr. 2008.
[33] B. Zhou, L. Zhang, J. Kang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Array dispersions of matrices and constructions of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes over non-binary fields,” in Proc. 2008 IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, pp. 1158–1162.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:11:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: A REVOLVING ITERATIVE ALGORITHM FOR DECODING ALGEBRAIC CYCLIC AND QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

4827

[34] B. Zhou, J. Kang, S. Song, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and M. Xu, “Construction of non-binary quasi-cyclic LDPC codes by arrays and array dispersions,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1652–1662, Jun. 2009.
[35] C.-L. Wang, X. Chen, Z. Li, and S. Yang, “A simplified min-sum decoding algorithm for non-binary LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 24–32, Jan. 2013.
[36] D. Declercq and M. Fossorier, “Decoding algorithms for nonbinary LDPC codes over GF(q),” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 633–643, Apr. 2007.
Keke Liu received the B.E. and M.E. degrees from Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2007 and 2009, respectively, both in electrical engineering. From 2009 to 2010, He joined Datang Mobile, Beijing, China, as a physical protocol engineer. He is currently working towards his Ph.D degree in electrical and computer engineering in the University of California, Davis. His current research interests are in the general area of channel coding for communication and storage systems.

He has published numerous technical papers in IEEE Transactions and other refereed journals. He is the author of the book, An Introduction to ErrorCorrecting Codes (Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970). He also coauthored (with D. J. Costello) the book, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1st edition, 1982, 2nd edition, 2004), (with T. Kasami, T. Fujiwara, and M. Fossorier) the book, Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms, (Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1998), and (with W. E. Ryan) the book, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern (Cambridge University Press, 2009). His current research areas include algebraic coding theory, coded modulation, error control systems, and satellite communications. He has served as the Principle Investigator on 32 research grants.
Dr. Lin is a Member of the IEEE Information Theory Society and the Communication Society. He served as the Associate Editor for Algebraic Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 1976 to 1978, and as the Program Co-Chairman of the IEEE International Symposium of Information Theory held in Kobe, Japan, in June 1988. He was the President of the IEEE Information Theory Society in 1991. In 1996, he was a recipient of the Alexander von Humboldt Research Prize for U.S. Senior Scientists and a recipient of the IEEE Third-Millennium Medal, 2000. In 2007, he was a recipient of The Communications Society Stephen O. Rice Prize in the Field of Communications Theory.

Shu Lin (S’62-M’65-SM’78-F’80-LF’00) received the B.S.E.E. degree from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1959, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Rice University, Houston, TX, in 1964 and 1965, respectively.
In 1965, he joined the Faculty of the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He became an Associate Professor in 1969 and a Professor in 1973. In 1986, he joined Texas A & M University, College Station, as the Irma Runyon Chair Professor of Electrical Engineering. In 1987, he returned to the University of Hawaii. From 1978 to 1979, he was a Visiting Scientist at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, where he worked on error control protocols for data communication systems. He spent the academic year of 1996-1997 as a Visiting Professor at the Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. He retired from University of Hawaii in 1999 and he is currently an Adjunct Professor at University of California, Davis.

Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar received the B.Sc. degree from Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt, in 1980, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, in 1983 and 1986, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
In 1988, Dr. Abdel-Ghaffar joined the University of California, Davis, where he is now a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering. He did research at the IBM Almaden Research Center, San Jose, CA, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands, University of Bergen, Norway, and Alexandria University, Egypt. His main interest is coding theory. Dr. Abdel-Ghaffar served as an Associate Editor for Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 2002 to 2005 and he is currently serving as an Associate Editor for Algebraic and LDPC Codes for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS. He is a co-recipient of the IEEE Communications Society 2007 Stephen O. Rice Prize paper award.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:11:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

