7898

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

LDPC Codes on Partial Geometries: Construction, Trapping Set Structure, and Puncturing
Qiuju Diao, Ying Yu Tai, Senior Member, IEEE, Shu Lin, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar

Abstract—Many known constructions of LDPC codes can be placed in a general framework using the notion of partial geometries. Based on this notion, the structure of such LDPC codes can be analyzed using a geometric approach that illuminates important properties of their parity-check matrices. In this approach, trapping sets are represented by subgeometries of the geometry used to construct the code. Based on the incidence relations between lines and points in this geometry, the structure of trapping sets is investigated. On the other hand, it is shown that removing a subgeometry corresponding to a trapping set gives a punctured matrix which can be used as a parity-check matrix of an LDPC code. This relates trapping sets, represented by subgeometries, and punctured matrices, represented by the residual geometries. The null spaces of these punctured matrices are LDPC codes which inherit many of the good structural properties of the original code. Hence, new LDPC codes, with various lengths and rates, can be obtained by puncturing an LDPC code constructed based on a partial geometry. Furthermore, these punctured matrices and codes can be used in a two-phase decoding scheme to correct combinations of errors and erasures.
Index Terms—LDPC code, parity-check matrix, partial geometry, puncturing, trapping set.

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE rapid dominance of LDPC codes in applications requiring error control coding is due to their capacity-ap-

proaching performance. LDPC codes were first discovered by

Gallager in 1962 [1] and then rediscovered in the late 1990s

[2], [3]. Since then, a great body of literature has emerged cov-

ering various aspects of these remarkable codes including con-

structions, structural, and performance analysis, encoding and

decoding methods, as well as generalizations. Many of these

codes subsequently found their way into practical communica-

tion systems and their use in storage systems, such as hard disk

drives and flash memories, seems to be inevitable.

A binary LDPC code [1] is specified as the null space of a

sparse parity-check matrix over

. This matrix does not

Manuscript received September 04, 2012; revised March 12, 2013; accepted August 14, 2013. Date of publication September 04, 2013; date of current version November 19, 2013. This work was supported in part by the NSF under Grant CCF-1015548 and in part by gift grants from Northrop Grumman Space Technology, Intel, Cadence, LSI Corporation, and SanDisk. This paper was presented in part at the 2012 and 2013 IEEE International Symposia on Information Theory.
Q. Diao was with Xidian University, Xi’an, China. She is currently with LSI Corporation, San Jose, CA 95131 USA (e-mail: judiao@ucdavis.edu).
Y. Y. Tai is with SanDisk Corporation, Milpitas, CA 95035 USA (e-mail: yytai@ucdavis.edu).
S. Lin and K. Abdel-Ghaffar are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: shulin@ucdavis.edu; ghaffar@ucdavis.edu).
Communicated by D. Burshtein, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2013.2280640

only define the code, but it is also used for decoding based on

belief propagation algorithms, which are commonly used to at-

tain the excellent performance of LDPC codes with reasonably

small complexity. Therefore, the structural properties of play

a significant role in determining the code performance as well

as the structure and cost of its decoder in terms of computations

and hardware.

An LDPC code defined by the parity-check matrix is

-regular if has a constant column weight and a

constant row weight . If the columns and/or rows of have

varying weights, then the null space of gives an irregular

LDPC code [4]. In almost all of the proposed constructions

of LDPC codes, the following constraint on the rows and the

columns of the parity-check matrix is imposed: no two

rows (or two columns) can have more than one place where

they both have nonzero components. This constraint on the

rows and the columns of is referred to as the row-column

(RC)-constraint. A parity-check matrix that satisfies the

RC-constraint is called an RC-constrained parity-check matrix

and the code given by its null space is called an RC-constrained

LDPC code. The RC-constraint ensures that the Tanner graph

[5] of the LDPC code constructed based on has a girth of

at least 6 and that the minimum distance of the code is at least

, where

is the minimum column weight of

[6], [7].

LDPC codes perform well with iterative decoding based on

belief propagation, such as the sum-product algorithm (SPA)

or the min-sum algorithm (MSA) [8]. However, with iterative

decoding, most LDPC codes have a common severe weakness,

known as the error-floor. The error-floor of an LDPC code is

characterized by the phenomenon that as the SNR continues

to increase, the error probability suddenly drops at a rate

much slower than that in the region of low to moderate SNR.

The error-floor may preclude LDPC codes from applications

where very low error rates are required, such as high-speed

satellite communications, optical communications, hard-disk

drives, and flash memories. High error-floors most commonly

occur for unstructured random or pseudorandom LDPC codes

constructed using computer-based methods or algorithms.

Structured LDPC codes constructed based on finite geometries,

finite fields, and combinatorial designs [6], [9]–[20], in general,

have much lower error-floors.

Ever since the phenomenon of the error-floors of LDPC

codes with iterative decoding became known [21], a great

deal of research effort has been expended in finding its causes

and methods to resolve or mitigate the error-floor problem

[22]–[44]. For the AWGN channel, the error-floor of an LDPC

code is mostly caused by an undesirable structure, known as

a trapping set [22], in the Tanner graph of the code based

on which the decoding is carried out. Extensive studies and

0018-9448 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIAO et al.: LDPC CODES ON PARTIAL GEOMETRIES: CONSTRUCTION, TRAPPING SET STRUCTURE, AND PUNCTURING

7899

simulation results show that most trapping sets that cause high lengths whose parity-check matrices are submatrices of the error-floors of LDPC codes are the trapping sets of small size. parity-check matrix of the original code. These submatrices in-

In a very recent paper [19], we investigated trapping set struc-

ture of RC-constrained regular LDPC codes and showed that,

for an RC-constrained

-regular LDPC code, its Tanner

graph contains no trapping set of size at most equal to with

the number of odd-degree check nodes smaller than .

Several researchers considered puncturing of LDPC codes

to obtain codes of various rate [45], [46] that can be used in

rate-compatible schemes where the coding rate is adapted based

on the available channel state information [47], [48]. Based

on the degree distributions of variable and check nodes in the

Tanner graph, it has been shown that good punctured codes can

be obtained for these applications. However, most codes are

constructed in the literature without taking into consideration

the detailed structure of the code to be punctured.

In this paper, we give a brief review of partial geometries

and codes constructed based on partial geometries, which we

call partial geometry codes. The parity-check matrices of these

codes are the incidence matrices of the lines and the points of

partial geometries. Partial geometries generalize both Euclidean

and projective geometries which were used to construct the first

classes of algebraic LDPC codes ever reported in the literature

and which were shown to have excellent performance [6]–[11],

[19], [23]. Codes constructed based on the more general partial

geometries were considered in [49]–[52]. We show that diverse

classes of codes that appear in the literature are actually par-

tial geometry codes although their construction methods do not

seem to have any geometrical notion.

We then investigate two related aspects of partial geometry

codes. For the first aspect, we analyze the trapping set struc-

ture of the Tanner graphs of partial geometry LDPC codes. The

trapping set is specified by an induced subgraph of the Tanner

graph that corresponds to a subgeometry in the partial geom-

etry composed of a set of points and the set of lines that pass

through any of these points. We give bounds on these trapping

sets which show that partial geometry LDPC codes do not have

small trapping sets of variable nodes adjacent to small numbers

of check nodes that have odd degrees. These are the trapping

sets that seem to contribute significantly to error-floors [22],

[23], [29], [30], [32], [42]. For LDPC codes constructed based

on Euclidean and projective geometries, which are examples of

partial geometries, there are no small trapping sets of sizes less

than the minimum distances of the codes [19], [23], [53], [54].

For these codes, their decoding failure when using suboptimal

iterative decoding is mainly caused by undetected errors, which

cannot be avoided even if optimal decoding algorithms are used.

Our conclusions regarding the trapping sets, that hold for par-

tial geometry codes including Euclidean and projective geom-

etry codes, justify the very low error-floor performance in many

simulation results of these codes.

For the second aspect, we investigate the puncturing of par-

tial geometry LDPC codes to obtain LDPC codes of various

lengths and rates. In particular, we show that removing a sub-

geometry corresponding to a trapping set gives a punctured

matrix which can be used as a parity-check matrix of an

LDPC code. This relates trapping sets, represented by subge-

ometries, and punctured matrices, represented by the residual

geometries. Depending on the size of the subgeometry removed

from the partial geometry, we obtain LDPC codes of different

herit many of the good structural properties of that matrix. We also investigate using partial geometry LDPC codes and their punctured codes over channels causing errors and erasures, where the input is binary and the output is either a real number or an erasure. Decoding is performed using a two-phase decoder. When a sequence is received by the decoder, the erasures are first removed. This results in a punctured received vector which is decoded based on its corresponding punctured parity-check matrix to correct the errors, if any, using an iterative belief propagation algorithm, such as the SPA or the MSA. After this error correction phase, the removed erasures are reinserted back in their original positions. Then, the erasures are corrected using a simple algebraic method based on the parity-check matrix of the original code. The most important aspect in this approach is that the parity-check matrices used for decoding the punctured codes are submatrices of the original parity-check matrix. Hence, no extra memory or computations are needed to determine these matrices.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II gives a brief review of partial geometries and partial geometry LDPC codes. Section III show that some known constructions of LDPC codes are actually based on partial geometries. Section IV gives the relevant definitions and concepts of trapping sets of an LDPC code and presents an analysis of trapping set structures of LDPC codes constructed using partial geometries. Section V considers puncturing parity-check matrices constructed based on partial geometries to obtain LDPC codes of various lengths and rates and to decode partial geometry LDPC codes over channels causing combinations of errors and erasures. Section VI concludes the paper.

II. PARTIAL GEOMETRIES AND PARTIAL GEOMETRY LDPC CODES

A. Introduction to Partial Geometries

We consider a system composed of a set of points and

a set of lines where each line is a set of points. If a line

contains a point , we say that is on and that passes

through . If two points are on a line, then we say that the two

points are adjacent and if two lines pass through the same point,

then we say that the two lines intersect, otherwise they are par-

allel. The system composed of the sets and is a partial

geometry if the following conditions are satisfied for some fixed

integers

,

, and

[55]–[57]:

1) Any two points are on at most one line.

2) Each point is on lines.

3) Each line passes through points.

4) If a point is not on a line , then there are exactly lines,

each passing through and a point on .

Such a partial geometry will be denoted by

, or

for short, and , , and are called the parameters of the

partial geometry.1 Partial geometries were first introduced by

1Our notation agrees with that of Bose [55] who uses , , and to denote

, , and , respectively, but differs from that used in most textbooks on partial

geometries where

,

, and , denoted by , , and , respectively, are

taken to be the parameters of the partial geometry [56], [57].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7900

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Bose in 1963 [55]. A simple counting argument shows that the implies that among all the rectangles in

whose four ver-

partial geometry

has exactly

tices are the intersections of two rows and two columns, there

is none that has ones in these four vertices. For any given zero

entry in

, there are exactly such rectangles each having

points and

this entry as a vertex and ones in the other three vertices since every line not passing through a point has exactly points ad-

jacent to that point.

lines. If and are two adjacent points, then there are exactly points such that each of these points is adjacent
to both and . On the other hand, if and are not adjacent, then there are exactly points such that each of these points is adjacent to both and .

If is small compared to , then

is sparse. In this case,

the null space of

gives a

-regular LDPC code

of length . The matrix

is then a parity-check matrix for

which is called a PaG-LDPC code. It was shown in [49]

that the rank of

is upper bounded by

If

, then each point not on a line is on a unique

line which is parallel to . It can be shown that the set of

lines in

can be partitioned into classes, each Furthermore, if

consisting of lines, such that all the lines in each class are

is even, then

parallel, any two lines in two different classes intersect, and each

of the

points in the partial geometry is on a unique line

in each class. These classes of lines are called parallel bundles. The minimum distance

A partial geometry,

with

, is called a net bounded by

of the PaG-LDPC code is lower

[55], [57].

For every point in

there are exactly lines

that intersect at , i.e., all of them pass through . These lines

are said to form an intersecting bundle at , denoted by

.

Notice that is on every line in

, there are exactly

points, each is on a unique line in

, and all the other

points in the PaG are not on any line in

. If

, then every point in

is adjacent to since

every point is on a line in . We conclude that any two points

in

are connected by a line.

Let be a set of points in

. Then,

is the union of intersecting bundles at points in ,

i.e.,

is the set of lines in

such that each line

passes through at least one point in . For a set

of points

and a line

in

, the restriction of to is

which consists of the points in that are on . The sub-

geometry induced by in , denoted by

, consists

of as the set of its points and the restrictions of the lines in

as its lines. Notice that the subgeometry

has

The transpose of the matrix is the incidence matrix of

a partial geometry

, called the dual of

obtained by identifying the points of

with the lines

of

and vice versa [56]. A point is on a line in

if and only if the line in

identified

with passes through the point in

identified with

. The null space of also gives a PaG-LDPC code.

If

is a set of points and

is a set of lines,

we use

to denote the submatrix of

obtained

by retaining only the entries in the columns labeled by and

the rows labeled by . For example,

is the in-

cidence matrix of the subgeometry

induced by . We

use and to denote the sets of points and lines not in and

, respectively, i.e.,

and

.

The Tanner graph

associated with the matrix

is

a bipartite graph composed of two sets of nodes, the set of vari-

points and

restricted lines.

able nodes (VNs) labeled by the points in the PaG or, equiva-

lently, the columns of

, and the set of check nodes (CNs)

B. Construction of LDPC Codes Based on Partial Geometries labeled by the lines in the PaG or, equivalently, the rows of

A matrix

can be constructed from the partial geometry

. Edges in

connect only VNs to CNs. The VN la-

as follows. The rows of

are labeled by the beled by a point is connected to the CN labeled by a line

lines and the columns are labeled by the points. The entry by an edge if and only if passes through , i.e., if and only if

at the column labeled by a point and the row labeled by a line the entry in

at the corresponding row and column is 1. In

is 1 if and only if passes through . In this case, we say this case, we say that this VN and this CN are adjacent. Hence,

that this row in

labeled by is attached to that column

is a bipartite graph that has VNs, CNs, each VN has

labeled by . The matrix

is the incidence matrix of the degree , and each CN has degree . Furthermore, any two dis-

PaG and each row is the incidence vector of the line labeling that tinct VNs are connected to at most one CN as any two points

row. It follows that the matrix

has rows and columns, in the PaG are connected by at most one line. This implies that

where each column has weight , which is the number of lines the girth of

, which is the shortest length of a cycle in the

intersecting at a point, and each row has weight , which is the bipartite graph, is at least six. In fact, it is shown in [49] that

number of points that lie on a line. Furthermore, since any two there are exactly

cycles of length

distinct points are connected by at most one line, for any two dis- six in

. As each such cycle contains three VNs, each VN

tinct columns there is at most one row that has ones in the two is on

cycles of length six. Such a

columns. In particular,

satisfies the RC-constraint. This large number of short cycles cause correlation in the messages

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIAO et al.: LDPC CODES ON PARTIAL GEOMETRIES: CONSTRUCTION, TRAPPING SET STRUCTURE, AND PUNCTURING

7901

passed during iterative decoding. However, the Tanner graph

III. NEW CONSTRUCTIONS OF PARTIAL GEOMETRIES

has a high degree of connectivity as each pair of VNs is con-

nected by a path of length at most four in

, as any two

points in

are either adjacent or both adjacent to a

common point. This allows rapid exchange of information be-

tween all the VNs which seems, based on simulations, to offset

the effect of short cycles.

In this section, we present two constructions of partial geometries that appear to be new and, in particular, do not seem initially to have a geometric notion.
A. Partial Geometries From an RC-Constrained Arrays of Circulant Permutation Matrices

The Tanner graph

is a graphical representation of the Let be an

RC-constrained matrix which is a

PaG. If is a set of points in the PaG, then the VNs in

labeled by the points in are adjacent to the CNs labeled by the

lines in

. In particular, the subgraph of

induced by the

VNs labeled by the points in , which is denoted by

,

is the graphical representation of the subgeometry

of

the

induced by . This subgraph has VNs and

CNs.

array of

circulant permutation matrices (CPMs), where

and

. We will show that is the incidence

matrix of a partial geometry

that has points

corresponding to the columns of and lines corresponding

to the rows of . Each point is on lines and each line passes

through points. The RC-constraint implies that any two points

are on at most one line. It remains to show that if a point

is not on a line then there are exactly

lines that pass

through and a point on . We group the points into sets

C. Examples of Partial Geometries

of size where the points in each set correspond to consecutive columns in , namely, columns comprising a column

There are many examples of partial geometries that appear in textbooks and can be used to construct LDPC codes. We present three classical examples. In the next section, we add two new

of CPMs in . Since every row has ones, then by adding all

the rows attached to the column corresponding to the point ,

where the sum is over the integers rather than over

, we

obtain a vector of length whose components as integers add

constructions.

up to . Notice that the entry in the column corresponding to

Euclidean Geometries: The -dimensional Euclidean geom- the point in is while all other entries in columns corre-

etry,

, where is a prime or a power of a prime, con- sponding to the

other points in the same set as are zeros

sists of points and

lines [7], [58]–[60]. since every row attached to the column corresponding to has

A line contains points and a point is on

zeros in all columns corresponding to other points in the same

lines. Any two distinct points in

are connected by set as as every CPM has a single 1 in each row. Hence, all the

one and only one line. Hence,

is a partial geometry

with parameters

and

. If

,

then

and the Euclidean geometry is a net. If, in

addition

is a power of two, then the incidence matrix

of the Euclidean geometry

has rank and,

hence, it is a parity-check matrix of a

EG-LDPC

code, . It can be shown that

has minimum distance

[7], [61], [62].

Projective Geometries: The -dimensional projective geom-

etry

where is a prime or a power of a prime, has

points and

lines. Each line passes through

points and each

point is on

lines [7], [58]–[60]. Any two distinct

points are on a unique line. Hence,

is a partial geom-

etry with parameters

and

.

If

and

is a power of two, then the incidence matrix

of the projective geometry

has rank

and,

hence, it is a parity-check matrix of a

PG-LDPC code, . It can be shown that has minimum

distance

[7], [61], [62].

Balanced Incomplete Block Design (BIBD) With

:A

BIBD consists of a set of points and distinct subsets, called

blocks, each consisting of points, such that each point is in

exactly blocks and each pair of distinct points is in exactly

components in other than those corresponding to

and the

points in the same set as add up to

.

Because of the RC-constraint, all these components are at most

equal to 1 implying that all of them are equal to 1. Hence, every

column other than those corresponding to or other points in its

set is attached to a unique row corresponding to a line passing

through while every column corresponding to a point other

than but in the same set as is not attached to any row cor-

responding to a line passing through . Since passes through

a single point in each set, it passes through

points in sets

other than that of . Each of these points is on a line passing

through . The point on that is in the same set as is not ad-

jacent to . Hence, there are exactly lines that pass through

and a point on .

The code constructed based on this partial geometry, i.e.,

whose parity-check matrix is , is quasi-cyclic. There are many

constructions of a matrix which is an

RC-constrained

matrix in the form of a

array of

CPMs based on finite

fields, see e.g., [8], [14]–[18]. If

, then the partial geom-

etry constructed in this way is actually a net where each parallel

bundle of lines in this net corresponds to the rows comprising a

row of CPMs in .

As an example, let be a power of a prime such that

is a prime. Let

,

,

, be

a

matrix, where

and is a primitive

blocks. By viewing the blocks as lines, a BIBD with

element in

. Since

is a prime, then it can be shown

is a partial geometry

. Numerous constructions of that any 2 2 submatrix in is nonsingular. Notice that

BIBDs appear in [63] and the references therein. Constructions is a Vandermonde matrix which is often used in the study of

of LDPC codes based on BIBDs can be found in [64]–[66].

Reed–Solomon codes. From this matrix, we form the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

matrix by replacing the

entry in by a

CPM whose first row is a vector of length

composed of

zeros and a single one in position

reduced modulo

. Then, has column weight

and row weight . The condition imposed on that all its 2 2

submatrices are nonsingular implies that is RC-constrained

[15]. Hence, is the incidence matrix of a partial geometry

which is a net if

. The matrix

given here is a special case of the matrix

used in the

construction denoted by Method-2 in [14].

This example shows that many algebraic constructions of

LDPC codes can be unified under the framework of partial

geometries.

B. Partial Geometries From RC-Constrained Matrices

Let be an RC-constrained matrix of size

with row

weight and column weight , where

. We

will show that is the incidence matrix of a partial geometry

that has points corresponding to the columns of

and lines corresponding to the rows of . The RC-con-

straint implies that any two points are on at most one line. Fur-

thermore, since each row has weight and each column has

weight , each line passes through points and each point is on

lines. Next, we will argue that if a point is not on a line

then there are exactly lines that pass through and a point on

. Since every row has ones, then by adding all the rows

attached to the column corresponding to the point , where the

sum is over the integers rather than over

, we obtain a

vector of length whose components as integers add up to

. Notice that the entry in the column corresponding to the

point in is . Hence, all other

components in add

up to

. Because of the RC-constraint, all these com-

ponents are at most equal to 1 and, hence, all of them equal 1.

Therefore, every column other than the one corresponding to

is attached to a unique row corresponding to a line passing

through . Since is a line not passing through the point that

passes through exactly points, each one of these points is on

a line passing through . This completes the proof that is the

incidence matrix of a partial geometry

.

We notice that the projective geometry

, which is a

partial geometry

, is a special

case of this construction.

IV. TRAPPING SETS OF PARTIAL GEOMETRY CODES
A. Definitions and General Results
As pointed out earlier, the performance of iterative decoding of most LDPC codes suffer from error-floors, which are caused by an undesirable structure, known as a trapping set, in the Tanner graph of the parity-check matrix based on which the decoding is carried out. These trapping sets are functions of the channel and the specific decoder used. For the AWGN channel, we adopt from the literature definitions of trapping sets and related structures as combinatorial objects that capture the failing mechanisms of iterative decoding algorithms in general and which are independent of the particular decoder used. After we briefly review these definitions and concepts of trapping

sets of an LDPC code, we give bounds on the sizes of these

trapping sets for PaG-LDPC codes.

First, we define trapping sets and some subclasses of trapping

sets and follow this with a motivation of these definitions.

Definition 1: Let be the Tanner graph of a binary LDPC

code of length given by the null space of an

matrix

over

. For

and

, we have the

following definitions [22], [23]:

1) A

trapping set is a set of VNs in which induces

a subgraph of with exactly odd-degree CNs and

an arbitrary number of even-degree CNs.

2) A

trapping set is elementary if all the CNs in the

induced subgraph have degree one or degree two, and

there are exactly degree-one CNs.

3) A

trapping set is small if

and

.

4) A

trapping set is absorbing if every VN in the trap-

ping set is connected in

to fewer CNs of odd degree

than CNs of even degree. If in addition, every VN not in

the trapping set is connected to fewer CNs of odd degree in

than other CNs, i.e., CNs not in or in but of

even degree, then the trapping set is fully absorbing [39].

In each decoding iteration, we call a CN a satisfied CN if it

satisfies its corresponding check-sum constraint (i.e., its corre-

sponding check-sum is equal to zero), otherwise we call it an

unsatisfied CN. During the decoding process, the decoder un-

dergoes state transitions from one state to another until all the

CNs satisfy their corresponding check-sum constraints or a pre-

determined maximum number of iterations is reached. The th

state of an iterative decoder is represented by the hard-decision

decoded sequence obtained at the end of the th iteration. In the

process of a decoding iteration, the messages from the satisfied

CNs try to reinforce the current decoder state, while the mes-

sages from the unsatisfied CNs try to change some of the bit

decisions to satisfy their check-sum constraints. If errors affect

the code bits (or the VNs) of a ( ) trapping set , the

odd-degree CNs, each connected to an odd number of VNs in ,

will not be satisfied while all other CNs will be satisfied. The de-

coder will succeed in correcting the errors in if the messages

coming from the unsatisfied CNs connected to the VNs in

are strong enough to overcome the messages coming from the

satisfied CNs. However, this may not be the case if is small.

As a result, the decoder may not converge to a valid codeword

even if more decoding iterations are performed and this noncon-

vergence of decoding results in an error-floor. In this case, the

decoder is said to be trapped.

For the AWGN channel, error patterns with small number of

errors are more probable to occur than error patterns with larger

number of errors. Consequently, and as supported by extensive

studies and simulation results [21]–[41], [43], [44], [67]–[75],

trapping sets that result in high decoding failure rates and con-

tribute significantly to high error-floors are those with small

values and small ratios . These conclusions are captured

by the notions of elementary trapping sets and small trapping

sets, see Definition 1, parts 2 and 3.

The notion of absorbing sets is motivated by the fact that for

the binary symmetric channel (BSC), if the channel causes er-

rors in the VNs of an absorbing set, then a Gallager type-B

decoder (or a one-step majority-logic) decoder will fail. With

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIAO et al.: LDPC CODES ON PARTIAL GEOMETRIES: CONSTRUCTION, TRAPPING SET STRUCTURE, AND PUNCTURING

7903

soft-decision iterative decoding, such as the SPA or the MSA,

if most of the soft messages become saturated, i.e., their mag-

nitudes are clipped to some finite values to avoid numerical

overflow [76] (which is usually true in the error-floor region),

then the decoder will behave like a Gallager type-B decoder and

will fail. Absorbing sets characterize the noncodeword states to

which the decoder converges when it fails.

As all check-sums of a codeword in the code are satisfied, the

VNs corresponding to the nonzero bits in a codeword forms a

trapping set, where is the weight of the codeword. If an

error pattern determined by these positions occurs, the decoder

converges to an incorrect codeword and commits an undetected

error. In this case, the decoder is permanently trapped. If there

are no trapping sets smaller than the minimum distance of an

LDPC code, then the error-floor of the code decoded with itera-

tive decoding is primarily dominated by the minimum distance.

For Tanner graphs of girth at least six in which the VNs have

the same degree, we have the following two theorems.

Theorem 1: Let be the Tanner graph of an LDPC code and

suppose that the girth of is at least six and every VN has degree

. Then, has no absorbing set of size

.

Proof: Let be an absorbing set and be a VN in .

Since is an absorbing set and there are precisely CNs in

adjacent to , more than half of these CNs, i.e., at least

, are of even degree. Each one of these CNs, being

of even degree, is adjacent to at least one VN in other than

. Since has no cycle of length four, no VN in other than

is adjacent to two of these CNs. Hence, contains at least

VNs other than , i.e.,

.

Theorem 2: Let be the Tanner graph of an LDPC code and

suppose that the girth of is at least six and every VN has

degree . If contains a

trapping set and

, then

.

Proof: Let be a

trapping set. Then, the number of

edges in

connecting VNs in to CNs of degree greater

than one is at most

. Indeed, if this is not the case, then

there is a VN, , in which is adjacent to at least CNs of

degree greater than one. However, as has no cycle of length

four, each such CN is adjacent to a distinct VN, other than , in

. This contradicts the assumption that

and implies

that there are at most

CNs of degree greater than one

adjacent to and there are at most

edges connecting

VNs in to CNs of degree greater than one. As

has

edges, it contains at least

CNs

of degree one and at least that many CNs of odd degree.

If

, then

. This follows from the

fact that

is a concave function in which equals

for

and . We conclude that the number of CNs of odd

degree in any trapping set of size at most is at least . Since

the ratio of the number of CNs of odd degree to the number of

VNs is at least

, it follows, from Definition 1 part (3),

that the Tanner graph contains no small trapping set of size

as

in this case.

As an example, consider the LDPC Euclidean geometry code

whose parity-check matrix

is the incidence matrix

of the 2-D Euclidean geometry

. The code

is

a

code with minimum distance 66 [6]–[8]. The

column weight of

is

and its row weight is

.

The Tanner graph associated with

has no small trapping

set of size

. Computer simulations confirm that the

error-floor of this code is below

.

B. Geometrical Interpretation of Trapping Sets of Partial Geometries

We consider, in particular, the structure of trapping sets as-

sociated with partial geometries. We give a geometric interpre-

tation of trapping sets and, based on this interpretation, we im-

prove upon the bound derived in Theorem 2.

A

trapping set in

is defined by the subgraph

induced by the VNs labeled by the points in a set

of size in the partial geometry such that

has ex-

actly odd-degree CNs. The CNs adjacent to the VNs in the

induced subgraph are labeled by the lines in the PaG that pass

through at least one of the points labeling the VNs, i.e., the

lines in . Hence, the subgraph

has exactly CNs

of odd degree if and only if there are exactly lines in

that pass through an odd number of points in . Let be the

number of lines in

, each passing through exactly points

in , where

. Then, is the sum of over all odd

integers such that

. Since

is the

largest odd integer not exceeding , we have

(1)

Based on the geometrical interpretation of trapping sets given

above, we can prove the following theorem, which gives an ex-

plicit way to improve the bound

stated in

Theorem 2 if any information regarding the s for

is

available.

Theorem 3: Let

be the Tanner graph constructed based

on the partial geometry

. If is a

trapping

set in

and

, then

where is the number of lines in , each passing through

exactly points in . Equality in the bound on holds if

.

Proof: The result is based on finding a lower bound on

the number of lines passing through exactly one point in

. This bound will certainly give a lower bound on in (1).

First, we count, in two different ways, the number of point-line

pairs where each pair consists of a point in and a line in

passing through this point. Since each of the points in is on

lines, the total number of such pairs is . Alternatively, since

a line passing through points in contributes such pairs, the

total number of point-line pairs is

. Hence,

(2)

Next, we count, also in two different ways, the number of pairs of adjacent points in . (Throughout this paper, by a pair of points we mean an unordered pair of distinct points.) Since

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7904

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

consists of points, there are at most such pairs. Alterna-

tively, since every pair of adjacent points in is on a unique

line in

and a line passing through points in connects

pairs of points, the total number of pairs of adjacent points

in is

. Hence,

Hence,

are disjoint sets whose union is and

.

Theorem 4: Let be a parallel bundle and

be

the lines in . If is a

trapping set in the Tanner graph

constructed based on the net

, then

(3)

Multiplying both sides in (3) by 2 and subtracting them from the corresponding sides in (2), we obtain

where is the number of points in that are on .

Proof: For convenience, we call the lines in parallel

lines and all other lines that pass through points in nonparallel

lines. We denote by the number of parallel lines ,

, for which

, i.e.,

Combining this with (1), we obtain the bound on stated in the

theorem. Equality holds if it holds in (3) which is the case if any

pair of points in the partial geometry are adjacent, i.e.,

.

From Theorem 3, it follows that

if and

only if equality holds in (3) and

,

i.e., each line in

passes through at most two points in .

This is the same as saying that no three points in are collinear.

Furthermore, equality in (3) implies that

, i.e.,

any two points in are adjacent. If these conditions hold and

, then forms a

elementary trapping

set that has

CNs of degree 1 and

CNs

of degree 2. It can be readily shown that for

, the

number of CNs of degree 1 is greater than the number of CNs

of degree 2.

As another special case, we consider the extreme opposite

case in which all the points in are collinear. Then, equality

holds in (3) and, therefore, also in the bound on specified in

Theorem 3. Furthermore,

and

.

Substituting in (2), it follows that

, i.e., the

trapping set has

CNs of degree 1 in addition to a CN

of degree . Hence, forms a

trapping set if is

even and a

trapping set if is odd. Typically,

such trapping sets do not trap the iterative decoder since they

have large numbers of CNs of odd degree.

C. Improved Bound on Trapping Sets for Net-LDPC Codes

(4)

For

, let denote the number of nonparallel lines,

each passing through points in . Since any two points in

are connected by a parallel line, they cannot be on the same non-

parallel line. Hence, the points on any nonparallel line belong to

different sets

. This implies that

(5)

We are interested in lower bounding

, the total

number of lines in

that pass through exactly one point

in . Since each of the points in is on lines, including

one parallel line, each point is on exactly

nonparallel

lines. Hence, by counting, in two different ways, the number

of point-line pairs consisting of a point in and a nonparallel

line in

passing through the point, we obtain

(6)

For

, there are pairs of points, one belonging

to and the other to . Hence, the number of pairs of adjacent

points in that do not belong to the same set for

,

is at most

(7)

In Theorem 3, we presented a bound on the number of odd-de-

gree CNs in the Tanner graph

associated with the partial

geometry

. In the following, we consider in partic-

ular the case in which the partial geometry is a net, e.g., a 2-D

Since the two points in any such pair are connected by a unique nonparallel line, and a nonparallel line passing through points in connects such pairs, we have

Euclidean geometry. Recall that the PaG is a net if

in

(8)

which case the lines can be partitioned into parallel bundles,

each consisting of parallel lines, and each point is on a unique line in each parallel bundle. In case of a net, we show how to improve upon the bound in Theorem 3 by considering the dis-

Multiplying both sides in (8) by 2 and subtracting them from the corresponding sides in (6), we obtain

tribution of points labeling the VNs in a trapping set over the lines in a parallel bundle.

(9)

Recall that each parallel bundle of lines contains all the

points in

and, in particular, all the points in Since the number of lines in

passing through a single point

. Let be a parallel bundle of lines and

be in , which equals

, is a lower bound on the

the lines in . For

, let be the (possibly empty) number of odd-degree CNs in , we obtain from (4) and

set of points in that are on the line and let be the (9) the bound stated in the theorem.

number of such points. Since the lines

are par- We notice that this bound agrees with Theorem 2 whenever

allel, each point in is on one and only one of these lines.

for all

and improves upon it in all other cases.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIAO et al.: LDPC CODES ON PARTIAL GEOMETRIES: CONSTRUCTION, TRAPPING SET STRUCTURE, AND PUNCTURING

7905

The bound on in Theorem 4 can be applied easily once Since

, it follows that

the distribution of the set of points corresponding to the the average value of

is

VNs of the trapping set over the lines in a parallel bundle

.

is given without the need to explicitly determine

. The This bound on agrees with the bound

on for

bound depends on the numbers

, which in turn

and 2 but exceeds it for all values of

.

depend on the set of points as well as on the choice of the As an example, consider the LDPC Euclidean geometry code,

parallel bundle . For example, if the net is the 2-D Euclidean

introduced in Section III-A where

and

geometry

, where is a prime or a power of a prime, whose Tanner graph has no small trapping sets of size

.

then each point can be represented by a two-tuple

over Whereas is lower bounded by

for

,

GF( ) and

for some

is Corollary 1 lower bounds by 272.62.

a line associated with this value of . The lines associated

with the values of

form a parallel bundle. (This

parallel bundle can be viewed as the set of the horizontal lines

V. PUNCTURING PARTIAL GEOMETRY LDPC CODES

in a 2-D plane where each point in the Euclidean geometry is represented by its cartesian coordinates.) The number of points A. Overview

in on the line associated with is the number of points

. This gives the numbers

which can

be used in Theorem 4 to obtain a lower bound on in a

trapping set.

The bound

stated in Theorem 2 gives a rather

skewed picture of trapping sets since it bounds the smallest of

a

trapping set. For a given , it is possible that there are

numerous

trapping sets in the Tanner graph with sig-

nificantly larger than this lower bound. Actually, by averaging

the sharper lower bound derived in Theorem 4 for nets over all

configurations of the distribution of the points on the lines

composing a parallel bundle, assuming that all configurations

are equiprobable, we obtain the following lower bound on the

average value of in a

trapping set.

Corollary 1: Consider the Tanner graph

constructed

based on the net

. For a given

, the

In this section, we consider puncturing LDPC codes con-

structed based on partial geometries. This study has two goals.

First, to show that a partial geometry can be used to design

LDPC codes whose lengths are not necessarily equal to the

number of points in the geometry. Second, to show that punc-

tured codes can be used to develop a two-phase decoding

scheme for correcting both errors and erasures.

Let be an

binary linear code of minimum distance

with parity-check matrix . Let be a set of column in-

dices and be the indices of all other columns in . Then, the

punctured code

consists of all codewords in in which

the bits indexed by are deleted. Clearly,

is a linear code

of length

and dimension

. If

, then

deleting bits from the codewords in gives distinct code-

words in . Hence, if

, then both and have

average value of in a

trapping set is lower bounded the same size and therefore

. In this case, the minimum

by

distance of

is at least

. By changing the size of

, we can construct a sequence of punctured codes of various

rates and minimum distances.

In this section, we explore punctured codes of a PaG-LDPC

Proof: We determine the average value of the lower bound

on in Theorem 4. Notice that the probability that

is

, which is the probability of placing

exactly points out of points on a particular line out of

lines where the lines are chosen independently and with equal

probability. Hence, follows a binomial distribution. The

average value of is the second moment of this distribution,

i.e.,

, which can be shown to be

equal to

. Hence, the average of

is

. Next, we consider the average value of

code

and show that, in some cases, these punctured codes

have parity-check matrices that are submatrices of the parity-

check matrix

of

. In this case, we readily have a

parity-check matrix for the punctured code which is RC-con-

strained. Furthermore, if the parity-check matrix of the punc-

tured code has a large number of redundant rows, then this typ-

ically improves the performance with iterative decoding at the

price of increased decoding complexity. Indeed, redundant rows

create CNs in the Tanner graph which provide more informa-

tion to the VNs about other VNs when decoding based on be-

. For

, let be lief propagation. This typically speeds decoding convergence.

a binary random variable assuming the value 1 if is odd Although identifying which redundant rows improve perfor-

and the value 0 otherwise. Then, the average value of is mance and by how much seems to be a very difficult problem,

. This can be written as

simulations on a large number of codes constructed using dif-

ferent methods show that by increasing the number of redundant

rows, performance typically improves up to a certain point. This

seems to be the point at which the Tanner graph reaches a high

degree of connectivity while still maintaining reasonably small

number of small cycles. In this section, we give lower bounds on

the number of rows in the submatrices forming the parity-check

matrices of the punctured PaG-LDPC codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7906

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

B. Geometrical Approach to Puncturing a Partial Geometry vectors are precisely the rows in

that have ones in

LDPC Code

the column corresponding to . Deleting these rows from

Consider the

matrix

of a PaG-LDPC code

constructed based on the partial geometry

. Let

be a set of points. We assume that

. Recall that

, which is the union of the intersecting bundles at

the points in , is the set of lines in the partial geometry each

passing through at least one point in . The residual geometry

is obtained from the partial geometry by deleting all the

points in and all the lines in

. The incidence matrix of

this residual geometry is the matrix

which can

be obtained from

by deleting all the columns labeled by

the points in and all the rows attached to these columns, i.e.,

labeled by the lines in

.

By labeling the indices of the codewords in

by the

points in the PaG, the punctured code

is obtained from

by deleting all bits with indices labeled by . Let be

a codeword in the punctured code

. By the definition

of a punctured code, there is a codeword in

such that

deleting the bits labeled by the points in from gives .

gives the matrix

that has zeros in

this column. Deleting this column from

gives the matrix

. Since this column in

is all-zero,

and its subma-

trix

have the same rank. We will show that the

rank of

is one less than the rank of

.

For this purpose, we make use of parallel bundles. Recall

that each line in the

is a line in a parallel bundle. For

, let be the parallel bundle that contains the line

in

whose incidence vector is . Let

be the lines in and

be their incidence

vectors, respectively. Without loss of generality, assume that

, i.e.,

. None of the other

vectors

is equal to any of the vectors ,

,

since

are parallel to

while

and are intersecting. Hence,

are rows in

. As each point in the

is on a unique line

in , it follows that

Since is in the null space of

, it is orthogonal to every

(10)

row in

. These are the rows in

labeled

by the lines not in

, i.e., not passing through any of the

points in . Hence, every row in

has zeros

in the positions labeled by the points in . These are precisely

the positions of bits deleted from to obtain . Furthermore,

by deleting these positions from the rows in

,

we obtain the rows in

. Therefore, is or-

thogonal to the rows in

if and only if

is orthogonal to the rows in

. We conclude

where

is the all-one vector. In particular,

is in the row span of

. However, is not in the row

span of

since has a one in the column corre-

sponding to while all rows in

have zeros in

this column. This implies that the rank of

is at

least one less than that of

. On the other hand, (10) can be

written as

(11)

that the null space of

contains the punctured

code

. However, it may also contain other vectors

not in

. Hence, the null space of

,

which we denote by

, may be larger than

and

may not be a parity-check matrix for

.

For

to be the parity-check matrix of

,

We conclude that the s, for

, which are the rows

deleted from

to form

, are linear combi-

nations of and the rows in

. Hence, the rank

of

is exactly one less than the rank of

.

it is necessary and sufficient that its rank equals

,

where is the dimension of

. Since we are assuming

that

, where is the number of lines passing through

a point, i.e., the column weight of

, then is less than

the minimum distance of

and, in this case,

, the

dimension of

. We conclude that

is a

parity-check matrix of the punctured code

if and only

if deleting the columns in

and all the rows attached

to them reduces its rank by exactly . This is indeed the case

if the partial geometry is a net, e.g., a 2-D Euclidean geometry,

and

as stated in the following result.

Theorem 5: Let

be the incidence matrix of the

net

. Then, for every point , the matrix

In Examples 1 and 2, we show that

may still

be the parity-check matrix of the punctured code

for

values of greater than 1 even if the partial geometry is not a

net. Although for large values of ,

may not

be a parity-check matrix of

, it is still a parity-check

matrix of an RC-constrained code and because of its large

row redundancy, which is discussed next, the performance

of this code may be good. For brevity, we call the matrix

a punctured matrix of

regardless of

whether or not it is a parity-check matrix of the punctured code

.

C. Number of Rows in the Punctured Matrix of

is a parity-check matrix of the punctured code As mentioned earlier, large row redundancy in the parity-

of the PaG-LDPC code .

check matrices used for iterative decoding of LDPC codes is

Proof: Recall that

is obtained by deleting preferred to aid convergence and break small trapping sets as it

the column of

corresponding to the point in the increases the number of CNs connected to VNs in a trapping set.

and all the rows corresponding to the lines passing The number of rows in

, denoted by

,

through this point, i.e., in the intersecting bundle

. equals

, where is the number of rows in

.

Denote these lines by

and their incidence Determining this number for a given is a difficult problem

vectors by

, respectively. These incidence since

depends on the set of points and not only on

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIAO et al.: LDPC CODES ON PARTIAL GEOMETRIES: CONSTRUCTION, TRAPPING SET STRUCTURE, AND PUNCTURING

7907

the size of this set. Here we give lower bounds on the number of

rows

when the partial geometry

satisfies

, i.e., every pair of distinct points in the partial geometry

are adjacent. This covers, e.g., the cases of Euclidean and pro-

jective geometries.

Theorem 6: Let be a set of

points in

.

Then,

, where

is the number of rows in

.

Proof: For

, let be the number of lines

each passing through exactly points in . Then, the sum of

for

, is equal to the number of lines in , and

Since

and

, we get the result stated in the

theorem.

Notice that the lower bound in Theorem 7 agrees with that

in Theorem 6 in the case

and in the case

for

. In all other cases, Theorem 7 gives a better bound

than Theorem 6 since

(12)

and the last sum includes

positive integer terms with at

Since the notation used here is exactly what was used in the least one term greater than one, i.e., this last sum is greater than

proof of Theorem 3, (2) and (3) hold and equality holds in (3)

since any pair of points in are adjacent. As

for

, it follows from (3) that

. Hence,

. This

implies that the bound in Theorem 7 exceeds that of Theorem

6 if not all the points in are on one line in the parallel bundle

and there are at least two points in that are on one of these (13) lines.

In the following, we use two examples to demonstrate the

Subtracting both sides in (13) from the corresponding sides in

(2), the result follows from (12).

We remark that if the points in are collinear, then the bound

in Theorem 6 holds with equality.

We notice the similarity of the proof of this theorem and the

proof of Theorem 3. Indeed, notice that whereas a trapping set

is characterized by the induced subgeometry

, the punc-

tured matrix

is characterized by the residual

geometry

.

If in addition, the partial geometry

is a net, i.e.,

, such as a 2-D Euclidean geometry, then we can

improve the bound on

given in Theorem 6.

Theorem 7: Let be a parallel bundle and

be

the lines in . If is a set of points in the net

,

where

, then

error performance of sequences of Euclidean geometry (EG)

and projective geometry (PG) LDPC codes obtained by punc-

turing a given EG-LDPC code and a given PG-LDPC code, re-

spectively.

Example 1: Let the 2-D Euclidean geometry

be the code construction geometry. This geometry consists

of 1024 points and 1056 lines, each line passing through 32

points. The incidence matrix of this geometry is

which is

of size 1056 1024 and has column and row weights 33 and

32, respectively. The rank of this matrix is

. Hence,

has 813 redundant rows. Its null space is the (1024,781)

EG-LDPC code . Puncturing the matrix

by deleting

various columns and their attached rows, we obtain various

punctured matrices whose null spaces give EG-LDPC codes.

Table I gives the parameters of the punctured matrices and their

resulting codes if

randomly chosen

columns and their attached rows are deleted from

. The

BER performances of these EG-LDPC codes over the AWGN

where

is the number of rows in

, is the

number of points in that are on , and

is the number of lines in passing through at least

one point in .

Proof: We follow the notation used in the proof of The-

orem 4. Then, (5)–(8) hold. Furthermore, (5) becomes

for

since, among all the subsets

, there

are only that are nonempty. Also, equality holds in (8) as any

two distinct points in are adjacent. As

for

, we obtain from (8) that

channel decoded using the SPA with 50 iterations are shown in

Fig. 1.

For example, the entries in Table I corresponding to 16 punc-

tured bits are generated by randomly selecting a set of 16

points in

and deleting from

the 16 columns la-

beled by the points in and their attached rows. The number

of rows attached to these 16 columns is 431. The resultant ma-

trix is the 625 1008 matrix,

, with constant

row weight 32 and minimum column weight 17. The rank of this

matrix is 227 which is 16 less than the rank of

and it still

has 398 redundant rows. Since deleting the 16 columns and all

(14)

rows attached to them reduces the rank of of deleted columns, the null space of

by the number is the

Subtracting both sides in (14) from the corresponding sides in (6), it follows that

(1008,781) punctured EG-LDPC code

of rate

and minimum distance at least 18. At the BER of ,

this punctured code performs 1.97 dB from the Shannon limit.

This punctured code is still capable of correcting 8 or fewer er-

rors with the simple one-step majority-logic decoding [7].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7908

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 1. Error performances of the (1024,781) EG-LDPC code and its punctured codes in Example 1.

TABLE I PARAMETERS OF THE PUNCTURED MATRICES OF THE PARITY-CHECK MATRIX
OF THE (1024,781) EG-LDPC CODE AND ITS PUNCTURED CODES GIVEN IN EXAMPLE 1

redundant rows, decoding of

should converge fast.

The bit performances of this code with 5, 10, and 50 iterations

of the SPA are shown in Fig. 3. We see that the decoding of this

code indeed converges fast.

Example 2: Let the 2-D projective geometry

be

the code construction geometry. The incidence matrix of this ge-

ometry

is a circulant of size 4161 4161. Its rank is 730

and hence it has 3431 redundant rows. The null space of this cir-

culant gives the (65,65)-regular (4161,3431) cyclic PG-LDPC

code of minimum distance 66. Suppose we puncture

by deleting randomly selected columns and their attached

Let be 16 collinear points in

. In this case, the

number of rows attached to the 16 columns labeled by points

in is

. Removing these columns and

their attached rows, we obtain a 543 1008 punctured matrix

with minimum column weight 17. The rank

of this punctured matrix is still 227 but it has a smaller number

of redundant rows 316 compared to the 398 redundant rows

of the above punctured matrix obtained by deleting the 16

columns corresponding to the randomly selected and their

attached rows. The null space of the 543 1008 punctured

matrix,

again gives a (1008,781) EG-LDPC

code

. The bit error performance of this EG-LDPC

code is given in Fig. 2 which also includes the bit error per-

formance of the (1008,781) EG-LDPC code

given

rows where

. The ranks of these matrices equal

. Hence, they are parity-check matrices of the codes

obtained by puncturing . The error performances of these

codes, along with itself, are shown in Fig. 4. For example,

the punctured PG-LDPC code corresponding to the deletion of

32 bits is a (4129,3431) LDPC code with minimum distance at

least 34.

From the above examples, we have two observations. The

first observation is that the rank reduction of a punctured ma-

trix is the same as the number of columns being deleted from

and

no matter whether the columns to be deleted

are randomly chosen or not. The second observation is that the

punctured codes perform well which may be attributed to the

large row redundancy of their parity-check matrices.

above. We see that the first punctured code outperforms the second punctured code

slightly which may

D. Two-Phase Decoding for Correcting Errors and Erasures

be attributed to the fact that its parity-check matrix has a larger We have shown that puncturing a PaG-LDPC code

row redundancy than the second code obtained by deleting the gives a sequence of punctured PaG-LDPC codes with various

columns in

corresponding to collinear points.

lengths, rates, and minimum distances. Next, we show that

Since the parity-check matrix

of the

can be decoded over a channel causing combinations of

(1008,781) punctured EG-LDPC code

still has 316 errors and erasures using these punctured codes. The decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIAO et al.: LDPC CODES ON PARTIAL GEOMETRIES: CONSTRUCTION, TRAPPING SET STRUCTURE, AND PUNCTURING

7909

Fig. 2. Error performances of the two (1008,781) punctured EG-LDPC codes

and

in Example 1.

Fig. 3. Error performance of the (1008,781) punctured EG-LDPC code

given in Example 1 decoded with 5, 10, and 50 iterations of the SPA.

scheme has two phases. In the first phase of decoding, the era- The above two-phase technique is straightforward and ap-

sures are deleted from the received sequence and the punctured pears in several textbooks, see e.g., [77], [78]. The crucial idea

received sequence is decoded to a codeword in the punctured in this paper is that decoding the punctured received sequence is

code. For this purpose, an iterative message-passing decoding performed based on a punctured matrix of

, i.e., a subma-

algorithm, such as the SPA or the MSA, is used. In the second trix of

. This submatrix is obtained from

by deleting

phase of decoding, erasures are reinserted back in the corrected all columns corresponding to the erased positions and all rows

punctured received sequence at their original positions. Then, attached to these columns. If this submatrix is a parity-check

erasures are corrected.

matrix of the punctured code, obtained by puncturing

at

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7910

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 4. Error performances of the (4161,3431) cyclic PG-LDPC code and its punctured codes over the AWGN channel given in Example 2.

the erased positions, then we say that

separates the era- Phase 2 Correcting Erasures: In this phase, the decoder in-

sures. In this case, there is no need to either compute or store a serts the erased symbols in in their proper positions to produce

parity-check matrix for each punctured code to perform the first the sequence . This sequence is of length and has erasures

phase. For

to contain parity-check matrices of all punc- in the positions labeled by points in . The decoder’s task now

tured codes (corresponding to all sets of erased bits to be cor- is to find a codeword in

that agrees with in all posi-

rected) as submatrices,

should have a sufficiently large tions labeled by points not in , i.e., to find

such that

number of rows. The concept of using parity-check matrices

, where

is obtained from after deleting all bits

that separate erasures was introduced in [79] and [80] where labeled by points in .

the emphasis was on bounding the minimum number of rows in To accomplish this, the decoder picks a point

and

such parity-check matrices separating up to a given maximum a row in the parity-check matrix

that has a one in the

number of erasures and on constructing matrices with such a column labeled by and zeros in all columns labeled by other

minimum number of rows. However, such matrices and their points in . Let be such a row and be the bit in labeled

submatrices may not be suitable for decoding with iterative de- by the point in the set of points in the PaG. Then,

coding algorithms since they may not be RC-constrained and and

for all

and

. Since is selected

they may have a large number of trapping sets. On the contrary, to be in , it is orthogonal to over

, i.e., the inner

as shown in earlier, punctured submatrices of

yield good product of and is zero. Hence,

in

decoding performance.

, where

is the bit in labeled by the point . This

Let be a codeword in the PaG-LDPC code

of length equation implies that

, from which

constructed based on the partial geometry

. As- the bit

can be determined. By repeating this process for

sume that the channel causes erasures in positions labeled by all points

, the vector , that has no erasures, is formed.

points in a set of points. We assume that

. Let be Notice that all the erasures are corrected one by one by summing

the received sequence, which contains the erasures.

bits over

without the need to solve a cumbersome system

Phase 1 Correcting Errors: In this phase, the decoder deletes of linear equations with more than one unknown. Furthermore,

the erasures from the received sequence . Let be the re- it is worth stating that retrieving all the erasures can be done in

sulting sequence of length

. The decoder decodes

parallel. Once is obtained, the decoder checks if

using the punctured matrix

as a parity-check . If so, is the final decoder output otherwise decoding failure

matrix. Recall that the null space of

, denoted is declared.

by

, contains the punctured code

. Decoding The two-phase decoder succeeds in retrieving the transmitted

can be accomplished using an iterative message-passing algo- codeword if the first phase is successful in retrieving . In

rithm. If decoding produces a codeword of length

in other words, the block error rate of the two-phase decoder equals

, which we denote by , then the decoder proceeds to that of the first phase. Typically, over AWGN channels, it is the

the second phase.

decoder that decides which of the received bits to erase based

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIAO et al.: LDPC CODES ON PARTIAL GEOMETRIES: CONSTRUCTION, TRAPPING SET STRUCTURE, AND PUNCTURING

7911

Fig. 5. Error performances of the (1024,781) EG-LDPC code set to zero.

decoded using 50 iterations of the SPA with the LLRs of the erasures labeled by and

on their reliability. Let be the maximum number of erasures two-phase decoder. However, the two-phase decoder requires

introduced by the decoder. The erasure parameter should be less computations since in the first phase decoding is performed

chosen to optimize the error performance of the decoding of on the punctured matrix

, which has fewer

a PaG-LDPC code for correcting combinations of errors and rows and columns than

. Although the second phase

erasures.

needs some computations to retrieve the erasures, as stated

As an illustration of the concepts enunciated in this section, earlier this can be easily done by summing bits over

.

we use the (1024,781) EG-LDPC code constructed using More specifically, consider the computations associated with a

given in Example 1 for correcting combinations of VN that corresponds to an erasure. When applying an iterative

errors and erasures. For this geometry

. Suppose the belief propagation algorithm to

after setting the LLR

channel causes

erasures whose positions are labeled by value of that VN to zero, the VN needs to perform real-number

the points in . Then, in the first phase of decoding, all erasures computations and to send real-number messages to be pro-

are deleted from the received sequence and the resulting vector cessed by the CNs connected to it. This has to be done for

is decoded with respect to the punctured code

based each iteration. The complexity of these computations depends

on its parity-check matrix

. Once this phase on the type of the algorithm used, e.g., SPA or MSA. On the

is accomplished, the decoder retrieves all the erased bits in the other hand, when applying the two-phase decoding, the VN

second phase. In a different scenario, suppose that the channel corresponding to an erasure does not require any computations

causes

erasures whose positions are labeled by the whatsoever in the first decoding phase as it is actually excluded

points in , rather than . Then, decoding in the first phase is in this phase. In the second decoding phase, a single XOR-op-

performed based on the parity-check matrix

eration is needed to determine the value of the erased bit.

of the punctured code

. In both scenarios, the decoder Therefore, the two-phase decoding requires less computations

succeeds in retrieving the erased bits correctly in the second than decoding based on applying iterative belief propagation

phase if it is successful in the first phase. As shown in Fig. 2, the algorithms to

.

probability of success in the first phase depends on the positions of the erasures.

VI. CONCLUSION AND REMARKS

It should be stated that decoding over channels causing In this paper, we focused on partial geometry LDPC codes

combinations of errors and erasures can also be performed which not only include LDPC codes constructed based on Eu-

in a different way by applying iterative belief propagation clidean and projective geometries, but also codes constructed

algorithms to the matrix

after setting the LLR values of using other methods that do not seem to have a geometric in-

the erased bits in the received sequence to zero. Fig. 5 shows terpretation. Basically, by viewing the parity-check matrices of

the performance using this decoder if the erased positions are these codes as incidence matrices of partial geometries rather

labeled by the points in and . Comparing with Fig. 2, than merely binary matrices, we were able to gain a better under-

it is clear that this decoder performs almost the same as the standing of their structure. The geometric approach we devel-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

oped allowed us to investigate trapping set structure and punc-
turing of PaG LDPC codes.
Our results are applicable to structured LDPC codes
constructed based on partial geometries. They are also ap-
plicable to a large number of codes defined by parity-check
matrices obtained by some variations of the incidence matrices
of partial geometries including deleting a certain number of
rows and columns or constructing parity-check matrices that
are arrays of the incidence matrices. These variations result in
mostly cyclic and quasi-cyclic codes [10]–[19] that avoid small
trapping sets.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. MacKay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] T. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[5] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[6] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[7] S. Lin and D. J. Costello Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[8] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. New York, NY, USA: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[9] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–596, Feb. 2005.
[10] J. Xu, L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of regular and irregular LDPC codes: Geometry decomposition and masking,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 121–134, Jan. 2007.
[11] N. Kamiya, “High-rate quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes derived from finite affine planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1444–1459, Apr. 2007.
[12] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[13] Y. Y. Tai, L. Lan, L. Zheng, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Algebraic construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for the AWGN and erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1765–1774, Oct. 2006.
[14] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels: A finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2429–2458, Jul. 2007.
[15] S. Song, B. Zhou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A unified approach to the construction of binary and nonbinary quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on finite fields,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 84–93, Jan. 2009.
[16] J. Kang, Q. Huang, L. Zhang, B. Zhou, and S. Lin, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: An algebraic construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1383–1396, May 2010.
[17] L. Zhang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: An algebraic construction, rank analysis, and codes on Latin squares,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3126–3139, Nov. 2010.
[18] L. Zhang, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, Z. Ding, and B. Zhou, “Quasicyclic LDPC codes on cyclic subgroups of finite fields,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 2330–2336, Sep. 2011.

[19] Q. Huang, Q. Diao, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Cyclic and quasicyclic LDPC codes on constrained parity-check matrices and their trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 2648–2671, May 2012.
[20] Q. Diao, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A matrix-theoretic approach for analyzing quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 4030–4048, Jun. 2012.
[21] D. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theoretical Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003.
[22] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control and Comp., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[23] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Networks, Commun. Mobile Comput., Maui, HI, USA, Jun. 2005, pp. 630–635.
[24] S. Sankaranarayanan, S. K. Chilappagari, R. Radhakrishnan, and B. Vasić, “Failures of the Gallager B decoder: Analysis and applications,” presented at the Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 6–10, 2006.
[25] M. Stepanov and M. Chertkov, “Instanton analysis of low-density parity-check codes in error-floor regime,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, USA, Jul. 9–14, 2006, pp. 552–556.
[26] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[27] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic, “LDPC codes based on Latin squares: Cycle structure, stopping set, and trapping set analysis,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 303–312, Feb. 2007.
[28] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating stopping and trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1640–1650, Apr. 2010.
[29] M. Ivković, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasić, “Designing LDPC codes without small trapping sets by using Tanner graph covers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 24–29, 2007, pp. 2266–2270.
[30] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolić, “Analysis of absorbing sets for array-based LDPC codes,” in Int. Conf. Commun., Glasgow, Scotland, Jun. 24–28, 2007, pp. 6261–6268.
[31] S. Abu-Surra, W. E. Ryan, and D. Divsalar, “Asymptotic ensemble enumerators for protograph-based generalized LDPC codes: Computational complexity,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, Jan.-Feb. 1, 2008, pp. 63–65.
[32] M. Ivković, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasić, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.
[33] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolić, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Lowering LDPC error floors by post processing,” presented at the IEEE GlobeCom. Conf., New Orleans, LA, USA, Nov.-Dec. 30–4, 2008.
[34] D. G. M. Michell, A. E. Pusane, and D. J. Costello Jr., “Asymptotic trapping set analysis of regular protograph-based LDPC convolutional code ensembles,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 8–13, 2009, pp. 264–271.
[35] E. Pusane, D. J. Costello Jr., and D. G. M. Mitchell, “Trapping set analysis of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seoul, Korea, Jun.-Jul. 28–3, 2009, pp. 561–565.
[36] H. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor detection/decoding of LDPCcoded partial response channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 252–260, Feb. 2010.
[37] E. Cavus, C. L. Haymes, and B. Daneshrad, “Low BER performance estimation of LDPC codes via application of importance sampling to trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1886–1888, Jul. 2009.
[38] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolić, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance: Quantization and algorithm choices,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 3258–3268, Nov. 2009.
[39] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolić, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIAO et al.: LDPC CODES ON PARTIAL GEOMETRIES: CONSTRUCTION, TRAPPING SET STRUCTURE, AND PUNCTURING

7913

[40] S. Abu-Surra, D. Declercq, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Trapping set enumerators for specific LDPC codes,” presented at the Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, Jan.-Feb. 31–5, 2010.
[41] S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, B. Vasić, and M. W. Marcellin, “On trapping sets and guaranteed error correction capability of LDPC codes and GLDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1600–1611, Apr. 2010.
[42] J. Kang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An iterative decoding algorithm with backtracking to lower the error floors of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 64–73, Jan. 2011.
[43] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
[44] C. Schlegel and S. Zhang, “On the dynamics of the error floor behavior in (regular) LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3248–3264, Jul. 2010.
[45] J. Ha and S. W. McLaughlin, “Optimal puncturing of irregular lowdensity parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Commun., Anchorage, AL, USA, May 11–15, 2003, pp. 3110–3114.
[46] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “Results on punctured low-density paritycheck codes and improved iterative decoding techniques,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 599–614, Feb. 2007.
[47] J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004.
[48] M. R. Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, “On construction of rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 159–161, Mar. 2004.
[49] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Codes for iterative decoding from partial geometries,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 236–243, Feb. 2004.
[50] X. Li, C. Zhang, and J. Shen, “Regular LDPC codes from semipartial geometries,” Acta. Appl. Math., vol. 102, pp. 25–35, 2008.
[51] J. R. H. Hutton, “LDPC codes from semipartial geometries,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Sussex, Sussex, U.K., 2011.
[52] P. Vandendriessche, “LDPC codes arising from partial and semipartial geometries,” presented at the Int. Workshop Codes Cryptography, Paris, France, Apr. 11–15, 2011.
[53] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “The trapping redundancy of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 53–63, Jan. 2009.
[54] H. Liu, Y. Li, L. Ma, and J. Chen, “On the smallest absorbing sets of LDPC codes from finite planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 4014–4020, Jun. 2012.
[55] R. C. Bose, “Strongly regular graphs, partial geometries and partially balanced designs,” Pacific J. Math., vol. 13, pp. 389–419, 1963.
[56] L. M. Batten, Combinatorics of Finite Geometries, 2nd ed. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997.
[57] P. J. Cameron and J. H. van Lint, Designs, Graphs, Codes, and their Links. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1991.
[58] H. Mann, Analysis and Design of Experiments. New York, NY, USA: Dover, 1949.
[59] R. D. Carmichael, Introduction to the Theory of Groups of Finite Orders. New York, NY, USA: Dover, 1956.
[60] A. P. Street and D. J. Street, Combinatorics of Experimental Designs. New York, NY, USA: Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1987.
[61] T. Kasami, S. Lin, and W. W. Peterson, “Polynomial codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 807–814, Nov. 1968.
[62] S. Lin, “Number of information symbols in polynomial codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 785–794, Nov. 1972.
[63] C. J. Colbourn and H. J. Dinitz, The CRC Handbook of Combinatorial Designs. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 1996.
[64] L. Lan, Y. Y. Tai, S. Lin, B. Memari, and B. Honary, “New constructions of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on special classes of BIBD’s for the AWGN and the binary erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 39–48, Jan. 2008.
[65] B. Ammar, B. Honary, Y. Kou, J. Xu, and S. Lin, “Construction of low density parity check codes based on balanced incomplete block designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory., vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1257–1268, Jun. 2004.
[66] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Regular low-density parity-check codes from combinatorial designs,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Cairns, Australia, Sep. 2001, pp. 90–92.

[67] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasić, “Error floors of LDPC codes on binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 11–15, 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1089–1094.
[68] C. A. Cole, S. G. Wilson, E. K. Hall, and T. R. Giallorenzi, A general method for finding low error-rates of LDPC codes 2006 [Online]. Available: arXiv:cs/0605051v1
[69] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolić, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation,” presented at the IEEE Globecom San Francisco, CA, USA, Nov.-Dec. 27–1, 2006.
[70] S. Abu-Surra, W. E. Ryan, and D. Divsalar, “Ensemble trapping set enumerators for protograph-based LDPC codes,” presented at the 45th Annu. Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. Monticello, IL, USA, Sep. 2007.
[71] M. Hirotomo, Y. Konishi, and M. Morii, “Approximate examination of trapping sets of LDPC codes using the probabilistic algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl., Auckland, New Zealand, Dec. 7–8, 2008, pp. 1–6.
[72] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, Jun. 2009.
[73] Y. F. Zhang and W. E. Ryan, “Toward low LDPC-code floors: A case study,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1566–1573, Jun. 2009.
[74] B. Vasić, S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, and S. K. Planjery, “Trapping set ontology,” presented at the 47th Annu. Conf. Commun, Control, Comput., Allerton, IL, USA, Sep.-Oct. 30–2, 2009.
[75] D. V. Nyuyen, B. Vasić, M. Marcellin, and S. K. Chilappagari, Structured LDPC codes from permutation matrices free of small trapping sets 2010 [Online]. Available: arXiv:1004.1198v1
[76] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, Error floor approximation for LDPC codes in the AWGN channel 2012 [Online]. Available: arXiv:1202. 2826v1
[77] W. C. Huffman and V. Pless, Fundamentals of Error-Correcting Codes. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
[78] R. M. Roth, Introduction to Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2006.
[79] K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar and J. H. Weber, “Separating erasures from errors for decoding,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Toronto, Canada, Jul. 6–11, 2008.
[80] K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar and J. H. Weber, “Parity-check matrices separating erasures from errors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 3332–3346, Jun. 2013.
Qiuju Diao received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Xi’an University of Science and Technology, Xi’an, China in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from University of California, Davis, CA in 2013. She is currently working as an engineer at the LSI Corporation, San Jose, CA.
Her research interests include coding theory and its applications to communication and storage systems.
Ying Yu Tai (S’05–M’06–SM’12) received the B.S. degree from National Sun Yat-Sen University, Taiwan, in 1995, and the M.S. degrees in mechanical engineering and statistics, both from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, in 2000 and 2002, respectively. In 2006, he received his Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from University of California, Davis.
Dr. Tai is currently with SanDisk Corporation, Milpitas, CA, where he is a Director of research engineering. Prior to SanDisk, he held senior technical and management positions at Cadence Design Systems Inc., The Boeing Company, and Ikanos Communications Inc. His current research areas include coding theory, signal processing, and their applications to data communications and storage systems.
Dr. Tai is a Senior Member of IEEE. In 2007, he was a recipient of the IEEE Communications Society Stephen O. Rice Prize in the Field of Communications Theory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7914

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Shu Lin (S’62–M’65–SM’78–F’80–LF’00) received the B.S.E.E. degree from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1959, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Rice University, Houston, TX, in 1964 and 1965, respectively.
In 1965, he joined the Faculty of the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He became an Associate Professor in 1969 and a Professor in 1973. In 1986, he joined Texas A & M University, College Station, as the Irma Runyon Chair Professor of Electrical Engineering. In 1987, he returned to the University of Hawaii. From 1978 to 1979, he was a Visiting Scientist at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, where he worked on error control protocols for data communication systems. He spent the academic year of 1996–1997 as a Visiting Professor at the Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. He retired from University of Hawaii in 1999 and he is currently an Adjunct Professor at University of California, Davis. He has published numerous technical papers in IEEE TRANSACTIONS and other refereed journals. He is the author of the book, An Introduction to Error-Correcting Codes (Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970). He also co-authored (with D. J. Costello) the book, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications (Upper Saddle River, NJ: PrenticeHall, 1st edition, 1982, 2nd edition, 2004), (with T. Kasami, T. Fujiwara, and M. Fossorier) the book, Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms, (Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1998), and (with W. E. Ryan) the book, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern, (Cambridge University Press, 2009). His current research areas include algebraic coding theory, coded modulation, error control systems, and satellite communications. He has served as the Principle Investigator on 32 research grants.
Dr. Lin is a Member of the IEEE Information Theory Society and the Communication Society. He served as the Associate Editor for Algebraic Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 1976 to 1978, and as the Program Co-Chairman of the IEEE International Symposium of Information Theory held in Kobe, Japan, in June 1988. He was the President of the IEEE Information Theory Society in 1991. In 1996, he was a recipient of the Alexander von Humboldt Research Prize for U.S. Senior Scientists and a recipient of the IEEE Third-Millennium Medal, 2000. In 2007, he was a recipient of The Communications Society Stephen O. Rice Prize in the Field of Communications Theory.

Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar received the B.Sc. degree from Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt, in 1980, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, in 1983 and 1986, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
In 1988, Dr. Abdel-Ghaffar joined the University of California, Davis, where he is now a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering. He did research at the IBM Almaden Research Center, San Jose, CA, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands, University of Bergen, Norway, and Alexandria University, Egypt. His main interest is coding theory.
Dr. Abdel-Ghaffar served as an Associate Editor for Coding Theory for the IEEE TTRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 2002 to 2005 and he is currently serving as an Associate Editor for Algebraic and LDPC Codes for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS. He is a co-recipient of the IEEE Communications Society 2007 Stephen O. Rice Prize paper award.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

