2464

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 28, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2020

Information Storage Bit-Flipping Decoder for LDPC Codes
Hangxuan Cui , Jun Lin, and Zhongfeng Wang

Abstract— Tabu-list random-penalty gradient descent bit-flipping (TRGDBF) decoder is the state-of-the-art hard-decision low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoder in terms of error-correction performance on binary symmetric channel (BSC). However, the TRGDBF decoder suffers from a long critical path caused by the global maximum-finding operation, limiting the achievable throughput. This brief proposes an information storage bit-flipping (ISBF) decoder to solve this problem. Different from the existing bit-flipping (BF) decoders which adopt serial decoding manner, in the ISBF decoder, by storing the previous decoding information, the global maximum-finding operation can be executed in parallel to other decoding operations, significantly shortening the critical path. Moreover, a nonuniform flipping rule is incorporated to achieve a better decoding performance. We also present an efficient architecture to implement the ISBF decoder. The design example demonstrates that compared to other hard-decision BF decoders, the ISBF decoder could provide both the best decoding performance and throughput on BSC.
Index Terms— Adaptive threshold, bit-flipping (BF), harddecision decoding, high-throughput, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been widely applied in communications and NAND flash memories due to their nearcapacity performance [1]. Among various decoding algorithms, the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm offers the optimal performance at the cost of high computation complexity. Therefore, the MinSum (MS) and offset MS (OMS) algorithms were proposed to simplify the decoding procedure. On the contrary, the bit-flipping (BF) decoding shows the lowest complexity but its performance is far from optimal [1]. To bridge the performance gap between the BF and BP algorithms, some soft-information-aided BF decodings, such as the gradient descent BF (GDBF) [2], noisy GDBF (NGDBF) [3], and adjustment factor aided NGDBF (A-NGDBF) [4] algorithms, have been proposed. However, the involved floating-point operations dramatically increase the overall complexity and the generation of soft information is much more complex than only generating hard information.
This brief focuses on the design of an efficient BF decoder for regular LDPC codes that only uses hard information. In [5], the GDBF was adapted to binary symmetric channel (BSC) and the probabilistic GDBF (PGDBF) decoder was proposed. Thanks to the introduction of deliberate random perturbation, the PGDBF decoder performs far better than the original GDBF. In [6], the probabilistic parallel BF (PPBF) decoder was proposed in which each bit is flipped with a probability depending on its reliability. Though the PPBF could offer a higher frequency with equivalent error-correction performance
Manuscript received May 12, 2020; revised June 17, 2020; accepted July 10, 2020. Date of publication September 17, 2020; date of current version October 23, 2020. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61604068, in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant 021014380065, and in part by the Key Research Plan of Jiangsu Province of China under Grant BE2019003-4. (Corresponding authors: Jun Lin; Zhongfeng Wang.)
The authors are with the School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210008, China (e-mail: haxcui@163.com; jlin@nju.edu.cn; zfwang@nju.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2020.3009270

to the PGDBF, it has numerous parameters to be adjusted which brings inconvenience to practical applications. The adaptive bit-local threshold BF (ABTBF) was designed to facilitate high-throughput decoding [7]. However, the ABTBF decoder is only applicable to LDPC codes with large enough column weight. Recently, the Tabulist random-penalty GDBF (TRGDBF) [8] decoder was proposed. Due to better capability to overcome the repeated flip problem, it further improves the performance of the PGDBF and PPBF by nearly two orders. Unfortunately, the involved global maximumfinding operation limits the achievable frequency, especially when the codeword length is long. The maximum approximation method presented in [9] is used to reduce the critical path of the BF decoder by approximating the sorting operation. However, since no sorting operation is involved, this method is not suitable for the abovementioned algorithms.
To improve the throughput of BF decoders while maintaining the good error-correction performance, a new decoder, named information storage BF (ISBF) decoder, is proposed in this work. The main character of the ISBF decoder is that instead of using the reliability values calculated in the current iteration, those of the previous iteration are used to perform the maximum-finding operations. Therefore, by storing the reliability values computed in the previous iteration, the maximum-finding operations can be executed in parallel to the reliability value calculations, significantly shortening the critical path. Moreover, a nonuniform flipping rule is proposed to improve the decoding performance. A well-optimized architecture is also presented to implement the ISBF decoder. The design example shows that compared to other BF decoders, the ISBF not only offers the best performance but also notably improves the throughput.

II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Notations
An (N, K ) (dv , dc) regular binary LDPC code is defined by an M × N parity check matrix H which has dv 1’s in each column and dc 1’s in each row. M = N − K and the code rate R = K /N. Let Nc(i) denote the set of variable nodes (VNs) connected to the ith check node (CN) for i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , M − 1}. Similarly, Nv (k) denotes the neighbor set of the kth VN where k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N − 1}. Assume x is a codeword which satisfies xHT = 0 and is transmitted over BSC with crossover probability α. Let y denote the received codeword from channel, for which we have Pr(yk = xk ) =1−α and Pr(yk =1−xk ) = α. The estimated codeword is denoted by c, and Tmax denotes the maximum number of iterations. In this brief, we use the superscript t to denote the iteration index, where 0 ≤ t < Tmax.

B. Related BF Decoders on BSC The energy function of the original BF algorithm [1] is defined as

Ek =

si

(1)

i∈Nv (k)

where s is the syndrome vector and si = ⊕k∈Nc(i)ck . ⊕ represents the Exclusive-OR (XOR) operation. The value of the energy function

is called energy value, which indicates the reliability of each bit.

In the BF algorithm, the bits with the maximum energy value are

1063-8210 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 28, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2020

2465

considered as the most unreliable ones that need to be flipped. As can be seen, the BF decoding is quite simple but it suffers from an inferior performance.
The GDBF algorithm [2] was derived by considering the decoding as a maximum likelihood problem and then applying the gradient descent method to solve it. When applied on BSC, the energy function of GDBF is

Algorithm 1 ISBF Decoding Algorithm

Ek = ck ⊕ yk +

si = ck ⊕ yk + Sk.

(2)

i∈Nv (k)

As can be seen, the energy value varies from 0 to dv + 1. Different from the GDBF decoding in which all bits with the maximum energy value are automatically flipped, these bits are flipped with a predefined probability p in the PGDBF [5] to help the decoder escape from local maximum. This probabilistic behavior makes the PGDBF obviously outperform the GDBF in terms of error-correction performance. In the PPBF [6], each bit is flipped with a probability corresponding to its energy value. Therefore, the PPBF could omit the global operation to find the maximum energy value so it could provide a higher frequency than the PGDBF decoder. However, optimizing dv + 2 probability factors is time-consuming, especially for high column-degree codes. Moreover, the above decoders still perform far from the MS decoder.
To help the decoder escape from trapping-sets, the TRGDBF decoder [8] was proposed which significantly narrows the performance gap between MS and BF decoders. The following equation shows the energy function of the TRGDBF decoder:

Ek = ck ⊕ yk +

si + λ.

(3)

i∈Nv (k)

λ is called random-penalty term which equals 1 with probability σ . Otherwise λ = 0. Moreover, a tabu-list is employed in the TRGDBF to overcome the repeated flip problem. The bits, which have the maximum energy value and are not in the tabu-list, are considered as the most unreliable ones that should be flipped. After the flipping operation, the flipped bits will be added into the tabu-list lasting for one iteration.

III. PROPOSED INFORMATION STORAGE BF DECODER

In order to reduce the negative influence of the maximum-finding

operation on critical path, an ISBF decoder is presented in this

section. In the proposed ISBF decoder, first, the energy value of each

bit is calculated according to (2). Then, a bit is flipped with a certain

probability if its energy value Ek reaches the threshold Th. By storing the energy values obtained from the previous iteration and setting Th

as the maximum value of them, Th can be calculated in parallel to

Ek . Therefore, different from other BF decoders where the energy value calculation and global maximum-finding operation are executed

serially, these two operations are performed parallel in the proposed

ISBF decoder so the decoding delay is significantly reduced.

Considering the decoding performance, it should be noted that the

energy value of the flipped bit should be adjusted before being used to

calculate the threshold Th. For instance, assume the kth bit is flipped

in the tth iteration. flipping operation,

wSiencseetckE ⊕k(t ) y=k

and δ−

Sk E

are both changed after

(t ) k

to

roughly

estimate

the the

updated information. δ denotes the maximum achievable energy value

and δ = dv +1 for a degree-dv code. Moreover, a nonuniform flipping

rule is introduced to the ISBF. As stated in [3], the local maximum

likelihood (LML) BF decisions have increasing dependence on Sk as the error probability of each bit decreases. Therefore, we flip the bits

which have Sk ≥ Th with probability p0. For other bits which have Ek ≥ Th, they will be flipped with probability p1 where p1 ≤ p0.

Fig. 1. Relationship between T h and Emax in the ISBF decoding.
Consequently, for two flipping candidates that have the same energy value, the one with larger Sk has more chance to be flipped, so the importance of Sk is highlighted.
Algorithm 1 describes the proposed ISBF algorithm in detail, where B( p) denotes the Bernoulli distribution with probability p. Since no prior information can be used, Th(0) is set to δ to avoid excessive flip.
In the proposed ISBF decoder, the threshold Th is inherently optimized by the decoding itself. To have an intuitive description of how the ISBF selects the flipping candidates, Fig. 1 shows the relationship between Th and Emax, where Emax denotes the maximum energy value in the corresponding iteration. The dv = 3, dc = 6, N = 1296, R = 1/2 (dv3R050N1296) code is adopted and at least 10 000 frames are simulated for each point. Tmax is set to 300. As can be seen, in most cases Th ≤ Emax. Moreover, Th is more likely to be Emax or Emax − 1. When Th = Emax, only the bits with the maximum energy value could be flipped. When Th = Emax − 1, the bits with the second maximum energy value also have chance to be flipped. Therefore, compared to other works, the ISBF keeps the priority of the bits with the maximum energy value in flipping and encourages other bits, especially the bits with the second maximum energy value, to become the flipping candidates. Since the probability that Th(t) = Em(ta)x increases as α decreases, the flipping priority of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2466

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 28, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2020

Fig. 2. Simulation results on the dv3R050N1296 LDPC code.

Fig. 3. Simulation results on the dv4R050N1296 LDPC code.

bits with the maximum energy value grows as the channel condition becomes better.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The decoding performance of the ISBF algorithm is illustrated in this section and compared with the GDBF, PGDBF, PPBF, ABTBF, and TRGDBF algorithms. All algorithms are simulated on BSC and the decoding will be terminated when 300 failed codewords are collected. As in the previous works [5], [6], [8], [10], we consider two widely used LDPC codes, the dv3R050N1296 code and the dv = 4, dc = 8, N = 1296, R = 1/2 (dv4R050N1296) code, to evaluate the frame-error-rate (FER) performance and Tmax is set to 300 unless otherwise stated. Moreover, the performance of the floating-point OMS algorithm with the layered schedule is also added for comparison, for which Tmax = 20.

Fig. 4. FER performance of several algorithms under different iteration number limits when α = 0.03.

A. Performance Comparison
Fig. 2 shows the simulation results on the dv3R050N1296 code, where p0 = 0.75 and p1 = 0.45. The probability values p0 and p1 are optimized by exploiting intensive simulations and the test step is set to 0.05. For simplicity, p0 and p1 are fixed for all crossover probability points. Since the ABTBF is only effective for some particular codes, it performs worse on the dv3R050N1296 code. The proposed ISBF shows the best error-correction performance among all BF algorithms. Compared to the TRGDBF algorithm, the ISBF provides almost one order gain in FER performance. It should be noted that the ISBF also has a shorter decoding delay than the TRGDBF. Compared to the PPBF and PGDBF algorithms, the ISBF improves the FER performance by more than two orders and the performance gap increases as α decreases.
Fig. 3 shows the simulation results on the dv4R050N1296 code, where p0 = 0.80 and p1 = 0.75. For this code, the ISBF performs similarly as the TRGDBF and even better than the OMS decoding with the layered schedule. In general, the ISBF shows the best performance among all BF algorithms and bridges the performance gap between the BF and OMS decoding algorithms on BSC.
In Fig. 4, we plot the FER as a function of Tmax when α = 0.03, where the dv3R050N1296 code is adopted. It can be observed that the GDBF is saturated when Tmax = 20 and the PGDBF tends to saturate from Tmax = 300, while the other three algorithms continuously provide extra performance gain. Moreover, the ISBF offers the best performance among all BF decoders from Tmax = 30 and the performance gap increases with the growth of Tmax. When Tmax = 1000, the FER performance gap between the ISBF and PGDBF decoders is almost three orders. Therefore, the ISBF is promising in the applications requiring very low error rate.

Fig. 5. Statistical results about the bits with the maximum and second maximum energy values.
B. Performance Analysis
Fig. 5(a) shows the percentages of erroneous bits in two cases, i.e., the bits which have the maximum energy value (Ek = Emax) and the bits which have the second maximum energy value (Ek = Emax − 1). The dv3R050N1296 code is adopted and at least 3 00 000 frames are simulated for each point. As can be seen, most of the bits with Ek = Emax are erroneous and the percentage grows as α decreases, which demonstrates it is reasonable to preferentially flip the bits with the maximum energy value, especially when the channel condition is good, as in the ISBF decoder. Moreover, considering nearly 20% of bits with Ek = Emax − 1 are erroneous, it is unwise to only flip the bits with the maximum energy value, as in the GDBF, PGDBF, and TRGDBF decoders. To demonstrate it more intuitively, Fig. 5(b) shows the percentages of bits with Ek = Emax and Ek = Emax −1 in all erroneous bits. It can be seen that these two

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 28, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2020
TABLE I SYNTHESIS RESULTS ON THE DV3R050N1296 CODE

2467

Fig. 7. Detailed architectures in the ISBF decoder. (a) Energy-value calculation unit. (b) Indicator unit.

Fig. 6. Top-level architecture of the ISBF decoder.
kinds of erroneous bits both occupy a large portion of the erroneous bits. Therefore, the decoder should also pay attention to the bits with the second maximum energy value, which explains the performance gain of the ISBF. As for the PPBF decoder, though all bits are flipping candidates, the flipping probability for each energy value is fixed while Emax varies during decoding. Therefore, the PPBF cannot match the decoding process precisely, and hence, it performs far worse than the ISBF decoder.
V. HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE AND SYNTHESIS RESULTS
In this section, we present the hardware architecture of the ISBF decoder and then synthesize it on the application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC). For convenience, the dv3R050N1296 code is adopted.
A. Hardware Architecture of the ISBF Decoder
Fig. 6 shows the top-level architecture of the ISBF decoder. The decoding process is described as follows. First, the estimated codeword c is initialized to the received codeword y in VN units (VNUs). Then, the syndrome vector s is calculated in CN units (CNUs). After that, the energy-value calculation units (ECUs) calculate Ek and Sk of each bit and then send these two values to the indicator units (IUs). At the same time, the threshold Th is calculated in the maximum finder (MF). By applying E, S, Th, and the probability signal vector R, IUs generate the indicator vector I according to Algorithm 1. Next, IUs adjust the energy values of bits with Ik = 1, which will be flipped in VNUs. The energy-value memory (E-MEM) is used to store the energy values. To support massive parallel read and write operations, E-MEM is implemented with registers. The early stop unit (ESU) is used to verify the estimated codeword. If c satisfies all parity check functions or Tmax is reached, the decoding will be terminated. The implementations of the VNU, CNU, and MF are simple and similar to the structures presented in our previous work [8], so the detailed circuits are not shown here. The random sequence is generated offline and stored in the random probability generator. By cyclically shifting the random sequence, the performance loss is negligible. Moreover, for the selected dv3R050N1296 code, p0 ≈ 1−(1− p1) p1. To reduce

the hardware resource consumption, only the random sequence for p1 is stored and the random sequence for p0 is generated by applying the probability controlling method presented in [6].
1) Energy-Value Calculation Unit: Fig. 7(a) shows the architecture of ECU, where sk,1, sk,2, and sk,3 are the syndromes connected to the kth VN. To reduce the decoding delay, Ek and Sk are both expressed in a modified format, i.e., Ek is represented by dv + 1 bits {Ek,dv +1 . . . Ek,2 Ek,1}, where Ek, j = 1 if Ek ≥ j . Since Sk is part of Ek , we calculate Sk first and then Ek is derived based on Sk and ck ⊕ yk to reduce hardware cost. If ck ⊕ yk = 1, Ek = {Sk, ck ⊕ yk}. Otherwise, Ek = {ck ⊕ yk, Sk}. Based on the above operation, the hardware overhead of ECUs is reduced from 30N OR gates to 8N OR gates and 4N 2-to-1 multiplexers.
2) Indicator Unit: In the IUs, the indicator vector I is calculated first using comparison operations. After that, the energy value of the bits with Ik = 1 should be adjusted. To avoid involving the data format transformation and add operations, Ek is updated based on the circuit shown in Fig. 7(b). When Ik = 1, which means that the kth bit will be flipped, its energy value Ek is modified from {Ek,4 Ek,3 Ek,2 Ek,1} to {E¯k,1 E¯k,2 E¯k,3 E¯k,4} that equals δ − Ek . Otherwise, Ek will not be changed. Therefore, instead of using adders and format converters, only four 2-to-1 multiplexers and inverters are applied to adjust the energy value.
B. Synthesis Results
In this section, we report the ASIC synthesis results of the ISBF decoder. The hardware architecture is coded with register transfer level (RTL) and synthesized under the TSMC 90-nm CMOS technology using the Synopsys Design Compiler. Since the reported implementation results of the PGDBF [11] and PPBF [6] decoders are obtained under another different synthesis environment, these two decoders are re-implemented and synthesized to make a fair comparison. Table I shows the synthesis results on the dv3R050N1296 code. Due to the additional memory cost of storing energy values, the area of the ISBF is 0.334 mm2, which is larger than those of the other three decoders. However, the ISBF shows a fairly good frequency, for its short critical path. Compared to the TRGDBF decoder, it improves the frequency by up to 76.8%. Note that the ISBF decoder also provides the best error-correction performance. Though the PPBF decoder has the highest frequency and the smallest area among all decoders, its performance is far worse than that of the ISBF decoder. Table I also lists the worst case throughput and average throughput

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2468

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 28, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2020

when α = 0.01, which are computed as θ = ((N × fmax)/(Tmax × Nc)) and θave = ((N × fmax)/(Tave × Nc)), respectively. Nc denotes the number of clock cycles in one iteration. For all decoders presented in Table I, Nc = 1 and Tmax = 300. As can be seen, the ISBF offers the best average throughput among all decoders. Compared to the PGDBF, PPBF, and TRGDBF decoders, the ISBF improves the throughput by 40.8%, 21.9%, and 28.5%, respectively. Therefore, considering its outstanding decoding performance and throughput, the proposed ISBF decoder is very competitive among hard-decision BF decoders.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, we present an ISBF decoder to improve the decoding performance and throughput of hard-decision BF decoders. To shorten the critical path, the previous reliability values are stored to achieve the parallel decoding operations. Moreover, a nonuniform flipping rule is proposed to fit the LML analysis. The hardware architecture of the ISBF is also introduced with thorough optimizations. Generally, the ISBF is visibly superior to other BF decoders in terms of both the decoding performance and throughput, making it a promising solution for practical applications.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[2] T. Wadayama, K. Nakamura, M. Yagita, Y. Funahashi, S. Usami, and I. Takumi, “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1610–1614, Jun. 2010.
[3] G. Sundararajan, C. Winstead, and E. Boutillon, “Noisy gradient descent bit-flip decoding for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 3385–3400, Oct. 2014.
[4] B. Dai, R. Liu, C. Gao, and Z. Mei, “Noisy gradient descent bit-flipping decoder based on adjustment factor for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1152–1155, Jun. 2018.
[5] O. A. Rasheed, P. Ivanis, and B. Vasic, “Fault-tolerant probabilistic gradient-descent bit flipping decoder,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 1487–1490, Sep. 2014.
[6] K. Le et al., “A probabilistic parallel bit-flipping decoder for low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 403–416, Jan. 2019.
[7] Y. Liu and M. Zhang, “Hard-decision bit-flipping decoder based on adaptive bit-local threshold for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 789–792, May 2019.
[8] H. Cui, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “An improved gradient descent bit-flipping decoder for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 3188–3200, Aug. 2019.
[9] J. Jung and I.-C. Park, “Multi-bit flipping decoding of LDPC codes for NAND storage systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 979–982, May 2017.
[10] H. Cui, J. Lin, S. Song, and Z. Wang, “A new probabilistic gradient descent bit flipping decoder for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Sapporo, Japan, May 2019, pp. 1–5.
[11] K. Le, D. Declercq, F. Ghaffari, L. Kessal, O. Boncalo, and V. Savin, “Variable-node-shift based architecture for probabilistic gradient descent bit flipping on QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 2183–2195, Jul. 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

