IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2020

6669

Enhanced Quasi-Maximum Likelihood Decoding Based on 2D Modified Min-Sum Algorithm for 5G LDPC Codes
Peng Kang , Member, IEEE, Yixuan Xie , Member, IEEE, Lei Yang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Jinhong Yuan , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— We propose a two-dimensional modified min-sum algorithm for the LDPC codes in the fifth generation (5G) networks standard to approach the error performance of the sum-product algorithm (SPA). In the proposed decoding algorithm, we adopt a partial self-correction method followed by message amplification to improve the reliability of the variableto-check (V2C) messages. To further approach the performance of the maximum likelihood decoding for 5G short LDPC codes, we propose an enhanced quasi-maximum likelihood (EQML) decoding method. The proposed decoding method performs multiple rounds of decoding tests once the first decoding attempt fails, where the decoder inputs of the selected unreliable variable nodes are modified in each decoding test. A novel node selection method based on the sign fluctuation of V2C messages is proposed for the EQML decoding method. We also present a partial pruning stopping (PPS) rule to reduce the decoding complexity by deactivating part of the decoding tests once a valid codeword is found. A lower bound on the error performance is also derived by using the semi-analytical method. Simulation results show that the EQML decoding method outperforms the SPA with the same decoding complexity and other QML decoding methods, and it approaches the Polyanskiy-Poor-Verdú bound within 0.4 dB.
Index Terms— LDPC codes, iterative decoding, short block lengths, low code rates, decoding complexity, node selection, reprocessing.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [2] and their variations, e.g., [3]–[12], have been proposed to wide
Manuscript received July 12, 2020; accepted August 1, 2020. Date of publication August 10, 2020; date of current version November 18, 2020. The work was supported in part by the Australian Research Council Discovery Projects under Grant No. DP190101363 and in part by the Linkage Project under Grant No. LP170101196. This article was presented at the IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW) [1]. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was E. Paolini. (Corresponding author: Jinhong Yuan.)
Peng Kang was with the School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, University of New South Wales, Kensington, NSW 2052, Australia. He is now with the Science and Math Cluster, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore 487372 (e-mail: peng_kang@sutd.edu.sg).
Yixuan Xie and Jinhong Yuan are with the School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, University of New South Wales, Kensington, NSW 2052, Australia (e-mail: yixuan.xie@unsw.edu.au; j.yuan@unsw.edu.au).
Lei Yang was with the School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, University of New South Wales, Kensington, NSW 2052, Australia. He is now with the Technology and Engineering Center for Space Utilization, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100094, China (e-mail: yang.lei@csu.ac.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2020.3015213

applications, such as wireless communications, optical communications, and data storage, for their near capacity performance under belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithms for moderate to long block lengths. In the coming fifth generation (5G) mobile networks, many researchers have contributed to the construction of channel coding technologies and their design features [13]–[16]. Due to the high throughput requirement and the need to support incremental redundancy hybrid automatic repeat request (IR-HARQ), protograph-based raptor-like (PBRL) LDPC codes [6] are adopted as one of the channel coding schemes for the Enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB) scenario in the 5G standard [13], [17]. With the commercialization of the 5G mobile networks, how to develop efficient and effective decoding algorithms with low complexity and good error performance for the LDPC codes becomes an important research question.
It is well-known that the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [18] has good error performance by iteratively performing messages update between variable nodes (VNs) and check nodes (CNs). However, its decoding complexity is fairly high for practical implementations. To reduce the decoding complexity at CN processing, the authors in [19] proposed an approximate-min* (A-Min*) algorithm, which computes the check-to-variable (C2V) messages by using the recursive method. Although the A-Min* algorithm has little or no performance loss compared to the SPA, the recursive process introduces a high decoding latency and additional memory requirement. Therefore, simplified versions of the SPA, such as the min-sum algorithm (MSA), and two MSA-based decoding algorithms, such as the normalized MSA (NMSA) and the offset MSA (OMSA) are proposed in [20] and widely used in practical applications. These decoding algorithms have minor performance degradation relative to the SPA but with a lower decoding complexity.
Following [20], several papers aim to further improve the performance of the MSA by enhancing the estimation accuracy for the messages at CN or VN processing [21]–[24]. As shown in [20], [21], the MSA-based decoding algorithms can achieve the error performance near that of the SPA for the moderate to long LDPC codes with high rates. Nonetheless, it is noticeable that the error performance of these MSA-based decoding algorithms is highly affected by the VNs with low degrees [25]. Since the 5G LDPC codes are a class of PBRL LDPC codes, it is shown in [17] that there are a number of

0090-6778 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6670

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2020

VNs with degree-1 in their associated Tanner graphs [26]. This causes a poor error performance of the MSA-based decoding algorithms compared to that of the SPA since the messages sent from the CNs connected to these degree1 VNs are bounded in magnitude [27] at each iteration and become unreliable for these degree-1 VNs. Moreover, the error performance degradation becomes more notable for low rate (R < 1/2) 5G LDPC codes when using the MSA-based decoding algorithms. This is because the portion of the degree1 VNs is even higher compared to the VNs of other degrees. To further improve the decoding performance, the adjusted MSA (Adj-MSA) was proposed in [28] and highly considered in the evaluation of 5G LDPC codes. Different from the above MSA-based decoding algorithms, the Adj-MSA computes only two C2V messages for each CN using the same function as that in SPA, where the CN processing is approximated by a look-up table. As shown in [29], the performance of the Adj-MSA is almost the same as the SPA for the 5G LDPC codes. However, extra additions and comparisons are required for the Adj-MSA compared to the MSA-based decoding algorithms due to the approximation of the hyperbolic-tangent function.
Recently, the mutual information-maximizing decoding of LDPC codes was proposed in [30], where the conventional node computations were replaced by the well-designed lookup tables (LUTs). In addition, the authors in [31] provided a systematic framework for decoding based on discrete message passing, where the degree distributions of the irregular LDPC codes are considered in a joint LUT design. Furthermore, the information bottleneck method was presented in [32] for decoding 5G LDPC codes. Note that all these methods require LUTs whose size grows exponentially with the node degrees. Therefore, it is necessary to develop an improved decoding algorithm particular for the 5G LDPC codes according to the structure of the parity-check matrices.
In addition to eMBB, new services and applications, such as vehicle-to-everything and Internet of things, have been considered in the 5G mobile networks recently. These applications require the ultra-reliability and low decoding complexity for massive low-cost devices, which have drawn significant research efforts for short codes with low code rates [33]–[35]. Compared to the asymptotic performance for long LDPC codes, the performance of LDPC codes with finite or short block lengths are more important for these applications [36]. It is shown in [37] that the SPA becomes sub-optimal and has considerable performance gap to the maximum likelihood (ML) decoding with short block lengths, which is due to the existence of the small cycles in their associated Tanner graphs. Therefore, several quasi-ML (QML) decoding methods have been also investigated [38]–[46] for short LDPC codes to achieve near-ML performance with a tolerable decoding complexity through the improved decoding architectures. The most common strategy adopted in these works is to introduce multiple rounds of decoding tests, so-called the reprocessing, after the failure of the conventional BP decoding. More specifically, the decoder is reinitialized with a list of different decoder inputs during the reprocessing, where each input sequence is generated by substituting the

channel outputs of the selected unreliable VNs with the

maximum or minimum values. The conventional BP decoding

is conducted with each input sequence, and the decoding

output is stored if it generates a valid codeword. The ‘best’

codeword is chosen from the list of valid codewords as the

decoder output according to a certain decision metric.

One of the earliest QML decoding method is the ordered

statistic decoding (OSD) [38]. For a received signal, this

decoding method chooses p most reliable bits and generates

a list of

p q=1

p q

possible error combinations for these bits.

Each combination is re-encoded into a codeword. In this way,

a list of codewords is obtained, and one of them is chosen as

the decoding output. Obviously, the OSD method introduces

a high decoding complexity since a large number of error

combinations need to be tested when p is larger than a hundred

of bits. Therefore, many researchers have make their efforts

to reduce the decoding complexity of the OSD by developing

early termination rules [39]–[42]. For example, the authors

in [40] and [41] precompute a list of most likely error patterns

among the total error combinations and reduce the number of

error patterns to be tested by choosing a reliability threshold.

In [42], a fast OSD method is presented for decoding linear

block codes with short block lengths. A probabilistic necessary

condition and a probabilistic sufficient condition are proposed

to terminate the OSD processing earlier so that the decoding

complexity can be reduced. However, matrix transformation

is always required for different p most reliable bits in order

to obtain the corresponding generator matrix, which makes

the OSD unsuitable for hardware implementations. To avoid

matrix transformation, the augmented BP (ABP) decoding and

saturated min-sum (SMS) decoding were proposed in [43]

and [44], respectively. To further reduce decoding complexity,

the QML decoder in [45] utilizes the feature of the VNs’

positions which are corresponding to the hybrid automatic

repeat request (HARQ) parity bits in the extended codewords

to conduct the reprocessing. Note that these parity bits are

naturally occurring in the code construction of 5G LDPC

codes. In addition, a single bit flip-aided decoding method

based on multitree search for the unreliable VNs was proposed

in [46]. For these decoding methods, a conventional BP

decoding is evoked for several rounds to generate a list of

codewords, where the decoder is fed with a different input

sequence derived from the same channel output sequence at

each round of the decoding test. Nevertheless, for all these

QML decoding methods with a small list size, the performance

gap to the ML decoding is still considerable.

In this paper, to obtain the decoding performance near

the SPA for the 5G LDPC codes, we propose an improved

MSA-based decoding algorithm with a low decoding com-

plexity compared to the SPA, where we only introduce one

pair of universal parameters for all information bit lengths

K ∈ [40, 8448] and code rates R ∈ [1/5, 8/9] in the 5G

standard. To further approach the error performance of the ML

decoding for 5G short LDPC codes, we propose an enhanced

QML decoding method with a new reprocessing architec-

ture, which obtains a near-ML performance with a small list

size. The main contributions of this work are summarized

below:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KANG et al.: EQML DECODING BASED ON 2D MODIFIED MSA FOR 5G LDPC CODES

6671

• We propose an improved MSA-based decoding algorithm for the 5G LDPC codes to achieve the error performance of the SPA. The proposed decoding algorithm adopts the self-correction method, which reserves the reliable variable-to-check (V2C) messages and reduces the sign flips. Moreover, based on the NMSA, we use an additional scaling factor amplifies the magnitude of the extrinsic messages sent to the CNs that are connected to degree-1 VNs, which further improves the reliability of the reserved messages with the self-correction method.
• We propose an enhanced decoding architecture based on the proposed decoding algorithm such that the error performance of the 5G short LDPC codes can approach that of ML decoding with a desirable decoding complexity even with a small list size. By investigating the phenomenon of sign flips for VNs’ extrinsic messages, we propose a novel node selection method from edge perspective to improve the accuracy of selecting unreliable VNs. To reduce the decoding complexity, we further introduce a stopping rule, namely partial pruning stopping (PPS) rule. The PPS rule effectively terminates the decoding tests on the part of reprocessing sub-branches if a valid codeword is obtained.
• We derive the asymptotic bounds on frame error rate (FER) of the proposed EQML decoding method for a given maximum number of reprocessing stages and then approximate the lower bounds on FER by using a semi-analytical method. The derived lower bound on the FER is close to the simulation results in the low signalto-noise ratio (SNR) region.
• We investigate the error performance of the proposed decoding algorithm and the EQML decoding method. It demonstrates that the proposed decoding algorithm can approach the error performance of the SPA for the 5G LDPC codes with small and large information bit lengths. Moreover, the EQML decoding method outperforms the SPA with the same decoding complexity and other QML decoding methods for the 5G short LDPC codes. It can approach the Polyanskiy-Poor-Verdú (PPV) bound within 0.4 dB in terms of FER performance. We also analyze the decoding complexity of the proposed EMQL decoding method with different stopping rules by using the average number of iterations for obtaining one decoded codeword. Simulation results show that the PPS rule has a lower decoding complexity compared to the list decoding stopping (LDS) rule in [43] without sacrificing the error performance.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we define the basic system parameters and give a brief overview of various conventional BP decoding algorithms in the literature. Motivated by the structure of the parity-check matrix of the 5G LDPC codes, we present the improved decoding algorithm and demonstrate the FER performance in Section III. Then the proposed EQML decoding method is presented in Section IV, including the improved node selection method and the stopping rule. The derivation of the lower bounds on FER performance and decoding complexity analysis are presented in Section V. In Section VI, we demonstrate

the FER performance of the proposed EQML decoding method and the decoding complexity comparison via simulations. Section VII draws the conclusions.

II. BACKGROUNDS AND PRELIMINARIES
Let H be a parity-check matrix of size M ×N for an LDPC code, where M and N are the number of rows and columns in H, respectively. For the PBRL LDPC codes designed in 5G standard, define Hcore as the core matrix with the highest rate that the parity-check matrix H can have. Denoted by Hex the sub-matrix indicating the connection in the single parity check (SPC) extension of the PBRL LDPC code from the high rate to low rate. The general structure of the parity-check matrix H can be represented as

H=

Hcore Hex

0 I

,

(1)

where 0 and I refer to the zero and the identity matrices. By

using the graph representation, we define H as the Tanner

graph of an LDPC code consisting of N VNs and M CNs.

A VN vn, 1 ≤ n ≤ N , is connected to a CN cm, 1 ≤ m ≤

M , by an edge in the Tanner graph if there is a nonzero

element in the m-th row and n-th column of H. Assume

that z = (z1, z2, . . . zN ) is the codeword transmitted through

an binary additive Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and the

decoder obtains the received signal y = (y1, y2, . . . yN ) at the output of the receiver match filter. Denoted by L(vn)

the initial log-likelihood ratio (LLR) for a node vn, we have

L(vn) =Δ log

Pr(yn |zn =0) Pr(yn |zn =1)

.

Let H(cm) and H(vn) denote the set of all VNs connected

to cm and the set of all CNs connected to vn, respectively. We also define H(cm)\vn as the set H(cm) with vn excluded, and H(vn)\cm as the set H(vn) with cm excluded. At the

i-th iteration, the conventional MSA [20] computes the C2V

message from cm to vn as

Ym(in)

=

vn

∈H(cm )\vn

sign(Zn(i−m1))

·

vn

min
∈H(cm)\vn

Zn(i−m1)

,

(2)

where 1 ≤ m ≤ M, vn ∈ H(cm), and Zn(0m) = L(vn). Then the V2C message from vn to cm are computed by

Zn(im) = L(vn) +

Ym(i)n,

(3)

cm ∈H(vn)\cm

where 1 ≤ n ≤ N and cm ∈ H(vn). Meanwhile, a posterior LLR of the node vn at each iteration is given by

L(ni) = L(vn) +

Ym(in) .

(4)

cm ∈H(vn )

Note that Eqs. (2) and (3) form the iterative process, which terminates until a valid codeword is found or the preset maximum number of iterations is reached.
It is shown in [20] that the C2V messages computed by (2) are always overestimated in magnitude compared to that of the SPA. This phenomenon causes performance degradation for the conventional MSA compared to the SPA, especially for the LDPC codes with a large number of low-degree VNs. To

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6672

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2020

improve the error performance, the normalized MSA (NMSA) in [20] uses a scaling factor α to minimize the overestimation effect on the C2V messages, where Eq. (2) is modified into

Ym(in)

=

α·
vn

sign(Zn(i−m1))
∈H(cm )\vn

·

vn

min
∈H(cm)\vn

Zn(i−m1)

.

(5)

Although the NMSA demonstrates a better error performance for regular LDPC codes, the performance gap from the SPA is still considerable for irregular LDPC codes as shown in [21] and [23].
Alternatively, the self-corrected MSA (SC-MSA) proposed in [23] can achieve an improved error performance for irregular LDPC codes by erasing the unreliable V2C messages which have different signs between two consecutive iterations. As shown in [23], the SC-MSA can outperform the SPA in the error floor region for irregular LDPC codes with moderate block lengths. However, there is still apparent performance degradation for irregular LDPC codes with short block lengths in the low SNR region.
III. THE TWO-DIMENSIONAL SCALE-CORRECTED MSA DECODING FOR 5G LDPC CODES
In this section, we propose an improved MSA-based decoding algorithm, so-called the two-dimensional scale-corrected (2D-SC) MSA, to approach the error performance of the SPA for the 5G LDPC codes. We can see from (1) that there is a large amount of degree-1 VNs in the parity-check matrix compared to the LDPC codes in other standards such as the IEEE 802.11n and the IEEE 802.16e standard. This results in a severe deterioration in error performance when the conventional BP decoding algorithms are used.
To improve the MSA-based decoding algorithms, the evolution of the sign and magnitude for the V2C messages is utilized to facilitate the propagation of the reliable V2C messages. In [23], the sign flips of the V2C messages are explored to avoid the propagation of the unreliable V2C messages. In the following, we further investigate the sign fluctuation phenomenon for the 5G LDPC codes and propose a partial self-correction method, which reserves the reliable V2C messages via significantly reducing the number of sign flips for the V2C messages sent from VNs in Hcore. In addition, we amplify the magnitude of the V2C messages sent to the CNs in Hex by a scaling factor larger than 1 to increase their reliability. Moreover, a pair of universal scaling factors (α, β) for the 5G LDPC code families is applied to all C2V messages and the V2C messages sent to the CNs in Hex, respectively, such that the error performance of the proposed decoding algorithm is close to that of the SPA for all information bit lengths K ∈ [40, 8448] and code rates R ∈ [1/5, 8/9] in the 5G standard.
A. Sign Flips Reduction
At each iteration of the BP decoding algorithm, the reliability of the V2C messages sent from the VNs in Hcore plays an

Fig. 1. The percentage of sign flips for the V2C messages per iteration with
the R = 1/5, K = 120 5G LDPC code under AWGN channels. Es/N0 = −2.6 dB.

important role in successful decoding compared to the degree-

1 VNs since these degree-1 VNs always send their initial chan-

nel output as the V2C messages. Fig. 1 shows the percentage

of sign flips for the V2C messages sent from the VNs in

Hcore per iteration. We can see that the percentage of sign flips behaves in completely different ways for successful and

unsuccessful decoding cases. For the successful decoding case,

the percentage of sign flips for both MSA and NMSA decoding

diminish to zero with the number of iteration increases. Note

that the percentage of sign flips decreases faster for the NMSA

decoding compared to the MSA decoding, which attributes to

the mitigation of the overestimation by the scaling factor in

the NMSA. In contrast, this percentage saturates to a constant

value for the MSA decoding after a rapid increasing in the first

few iterations for the unsuccessful decoding case. A similar

tendency is also observed by using the NMSA decoding for

the unsuccessful decoding case. When the NMSA decoding

is adopted, although the percentage of sign flips for the V2C

messages reduces slightly at the first few iterations, it saturates

to a much high constant value compared to the case of

successful decoding. Therefore, we have the conjecture that

there exists a high percentage of the sign flips for the V2C

messages when a decoding failure occurs.

To reduce the number of sign flips during the decoding

iterations, we propose a partial self-correction (PSC) method

for the V2C messages sent from the VNs in Hcore. Define Ncore as the number of VNs in Hcore, the self-correction is

performed as

⎧ ⎪⎨Zntmmp,

if sign(Zntmmp · Zn(im−1)) > 0,

Zn(im) = ⎩⎪0,

1 ≤ n ≤ Ncore, otherwise,

(6)

where Zntmmp is the temporary V2C messages computed by Eq. (3). Note that the proposed PSC method compares the signs of the V2C messages sent from the VNs in Hcore at the current iteration with that at the previous iteration, and the associated V2C message is only sent to its neighboring CN if the two signs are the same. For the V2C messages with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KANG et al.: EQML DECODING BASED ON 2D MODIFIED MSA FOR 5G LDPC CODES

6673

Fig. 2. Percentage of V2C messages sent to the CNs in Hex, which is smaller than that of SPA. R = 1/5, K = 120 and Es/N0 = −2.6 dB.
their signs contradictory with that in the previous iteration, they are set to zero by the self-correction method. As shown in the later section, the PSC method can reduce the number of sign flips efficiently and improve the decoding performance.

iteration increases, this value decreases dramatically to zero for

the case of successful decoding while it gradually increases to

almost 100% for unsuccessful decoding cases. This indicates

that the reliability of the V2C messages sent to the CNs in Hex decreases with iterations increase for unsuccessful decoding

cases. This is because the associated C2V messages with

bounded magnitude in the previous iterations counteract the

propagation of the reliable messages.

To reduce the disadvantage of the bounded effect, the upper

bound |L(vnˆ)| need to be enlarged properly for these VNs. Therefore, we introduce a scaling factor β, where β > 1,

to amplify the magnitude of the V2C messages sent to the

CNs in Hex. In this way, the V2C messages can be computed

by

Zntmmp

=

⎧ ⎪⎨⎪β

·

[L(vn) +

Ym(i)n

cm ∈H(vn)\cm

⎪⎩⎪L(vn) +

Ym(i)n,

],

cm ∈H(vn)\cm

Mcore + 1 ≤ m ≤ M, otherwise,

(8)

where Mcore is defined as the number of CNs in Hcore. As a result, the upper bound of the V2C messages sent to the CNs in Hex is linearly scaled as β · |L(vnˆ)|.

B. Message Amplification

Note that the C2V messages sent from the CNs in Hex is upper bounded in magnitude by the channel output of their associated degree-1 VN when the SPA is adopted [27]. This
phenomenon also happens when the conventional MSA or NMSA decoding is employed. Assume that a CN cm in Hex is connected to a VN vnˆ of degree 1. At the i-th iteration, for any vn that is connected to cm and deg(vn) = 1, we have

min
vn ∈H(cm)\vn

Zn(i−m1)

≤

Znˆ(im−1)

= |L(vnˆ )| .

(7)

It demonstrates a bounded effect that the magnitude of the C2V messages from cm to any of its neighboring VNs except vnˆ is not greater than the magnitude of the V2C message sent from vnˆ . Since vnˆ is a degree-1 node, we have |Znˆm| = |L(vnˆ)|. We know that the reliability of a message can be indicated by the magnitude of its channel output. Thus, the reliability of the C2V messages sent from the CNs in Hex highly relies on the magnitude of the channel output received on the degree-1 VNs. Obviously, the reliability of the C2V messages sent from a CN in Hex to their neighboring VNs in Hcore could be degraded if its connected degree-1 VN receives the channel output with a small magnitude. Moreover, the impact of this effect could be more severe when errors occur on the degree-1 VNs because the erroneous VNs usually have small channel outputs.
We further explore the evolution of the V2C messages for the conventional MSA and SPA to verify the above conjecture. Fig. 2 presents the percentage of the V2C messages sent to the CNs in Hex, which is smaller in magnitude by using the conventional MSA than the SPA. We see that there is a high percentage of the V2C messages obtained by the conventional MSA decoder being smaller than that of SPA decoder in magnitude at the first few iterations. With the

C. The 2D-SC MSA
Set the maximum number of iterations as Imax. By combining the PSC method and the message amplification, we propose the 2D-SC MSA, which can be summarized in Algorithm 1.
It is notable that the scaling factor α ∈ (0, 1) used for the C2V messages is the same as Eq. (5) in the NMSA. Because the NMSA demonstrates a rapid decreasing in the number of sign flips as shown in Fig. 1, we expect the decoding algorithm based on the NMSA to achieve a fast convergence speed.
In our proposed 2D-SC MSA, the PSC operation tries to retain the reliable V2C messages in each iteration based on their sign flips behavior. Then these reliable V2C messages sent to the CNs in Hex are amplified by the scaling factor β. Since the C2V messages sent from the CNs in Hex are directly affected by the vulnerable degree-1 VNs, enlarging the magnitude of these reliable V2C messages can further improve the reliability of these C2V messages computed in the next iteration, which is beneficial to the decoding performance of the 5G LDPC codes.
Note that different scaling factors are applied to the conventional MSA to decode irregular LDPC codes with long block lengths in [21] when computing both C2V and V2C messages. However, the scaling factors used for the calculation of the V2C messages in [21] are optimized within (0, 1) by considering the degree differences among the adjacent VNs, which aims to further reduce the overestimation effect. For our proposed 2D-SC MSA, the scaling factor β aims at amplifying the reliable V2C messages sent to the CNs in Hex for the next decoding iteration, which means that the initial channel values in (3) are also amplified if the associated V2C messages are considered to be reliable.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6674

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2020

Algorithm 1 The 2D-SC MSA

1: Initialize:

i=0 For each n, m, set Zn(0m) = L(vn)

2: Iterations:

3: while i ≤ Imax do

4: i = i + 1

5: for m = 1 : M and each vn ∈ H(cm) do 6: Update Ym(in) as in Eq. (5)

7: end for

8: for n = 1 : N and each cm ∈ H(vn) do 9: Compute Zntmmp as in Eq. (8) 10: Update Zn(im) as in Eq. (6)

11: end for

12: for n = 1 : N do 13: Compute L(ni) as in Eq. (4) 14: if L(ni) < 0 then

15:

xn = 1

16: else

17:

xn = 0

18: end if

19: end for 20: if x · HT = 0 or i = Imax then 21: Stop and output x

22: end if

23: end while

D. Comparison of FER Performance
We investigate the FER performance of the proposed 2D-SC MSA for the 5G LDPC codes with the details listed as follows [17].
• Code ensemble 1: K = 120, code rate R = 1/5, 1/3, 2/5, 1/2, 2/3.
• Code ensemble 2: K = 8448, code rate R = 1/3, 2/5, 1/2, 2/3, 8/9.
Quadrature phase shift keying modulation and an AWGN channel are considered in the floating-point simulations. We set Imax = 50. The scaling factor for the NMSA is set to α = 0.7125, and the scaling factor pair (α, β) is optimized as (0.75, 1.25) for the 2D-SC MSA,1 which can obtain nearly the optimal performance for the 5G LDPC codes with all information bit lengths and code rates.
Fig. 3 depicts the FER performance of the Code ensemble 1 decoded by the proposed 2D-SC MSA and compared to that of different decoding algorithms. We set the target FER as 10−2 and 10−4 to evaluate the decoding gain. It can be seen that the FER performance of the MSA is far away from that of the SPA for code rates R = 1/5, 1/3, 2/5, 1/2, and 2/3 at FER 10−2 and 10−4. In particular, the performance gap between the SPA and MSA is around 0.8 dB at FER 10−2 and 0.6 dB at FER 10−4 for code rate R = 1/5. Although the NMSA has nearly the same FER performance
1The scaling factors here is searched to minimize the minimum mean-square error gap between the FER performance of the 2D-SC MSA and the SPA.

Fig. 3. FER performance of the 5G LDPC codes decoded by different decoding algorithms with information bit lengths K = 120 and code rate R = 1/5, 1/3, 2/5, 1/2, 2/3.
as the SPA for the high code rates, i.e., R = 1/2, 2/3, it still has a significant gap from the SPA for the low code rates R = 1/5, 1/3, 2/5. For example, the performance gap between the SPA and NMSA becomes 0.3 dB and 0.4 dB at FER 10−2 and 10−4, respectively. Nevertheless, the A-Min* algorithm and the Adj-MSA are almost identical to that of the SPA for Code ensemble 1 with all simulated code rates and K = 120. It is noticeable that our proposed 2D-SC MSA has also nearly the same FER performance as that of the SPA, the A-Min* algorithm, and the Adj-MSA for Code ensemble 1 with all simulated code rates at FER 10−2 and 10−4.
The FER performance of the Code ensemble 2, which has the maximum information bit lengths supported by the 5G LDPC codes, is shown in Fig. 4. It demonstrates that the performance gap between the MSA and the SPA is even more significant, particularly for low code rates, i.e., R ≤ 1/2. Similarly, the FER performance of the NMSA is about 0.6 dB, 0.5 dB, and 0.4 dB away from the SPA at FER 10−2 for R = 1/3, 2/5 and 1/2, respectively. While the performance gap between the NMSA and the SPA increases to about 0.5 dB at FER 10−4 for R ≤ 1/2. However, the proposed 2D-SC MSA is less than 0.2 dB away from the SPA performance at FER 10−2 and 10−4 for Code ensemble 2 with R ≥ 1/2, and it can approach the FER performance of the SPA within 0.3 dB at FER 10−2 and 10−4 for code rates R = 1/3 and 2/5. Moreover, the proposed 2D-SC MSA is less than 0.15 dB away from the performance of the A-Min* algorithm and the Adj-MSA at FER 10−2 and 10−4 for R ≥ 1/2 and K = 8448. It approaches the FER performance of the A-Min* algorithm and the Adj-MSA within 0.25 dB at FER 10−2 and 10−4 for code rates R = 1/3 and 2/5 when K = 8448.2
2Note that a better FER performance can be obtained by using degree-dependent scaling factors for the V2C messages. An additional 0.05 dB and 0.01 dB gain can be obtained for the 5G LDPC codes with K = 8448, R = 1/3 and 8/9, respectively, with degree-dependent scaling factors compared to the 2D-SC MSA.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KANG et al.: EQML DECODING BASED ON 2D MODIFIED MSA FOR 5G LDPC CODES
TABLE I DECODING COMPLEXITY OF VARIOUS DECODING ALGORITHMS

6675

Fig. 4. FER performance of the 5G LDPC codes decoded by different decoding algorithms with information bit lengths K = 8448 and code rate R = 1/3, 2/5, 1/2, 2/3, 8/9.

IV. THE ENHANCED QML DECODING METHOD
Although the proposed 2D-SC MSA improves the error performance of the 5G LDPC codes and it approaches the performance of the SPA, there is still a notable performance gap from the ML decoding for the 5G LDPC codes. This performance gap is due to the presence of the cycles with small girth in the Tanner graphs, which introduces the correlation in the messages and makes the SPA sub-optimal in terms of the error performance. To reduce the performance gap between the conventional BP decoding and the ML decoding for short LDPC codes, QML decoding methods were proposed in [43] and [44]. However, there is a high decoding complexity if we expect to obtain the near-ML error performance. Therefore, in this section, we further improve the decoding method for the 5G short LDPC codes, aiming at approaching the error performance of the ML decoding with a desirable decoding complexity. In the following, we would briefly introduce the conventional QML decoding methods and present our proposed enhanced QML (EQML) decoding method.

E. Comparison of Decoding Complexity
In this section, we compare the decoding complexity of the 2D-SC MSA to that of other decoding algorithms. Define dv and dc as the average of VN and CN degree of the LDPC code, respectively. The computational complexity and the memory requirement for storing the intermediate messages per iteration of various decoding algorithms are summarized in TABLE I. Note that the hyperbolic-tangent function in the CN processing of the SPA and the Adj-MSA is approximated by the look-up tables in [19] and [28], respectively.
From TABLE I, we observe that our proposed 2D-SC MSA doesn’t require a look-up table compared to the SPA, A-Min* algorithm, and the Adj-MSA. Due to the self-correction operations, the proposed 2D-SC MSA has an increased number of comparisons and needs to have extra memory of size d¯v · Ncore compared to the NMSA, where Ncore is the number of VNs in the Tanner graph of the core matrix Hcore for the 5G LDPC codes. In practice, instead of storing the variable-to-check (V2C) messages for every edge of the VNs in Hcore, the memory efficient implementation in [47] can be employed, which only reserves the signs of the V2C messages. Moreover, the 2D-SC MSA has a much fewer number of additions and table look-up operations, which reduces the routing congestion [48].

A. The Conventional QML Decoding Methods
After the failure of the initial BP decoding test, the conventional QML decoding methods perform the reprocessing with the maximum number of reprocessing stage jmax. At each stage of the reprocessing, they choose unreliable VNs according to certain node selection method. A list of the decoder input sequences is generated by modifying the LLRs of the unreliable VNs. The conventional BP decoding is then performed with each decoder input sequence and only the valid codewords are collected from the reprocessing. In the end, the best codeword is selected as the decoding output based on a decision metric.
Note that the performance of a QML decoding is determined by the accuracy of selecting unreliable VNs for the reprocessing. Moreover, the decoding complexity depends on the number of decoding tests performed in the reprocessing. Here we briefly introduce the node selection method and the reprocessing of the conventional QML decoding methods in [43] and [44].
1) Node-Wise Selection (NWS) Method: For the decoding tests at the j-th stage, the ABP decoding selects j unreliable VNs for saturation. Here the saturation of a node vn means that its LLR r(vn) is set to the maximum (+S) or minimum (−S) value, which is determined by the precision or quantization of the decoder. Define T as the index of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6676

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2020

decoding test in the reprocessing. Denote the set of VNs

saturated VS(T ) for

for the T -th decoding test by VS(T ). To determine every T -th decoding test at stage j reprocessing

(T = 2j −1, 2j, . . . , 2j+1 −2), the ABP decoder [43] chooses

a new unreliable VN, denoted by vs(T ), and (j − 1) unreliable

VNs which have been selected in the at stage (j − 1) reprocessing. Let T

T −1 2
=

-th decoding test

T −1 2

,

the

newly

saturated VN vs(T ) is selected based on the output of the T -th

decoding test at stage (j − 1) reprocessing. More specifically,

for a given output of the T -th decoding test, find all VNs connected to unsatisfied CNs, which is defined as V(T ). In

particular, when T = 0, the T -th decoding test refers to the

initial BP decoding. Note that an unsatisfied CN means its

associated syndrome is nonzero after the decoding. From all VNs in V(T ), we only consider the VN with the maximum

node degree to be the candidate node. If there are more than

one VN with the same maximum node degree, the VN with

the minimal magnitude of its channel output |r(vn)| is selected with priority.

In [46], the proposed QML decoder computes the reliability

of each unsatisfied CN based on the LLRs. Starting from the

unsatisfied CN with the largest LLR value, two least reliable

VNs with the smallest |r(vn)| connected to the CN are forced to flip their hard decision with a high priority. Note that

the SMS decoding in [44] chooses the unreliable VNs for

saturation solely based on |r(vn)| for hardware considerations. To further simplify the hardware implementation, the QML

decoder in [45] directly selects the unreliable VNs whose

positions are corresponding to the HARQ parity bits in the

extended codewords. It is notable that the node selection

methods in [43]–[46] determine the unreliable VNs based on

the node reliability |r(vn)| or their positions occurred in the code construction. Therefore, we call these node selection

methods as NWS methods.

2) The Reprocessing: Denote M = {m1, m2, . . . , m2j } as
the list of length-j LLR vectors for the saturated VNs at stage
j reprocessing, where mt∈ {+S, −S}j, t = 1, 2, . . . , 2j. The stage j reprocessing performs 2j BP decoding tests with the

modified input LLRs. For each BP decoding test at the j-th stage, the initial LLR values of VS(T ) are replaced by one mt from M, i.e., r(VS(T )) = mt, and the rest of VNs’ initial LLR
values remain the same from the channel outputs. When all

vectors mt in M are tested, the reprocessing moves to stage

j + 1. It stops until the maximum number of reprocessing

stage jmax is reached. Thus, there are total

jmax j=1

2j=2jmax +1−2

additional decoding tests need to be performed subsequently

if the conventional BP decoding fails. In the end, the ABP

decoding outputs the best codeword which has the minimum

Euclidean distance to the received sequence [43].

It is shown that the performance of the ABP decoding for

the (155, 64) Tanner code in [43] can approach that of the

ML decoding when the number of saturated VNs is relatively

large, e.g., jmax = 11, which results in a high decoding complexity. However, for a small or moderate jmax, there

is still a significant performance loss. In addition, the SMS

decoder in [44] and the QML decoder in [45] simplify the

Fig. 5. The average number of sign flips for the V2C messages per VN degree under decoding failure. An AWGN channel is considered. R = 1/5, K = 120. Note that α = 0.7125 for the NMSA and (α, β) = (0.75, 1.25) for the 2D-SC MSA. Es/N0 = −2.6 dB. The VN degrees are shown in the order of (5, 9, 10, 12, 14, 16, 22, 23) with the descending of the degree index.
reprocessing in the sense that all the jmax unreliable VNs are selected simultaneously. Therefore, only 2jmax decoder input sequences are tested, which reduces the decoding complexity. However, this degrades the error performance compared to the ABP decoding with the same jmax since the number of tested decoder input sequences reduces by almost half from 2jmax+1 − 2 to 2jmax . To improve the error performance for small to moderate jmax with acceptable decoding complexity, we propose an enhanced QML (EQML) decoding method in the rest of this section. In particular, we propose an edge-wise selection method to improve the error performance and a partial pruning stopping rule to reduce the decoding complexity.
B. The Edge-Wise Selection (EWS) Method
In [43], the NWS method selects the unreliable VNs based on syndrome, which is a kind of hard information. To measure the reliability of each VN in a more precise way, here we would like to select the unreliable VNs based on the soft information exchanged during the conventional BP decoding and expect an improved error performance. Therefore, instead of focusing on the hard information given by syndrome, the sign evolution of the V2C messages is investigated for the node selection.
Fig. 5 shows the average number of sign flips for the V2C messages per VN degree with the increase of iterations under the unsuccessful decoding case. Compared to the percentage of total sign flips per iteration in Fig. 1, we can see that the average number of sign flips per VN degree has a similar trend and the average number of sign flips of different decoding algorithms eventually saturates to a constant value. Apart from that, it also has a similar behavior as observed in [43] that the VNs with higher degrees are more prone to be in errors compared to other VNs. Although the 2D-SC MSA demonstrates its capabilities of reducing the number of sign

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KANG et al.: EQML DECODING BASED ON 2D MODIFIED MSA FOR 5G LDPC CODES

6677

flips compared to other decoding algorithms, there are still V2C messages having their sign fluctuated with the increase of iterations. Note that we observed similar behaviors for other 5G short LDPC codes with different block lengths.
Motivated by this observation, we propose a novel node selection method based on this sign flips phenomenon. Let wk,n be the number of sign flips for the V2C message passed through the k-th edge of the n-th VN. Denoted by

w(vn) =

d(vn )
k=1 wk,n

(9)

the total number of sign flips for the V2C messages of node
vn, where d(vn) refers to the degree of vn.
At stage j reprocessing, the proposed node selection method
chooses a new unreliable VN according to w(vn), which is computed from the decoding tests at the (j−1)-th stage. Define w(T )(vn) as the number of sign flips for the V2C messages of node vn obtained from the T -th decoding test. For the
T -th decoding test, only the node vn with the maximum number of sign flips w(T )(vn) is selected as the candidate node vs(T ). Then we have VS(T ) = VS(T ) ∪ vs(T ) . When T = 0, w(0)(vn) is obtained from the initial BP decoding. To
avoid selecting the same VN in different reprocessing stages, we set w(T )(VS (T )) = 0 after the T -th decoding test.
Compared to the NWS method, the proposed node selection

method explores more diversities on measuring the reliability

of each VN since the selection criterion relies on the edge level

rather than the node level messages. Thus, we would like to

call it an EWS method. We would point out that the NWS

method in [43] cannot be directly applied to the 5G LDPC

codes since a few punctured VNs in the codeword do not

have associated channel outputs. However, the EWS method

estimates the reliability of each VN by the VN’s extrinsic

messages, which does not rely on the existence of the channel

output of that VN.

C. The Partial Pruning Stopping (PPS) Rule
Define ˆr(T ) as the decoder input sequence for the T -th decoding test, which is obtained by replacing r(VS(T )) by mt on the channel output sequence. To collect all possible output codewords, 2jmax+1 − 2 possible input sequences need to be tested before the decoder stops. This stopping rule is called list stopping rule (LDS) in [43]. Although the LDS rule guarantees the completion of the output codewords, which is beneficial to the error performance, it has a high complexity. To reduce the complexity, we propose a PPS rule to avoid some decoding tests in the reprocessing. Define x(T ) and X as the output codeword after T decoding tests and the set of all valid codewords collected in the reprocessing, respectively. After the T -th decoding test, we save x(T ) in X if it is a valid codeword and perform the PPS rule, which stops the decoding tests on its associated sub-branches thereafter. The decoding tests on other sub-branches continue until jmax is reached, or there is no more active decoding test.
Fig. 6 depicts the general tree of the proposed EQML decoding method with the PPS rule. A branch is considered

Fig. 6. The general tree of the EQML decoding method with the PPS rule.
to be converged if there is a valid codeword found in that branch. Compared to the LDS rule, the proposed PPS rule reduces the decoding complexity by pruning the reprocessing on the sub-branches followed by a converged branch, which is shown as dash lines in Fig. 6.
Note that an alternative stopping rule was proposed in [44], where the reprocessing stops once the number of output codewords exceeds a preset threshold. However, the threshold has to be optimized in advance by computer simulations in order to obtain good performance. Compared to that, our proposed PPS rule can make a good balance between the decoding complexity and the error performance, which is desirable for practical applications.
D. The EQML Decoding Method
Set the maximum number of decoding iterations as Imax for all BP decoding process. Define the output codeword of the EQML decoding method as xbest. By utilizing the EWS method and the PPS rule in the reprocessing, the proposed EQML decoding method is summarized in Algorithm 2.
Note that the proposed node selection method can efficiently work together with the PSC method in the 2D-SC MSA by adding the associated counters at each VNs. Whenever a V2C message is set to zero by the self-correction method, the counter is incremented by one. At the end of each decoding test, the number of self-correction operations computed by the counter can be used for the EWS method in the reprocessing if there is a decoding failure. Moreover, the complexity of the self-correction method is associated with the size of Hcore instead of the size of H since the PSC method only focuses on the V2C messages sent from the VNs in Hcore. Thus, it results in only slightly increased memory demands as O(M · Ncore).
V. ERROR PERFORMANCE AND COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we first derive the lower bound on FER for the proposed EQML decoding method with a given jmax by considering different error cases. Then, the decoding complexity of the proposed EQML decoding method with a given jmax is evaluated through the average number of iterations performed for one decoded codeword.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6678

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2020

Algorithm 2 The EQML Decoding Method

1: Perform BP decoding with Imax 2: if a valid codeword is found then

3: Output the codeword

4: else 5: Initialize: T = 1, j = 1, VS(0) = ∅, TF = 2jmax+1 − 2 6: while j ≤ jmax do 7: for t = 1 : 2j do

8:

T=

T −1 2

9:

for n = 1 : N do

10:

Compute w(T )(vn) according to Eq. (9)

11:

end for

12:

Select vs(T ) as vs(T ) = arg max w(T )(vn)

1≤n≤N

13: 14:

GDeetneerrmatieneMVSby(Te)n=um{eVrS(aTtin) g∪rv(s(VTS()T})) to ±S

15:

Determine ˆr(T ) by setting r(VS(T )) = mt

16:

Perform BP decoding with ˆr(T ) and Imax

17:

Perform PPS rule

18:

T =T +1

19: end for 20: j = j + 1

21: end while

22: if X = ∅ then

23:

N
Output xbest = arg min

r(vn) − xn(T ) 2

x(T )∈X n=1

24: else

25: Declare decoding failure.

26: end if

27: end if

A. Error Performance Analysis

The lower bounds on FER under the ML decoding for

linear block codes have been investigated by many researchers,

e.g., [49]–[51]. We first present the expression of FER for

the proposed EQML decoding method and then derive its

asymptotic bound. Note that there are two cases that the

proposed EQML decoding method fails to obtain the correct

codeword. That is either no valid codeword is obtained or the

output

codeword

is

not

the

correct

one.

Define

P jmax
EL

as

the

probability that the EQML decoding method does not obtain

a valid codeword and outputs an empty list after jmax stages of

the

reprocessing.

We

also

define

P jmax
UE

as

the

probability

that

the EQML decoding method obtains a wrong codeword at

the end of jmax reprocessing stages, where an undetected error

happens in this case. The FER of the EQML decoding method

with

jmax

reprocessing

stages,

denoted

by

P jmax
e

,

is

given

by

P jmax
e

=

P jmax
EL

+

P jmax
UE

.

(10)

In the following, we present the details of the deriva-

tion.

To

derive

P jmax
EL

,

we

start

with

the

probability

that

the

EQML decoding method misses valid codewords at each

stage. Without loss of generality, define PEj L as the prob-

ability that the reprocessing at the j-th stage outputs an

empty list of codewords. At the j-th reprocessing stage,

the proposed EQML decoding method enumerates all pos-

sible combinations to create a list of length-j LLR vectors,

where each LLR vector in the list is independent. Since

each decoder input sequence at the j-th stage is modified

individually based on one of the generated LLR vectors from

the list, we consider that the independence assumption holds

for each decoding test at the j-th reprocessing stage. Let EEt L be the event that the t-th decoding test at the j-th reprocessing stage fails to obtain a valid codeword. Therefore,

we obtain

PEj L = P (EE1 L, EE2 L, · · · , EE2jL) =

2j t=1

P

(EEt

L

).

(11)

Note that the EQML decoding method outputs an empty list of codewords if all 2jmax+1 − 1 decoding tests are unable to

obtain a valid codeword. Referring to the initial BP decoding

test as the stage-0 decoding, we have

jmax

jmax 2j

P jmax
EL

=

PEj L =

P (EEt L),

j=0

j=0 t=1

(12)

To

obtain

P jmax
UE

,

we

first

explore

the

probability

that

the

EQML decoding method outputs a wrong codeword at each

reprocessing stage. Let EUt E be the event that the t-th decoding

test at the j-th stage reprocessing obtains a wrong codeword.

Denoted by PUj E the probability that a wrong codeword is obtained at stage-j reprocessing, that is

PUj E = P (EUt E |xbest = xt) = (1 − PEj L) · P (xbest = z), (13)

where z is the transmitted codeword and xbest is the best codeword output after the reprocessing.
Note that the PPS rule terminates the subsequent decoding tests when a valid codeword is obtained at the j-th reprocessing stage. As a result, the probability that the EQML decoding method with jmax reprocessing stages obtains a wrong codeword can be given by

jmax

j−1

P jmax
UE

=

PUj E ·

PEj L,

j=0

j =0

(14)

In Fig. 7, a binary tree illustrates the FER performance of the proposed EQML decoding method with the first two reprocessing stages. The probabilities of every event associated with the decoding tests are shown in the figure. According to Fig. 7, we conclude the FER of the EQML decoding method from (12) and (14) as

jmax

jmax

j−1

P jmax
e

=

PEj L +

(1−PEj L) · P (xbest = z)·

PEj L.

j=0

j=0

j =0

(15)

Motivated by [51], we know that the most likely error for a
short LDPC code under ML decoding over AWGN channels
is caused by the codewords with the minimum Hamming weight dmin from the transmitted codeword. Denoted by nd the number of codewords with dmin for an LDPC code. We consider that all the nd codewords with dmin to the transmitted one contributes equally to the error xbest = z for the EQML

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KANG et al.: EQML DECODING BASED ON 2D MODIFIED MSA FOR 5G LDPC CODES

6679

Fig. 7. The binary tree of the error probability for the proposed EQML decoding method operations.

decoding method. Therefore, we obtain P (xbest = z) ≥

nd · Q

dmin σ2

, where σ2 is the noise variance [52]. By

substituting in (15), the lower bound on FER of the EQML

decoding method is

jmax

P jmax
e

≥

PEj L+nd ·Q

j=0

dmin σ2

jmax

j−1

· (1−PEj L)· PEj L.

j=0

j =0

(16)

B. Decoding Complexity Analysis

Apart from the error performance, the decoding complexity

is also a critical issue for practical implementation. In fact,

reducing decoding complexity is significantly important for

various applications, such as remote control, factory automa-

tion, and smart grid. Here we evaluate the decoding complexity

of the proposed EQML decoding method for a given jmax. Since the conventional BP decoding is executed in multiple

times in the reprocessing, we use the average number of

iterations for decoding one codeword to evaluate the decoding

complexity. Define Il,f as the number of iterations used during the l-th reprocessing test of the f -th received codeword. Let

Iavg be the average number of iterations used for decoding one codeword. Then we have

1 Iavg = F

F
f=1 (I0,f +

(2jmax +1−2)

l=1

Il,f ),

(17)

where F represents the total number of codewords transmitted.
Note that the decoding complexity of a transmitted codeword consists of two parts, i.e., the iterations performed in the conventional BP decoding and the reprocessing. If the conventional BP decoding does not converge to a valid codeword after a preset Imax, the reprocessing is performed which largely increases the decoding complexity. More specifically, for a preset Imax, the decoding complexity of the proposed EQML decoding method increases exponentially with jmax and is equal to (2jmax+1 − 2) · Imax in the worst case.

VI. NUMERICAL RESULT
In this section, we demonstrate the FER performance of the
proposed EQML decoding method and compare it with that
of the pure SPA decoding, the reprocessing with the fast OSD
method in [42], and the list decoding in [45]. We also compare
the decoding complexity of the EQML decoding method with
different stopping criteria and jmax. We consider the Code ensemble 1 with code rates R = 1/5 and 1/3, which have the associated code block lengths N = 600 and 360, respectively.
All the simulation settings used are the same as shown in
Section III-D. Note that the 2D-SC MSA is used for each BP decoding test in the EQML decoding method with Imax = 50. In Fig. 8a and Fig. 8b, we investigate the FER performance of
the proposed EQML decoding method with different stopping
criteria and jmax. The FER performance of the SPA decoding is also shown in Fig. 8a and Fig. 8b. For a fair comparison,
we set the maximum number of iterations performed by the
SPA decoding the same as it is used by the EQML decoding method with the LDS rule, i.e., ISPA = (2jmax+1 − 1) · Imax. For convenience, we represent ISPA by TF , where TF = 2jmax+1 − 1, refers to the number of the decoding tests to be conducted.
We can see from Fig. 8a and Fig. 8b that the proposed EQML decoding method with jmax = 4 outperforms the SPA decoding with TF = 31 for N = 600 and 360 by about 0.2 dB at FER 10−2 and 10−4. The performance gain increases to 0.3 dB at FER 10−2 when jmax = 6 compared to the SPA decoder with TF = 127. It can be also seen in Fig. 8a and Fig. 8b that the proposed EQML decoding method with jmax = 4 outperforms the reprocessing with the order-2 fast OSD method by at least 0.4 dB at FER 10−2 and 10−4 for both N = 600 and 360. There is an additional 0.1 dB gain at FER 10−2 for both N = 600 and 360 by adopting the proposed EQML decoding method with jmax = 6 compared to the fast OSD method. Note that the OSD parameters for the fast OSD method are chosen as τ = 1 and λ = 0.1 in
order to satisfy the conditions presented in [42]. Moreover, our proposed EQML decoding method with jmax = 4 and 6 surpasses the QML decoder in [45] with the same number
of HARQ parity bits used for reprocessing, respectively, for both N = 600 and 360. In particular, the EQML decoding method with jmax = 4 shows about 0.25 dB performance gain at FER 10−2 and 10−4 compared to that of the QML decoder in [45]. When jmax = 6, the performance gain increases to 0.35 dB at FER 10−2. Note that the Polyanskiy-Poor-Verdú (PPV) bounds [36] for the block lengths N = 600 and 360 are
also shown in Fig. 8a and Fig. 8b, respectively, where the
performance gaps between the EQML decoding method with jmax = 6 and the PPV bound for different block lengths are within 0.6 dB. More importantly, the EQML decoding method
with the PPS rule achieves almost the same FER performance compared to that of the LDS rule for both jmax = 4 and 6.
In Fig. 8a and Fig. 8b, we also show the proposed lower
bound on the FER of the EQML decoding method with jmax = 4 and 6 for the two LDPC short codes. More specifically, the number of the codewords with the minimum
Hamming distance is computed by the method introduced
in [53]. The relevant results for the simulated 5G LDPC codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6680

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2020

Fig. 9. The comparison of Iavg and Nre for the 5G LDPC code with different decoding methods, N = 360 and 600.

Fig. 8. FER performance of the EQML decoding method for the 5G LDPC codes.
TABLE II THE NUMBER OF THE CODEWORDS WITH dmin
FOR THE 5G LDPC CODES

In particular, there is about 15 % less Iavg required for the Es/N0 from −3.7 dB to −3 dB with N = 600, and for the Es/N0 −1.2 dB to −0.6 dB with N = 360. Moreover, the reduction of the decoding complexity can be about 25 % in the SNR region from −3.7 dB to −2.8 dB and from −1 dB to −0.2 dB for N = 600 and N = 360, respectively, when jmax is equal to 6.
Define Nre as the average number of re-encoding used to obtain one codeword for the OSD method. We further com-
pare the decoding resource of the proposed EQML decoding
method to that of the OSD method. It is illustrated in Fig. 9
that our proposed EQML decoding method with the PPS rule
has a much less decoding resource compared to the OSD method. More specifically, with jmax = 4, only about 19 % decoding resource is required for our proposed EQML
decoding method with the PPS rule compared to that for the OSD method for the Es/N0 from −3.7 dB to −3 dB with N = 600, and for the Es/N0 from −1.4 dB to −0.2 dB with N = 360. Even with jmax = 6, our proposed EQML decoding method with the PPS rule only requires about 70 % decoding
resource compared to the OSD method for the Es/N0 from −3.7 dB to −3 dB with N = 600, and for the Es/N0 from −1.4 dB to −0.2 dB with N = 360.

are summarized in TABLE II. Note that the average probability of empty list at each reprocessing stage is obtained from the simulations by collecting 4000 error codewords. In other words, the plotted lower bound is based on a semi-analytical approach. We can see from the figures that the gap between the lower bound and the simulation result is close for both LDPC codes particularly in the low SNR region.
We also compare the decoding complexity of the proposed EQML decoding method with different stopping criteria and jmax in terms of the average number of iterations Iavg. As shown in Fig. 9, we can see that our proposed EQML decoding method with the PPS rule requires a less number of Iavg for both jmax = 4 and 6 compared to that with the LDS rule.

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed an EQML decoding method for the 5G LDPC codes. Firstly, we proposed an improved decoding algorithm, called the 2D-SC MSA to approach the FER performance of the SPA for the 5G LDPC codes. The proposed 2D-SC MSA adopts self-correction method and message amplification, where the self-correction method reduces the frequency of sign flips for the V2C messages, and the message amplification reinforces the reliability of the V2C messages, respectively. Then we employed the EQML decoding method to further improve the FER performance of the 5G short LDPC codes. The EQML decoding method adopts the EWS method to improve the accuracy of the node selection for unreliable VNs. In addition, the PPS rule was proposed for the EQML decoding method to reduce the decoding complexity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KANG et al.: EQML DECODING BASED ON 2D MODIFIED MSA FOR 5G LDPC CODES

6681

We also evaluated the FER performance of the proposed
EMQL decoding method by using the semi-analytical method
and examined the decoding complexity for different stopping
criteria and jmax. Simulation results show that the proposed 2D-SC MSA can approach the FER performance of the SPA
within 0.3 dB. The EQML decoding method outperforms the
SPA and other QML decoding methods for the 5G short LDPC
codes, and it approaches the PPV bound within 0.4 dB in the low SNR region when jmax = 6. In addition, the proposed PPS rule has a lower decoding complexity compared to the LDS
rule without performance loss.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Kang, Y. Xie, L. Yang, C. Zheng, J. Yuan, and Y. Wei, “Enhanced quasi-maximum likelihood decoding of short LDPC codes based on saturation,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Aug. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] A. Jimenez Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[4] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[5] Y. Xie, J. C. Mu, and J. Yuan, “Design of rate-compatible protographbased LDPC codes with mixed circulants,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Sep. 2010, pp. 434–438.
[6] T.-Y. Chen, K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Protographbased raptor-like LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1522–1532, May 2015.
[7] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[8] Y. Xie, L. Yang, P. Kang, and J. Yuan, “Euclidean geometry-based spatially coupled LDPC codes for storage,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2498–2509, Sep. 2016.
[9] M. Zhang, Z. Wang, Q. Huang, and S. Wang, “Time-invariant quasicyclic spatially coupled LDPC codes based on packings,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 12, pp. 4936–4945, Dec. 2016.
[10] L. Yang, Y. Xie, J. Yuan, X. Cheng, and L. Wan, “Chained LDPC codes for future communication systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 898–901, May 2018.
[11] J. Zhang, B. Bai, D. Deng, M. Zhu, H. Xu, and M. Guan, “Non-uniform spatially-coupled LDPC codes over GF(2m),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2018, pp. 816–820.
[12] P. Kang, Y. Xie, L. Yang, and J. Yuan, “Reliability-based windowed decoding for spatially coupled LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 1322–1325, Jul. 2018.
[13] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of low-density parity check codes for 5G new radio,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28–34, Mar. 2018.
[14] H. Li, B. Bai, X. Mu, J. Zhang, and H. Xu, “Algebra-assisted construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for 5G new radio,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 50229–50244, 2018.
[15] D. Hui, S. Sandberg, Y. Blankenship, M. Andersson, and L. Grosjean, “Channel coding in 5G new radio: A tutorial overview and performance comparison with 4G LTE,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 60–69, Dec. 2018.
[16] P. Chen, B. Bai, Z. Ren, J. Wang, and S. Sun, “Hash-polar codes with application to 5G,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 12441–12455, 2019.
[17] NR; Multiplexing and Channel Coding, Standard 3GPP TS 38.212, Release 15, Tech. Specification (TS), 3GPP, 2017.
[18] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[19] C. Jones, E. VaIles, M. Smith, and J. Villasenor, “Approximate-min* constraint node updating for ldpc code decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. MILCOM, Oct. 2003, pp. 157–162.
[20] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.

[21] J. Zhang, M. Fossorier, D. Gu, and J. Zhang, “Two-dimensional correction for min-sum decoding of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 180–182, Mar. 2006.
[22] J. Tang, T. Bhatt, and V. Stolpman, “Modified min-sum algorithm for LDPC decoders in UWB communications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Ultra-Wideband, Sep. 2006, pp. 125–130.
[23] V. Savin, “Self-corrected min-sum decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 146–150.
[24] X. Wu, Y. Song, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Adaptive-normalized/offset min-sum algorithm,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 667–669, Jul. 2010.
[25] J. Chen, R. M. Tanner, C. Jones, and Y. Li, “Improved min-sum decoding algorithms for irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory ISIT, Sep. 2005, pp. 449–453.
[26] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[27] S. V. S. Ranganathan, R. D. Wesel, and D. Divsalar, “Linear ratecompatible codes with Degree-1 extending variable nodes under iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2018, pp. 1166–1170.
[28] T. Richardson, S. Kudekar, and L. Vincent, “Adjusted mim-sum decoder,” U.S. Patent 0 109 269 A1, Apr. 19, 2018.
[29] LDPC Decoding With Adjusted Min-Sum, Standard 3. R1-1610140, 3GPP TSG-RAN WG1, 86bis, Lisbon, Portuga, Oct. 2016.
[30] F. J. C. Romero and B. M. Kurkoski, “LDPC decoding mappings that maximize mutual information,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2391–2401, Sep. 2016.
[31] M. Meidlinger, G. Matz, and A. Burg, “Design and decoding of irregular LDPC codes based on discrete message passing,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1329–1343, Mar. 2020.
[32] M. Stark, L. Wang, G. Bauch, and R. D. Wesel, “Decoding ratecompatible 5G-LDPC codes with coarse quantization using the information bottleneck method,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 1, pp. 646–660, 2020.
[33] M. Shirvanimoghaddam et al., “Short block-length codes for ultrareliable low latency communications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 130–137, Feb. 2019.
[34] X. Wu, L. Yang, J. Yuan, X. Cheng, and L. Wan, “Rate-compatible tailbiting convolutional codes for M2M communications,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 482–485, Mar. 2018.
[35] S. Zhao, X. Ma, Q. Huang, and B. Bai, “Recursive block Markov superposition transmission of short codes: Construction, analysis, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 2784–2796, Jul. 2018.
[36] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Channel coding rate in the finite blocklength regime,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2307–2359, May 2010.
[37] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenberg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cycle-free tanner graphs?” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2173–2181, Sep. 1999.
[38] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 908–917, May 2001.
[39] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Reliability-based soft-decision decoding with iterative information set reduction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3101–3106, Dec. 2002.
[40] M. Baldi, N. Maturo, E. Paolini, and F. Chiaraluce, “On the applicability of the most reliable basis algorithm for LDPC decoding in telecommand links,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. Syst. (ICICS), Apr. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[41] M. Baldi, N. Maturo, F. Chiaraluce, and E. Paolini, “On the applicability of the most reliable basis algorithm for LDPC decoding in telecommand links,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2016, no. 1, pp. 272–286, Nov. 2016.
[42] J. Van Wonterghem, A. Alloum, J. J. Boutros, and M. Moeneclaey, “Performance comparison of short-length error-correcting codes,” in Proc. Symp. Commun. Veh. Technol. (SCVT), Nov. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[43] N. Varnica, M. P. C. Fossorier, and A. Kavcic, “Augmented belief propagation decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1308–1317, Jul. 2007.
[44] S. Scholl, P. Schläfer, and N. Wehn, “Saturated min-sum decoding: An ‘Afterburner’ for LDPC decoder hardware,” in Proc. Des., Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), 2016, pp. 1219–1224.
[45] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, G. Sarkis, and L. Vincent, “Efficient list decoding of LDPC codes,” U.S. Patent 0 131 391 A1, May 10, 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6682

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2020

[46] M. Ostojic and H.-A. Loeliger, “Multitree decoding and multitree-aided LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2010, pp. 779–783.
[47] O. Boncalo, A. Amaricai, and V. Savin, “Memory efficient implementation of self-corrected min-sum LDPC decoder,” in Proc. 21st IEEE Int. Conf. Electron., Circuits Syst. (ICECS), Dec. 2014, pp. 295–298.
[48] T. Mohsenin, D. N. Truong, and B. M. Baas, “A low-complexity message-passing algorithm for reduced routing congestion in LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1048–1061, May 2010.
[49] A. Barg and G. D. Forney, “Random codes: Minimum distances and error exponents,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 2568–2573, Sep. 2002.
[50] A. Cohen and N. Merhav, “Lower bounds on the error probability of block codes based on improvements on de Caen’s inequality,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 290–310, Feb. 2004.
[51] X. Ma, K. Huang, and B. Bai, “Systematic block Markov superposition transmission of repetition codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 1604–1620, Mar. 2018.
[52] W. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[53] X.-Y. Hu, M. P. C. Fossorier, and E. Eleftheriou, “On the computation of the minimum distance of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2004, pp. 767–771.

Lei Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.E. and M.Sc. degrees in electronics engineering from Beihang University, Beijing, China, in 2004 and 2007, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in communications and information system from the Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, in 2015.
He is currently a Professor with the Technology and Engineering Center for Space Utilization, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include free-space optical communications, error control coding, spectrum-efficient coded modulation, and iterative signal processing. He received the Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA) in 2019.

Peng Kang (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree in communications engineering from Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China, in 2013, the M.Sc. degree in telecommunications from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong SAR, in 2014, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of New South Wales (UNSW), Australia, in 2019. From 2014 to 2015, he joined the Hong Kong Applied Science and Technology Research Institute (ASTRI), where he was involved in the project about the development of self-organized small cells. He is currently a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with the Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD). His research interests include channel coding, iterative decoding techniques, and their application in communication systems.
Yixuan Xie (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of New South Wales (UNSW), Australia, in 2016.
Since then, he has been focusing on FPGA design and implementation of channel codecs and prototyping communication schemes on software-define radio platforms. He is currently a member of the School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, UNSW. His research interests include error control coding/channel coding, iterative detection/decoding processes, digital communication systems, and multiple access schemes.

Jinhong Yuan (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees in electronics engineering from the Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 1991 and 1997, respectively.
From 1997 to 1999, he was a Research Fellow with the School of Electrical Engineering, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. In 2000, he joined the School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia, where he is currently a Professor and the Head of the Telecommunication Group with the School. He has published two books, five book chapters, more than 300 papers in telecommunications journals and conference proceedings, and 50 industrial reports. He is also a co-inventor of one patent on MIMO systems and two patents on low-density-parity-check codes. His current research interests include error control coding and information theory, communication theory, and wireless communications. He has coauthored four best paper awards and one Best Poster Award, including the Best Paper Award from the IEEE International Conference on Communications, Kansas, MI, USA, in 2018, the Best Paper Award from IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, Cancun, Mexico, in 2011, and the Best Paper Award from the IEEE International Symposium on Wireless Communications Systems, Trondheim, Norway, in 2007. He is currently serving as an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS. He has served as the IEEE NSW Chapter Chair of Joint Communications/Signal Processions/Ocean Engineering Chapter from 2011 to 2014 and an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2012 to 2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:30:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

