1104
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 15, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2011
Designing Rate-Compatible
Irregular Repeat Accumulate Codes through Splitting
Min Xiao, Lin Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, and Jing Li, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—A new scheme of rate-compatible (RC) irregular
repeat accumulate (IRA) codes is proposed which can be encoded
and decoded using a single encoder-decoder pair and which
can provide good performance across a wide range of code
rates. Conventional strategies generally start from a low-rate
mother code and puncture the rate up. Considering that the
initial transmissions (and hence the higher-rate codes) are most
important, we propose to start from a good high-rate code and
“split” the rate down. Rather than do it gradually in a greedy
manner, we propose to design a good one-shot-split to control the
worst-case (lowest-rate) performance, and subsequently work out
all the intermediate rates. We show the proposed strategy is both
simple and powerful resulting in RC-IRA codes that outperform
the existing ones.
Index Terms—Rate-compatible, IRA codes, splitting.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
ECHNIQUES for implementing rate-compatible (RC)
channel codes have primarily pursued a puncturing ap-
proach, which starts from a good low-rate code and achieves
higher rates by incrementally puncturing parity bits. In the
context of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, although
puncturing allows a single encoder-decoder pair to serve all the
different codes in the RC family, these codes typically exhibit
increasingly widening gaps to the capacity as the number
of punctured parity bits and hence the code rate increase.
This can be disappointing in practice, since in a hybrid
automatic-repeat-request (HARQ) system with incremental
retransmission, one expects the initial transmission(s) of the
high-rate code(s) to be powerful, so as to avoid cumbersome
re-transmission as much as possible.
This shortcoming can be addressed with an opposite philos-
ophy: starting from a good high-rate code and work the rate
down. The techniques of extending and splitting have been
suggested for this purpose. Since extending and splitting may
result in different code graphs, caution should be exercised in
order to ensure the resultant codes are indeed rate-compatible
and can share exactly the same LDPC encoder/decoder.
This paper considers the design of RC irregular repeat
accumulate (IRA) codes using one single encoder-decoder pair
through splitting. The reasons for choosing IRA codes are two-
fold: First, IRA codes are known for both good performance
Manuscript received December 24, 2010. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M. Ardakani.
This work was supported by the US NSF under Grants No. CCF-
0635199, CCF-0829888, and CMMI-0928092, the China NSF under Grant
No.60972053, and the NSF of Fujian Province in China under Grant
No.2008J0035.
M. Xiao and L. Wang are with the Department of Communication
Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China, 361005 (e-mail:
mix209@gmail.com, wanglin@xmu.eud.cn).
J.
Li
is
with
the
Department
of
Electrical
and
Computer
En-
gineering,
Lehigh
University,
Bethlehem,
PA,
USA,
18015
(e-mail:
jingli@ece.lehigh.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2011.080811.102549
Splitting
Merging
(puncturing node 2)
1
4
5
6
7
8
4
5
6
7
8
3
3
1
2
Fig. 1.
Check node splitting and merging. Upper and lower circles denote
parity and information nodes respectively, and squares denote check nodes.
and low encoding and decoding complexity; second, there
exists an interesting reciprocal relationship between punctur-
ing and splitting for IRA codes [1] [2], which inspires new
ways to design RC-IRA codes with good performance at the
highest rate. The proposed algorithm here exercises a philos-
ophy different from the conventional “low-rate-up straight”
or “high-rate-down straight” approaches, and achieves rate-
compatibility in three steps: design a good highest-rate code,
split it all the way to the lowest rate, and progressively
reverse the splitting operation to construct the entire family of
rate-compatible codes by puncturing. The proposed algorithm
benefits from the single-encoder-decoder-pair advantage, and
at the same time, allows the highest-rate code to be optimally
designed/selected. The key step is to design the one-shot-split
pattern and the reverse puncturing pattern in a controlled way
to ensure good performance along the way and especially in
the lowest-rate case. We discuss the general guideline, propose
three criteria to guide practical splitting, and demonstrate their
effectiveness through a greedy approach.
II. RELATION BETWEEN PUNCTURING AND SPLITTING
It is known that the degree-2 variable nodes (parity nodes)
of an IRA code are linked together in a zig-zag pattern (the
dual diagonal part of the parity check matrix). Specifically,
if one such degree-2 parity node is punctured, then the two
check nodes connecting to it can be merged into one and still
maintain the zig-zag structure [1]; see Fig. 1. Following the
convention, we call the original Tanner graph with unmerged
checks the oTanner graph, and the equivalent/effective Tanner
graph after the merge the eTanner graph. It can be proven
that the oTanner graph and the eTanner graph exhibit the same
finite-length performance given enough iterations.
On the other hand, a degree-𝑘check node of an IRA code
(or a general LDPC code) can also be split into two check
nodes of degrees 𝑖and 𝑗= 2+𝑘−𝑖respectively, by inserting
a new degree-2 parity node; see Fig. 1. If all the newly-
added degree-2 parity nodes preserve the dual-diagonal parity
structure, then not only does the resultant code remain an IRA
1089-7798/11$25.00 c⃝2011 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:19:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
XIAO et al.: DESIGNING RATE-COMPATIBLE IRREGULAR REPEAT ACCUMULATE CODES THROUGH SPLITTING
1105
code and hence continue to enjoy linear-time encodability, but
the girth will likely also be increased to provide improved
performance [2]. This suggests a possibility for constructing
good low-rate IRA code(s) from a high-rate one by splitting.
However, the rate-compatible splitting scheme proposed by [2]
still needs different encoder-decoder pairs for different code
rates and requires the parity-check matrices for all the code
rates to be saved. Below we provide guidelines for effective
splitting which will result in RC-IRA codes that perform well
and fit in a single encoder/decoder pair.
III. CONSTRUCTING RC-IRA CODES BY SPLITTING
The reciprocal relationship between puncturing (check node
merging) and splitting for IRA codes inspires us to design RC-
IRA codes through splitting. The proposed procedure involves
three steps:
Step 1: Optimize an IRA code at the desired highest rate,
there after referred to as the mother code, to ensure quality
initial transmissions. The optimization of the code can be
accomplished using the existing efficient algorithms proposed
in literature, e.g. [3] and [4].
Step 2: Starting from the mother code, split the check nodes
and correspondingly inject new parity nodes to construct
the lowest-rate code of interest, thereafter referred to as the
proxy code. To ensure a consistent graph structure (and hence
encoder/decoder-compatibility), we restrict the added parity
nodes to having degree 2 only and preserving the double
diagonal structure. The key is to design a good splitting
procedure (will be discussed later), as it directly determines
the performance of the proxy code.
Step 3: Starting from the proxy code, progressively puncture
the previously-injected parity nodes and merge back the check
nodes to obtain codes of increasing rates. We recommend
uniform puncturing, such as the algorithm in [5], because it
has produced the best-performing puncturing patterns for IRA
codes in literature.
It is obvious from the above three steps that the resul-
tant RC-IRA scheme is a single-encoder-decoder-pair system
which uses the same encoder and decoder corresponding to
the proxy code for all the different code rates.
Splitting Procedure: The splitting procedure in Step 2,
which is a one-shot splitting that gets the highest rate directly
to the lowest rate, involves the design of two important
aspects: the splitting pattern, which determines how many new
check nodes each original check code should split into, and
the connection pattern, which determines what degrees should
the new check nodes take and how they should be connected
to the original and the injected variable nodes.
Splitting Pattern: It has been shown that for IRA codes,
the optimal puncturing pattern is uniform puncturing among
the parity bits [5]. Our splitting pattern is designed based on
this fact and the reciprocity between puncturing and splitting.
Consider splitting the 𝑀original check nodes in the mother
code into a total of 𝑚(new) check nodes in the proxy code
(𝑚is also the total number of parity nodes in the proxy
code). If it is a good splitting, then reversing the splitting
operation should lead to a uniform puncturing pattern for
the highest rate. Specifically, given the values of 𝑀and 𝑚
(i.e. highest and lowest code rates in the RC family), one
can easily determine the uniform puncturing pattern, and then
work out the corresponding splitting pattern. Let binary vector
P={𝑝1, 𝑝2, ..., 𝑝𝑚} denote a given puncturing pattern, where
𝑝𝑖= 0 indicates 𝑖th parity node is punctured, and 𝑝𝑖= 1
otherwise. Without loss of generality, suppose the first parity
bit is always preserved, i.e. 𝑝1 =1. Let K = {𝑘1, 𝑘2, ..., 𝑘𝑀}
denote the numbers of new check nodes which result from
splitting the 1st, 2nd, ⋅⋅⋅and 𝑀th original check nodes,
respectively, where ∑𝑀
𝑖=1 𝑘𝑖= 𝑚. The splitting pattern K
can be quickly derived from P, by noting that (𝑘𝑖−1) is the
number of zeros between 𝑖th “1” and (𝑖+1)th “1” in P.
Example: Suppose we are to design for 𝑀= 5 and 𝑚=
18. We can first get a desirable uniform puncturing pattern
such as P = {100010010001001000} (P is not unique), and
subsequently determine K = {4, 3, 4, 3, 4}.
Connection Pattern: The splitting pattern provides the num-
ber of new check nodes that each original check node should
be split into. To assign proper degrees to the new check
nodes and to arrange proper connection between the new
check nodes and variable nodes is also critical to the code
performance. Here we propose three criteria to guide the
realization of the oTanner graph of the proxy code:
A. concentrate the degrees of new check nodes,
B. uniformly connect variable nodes of different degrees to
each new check node,
C. maximize the girth of the underlying graph.
The first criterion is based on plenty of investigations in
literature that a good LDPC code should in general have check
nodes with similar degrees. The purpose of Criterion B makes
each check node connect to both high-degree and low-degree
variable nodes. This will avoid the case where some check
nodes connect only to low-degree variable nodes that are less
protected. We will show the necessity of this criterion in the
next section. The rational for Criterion C is that a large girth
can help enlarge the size of the smallest stopping/trapping
sets and will in general make the message-passing decoding
algorithm more effective. In our algorithm, Criterion A takes
precedence over Criterion B which in turn takes precedence
over Criterion C.
It should be noted that our splitting procedure differs from
a previous one proposed by Shi et al in [6]. Shi et al adopted a
progressive (greedy) procedure that uses a set of “mini-step”
uniform splitting patterns, each getting the current code to
the immediate next code-rate level, without worrying about
the cumulative effect on the last one. In comparison, ours is
a one-shot splitting that gets the highest rate directly down
to the lowest rate. After the lowest-rate code (long-term and
worst case) is under control, we then re-combine some of the
splits we did, to claim all the intermediate code-rate levels.
To illustrate, consider a simple example of splitting 1 check
of degree 20 to 2 checks and then to 3 checks. Progressive
splitting will result in 20 =⇒11∣11 =⇒7∣6∣11, whereas
one-shot splitting will directly lead to 8∣8∣8 for the last level.
Our study shows that the one-shot splitting in general leads
to better performance over all. Additionally, three criteria are
proposed to guide the connections between the variable nodes
and the newly-split checks in this work, while [6] determined
the connections with density evolution.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:19:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1106
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 15, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2011
TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF DIFFERENT RATE-COMPATIBLE IRA CODES
Code name
Rate-compatible
algorithm
Mother code
Proxy code
Rate
Information block length
Construction method
Rate
Connection criteria
Proposed-1
Proposed one-shot
splitting algorithm
0.9
512
Algorithm
in [4]
0.5
A,C
Proposed-2
0.9
512
0.5
A,B,C
Proposed-3
0.9
1024
0.5
A,B,C
Conventional
Puncturing, in [5]
0.5
512
Algorithm in [4]
Code-Yue
Puncturing, in [5]
0.5
1024
Algorithm in [3]
𝐸2RC
Progressive splitting, in [6]
0.5
1024
Algorithm in [6]
IV. EXAMPLES AND SIMULATIONS
We now present and compare the simulated performance
of our codes with a variety of RC-IRA codes in literature
(see Table I) over binary-input additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) channels. The rate-0.5 mother IRA code in the
conventional puncturing algorithm uses an optimized degree
profile 𝜆(𝑥) = .0001𝑥0 + .3040𝑥+ .2768𝑥2 + .4191𝑥6 and
𝜌(𝑥)=.3886𝑥5+.6114𝑥6. The proposed algorithms use a rate-
0.9 optimized IRA code with a degree profile 𝜆(𝑥)=.0002𝑥0+
.0460𝑥+.3794𝑥2+.5744𝑥6 and 𝜌(𝑥) = .9103𝑥42+.0897𝑥43.
A maximum of 100 iterations of the sum-product decoding
algorithm is used for all the codes. When applicable, the
puncturing patterns are obtained by the algorithm in [5].
Fig. 2 compares the frame error rate (FER) of our codes
with those designed by conventional puncturing at informa-
tion block size of 512. Our RC-IRA codes, and especially
“proposed-2”, significantly outperforms “conventional” for a
wide rage of rates and pushes the error floors lower, partic-
ularly at rate 0.9. Comparing the two codes we designed, it
can be seen that “proposed-2” generally outwins “proposed-
1”, which clearly speaks for the necessity of the connection
Criterion B, especially when designing for a wide rate range.
We also compare our codes with the best-reported RC-IRA
codes in literature in Fig. 3. All the codes have information
block length of 1024. It is encouraging indeed to see that our
codes (“proposed-3”) also outperform Code-Yue [5] and E2RC
[6] for a wide range of rates both at the waterfall region and
the error floor region!
V. CONCLUSION
Aiming at quality initial transmissions (high-rate codes) in
a HARQ system and exploiting the reciprocal relation be-
tween puncturing (check node merging) and splitting for IRA
codes, we have developed a new splitting-based procedure
to construct finite-length rate-compatible IRA codes that can
provide a wide range of rates using a single encoder/decoder
pair. Exercising a philosophy different from the conventional
“low-rate-up” or “high-rate-down”, the algorithm starts from
designing a powerful high-rate code, splits it all the way down
to the lowest rate of interest, and subsequently re-gains the
intermediate levels by merging back some of the split check
nodes. Simulation shows that the resultant codes not only
guarantee superb performance at very high rate (0.9), but also
promise very good performance across the board. That they
outperform the best RC-IRA codes reported so far speaks
volume for the effectiveness of the proposed strategy.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Eb/No (dB)
FER
Conventional
Proposed−1
Proposed−2
Fig. 2.
The FER performance comparison of the proposed RC-IRA codes
and the conventionally punctured RC-IRA codes. Information block length is
512. Rates are 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8 and 0.9 from left to right.
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Eb/No (dB)
FER
Proposed−3
Code−Yue
E2RC
Fig. 3.
The FER performance comparison of the proposed RC-IRA codes,
the best-reported RC-IRA codes in literature and the E2RC codes. Information
block length is 1024. Rates are 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8 and 0.9 from left to right.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Hong and J. Cho, “Rate-compatible puncturing for finite-length
low-density parity-check codes with zigzag parity structure,” IEEE
17th International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio
Communications, Sep. 2006.
[2] H. Joo, S. Hong, and D. Shin, “Design of rate-compatible RA-type low-
density parity-check codes using splitting,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol.
57, no. 12, pp. 3524-3528, Dec. 2009.
[3] G. Yue, B. Lu, X. Wang, and M. Madihian, “Analysis and design of
finite-length LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 56, no. 3,
pp. 1321-1332, May 2007.
[4] A. Serener, B. Natarajan, and D. M. Gruenbacher, “Optimized LDPC
codes for OFDM and spread OFDM in correlated channels,” in Proc.
IEEE VTC2007-Spring, Apr. 2007, pp. 2276-2280.
[5] G. Yue, B. Lu, X. Wang, and M. Madihian, “Design of rate-compatible
irregular repeat accumulate codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no.
6, pp. 1153-1163, June 2007.
[6] C. Shi and A. Ramamoorthy, “Design and analysis of 𝐸2RC Codes,”
IEEE J Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 889-898, Aug. 2009.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:19:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
