3562

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 47, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2011

Serial Belief Propagation for The High-Rate LDPC Decoders and Performances in The Bit Patterned Media Systems With Media Noise
Watid Phakphisut , Pornchai Supnithi , Thanomsak Sopon , and Lin M. M. Myint
Telecommunications Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, Bangkok 10520, Thailand
College of Data Storage Innovation, King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, Bangkok 10520, Thailand School of Technology, Shinawatra University, Pathum Thani 12160, Thailand
In this work, we propose to use the serial belief propagation or serial scheduling in the 2-D bit patterned media (BPM) system with media noise. The serial scheduling methods are applied to the random LDPC codes and quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes of high code rates. Both are constructed from the progress-edge growth (PEG) algorithm. We compare the performance of the LDPC codes using the serial belief propagation and the conventional belief propagation (BP) decoding. The simulation results show that the serial scheduling provides a faster convergence speed and a better bit error rate performance than the conventional BP in an AWGN channel. The serial belief propagation is also shown to offer the performance gains over the BP decoding for the BPM system with various media noise levels.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check codes, belief propagation, layered belief propagation, bit patterned media.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) code is currently the standard iterative code for the magnetic recording systems due to its performance close to the Shannon’s limit [1]. Moreover, the efficient encoding and decoding algorithms of LDPC, which are very suitable for hardware implementation, yield the advantages to other codes. Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes have the parity-check matrix constructed based on the permutation matrices. Well-designed QC-LDPC codes perform as well as the random sparse matrices [2]. Recently, the random and QC-LDPC codes constructed from the progressive-edge growth (PEG) algorithm [3]–[5] have gained some interests for the magnetic recording systems.
Traditionally, an LDPC decoder relies on the belief propagation (BP) algorithm, also known as the flooding strategy. Recently, the serial scheduling strategies such as layered belief propagation (LBP) [6]–[8] and shuffled belief propagation (SBP) [9], [10] have been proposed and they exhibit the superior performance over the traditional approach for the LDPC codes in an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.
Bit patterned media (BPM) technology is one of the candidates for the high-density magnetic recording systems beyond 1 Tb/in . In BPM, each data bit is stored on a magnetic island in the rectangular or hexagonal array. To avoid the super paramagnetic limit, each island contains a single magnetic grain [11]. The most dominant noise in the BPM is the media noise resulting from the size and position fluctuations of the islands [11], [12]. As the areal density increases, the media noise will severely affect the readback signal and degrade the system performance. From the system design perspective, the media noise needs to be included in the system evaluation.

Motivated by the fact that the previous works mostly focus on the low-to-medium block sizes, around 1 500 bits or smaller, suitable for wireless communication, in this work, we investigate how the serial belief propagation can improve the performance of the high-rate random LDPC and QC-LDPC codes constructed using the PEG algorithm. The performance improvement using the serial scheduling of these codes in the AWGN channels and the BPM systems with and without the media noise will be shown.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the bit patterned media (BPM) channels with the media noise due to the size and position fluctuations. In Section III, we briefly review the BP decoding for LDPC codes. The serial scheduling for belief propagation are described in Section IV. The simulation results of the serial belief propagation in the AWGN channels and BPM systems are shown and discussed in Section V. Finally, in Section VI, we give the conclusions.

II. BIT PATTERNED MEDIA CHANNELS WITH MEDIA NOISE

For a discrete-time channel model of the BPM system, the

readback signal

from the th magnetic island along the

th track is expressed as

(1)

where

s are the coefficients of 2-D channel response,

is the recorded bit, and

is an additive white

Gaussian noise (AWGN) sequence. In this study, the 2-D

channel response coefficients

of the BPM system are

generated by sampling the 2-D Gaussian pulse response at the

integer multiples of the bit period and the track period [13]. With

the media noise due to the size and position fluctuation, the 2-D

Gaussian pulse response of the BPM system is expressed as

Manuscript received February 21, 2011; accepted May 06, 2011. Date of cur-

rent version September 23, 2011. Corresponding author: P. Supnithi (e-mail:

ksupornc@kmitl.ac.th).

Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online

at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

(2)

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2011.2155049

0018-9464/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PHAKPHISUT et al.: HIGH-RATE LDPC DECODERS

3563

Fig. 1. Block diagram of bit patterned media recording system.

Fig. 3. Illustration of the LBP strategy.

. During the iterations, at each check node and bit node, the reliability can be computed from

(3)

Fig. 2. A Tanner graph.
(4)

where is the amplitude of the pulse response, and are

the bit and track period, respectively,

and

are the

width of the pulse response at its half maximum (PW50), is

the amplitude fluctuation, and are the location fluctua-

respectively. In (3) and (4),

denotes the variable

nodes connected to the check node except the variable noise

, and

denotes the check nodes connected to the

tions, and

and

are the PW50 fluctuations. Similar variable node except check node . The LLR of a variable

to [12], [13], the location fluctuations and , and the size node is

.

fluctuations

and

are generated by the Gaussian

random variable with the standard deviation which is defined by the percentage of the bit period.

IV. SERIAL SCHEDULING FOR BELIEF PROPAGATION

The model of the BPM recording system is shown in Fig. 1. The LDPC encoded data are sent to the 2-D BPM channel with

A. Layered Belief Propagation (LBP)

media noise. On the read side, three readback signals are pro- Layered belief propagation algorithm (LBP) is proposed for

cessed with a 2-D equalizer to eliminate the ITI effects from the LDPC codes [6] and is shown to exhibit a faster convergence

the main track. Note that, in this work, we focus on the detec- than the BP algorithm. Unlike the BP algorithm, the LBP algo-

tion of the recorded data on the main track only. The equalizer rithm applies a different scheduling method to update the check

and the 2-D generalized partial response (GPR) target are de- nodes. In the BP algorithm, all check nodes propagate the re-

signed by minimizing the mean-squared error (MSE) method liability information to their connected variable nodes simulta-

similar to [14]. The equalized readback signal is then processed neously before the propagation of updated information

with turbo equalization consisting of the soft-output Viterbi al- from the variable nodes can start. For the LBP strategy, after

gorithm (SOVA) detector and the LDPC decoder. The variables each check node passes the reliability information to its con-

in Fig. 1 are self-explanatory. Here we do not use other less nected variable nodes, each of these variable nodes will send

complex schemes such as the joint-track equalization [15] and the updated information to their connected check nodes, except

the iterative SOVA detectors [16].

the check node . The sequence of check-node updates used

in LBP is also known as horizontal shuffle scheduling [7], [8].

III. BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING FOR LDPC CODES

Fig. 3 shows a graphical illustration of the LBP strategy based on the Tanner graph in Fig. 2. The check node will first prop-

Belief propagation algorithm is a well-known decoding method of the LDPC codes [1]. It is based on the exchange of information or reliability between the nodes over a Tanner graph [17] that represents the relation between the codewords and the parity-check equations. A graph is composed of the variable node representing the th code bit and the check

agate the reliability information to the variable node

and

, respectively, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Afterward, the informa-

tion is sent from the variable node

and to the check

node

and , respectively, as shown in Fig. 3(b). An iter-

ation of the LBP strategy is finished after all the check nodes

completely propagate the information

.

node representing the th parity-check equation. An example of a Tanner graph is shown in Fig. 2.

B. Shuffled Belief Propagation (SBP)

Belief propagation algorithm relies on the propagation of the Shuffled belief propagation (SBP) [9], [10] is another type

reliability message

from the check nodes to the vari- of serial scheduling, which also converges faster than the tradi-

able nodes as well as the reliability message

from the tional BP decoding. The shuffled belief propagation (also called

variable nodes to the check nodes. Given that the received se- the vertical shuffle scheduling) is used to sequentially update the

quence

, where is the AWGN sequence. The variable nodes instead of the check nodes in LBP. The graph-

log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of the bit at the variable node is ical illustration of the SBP strategy is shown in Fig. 4. For the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3564

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 47, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2011

Fig. 4. Illustration of the SBP strategy.

Fig. 5. Tanner graph of an LDPC code based on a 3 3 permutation matrix.

LBP strategy, each check node will propagate all the informa-

tion

to its connected variable nodes. On the other hand,

the SBP strategy does not schedule to propagate all the

from the same check node , but it will schedule to propagate

from the check nodes connected to a variable node as

shown in Fig. 4(a). Afterward, this variable node will send back

the information to all the connected check nodes as shown in

Fig. 4(b). An iteration of SBP strategy will be counted after all

variable nodes are completely updated.

Fig. 6. Performance comparison between BP, LBP and SBP for a (4608,4096) LDPC code in an AWGN channel.

C. Implementation

For random LDPC codes, the serial belief propagation will

sequentially update the nodes in the graph. On the contrary,

when the LBP algorithm is applied to the quasi-cyclic LDPC

(QC-LDPC) codes, parallel processing can be exploited. The

QC-LDPC codes are constructed based on the sub-matrix typically, in the form of the permutation matrix of dimension . Hence, this guarantees that each variable node does not con-

Fig. 7. Performance of the BP, LBP and SBP algorithms in an AWGN channel at various iterations.

nect to more than one check nodes within the same group. An

example of the Tanner graph of a QC-LDPC code based on a the code rate considered is 8/9. The performance is plotted in

3 3 permutation matrix is shown in Fig. 5. Each sub matrix terms of the bit error rate (BER) versus signal-to-noise ratio

group is separated by the dotted lines. The information from the (SNR) in terms of

, where is the bit

check nodes in the same group is sent to their connected variable energy, is a one-sided power spectral density of AWGN,

nodes. Afterward, these variable nodes update the messages and

is the variance of AWGN and is the code rate. For each

then send them to the connected check nodes in other groups, SNR, the simulation is run until about 1000 erroneous bits are

respectively.

obtained.

On the other hand, QC-LDPC codes cannot use the parallel processing in the SBP algorithm since it needs to propagate the A. AWGN Channel

information from the check nodes from various groups to each In Fig. 6, the performances of BP, LBP and SBP in an AWGN

variable node.

channel are shown. For all the curves, the number of decoding

V. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

iterations is 20. The results reveal that both the LBP and SBP improve the performance over the traditional BP algorithm. On

In this section, we investigate the performance improvement the other hand, the LBP exhibits the same performance levels

of the serial belief propagation decoding on the high-code-rate as the SBP. At the BER of , the SNR gain of LBP and SBP

binary random LDPC and QC-LDPC codes. Both codes are over the BP is about 0.2 dB. As mentioned in Section IV, the

constructed using the progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algo- SBP requires a higher implementation complexity than both the

rithm [3], [4]. For the random LDPC code, in the Tanner graph, BP and LBP. However, the BP requires a comparable number of

the degree of the variable nodes, the number of edges connected node processors and memory as the LBP [18]. In addition, the

to each variable node, is 3, while the degree of the check nodes performance of QC-LDPC codes is almost identical to that of

varies from 26 to 29. For the QC-LDPC code, the dimension of the random LDPC codes whether the serial scheduling is used.

the permutation matrix is 128 and the degrees of each variable To investigate how the bit error rates converge at higher iter-

node and check node are 3 and 27, respectively. The girth of ations, we run the simulations up to 50 iterations. Fig. 7 shows

both Tanner graphs is 6. The codeword block size is 4608 and the performance of the serial schedulings for the random LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PHAKPHISUT et al.: HIGH-RATE LDPC DECODERS

3565

all media noise levels. The SNR gains due to the LBP are similar at all the media noise levels.

VI. CONCLUSION
We have proposed the improved LDPC decoding via serial belief-propagation in the 2-D BPM systems with media noise. The random LDPC and QC-LDPC codes of high code rates are constructed from the PEG algorithm. The serial belief propagation offers a faster convergence speed and a better performance. Simulation results on BPM systems with media noise show that the serial belief-propagation achieves some coding gains over the conventional LDPC decoding.

Fig. 8. Performance of BP, LBP and SBP decoders in the BPM systems with 3% media noise.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported in part by College of Data Storage Innovation, King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang and National Electronics and Computer Technology Center, National Science and Technology Development Agency, Thailand, under contract DSTAR-R&D 02-05-53.

REFERENCES

[1] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, p. 1645, 1996.
[2] C. Lei et al., “Near-Shannon-limit quasi-cyclic low-density paritycheck codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, pp. 1038–1042, 2004.

[3] X. Y. Hu et al., “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner

graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, pp. 386–398, 2005.

[4] L. Zongwang and B. V. K. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic

low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., 2004, pp. 1990–1994.

Fig. 9. Performance comparison between the BP and LBP decoders for the BPM systems with media noise.

[5] L. Xingcheng et al., “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes and the performance on the PR4-equalized MRC channel,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, pp. 3699–3702, 2009.

[6] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered

code at various iterations with the SNR fixed at 4.25 dB. The serial belief propagation is superior to the BP at all iterations. The BER of the serial belief propagation converge after about

decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS), 2004, pp. 107–112. [7] E. Yeo et al., “High throughput low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 2001, vol. 5, pp. 3019–3024. [8] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC

40 iterations. For the target BER of

, the LBP and

SBP schemes require 15 iterations as opposed to 30 iterations

for the BP scheme. At 50 iterations, the BER of the BP algo-

rithm is

, while that of LBP and SBP is

. Both

LBP and SBP give an order of BER improvement over the BP

even at the number of iterations as low as 5 iterations.

decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., pp. 976–996, 2003. [9] H. Kfir and I. Kanter, “Parallel versus sequential updating for belief propagation decoding,” Physica A, vol. 330, pp. 259–270, 2003. [10] Z. Juntan and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. 36th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., 2002, pp. 8–15. [11] R. L. White et al., “Patterned media: A viable route to 50 Gbit/in and up for magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 33, pp. 990–995,

B. BPM Systems With Media Noise
In this work, we consider a BPM recording system with the density of 2 Tbits/in and the bit period and the track pitch are 18

1997. [12] S. Nabavi et al., “Two-dimensional pulse response and media noise
modeling for bit-patterned media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., p. 3789, 2008. [13] S. Nabavi et al., “Application of image processing to characterize pat-
terning noise in self-assembled nano-masks for bit-patterned media,”

nm. The 2-D BPM channel model is generated by (2) using the along-track PW50 of 19.4 nm and across-track PW50 of 24.8 nm from [13]. In the simulation, we use 2 global iterations and 10 inner iterations (LDPC decoding). In Fig. 8, we compare the turbo equalizations with conventional and serial belief propagation in a BPM channel with 3% media noise. The serial belief-propagation yields a better performance than BP. The performances of LBP and SBP after 5 iterations are equivalent to that of BP after 10 iterations. For the error-correcting performance of the BPM systems under various media noise levels, in Fig. 9, the results show that LBP slightly outperforms the BP at

IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, pp. 3523–3526, 2009. [14] S. Nabavi and B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, “Two-dimensional generalized
partial response equalizer for bit-patterned media,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2007, pp. 6249–54. [15] W. Chang and J. R. Cruz, “Inter-track interference mitigation for bitpatterned magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 11, pp. 3899–3908, Nov. 2010. [16] J. Kim and J. Lee, “Iterative two-dimensional soft-output Viterbi algorithm for patterned media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 11, pp. 594–597, Feb. 2011. [17] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533–47, 1981. [18] F. Guilloud et al., “Generic description and synthesis of LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, pp. 2084–91, 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

