The Power Cost of Over-Designing Codes
Karthik Ganesan, Pulkit Grover, and Jan Rabaey {karthikg, pulkit, jan}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract— In “modern” coding theory, the goal of codedesign often boils down to maximizing the code girth because from a traditional transmit-power perspective, larger girths ensure better performance. In this paper, we provide an experimental example showing that maximizing code girth can hurt: codes with larger girth can consume significantly larger decoding power. This is because larger girths require increased length of decoder interconnects. Concretely, we show that for (3, 4)-regular LDPC codes of girth 6 and 8 decoded using Gallager-A decoding algorithm, the decoders for girth 8 codes can consume up to 36% more power than those for girth 6 codes at high decoding throughputs. Existing results in theoretical literature suggest that this effect will be greatly exaggerated at larger girths and degrees.
Index Terms— LDPC Decoding, Low Power Digital Circuits, Large Girth Codes, Interconnects, Tradeoffs.
I. INTRODUCTION
Code and decoder design today are often done in isolation. In coding theory, a code is considered good if it performs well according to the traditional information-theoretic metrics of error-probability and gap from capacity. On the other hand, a decoder implementation is considered good when it consumes low power and has small area. This disconnect has been acknowledged in both theoretical and experimental communities. Consequently, in theory, the issues of implementation have been abstracted as issues of “complexity,” related in various ways to computational complexity of decoding. This acknowledgment, together with the fact that modern codes such as turbo codes [1], low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes [2] etc. approach capacity, led to the revolution that begot modern coding theory [3]. The proof of the success lies in the pudding: it is now possible to have codes and decoders that, at short distances, can work at tens of Gbps (e.g. [4]) while operating at low error probabilities. In the absence of low complexity algorithms, realizing such high data-rates would have been extremely hard, if not impossible. This short-distance high data-rate technology has allowed extremely useful applications to be conceived and implemented.
But is the design of codes and decoders in isolation yielding the most efficient systems? While the core focus of theory is on the power required in transmissions, the “balance of power” has gradually shifted towards the decoder: the required decoding power at short distances easily exceeds transmit power at high data-rates in many cases [5], [6]. This shift has been reflected in the choice of codes for which decoders have been implemented. For example, Zhang et al. [4] design a power-optimized decoder for a regular LDPC code (within the 10-GBASE-T standard) that achieves

a throughput of 47 GB/s with 2.8 W of power dissipation. Why do the authors, and indeed also the 10-GBASE-T standard, use regular LDPC codes? After all, the classical transmit-power theory tells us that regular LDPCs require larger transmit power than their irregular counterparts1. This is because the decoding power of non-capacity-approaching (e.g. regular) LDPC codes can be significantly smaller [7].
This observation prompted many implementations (e.g. Marcu et al. [6]) to do away with the use of forward error correction and simply use low power transceivers with uncoded transmission. The rule-of-thumb of approaching capacity (obtained by traditional theoretical analysis) was thus rescinded. But what if we want many links to operate in the same geographical area [8]? Using uncoded transmission increases transmit power, which can cause interference to nearby links. Thus coding is needed, even though Shannoncapacity is no longer the correct metric for minimizing total power. What is the new code design criterion? A new theory that combines transmit and decoding power is required. The theory is still in the works (see, e.g. [9], [10], [11], [5], [12], [7] etc.).
This paper brings out another rule-of-thumb that breaks down in this modern era. Simultaneously, it also proposes a short-term “bandaid solution” to the problem while the “surgery” of a new theory is developed. As explained in [13], in constructing LDPC codes that achieve low bit-error probabilities, it is desirable that the codes are designed to have large girth (defined as the shortest cycle in the Tanner Graph representation of the code [14]). Traditionally, large girth codes are preferred because they provide a lower error floor and require a smaller number of decoding iterations for information bits to achieve their optimal decoded values [13]. The twist in the new “short-distance era” is the following: required wire-lengths in decoder implementations increase exponentially with the girth of the code [11]! Longer wires in turn could increase the decoding power. The question of interest in this paper is: by how much? Should we care about this power increase? If not, then the rule-of-thumb of designing codes of largest girth (the approach adopted in [13], [15] etc.) is still valid!
In Section III, we show that large-girth codes are indeed associated with an increased decoding power. Comparing two codes of small block-length, we observe that at high throughputs, this increase can be as large as 36% for just a 6 to 8 increase in girth. The exponential increase of wire-length in code girth guarantees that at larger girths, block-lengths,
1Irregular LDPC codes can operate close to the channel capacity, while regular LDPC codes cannot [3].

978-1-4577-1921-9/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

128

SiPS 2011

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:23:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and degrees of LDPC codes, the increase could be exorbitant! This partly explains why high-performance, high-throughput decoders (such as those in [4]) consume such large amounts of power. This effect is compounded by the associated wiring complexity due to large block-lengths that are often utilized to achieve high throughput in such high-performance chips. Our results thus exemplify the danger in only constructing codes for the lowest error probabilities and/or only using decoders that are designed for such high-performance codes. Instead, we advocate that code and decoder design should be done in a joint manner so as to achieve the desired code performance, power consumption, area, and throughput for a specific application.
We claim that our results also simultaneously provide a band-aid solution. By building tiny decoders (block-length 180) and using simple decoding algorithms (Gallager’s bitflipping decoders [2]) that have relatively low power consumption (see comparison in Table II), we suggest that use of a decoder may not necessarily be very expensive after all. What is the catch? The performance of our decoders is worse than that of comparable decoders of larger blocklengths and high-complexity decoding. Furthermore, through our break-up of decoding power into isolated components, we make initial steps in identifying the important properties of the decoder that code-designers should base their code constructions on for joint code/decoder designs. The results of this paper should therefore be seen as suggestive of a much richer set of ideas.
II. MODEL AND ASSUMPTIONS
A. Decoder Model
To compare two codes of different girths, we choose (3, 4)-regular LDPC as the basic code construction that specifies the left and right degrees of the code. We use the guess-and-test algorithm in [16] and [15] to obtain a girth-6 code of block-length 20 and girth-8 code of block-length 36. The MATLAB code for this LDPC code generation algorithm can be found on [17]. The Tanner graphs for our chosen codes are shown in Figure 1. The end-to-end channel is modeled as a BSC. Then, a simulation flow using
Fig. 1: Tanner Graphs for (3,4)-regular LDPC Codes of block-length 20, girth-6 (bottom) and block-length 36, girth-8 (top).
CAD tools is carried out in order to obtain decoding power consumption for the chosen codes. The STMicroelectronics 90 nm Standard CMOS Process with 7 metal layers is used in the design of our decoders for simulation. Decoders are designed in a hierarchical manner, where behavioral verilog descriptions of check-nodes and variable-nodes (described

in [2]) are first mapped to standard cells using logic synthesis and then layed out using place & route. These decoders use the Gallager-A iterative message passing algorithm [2] with 1-bit messages. Then, these check-node and variable-node cells are connected according to their respective parity-check matrices to create block level layouts for girth-6 and girth-8 decoders (see Figure 2).
The different block-lengths of girth-6 and girth-8 decoders now poses a difficulty: how do we perform a fair comparison of the two when each decodes a different number of bits? Since the varying block-length of codes of different girth directly affects the decoder area and the wiring complexity, we fix the information density per unit area of the two decoder layouts. Post-layout simulation is then performed, using extracted RC parasitics from the layout and typical corners for the ST 90 nm CMOS process. Various components
Fig. 2: Floorplan views (to scale) of (3,4)-regular LDPC Decoders of blocklength 20, girth-6 (left) and block-length 36, girth-8 (right). The layout dimensions are 146.25μm x 146.25μm for girth-6 and 196μm x 196μm for girth-8. Individual check-node and variable-node cells consume 17.92μm x 17.92μm area each and the circuit topology and sizing of transistors in these cells is not changed between girth-6 and girth-8 decoders.
of the total power consumption (including computation + glitches, interconnects, and clock tree) are isolated by means of post-layout netlist modification. Starting from a nominal supply voltage of 1.2 V, power reduction steps are taken by means of dynamic supply voltage scaling, and a range of clock frequencies at which the decoders can be run is determined. During this process, no changes to the circuit topology or transistor sizing in the decoder cells are made.
To compare the power consumption for girth-6 and girth-8 decoders, we stack multiple decoders so that the total number of output bits is the same for both: the LCM of the blocklengths of the original codes (see Figure 4 for a conceptual diagram). This ensures a fair comparison for codes of different lengths: the decoding throughput is the same for a given clock cycle and a given number of decoding iterations, and the overall area of the implementations are equal. For convenience, we use the term “total-block-length” to refer to the sum of code-lengths of various decoders in these stacked configurations.
Initial simulations are performed assuming that the received sequence is an all-zero sequence, providing a bestcase approximation of decoding power. An assumption of all-zero transmitted sequence (codeword) is easy to justify in theory [18] due to the linearity of the code, the symmetry of the channel, and the symmetry of the decoder with respect to ones and zeros. In practice however, the received sequence has errors, and could therefore require much more switching

129
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:23:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

activity at the decoder than the best-case simulations indicate. Therefore, individual check-nodes and variable-nodes are simulated separately and switching patterns at the inputs of nodes are ranked based on their power consumption. A MATLAB code is written which iterates through all possible decoder input sequences and determines the sequence that maximizes the overall switching activity at individual nodes of the decoder. Simulations are then repeated using this worst-case input sequence as the received codeword, thereby providing a worst-case approximation of decoding power.

In this equation, l is the number of decoding iterations, and

dc, dv are the check and variable node degrees, respectively.

Note

that

this

formula

only

holds

when

l

<

g 2

where

g

is

the

girth of the code.

A

plot

of

the

bit-error

probabilities

as

a

function

of

the

Eb No

for BPSK transmission over the AWGN channel is shown in

Figure 3.

B. Full System and Transmission Model
Once decoding power consumption is obtained through simulation, the required transmit power is calculated under the following assumptions:
• BPSK modulation is used over an AWGN channel. • Center frequency fc = 60 GHz, and bandwidth W = 7
GHz. • The decoder performs a hard-decision on the observed
channel outputs before starting the decoding process. Then, we consider total power budgets (Ptransmit + Pdecoding) in the range of 350 mW to 1.5 W. We first fix the decoding throughput to be 60 Gbps and consider running decoders for 1 iteration, 2 iterations, or 3 iterations in the case of girth-8. Then, we take the corresponding decoding power numbers obtained from simulation and consider those fixed (see Section II-A for explanation). We subtract this from the total power budget and obtain the maximum allowable value of Ptransmit for a given decoder to run for a given number of iterations. Then, we convert this transmit power to the channel cross-over probability pch for the BSC channel using the Frii’s transmission equation:

pch = Q

PT

r λ

α kT W

,

where Q is the tail probability function of the standard

normal distribution, Q(x)

=

√1 2π

e ∞ −u2

x

2

du,

and

λ

is

the wavelength of transmission at fc = 60 GHz, λ =

3×108 60×109

m

=

5mm.

Here,

k

is

the

boltzmann

constant

(1.38×

10−23

J K

)

and

T

is

the

temperature

(assumed

to

be

300K).

We vary r (transmit distance) and α (path-loss exponent)

to simulate the effect of varying transmit conditions and

compare the BER performance of girth-6 and girth-8 codes

under different configurations.

To analyze the BER performance of our LDPC decoders

we apply the formula for the evolution of bit-error probabil-

ities with number of independent decoding iterations using

Gallager-A message passing algorithm (given in [2]):

pe(l)

=

⎡ pch − pch ⎢⎢⎣

1+

1 − 2pe(l−1) dc−1 2

⎤dv −1 ⎥⎦⎥

+

⎡ (1 − pch) ⎢⎢⎣

1 − 1 − 2pe(l−1) dc−1 2

⎤dv −1

⎥⎦⎥

(1)

Fig. 3: Bit Error Probabilities for (3,4)-regular LDPC (2 and 3 iterations),

repetition code of rate 1/4, and uncoded We assume BPSK transmission over an

transmission as a function of AWGN channel and compare

NEobour.

result to a repetition code which uses a majority function for decisions (with

additional fair coin flip if necessary).

III. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Decoding Power - Code Performance Tradeoff
As explained in Section II-A, once decoding power consumption is obtained for (3,4)-Regular LDPC decoders of block-length 20, girth-6 and block-length 36, girth-8, a fair comparison is performed by considering decoders of totalblock-length 180 (LCM(20,36)) made using these individual blocks (See Figure 4). We then obtain plots of best-case and worst-case decoding power consumption vs. throughput for these LDPC decoders (see Figure 5). A plot of the percentage increase in total decoding power consumption between girth6 and girth-8 for both cases is given in Figure 6. Our results show that decoding power consumption can increase upwards of 36% with only a girth-6 to girth-8 increase in code girth.

Fig. 4: A conceptual diagram illustrating fully parallel configurations of total-block-length 180 LDPC decoders. The diagram is drawn to scale and annotated according to the specific LDPC decoders used in this work. We consider these configurations in order to ensure a fair comparison between codes of different block-length (see Section II-A for explanation). Note that 980μm × 196μm ≈ 146.25μm × 1.380mm, and the implementations are approximately equal in area.

130
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:23:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and check nodes, the clock tree, and the rest of the decoder. A summary of this breakdown of power consumption is provided in Table I. A plot of the power consumed strictly by interconnects connecting variable and check-nodes is given in Figure 7. These interconnects consume upwards of 26% of the total decoding power. Further, the long wires which compose the clock tree are also responsible for a large portion of the decoding power. Thus long interconnects consume a significant fraction of the total power. But is

Fig. 5: Best-Case (top) and Worst-Case (bottom) Decoding Power Consumption vs. Throughput for total-block-length 180 (3,4)-regular LDPC Decoders of girth-6 and girth-8. These curves are obtained from simulations where the decoders are both run for 2 iterations.

Fig. 6: Percentage increase in total decoding power consumption for totalblock-length 180 (3,4)-regular LDPC between girth-6 and girth-8 under best-case and worst-case decoding.
B. Power break-up: the cost of long interconnects
In order to determine which components of the total decoding power contribute most to this increase, supply nodes in the decoder netlists are grouped based on whether they supply current to the clock tree cells, the interconnects connecting variable and check nodes, or the standard cells used for logic. Then, the power consumption for each of these three groups is simulated, giving separate estimates of the power consumed by interconnects connecting variable

Fig. 7: Best-Case (top) and Worst-Case (bottom) Interconnect Power Consumption for total-block-length 180 (3,4)-regular LDPC Decoders of girth-6 and girth-8. These values reflect only the power consumed in interconnects between check-nodes and variable-nodes (only the wires along which messages are passed).
the remaining power all computational? We notice that the non-interconnect, non-clock-tree component of the decoding power dominates, consuming 66.8% (on average for girth-6) and 68.5% (on average for girth-8) of the total decoding power. In order to understand this power further, we fix the clock-period (and therefore, the throughput) for the two total-block-length 180 decoders and compare this remaining component of the power. If the remaining component of the decoding power were purely computational, it would remain roughly constant between the two decoders. This is because the number of computational nodes is fixed and the computations performed under best-case decoding are identical for the two decoders. It turns out that this assumption is not corroborated by our results: the decoding power increases by 10.6% on average from girth-6 to girth-8 under this comparison.
What can be the reason for this large increase in power consumption? Upon closer observation of the waveforms in

131
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:23:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Average Percentage of Total Decoding Power

Component

Girth-6 Girth-8

Computation + Glitches 66.8% 68.5%

Interconnects

23.4% 23.5%

Clock Tree

9.8% 8%

TABLE I: Average (across all throughputs of both best and worst cases) percentage breakdown for various components of total decoder power consumption for total-block-length 180 (3,4)-regular LDPC Decoders of girth-6 and girth-8.

our variable-nodes, we notice that during the first decoding iteration, many glitches propagate through the critical path logic to the inputs of the message passing registers. Due to long wires of unequal lengths from the channel inputs to the variable-node logic, the correction of these glitches is delayed. However, due to proper timing of the decoders, the glitches are resolved before the initial messages are passed, and the decoders operate correctly. Regardless, large amounts of power are consumed by such glitches, contributing to the overall disparity of the decoding power between girth6 and girth-8 decoders. Because the initial state of wires is the primary cause for glitches as well, our numbers here underestimate the power consumed due to long interconnects.

C. Tradeoff between Transmit and Decoding Power
Following the method and assumptions described in Section II-B, we consider transmission over short-distances with a path-loss exponent of α = 3. Under worst-case decoding, at a distance of 4.75m, shown in Figure 8, a girth-6 decoder can outperform a girth-8 decoder by up to two orders of magnitude in the error probability at a total power of 0.9 W. Viewed from the Y-axis, the girth-6 decoder is better by ∼ 0.45 dB at an error probability of 10−16. At lower error probabilities (attainable at larger total power), running a girth-8 decoder for 3 iterations can be better, as is evidenced by the best-case power consumption plot.
Increasing the distance to 8m (see Figure 9), girth-6 codes still outperform girth-8 codes at high pe (low total power), but the difference is smaller: e.g. at 1 W of total power, the difference in pe is ∼ 0.5 orders of magnitude under worstcase decoding. The gain at pe ≈ 10−4.2 is ∼ 0.37 dB.
IV. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we use an example to show that increase in code girth can significantly increase the power consumption for simple decoders. Further, interconnects can consume a significant fraction of the total decoding power. While we consider merely a 6 to 8 increase in code girth for (3,4)regular LDPC codes, to achieve a girth of 10 for (3,4)regular LDPC, the required code-length can be much larger (∼ 156 as compared to 36 for girth-8 [16]). Not only would this greatly increase the wiring complexity and area of the decoder implementation, but because of exponential increase in wire-length with increasing girth [11], the corresponding increase in decoding power could be much larger. An increase in the degree of the variable-nodes (dv) and checknodes (dc) in the decoder can also lead to a similar increase

Fig. 8: Best achievable Bit-Error-Probabilities for transmission over 4.75m distance with path loss exponent α = 3 assuming Worst-Case (top) or BestCase (bottom) Decoding Power. The distance 4.75 m is specifically chosen to illustrate our point.
in power: results in [16], [15] show that an increase in dc from just 4 to 5 requires a block-length of 70 for girth-8 and 315 for girth-10!
One argument for using uncoded transmission has been the high cost of decoding, even though this can result in large interference. Our results also show that the power and area costs associated with a decoder can be significantly smaller than those for state-of-the-art decoders. Although simple decoders such as ours sacrifice on the BER performance, they could provide a competitive alternative to uncoded transmission because of their low power consumption and very small area.
Our results also suggest a theoretical framework for systematic joint code/decoder design: each of the components included in our breakdown can dictate a specific model for decoding power. This can be quite useful: for instance, code-design strategies can then be developed to optimize the decoding power for the dominant component.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge the support of NSF grant CCF-0917212. We thank Anant Sahai for stimulating discussions, Jose Moura for providing code constructions that we started our

132
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:23:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Decoder Structure Bits Technology Area Supply Power Throughput (Nominal Supply) BER (at 4dB Eb/N0)

Simple vs. High-Performance Decoders

Simple Girth-6

Simple Girth-8

(3,4)-regular LDPC

(3,4)-regular LDPC

180 (stacked)

180 (stacked)

90nm

90nm

1.316mm x 146.25μm

980μm x 196μm

1.2V

1.2V

236.61 mW

318.95 mW

60 Gbps (2 iterations)

40 Gbps (3 iterations)

2.1 × 10−4 (2 iterations) 1.6 × 10−5 (3 iterations)

Decoder from [4] (6,32)-regular LDPC 2048 65nm 2.316mm x 2.311mm (core) 1.2V 2.80 W 47 Gbps ≈ 10−6

TABLE II: An example comparison between our simple decoders and the decoder from [4]. Our decoders exhibit much smaller area and power consumption than state-of-the-art decoders, but they also have worse code performance.

Fig. 9: Best achievable Bit-Error-Probabilities for transmission over 8m distance with path loss exponent α = 3 assuming Worst-Case (top) or BestCase (bottom) Decoding Power. The distance 8 m is specifically chosen to illustrate our point.
simulations with. We thank the students, staff, faculty, and sponsors of the Berkeley Wireless Research Center and Wireless Foundations. In particular, Brian Richards assisted with the simulation flow. We also acknowledge STMicroelectronics for making available the technology information that was used in our simulations.

[3] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[4] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “A 47 Gb/s LDPC decoder with improved low error rate performance,” in Symposium on VLSI Circuits, 2009, pp. 286 – 287.
[5] P. Grover and A. Sahai, “Green codes: Energy-efficient short-range communication,” in Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE Symposium on Information Theory, Toronto, Canada, Jul. 2008.
[6] C. Marcu, D. Chowdhury, C. Thakkar, J.-D. Park, L.-K. Kong, M. Tabesh, Y. Wang, B. Afshar, A. Gupta, A.Arbabian, S. Gambini, R. Zamani, E. Alon, and A. Niknejad, “A 90 nm CMOS low-power 60 GHz transceiver with integrated baseband circuitry,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 3434 – 3447, 2009.
[7] P. Grover, K. Woyach, and A. Sahai, “Towards a communicationtheoretic understanding of system-level power consumption,” Arxiv preprint arXiv:1010.4855, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communication, to appear, 2011.
[8] P. Grover, K. A. Woyach, H. Palaiyanur, and A. Sahai, “An interference-aware perspective on decoding power,” in International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing (ISTC), 2010.
[9] P. Massaad, M. Medard, and L. Zheng, “Impact of Processing Energy on the Capacity of Wireless Channels,” in International Symposium on Information Theory and its Applications (ISITA), 2004.
[10] S Cui, AJ Goldsmith and A Bahai, “Energy Constrained Modulation Optimization,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 1–11, 2005.
[11] P. Grover and A. Sahai, “Fundamental bounds on the interconnect complexity of decoder implementations,” in Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS), 2011.
[12] ——, “Time-division multiplexing for green broadcasting,” in Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE Symposium on Information Theory, Seoul, Korea, Jul. 2009.
[13] J. Lu and J. M. F. Moura, “Structured LDPC codes for High-Density Recording: Large Girth and Low Error Floor,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 208 – 213, 2006.
[14] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533 – 547, 1981.
[15] M. P. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes from Circulant Permutation Matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 599 – 618, 2004.
[16] Y. Wang, J. S. Yedidia, and S. C. Draper, “Construction of High-Girth QC-LDPC Codes,” Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Tech. Rep. TR2008-061, September 2008.
[17] K. Ganesan, “Search and verification program for LDPC codes,” Apr. 2011, http://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/∼karthikg/LDPCGIRTH.m.
[18] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in IEEE International Conference on Communications, 1993.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.

133
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:23:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

