3320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 47, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2011

A Novel Error-Correcting System Based on Product Codes for Future Magnetic Recording Channels
Tam Van Vo and Seiichi Mita
Toyota Technological Institute, Hisakata, Tempaku, Nagoya 468-8511, Japan
We propose a novel construction of product codes for high-density magnetic recording based on binary low-density parity check (LDPC) codes and binary image of Reed–Solomon (RS) codes. Moreover, two novel algorithms are proposed to decode the codes in the presence of AWGN errors and scattered hard errors (SHEs). Simulation results show that at a bit-error rate (BER) of approximately
10 8, our method allows improving the error performance by approximately 1.9 dB compared with that of a hard decision decoder of
RS codes of the same length and code rate. For the mixed error channel, including random noise and SHEs, the signal-to-noise ratio is set at 5 dB, and 150 to 400 SHEs are randomly generated. The bit-error performance of the proposed product code shows a significant improvement over that of equivalent random LDPC codes or serial concatenation of LDPC and RS codes.
Index Terms—Binary image of RS codes, permutation decoding algorithm, product codes, projective geometry LDPC codes.

I. INTRODUCTION
F OR FUTURE magnetic recording systems, bit-patterned media (BPM) and shingled writing recording (SWR) are two promising candidates in order to implement high-density recording of more than 10 Tb/square in. From the viewpoint of error correction, these systems will include not only conventional errors, such as random errors due to the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and burst errors due to media defects, but scattered hard errors (SHEs) as well. SHEs are errors with large changes in signal amplitude and large values of log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) at each bit position due to strong neighboring interference. Therefore, a powerful error-correcting method will necessarily be demanded for correcting these types of mixed errors at high recording densities.
Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes and Reed-Solomon (RS) codes are widely used for correcting these errors. However, it has been shown that RS codes are very robust against hard errors and become weak over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels. Similarly, LDPC codes perform well in correcting random noises and poor to hard errors. To solve the main drawback of RS hard decoders, many methods have been proposed to overcome the problems [1], [3]. For small length and high-rate RS codes, perhaps the most impressive results are achieved by the permutation decoding algorithm proposed in [3]. It is shown that the algorithm produces very good error performance and comes extremely close to the maximum-likelihood decoder (MLD) within 0.3 dB at a bit-error rate (BER) of approximately . For long code lengths, LDPC codes are commonly used instead of RS codes; however, they are poor at dealing with hard errors caused by media defects, thermal asperity, etc.
The aim of this study is to propose good codes that can perform with the strong ability to correct the three types of errors from before. We propose product codes based on binary LDPC codes and binary images of small RS codes. Although product codes can improve the minimum distance at the expense of the

code rate [4], they are infrequently used in practical applications, such as hard-disk drives (HDDs) since their decoding performances are usually poor. To overcome this problem, we proposed two novel algorithms for product codes that we refer to as the error detection algorithm (EDA) and the product decoding algorithm (PDA). We evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithms by applying it to various noise channels. These proposed product codes have hard and soft iterative decisions.

II. BACKGROUND

A. Binary Images of Double-Parity RS Codes

In this subsection, we briefly review the structure of binary

images of a double-parity RS code. For complete discussions

on the binary images of RS codes, we refer the reader to [1],

[3], and [4].

Let be a fixed primitive element in the Galois field

.

Let

be a basis of

over

. Let the code length be

.

The binary image of a

RS code is obtained by

representing every codeword

as an

binary matrix.

...

...

...

...

...

where

for all

The parity check matrix of the double-parity RS

binary image is represented by the following

mial matrix in the ring

. polyno-

...

...

...

...

Manuscript received February 20, 2011; revised May 04, 2011; accepted May 12, 2011. Date of current version September 23, 2011. Corresponding author: T. V. Vo (e-mail: van@toyota-ti.ac.jp).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2011.2157091

... where

...

...

...

(1) is known as the idempotent [4].

0018-9464/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:18:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VO AND MITA: NOVEL ERROR-CORRECTING SYSTEM BASED ON PRODUCT CODE

3321

= [1 . . . ] TABLE I
u VECTORS COMPUTED FOR 


; ; ; 

( 0 2 3) GF(2 ) Fig. 2. Product code of binary image of n ; n ( ) and n ; k binary LDPC codes.

; RS codes in

III. EFFECTIVE DECODER OF PRODUCT CODES

GF(2 ) Fig. 1. Example of permutation decoding. Each column represents a
symbol in binary notation. Erroneous symbols occur at (1,6), (2,0), and (3,1).

In particular,

is equal to

and

vector

is computed in Table I [3].

B. Permutation Decoding Algorithm

In this subsection, an introduction to permutation decoding

algorithm is included in order to make this paper self-contained.

Further discussion on this topic can be found in [1] and [3].

Consider an RS code

over

. Let the basis

where primitive element satisfies

.

Let the RS codeword

be transmitted

in its binary image as shown in Fig. 1. Assume that error po-

sitions only occur at (1,6), (2,0), and (3,1). Next, permute the

three rows of

by (0,4,6)(2,5,3), and (1,4,2)(3,5,6), and

(0,4,6)(2,5,3), respectively. It is observed that all of the erro-

neous bits are permuted into the first symbol. Furthermore, the

binary image

is permuted to

, which is also an

RS codeword. Therefore, all errors can be corrected by using a

conventional hard-decision decoder. The details of the permu-

tation decoding algorithm are restated as:

A. Structure of Product Codes

To produce powerful codes, a product of the binary image of

RS code and

binary LDPC code is

formed. The product code

is encoded in two steps. At

the first step, each row of the information array is encoded into a

RS codeword in . At the second one, each of the columns

of the array formed in the first encoding step is encoded into an

LDPC codeword in . This results in a code array of rows

and columns, as shown in Fig. 2. It should be noted that

the information digits are decomposed into many -bit rows

corresponding to binary images of RS symbols in

over

. For the long sector format, we investigate a product code

of a 2-D (1057, 813, 34) projective geometry (PG) LDPC code

and a (31, 29) RS code over

. The final code rate is 0.72.

Any high code rate can be constructed using adequate codes.

B. Error Detection Algorithm
We propose an error detection algorithm (EDA) based on the checksum on rows and columns of product codes to enhance the error-correction ability of product codes. The details of the EDA are described in the following paragraphs.

Error detection algorithm (EDA)

Permutation decoding algorithm [3] Input: Observations of channel output . Parameter .

Input: A received product codeword of size

.

Parameter

. A parity check matrix H of the

LDPC code.

Matrix and vector , basis .

Output: A list of error positions.

Output: Most-likely codeword in list

1) Perform hard decision decoding on .

2) if can be decoded to some codeword then store in .

3) forall

.

4) Compute a permutation with input

, and .

5) Construct by setting

.

6) Compute

.

7) Erase 0-th and -th symbols, decode

codeword .

to obtain

1) Checksum on the row of product codeword and

output a list of erroneous rows.

2) forall

3) Checksum on the th column of using matrix

and output a list of positions

that cause errors

on all checksums.

4) Output the error positions

, where are

intersections of and

.

5) end

8) Permute with and store in .

It should be noted that the proposed algorithm can be regarded

9) end

as a generalization of the error detection method in single parity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:18:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3322

PRODUCT CODEWORD c

TABLE II WITH ERROR POSITIONS AT (1,6), (2,0), AND (3,1)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 47, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2011

0 Fig. 3. Product decoding algorithm for product codes from binary image of
(n; n 2; 3) RS codes and binary LDPC codes.

check (SPC) product codes using the parity parts of RS codes and LDPC codes. Moreover, we empirically found that the detection ability of our algorithm strongly depends on the minimum Hamming distance of LDPC codes, such as in the case using (1057, 813) PG-LDPC codes with a minimum distance
34. Our method works perfectly even in various noise channels.
Example 1: Consider an example product code of a binary image of RS (7, 5, 3) and a Hamming code (7, 4, 3) with the parity matrix

We reuse the RS codeword as shown in Fig. 1. After two-

step encoding, we obtain a product codeword , whose first

three rows contain information digits from the RS codeword.

Remember that row 4 of contains redundant information

digits only for this example. Suppose

has errors only at

(1,6), (2,0), and (3,1). In order to detect errors, we first check on

the first three rows of and obtain

. We then

check on the first column of . From Table II, it can be seen

that parity-check failures occur on check row and ; hence,

the possible error locations could be

, which

are the common “1” in and . Therefore, it can be concluded

that the error location occurs at (2,0). The others (3,1) and (1,6)

can be detected similarly.

Although this example was applied to a small code length, our

method can be used for all

RS codes and the entire

parity check matrix H. It should be noticed that our method does

not require

operations;, hence, it is effective and low

in complexity.

Product decoding algorithm (PDA)

Input: Received codewords of a product code based on

binary image of RS

code and a binary LDPC

code.

Output: Corrected codewords. 1) Detect error positions using the proposed error detection algorithm. 2) Set log-likelihood ratio (LLR) at a position equal to zero. 3) Iterative decoding on columns of the product code by the sum product algorithm (SPA); repeat step 1). 4) After several iterations, apply RS permutation decoding on information rows of the product code. 5) Decode on columns of the product code using the majority logic decoder. 6) If some errors exist, apply the hard decision decoder on rows of the product code and output the corrected codewords.

It can be clearly seen that our EDA is necessarily used to detect and erase hard errors before executing SPA decoding on columns of product codes. This is because LDPC decoders perform poorly at correct SHEs. Simulation results show that the total numbers of errors ware reduced quickly by the SPA algorithm after applying the EDA method. For decoding rows of product codes, RS permutation decoders are used to eliminate the remaining erasure errors. To correct two errors from occurring in the same row of the product code, we use an iterative hard-decision decoder, including LDPC majority logic decoding on columns and RS hard-decision decoding on rows of the product codes as shown in Fig. 3.

C. Decoding Algorithm for Product Codes

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

Permutation decoders show the ability to correct more hard errors than conventional hard-decision decoders [3]. However, A. Product Codes of LDPC Codes and RS Codes

they require adequate erasure information of bit locations and In our evaluation, a double-parity (31,29) RS code over

the length of RS codes to be quite small. For practical applica-

is used as the inner codes. For the outer codes, we

tions, our proposed structure resolves these problems. Based on investigate a 2-D (1057, 813, 34) projective geometry (PG)

our EDA method in the previous subsection, a novel decoding LDPC code given in [2], with a column weight of 33 and a

algorithm for product codes is proposed and denoted as the minimum distance of 34. The length of the final product code

product decoding algorithm (PDA). Fig. 3. describes the flow

is 32767 and the code rate is 0.72. The maximum number

diagram of the product decoding algorithm.

of SPA iterations is set to 20 for all LDPC decoders.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:18:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VO AND MITA: NOVEL ERROR-CORRECTING SYSTEM BASED ON PRODUCT CODE

3323

Fig. 4. BER of the product code C based on a (1057, 813) PG-LDPC code
and a (31,29) RS code over AWGN channels.

Fig. 5. BER of the product code C based on a (1057, 813) PG-LDPC code
and a (31,29) RS code at SNR =5 dB and hard errors from 150 to 400.

B. Performance Evaluation of Product Codes

Fig. 4 compares the BER performance of the code with

an equivalent RS code, random LDPC code, and serial concate-

nation LDPC-RS code over AWGN channels. The RS code is a

(4095, 2947) over

that can correct up to 574 symbol er-

rors. The LDPC code is a (32767, 23592) random binary LDPC

code with no 4 cycle. The equivalent serial concatenation of

LDPC and RS code has the same code length and 20% and 8%

of the code length are used as the parity parts of the LDPC outer

and RS inner code, respectively. The code is decoded by

the PDA method. Fig. 4 shows that the code outperforms

the same code-rate RS code decoded by using the hard-decision

decoding algorithm by 1.9 dB at a BER of approximately .

Although its BER performance is slightly degraded compared to

that of the LDPC code and the serial concatenation LDPC-RS

code over AWGN channels, our product code can be used in

real applications of ultra-high-density HDDs where error per-

formance is dominated by SHEs and long burst errors. Fig. 5

presents the BER performance in the case of mixed-error chan-

nels, including random noises and SHEs where SNR is set at

5 dB, and 150 to 400 SHEs are randomly generated with am-

plitudes ranging from 1.0 to 1.5. When the amplitude of SHEs

is equal to 1.5 as shown in Fig. 5, the BER performance of

shows a significant improvement compared to the equiva-

lent random LDPC code and the serial concatenation LDPC-RS

code. Moreover, our code can correct any two arbitrary columns

containing long burst errors of length 1057 based on the ability of the RS code. Therefore, the proposed code will be useful for the implementation of future HDDs.
V. CONCLUSION
The proposed algorithms using parity check on rows and columns of product codes were able to improve the BER performance in the presence of SHEs, AWGN errors, and long burst errors of a length up to 1057 based on the ability of the RS code. Therefore, the proposed code might become a key step to practical implementation of future HDDs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) for Scientific Research 21560418, the Storage Research Consortium (SRC), and the NEDO project.
REFERENCES [1] J. Lacan and E. Delpeyroux, “The q-ary image of some q -ary cyclic
codes: Permutation group and soft-decision decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 7, pp. 2069–2078, Jul. 2002. [2] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001. [3] F. Lim, M. P. Fossorier, and A. Kavcic, “Code automorphisms and permutation decoding of certain Reed-Solomon binary images,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5253–5273, Oct. 2010. [4] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes, 2nd ed. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1983.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:18:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

