IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 45, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

843

An Efficient 10GBASE-T Ethernet LDPC Decoder
Design With Low Error Floors
Zhengya Zhang, Member, IEEE, Venkat Anantharam, Fellow, IEEE, Martin J. Wainwright, Member, IEEE, and Borivoje Nikolic´, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—A grouped-parallel low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoder is designed for the (2048,1723) Reed-Solomon-based LDPC (RS-LDPC) code suitable for 10GBASE-T Ethernet. A two-step decoding scheme reduces the wordlength to 4 bits while lowering the error floor to below 10 14 BER. The proposed post-processor is conveniently integrated with the decoder, adding minimal area and power. The decoder architecture is optimized by groupings so as to localize irregular interconnects and regularize global interconnects and the overall wiring overhead is minimized. The 5.35 mm2, 65 nm CMOS chip achieves a decoding throughput of 47.7 Gb/s. With scaled frequency and voltage, the chip delivers a 6.67 Gb/s throughput necessary for 10GBASE-T while dissipating 144 mW of power.
Index Terms—Error floors, iterative decoder architecture, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, message-passing decoding, post-processing.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes have been demonstrated to perform very close to the Shannon limit when decoded iteratively using message-passing algorithms [1]–[4]. A wide array of the latest communication and storage systems have chosen LDPC codes for forward error correction in applications including digital video broadcasting (DVB-S2) [5], [6], 10 Gigabit Ethernet (10GBASE-T) [7], broadband wireless access (WiMax) [8], wireless local area network (WiFi) [9], deep-space communications [10], and magnetic storage in hard disk drives [11]. The adoption of the capacity-approaching LDPC codes is, at least in theory, one of the keys to achieving lower transmission power and more reliable communication.
Manuscript received August 24, 2009; revised January 15, 2010. Current version published March 24, 2010. This paper was approved by Guest Editor Ajith Amerasekera. This work was supported in part by NSF CCF Grant 0635372, Marvell Semiconductor, and Intel Corporation through a UC MICRO Grant. The design infrastructure was developed with the support of Center for Circuit and System Solutions (C2S2) Focus Center, one of five research centers funded under the Focus Center Research Program, a Semiconductor Research Corporation program. The NSF Grant CNS RI-0403427 provided the computing infrastructure and ST Microelectronics donated the chip fabrication.
Z. Zhang was with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, and is now with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA (e-mail: zhengya@eecs.umich.edu).
V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic´ are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA (e-mail: ananth@eecs.berkeley.edu; wainwrig@eecs.berkeley.edu; bora@eecs.berkeley.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2010.2042255

There is a challenge in implementing high-throughput LDPC decoders with a low area and power on a silicon chip for practical applications. The intrinsically parallel message-passing decoding algorithm relies on message exchange between variable processing nodes (VN) and check processing nodes (CN) in the graph defined by the matrix. A direct mapping of the interconnection graph causes large wiring overhead and low area utilization. In the first silicon implementation of a fully parallel decoder, Blanksby and Howland reported that the size of the decoder was determined by routing congestion and not by the gate count [12]. Even with optimized floor plan and buffer placement techniques, the area utilization rate is only 50%.
Architectures with lower parallelism can be attractive, as the area efficiency can be improved. In the decoder used in an ultrawideband (UWB) baseband transceiver [13], the matrix is partitioned: partitions are time-multiplexed and each partition is processed in a fully parallel manner. With structured codes, the routing can be further simplified. Examples include the decoders for the DVB-S2 standard [14], [15], where the connection between memory and processors is realized using barrel shifters. A more compact routing scheme, only for codes constructed with circulant matrices, is to fix the wiring between memory and processors while rotating data stored in shift registers [16]. The more generic and most common grouped-parallel architecture is implemented in segmented memories to increase the access bandwidth and the schedules are controlled by lookup tables. Architectures constructed this way permit reconfigurability, as demonstrated by a WiMAX decoder [17].
Solely relying on architecture transformation could be limiting in producing the optimal designs. Novel schemes have been proposed for achieving the design specification with no addition (or even a reduction) of the architectural overhead. In the work [18], a layered decoding schedule was implemented by interleaving check and variable node operations in order to speed up convergence and increase throughput. This scheme requires additional processing and a higher power consumption. Other authors [19] have used a bit-serial arithmetic to reduce the number of interconnects by a factor equal to the wordlength, thereby lowering the wiring overhead in a fully parallel architecture. This bit-serial architecture was demonstrated for a small LDPC code with a block length of 660. More complex codes can still be difficult to implement due to the poor scalability of global wires.
Aside from the implementation challenges, LDPC codes are not guaranteed to perform well in every application either. Sometimes the excellent error-correction performance of LDPC codes is only observed up until a moderate bit error rate

0018-9200/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

844

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 45, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

H Fig. 1. Representation of an LDPC code in (a) a parity-check matrix ( matrix) and (b) a factor graph.

(BER); at a lower BER, the error curve often changes its slope, resents the number of bits in the code block (block length) and

manifesting a so-called error floor [20]. With communication represents the number of parity checks. An example of the

and storage systems demanding data rates up to Gb/s, relatively matrix of an LDPC code is shown in Fig. 1(a). The matrix can

high error floors degrade the quality of service. To prevent such be represented graphically using a factor graph as in Fig. 1(b),

degradation, transmission power is raised or a more complex where each bit is represented by a variable node and each check

scheme, such as an additional level of error-correction coding is represented by a factor (check) node. An edge exists between

[5], is created. These approaches increase the power consump- the variable node and the check node if

.

tion and complicate the system integration. This work implements a post-processing algorithm that uti- A. Decoding Algorithm

lizes aspects of the structure of the Tanner graph associated to the LDPC code [21], [22]. The post-processing approach is based on a message-passing algorithm with selectively-biased messages. As a result, it can be seamlessly integrated with the message-passing decoder. Results show performance improvement of orders of magnitude at low error rates after post-processing even with short wordlengths. The wordlength reduction permits a more compact physical implementation.

Low-density parity-check codes are usually iteratively decoded using the belief propagation algorithm, also known as the message-passing algorithm. The message-passing algorithm operates on a factor graph, where soft messages are exchanged between variable nodes and check nodes. The algorithm can be formulated as follows: in the first step, variable nodes are initialized with the prior log-likelihood ratios (LLR) defined in (1) using the channel outputs , where represents the channel

In formulating the hardware architecture of a high-throughput noise variance. This formulation assumes the information bits

decoder, a grouping strategy is applied in separating irregular take on the values 0 and 1 with equal probability.

local wires from regular global wires. The post-processor is im-

plemented as a small add-on to each local processing element

(1)

without adding external wiring, thus the area penalty is kept

minimal. A low wiring overhead enables a highly parallel decoder design that achieves a very high throughput. Frequency and voltage scaling can be applied to improve power efficiency if a lower throughput is desired.
In this paper, Section II introduces the LDPC code and the decoding algorithm. Emphasis is placed on LDPC codes constructed in a structured way and its implication on the decoder architecture. In Section III, hardware emulation is applied in choosing the decoding algorithm and wordlength. In particular, the post-processing algorithm is demonstrated to achieve an excellent decoding performance at a very short wordlength of 4 bits. In Section IV, the architecture of the chip is determined based on a set of experiments to explore how architectural grouping affects implementation results. Section V explains individual block designs and Section VI presents steps in optimizing the overall area and power efficiencies. The performance and power measurements of the fabricated test chip are presented in Section VII.

The variable nodes send messages to the check nodes along the edges defined by the factor graph. The LLRs are recomputed based on the parity constraints at each check node and returned to the neighboring variable nodes. Each variable node then updates its decision based on the channel output and the extrinsic information received from all the neighboring check nodes. The marginalized posterior information is used as the variable-to-check message in the next iteration.
1) Sum-Product Algorithm: The sum-product algorithm is a common form of the message-passing algorithm, a simplified illustration of which is shown in Fig. 2(a). The block diagram is for one slice of the factor graph showing a round trip from a variable node to a check node back to the same variable node as highlighted in Fig. 2(b). Variable-to-check and check-to-variable messages are computed using equations (2) and (3), where
. The messages and refer to the variable-to-check and check-to-variable messages, respectively, that are passed between the th variable node and

II. BACKGROUND

the th check node. In representing the connectivity of the factor

graph,

refers to the set of all the check nodes adjacent to

A low-density parity-check code is a linear block code, de- the th variable node and

refers to the set of all the vari-

fined by a sparse

parity check matrix where rep- able nodes adjacent the th check node. The posterior LLR is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: AN EFFICIENT 10GBASE-T ETHERNET LDPC DECODER DESIGN WITH LOW ERROR FLOORS

845

Fig. 2. Message-passing decoding implementation showing (a) sum-product message-passing decoding, (b) the corresponding one slice of a factor graph, and (c) min-sum message-passing decoding.

computed in each iteration using the update (4). A hard decision is made based on the posterior LLR in every iteration. The iterative decoding algorithm is allowed to run until the hard decisions satisfy all the parity check equations or when an upper limit on the iteration number is reached, whichever occurs earlier.

shown in the papers [23], [24]. The magnitude of

com-

puted using such min-sum approximation is usually overesti-

mated and correction terms are introduced to reduce the approx-

imation error. The correction can be in the form of an offset [25],

shown as in the update (5).

(2)

(5)

3) Reordered Schedule: The above equations can also be rearranged by taking into account the relationship between consecutive decoding iterations. A variable-to-check message of (3) iteration can be computed by subtracting the corresponding check-to-variable message from the posterior LLR of iteration
as in (6), while the posterior LLR of iteration can be (4) computed by updating the posterior LLR of the previous itera-
tion with the check-to-variable message of iteration , as in (7).

2) Min-Sum Approximation: Equation (3) can be simplified

by observing that the magnitude of

is usually dominated

(6)

by the minimum

term, and thus this minimum term

can be used as an approximation of the magnitude of

, as

(7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

846

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 45, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

Fig. 3. Illustration of the subgraph induced by the incorrect bits in an (8,8) fully absorbing set.

B. Structured LDPC Codes

A practical high-throughput LDPC decoder can be imple-

mented in a fully parallel manner by directly mapping the factor

graph onto an array of processing elements interconnected by

wires. Each variable node is mapped to a variable processing

node (VN) and each check node is mapped to a check processing

node (CN), such that all messages from variable nodes to check

nodes and then in reverse are processed concurrently. Practical

high-performance LDPC codes commonly feature block lengths

on the order of 1kb and up to 64kb, requiring a large number of

VNs. The ensuing wiring overhead poses a substantial obstacle

towards efficient silicon implementations.

Structured LDPC codes of moderate block lengths have re-

ceived more attention in practice recently because they prove

amenable for efficient decoder architectures and recent pub-

lished standards have adopted such LDPC codes [7]–[9]. The matrices of these structured LDPC codes consist of compo-
nent matrices, each of which is, or closely resembles, a permu-

Fig. 4. FER (dashed lines) and BER (solid lines) performance of a (2048,1723) RS-LDPC code obtained by FPGA emulation using 20 decoding iterations.

tation matrix or a zero matrix. Structured codes open the door

to a range of efficient high-throughput decoder architectures by

taking advantage of the regularity in wiring and data storage.

In this work, a highly parallel LDPC decoder design is demon-

strated for a (6,32)-regular (2048,1723) RS-LDPC code [26].

This particular LDPC code has been adopted for the forward

error correction in the IEEE 802.3an 10GBASE-T standard [7],

which governs the operation of 10 Gigabit Ethernet over up to

100 m of CAT-6a unshielded twisted-pair (UTP) cable. The

matrix of this code contains

384 rows and

2048

columns. This matrix can be partitioned into 6 row groups and

32 column groups of 64 64 permutation submatrices.

node attempting to correct the error, which is overpowered by five messages from satisfied check nodes that reinforce the error.
It was also found that a sum-product decoder implementation tends to incur excessive numerical saturation due to the finitewordlength approximation of the functions. The reliability of messages is reduced with each iteration until the messagepassing decoder is essentially performing majority decoding, and the effect of absorbing sets is worsened. In comparison, an offset min-sum decoder implementation eliminates the saturation problem due to the functions. A 6-bit offset min-sum decoder achieves a 0.5 dB SNR gain compared to a 6-bit sum-

product decoder as seen in Fig. 4. Despite the extra coding gain

III. EMULATION-BASED STUDY

and lower error rate performance of the offset min-sum decoder, its error floor emerges at a BER level of 10 , which still

An FPGA-based hardware emulation has been used to ini- renders this implementation unacceptable for 10GBASE-T Eth-

tially investigate the low error rate performance of this code, and ernet that requires an error-free operation below the BER level

it has been discovered that a class of (8,8) absorbing-set errors of 10 [7].

dominate the error floors [22], [27]. A subgraph illustrating the Brute-force performance improvement requires a longer

(8,8) absorbing set is shown in Fig. 3, representing a substruc- wordlength, though the performance gain with each additional

ture of the factor graph associated with the LDPC code. Con- bit of wordlength diminishes as the wordlength increases over

sider a state with all eight variable nodes of an (8,8) absorbing 6 bits. Further improvement should rely on adapting the mes-

set in error—a state that cannot be decoded successfully by a sage-passing algorithm to combat the effect due to absorbing

message-passing decoder because the variable nodes that con- sets. A two-step decoding strategy can be applied: in the first

stitute the absorbing set reinforce the incorrect values among step, a regular message-passing decoding is performed. If it

themselves through the cycles in the graph. More precisely, each fails, the second step is invoked to perform post-processing

variable node receives one message from a unsatisfied check [21], [22]: the unsatisfied checks are marked and the messages

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: AN EFFICIENT 10GBASE-T ETHERNET LDPC DECODER DESIGN WITH LOW ERROR FLOORS

847

H Fig. 5. Architectural mapping and transformation: (a) a simple structured matrix, (b) the fully parallel architecture, (c) a 3VNG-1CNG parallel architecture.

via these unsatisfied checks are strengthened and/or the mes- group, similar to a routing operation. The fully parallel archi-

sages via the satisfied checks are weakened. Such a message tecture with all the routers expanded is shown in Fig. 5(b).

biasing scheme introduces a systematic perturbation to the local Even with node grouping and wire bundling, the fully par-

minimum state. Message biasing is followed by a few more allel architecture might not be the most efficient for a complex

iterations of regular message-passing decoding until post-pro- LDPC decoder. To reduce the level of parallelism, individual

cessing converges or a failure is declared. The post-processor routers are combined and routing operations are time-multi-

proves to be highly effective: a 4-bit offset min-sum decoder, plexed. Fig. 5(c) shows how the two routers in every column are

aided by the post-processor, surpasses the performance of a combined, leading to the creation of local units—three variable

6-bit decoder below the BER level of 10 .

node groups (VNG) and one check node group (CNG), that en-

capsulate irregular local wiring, and wires outside of local units

IV. ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN

are regular and structured. The number of local units determines the level of parallelism. A less parallel design uses fewer local

A high decoding throughput requires a high degree of paral- units, but each one is more complex as it needs to encapsulate

lelism and a large memory access bandwidth. With the struc- more irregular wiring to support multiplexing; a highly parallel

tured RS-LDPC code, VNs and CNs can be grouped and wires design uses more local units and each one is simpler, but the

bundled between the node groups, as illustrated in Fig. 5(b) for amount of global wiring, though regular and structured, would

the matrix in Fig. 5(a). Irregular wires are sorted within the increase accordingly.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

848

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 45, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

minimum with the 32VNG-1CNG architecture. This minimum corresponds to the balance of local wiring and global wiring. Any further increase in the degree of parallelism causes a significant increase in the global wiring overhead. The 32VNG-1CNG architecture is selected for implementation.

V. FUNCTIONAL DESIGN

A. Components

The 32VNG-1CNG decoder architecture consists of 2,048

VNs, representing the majority of the chip area. The block

diagram of the VN for the offset min-sum decoder is illustrated

in Fig. 7. Each VN sequentially sends six variable-to-check

messages and receives six returning messages from CNs

per decoding iteration, as illustrated in the pipeline chart of

Fig. 6. Architectural optimization by the area expansion metric.

Fig. 8. Three storage elements are allocated: the posterior LLR

TABLE I ARCHITECTURAL SELECTION BASED ON SYNTHESIS, PLACE AND ROUTE
RESULTS IN THE WORST-CASE CORNER

memory which accumulates the check-to-variable messages, the extrinsic memory which stores the check-to-variable messages in a shift register, and the prior LLR memory.

Each VN participates in the operations in six horizontal rows.

In each operation, a variable-to-check message is computed by

subtracting the corresponding check-to-variable message (of the

previous iteration) from the posterior LLR (of the previous iter-

ation) as in equation (6) (refer to Fig. 7). The variable-to-check

message is converted to the sign-magnitude form before it is sent

to the VNG routers destined for a CN. The returning messages to

the VN could be from one of the six CNs. A multiplexer selects

the appropriate message based on a schedule. The check node

To explore the optimal level of parallelism targeting a lower operation described in equation (5) is completed in two steps:

wiring overhead, a new metric, the area expansion factor, or 1) the CN computes the minimum

and the second min-

AEF is defined as the ratio between the area of the complete imum ( ,

) among all the variable-to-check

system and the total area of stand-alone component nodes. A messages received from the neighboring VNs, as well as the

few selected decoder architectures were investigated for the product of the signs

of these messages; 2) the VN re-

(2048,1723) RS-LDPC code, listed in Table I with increasing ceives , , and , computes the marginals, which is

degrees of parallelism from top to bottom. The AEF of the followed by the conversion to the two’s complement format and

designs is shown in Fig. 6 with the horizontal axis displaying the offset correction. The resulting check-to-variable message is

the approximate decoding throughput. The upward-facing AEF accumulated serially to form the posterior LLR as in (7). Hard

curve features a flat middle segment at the 16VNG-1CNG decisions are made in every iteration.

architecture and the 32VNG-1CNG architecture. Designs po- Post-processing is enabled in the VN in three phases: pre-bi-

sitioned in the flat segment achieve a balance of throughput asing, biasing, and follow-up. In the pre-biasing phase (one iter-

and area—doubling the throughput from 16VNG-1CNG to ation before post-processing), tag is enabled (refer to Fig. 7). If

32VNG-1CNG requires almost twice as many processing a parity check is not satisfied, as indicated by , the edges em-

nodes, but the AEF remains almost constant, so the area dou- anating from the unsatisfied check node are tagged by marking

bles. In the region where the AEF is constant, the average the messages on these edges, and the variable nodes neighboring

global wiring overhead is constant and it is advantageous to the unsatisfied check are also tagged. In the biasing phase, post-

increase the degree of parallelism for a higher throughput.

proc is enabled (refer to Fig. 7). Tags are inspected, such that

The AEF plot alone actually suggests a more serial architec- if a tagged variable node sends a message to a satisfied check

ture, e.g., 8VNG-1CNG, as it incurs the lowest average global node, the magnitude of this message is weakened with the inten-

wiring overhead. However, the total on-chip signal wire length tion of reducing the reinforcement among the possibly incorrect

of the 8VNG-1CNG architecture is still significant—an indi- variable nodes. Finally in the follow-up phase, regular message

cation of the excessive local wiring in supporting time-multi- passing decoding is performed for a few iterations to clean up

plexing. To supplement the AEF curve, the incremental wiring the possible errors after message biasing.

overhead (measured in on-chip signal wire length) per addi- The VNG routers follow the structure shown in Fig. 5(c)

tional processing node is shown in Fig. 6. As the degree of paral- with 64 6:1 multiplexers. The CN is designed as a compare-se-

lelism increases from 8VNG-1CNG, the local wiring should be lect tree. The 32 input variable-to-check messages are sorted in

decreasing more quickly while the global wiring is increasing pairs, followed by four stages of 4-to-2 compare-selects. The

slowly, resulting in a decrease in the incremental wiring over- outputs , , and product of signs, are buffered and

head. The incremental wiring overhead eventually reaches the broadcast to the 32 VNGs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: AN EFFICIENT 10GBASE-T ETHERNET LDPC DECODER DESIGN WITH LOW ERROR FLOORS

849

Fig. 7. VN design for post-processing.

Fig. 8. Pipeline design of the 32VNG-1CNG decoder.

B. Pipeline

with a sufficient margin. A deeper-pipelined design would re-

A 7-stage pipeline is designed as in Fig. 8. One stage is allocated for the VN in preparing variable-to-check message, and one stage for the delay through the VNG routers. Three stages are dedicated to the compare-select tree in the CN—one for the sorting and the first-level compare-select, one for the following two levels of compare-select, and one for the final compare-select as well as the fanout. Two stages are set aside for processing the return messages from the CN—one for preparing the check-to-variable message and one for accumulating the check-to-variable message.
The pipeline design shows that the interconnect latency is still significant: the interconnect routing in VNG occupies one

quire wire pipelining and an increase in area and power due to

additional pipeline registers.

The two-iteration pipeline diagram is shown in Fig. 9. Due to

the data dependency between consecutive iterations, a 6-cycle

stall is inserted between iterations such that the posterior LLR

can be fully updated in the current iteration before the next iter-

ation starts. The stall requires the first VC stage (refer to Fig. 9)

of iteration

to wait for 6 cycles for the last PS stage of

iteration to complete. No useful work is performed during the

stall cycles, so the efficiency is lower. The efficiency would be

reduced even more if a turbo decoding schedule (also known

as a layered schedule) [28] or a shuffled schedule [29] is ap-

plied to such a pipeline, where data dependency arises between

pipeline stage and the fanout from CN to VN occupies a substantial part of another pipeline stage. Advanced on-chip interconnect techniques and more metal layers could potentially help reduce the interconnect latency.
With the 7-stage pipeline and the minimum 2.5-ns clock period for the CMOS technology being used, a decoding

layers within an iteration. If more pipeline stalls are inserted to resolve the dependency, the efficiency is degraded to as low as 1/7, defeating the purpose of a slightly higher convergence rate achieved with these schedules.
C. Density

throughput of 6.83 Gb/s can be achieved, assuming 10 de- The optimal density depends on the tradeoff between

coding iterations. Trial placement and routing are performed routability and wire distance. A lower-density design can be

to identify the critical paths and characterize the global wiring easily routed, but it occupies a larger area and wires need

delays. The clock period is set such that it accommodates the to travel longer distances. On the other hand, a high-density

longest wire delay and the wire’s driving or receiving gate delay design cannot be routed easily, and the clock frequency needs

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

850

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 45, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

Fig. 9. Two-iteration pipeline chart with pipeline stalls.

Fig. 10. The decoder implementation using the 32VNG-1CNG architecture.

TABLE II DENSITY SELECTION BASED ON SYNTHESIS, PLACE AND ROUTE RESULTS
IN THE WORST-CASE CORNER

improvements of this decoder are illustrated in Fig. 11(a) and (b) based on synthesis, placement and routing results

reported by CAD tools at the worst-case corner of the ST 65 nm

low-power CMOS standard cell library at 0.9 V supply voltage

and temperature of 105 C. The baseline design is a 6-bit

sum-product decoder. It occupies 6.83 mm of core area and

consumes 1.38 W of power to deliver the 6.68 Gb/s throughput

(assuming 8 decoding iterations) at the maximum 310 MHz

clock frequency. This implementation incurs an error floor at a

BER level of 10 .

FPGA emulation shows that the 6-bit sum-product decoder

to be reduced as a compromise. Table II shows that timing closure can be achieved with initial densities of 70% to 90%. The total signal wire length decreases with increasing density due to the shorter wire distances even with increasing wire counts. An initial density above 80% results in routing difficulty and the maximum clock frequency has to be reduced to accommodate longer propagation delays. To maximize density without sacrificing timing, an 80% initial density is selected.

can be replaced by a 6-bit offset min-sum decoder to gain 0.5 dB

in SNR. The core area increases to 7.15 mm due to additional

routing required to send both

and

from CN to VN

and this overhead is reflected in the 15.6% increase in wiring and

a lower clock frequency of 300 MHz. Despite the area increase,

the offset min-sum decoder consumes less power at 1.03 W—a

saving attributed to the reduction in dynamic power in the CN

design. At high SNR levels or when decoding approaches con-

vergence, the majority of the messages are saturated and the

VI. AREA AND POWER OPTIMIZATIONS

wires in a compare-select tree do not switch frequently, thus consuming less power.

The block diagram of the complete decoder is shown in To reduce the area and power further, the wordlength of

Fig. 10. Steps of area, performance, power, and throughput the offset min-sum decoder is reduced from 6 bits to 4 bits.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: AN EFFICIENT 10GBASE-T ETHERNET LDPC DECODER DESIGN WITH LOW ERROR FLOORS

851

throughput gain becomes significant at high SNR levels—at an SNR level of 5.5 dB, convergence can be achieved in 1.47 iterations on average. Even accounting for one additional iteration in detecting convergence, the average throughput can be improved to 27.7 Gb/s as shown in Fig. 12. With early termination, the power consumption increases by 18.4% to 960 mW due to a higher activity factor. Now with a much higher throughput, the clock frequency and supply voltage can be aggressively scaled down to reduce the power consumption. To reach the required throughput of 6.67 Gb/s, the clock frequency can be scaled to 100 MHz and the supply voltage scaled to 0.7 V to reduce the power consumption by almost 85% to 145 mW.
The decoding throughput quoted for an early-termination-enabled decoder is an average throughput at a specific SNR point. A maximum iteration limit is still imposed to prevent running an excessive number of iterations due to the occasional failures. A higher maximum iteration limit calls for a larger input and output buffering to provide the necessary timing slacks. A detailed analysis can be performed to determine the optimal buffer length for a performance target [30], [31].

VII. CHIP IMPLEMENTATION

Fig. 11. Steps of improvement evaluated on the 32VNG-1CNG architecture using synthesis, place and route results in the worst-case corner: (a) area and performance improvement, (b) power and throughput improvement.

The decoder is implemented in ST 65 nm 7-metal low-power CMOS technology [32]. An initial density of 80% is used in placement and routing to produce the final density of 84.5% in a 5.35 mm core. The decoder occupies 5.05 mm of area, while the remaining 0.30 mm is dedicated to on-chip AWGN noise generation, error collection, and I/O compensation. The chip microphotograph is shown in Fig. 13, featuring the dimensions of 2.556 2.608 mm for a chip area of 6.67 mm . The nominal core supply voltage is 1.2 V. The clock signal is externally generated.
A. Chip Testing Setup

The chip supports automated, real-time functional testing

Wordlength reduction cuts the total wire length by 41.2% and by incorporating AWGN noise generators and error collection.

shrinks the core area by 37.9% down to 4.44 mm . With a AWGN noise is implemented by the Box-Muller algorithm and

reduced wiring overhead, the maximum clock frequency can be the unit variance Gaussian random noise is scaled by pre-stored

raised to 400 MHz, reaching a 8.53 Gb/s throughput while con- multipliers to emulate an AWGN channel at a particular SNR

suming only 690 mW. Wordlength reduction causes the error level. The automated functional testing assumes either all-zeros

floor to be elevated by an order of magnitude, as seen in Fig. 4. or all-ones codeword. The output hard decisions are compared

To fix the error floor, the post-processor is added to the 4-bit to the expected codeword, and the number of bit and frame

decoder. The post-processor increases the core area by 13.7% mismatches are accumulated in the error counters.

to 5.05 mm and the power consumption by 17.6% to 810 mW. An internally-developed FPGA board is programmed to be

However, as an internal addition to the VN, the post-processor the equivalent logic analyzer that can be attached to the chip test

does not contribute to the wiring external to the VN. Overall board. In the simplest setup, the registers can be programmed on

wiring overhead increases by only 1.7%, indicating that the the FPGA to connect to the corresponding interface pins to the

majority of the area and power increase is due to the extra logic test board. A write operation to the register functions as an input

and storage in the VN. The almost constant wiring overhead to the chip under test and a read functions as an output from the

allows the maximum clock frequency to be maintained, and the chip. This simplest form is used in automated testing, where the

decoding throughput is kept at 8.53 Gb/s.

control signals (start, load, reset) and configuration (limit on it-

To increase the decoding throughput further, an early termi- eration count, SNR level, limit on the number of input frames)

nation scheme [17], [19] is implemented on-chip to detect early are set via the FPGA board. The progress of decoding (number

convergence by monitoring whether all the check nodes are sat- of frames processed) can be monitored by polling the corre-

isfied and if so, the decoder can immediately proceed to the sponding registers. Decoding results (bit and frame error counts)

next input frame. The early termination scheme eliminates idle are collected by the decoder chip and can be read through the

cycles and the processing nodes are kept busy constantly. The FPGA.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

852

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 45, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

Fig. 12. Power reduction steps with results from synthesis, place and route in the worst-case corner.

Fig. 14. Measured FER (dashed lines) and BER (solid lines) performance of the decoder chip using a maximum of 20 regular decoding iterations and 10 iterations of post-processing, and a maximum of 8 regular decoding iterations and 6 iterations of post-processing.

Fig. 13. Chip microphotograph.

TABLE III
+ ERROR STATISTICS BASED ON CHIP MEASUREMENTS (20 REGULAR DECODING ITERATIONS 10 ITERATIONS OF POST-PROCESSING)

In a more elaborate testing scheme, the FPGA is programmed to generate the input data which are scanned in. A functionally-equivalent LDPC decoder (of a much lower throughput due to resource limitations) is programmed on the FPGA, which runs concurrently with the decoder chip. The output from the chip through output scan chains is compared to the on-FPGA emulation to check for errors. This elaborate testing scheme enables more flexibility of operating on any codeword, however the decoder needs to be paused in waiting for scan-in and scan-out to complete loading and unloading, resulting in a much lower decoding throughput.

B. Measurement Results

performance remains very close, as shown in Fig. 14. Without

The chip is fully functional. Automated functional testing post-processing, the waterfall curve displays a change of slope

has been used to collect error counts at a range of SNR levels below the BER of 10 . After enabling post-processing, the

to generate the BER waterfall curves. Early termination is ap- error floor is lowered and an excellent error correction perfor-

plied in increasing the decoding throughput while the maximum mance is measured below the BER of 10 . The measured wa-

iteration counts are set to 20 and 8 for regular decoding, to- terfall curve matches the performance obtained from hardware

gether with 10 and 6 respectively for post-processing. The lower emulation shown in Fig. 4 with extended BER by more than two

maximum iteration count results in less than 0.2 dB perfor- orders of magnitude at high SNR levels. The post-processor sup-

mance loss at moderate to low SNR levels, while the high-SNR presses the error floor by eliminating the absorbing errors, which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: AN EFFICIENT 10GBASE-T ETHERNET LDPC DECODER DESIGN WITH LOW ERROR FLOORS

853

TABLE IV CONVERGENCE BEHAVIOR AND DECODING THROUGHPUT

is evident in Table III. Five of the seven unresolved errors at the

lowest point on the curve are due to undetected errors—errors

that are valid codewords, but not the intended codeword. It was

empirically discovered that the minimum distance is 14 for the

(2048,1723) RS-LDPC code. The eventual elimination of ab-

sorbing errors and the emergence of weight-14 undetected errors

indicate the near maximum-likelihood decoding performance.

The convergence behavior of the decoder is shown in Table IV.

If the regular iteration count is limited to 8, the decoding con-

verges in approximately 8, 7, and 4 iterations on average at SNR

levels of 3.0 dB, 3.5 dB, 4.0 dB respectively. For a lower error

floor, post-processing is enabled when SNR reaches 4.5 dB

or higher. Decoding of high-rate codes, e.g., the (2048,1723)

RS-LDPC code, commonly requires far less number of itera-

tions than low-rate codes [16] especially at moderate to high

SNR levels. With an 8-iteration limit on regular decoding and a 6-iteration limit on post-processing, the decoding converges in Fig. 15. Frequency and power measurement results of the decoder chip.

only 2.6, 2, and 1.5 iterations on average at SNR levels of 4.5 dB,

5.0 dB, and 5.5 dB, respectively. A higher maximum iteration

count of 20 on regular decoding and 10 on post-processing These throughputs are measured with early termination enabled

increases the average convergence time at low SNR levels, but on-chip. (Early termination detection takes one additional itera-

it has almost no effect on the average convergence time at high tion after decoding convergence is reached, and the throughputs

SNR levels (see Table IV), because only a small fraction of the reported in Table IV have accounted for this overhead.) At lower

inputs require the extra iterations for convergence. However a SNR levels, the standard-required BER cannot be met and the

high maximum iteration count requires longer input and output throughput is lower due to longer convergence time. A higher

buffers to accommodate the worst decoding latency.

maximum iteration count further degrades the throughput.

For a BER of 10 or lower required by the 10GBASE-T To achieve the required 6.67 Gb/s of throughput for

Ethernet standard, this decoder can be efficiently operated at an 10GBASE-T Ethernet, the chip can be frequency and voltage

SNR of 5.0 dB. An extra margin of at least 0.5 dB is added due scaled to operate at 100 MHz at the 5.5 dB operating SNR,

to ingress noise. Fast convergence at the 5.5 dB SNR allows while the supply voltage can be scaled down to 0.7 V to re-

more time borrowing and effective throughput averaging among duce the power dissipation to only 144 mW. At the maximum

the average and worst cases. Buffers are added to handle the allowed supply voltage of 1.32 V, a decoding throughput of

long latency in decoding multiple successive frames corrupted 53.3 Gb/s is achieved at the clock frequency of 780 MHz.

by burst noise. Buffer size is an integral part of a decoder design The maximum clock frequency and decoding throughput are

employing early termination and thorough discussions can be measured at each supply voltage. The measurements are per-

found in [30] and [31]. The number of iterations is practically formed by fixing the supply voltage while ramping up the clock

limited by the buffer size in constant throughput applications. frequency until the FER and BER performance start to deviate.

The maximum iteration count is therefore not limited by the The power consumption and decoding throughput are shown

decoder architecture but by the choice of the buffer size.

against the clock frequency in Fig. 15. Quadratic power sav-

The decoder chip operates at a maximum clock frequency of ings can be realized by the simultaneous voltage and frequency

700 MHz at the nominal 1.2 V supply voltage. At the 700 MHz scaling. It is therefore more power efficient to operate at the

clock frequency, the decoder delivers a throughput of 40.5 Gb/s lowest supply voltage and clock frequency to deliver the re-

at SNR 5.0 dB and 47.7 Gb/s at 5.5 dB as shown in Table IV. quired throughput within this range of operation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

854

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 45, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

TABLE V CHIP FEATURES

Techniques applied in this decoder chip design can be extended to many other high-throughput applications, including data storage, optical communications, and high-speed wireless. Enabling the reconfigurability of such a high-throughput architecture is the topic of future work.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like thank Dr. Zining Wu, Dr. Engling Yeo and other members of the read channel group at Marvell Semiconductor for helpful discussions and Dr. Pascal Urard and his team at ST Microelectronics for contributing constructive suggestions on the chip design. This research is a result of past and ongoing collaboration with Dr. Lara Dolecek and Pamela Lee at UC Berkeley. The authors also wish to acknowledge the contributions of the students, faculty, and sponsors of Berkeley Wireless Research Center and Wireless Foundations. In particular, Brian Richards and Henry Chen assisted with design flow and test setup.

REFERENCES

The features of the decoder chip are summarized in Table V. At the nominal supply voltage and the maximum 700 MHz of clock frequency, the decoder experiences the worst latency of 137 ns assuming an 8-iteration regular decoding limit, or 240 ns if an additional 6-iteration post-processing is accounted for. The energy per coded bit is 58.7 pJ/bit. At the 100 MHz clock frequency and a 0.7 V supply voltage, the worst latency is 960 ns (or 1.68 s with a 6-iteration post-processing), but the energy per coded bit is reduced to 21.5 pJ/bit. These implementation results compare favorably to the state-of-the-art high-throughput LDPC decoder implementations.
VIII. CONCLUSION
A highly parallel LDPC decoder is designed for the (2048,1723) RS-LDPC code suitable for 10GBASE-T Ethernet. A two-step decoding scheme shortens the minimum wordlength required to achieve a good decoding performance. A grouping strategy is applied in the architectural design to divide wires into global wires and local wires. The optimal architecture lies at the point where the incremental wiring per additional degree of parallelism reaches the minimum, which coincides with the balance point between area and throughput. The LDPC decoder is synthesized, placed and routed to achieve a 84.5% density without sacrificing the maximum clock frequency. The message-passing decoding is scheduled based on a 7-stage pipeline to deliver a high effective throughput.
The optimized decoder architecture, when aided by an early termination scheme, achieves a maximum 47.7 Gb/s decoding throughput at the nominal supply voltage. The high throughput capacity allows the voltage and frequency to be scaled to reduce the power dissipation to 144 mW while delivering a 6.67 Gb/s throughput. Automated functional testing with real-time noise generation and error collection extends the BER measurements below 10 , where no error floor is observed.

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[5] ETSI Standard TR 102 376 V1.1.1: Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) User Guidelines for the Second Generation System for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications (DVB-S2), , Feb. 2005, ETSI Std. TR 102 376.
[6] A. Morello and V. Mignone, “DVB-S2: The second generation standard for satellite broadband services,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 94, pp. 210–227, Jan. 2006.
[7] IEEE Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems-Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Specific Requirements Part 3: Carrier Sense Multiple Access With Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) Access Method and Physical Layer Specifications, , Sep. 2006, IEEE Std. 802.3an.
[8] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems Amendment 2: Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands and Corrigendum 1, , Feb. 2006, IEEE Std. 802.16e.
[9] IEEE Draft Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications and information Exchange Between Systems-Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Specific Requirements-Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications: Amendment : Enhancements for Higher Throughput, , Feb. 2007, IEEE Std. 802.11n/D2.00.
[10] K. S. Andrews, D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, J. Hamkins, C. R. Jones, and F. Pollara, “The development of turbo and LDPC codes for deep-space applications,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 95, pp. 2142–2156, Nov. 2007.
[11] A. Kavcic and A. Patapoutian, “The read channel,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 96, pp. 1761–1774, Nov. 2008.
[12] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[13] H. Liu, C. Lin, Y. Lin, C. Chung, K. Lin, W. Chang, L. Chen, H. Chang, and C. Lee, “A 480 Mb/s LDPC-COFDM-based UWB baseband transceiver,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig., San Francisco, CA, Feb. 2005, pp. 444–445.
[14] P. Urard, E. Yeo, L. Paumier, P. Georgelin, T. Michel, V. Lebars, E. Lantreibecq, and B. Gupta, “A 135 Mb/s DVB-S2 compliant codec based on 64800b LDPC and BCH codes,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig., San Francisco, CA, Feb. 2005, pp. 446–447.
[15] P. Urard, L. Paumier, V. Heinrich, N. Raina, and N. Chawla, “A 360 mW 105Mb/s DVB-S2 compliant codec based on 64800 b LDPC and BCH codes enabling satellite-transmission portable devices,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig., San Francisco, CA, Feb. 2008, pp. 310–311.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: AN EFFICIENT 10GBASE-T ETHERNET LDPC DECODER DESIGN WITH LOW ERROR FLOORS

855

[16] E. Yeo and B. Nikolic´, “A 1.1-Gb/s 4092-bit low-density parity-check decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conf., Hsinchu, Taiwan, Nov. 2005, pp. 237–240.
[17] X. Shih, C. Zhan, C. Lin, and A. Wu, “A 8:29 mm 52 mW multi-mode LDPC decoder design for mobile WiMAX system in 0:13 m CMOS process,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, pp. 672–683, Mar. 2008.
[18] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid- State Circuits, vol. 41, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[19] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, pp. 1835–1845, Aug. 2008.
[20] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[21] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic´, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Lowering LDPC error floors by postprocessing,” in Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conf., New Orleans, LA, Nov. 2008, pp. 1–6.
[22] Z. Zhang, “Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 2009.
[23] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[24] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[25] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[26] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of low-density parity-check codes constructed based on Reed–Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[27] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic´, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance: Quantization and algorithm choices,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, pp. 3258–3268, Nov. 2009.
[28] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Turbo decoder architectures for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conf., Taipei, Taiwan, Nov. 2002, pp. 1383–1388.
[29] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[30] G. Bosco, G. Montorsi, and S. Benedetto, “Decreasing the complexity of LDPC iterative decoders,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 634–636, Jul. 2005.
[31] M. Rovini and A. Martinez, “On the addition of an input buffer to an iterative decoder for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conf., Dublin, Ireland, Apr. 2007, pp. 1995–1999.
[32] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic´, “A 47 Gb/s LDPC decoder with improved low error rate performance,” in Symp. VLSI Circuits Dig., Kyoto, Japan, Jun. 2009, pp. 286–287.
Zhengya Zhang (S’02–M’09) received the B.A.Sc. degree in computer engineering from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 2003, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of California, Berkeley, in 2005 and 2009, respectively.
In September 2009, he joined the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. His research interest is in energy-efficient communications and signal processing system design that spans algorithm design and analysis, architectural optimization, and efficient hardware implementation. Dr. Zhang received the David J. Sakrison Memorial Prize for the most outstanding doctoral research in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences at the University of California, Berkeley, in 2009. He is also the recipient of the Analog Devices Outstanding Student Designer Award and the Vodafone U.S. Foundation Fellowship for his graduate research.

Venkat Anantharam (M’86–SM’96–F’98) received the B.Tech. degree in electronics in 1980 from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras (IIT-M), and the M.A. and C.Phil. degrees in mathematics and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering in 1983, 1984, 1982, and 1986, respectively, from the University of California at Berkeley (UCB).
From 1986 to 1994 he was on the faculty of the School of Electrical Engineering at Cornell University, Ithaca, NY. From 1994 he has been on the faculty of the EECS department at UCB. Dr. Anantharam received the Philips India Medal and the President of India Gold Medal from IIT-M in 1980, and an NSF Presidential Young Investigator award (1988–1993). He is a co-recipient of the 1998 Prize Paper award of the IEEE Information Theory Society (with S. Verdú) and a co-recipient of the 2000 Stephen O. Rice Prize Paper award of the IEEE Communications Theory Society (with N. Mckeown and J. Walrand). He received the Distinguished Alumnus Award from IIT-M in 2008.
Martin Wainwright (M’03) received the Bachelors degree in mathematics from University of Waterloo, Canada, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and computer science from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge.
He is currently an Associate Professor at the University of California at Berkeley, with a joint appointment between the Department of Statistics and the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences. His research interests include statistical signal processing, coding and information theory, statistical machine learning, and high-dimensional statistics. Dr. Wainwright has been awarded an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Fellowship, an NSF CAREER Award, the George M. Sprowls Prize for his dissertation research (EECS department, MIT), a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada 1967 Fellowship, an IEEE Signal Processing Society Best Paper Award in 2008, and several outstanding conference paper awards.
Borivoje Nikolic´ (S’93–M’99–SM’06) received the Dipl.Ing. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Belgrade, Serbia, in 1992 and 1994, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of California at Davis in 1999.
He lectured electronics courses at the University of Belgrade from 1992 to 1996. He spent two years with Silicon Systems, Inc., Texas Instruments Storage Products Group, San Jose, CA, working on disk-drive signal processing electronics. In 1999, he joined the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California at Berkeley, where he is now a Professor. His research activities include digital and analog integrated circuit design and VLSI implementation of communications and signal processing algorithms. He is coauthor of the book Digital Integrated Circuits: A Design Perspective (2nd ed, Prentice-Hall, 2003). Dr. Nikolic´ received the NSF CAREER award in 2003, College of Engineering Best Doctoral Dissertation Prize and Anil K. Jain Prize for the Best Doctoral Dissertation in Electrical and Computer Engineering at University of California at Davis in 1999, as well as the City of Belgrade Award for the Best Diploma Thesis in 1992. For work with his students and colleagues he received the best paper awards at the ISSCC, ISLPED, and the International SOI Conference.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

