IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

1651

Generalized and Doubly Generalized LDPC Codes With Random Component Codes for the Binary Erasure Channel
Enrico Paolini, Member, IEEE, Marc P. C. Fossorier, Fellow, IEEE, and Marco Chiani, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, a method for the asymptotic analysis of generalized low-density parity-check (GLDPC) codes and doubly generalized low-density parity-check (D-GLDPC) codes over the binary erasure channel (BEC), based on extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart, is described. This method overcomes the problem consisting of the impossibility to evaluate the EXIT function for the check or variable component codes, in situations where the information functions or split information functions for component codes are unknown. According to the proposed technique, GLDPC codes and D-GLDPC codes where the generalized check and variable component codes are random codes with minimum distance at least 2, are considered. A technique is then developed which finds the EXIT chart for the overall GLDPC or D-GLDPC code, by evaluating the expected EXIT function for each check and variable component code. This technique is finally combined with the differential evolution algorithm in order to generate some good GLDPC and D-GLDPC edge distributions. Numerical results of long, random codes, are presented which confirm the effectiveness of the proposed approach. They also reveal that D-GLDPC codes can outperform standard LDPC codes and GLDPC codes in terms of both waterfall performance and error floor.
Index Terms—Binary erasure channel, channel coding, EXIT chart, information functions, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, split information functions.

I. INTRODUCTION

L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] have been shown to exhibit excellent asymptotic performance over a

wide range of channels, under iterative decoding [2], [3]. It has

been proved that irregular LDPC codes are able to asymptoti-

cally achieve the binary erasure channel (BEC) capacity for any

code rate [4], [5]: this means that, for any code rate and for

any small

, it is possible to design an edge degree dis-

tribution

such that

and

Manuscript received May 08, 2007; revised March 02, 2009. Current version published March 17, 2010. This research was supported by the NSF under Grant CCF-0515154, by ESA/ESOC and by the European Community under Seventh Framework Program grant agreement ICT OPTIMIX n.INFSO-ICT214625. The material in this paper was presented in part at the Forty-Fourth Allerton Conference on Communications, Control & Computing, Monticello, IL, September 2006 and in part at the International Symposium on Information Theory and its Applications (ISITA), Seoul, Korea, November 2006.
E. Paolini and M. Chiani are with DEIS/WiLAB, University of Bologna, 47521 Cesena (FC), Italy (e-mail: e.paolini@unibo.it, marco.chiani@unibo.it).
Marc Fossorier is with ETIS ENSEA/UCP/CNRS/UMR-8051, 95014 Cergy Pontoise, France (e-mail: mfossorier@ieee.org).
Communicated by T. J. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2040938

whose asymptotic threshold is

. Examples

of capacity achieving (sequences of) degree distributions are the

heavy-tail Poisson sequence [4] and the binomial sequence [6].

It is well known that this very good asymptotic performance

in terms of decoding threshold does not necessarily correspond

to a satisfying finite length performance. In fact, finite length

LDPC codes with good asymptotic threshold, though typically

characterized by good waterfall performance, are usually af-

fected by high error floors [7]–[9]. This phenomenon has been

partly addressed in [10], where it is proved that all the so far

known capacity approaching LDPC degree distributions, all

characterized by

, are associated with finite

length LDPC codes whose minimum distance is a sublinear

(more precisely, logarithmic) function of the codeword length

. When considering transmission on the BEC, the low weight

codewords induce small stopping sets [11], thus resulting in

high error floors.

The (so far not overcome) inability in generating LDPC codes

with threshold close to capacity and good minimum distance

properties as well, is one of the main motivations for investi-

gating more powerful (and complex) coding schemes. Such ex-

amples are generalized LDPC (GLDPC) codes and doubly gen-

eralized LDPC (D-GLDPC) codes. In GLDPC codes, generic

linear block codes are used as check nodes (CNs) in addition to

the traditional single parity-check (SPC) codes. First introduced

in [12], GLDPC codes have been more recently investigated,

for instance, in [13]–[23]. Recently introduced in [24], [25] (see

also the previous work [26]), D-GLDPC codes represent a wider

class of codes than GLDPC codes. The generalization consists

of using generic linear block codes as variable nodes (VNs) in

addition to the traditional repetition codes. Linear block codes

used as check or variable nodes are called component codes

of the D-GLDPC code. The CNs represented by component

codes which are not SPC codes are called generalized check

nodes, and their associated codes generalized check component

codes. Analogously, the VNs represented by component codes

which are not repetition codes are called generalized variable

nodes, and their associated codes generalized variable compo-

nent codes. The ensemble of all the CNs is referred to as the

check node set, and the ensemble of all the VNs as the variable

node set. In this paper, only check and variable (linear) binary

component codes are considered, so that the overall GLDPC or

D-GLDPC code is a binary code.

It is worthwhile pointing out a connection between

D-GLDPC codes and the class of expander codes constructed

on bipartite graphs investigated, for instance, in [27], [28] and

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

referred to in this latter work as bipartite graph codes. Consid-

ering the code construction described in [28, Section II.A], each

node in the bipartite graph is associated with a binary linear

code, and each edge in the bipartite graph is associated with an

encoded bit. A binary word is a valid codeword for the bipartite

graph code if and only if each node in the graph recognizes

a valid local codeword. (Note that the regular construction

described in [27], [28] can be easily extended to irregular con-

structions.) A D-GLDPC code whose VNs are all represented

in systematic form can be interpreted as a punctured bipartite

graph code, where the punctured bits are those associated with

the local parity bits of each VN.

This interpretation is coherent with the representation of

these codes as GLDPC codes. A bipartite graph code can be

represented as a GLDPC code where all VNs have a degree 2

(in the same way as the code-to-code graph illustrated in [21]).

Moreover, a D-GLDPC code can be represented as a punctured

GLDPC code, provided all the VNs of the D-GLDPC code

are represented in systematic form [29].1 If we now consider a

D-GLDPC code with VNs in systematic form, we can represent

it either as a punctured GLDPC code or as a punctured bipartite

graph code. If we now represent this latter code as a GLDPC

code we obtain again the same punctured GLDPC code. This

interpretation of a D-GLDPC codes as a punctured bipartite

graph code is however limited to the case where all D-GLDPC

code VNs are represented in systematic form.

The asymptotic threshold analysis of random GLDPC codes

and random D-GLDPC codes can be in principle performed

through extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts [30]–[32].

The success of this approach is bound to the knowledge of the

EXIT function for each check and variable component code.

In [31, Th. 2] it is proved that, if the communication channel

is a BEC, then the EXIT function of a linear block code,

under maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) decoding, can

be related to the code information functions (a concept first

introduced in [33]), and that the EXIT function of a linear block

code with split encoder, under MAP decoding, to the code

split information functions. This relationship between EXIT

function and (split) information functions is very useful for the

threshold analysis over the BEC of GLDPC and D-GLDPC

codes constructed with component codes whose (split) infor-

mation functions are known. A major problem is that, for a

wide range of linear block codes, including most binary double

error-correcting and more powerful Bose–Chaudhuri–Hoc-

quenghen (BCH) codes, these parameters are still unknown.

In fact, no closed-form expression is available as a function of

the code dimension and code length , and a direct compu-

tation of these parameters is often unfeasible, due to the huge

computation time required, even for small codeword lengths.

This is the case, for instance, of the split information function

computations for the

dual code of a narrowsense binary

BCH code.

In this paper, a solution is proposed for the asymptotic anal-

ysis of GLDPC and D-GLDPC codes, which allows to overcome

the impossibility to evaluate the EXIT function for the check or

1Note that the D-GLDPC and GLDPC representations are equivalent in the sense that they share the same set of codewords, but the equivalence does not hold for the iterative decoders.

variable component codes when the above-mentioned code pa-

rameters become too large. The proposed method consists of

considering random check and variable generalized component

codes belonging to a certain expurgated ensemble, instead of

specific check and variable generalized component codes (like

Hamming codes, BCH codes, etc., or their dual codes). This

expurgated ensemble is the ensemble of all the binary linear

block codes with given codeword and information block lengths

and whose minimum distance satisfies

. A technique

is then developed to exactly evaluate the expected information

function for each check component code and the expected split

information function for each variable component code over

the expurgated ensemble. This allows to evaluate the expected

EXIT function for each check component code or variable com-

ponent code, assuming transmission over a BEC, and therefore

the expected EXIT function for the overall CN set or VN set.

The developed analytical tool is then exploited to design

capacity approaching GLDPC and D-GLDPC distributions.

Simulation results obtained on random, long codes, reveal that

capacity approaching D-GLDPC codes can be characterized

by a better threshold and a lower error floor than capacity

approaching LDPC and GLDPC codes, at the cost of increased

decoding complexity. Moreover, by imposing constraints on

the fraction of edges toward the generalized CNs, the error floor

of D-GLDPC codes can be further lowered, while preserving

a good waterfall performance.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the con-

cept of GLDPC code and D-GLDPC code is presented, while

in Section III the relationship between the EXIT function of

check and variable component codes, and (split) information

functions, is reviewed for the BEC. In the same section, the

EXIT function of a generalized CN, assuming bounded dis-

tance decoding instead of MAP decoding, is investigated for

the BEC. Section IV is devoted to the derivation of the random

component code constraints and to the definition of the expur-

gated ensemble of check and variable component codes, which

guarantees a correct application of the EXIT chart analysis. In

Sections V and VI, the evaluations of the expected informa-

tion function for a random check component code and of the

expected split information function for a random variable com-

ponent code are developed, respectively. Numerical results in-

volving threshold analysis, distribution optimization and finite-

length performance analysis, for both GLDPC and D-GLDPC

codes, are presented in Section VII. Finally, concluding remarks

are given in Section VIII.

II. GLDPC CODES AND D-GLDPC CODES

A traditional LDPC code of length and dimension is

usually graphically represented by means of a bipartite graph,

known as a Tanner graph [12], characterized by VNs and

a number

of CNs. Each edge in the graph can

only connect a VN to a CN. According to this representation, the

VNs have a one-to-one correspondence with the encoded bits of

the codeword, and each CN represents a parity-check equation

involving a certain number of encoded bits. The degree of a

node is defined as the number of edges connected to the node.

Thus, the degree of a VN is the number of parity constraints the

corresponding encoded bit is involved in, and the degree of a CN

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI et al.: GENERALIZED AND DOUBLY GENERALIZED LDPC CODES

1653

Fig. 1. Structure of a D-GLDPC code.

is the number of bits involved in the corresponding parity-check CNs are of the same type and all the VNs have the same degree.

equation.

If

Hamming codes are chosen as check component codes,

A degree- CN of a standard LDPC code can be interpreted then the only possible choice for the degree of the VNs is , re-

as a length- SPC code, i.e., as a

linear block code. sulting in an overall code rate

. Additionally, letting the

Analogously, a degree- VN can be interpreted as a length- VNs be linear block codes other than repetition codes enables

repetition code, i.e., as a

linear block code, where the in- to achieve a much wider range of code rates. A rate

formation bit corresponds to the bit received from the communi- is achieved if all the VNs have a local code rate equal to ,

cation channel. A first step toward the generalization of LDPC i.e., if they are SPC codes of length . A high rate

is

codes consists of letting some of (or eventually all) the CNs, achieved if the local code rate of the VNs is larger than and

be generic

linear block codes: the corresponding code a lower rate

is achieved otherwise.

structure is known as a GLDPC code. An

generalized CN The iterative decoding algorithm for GLDPC and D-GLDPC

is connected to VNs, and corresponds to

parity-check codes over the BEC is a generalization of the iterative decoder

equations. Then, for GLDPC codes, the number of parity check for LDPC codes presented in [4]. Suppose that MAP decoding

equations is no longer equal to the number of CNs.

is performed at each check and variable component code. In the

The generalized CNs are characterized by a higher error first half of each decoding iteration (horizontal step), a generic

or erasure correction capability than SPC codes, and they

CN receives messages from its neighboring VNs: Some

can be favorable from the viewpoint of the code minimum of them are known messages (i.e., “0” or “1” messages, with

distance [13], [22]. The drawback of using generalized CNs infinite reliability), others are erasure messages (i.e., “?” mes-

is an overall code rate loss, which might not be compensated sages). MAP decoding is then performed at the CN in order to

by their higher correction capability [18]. This makes GLDPC recover its unknown encoded bits. After the CN has completed

codes with a uniform CN structure (i.e., composed only of its decoding procedure, a known message is sent toward the

generalized nodes, e.g., only of

Hamming codes) quite VNs for each known encoded bit, along the corresponding edge,

poor in terms of decoding threshold. This poor threshold, which while an erasure message is sent for each encoded bit which re-

was evaluated in [18] for the BEC assuming bounded distance mains unknown.

decoding at the CNs, does not improve to competitive values In the second half of each decoding iteration (vertical step),

even if MAP decoding is performed at the CNs, as it will be a generic

VN receives messages from its neighboring

shown in Section VII.

CNs: Again, some of them are known messages, others are

The second generalization step consists of introducing VNs erasure messages. The decoding of an

VN is analogous

different from repetition codes. The corresponding code struc- to that of a CN, with the difference that, at each iteration, some

ture is known as D-GLDPC code [24], [25], [34], and is rep- of the information bits (observed from the communication

resented in Fig. 1. An

generalized VN is connected to channel) might be known as well as some of the encoded bits.

CNs, and receives its information bits from the communi- In order to exploit the partial knowledge of the information

cation channel. Thus, of the encoded bits for the overall bits, MAP decoding is performed on the extended generator

D-GLDPC code are received by the

generalized VN, and matrix

, where is the

generator matrix chosen

interpreted by the VN as its information bits.

to represent the VN and is the

identity matrix. After

The above mentioned rate loss introduced by generalized CNs MAP decoding has been performed, some of the previously

makes GLDPC codes an attractive solution only for low code unknown information and encoded bits for the VN might be

rate coding schemes. On the other hand, the introduction of gen- recovered. Known messages are then sent to the CNs associated

eralized variable component codes enables a larger flexibility in with known encoded bits, while erasure messages are sent for

terms of code rate, due to the possibility to employ VNs with the encoded bits which remain unknown.

a higher local code rate than repetition VNs for the same node The algorithm is stopped as soon as there are no longer un-

degree. For example, consider a GLDPC ensemble where all the known encoded bits for the overall

code (in this case

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1654

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

Fig. 2. General decoding model for the variable and check nodes of a D-GLDPC code.

decoding is successful), or when unknown encoded bits for the

overall

code still exist, but either a maximum number of

iterations has been reached, or in the last iteration no encoded

bits were recovered (in these cases, a decoding failure is de-

clared).

With respect to iterative decoding of LDPC codes over the

BEC, during iterative decoding of D-GLDPC codes over the

BEC, each generalized VN or CN node may not be updated only

once if MAP decoding is used at the nodes of the graph. In fact,

during a certain iteration, MAP decoding performed locally at a

generalized VN or CN may recover some of the unknown local

code bits but not all of them, so that at the next iteration the

node needs a further MAP decoding processing.2 On the other

hand, similarly to iterative decoding of LDPC codes over the

BEC, also during iterative decoding of D-GLDPC codes over

the BEC each edge of the bipartite graph is used only once.

III. EXIT FUNCTIONS FOR GENERALIZED VARIABLE AND CHECK NODES OVER THE BEC

In [31, Fig. 3], a general decoding model is described, which

can be effectively adopted to express the EXIT function over

the BEC for the generalized CNs and generalized VNs of a

D-GLDPC code. This general decoding model is depicted in

Fig. 2. The encoder of a linear block code with dimension

is split into two linear encoders, namely encoder 1 and encoder

2, with generator matrices and . The encoder generates a

codeword , with

and

, and codeword

length

, where denotes the length of a vector. For each

information word , the encoded bits are transmitted over a

communication channel, resulting in , while the encoded bits

are transmitted over an extrinsic channel, resulting in . Both

the likelihood ratios and , relative to and , respectively,

are exploited by the a posteriori probability (APP) decoder in

order to compute the likelihood ratios for the encoded bits, and

the extrinsic likelihood ratios . In the following, capital letters

denote random variables and lower case letters realizations of

such random variables.

The EXIT function of the linear code in Fig. 2, assuming that

the encoders 1 and 2 have no idle bits3, that MAP decoding

is performed, that the communication channel is a BEC with

erasure probability and that the extrinsic channel is a BEC

with erasure probability , has been shown in [31, eq. 36] to be expressed by

(1)

In (1), is the th bit of the encoded word (that is a Bernoulli

random variable with equiprobable values), is the extrinsic

log-likelihood ratio associated with the th encoded bit

is the random word outcoming from the communication

channel, is the random word outcoming from the extrinsic

channel except its element

denotes the mutual infor-

mation, and is the th unnormalized split information

function. This parameter is defined as the summation of the di-

mensions of all the possible codes obtained by considering

positions among the encoded bits and positions among the

encoded bits . It can be computed by performing the summa-

tion of the ranks of the

submatrices obtained by

selecting columns in and columns in . Note that the

equality

, proved in [31, Proposition

1], remains valid (under MAP decoding) over channels other

than the BEC.

We refer to this decoding model in order to describe and

analyze each generalized CN and each generalized VN of a

D-GLDPC code. Within the context of GLDPC and D-GLDPC

codes, the communication channel is the channel over which the

encoded bits of the overall code are transmitted, while the ex-

trinsic channel represents a model for the channel over which

the messages are exchanged between variable and check nodes,

during the iterative decoding process. Coherently with the the

description of the decoding algorithm presented in the previous

section, if the communication channel is a BEC, then also the

extrinsic channel can be modeled as a BEC.

A. EXIT Function for the Variable Nodes Over the BEC

2Each VN or CN is updated only once if bounded distance decoding is used at the node instead of MAP decoding. Note that, for repetition VNs and SPC CNs, MAP and bounded distance decoding algorithms are equivalent.
3The expression “linear block code with no idle bits” is used to indicate that the generator matrix of the linear block code has no all-zero columns (the expression “no idle components” is used in [31]). A linear block code with no idle bits is often referred to as a “proper code”.

The generic VN (either repetition or generalized), repre-

senting an

linear block code, receives its information

bits from the communication channel, and interfaces with the

extrinsic channel through its encoded bits. For this reason,

for a VN the encoder 1 is represented by the identity mapping

(i.e.,

) and the encoder 2 performs the linear

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI et al.: GENERALIZED AND DOUBLY GENERALIZED LDPC CODES

1655

mapping

(i.e.,

), where is the generator

matrix chosen to represent the

linear block code. In this

case it results

and

. Thus, the

VN may be

interpreted as a

code whose generator matrix is in the

form

, and its EXIT function over the BEC is given by

(1), with the encoder 1 being the identity mapping

and

the encoder 2 being the linear mapping

. This EXIT

function can be equivalently expressed by:

communication channel is present). The obtained expression, equivalent to [31, eq. 40], is

(2)

(3)

which can be easily obtained from (1) by performing the substi-

tutions

and

. Expressions (1) and (2) are

valid under the hypothesis of MAP erasure decoding. If applied

to a

repetition code, (2) leads to

,

i.e., to the well known expression of the EXIT function for a

degree- VN of an LDPC code over the BEC.

where, for

is the th (un-normalized) infor-

mation function [33]. It is defined as the summation of the di-

mensions of all the possible codes obtained by considering

positions in the code block of length . This parameter can be

computed by performing the summation of the ranks of the

We observe that the split information functions are not uni-

vocal for a given

generalized VN and depend on the spe-

cific representation chosen for its generator matrix . This can

be justified as follows. Different generator matrices correspond

to different mappings of vectors ’s to vectors ’s. Hence, for

a given information vector , a generator matrix leads to a

codeword

for the

code with split encoder, while

a generator matrix leads to a different codeword

, thus

generating a different code book. As a consequence, the EXIT

function for a

linear block code when used as a VN of

a D-GLDPC code, depends on the generator matrix representa-

tion chosen for the code. This fact does not hold for repetition

codes (i.e., for the traditional VNs of LDPC and GLDPC codes),

for which only one code representation is possible. Then, an im-

submatrices obtained by selecting columns in .

As (2), (3) assumes that erasures are corrected at the CN ac-

cording to MAP decoding. If applied to a

SPC code,

(3) leads to the expression of the EXIT function on the BEC for

a degree- CN of an LDPC code, i.e.,

.

Since the code book of a linear block code is independent of

the choice of its generator matrix, different code representations

have the same information function. Thus, different code repre-

sentations for a generalized CN lead to the same EXIT function.

This means that, differently from what happens for the gener-

alized VNs, the performance of a GLDPC or D-GLDPC code

is independent of the specific representation of its generalized

CNs.

portant difference between VNs represented by repetition codes

and generalized

VNs of a D-GLDPC code (with

) C. Bounded-Distance EXIT Functions

is that, in the latter case, different representations of the generator matrix are possible. These different VN representations correspond to different performances of the overall D-GLDPC codes. Therefore, two generalized VNs associated with different representations of the same linear block code shall be considered to belong to different variable component code types. The code representation for the generalized VNs becomes a degree of freedom for the code design.

Decoding algorithms less powerful than MAP decoding, but

having a reduced complexity, may be used at the generalized

variable and check nodes. In these cases, different expressions

of the EXIT function must be considered. For example, con-

sider a generalized

CN, and assume that erasure recovery

is performed according to the following bounded-distance de-

coding strategy, referred to as -bounded-distance decoding: “if

the number of received erasures from the extrinsic channel is

less than or equal to , execute MAP decoding, otherwise de-

B. EXIT Function for the Check Nodes Over the BEC

clare a decoding failure”.

For a CN (either SPC or generalized), no communication channel is present. Moreover, any CN representing an linear block code interfaces with the extrinsic channel through its encoded bits. Then, the encoder 1 is not present, while the

Theorem 1: If the extrinsic channel is a BEC with erasure probability , then the EXIT function for a generalized CN without idle bits, under -bounded-distance decoding, is given by

encoder 2 performs the linear mapping

, where is

one of the several possible generator matrix representations for

the

linear block code. It follows that

. This model

is the same as that proposed in [31, Sec. VII-A].

The EXIT function of a generic

CN of a D-GLDPC

(4)

code on the BEC can be obtained by letting

in (2) (no

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1656

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

Proof: See Appendix I.

A nontrivial consequence of Theorem 1 is that, over the

BEC, the equality

remains valid if

-bounded-distance decoding is employed instead of MAP

decoding. In fact, it is readily shown that (4) can be obtained

both from

and from

.

Example 1: In [18, Table 2], some thresholds on the BEC

are presented for GLDPC codes with a uniform CN structure,

composed of narrow-sense binary BCH codes. These thresh-

olds have been evaluated through density evolution, assuming

-bounded-distance decoding at the CNs, with

.

The same thresholds can also be obtained through an EXIT chart

approach exploiting (4) for the BCH codes, with

.

IV. RANDOM COMPONENT CODE HYPOTHESIS

A. Definitions

Consider a D-GLDPC code with variable component code

types and check component code types. Any type- vari-

able node

has EXIT function over the BEC

(corresponding to a specific code representation),

and is assumed to have no idle components. Analogously, any

type- CN

has EXIT function

, and is

assumed to have no idle components. Variable and check nodes

are assumed to be randomly connected through an edge inter-

leaver. The fraction of edges incident on the variable nodes of

type is denoted by for

), and the fraction of

edges incident on the CNs of type by for

).

Then, the EXIT functions of the VN set and CN set are given by

(5) and
(6)

respectively. The relationships (5) and (6) can be obtained by reasoning in the same way as in [31, Example 7] for the EXIT functions of the variable and check node sets of an irregular LDPC code.

Definition 1 (Independent Set and Independent Column):

Given a

binary matrix of rank , a set of columns

is called an independent set4 when removing these columns

from the matrix leads to a

matrix with rank

, for some

. The number is the size

of the independent set. An independent set of size

is

also called an independent column. An independent column is

linearly independent of all the other columns of the matrix.

leads to the same rank reduction . This is because such operations performed on cannot alter the rank of or of submatrices composed of columns of . Hence, if columns form an independent set for a generator matrix of a linear block code, then they form an independent set for any other generator matrix of the same code. Moreover, removing these columns from any representation of the generator matrix leads to the same rank reduction.

Definition 2 (Expurgated Ensemble of

Matrices): Let

denote the ensemble of all the

binary matrices.

Moreover, for

let

denote the ensemble of all the

binary matrices of rank , that is the ensemble of all the

binary matrices representing binary linear block codes

of length and dimension . We define expurgated ensemble

of

generator matrices the ensemble

of all the

binary matrices with rank , without

all-zero columns and without independent columns.

Definition 3 (Random Component Code Hypothesis): A

D-GLDPC code ensemble is said to fulfill the random com-

ponent code hypothesis when the two following conditions

hold: 1) any variable component code is a random linear block

code whose generator matrix is randomly chosen, with uniform

probability, from the expurgated ensemble

, where and

are the length and the dimension of the variable component

code, respectively; 2) any check component code is a random

linear block code whose generator matrix is randomly chosen,

with uniform probability, from the expurgated ensemble

,

where and are the length and the dimension of the check

component code, respectively.

Let us consider a D-GLDPC ensemble fulfilling the random

component code hypothesis. Assume the VN set is parti-

tioned into a number of subsets, where the th subset

is the ensemble of all the VNs whose gen-

erator matrix is randomly drawn from

, for the same

and . Similarly, assume the CN set is partitioned into a

number of subsets, where the th subset

is

the ensemble of all the CNs whose generator matrix is randomly

drawn from

, for the same and . Furthermore, let us

denote by the fraction of edges incident on VNs belonging

to the th such subset of the VN set, and by the fraction

of edges incident on CNs belonging to the th such subset of

the CN set. Let

and

be the expected

EXIT functions of the variable and check node set, respectively.

From (5) and (6) we have

If columns form an independent set for a

binary

(7)

matrix of rank , then they form an independent set for any

matrix obtained by summing to any row of other rows

of . Moreover, removing these columns from any such matrix

4We prefer to use the expression “independent set” even if there may exist

columns in the set that are not linearly independent of the other columns in the

matrix. As commented by one of the Reviewers, the expression “independent

(8)

set” is intended here as “not fully dependent set”.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI et al.: GENERALIZED AND DOUBLY GENERALIZED LDPC CODES

1657

In (7),

is the expected

EXIT function over

for a VN whose generator matrix is

randomly drawn from

. Note that, if

(repetition

code), expectation may be omitted. In (8),

is the expected EXIT function over

for a CN whose generator matrix is randomly drawn from

.

The reason for an expurgated ensemble

of

generator matrices, instead of either the ensemble

of all

the possible

binary matrices with rank or the ensemble

of all the

binary matrices, is to ensure a correct

application of the EXIT chart analysis, as explained next.

Theorem 2: For a D-GLDPC ensemble fulfilling the random component code hypothesis, the following relationships hold:

(9) (10) (11)

Proof: Since we have

and

,

it follows from (7) and (8) that (9) and (10) are satisfied if the

following properties hold:

(12) (13)

Analogously, (11) is satisfied if (14)

To prove (12) it is sufficient to show that for all

with

, for any binary matrix in

we have

, where

is given by (2). Moreover, to prove (13) and (14) it is suffi-

cient to show that for all

with

, for any binary

matrix in

we have

and

, respectively, where

is given

by (3). Consider at first a check component code. From (3) it

follows

Then,

when

, i.e., when the generator

matrix of the check component code has no all-zero columns.

This is equivalent to assume that the component code has no

idle bits, an hypothesis already implicitly considered in (3). We

conclude that (13) and (14) (and then (10) and (11)) are satisfied

if the generator matrix of the generic check component code is

full rank, has no independent columns, and has no zero columns.

Consider a variable component code. From (2):

If erator matrix

for

, then

. This is always true when the

gen-

of the variable component code is full rank

and has no independent columns. In fact, in

this case

. The constraint that the

generator matrix has no zero columns must be also considered, since it is a key hypothesis for the validity of (1). We conclude that (12) (and then (9)) is satisfied if the generator matrix of the generic variable component code is full rank, has no independent columns, and has no zero columns.

Our aim is to perform a D-GLDPC code threshold analysis

through an EXIT chart approach, using the expected EXIT func-

tions expressed by (7) and (8). To apply EXIT chart analysis, we

require that the conditions (9), (10) and (11) are satisfied. Condi-

tions (9) and (10) guarantee that, for both the VN set and the CN

set, the outcoming average extrinsic information is equal to 1

(i.e., it assumes its maximum value) when the extrinsic channel

in Fig. 2 is noiseless. Condition (11) guarantees a zero average

extrinsic information outcoming from the CN set when the ex-

trinsic channel is the useless channel. Theorem 2 ensures ful-

filling of (9), (10) and (11) when the generator matrix of each

VN and CN is drawn from

(for proper values of and ).

On the other hand, it is readily shown that the above conditions

would not be satisfied for generator matrices randomly drawn

from

or

instead of

.

B. Further Characterization of

The expurgated ensemble

is obtained by removing

from

those matrices either with all-zero columns or

with independent columns. Next, we show that removing from

the

matrices with independent columns is

equivalent to removing from

those matrices representing

codes with minimum distance .

Then, the desired property

is guaranteed by

the equality

. This equality is satisfied when the

generator matrix of the check component code is

full-rank

, and when the

matrix

obtained by removing any column from is full rank. In fact,

in this case both sides of the previous equality are equal to .

By reasoning in the same way, it is readily shown from (3) that

Lemma 1: Let us consider an

binary linear block code,

and let be any representation of its generator matrix. If has

an independent set of size , then the code minimum distance

satisfies

.

Proof: Let us suppose that columns of form an in-

dependent set of size . For

, consider the

matrix obtained by removing the columns forming

the independent set.5 Since the rank of this matrix is less than

0 5For j > n k the lemma is a straightforward consequence of the Singleton

 0 + 1 bound d

nk .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1658

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

Proof: Let us consider an

binary linear block code

without idle bits and with

, and let be any gener-

ator matrix of . First, as

, we have

.

Second, as the code has no idle bits, has no all-zero columns.

Third, it follows from Lemma 2 that the minimum size of an

independent set of is at least 2, so that has no indepen-

dent columns. Therefore

. Conversely, any matrix

represents a linear block code of length and

dimension without idle bits. In fact, we have

and has no all-zero columns. Moreover, since has no inde-

pendent columns, we have from Lemma 2 that has minimum

distance at least .

Fig. 3. Two representations of the generator matrix of a linear block code, whose first j columns form an independent set of size j.

, it is possible to obtain all-zero rows by row

additions only,

. Applying the same row additions to

provides a new generator matrix representation, that we denote

by , where these rows6 have all their 1’s lying only in the

columns of the independent set (see for example Fig. 3, where

the first columns are assumed to form an independent set, and

where

and are nonzero matrices). Any of these rows

is a valid codeword, so that

.

Lemma 2: Let us consider an

binary linear block code,

and let be any representation of its generator matrix. Then,

the following statements are equivalent:

a) the code has minimum distance ;

b) the minimum size of the independent sets of is .

Proof:

If

, then it is possible to con-

struct a representation of where there is at least one row with

exactly 1’s. The columns of corresponding to these 1’s are

an independent set (of size ), because removing them from

leads to a reduction of the rank. This independent set must be

of minimum size. In fact, if it existed an independent set of size

, then from Lemma 1 it would follow

, thus vio-

lating the hypothesis

.

Let us suppose that the minimum size of the inde-

pendent sets of is , and let us consider an independent set

of size . From Lemma 1 it follows that

. The proof is

completed by showing that it is not possible to have

.

In fact, if

then, by reasoning in the same way as

for the

proof, it would follow that the minimum size of

the independent sets of is , which violates the hypoth-

esis.

It follows from (3) that the problem of evaluating the expected

EXIT function on

for an

CN over the BEC can be

completely solved by evaluating the expected information func-

tions on

. Similarly, it follows from (2) that the problem of

evaluating the expected EXIT function on

for an

VN over the BEC can be completely solved by evaluating the

expected split information functions on

. These two prob-

lems are addressed in Sections V and VI, respectively.

V. EXPECTED INFORMATION FUNCTIONS COMPUTATION

In this section, we present an approach to compute the ex-

pected values of the information functions for any random

linear block code, where the expectation is over the expurgated

ensemble

of all the

generator matrices representing

codes with minimum distance at least . The method is based on

some recursive formulas that allow to compute the exact number

of binary matrices with specific properties.

Let be a random generator matrix from

, and let be

a submatrix of obtained selecting columns. The expectation

of can be developed as

(15)

where the last equality is due to the fact that, for random

matrices in

, the expectation of the rank when selecting

columns is independent of the specific selected columns.

Without loss of generality, in the following we assume that

in (15) is the submatrix composed of the first columns of .

The expectation of

in (15) can be further developed

as

Theorem 3: The ensemble

is the ensemble of all the

binary matrices that represent

linear block codes

without idle bits and with minimum distance at least .

 6Even if not essential for the proof, we observe that  j, which can be
readily shown as follows. Let M be the matrix obtained by removing the j
 0 columns forming the independent set. Then: rank(M ) k j (as removing  0 j columns can reduce the rank at most by j) and rank(M ) k  (as M 0 has k  nonzero rows, not necessarily linearly independent). The inequality   j follows.

(16)

where the summation in is from

and not from

be-

cause has no zero columns by hypothesis. In (16), we denote

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI et al.: GENERALIZED AND DOUBLY GENERALIZED LDPC CODES

1659

by

the number of rank-

binary matrices

without zero columns, and such that removing any column does

not reduce the rank (i.e., with no independent columns). Ac-

cording to Definition 2, we have

of the following conditions is true: .
B. Computation of

The function

represents the number of rank-

binary matrices without zero columns, without inde-

pendent columns, and such that the first columns have rank .

For any

, we have

(17)

Next we develop recursive formulas for computing

and

. Even if

can be expressed in terms of

ac-

cording to (17), an independent recursive formula for

is

presented. In this section and in the next section, we often use

the following well-known result [35].

In order to develop a formula for computing the number

of rank- binary

matrices without

zero columns, without independent columns, and such that the

first columns have rank equal to , we use a method analogous

to that one used for the function . Let

be

the number of rank- binary

matrices without zero

columns and such that the first columns have rank equal to

. Then

is equal to the difference between

and the number of such matrices with at least

one independent column.

Lemma 5: Let

be the total number of

matrices without zero columns, i.e.

binary

Lemma 3: The number of rank-

denoted by

, is given by

binary matrices, and let by definition

Then:

A. Computation of

The number

of rank-

binary matrices

without zero columns and without independent columns may be

computed as the difference between the total number

of rank-

binary matrices without zero columns and the

number of such matrices with at least one independent column.

Lemma 4: Let

be the number of rank-

binary matrices without zero columns. Then

(20)
Proof: See Appendix II. For completeness of the recursion (20), we must impose
if one of the following conditions is true:

(18)

. Special cases are:

Proof: See Appendix II.

For completeness of the recursion (18) it must be imposed

, and

when at least one

of the following conditions is true:

.

Theorem 4: The function according to

can be recursively evaluated Theorem 5: The function
according to

if can be recursively evaluated

(19)

Proof: See Appendix II. (21)
For completeness of the recursion (19) it must be imposed

, and

when at least one

Proof: See Appendix II.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1660

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

Fig. 4. EXIT functions of a (31; 21) code with d = 2, a (31; 21) code with d = 3 and the (31; 21) narrow-sense binary BCH code (d = 5). Dashed

line: Average EXIT function over G

.

For completeness of the recursion (21), we must impose in the same cases where
is set to . Special cases are
if if

VI. EXPECTED SPLIT INFORMATION FUNCTIONS COMPUTATION

In this section, the technique for the evaluation of the ex-

pected information functions over

, presented in the pre-

vious section, is extended to the split information functions.

Let be a

binary matrix from

, and let

be a submatrix of

obtained by selecting columns in

and columns in . Then:

In summary, for some and

can be computed

from (15) and (16), where

is obtained recursively from

(19), and

is obtained recursively from (21).

(22)

Example 2: In Fig. 4, a detail of the EXIT function on the

BEC for three binary

linear block codes (solid lines)

is depicted, as a function of the a priori mutual information

, for ranging between and . The min-

imum distances for the three codes are and , where the

code is the

narrow-sense binary BCH code.

The other two codes were randomly generated. For each of the

three codes, the EXIT function has been evaluated by first com-

puting the information functions (which is still feasible for

codes, even if time consuming), and then applying (3).

In the same figure, the dashed line is the expected EXIT func-

The last equality is due to the fact that, for matrices in

,

the expectation of the rank when selecting columns in and

columns in is independent of the specific selected columns.

Thus, in (22) can be in principle any such submatrix.

Without loss of generality, we assume that in (22) is the

submatrix composed of the last columns of , and the first

columns of (see Fig. 5). The probability

that, for a randomly chosen matrix in

, the submatrix

has rank , can be expressed as the number of matrices in

tion on

, evaluated by first computing the expected infor-

for which this property holds divided by the total number

mation functions

according to (15), (16), (19) and of matrices in

. It is clear from Fig. 5 that

.

(21), and then applying (3). The match between the solid curves

and the dashed curve in Fig. 4 is quite good, despite the moder-

ately short codeword length

. This fact indicates that

the expected EXIT function can be confidently used, instead of

In fact, the last columns of this submatrix, i.e., the first

columns of , are linearly independent. Moreover, in order to

have

, it is necessary and sufficient that the

submatrix in Fig. 5 has rank

. Hence,

the exact EXIT function, for longer component codes for which the binary matrices

leading to

, are

the information functions remain unknown.

those for which

. Equivalently, they are those

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI et al.: GENERALIZED AND DOUBLY GENERALIZED LDPC CODES

1661

Lemma 6: Let

be the number of rank-

binary matrices, such that the rank of the first rows is .

Then

Fig. 5. Definition of the submatrix S for the evaluation of the expected split
information functions.

(25)

for which the submatrix intersection of the first columns and

the first rows of has rank (since may in principle

be any intersection of

rows and columns of ).

Then, the expectation of

in (22) can be further

developed as

Proof: See Appendix III.

The function

is set to

lowing conditions is true:

if at least one of the fol-

. Particular cases are

(23)

where

represents the number of rank-

binary matrices without zero columns, without independent

columns, and such that the submatrix intersection of the first

columns and first rows has rank . Note that the function

is a generalization of the function

investigated in

the previous section. In fact, we have

Lemma 7: Let

be the number of rank-

binary matrices, such that the rank of the first rows is , and

without zero columns. Then

(26)

Proof: See Appendix III.

In the following, a technique for the computation of derived.

For completeness of the recursion (26), we must impose

is

in the same cases where

is

set to 0, or when

. Special cases are:

A. Computation of

Let

be the number of rank-

binary matrices without zero columns, without independent

columns, such that the submatrix intersection of the first

columns and rows has rank , and such that the submatrix

composed of the first columns has rank . The function

can be expressed in terms of , as

(24)

Lemma 8: Let

be the number of rank-

binary matrices without zero columns, such that the

submatrix intersection of the first columns and the first rows

has rank , and such that the submatrix composed of the first

columns has rank . Then

The technique for the evaluation of

is based on a

recursive formula developed for

, and presented in

the next subsection. For some

, the ex-

pression for

is first evaluated for all

and then

is com-

(27)

puted according to (24).

where

is defined as in Lemma 5.

B. Computation of

Proof: See Appendix III.

In this section a recursion for the computation of For completeness of the recursion (27), we must impose

is developed.

if at least one of the following

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1662
conditions is true: },
cases are:

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

. Special

(29)

Proof: See Appendix III.

For completeness of the recursion (29), we must im-

pose

, in the same cases where

is set to . Special cases are:

Lemma 9: Let

be the number of rank-

binary matrices (necessarily without zero columns),

such that the submatrix intersection of the first columns and

the first rows has rank , and such that the submatrix com-

posed of the first rows has rank . Then

(28)

Proof: See Appendix III.

The function

is set to when at least one of the fol-

lowing conditions is true:

. Special cases are:

Example 3: In Fig. 6 the EXIT function on the BEC

of a

VN, with generator matrix randomly chosen

from

, is compared with the expected EXIT func-

tion over

, computed according to (22), (23), (19),

(24) and (29). The two EXIT functions are compared for

, where the

case corresponds

to the code used as a CN. Despite the short codeword length

, the ensemble average confidently approximates the

EXIT function of the specific code, for all values of . The

expected EXIT function can be confidently used, instead of

the exact EXIT function, for variable component codes with

a random representation7 for which the information functions

remain unknown.

VII. NUMERICAL RESULTS

Theorem 6: Let

be the number of rank-

binary matrices without zero columns, without inde-

pendent columns, such that the submatrix intersection of the

first columns and rows has rank , and such that the sub-

matrix composed of the first columns has rank . Let

and

. Then,

can be recursively evaluated ac-

cording to (29)

In this section, some numerical results about GLDPC and D-GLDPC codes on the BEC are presented. These results are obtained by exploiting the technique for the evaluation of the expected CN set and VN set EXIT functions, under the random component code hypothesis. Section VII-A is focused on noncapacity-approaching GLDPC codes with a uniform CN structure, composed only of generalized CNs, and with a VN set composed of length- repetition codes (i.e., the GLDPC codes considered for instance in [13], [14], [18]). It is shown that for this class of codes, choosing check component codes with a poor minimum distance may be favorable from a threshold viewpoint with respect to (w.r.t.) the choice of good minimum distance component codes. Section VII-B moves to consider GLDPC codes with a hybrid CN structure and an irregular VN set. It is provided evidence that, in this case, check component codes with good minimum distance properties are a good choice from a decoding threshold point of view. It is also shown that the use of generalized CNs can improve the threshold of standard LDPC

7For some linear block codes used as VNs, the EXIT function associated with a certain representation may be quite different from the EXIT function associated with another representation (an example may be found in [34] for SPC VNs). In general, the developed approach allows to match tightly the EXIT function of generalized VNs under a random representation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI et al.: GENERALIZED AND DOUBLY GENERALIZED LDPC CODES

1663

Fig. 6. Comparison between the EXIT function of a (16; 8) variable node, with generator matrix randomly chosen from G

function over G

2 f g (dotted), for q 0:2; 0:4; 0:6; 0:8; 1:0 .

(solid), and the expected EXIT

capacity-approaching distributions. Finally, in Section VII.C ca- better GLDPC threshold than the BCH code. In fact, for suf-

pacity-approaching D-GLDPC codes are compared to capacity- ficiently high , the threshold computed assuming the expected

approaching LDPC and GLDPC codes, in terms of both asymp- CN set EXIT function is better than the threshold obtained with

totic threshold and finite length performance of long random the BCH CNs. For this specific example, the crossover point be-

codes. The obtained results reveal that random D-GLDPC codes tween the ensemble average and the BCH code is at

.

can outperform standard LDPC codes and GLDPC codes in We actually found

linear block codes for which

terms of asymptotic threshold, waterfall performance and error the GLDPC threshold is better than the ensemble average,

floor.

under unconstrained MAP decoding. For instance, we gen-

erated a

code with

for which the GLDPC

A. GLDPC Codes With Uniform Check Node Structure

Let us consider a GLDPC code with

BCH codes as

CNs and length- repetition codes as VNs. The code rate is

, corresponding to a Shannon limit over the BEC

equal to

. Let us assume -bounded distance

decoding (see Section III-C) at the BCH CNs. The GLDPC

code threshold can be evaluated with the EXIT chart based on

(4), by numerically evaluating the

BCH code informa-

tion functions. The EXIT functions for

are

depicted in Fig. 7 (solid curves) as a function of the extrinsic

channel erasure probability . The corresponding GLDPC

thresholds are given in Table I. Next, let us consider the same

class of GLDPC codes, under the hypothesis that the

CNs are random linear block codes from

. The corre-

sponding expected EXIT functions are depicted in Fig. 7 (dotted

curves), and the GLPDC thresholds under -bounded-distance

decoding are given in Table I for

.

The threshold values in Table I suggest the following. From

a threshold point of view, when the maximum number of era-

sures faced by the decoder is small, it is convenient to use a

threshold is

. We also generated a

linear

code characterized by

, and we found a threshold

for the GLDPC code. This value is intermediate

w.r.t. the thresholds corresponding to the BCH code and to

the

code. The EXIT functions for the

and

codes are those already shown in Fig. 4. De-

noting by

the GLDPC code threshold corresponding

to the choice of component code for the CNs, we have

.

This reveals that using weak codes as check component codes

for GLDPC codes with a uniform check structure can be

more favorable, from a threshold viewpoint, than using more

powerful codes, like the BCH codes. This fact is confirmed by

the simulation result shown in Fig. 8, in which the waterfall

performance of a

GLDPC code using

BCH CNs is worse than the waterfall performance of a GLDPC

code, having the same bipartite graph, and using the

code as check component code.

B. Capacity-Approaching GLDPC Codes With Hybrid Check Node Structure

check component code with a good minimum distance, like the Let us first consider the problem of finding the LDPC degree

BCH code. On the contrary, for a higher , or if no bound on is distribution with the largest threshold over the BEC and subject

imposed at all (

, which corresponds to MAP decoding), to the following constraints: VN degrees ranging from 2 up to

linear block codes must exist within

that guarantee a 30, CN degrees ranging from 3 up to 14, code rate

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1664

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

Fig. 7. EXIT function of the (31; 21) BCH code (solid) and expected EXIT function over the expurgated ensemble G
2 f g decoding, for d 4; 7; 10; 31 .

(dotted) under d-bounded-distance

TABLE I THRESHOLDS OVER THE BEC FOR GLPDC CODES WITH (31; 21) BCH CNS AND THRESHOLDS EVALUATED WITH THE EXPECTED EXIT FUNCTION OVER
G

is a degree distribution pair, while the cost function is the func-

tion returning the threshold of a degree distribution pair.9

Differential evolution was run with

, for different

initial populations. The threshold of the best found distribution

is

, quite close to the Shannon limit

.

The distribution is described in Table II (LDPC column).

Next, we solved the same optimization problem for a GLDPC

code with a hybrid CN structure, composed of SPC codes and

linear block codes. We solved again the optimization

problem with the DE algorithm, assuming the same degree con-

straints for the VNs and for the SPC CNs, and again

.

We solved the problem using the differential evolution (DE) algorithm [36]. DE is an evolutionary, parallel optimization algorithm to find the global minimum of a real-valued function of a vector of continuous parameters. The algorithm is based on the evolution of a population of vectors, and its main steps are similar to those of evolutionary optimization algorithms [37]. Once a starting population of vectors has been generated (initialization), a competitor for each population element is generated by properly combining a subset of randomly chosen vectors from the same population (mutation and crossover). Each element of the population is then compared with its competitor : the vector yielding a smaller value of the cost function is selected (selection) as an element of the evolved population. The mutation, crossover and selection steps are iterated until a certain stopping criterion is fulfilled.8 Introduced in [38], DE was first proposed for the optimization of LDPC codes degree profile in [39]. In this specific case, each element of the population
8In evolutionary algorithms, the weakest elements of the population are typically replaced by stronger mutant elements. On the other hand, in DE a competitor is created for each vector of the population, and compared only with that vector. Heuristically, this choice is effective to avoid that the algorithm remains trapped in local minima. It is also worth mentioning the peculiar mutation technique of DE, where a mutant vector is obtained by adding to a vector the difference (multiplied by a scaling factor) between two other vectors.

More specifically, we separately solved the problem in the cases

where the

CNs are represented by the binary BCH code

with

and by the

codes

con-

sidered in previous subsection. We also solved the optimization

problem using the expected EXIT function over the expurgated

ensemble

. The optimal distribution corresponding to

the choice of the

BCH code is described in Table II

(GLDPC column), while the four GLDPC thresholds are com-

pared in Table III.

For all choices of the

generalized CNs, the edges for

the capacity-approaching distribution are connected to the SPC

nodes with degree and to the

nodes. Moreover, the

optimized distributions (both variable and check) are very sim-

ilar in all cases. The fraction of edges connected to the

codes ranges from about 5.73% for the

code to about

8.72% for the BCH code. Some considerations about these re-

sults are presented next.

First, in this case study it has been possible to improve the

threshold of the LDPC code by letting unchanged the constraints

on the degrees of the repetition and SPC nodes, introducing

check component codes different from the SPC codes, and prop-

9A threshold sign change is necessary, for instance, over the BEC as we look for the global maximum.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI et al.: GENERALIZED AND DOUBLY GENERALIZED LDPC CODES

1665

Fig. 8. Comparison between the waterfall performance of a (3999; 1419) GLDPC code with uniform CN structure composed of (31; 21) binary BCH codes and a (3999; 1419) GLDPC code with uniform CN structure composed of (31; 21) linear block codes with d = 2. The bipartite graph is the same for the two GLDPC codes.

TABLE II CAPACITY-APPROACHING RATE-1=2 LDPC, GLPDC, D-GLDPC AND
D-GLDPC EDGE DISTRIBUTIONS

CNs: the fraction of BCH CNs is about 2.70%, which results in a small increase in terms of decoding complexity w.r.t. the LDPC code.
Second, when considering hybrid CN structures instead of uniform ones, using more powerful codes like the BCH codes (judiciously mixed with SPC codes) leads to better thresholds.

For the hybrid case we obtain

, which is the opposite of what was found for a uniform check node structure. The reason is that the role of weak codes (necessary for obtaining good thresholds) is now played by the SPC codes.
Third, when combined with DE, the developed technique for

the expected EXIT function of generalized CNs in

leads

to an optimal distribution and threshold which closely match

those obtained for the choice of the BCH CNs. Hence, this tech-

nique can be confidently used not only for the threshold analysis,

but also for the purposes of GLDPC distribution optimizations.

C. Capacity Approaching D-GLDPC Codes

TABLE III THRESHOLDS q FOR CAPACITY-APPROACHING RATE-1/2 LDPC AND GLPDC
DISTRIBUTIONS

We solved the same optimization problem as that considered

in the previous subsection for a

D-GLDPC coding

scheme. Generalized

BCH CNs and SPC CNs were

considered; in addition, a hybrid VN set was allowed, composed

by a mixture of repetition codes with the same degrees as for the

LDPC code, with the addition of

random linear block

codes from

. The choice of

codes as VNs was

dictated by the heuristic guideline to use codes with same length

and dual dimensions at opposite sides of the bipartite graph. The

erly modifying the edge distribution. The presented example is random code approach was followed since the direct compu-

even more meaningful, since the starting LDPC distribution is tation of the split information functions for a specific

already capacity-approaching. This better GLDPC threshold has linear block code, e.g., the dual of the

BCH code, is

been achieved with a relatively small fraction of generalized not feasible in terms of computation time. The expected EXIT

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1666

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

= 1 2 = 128000 R = N Fig. 9. Performance of

LDPC, GLDPC and D-GLDPC codes of length

on the BEC.

function for the generalized VNs over

was evaluated ac- decoding bit erasure rate (BER) is shown for codes of length

cording to the method presented in Section V. The capacity-ap-

. As expected, the LDPC code exhibits bad error

proaching D-GLDPC distribution obtained by DE is shown in floor performance, due to the poor minimum distance of ca-

Table II, together with its threshold, and called D-GLDPC dis- pacity approaching distributions [10] (for this distribution we

tribution. Some considerations are provided next.

have

). This high error floor is not improved

First, the D-GLDPC distribution has the best threshold. when considering the GLDPC code construction. However, the

Hence, under the described constraints, using generalized VNs D-GLDPC code exhibits both a slightly better waterfall perfor-

together with generalized CNs increases the threshold w.r.t. mance (according to the slightly better threshold) and an error

GLDPC codes, even in a case study where the GLDPC threshold floor which is about one order of magnitude lower than that of

is already very close to capacity. This better D-GLDPC LDPC and GLDPC codes. This result suggests that capacity ap-

threshold is achieved with a small increase of the fraction proaching D-GLDPC codes can be constructed, characterized

of BCH CNs, and with a small fraction of generalized VNs. by better properties in terms of both waterfall and error floor

In fact, the fraction of BCH CNs and

VNs for the performance than that of LDPC and GLDPC codes, and with

D-GLDPC code are about 4.11% and 0.48%, respectively, limited increase of decoding complexity.

which results in a small increase in decoding complexity w.r.t. Using generalized VNs enables to use a larger number of

the GLDPC code.

generalized (powerful) CNs than for GLDPC codes, providing

Second, the larger fraction of BCH CNs in the D-GLDPC better minimum distance properties, while keeping a better

distribution than in the GLDPC one (4.11% versus 2.70%) sug- threshold. In order to construct D-GLDPC codes with better

gests the following. The original idea behind GLDPC codes was minimum distance properties than the D-GLDPC code, and

to strengthen the CN set, by introducing powerful generalized still a good threshold, we tried the following approach. We ran

CNs [12]. This approach can provide good minimum distance the DE algorithm again for the D-GLDPC distribution, with the

properties, but the drawback is a lowering of the overall code additional constraint of a lower bound on the fraction of edges

rate, which reveals unacceptable in many cases [18]. In the case incident on the generalized CNs. More specifically, we ran the

study under analysis, the introduction of

generalized DE optimization with the further constraint

. The

VNs is able to partly compensate the rate loss due to the

obtained distribution for

and the corresponding

BCH CNs. Then it is possible to use a larger number of powerful threshold are presented in Table II, in the D-GLDPC column.

erasure correcting codes at the CNs, with no threshold loss.

The threshold is still better than that of the LDPC distribution.

In order to support these asymptotic results, we simulated The performance curve on the BEC obtained for a random

long and randomly constructed codes, designed according to the

code, designed according to the D-GLDPC dis-

distributions presented in Table II. Random codes were simu- tribution, is also shown in Fig. 9. We observe an improvement

lated, because random connections between the VN set and the in the error floor region, about one order of magnitude w.r.t. the

CN set are assumed in (5) and (6). For the D-GLDPC coding D-GLDPC code, and about two orders of magnitude w.r.t. the

scheme, the dual of the

BCH code was used at the GLDPC and LDPC codes, with no loss in terms of waterfall per-

generalized VNs. In Fig. 9, the performance in terms of post- formance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI et al.: GENERALIZED AND DOUBLY GENERALIZED LDPC CODES

1667

VIII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, a technique for the asymptotic analysis of

D-GLDPC codes on the BEC has been proposed. This tech-

nique assumes that the variable and check component codes

are random codes. It computes the expected EXIT function for

the variable and check node decoders, thus enabling an EXIT

chart analysis. The core of this method is the computation of

the expected (split) information functions over an expurgated

ensemble of

linear block codes. The expurgation guar-

antees a correct application of the EXIT charts analysis. The

expected (split) information function computation exploits

some formulas for obtaining the exact number of binary ma-

trices with specific properties. The proposed analysis method

has been combined with the DE algorithm, in order to search

good D-GLDPC distributions. Focusing on random capacity

approaching codes, it has been shown that D-GLDPC codes

can be constructed, outperforming LDPC and GLDPC codes

in terms of both waterfall and error floor. Moreover, by lower

bounding the fraction of edges toward the generalized CNs,

D-GLDPC codes have been designed with significantly better

error floor than LDPC and GLDPC codes and no sacrifice in

terms of waterfall performance.

APPENDIX I PROOF OF THEOREM 1

Let us denote by the generic

generator matrix

of the CN. If the extrinsic channel is a BEC we have

, where

corresponds to an erasure mes-

sage. Therefore

To develop the third summand in the RHS of (31), let us introduce the random variable as the number of erasures in , and the set of all realizations of such that the th column of (associated with ) is linearly independent of the columns of associated with the nonerasure elements of . We have

(33)

where the last equality follows from the fact that

, where

is the

number of realizations characterized by erasures and be-

longing to (denoted by ). Let be the matrix ex-

cept its th column. For a given realization with erasures,

let

be the

matrix formed by the

columns of corresponding to the nonerasure el-

ements of . Moreover, let us define the

ma-

trix

, where is the th column of .

Using (33) and denoting by

the summation over all

possible matrices

, we can write

(30)

where (a) follows from

and from the hypothesis that the code has no idle bits,

and (b) from

. Under -bounded-distance

decoding, we have

when either the number of erasures in

is larger than or equal to , or when it is smaller than but

the nonerasure elements of are not sufficient to recover .

Denoting these two disjoint events by and , respectively,

(30) may be written as (34)

(31) In the previous equation list, (a) follows from the fact that equals 1 in correspondence

It is readily shown that

with realizations and equals 0 in correspondence with any

other realization ; (b) follows from the definition of infor-
(32) mation function. Substituting (32) and (34) into (31) completes the proof of the theorem.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1668

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

Fig. 10. Specific matrix for the computation of the function J( 1 ).

Fig. 12. Matrix for the computation of the function K( 1 ).

Fig. 13. Specific matrix for the computation of the function N~ ( 1 ).

Fig. 11. Specific matrix for the computation of the function M ( 1 ).

With respect to this choice,

is the number of

choices of the last

columns.

APPENDIX II PROOFS OF LEMMAS AND THEOREMS OF SECTION V

Proof of Lemma 4:

is equal to the total number

of rank-

binary matrices,

, minus the

number of rank-

binary matrices with at least one

zero column. The number of rank-

binary matrices

with exactly zero columns

is expressed by

The rank of the matrix in Fig. 10 is equal to

.

Thus must have rank , and it must have no independent

columns. In fact, since the total rank is

, an in-

dependent column for would be independent for the whole

matrix. Moreover, since each of the last

columns must be

linearly independent of each of the first columns, each column

of must have at least one 1. Hence, the number of ma-

trices is equal to

. Since the first columns

.

are independent columns, removing them from the matrix must

lead to a rank , so that

.

Proof of Theorem 4:

can be computed as Then, any row in must be a linear combination of rows in

, where

is

. The total number of such combinations is

. Equa-

the number of rank-

binary matrices without zero tion (35) follows.

columns and with independent columns.10

Proof of Lemma 5: The function

can

There are

possible positions for the independent be expressed as

(number of choices of the first

columns, and the number of choices of the independent columns) times the number of

binary matrices

columns is

. Hence we have

without zero columns and such that the overall rank is . Since

this number is independent of the specific choice of the first

columns, we can reason on the specific matrix depicted in

Fig. 11.

In order to have an overall rank , we must have

where

is the residual number of

. Denoting by the number of zero columns in , the

binary matrices (that must have no zero columns and no number of independent columns). We prove next that

matrices can be expressed as . Since

, the number

(35) of zero columns in cannot exceed . The only constraint on is that at least one 1 must be

thus leading to the recursion (19).

Since

is independent of the position and

choice of the independent columns, we can reason on the

specific matrix shown in Fig. 10, where the matrix is defined.

10The summation in j can be actually always stopped at j = r 0 1, i.e.,

J(m; n; r) = F (m; n; r) 0

J (m; n; r), except for full-rank ma-

trices for which m  n. Since for binary (k 2 n) generator matrices k < n is

always assumed, for the purpose of expected information function computation,

the summation in j up to r 0 1 is sufficient. This fact is implicitly used in the

proofs of Theorem 5 and Theorem 6 as well.

present in each column of corresponding to a zero column

of . Thus the number of matrices corresponding to a

matrix with zero columns is

, where is

defined in the statement of the lemma, and where

must

be set to 1 (no zero columns in ). Then we obtain (20).

Proof of Theorem 5: In a similar way as for the func-

tion , we have

, where

is the

number of rank-

binary matrices without zero

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI et al.: GENERALIZED AND DOUBLY GENERALIZED LDPC CODES

1669

M M m; n; a; b; t; u; r Fig. 14. Specific choice of the submatrix for the computation of ^ (

).

m j2 Fig. 15. Specific choice of the (

) matrix for the computation of

G m;j;l;b;
; (

).

j 
 Fig. 16. Specific position of the independent columns, with rank(0) =  and rank(1) = .

columns, with the first columns having a rank , and with

independent columns.

Let the number of independent columns among the first

columns be

, and the number of independent

columns among the last

columns be . The number of

possible positions of the independent columns is

,

while the number of choices of the independent columns is . We can reason on a specific position and choice
of the independent columns. This specific choice is depicted in Fig. 12, where the matrices and are defined. We have

This latter condition can be obtained in the following way.

Since

, each row in

must be a linear combination of rows in

. This

implies in particular that each row in must be a linear

combination of rows in , i.e.,

. The

rank of the first columns is equal to

. Since this

rank must be equal to , it follows

, i.e.,

. Then, the number of

matrices

is

.

Since each row in is a linear combination of rows of

, and since

, then for each

choice of

there are

possible matrices.

APPENDIX III PROOFS OF LEMMAS AND THEOREMS OF SECTION VI

with defined as the number of matrices for each choice

of the independent columns. We prove next that the number of

possible matrices is

and, for each choice of

, the number of matrices is

, so that

Proof of Lemma 6: The number of choices of the first

rows is

. Since the number of

choices of the last

rows does not depend on the structure

of the first rows, the specific matrix depicted in Fig. 13 can

be considered. The rank of the

matrix is given by

: then,

, and the number of

matrices is

. Since

there are no constraints on the choice of , the number of

from which the recursion (21) follows. The rank of the overall matrix is equal to

matrices for each choice of the first rows and for each choice

. of is

.

Consequently,

. Furthermore,

must have no independent columns. In fact, since

the overall rank is

, any such column

would also be an independent column for the overall matrix. The

matrix

must also have at least one 1 for each column

due to the linear independence between the independent

Proof of Lemma 7:

is equal to the total

number of rank- binary matrices such that the rank of the first

rows is , i.e.,

, minus the number of such

matrices with zero columns, for

. There

are choices for the zero columns. Then, the number of

columns and all the columns of . Finally,

. rank-

binary matrices such that the rank of the first

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1670

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

m n K m; n; a; b; t; u; r 2 Fig. 17. Specific choice of the (

) matrix for the computation of ^ (

).

A M M Fig. 18. Specific choice of the matrix defined in Fig. 17 for the computation of the number of [ j ] matrices.

rows is and with exactly zero columns is expressed by .

Proof of Lemma 8: Let be the submatrix composed of

the first columns of , and be the submatrix composed

of the last

columns of . The number of matrices

is

, expressed by Lemma 7. The number of

matrices is independent of the specific choice of . A conve-

nient choice of is depicted in Fig. 14, where is parti-

tioned into the three submatrices

, and where the

matrix is defined. In order to have a total rank , we must have

. Denoting by the number of zero columns

in , the number of matrices is

columns, the number of matrices is

and, for each choice of the first columns and matrix,

the number of matrices is

, thus leading to (28).

The total rank of the

matrix is equal to

,

so that

. Moreover, in order to have a rank

for the first rows, we must have

. Since

all the columns must be linearly independent, must have no

zero columns. Then, the number of matrices is

. Since any choice is allowed for , the

number of such submatrices is

.

Proof of Theorem 6: The number of desired binary matrices can be obtained as

, where

(because we need

at least nonzero columns for ). Since the overall

matrix must have no zero columns, the total number of choices

for the columns of , corresponding to the zero columns

of some choice of , is

. Moreover, no constraint exists

on the choice of the

columns of corresponding to

the nonzero columns of . Then, this number is

. where

is the number of rank-

Proof of Lemma 9: Since the rank of the

ma-

trix is equal to , all its columns must be linearly independent.

Hence, the number of possible choices for the first columns is

, with

defined in Lemma 7. The number of

possible choices for the last columns is independent of the

specific choice of the first columns. A convenient choice is de-

picted in Fig. 15, where the last columns are decomposed

into the three submatrices

and , and where the ma-

binary matrices without zero columns, such that the rank of

the submatrix intersection of the first columns and the first

rows is , such that the rank of the first columns is and with

exactly independent columns. For each , let be the number

of independent columns among the first columns, and the

number of independent columns among the last

columns.

Since the rank of the first columns must be , we must have

. For each , there are

possible positions

trix is defined. We prove next that, for each choice of the first for the independent columns.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI et al.: GENERALIZED AND DOUBLY GENERALIZED LDPC CODES

1671

Let us assume that the independent columns are the last

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

columns out of the first columns, and the first columns

out of the last

columns, as shown in Fig. 16, where the

matrices and are defined. Denoting by the rank of the

The authors wish to thank Yige Wang for her feedback on this work and Gianluigi Liva for useful discussion.

matrix and by the rank of the

matrix , we

have

and

.

REFERENCES

For given and , the number choices for the independent

columns is

as from Lemma 9. We can reason

on the specific choice of the independent columns depicted in

Fig. 17, where the matrices

and are defined. Let

. Since is a

matrix, and

since

, we have

.

For each value of , the number of matrices is equal to

, as proved next.

The

matrix in Fig. 17 must have rank

, because the overall rank is given by

. It must

have no zero columns due to the linear independence between

the independent columns and all the other columns. It must

have no independent columns because, as the total rank is equal

to

, such columns would be independent columns

for the overall

matrix which contradicts the hypothesis.

The rank of the intersection between its first columns and

rows is . Finally, the rank of its first columns (i.e.,

) must be equal to

. This latter property can be

proved as follows. By removing the independent columns, we

obtain a matrix with rank , which is also the rank of . Then,

each row in the matrix obtained by removing the independent

columns is a linear combination of the rows of . In particular,

each row in is a linear combination of the rows of , from

which we obtain

. Since the rank of the

first columns of the overall

matrix is , it follows

from Fig. 17 that

, that is

.

The number of rows of is

, and the only condition

on this matrix is that all its rows must be linear combinations of

the rows of , whose rank is . Then, the number of choices

of is

, that is independent of .

The proof is completed by computing the number of

matrices. We have

and any row in

must be a linear

combination of the rows of . Let us consider the specific choice

of depicted in Fig. 18, where

. The condition

is satisfied if and only if

.

Each row in must be a linear combination of the

rows of corresponding to the

matrix. All the possible

matrices can be generated with

these vectors. Then, the number of matrices is

Let us consider any specific choice of the matrix . Each row

in selects a specific linear combination of the

rows

of that correspond to

. The other rows define a matrix

of rank

, so there are

pos-

sible choices for each row of

. Since the total number

of such rows is

, the number of

matrices is

.

[1] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[3] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 db of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[4] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[5] P. Oswald and M. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 364–373, Dec. 2002.
[6] M. Shokrollahi, “New sequences of linear time erasure codes approaching the channel capacity,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Appl. Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms, Error Correcting Codes, M. Fossorier, H. Imai, S. Lin, and A. Poli, Eds., Berlin, Germany, 1999, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 65–76.
[7] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Forty-First Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr. Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[8] M. Chiani and A. Ventura, “Design and performance evaluation of some high-rate irregular low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 990–994.
[9] A. Amraoui, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “How to find good finite-length codes: From art towards science,” European Trans. Telecommun., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 491–508, Aug. 2007.
[10] C. Di, R. Urbanke, and T. Richardson, “Weight distribution of lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 4839–4855, Nov. 2006.
[11] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, June 2002.
[12] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[13] M. Lentmaier and K. Zigangirov, “On generalized low-density paritycheck codes based on Hamming component codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 248–250, Aug. 1999.
[14] J. Boutros, O. Pothier, and G. Zemor, “Generalized low density (Tanner) codes,” in Proc. 1999 IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Vancouver, Canada, Jun. 1999, vol. 1, pp. 441–445.
[15] C. Measson and R. Urbanke, “Further analytic properties of EXIT-like curves and applications,” in Proc. 2003 IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 266.
[16] I. Djordjevic, O. Milenkovic, and B. Vasic, “Generalized low-density parity-check codes for optical communication systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 1939–1946, May 2005.
[17] M. Lentmaier, D. Truhachev, K. Zigangirov, and D. Costello, “An analysis of the block error probability performance of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3834–3855, Nov. 2005.
[18] N. Miladinovic and M. Fossorier, “Generalized LDPC codes and generalized stopping sets,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 201–212, Feb. 2008.
[19] F. Kuo and L. Hanzo, “Symbol-flipping based decoding of generalized low-density parity-check codes over GF(q),” in Proc. 2006 IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf., Las Vegas, NV, Apr. 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1207–1211.
[20] S. Abu-Surra, G. Liva, and W. Ryan, “Low-floor Tanner codes via Hamming-node or RSCC-node doping,” in Proc. of Int. Symp. Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algoritmhs, and Error Correcting Codes, M. Fossorier, H. Imai, S. Lin, and A. Poli, Eds., Berlin, Germany, 2006, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 245–254.
[21] J. Chen and R. M. Tanner, “A hybrid coding scheme for the GilbertElliott channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1787–1796, Oct. 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1672

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

[22] G. Liva, W. Ryan, and M. Chiani, “Quasi-cyclic generalized LDPC codes with low error floors,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 49–57, Jan. 2008.
[23] G. Yue, L. Ping, and X. Wang, “Generalized low-density parity-check codes based on Hadamard constraints,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1058–1079, Mar. 2007.
[24] Y. Wang and M. Fossorier, “Doubly generalized LDPC codes over the AWGN channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1312–1319, May 2009.
[25] Y. Wang and M. Fossorier, “EXIT chart analysis for doubly generalized LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2006 IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., San Francisco, CA, Nov. 2006, pp. 1–6.
[26] S. Dolinar, “Design and iterative decoding of networks of many small codes,” in Proc. 2003 IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 346.
[27] G. Zemor, “On expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 835–837, Feb. 2001.
[28] A. Barg and G. Zemor, “Distance properties of expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 78–90, Jan. 2006.
[29] S. Abu-Surra, G. Liva, and W. Ryan, “Design of generalized LDPC codes and their decoders,” in Proc. 2007 IEEE Commun. Theory Workshop, Sedona, AZ, May 2007, p. 2.
[30] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[31] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.
[32] E. Sharon, A. Ashikhmin, and S. Litsyn, “Analysis of low-density parity-check codes based on EXIT functions,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1407–1414, Aug. 2006.
[33] T. Helleseth, T. Kløve, and V. I. Levenshtein, “On the information function of an error-correcting code,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 549–557, Mar. 1997.
[34] E. Paolini, M. Fossorier, and M. Chiani, “Doubly-generalized LDPC codes: Stability bound over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1027–1046, Mar. 2009.
[35] A. Barg, Complexity Issues in Coding Theory, Handbook on Coding Theory, (Part I: Algebraic Coding). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North Holland, 1998.
[36] K. Price, R. Storn, and J. Lampinen, Differential Evolution: A Practical Approach to Global Optimization. Berlin, Germany: SpringerVerlag, 2005.
[37] Handbook of Evolutionary Computation, T. Back, D. Fogel, and Z. Michalewicz, Eds. Bristol, U.K.: IOP Publishing Ltd., 1997.
[38] K. Price and R. Storn, “Differential evolution—A simple and efficient heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces,” J. Global Optimization, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 341–359, Dec. 1997.
[39] M. Shokrollahi and R. Storn, “Design of efficient erasure codes with differential evolution,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Sorrento, Italy, Jun. 2000, p. 5.
Enrico Paolini (M’08) received the Dr. Ing. degree (with honors) in telecommunications engineering and the Ph.D. degree in telecommunications engineering from the University of Bologna, Italy, in 2003 and 2007, respectively.
While working towards the Ph.D. degree, he was Visiting Research Scholar at the University of Hawaii at Manoa. Currently, he holds a postdoctoral position

at the Department of Electronics, Computer Science and Systems (DEIS) of the University of Bologna, Italy. His research interests include error-control coding (with emphasis on LDPC codes and their generalizations, iterative decoding algorithms, reduced-complexity maximum likelihood decoding for erasure channels), and distributed radar systems based on ultrawideband. In the field of error correcting codes, has been involved since 2004 in activities with the European Space Agency (ESA).
Dr. Paolini is member of the IEEE Communications Society and of the IEEE Information Theory Society.
Marc P. C. Fossorier (F’06) received the B.E. degree from the National Institute of Applied Sciences (INSA), Lyon, France, in 1987, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in 1991 and 1994, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
His research interests include decoding techniques for linear codes, communication algorithms, and statistics.
Dr. Fossorier is a recipient of a 1998 NSF Career Development Award and became IEEE Fellow in 2006. He has served as Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 2003 to 2006, as Editor for the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS from 1999 to 2008, as Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 1996 to 2003, and as Treasurer of the IEEE Information Theory Society from 1999 to 2003. From 2002 to 2008, he was also an Elected Member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Society which he served as Second Vice-President and First Vice-President. He was Co-Chairman of the 2007 International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Program Co-Chairman for the 2000 International Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications (ISITA) and Editor for the Proceedings of the 2006, 2003, and 1999 Symposiums on Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms, and Error Correcting Codes (AAECC).
Marco Chiani (SM’02) was born in Rimini, Italy, in April 1964. He received the Dr. Ing. degree (magna cum laude) in electronic engineering and the Ph.D. degree in electronic and computer science from the University of Bologna, Italy, in 1989 and 1993, respectively.
He is a Full Professor at the II Engineering Faculty, University of Bologna, Italy, where he is the Chair in Telecommunication. During summer 2001, he was a Visiting Scientist at AT&T Research Laboratories in Middletown, NJ. He is a frequent visitor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, where he presently holds a Research Affiliate appointment. His research interests include wireless communication systems, MIMO systems, wireless multimedia, low-density parity-check codes (LDPCC) and UWB. He is leading the research unit of CNIT/University of Bologna on Joint Source and Channel Coding for wireless video and is a consultant to the European Space Agency (ESA-ESOC) for the design and evaluation of error correcting codes based on LDPCC for space CCSDS applications.
Dr. Chiani has chaired, organized sessions and served on the Technical Program Committees at several IEEE International Conferences. He was Co-Chair of the Wireless Communications Symposium at ICC 2004. In January 2006, he received the ICNEWS award “For Fundamental Contributions to the Theory and Practice of Wireless Communications”. He was the recipient of the 2008 IEEE ComSoc Radio Communications Committee Outstanding Service Award. He is the past Chair (2002–2004) of the Radio Communications Committee of the IEEE Communication Society and past Editor of Wireless Communication (2000–2007) for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

