Low-Power Baseband Processing for Wireless Multimedia Systems using Unequal Error Protection

Yoon Seok Yang and Gwan Choi Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77840
Email: ysyang14@tamu.edu gchoi@ece.tamu.edu

Abstract—This paper presents a low-power baseband-video joint decoder design using a novel unequal error protection (UEP) scheme for wireless telecommunications. This method is developed for H.264 layered (data partitioned) video transmission over low density parity check (LDPC) codec. We exploit the fact that not all transmitted data require the same level of error protection; this is known as unequal error protection. In particular, we use a variable iteration LDPC decoding scheme along with H.264 data partitioning (DP). In this scheme, we determine and use variable iterations that are needed by the LDPC baseband decoder to achieve pre-specified image qualities at the receiver and apply power gating to minimize energy consumption.
I. INTRODUCTION
The increasing capabilities of wireless multimedia devices and services demand improved energy efficiency and error tolerance. We address this using a UEP scheme which reprioritizes data information, aiming to reduce errors in more important data. This is in contrast to an equal error protection (EEP) scheme where all received frames are treated equally. An LDPC-based unequal error protection algorithm with data partitioning is proposed in [10]. In that paper, high priority data are allocated to low code rate, and low priority data are allocated to high code rate to protect more important partitions from channel errors. A dynamic rate selection forward error correction (FEC) scheme using an LDPC code and a ReedSolomon (RS) code to achieve robust video communication is presented in [7].
In contrast to the above references focusing on improving received data quality, [11] considers minimizing power consumption in both processing power for joint source-channel decoding (JSCD) and transmitting energy for a constrained video quality with RS channel coding scheme. The LDPC decoder presented in [9] based on a layered LDPC decoding method improves power efficiency in a different approach by adaptively adjusting the number of iterations of the decoder to meet the required quality for each incoming frame. Early termination of its iterative process is determined by the constraint of check errors during the decoding of each individual frame. This scheme leads to reduction in energy compared to fixed iteration decoding which sets a fixed number of iterations for all data frames in the conventional decoding scenario.
In this paper, we present a novel UEP scheme based on a recently developed low-power LDPC decoding architecture,

9LGHR 6RXUFH

+(QFRGHU

/'3&(QFRGHU

%36. 0RGXODWRU

6OHHSFRQWURO

&ORFN3RZHU *DWLQJ&RQWUROOHU
,GOHFRQWURO

6OHHSFRQWURO

5HFHLYHG 9LGHR

+'HFRGHU

/'3&'HFRGHU

$:*1&KDQQHO
%36. 'HPRGXODWRU

Fig. 1: Proposed JSCD scheme.

H.264 data partitioning, and a leakage power control technique. The objective is to minimize both static and dynamic power consumption. Data partitioning that labels each video frame into high, medium and low priority data is used to treat each frame with only an appropriate degree of error protection, thereby minimizing energy spent for each decoding cycle. The level of decoding effort is then further scaled by the amount of additive noise received from the Gaussian channel. The application targets include wireless video receivers that can benefit from low-power joint source-channel decoding. This approach thus carries out the unequal number of decoding iterations for each frame; the decoding gain varies with respect to the number of iterations. In addition, to further reduce power, leakage power control is used in concurrence with clock gating during idle period in a 0.13µm CMOS technology [1]. In new deep sub-micron technologies, static leakage power begins to increase exponentially and reaches over 18% of chip power in 130 nm and 54% in 65 nm node [1]. The runtime power gating technique is implemented by high Vt sleep transistors, also known as multi-threshold CMOS (MTCMOS), which disable a circuit block when the block is not switching [4], [8]. We explore the trade-offs inherent in the impact of the degradation of picture quality with respect to the amount of energy saved by lowering the LDPC decoding iterations. Fig. 1 illustrates the proposed JSCD approach based on LDPC and H.264 video decoding with a low-power scheme which configures dynamically clock and power gating control. We determine the sets of minimum iterations for priority frames according to the check error distribution presented in [9]. The iteration values are stored into a look-up table of the clock/power controller shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 2 shows power dissipation factor over a time period. Shown in part (a), typically the decoder operates at full voltage level for a time duration necessary to success-

978-1-4244-6557-6/10/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Power dissipation

Idle Fixed
Iterations

Idle Fixed
Iterations

Idle Fixed
Iterations

Idle Fixed
Iterations

Fixed Iterations

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

Time

Clock gating

(a) Fixed max-iteration decoding

Power dissipation

Idle

Idle

Variable Idle Variable Idle

Idle

Iterations

Iterations

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

Time

Clock/power gating
(b) Variable max-iteration decoding

Fig. 2: Performance scheduling for energy reduction.

fully decode the frame. Then it is clock-gated until the next frame arrives. This process is repeated for each subsequent frame. The proposed joint decoder loads the iteration values corresponding to the priorities of received frames from the table. Our UEP scheme is derived from an early terminated iteration approach, hence an idle interval occurs between frame decoding tasks (Fig. 2(b)). In each idle period, the joint decoder goes to deep sleep mode until new frame data arrives. Sleep control signals for the baseband decoder and video decoder are generated upon completion of decoding a frame. Wake signals are also enabled by the clock/power gating controller when a new frame arrives. Consequently, the quality degradation of the received video is measured in terms of peak signal to noise ratio (PSNR), typically used in image quality estimation. The paper is organized as follows. Section II provides the background of H.264 UEP method and LDPC code. Section III describes our proposed joint sourcechannel decoding scheme using UEP and its implementation to achieve minimum energy consumption on combination of data partitioning and variable iteration LDPC decoding. Section IV presents implementation results in coding performance and reduction power compared to an EEP scheme. Section V summarizes and concludes the paper.

In this paper, we use H.264/MPEG-4 AVC (Advanced Video Coding) standard [5] developed by the Joint Video Team (JVT) of ISO/IEC and ITU-T (Telecommunication Standardization sector). This standard prioritizes partitioned Network Abstraction Layer (NAL) units into three priority groups where the units contain certain coded video elements of similar importance. The first part (priority A) contains the most important data, namely, macro blocks headers, motion vectors, quantization parameters, IDR picture, and parameter sets. Intra residual data is placed in the second partition (priority B), and inter residual data are in the last partition (priority C).
B. LDPC Coding
LDPC code is an error correcting block code originally proposed by Gallager [2] in the 1960’s and rediscovered in the late 1990’s [6]. They describe an iterative two-phase message passing algorithm (TPMP), also known as beliefpropagation (BP) algorithm (also called Min-Sum algorithm), which involves check-node updates and variable-node updates as a two phase schedule. This code is defined by a sparse parity check matrix H that consists mostly of 0’s. In the H matrix, each column contains a small fixed number dv of 1’s and each row contains a small fixed number dc > dv of 1’s. The block length of this code is n which is equal to the number of columns in the H matrix. Suppose that the number of data bits before the channel encoding is l, then the number of rows of this H matrix is m = n − l. Rate of this code is defined as l/n = 1 − dv/dc. Another type of LDPC code is irregular codes, in which the number of 1’s in each row and column is not constant.
The LDPC decoder is typically set to run for data convergence until a prescribed fixed number of iterations. However, the actual number of decoding iterations varies from frame to frame. As a result, the decoder often remains idle since for most frames, the decoding process ends far earlier than the fixed number of iterations, thus it is not power efficient. In this paper, the joint decoder design is based on the adaptive LDPC decoder [9] using an early termination scheme that adjusts the number of decoding iterations.
III. PROPOSED LOW-POWER JSCD SCHEME
A. Low-power UEP Method

II. BACKGROUND
A. H.264 Unequal Error Protection
In order to prevent the degradation caused by errors, one effective error resilience technique is layered video transmission using unequal error protection. UEP provides different levels of protection to different parts of video data, which may have unequal degrees of importance. Basically, UEP changes the distribution of errors without incurring extra resource consumption. The aim is to reduce bit errors in more important data. To achieve UEP, some layered video coding schemes need to be employed to encode the video source into two or more layers with different priorities.

Algorithm 1 Unequal Error Protection Function

1: uep func(cErrT hre, Importance)

2: if Importance = P riorityA then

3:

Iterations = ItercErrLevel,A

4: else if Importance = P riorityB then

5:

Iterations = ItercErrLevel,B

6: else if Importance = P riorityC then

7:

Iterations = ItercErrLevel,C

8: end if

In our UEP Algorithm 1, the number of iterations for LDPC decoding is assigned by the threshold of check errors and importance (priority). The number of iterations (Iterations) depends on the degree of check errors (cErrLevel) because

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 2 Layered LDPC decoding for Unequal Error

Protection

1: 2:

−→ → −PR (ln,0n)==−→L0n(,0∀)l,

∈ [1, ∀n ∈

dv], n ∈ [1, dc]

[1,

dc]

3: xˆn = hard decision of Pn 4: if xˆHT ∈ (cErrT hre1, +∞) then

5:

uep func(1, Importance)

6: else if xˆHT ∈ (cErrT hre2, cErrT hre1] then

7:

uep func(2, Importance)

8: else if xˆHT ∈ (cErrT hre3, cErrT hre2] then

9:

uep func(3, Importance)

10: else if xˆHT ∈ (0, cErrT hre3] then

11:

uep func(4, Importance)

12: end if

13: for iter = 1, 2, ..., Iterations do

14:

i = iter/dv

15:

l = (iter − 1) mod (dv) + 1

16: 17: 18: 19:

for

n−→ [[R→ −−→QP=l(,l(nin,1i)n]),S]=2S(l,(,f.ln,.)n(.,[)=→ −dQ=cl([,→ −idQn[)−→oP(l],iSnn)(]]lSS,n((ll,,)nn))),

− → −R (l,in−1)

∀n ∈ [1, + −→R (l,in)

dc

]

20:

end for

21: end for

more check errors (severity of noise impairment) require more

decoding effort (iterations). Thus, the information priority

(Importance) of the incoming frame determines the iteration

value. As shown in Algorithm 2, which is a layered LDPC

decoding process, there are two iteration parameters: inner

loop iterations (iter=outer loop iterations × the number of

layers(dv)) and outer loop iterations (i = iter/dv ) known

as ordinary LDPC iterations. One of advantages of layered

decoding is that the LDPC decoding can be performed at

each layered level. This brings more efficiency to the iterative

decoding process. In this paper, we regard iteration values as

inner loop iterations. For instance, 12 iteration values in a

regular LDPC decoding are completed in the same time as

12 × 5 = 60 iterations when dv = 5 in the layered LDPC

id−→Qsecc(l,ioon)dmreber.pinrIeendseAwnltgitoahlrlitththhemeUR2E,PatnhAdelaQgdoarmpitethisvmseag1Le.DsTPihnCe evdaeeccchtoodbrsilno−→Rgckr(l,oion)uftaitnnhdee H matrix. The coefficient s(l, n) denotes the shift coefficient

for H

mthaetribxl.oc[−→kRi(ln,in−l1t)h]Sb(ll,onc)k

row and nth denotes that

thbelocvkecctoorlu−→mRnl(,in−of1)thies

cyclically shifted up by the amount s(l, n). A negative sign

on s(l, n) indicates that it is cyclic down shifted (equivalent

cyclic left shift). The function f () denotes the check-node

processing, which can be done using min-sum algorithm.

When Iterations is achieved by the UEP function, the layered

LDPC iterative routine runs until iter reaches the Iterations.

In the decoding process (Algorithm 2), we use three thresh-

old parameters (cErrT hre1, cErrT hre2, cErrT hre3), and this makes four threshold levels (cErrLevel1, cErrLevel2, cErrLevel3, cErrLevel4) as shown in Table I. As a result,

there are twelve Iterations parameters categorized by four

check error levels and three priority groups in Table II (4 error

classes × 3 priorities = 12), each requiring its specific error coverage, as summarized in Table III. In pre-processing, the three check errors threshold values (cErrT hre1, cErrT hre2, cErrT hre3) and necessary iterations (Table III) are determined by the empirical analysis of the check error distribution shown in [9] and stored in a look-up table. One of the iteration values of the table can be loaded into the LDPC decoder when a frame arrives in a real-time wireless system. Furthermore, the results of performance and power consumption are studied to determine optimal parameter sets. The details of this experiment are described in the results and discussion section.

Check error level cErrLevel1 cErrLevel2 cErrLevel3 cErrLevel4

Check error scope
∞ ∼ cErrT hre1 cErrT hre1 ∼ cErrT hre2 cErrT hre2 ∼ cErrT hre3
cErrT hre3 ∼ 0

TABLE I: Check error levels for each error scope

Priority P riorityA P riorityB P riorityC

NAL type 2, 5, 6, 7, 8

3

4

TABLE II: Three Priorities based on NAL types

Error Level
1 2 3 4

P riorityA
I ter1,A I ter2,A I ter3,A I ter4,A

P riorityB
I ter1,B I ter2,B I ter3,B I ter4,B

P riorityC
I ter1,C I ter2,C I ter3,C I ter4,C

TABLE III: Parameters of iterations(ItercErrLevel,P riority)

B. Low-power JSCD Implementation
For low-power decoding, the LDPC decoder includes two particular modules in order to generate parameters (importance and the number of check errors), which provide variable iterations for the adaptive LDPC decoding. The first module is a priority (importance) detector using NAL unit types. The second module is a check node message block to achieve a check error level (cHT ). The error level is used simultaneously with the importance parameter to determine the number of iterations. The benefit of this technique is the significant reduction of decoding power compared to conventional fixed iteration LDPC decoding schemes. Fig. 3 illustrates a block diagram of clock/power gating controller. The clock gating makes a clock disable control signal for each decoder to manage dynamic energy dissipation. The power gating [8] organizes sleep control signals to block leakage current by using sleep transistors. One of the negative impacts of the sleep transistors is the latency to enter active mode. This adds to the critical path delay and lowers performance. To prevent this minor influence, we grant extra cycles to the idle period for critical paths in our simulation model when the decoders wake up for operation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Received Frame

LDPC decoder

Importance

cHT

H.264 decoder

Recontructed Frame

Sleep control signal

Idle control signal
&ORFN3RZHU*DWLQJ &RQWUROOHU

Clock control

Sleep control

Sleep control signal

Fig. 3: Clock/Power Gating Controller.

LDPC decoder

R select
Rold -
+

FS/R-sign Frame buffer
Qshift

+ Pshift
Cyclic Shifter

Q FIFO +

Mux

+
+

P
Channel LLR

CNU 1-61
Rnew NAL Type
Parser

Idle control

NAL

Bitstream Buffer

H.264 decoder

Bitstream Parser

Entropy Decoder

Reorder

Inter prediction

Inverse Quantization
+ +
+

Decoded Frame

Intra prediction

Deblocking Filter

Reconstruction

Idle control

Sleep control

Clock/Power Gating Controller

Sleep control

Fig. 4: Proposed Joint Source-Channel Decoder Architecture.

We develop a joint source-channel decoder architecture (Fig. 4) based on a layered LDPC decoder and a H.264/AVC baseline decoder. The left part illustrates the architecture of the LDPC decoder, and the H.264 decoder is in the right with a NAL stream interface to the LDPC decoder. The H.264 video decoder is built on an open-source low-power H.264 baseline decoder, a fully hardwired design with QCIF (176x144) resolution [12], [13]. Several minor modifications were made to incorporate the UEP scheme. These include additional functions such as a data partitioning function and a fixed-length packetization unit.
The LDPC decoder in Fig. 4 is derived from the layered LDPC decoder implementation proposed in [3]. The check node units (CNUs) in the figure take the dc variable-node messages associated with each check-node serially and compute the compressed check-node message and index where this compressed check-node is the least magnitude of all dc variable-node messages. These check-node messages are called Final States (FS) and they are stored in FS buffers. The check-node messages to each associated variable-node are sent out serially again, and they are selected by index and sign comparison, where the signs of R messages are stored in a sign FIFO. As soon as the check-node messages to the first connected variable-node are ready, the corresponding P sum message can be computed. The Q message is then ready for the check-node messages of next iteration. As such, each CNU operates on two layers of the H matrix simultaneously: selecting check-node messages for one layer and computing FS for the next layer.

Error Level
1 2 3 4

P riorityA
60 45 30 15

P riorityB
50 40 30 15

P riorityC
40 30 15 15

TABLE IV: The number of iterations used in the simulation

#Case
Case1 Case2 Case3 Case4 Case5

cErrT hre1
140 140 140 140 140

cErrT hre2
115 120 125 130 135

cErrT hre3
110 110 110 110 110

TABLE V: Check error threshold values (cHT ) used in the simulation

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Simulation Environment
In this subsection, the simulation environment used in this experiment is explained with specific case studies. A video source, foreman qcif (150frames, 30fps, 240.82kbps, Quant. parameter=28, QCIF resolution) is used to evaluate performance and energy efficiency in the proposed UEP approach. In this experiment, the LDPC encoder consists of dc = 25, dv = 5, and p = 67 (code rate=0.8) for an H matrix. For the decoding process, the layered LDPC decoder is simulated with AWGN channel.
In Table IV, the twelve parameter values of maximum iterations for the UEP simulation are described (see Table III in Section III.A.) which are critical parameters in performance evaluation and power measurement. For instance, a frame involved in the priority group A and check error level 1, can be decoded with 60 maximum iterations. These iteration values are stored in the look-up table of the joint decoder.
Another heuristic parameter set, check error threshold values (see Table I in Section III.A.), are shown in Table V. To conduct the experiment for identifying an optimal threshold value set, five sets of threshold triplets(cErrT hre1, cErrT hre2, cErrT hre3) are tested in the UEP simulation. In the table, the ranges of error level 1 (∞ ∼ 140) and error level 4 (110 ∼ 0) are the same, but those of level 2 and level 3 are different in the cases. Case 1 has more iterations (more protection) in level 2 compared to other level 2s in the cases but less iterations in level 3.
For the evaluation of the simulation results, we compare the UEP results with an EEP simulation using fixed iterations (Iterations=30 is equivalent to usual LDPC iterations=6). The fixed iteration value is selected as a half value of UEP maximum iterations (Iterations=60) for a fair comparison. If we choose the fixed iterations (Iterations=60) in the comparison, the energy reduction in the UEP simulation is naturally achieved because the EEP process takes more time than the UEP process, thus it is not fair. In the simulation, our proposed UEP-based design identifies the set of thresholds that yields

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10−2

10−3

Bit Error Rate

10−4

10−5

UEP(case1) UEP(case2)

UEP(case3)

UEP(case4)

UEP(case5)

EEP(fixed iterations)

10−6

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.7

3.8

3.9

4

SNR dB

Fig. 5: BER performance of the UEP-LDPC decoder.

75

70

Energy reduction (percentage)

65

60

55

50

45

UEP(case1)

UEP(case2)

40

UEP(case3)

UEP(case4)

UEP(case5)

35

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.7

3.8

3.9

4

SNR dB

Fig. 7: Energy reduction in the UEP-LDPC decoder.

Average PSNR

40

38

36

34

32

30

28

26

24

EEP(fixed iterations)

22

UEP(variable iterations)

No LDPC with 5% frame loss

20

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.7

3.8

3.9

4

SNR (dB)

Fig. 6: Comparison of PSNR between EEP and UEP.

80

70

Energy reduction (percentage)

60

50

40

30

20

10

UEP LDPC decoder

Overall decoder(LDPC+H.264)

0

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.7

3.8

3.9

4

SNR dB

Fig. 8: Energy reduction in the UEP joint decoder.

best power and performance trade-offs. For ASIC design, we synthesize the joint source-channel
decoder with the 0.13µm technology. The critical path of the decoder is extracted from Synopsys Design Compiler. A low bit-rate and low throughput wireless system is targeted such that video bit rate is under 300kbps (H.264 baseline decoder) and a LDPC decoder has 1Mbps throughput, which is very low in comparison with LDPC decoder [9]’s throughput, 200Mbps. With 1.45V, the presented LDPC decoder uses 16.2MHz clock frequency, and the video decoder uses 3.3MHz, which can be easily derived from a 33MHz system clock. Measured power consumption for the video decoder is approximately 502.6µW, and the LDPC decoder is around 280µW; in summary, this consumes 782.6µW overall at 1.5V.
B. Simulation Results
Our evaluation is emphasized on the analysis of power reduction without severe performance loss. In order to measure the performance and the power reduction, the implemented hardware is operated in the five parameter cases (Table V). There are two approaches for the evaluation. The first is the comparison of decoding performance between the EEP

simulation and the UEP simulation in terms of UEP-LDPC performance (BER) and reconstructed image quality (PSNR). The other approach is the measurement of energy reduction while driving the clock/power gating controller in the UEP simulation. In Fig. 5, the BER performance of the UEPLDPC decoder is illustrated, compared with the EEP BER performance. As explained in Section IV.A., case 1 is more protected in high errors (level 2) so that it requires more iterations (more decoding effort but less power reduction) in the LDPC decoding process. Therefore, it shows higher BER performance than other cases in the figure. Fig. 6 demonstrates the PSNR performance, which indicates the quality of decoded images. In low SNR regions (high errors) such as 3.4∼3.6dB, the PRNR performance of the UEP method is higher than that of the EEP method because the UEP can effectively protect high priority data from high error environment. However, in high SNRs (3.8∼4.0dB), the UEP yields slightly less PSNR performance than the EEP since the UEP-LDPC decoding is terminated early compared to the EEP in low error environment. This trade-off between PSNR and decoding effort can lead to the energy reduction. The power analysis (Fig. 7

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) Original frame

(b) EEP frame
Fig. 9: Comparison of frame distortion

(c) UEP frame

and Fig. 8) shows the energy reduction of the proposed joint decoder. In Fig. 7, the power reduction of the five threshold scenarios are demonstrated. In case 5, the UEP scheme reduces 38% power more than the EEP scheme at 3.4dB. As SNR is increased, more and more energy reduction is achieved because the average of UEP decoding iterations is decreased, whereas the number of EEP decoding iterations is fixed. The energy reduction of case 5 (38%) is sightly higher than case 1 (36%) because case 5 uses less decoding effort in high errors (level 2). Fig. 8 illustrates the energy reduction of the UEP-LDPC decoder (case 5) and the overall energy reduction in the joint decoder (UEP-LDPC+H.264). The overall power reduction is 25%, 29% and 39% at 3.4, 3.5 and 4.0dB respectively. The video decoder achieves 18% power reduction due to more idle time in the UEP scheme. The energy consumption of the video decoder is twice as much as that of the LDPC decoder so that the overall power consumption is slowly increased according to the power reduction of the UEP-LDPC decoder in the figure. From above, the proposed UEP method is a trade-off between performance and energy efficiency in a noisy channel environment. It can be concluded that the proposed system provides efficient energy scheduling without significant performance loss. For instance, Fig. 9 shows a reconstructed image in each EEP and UEP simulation. In this comparison, the difference in frame distortion between the EEP and the UEP is small.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents a JSCD based low-power decoder design that uses a novel Unequal Error Protection (UEP) scheme and clock/power gating management. The proposed scheme based on an LDPC channel decoder and a H.264 video decoder is devised to operate at unequal decoding effort. This design meets the real-time requirements of motion picture reproduction and minimizes overall power consumption without picture quality degradation. The joint decoder is synthesized using 0.13 micron CMOS technology and is capable of decoding QCIF (176x144) video stream at 30 fps using 782.6µW over a wireless channel with 80% code rate. We achieve 25% reduction in power at 3.4dB compared to that of similar setup

without UEP-based power management.

REFERENCES

[1] Tutorial 2: Leakage issues in ic design: Trends, estimation, and avoid-

ance. In ICCAD ’03: Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE/ACM international

conference on Computer-aided design, page .11, Washington, DC, USA,

2003. IEEE Computer Society.

[2] R. Gallager. Low-density parity-check codes. Information Theory, IRE

Transactions on, 8(1):21–28, January 1962.

[3] K. Gunnam, G. Choi, and M. Yeary. A parallel vlsi architecture

for layered decoding for array ldpc codes. VLSI Design, 2007. Held

jointly with 6th International Conference on Embedded Systems., 20th

International Conference on, pages 738–743, Jan. 2007.

[4] H. Jiang, M. Marek-Sadowska, and S. R. Nassif. Benefits and costs of

power-gating technique. In ICCD ’05: Proceedings of the 2005 Inter-

national Conference on Computer Design, pages 559–566, Washington,

DC, USA, 2005. IEEE Computer Society.

[5] JVT. International standard of joint video specification. ITU-T Rec.

H.264, ISO/IEC 14 496-10 AVC, Mar. 2003.

[6] D. MacKay and R. Neal. Near shannon limit performance of low density

parity check codes. Electronics Letters, 33(6):457–458, Mar 1997.

[7] L. Qi, L. Y, W. Wensheng, C. Huijuan, and T. Kun. Robust video

transmission scheme using dynamic rate selection ldpc and rs codes.

Computational Engineering in Systems Applications, IMACS Multicon-

ference on, 2:1673–1679, Oct. 2006.

[8] J. Tschanz, S. Narendra, Y. Ye, B. Bloechel, S. Borkar, and V. De.

Dynamic sleep transistor and body bias for active leakage power control

of microprocessors. Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, 38(11):1838–

1845, Nov. 2003.

[9] W. Wang, G. Choi, and K. K. Gunnam. Low-power vlsi design of ldpc

decoder using dvfs for awgn channels. In VLSID ’09: Proceedings of

the 2009 22nd International Conference on VLSI Design, pages 51–56,

Washington, DC, USA, 2009. IEEE Computer Society.

[10] Y. Wang, S. Yu, and X. Y. Error robustness scheme for h.264 based on

ldpc code. Multi-Media Modelling Conference Proceedings, 2006 12th

International, page 4 pp., 2006.

[11] Y. Wang, S. Yu, and X. Y. Unequal iterative decoding for power efficient

video transmission. Multimedia and Expo, 2006 IEEE International

Conference on, pages 613–616, July 2006.

[12] K. Xu.

H.264/avc baseline decoder.

Online available

http://www.opencores.org/projects.cgi/web/nova/overview, 2008.

[13] K. Xu and C. S. Choy. Low-power h.264/avc baseline decoder for

portable applications. In ISLPED ’07: Proceedings of the 2007 interna-

tional symposium on Low power electronics and design, pages 256–261,

New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

