This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2010 proceedings.

Constructing Rate-Compatible LDPC Codes with a Novel Efficient Ranking Criterion
Sissi X. Wu, and Wai Ho Mow Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Email: {eesissi, eewhmow}@ust.hk

Abstract—In this paper, we consider the construction of efficient rate-compatible (RC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Specifically, we introduce a novel criterion to rank puncturing patterns and splitting patterns for RC LDPC codes. Based on the Gaussian approximation density evolution (GADE), cost functions are devised to characterize the degree distribution of the punctured or split code matrices, which are derived from a given code’s parity check matrix by some matrix row transformations. These cost functions allow us to effectively compare the estimated performance of the candidate patterns and to sort out good ones. Based on the proposed ranking criterion, we provide a good RC LDPC code structure, which can support a wide range of code rates and outperform most of the existing RC LDPC codes in literatures. Moreover, the proposed scheme has the important advantage of reduced decoding latency and complexity without sacrificing performance. Numerical results demonstrate that the proposed RC LDPC codes can lead to nearly 25% decoding complexity saving and latency reduction at comparable or even better performance.
Index Terms—Rate-compatible LDPC codes, puncturing patterns, row splitting, cost function, decoding latency.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been intensively studied recently due to the capacity approaching property and the novel graph-based iterative decoding method. With superior performance and manageable decoding complexity, this type of codes has been adopted as an important element in newly developed industrial standards, such as DVBS2, 3GPP2, IEEE 802.20, IEEE 802.11n, IEEE 802.16m [1], [2], and play a significant role in various communication systems. Generally speaking, for today’s practical communication systems, there are three important challenges associated with the application of LDPC codes: 1) To overcome channel fading effects as well as block-size mismatch issues, the channel coding protocols are required to be very flexible in terms of supporting code rates as well as code lengths. Their typical examples include communication standards incorporating puncturing adjustment, as specified in the IEEE 802.16m standard [1], and incremental redundancy (IR) hybrid automatic-repeat-request (HARQ) options. Such requirements call for efficient constructions of classes of RC LDPC codes with good error performance. 2) Today’s wireless devices have been deployed in many personal portable systems, such as notebook computers and wireless handsets, where the chips
This work was supported by the Hong Kong Research Grants Councils under project number 617706.

inside are limited by size and power consumption but still need to implement relatively complicated iterative decoding when LDPC codes are adopted. Hence, low complexity LDPC decoding schemes are highly desirable in such applications. 3) Most existing LDPC coding schemes reported in the literature were designed to optimize the convergent error performance which is achieved with a sufficiently large number of decoding iterations. However, all practical real-time communication systems require LDPC coding scheme can only afford a limited number of decoding iterations so that stringent applicationspecific latency requirements can be satisfied. For example, the decoding latency in IEEE 802.11n [2] must be less than 6μs which implies that the number of decoding iterations cannot exceed 10 for the whole LDPC decoding process. All the aforementioned challenges provide strong motivations for our work to be presented in this paper. We try to construct a class of RC LDPC codes which own low decoding complexity, low decoding latency and also provide good error performance. Such RC codes can be used in the aforementioned applications and satisfy different practical requirements.
Among existing approaches, puncturing and extension provide two simple and effective ways to acquire a series of RC codes from an initially given LDPC code [3], i.e., the socalled mother code for puncturing and the descendant code for extension. For the puncturing approach, given a mother code, the error performance of a punctured code is determined by the corresponding puncturing pattern. In [4] and [5], efficient puncturing schemes are introduced by grouping all the codebits into different recovery groups (denoted by the k-SR group) and a class of RC LDPC codes with very good error performance can be obtained by successively puncturing a given mother code matrix. Based on the k-SR approach, reference [6] proposes the so-called E2RC codes which construct a mother code matrix with layers of different k-SR groups and conduct puncturing bit by bit in a greedy manner based on the group with the smallest k available. Despite the k-SR schemes can provide very good RC LDPC codes, the effectiveness of such schemes are based on the requirement that all the punctured bits have to be recovered during the decoding process. This constraint brings two issues on the puncturing codes. Firstly, when the number of punctured bits increases, the number of iterations needed to recover the punctured bits also increases, and thus the decoding performance of the resultant punctured codes will degrade as well. Secondly, some

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a6d3e9d8o-n5/J1u0ne/$2246,2.00026©a2t 0021:021I:E13EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2010 proceedings.

applications require that only the parity bits are punctured. Yet recovering the punctured parity bits induces high decoding latency and power consumption at the decoder, even though such parity bits provide no useful information once they are punctured. In [7], the authors introduced a puncturing approach advocating that the punctured codes may be decoded directly using the punctured (instead of the mother) code matrix. However, this scheme is only applicable to the LDPC code matrices with a dual-diagonal structure and it only punctures degree-2 variable nodes. Besides, the puncturing patterns are selected by a heuristic that only considers the effect of the row degree distribution. This is obviously insufficient, since the performance threshold of the code ensemble is determined by both the column and row degree distributions. Hence, it is desirable to devise a more powerful puncturing scheme which uses a more precise ranking criterion, can tackle more generic puncturing problems, and can avoid the unnecessary efforts for recovering the punctured parity bits.
Another approach to obtain lower rate RC LDPC codes is by extension. In [8] , an important extension method, called splitting, is introduced to obtain RC LDPC codes from a given code, called the descendant code. The splitting scheme can increase the girth of the original code matrix, keep the small density of the split code matrix and provide lower rate RC codes with good error performance. For a given descendant code matrix, a splitting pattern can be used to devise the corresponding split code matrix and hence determine its error performance. A heuristical and greedy method is adopted in both and [8] to find good splitting patterns, where the code is split bit by bit in a heuristic way. However, there is no rigorous criterion in [8] guaranteeing that the splitting patterns are optimized any meaningful sense, and some issues are still open for the splitting problem: 1) it is desirable to adopt a non-greedy strategy, which is supposed to be able to provide better split codes for given supporting rates; 2) with a target supporting rate, listing all the possible splitting patterns is an intractable combinatorial problem with a huge complexity, so how to efficiently represent splitting patterns is of great importance for the purpose of finding good ones; 3) a criterion that can efficiently rank splitting patterns is required. Later on, we shall provide the first ever solution to tackle these issues of the splitting problem.
In this paper, we will propose a novel ranking criterion which can be used to efficiently shortlist good puncturing patterns and splitting patterns for the purpose of constructing good RC LDPC codes. The puncturing (splitting) process will be formulated as a code optimization problem subject to the constraints incurred by the given mother (descendant) code matrix, the target supporting rates. We shall show how such code optimization problems can be systematically solved by applying the proposed ranking criterion. In particular, the constructed RC LDPC codes can be decoded directly on the punctured (split) code matrices, resulting in faster decoding convergence speed and potentially lower hardware complexity and power consumption relative to the conventional method (i.e. decoding on the mother code matrix so

as to avoid small girths). To support a wide range of code rates, we also provide a RC LDPC code structure, which allows faster decoding convergence, better performance and lower computational complexity compared to existing RC codes. Specifically, we shall provide examples of our code construction methods to demonstrate that nearly 25% saving on decoding latency, complexity and power consumption may be obtained at comparable or even better error performance, compared to codes constructed by the method in [6].
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. The rate compatible coding problem is described in Section II. In Section III, we present the optimization formulation of the puncturing (splitting) problem and devise efficient cost functions to measure punctured (split) code performance. In Section IV, ranking methods are proposed to facilitate sorting out good patterns based on the cost functions. In Section V, an efficient RC LDPC code structure is introduced for IR HARQ application. Numerical results and conclusions are given in Section VI and VII.

II. RATE COMPATIBLE CODING PROBLEM

For any code class, rate compatibility is a very important characteristic that ensures continuous codebit transmission among a wide range of code rates. The codebits of a higher rate code are always some of the codebits of a lower rate code as long as they belong to the same class of rate compatible codes. Note that for a LDPC code, each row of the parity check matrix represents a check equation which denotes the checksum relationship of the involved codebits. Since any linear row transformation does not change the checksum relationship among the codebits involved, it preserves the rate compatibility among different transformed code matrices. In the following, we shall introduce two methods for obtaining RC LDPC codes by performing certain row transformations on the parity check matrix.

A. Puncturing pattern candidate set

Puncturing provides a simple and effective way to acquire a

series of rate compatible codes from a given low rate mother

code matrix. We presented the subtraction operation and the

formulation of the puncturing problem in [9]. Recall that for

a given code C0 with length n and rate r0, in order to obtain a child code of rate r1 ≥ r0, x01 = n(1 − r0/r1) bits need

to be punctured and we can eliminate these punctured bits

from the mother code matrix by the subtraction operation and

obtain the punctured code matrix. Let Ω(C0, r1) denote the

puncturing pattern candidate set which contains all candidate

puncturing patterns for the predecessor code C0 and the target rate r1. We can get a child code C1 with the puncturing patten p ∈ Ω(C0, r1), where p = (p0, p1, p2, ...px01 ) is a row vector denoting the punctured bit positions in the

original codeword. The cardinality of Ω(C0, r1) is the number

of combinations to choose x01 bits out of n codebits, i.e.

|Ω(C0, r1)|

=

(

n n(1−r0 /r1 )

).

In

general,

exhaustively

search-

ing for good puncturing patterns from the candidate set Ω

requires a complexity that grows exponentially with the code

length and the number of punctured bits.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:21:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2010 proceedings.

B. Splitting pattern candidate set

Splitting was originally proposed in [8] in two different forms, row splitting and column splitting. The original splitting operation does not preserve rate compatibility but aims to increase the girth condition1. In this paper, we focus on row splitting which is the reverse of the aforementioned puncturing process. This type of splitting provides a simple and effective way to acquire a series of rate compatible codes from a given high rate descendant code matrix. By splitting rows and placing additional parity codebits into the parity check matrix of the given code, we can get a lower rate code from the higher rate code. Fig.1 gives an example of splitting the equation e1 three times into e10, e11 and e12 by placing additional parity bit v5 and v6 of degree 2. After the splitting, the new split code is rate compatible with the descendant code and has a lower rate as well as a possibly larger (and no smaller) girth. .When suboptimal decoding algorithms (e.g. Belief Propagation decoding) are applied, the girth condition of the parity check matrix may greatly impact the decoding performance. Hence, in practice, splitting is usually adopted by placing additional parity bits with degree 2, which guarantees that the girth of the new split code matrix is always no smaller than that of the descendant code. In the following sections, the splitting method of adding degree-2 parity bits will be demonstrated as a target scheme for constructing ratecompatible codes.
Generally speaking, there are two degrees of freedom in the splitting problem: 1) which row is chosen to be split; 2) how many times the chosen row is to be split. Consider the code C0 of length n and rate r0. In order to obtain a new code of rate r1 ≤ r0, y01 = n(r0/r1 − 1) new rows need to be obtained by spitting. Let the row sequence p = (p0, p1, p2, ...pl) specify the target rows to be split and they are split by q = (q0, q1, q2, ...ql) times, respectively. That is, the row pl is split ql times. Then, we have

l

(qi − 1) = y01

(1)

i=0

The pair (p, q) is referred to as a splitting pattern. Let Θ(C0, r1) denote the splitting pattern candidate set which contains all the possible splitting patterns for the descendant code C0 and the target rate r1. The cardinality of Θ(C0, r1) increases exponentially with y01 and n.
In summary, puncturing and splitting are two ways of constructing rate-compatible codes. The formulations of the two problems have the following similarities: 1) they are both based on matrix row transformations, 2) the resultant matrices for target rates are constrained by the given mother or descendant code matrix, 3) they involve a huge candidate set for which performing an exhaustive search is extremely difficult, if not impossible. In the next sections, we shall make some simplifications to the search problem, and provide ranking algorithms to facilitate the ranking process.

1The girth of the decoding matrix should be larger than 4 to preserve the iterative decoding performance.

III. RANKING CRITERION

A. Optimized degree distribution and the cost functions
Given a code matrix with degree distribution (λ, ρ) and target supporting rate r, let Ψ denote all the row transformations (subtraction or splitting) for achieving the target rate from the given code matrix, then Ψ{λ(x), ρ(x)} represents the candidate set for all the possible resultant degree distribution of the equivalent punctured code matrix. Then, the optimized degree distribution of the transformed code can be obtained by solving the following optimization problem [9]

dr

min

log

{λˆ(x),ρˆ(x)}∈Ψ{λ(x),ρ(x)}

λˆi1

+

j=2

ρˆj

log(j

−

1)

−

c0

· ˆi1

(2)

where dr is the maximum row weight, c0 is a sufficiently
large positive constant which is determined by the specific codelength, ˆi1 is the first nonzero column weight of the punctured (split) code matrix and λˆi1 is the first nonzero λˆi.
Therein, the cost function

dr
f (λˆi1 , ρˆ(x)) := log λˆi1 + ρˆj log(j − 1) − c0 · ˆi1 (3)
j=2

can be regarded as a reasonable performance measure of the candidate pattern.
With the efficient cost function, the challenge of the problem remains as how to effectively represent the candidate space. It has been mentioned that listing the candidate space is a high complexity combinatorial problem. In the next section, we will provide some efficient ranking algorithms for the splitting and puncturing problems, which aim to reduce the combinatorial complexity and provide good rate compatible codes for different applications.

IV. RANKING METHODS
A. The ranking method for splitting patterns
For the splitting problem, with the same descendant code, all the splitting patterns give the same column degree distribution {λ(x)}. Specifically, given a descendant code with a degree distribution {ρ(x)}, by splitting the code with a splitting pattern (p, q) ∈ Θ, the equivalent split code matrix can be obtained with row degree distribution {ρˆ(x)}. Denoting the set of all the row transformations by Ψ, we have

{ρˆ(x)} ∈ Ψ{ρ(x)}

(4)

The cost function of the split code can be expressed as

dr

f1(ρˆ(x)) := ρˆj log(j − 1)

(5)

j=2

Due to the high complexity of the combinatorial problem, it is hard to list all the splitting patterns in Θ. Hence, we first reduce the candidate space so that the ranking criterion can be applied more efficiently. By relaxing the discrete constraint

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:21:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2010 proceedings.

(4), the row splitting problem can be seen as a row degree optimization problem as follow

min
ρ¯(x)

dr j=2

ρ¯j

log(j

−

1)

s.t.

ρ¯(1) = 1,

1 0

ρ¯(x)

=

c

(6)

where c > 0 is a constant from the rate constraint and we use ρ¯ instead of ρˆ to denote that here ρ¯ is a continuous variable.
Theorem 1: Problem (6) has a unique optimal solution

ρ¯k = k(k + 1)c − k, ρ¯k+1 = 1 − ρ¯k.

where

k

is

an

integer

such

that

1 k+1

<

c<

1 k

.

The optimal solution for problem (6) has been given in [10]

by applying the duality property. In [11], we provide a rigorous

proof and more importantly, the uniqueness of the optimal

solution is proven, and this can be efficiently used to reduce

the candidate space.

Since the solution for problem (6) is unique, with a given

target supporting rate, we do not need to list out all the

elements in the candidate space. Instead, we can first choose

the splitting patterns which is close to the optimal degree

distribution to form the reduced candidate list. Within the

reduced candidate list, the ranking criterion can be efficiently

applied based on the proposed cost function f1. Note that the

aforementioned criterion allows the straightforward realization

of a non-greedy splitting strategy as long as we optimize the

splitting patterns only for the supporting code rates, instead of

performing successive splitting in a bit by bit manner. Some

heuristical methods can be used to find good splitting patterns

in the reduced candidate list. For example, if the row degree

of the descendant code is concentrated, we can always split

the row with the largest weight into two rows with similar

weights, as mentioned in [8]. Moreover, the splitting patterns

in the reduced candidate list should be chosen to make the split

matrix as concentrated as possible. Some specific examples

will be given in Section V when constructing rate-compatible

codes. Here we extract the splitting part as an example to

demonstrate the effectiveness of the ranking algorithm.

Example 1: A descendant code of rate 8/13 and length

1660 is given. In order to obtain a split code of rate 8/15,

256 new rows need to be obtained by spitting. Assume we

choose the splitting pattern (p, q), where p = (p0, p1, p2, ...pl)

denotes the target row to split and each of them is split by

q = (q0, q1, q2, ...ql) times. Then, we have

l

(qi − 1) = 256

(7)

i=0

The reduced list can be formed in a heuristic way by keeping the equation (7) holding. Within the reduced list, the cost function (5) can be used to rank all the candidate splitting patterns. The error performance of different splitting patterns in the reduced list will be shown in Section VI. Note that the split code can be decoded on the corresponding split code matrices, which provides faster convergence speed and lower power consumption compared to the conventional method.

B. The ranking method for puncturing patterns
For the puncturing problem, given a mother code with degree distribution (λ, ρ), the equivalent punctured code matrix with degree distribution (λˆ, ρˆ) can be obtained by a puncturing pattern p ∈ Ω. Let Ψ denote all the subtraction operations,
{λˆ(x), ρˆ(x)} ∈ Ψ{λ(x), ρ(x)}
Then the cost function can be derived as
dr
f2(λˆi1 , ρˆ(x)) := log λˆi1 + ρˆj log(j − 1) − c0(ˆi1 − 2) (8)
j=2
which is a reasonable measure of the error performance of puncturing patterns. Hence, given a mother code C0 and the target rate r1, all the candidate puncturing patterns in the set Ω can be ranked with cost function f2 in the descending order and the top patterns are expected to have better error performance and can be sorted out as the resultant puncturing patterns. Some efficient ranking algorithms for the puncturing problem can be found in [9].
Note that, to preserve the expected decoding performance of the punctured code indicated by the ranking criterion, the punctured codes are supposed to be decoded on the punctured code matrix. However, this constraint can be removed if we can find an appropriate decoding matrix. We shall provide some interesting results for this issue in the subsequent.
V. RC LDPC CODE STRUCTURE
Next, we will provide a method to construct rate-compatible codes with target rates 8/10, 8/11, ... 8/19 via puncturing and splitting based on the proposed ranking criterion.
As shown in Fig. 2, to construct a series of RC LDPC codes, a mother code with rate 8/13 is constructed with the structure proposed in [6], where the parity part is delicately designed by different recovery groups. According to the specific structure of rate-8/13 mother code, we adopt the optimized degree distribution of the mother code as follow
λ(x) =0.0002 + 0.2289x + 0.2342x2 + 0.2166x5+ 0.0021x6 + 0.3181x14
The information length is set as 1024, and thus 128, 256, and 384 parity bits need to be punctured to achieve target rates 8/12, 8/11, and 8/10, respectively, and these bits should be chosen from the recovery groups which need less iterations as shown in Fig. 2, i.e. (1-SR, 2-SR). Then, according to the proposed structure in [6], at most two iterations are needed to recover all the punctured bits in our example. The code matrix for rate 8/13 is adopted as the decoding matrix for the codes of rates 8/10 to 8/13. On the other hand, splitting is used to achieve codes of rates from 8/14 to 8/19. The reduced list is first formed in a heuristic way and then the ranking criterion is used to rank all the candidates in the reduced list. Some good row degree distribution is obtained and shown in Table I. Note that the codes of rates 8/14 to 8/19 can be decoded on the corresponding split matrices, which results in fast decoding convergence speed. Meanwhile,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:21:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2010 proceedings.

according to [6], the code structure of rate 8/13 mother code owns linear encoding time, and for the split codes, after row permutation, it can be rearranged as a proper structure which can also be encoded in linear time. Thus all the RC LDPC codes under consideration can be encoded in linear time. In the next section, some comparison results will be provided to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed RC code structure compared with the RC codes obtained merely by the state-of-art puncturing scheme in [6].
VI. NUMERICAL SIMULATION
In this section, numerical simulation results will be given to demonstrate the proposed ranking criterion for puncturing codes, splitting codes and the superiority of the proposed RC LDPC code structure in Section V.
To demonstrate the superiority of the proposed RC LDPC code structure, we compare the proposed codes and the RC codes constructed only by the methods in [6]. Fig. 3 shows the FERs of the proposed RC LDPC codes compared to the RC codes constructed by the methods in [6], where the lowest rate mother code is dedicatedly designed as different “K-SR” groups and the puncturing bits are chosen from 1-SR group, then 2-SR group, etc. For fair comparison, the compared mother code is a dedicated rate 8/19 code with the following column degree distribution
λ(x) =0.3054x + 0.2428x2 + 0.2094x5 + 0.0079x10+ 0.0057x11 + 0.2286x12
and the row degree distribution is concentrated. Note that, we try to optimize the degree distribution of the lowest rate code of this series of the compared RC codes so that they can show the ultimate performance. In Fig. 3, the proposed RC LDPC codes outperform the compared codes for most of the supporting rates and only slightly inferior at rates of 8/19 since at this rate, the compared code is dedicatedly designed. The simulation setting assumes the AWGN channel, a maximum of 50 iterations, a transmission block number of 10e5, and the belief propagation decoding algorithm.
In Fig. 4, we demonstrate the complexity advantage of the proposed RC codes. To achieve the FER of 10e-2, the proposed codes can save nearly 30% iterations. Since the compared code matrix has similar density as the proposed code matrix, the proposed RC codes can save 25% power consumption and provide comparable (even better) decoding performance.
We also consider the designed RC LDPC codes for IR HARQ application. We assume that the LDPC codes are transmitted over a binary input AWGN channel with antipodal signaling and adopt the same hybrid ARQ scheme demonstrated in [12] to calculate the throughput. The throughput comparison over FER at 10e-2 is shown in Fig.5, compared with the RC codes constructed by the methods in [6]. The iteration time is set as 30 and 50, respectively. According to the plots, the proposed codes do not degrade too much when the number of iteration is reduced to 30, but the compared RC codes are very sensitive to the iteration time reduction. This phenomenon denotes that the proposed codes convergent

faster and can save the decoding latency for IR HARQ protocols. The aforementioned simulations tell that compared to the E2RC codes, the RC codes constructed by the proposed ranking criterion can provide better error performance and lower complexity decoding.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the ranking criterion for the splitting patterns. Fig.6 gives split codes of rate 8/15 with different cost values as demonstrated in Example 1. The simulation setting is the same as Fig.3 except that the maximum number of iteration is set as 500. It turns out that the proposed cost function can efficiently predict the expected error performance of the code.
The numerical results verify the proposed ranking criterion is efficient and can be used to rank candidate patterns. Moreover, with the proposed schemes, fast decoding convergence and low latency can be achieved on the decoder, and very good RC LDPC codes can be provided by the proposed methods.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, the rate-compatible puncturing and splitting problems for LDPC codes have been formulated as some optimization problems subject to the given code matrix and the target supporting code rates. Based on the GADE, efficient cost functions are devised to shortlist good patterns. The proposed ranking scheme considers both row degree and column degree distributions and can efficiently sort out good patterns from the huge candidate pattern set. Moreover, a good RC LDPC code structure has been proposed to provide a series of RC LDPC codes for a wide range of supporting rates. Numerical simulation results have demonstrated that the proposed cost functions are efficient and very good puncturing patterns and splitting patterns can be obtained. Besides, it can provide decoding matrix allowing faster decoding convergence, and hence lower latency, hardware complexity and power consumption, compared to the conventional methods. Moreover, very good RC LDPC codes can be constructed by the proposed schemes for practical communication systems at an affordable computational complexity.
REFERENCES
[1] 802.16m System Requirements, IEEE Std. 802.16m-07/002r4, 2007. [2] Wireless LAN Medium Access Control and Physical Layer specifications:
Enhancements for Higher Throughput, IEEE Std. 802.16n, 2006. [3] J. Hagenauer, “Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (RCPC
codes) and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 36, pp. 389– 400, Apr. 1988. [4] J. Ha, J. Kim, D. Klinc, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible punctured low-density parity-check codes with short block lengths,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, pp. 728–738, Feb. 2006. [5] H. Park, J. W. Kang, K. S. Kim, and K. C. Whang, “Efficient puncturing method for rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 6, pp. 3914–3919, Nov. 2007. [6] J. Kim, A. Ramamoorthy, and W. Mclaughlin, “The design of efficientlyencodable rate-compatible LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, pp. 365–375, Feb. 2009. [7] S. N. Hong, H. J. Goo, and D. J. Shin, “Optimal puncturing of blocktype LDPC codes and their fast convergence decoding,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Seattle, 2006, pp. 826–830. [8] H. G. Joo, D. J. Shin, and S. N. Hong, “New construction of ratecompatible block-type lowdensity parity-check codes using splitting,” in Proc. IEEE PIMRC, 2006, pp. 1–5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:21:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2010 proceedings.

Iterations needed to achive FER of 10E−2

[9] S. X. Wu and W. H. Mow, “Efficient ranking of rate-compatible

puncturing patterns for a given LDPC code matrix,” in Proc. IEEE

25

GLOBECOM, Hawaii, Nov. 2009.

[10] S. Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-

product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a gaussian

20

approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657–670, Feb.

2001.

[11] S. X. Wu, “Efficient Design and Decoding of the Rate-Compatible Low-

15

Density Parity-Check Codes ,” Master’s thesis, KHUST, August 2009.

[12] M. R. Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, “On construction of rate-

compatible low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,

10

vol. 8, pp. 159–161, Mar. 2004.

5

Proposed RC codes RC codes C

Fig. 1: An example for Splitting.

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Codes with different rates
Fig. 4: Number of iterations needed to achieve FER of 10e-2. In the x axis, 1, 2, ...10
correspond to rate 8/10,...,8/19. The solid curves are the proposed codes, and the dashed curves are the codes (denoted by codes C) constructed with the method in [6].

Fig. 2: The proposed rate-compatible codes structure
100 10−1 10−2 10−3

Throughput (bits/channel use)

0.8

Proposed RC codes with max. 50 iter.

0.75

RC codes C with max. 50 iter.

Proposed RC codes with max. 30 iter.

RC codes C with max. 30 iter.

0.7

0.65

0.6

0.55

0.5

0.45

0.4

−2.5

−2

−1.5

−1

−0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

Es/No (dB)

Fig. 5: Throughput comparisons between the proposed RC LDPC codes and the codes
(denoted by codes C) in [6]. The maximum (max.) iteration (iter.) time is set as 30 and 50, respectively.

FER

10−4

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

Es/No (dB)

Fig. 3: FERs of RC-LDPC codes: rates from right to left: 8/10−8/19. The solid curves
are the proposed codes, and the dashed are the codes constructed by methods in [6].

TABLE I: DEGREE DISTRIBUTION FOR THE PROPOSED RATE-
COMPATIBLE CODES.

Target Rates 8/13 8/14 8/15 8/16 8/17 8/18 8/19

Degree Distribution ρ(x) = 0.5881x9 + 0.4119x10 ρ(x) = 0.1112x5 + 0.1298x6 + 0.5663x9 + 0.1928x10 ρ(x) = 0.2204x5 + 0.2434x6 + 0.5362x9 ρ(x) = 0.4198x5 + 0.2350x6 + 0.3452x9 ρ(x) = 0.6060x5 + 0.2272x6 + 0.1668x9 ρ(x) = 0.7802x5 + 0.2198x6 ρ(x) = 0.0626x3 + 0.0782x4 + 0.7558x5 + 0.1035x6

Fig. 6: The comparison of the rate-8/15 codes with different cost value.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:21:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

