1600

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

On Trapping Sets and Guaranteed Error Correction Capability of LDPC Codes and GLDPC Codes
Shashi Kiran Chilappagari, Member, IEEE, Dung Viet Nguyen, Student Member, IEEE, Bane Vasic, Senior Member, IEEE, and Michael W. Marcellin, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The relation between the girth and the guaranteed error correction capability of 
-left-regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes when decoded using the bit flipping (serial and parallel) algorithms is investigated. A lower bound on the size of variable node sets which expand by a factor of at least 3
=4 is found based on the Moore bound. This bound, combined with the well known expander based arguments, leads to a lower bound on the guaranteed error correction capability. The decoding failures of the bit flipping algorithms are characterized using the notions of trapping sets and fixed sets. The relation between fixed sets and a class of graphs known as cage graphs is studied. Upper bounds on the guaranteed error correction capability are then established based on the order of cage graphs. The results are extended to left-regular and right-uniform generalized LDPC codes. It is shown that this class of generalized LDPC codes can correct a linear number of worst case errors (in the code length) under the parallel bit flipping algorithm when the underlying Tanner graph is a good expander. A lower bound on the size of variable node sets which have the required expansion is established.
Index Terms—Bit flipping algorithms, error correction capability, fixed sets, generalized low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
W E study lower and upper bounds on the guaranteed error correction capability of iterative hard decision decoding algorithms for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] and generalized low-density parity-check (GLDPC) codes [2]. The decoding algorithms that we consider in this paper belong to the class of bit flipping decoders [3], [4]. We consider two classes of codes: 1) left-regular LDPC codes and 2) left-regular and right-uniform GLDPC codes (also known as Tanner codes, henceforth referred to as regular
Manuscript received May 16, 2008; revised July 14, 2009. Current version published March 17, 2010. This work is funded by the NSF under Grant CCF0634969, ECCS-0725405, ITR-0325979, and by the INSIC-EHDR program. The material in this paper was presented in part at the International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT’08) and the International Telemetering Conference (ITC’08). The work of S. K. Chilappagari was performed when he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson.
S. K. Chilappagari was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, 85721 USA. He is now with Marvell Semiconductor Inc., Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA.
D. V. Nguyen, B. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, 85721 USA.
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of Figures 6 and 7 are available online at http://ieeexplore. ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2040962

GLDPC codes)1. The bounds we derive are functions of the column weight and girth of the underlying Tanner graph and (in the case of regular GLDPC codes) the error correction capability of the component-code. For the regular GLDPC codes, we also find the expansion required to guarantee correction of a linear number of errors under the parallel bit flipping algorithm, as a function of the column weight of the Tanner graph and the error correction capability of the component-code.

A. Previous Work

Gallager proposed two binary message passing algorithms,

namely Gallager A and Gallager B, for decoding of LDPC codes

over the binary symmetric channel (BSC) [1]. He showed that

for column weight

and row weight

, there exist

regular LDPC codes for which the bit error probability

asymptotically tends to zero, whenever we operate below the

threshold. The minimum distance was shown to increase lin-

early with the code length, but correction of a linear number of

errors (in the code length) was not shown. When we say that an

algorithm will correct a linear number of worst case errors for a

code of length , we mean that for some constant

,

the algorithm corrects any arbitrary error pattern with up to

errors. Zyablov and Pinsker [3] showed that, asymptotically the

parallel bit flipping algorithm can correct a linear number of er-

rors for almost all the codes in the regular ensemble with .

Sipser and Spielman [4] used expander graph arguments to ana-

lyze two bit flipping algorithms, serial and parallel. Specifically,

they showed that these algorithms can correct a linear number

of errors if the underlying Tanner graph is a good expander.

Burshtein and Miller [5] applied expander based arguments to

show that message passing algorithms can also correct a linear

number of errors when the degree of each variable node is more

than five. Feldman et al. [6] showed that the linear program-

ming decoder [7] is also capable of correcting a linear number

of errors. Recently, Burshtein [8] showed that regular codes with

variable nodes of degree four are capable of correcting a linear

number of errors under the parallel bit flipping algorithm.

Tanner studied a class of codes constructed based on bipartite

graphs and short error correcting codes [2]. Tanner’s work is

a generalization of the LDPC codes proposed by Gallager [1]

and hence the name GLDPC codes. Tanner proposed code

construction techniques, decoding algorithms and complexity

and performance analysis to analyze these codes and derived

bounds on the rate and minimum distance for these codes.

Sipser and Spielman [4] analyzed a special case of GLDPC

1Precise definitions will be given in Section II and we follow standard terminology from [1] and [2]

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: ON TRAPPING SETS AND GUARANTEED ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF LDPC CODES AND GLDPC CODES

1601

codes (which they termed as expander codes) using expansion arguments and proposed explicit constructions of asymptotically good codes capable of correcting a linear number of errors. Zemor [9] improved the fraction of correctable errors under a modified decoding algorithm. Barg and Zemor in [10] analyzed the error exponents of expander codes and showed that expander codes achieve capacity over the BSC. Janwa and Lal [11] studied GLDPC codes in the most general setting by considering unbalanced bipartite graphs. Miladinovic and Fossorier [12] derived bounds on the guaranteed error correction capability of GLDPC codes for the special case of failures only decoding.
It is well known that a random graph is a good expander with high probability [4]. However, the fraction of nodes having the required expansion is very small and hence the code length to guarantee correction of a fixed number of errors must be large. Moreover, determining the expansion of a given graph is known to be NP hard [13], and spectral gap methods cannot guarantee an expansion factor of more than 1/2 [4]. On the other hand, code parameters such as column weight and girth can be easily determined or are assumed to be known for the code under consideration. In fact, Tanner derived bounds on the minimum distance of left-regular, right-uniform GLDPC codes as a function of the minimum distance of the component-code, the column weight and girth of the graph [2]. For LDPC codes, Orlitsky et al. derived bounds on the size of the minimum stopping sets [14] as a function of girth and column weight [15].

the notion of trapping sets to estimate the error floor on the AWGNC [17]. In [19], trapping sets were used to estimate the frame error rate of column-weight-three LDPC codes. In this paper, we study combinatorial objects known as fixed sets and their relation to trapping sets. We then find bounds on the size of fixed sets, which lead to upper bounds on the guaranteed error correction capability.
For the regular GLDPC codes, we study the parallel bit flipping algorithm and derive the expansion sufficient to guarantee correction of a linear number of errors. Using the same approach as in LDPC codes, we then derive lower bounds on the number of variable nodes that are guaranteed to achieve the required expansion. Finally, we derive bounds on the sizes of fixed sets and consequently the upper bounds on the guaranteed error correction capability.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we provide a brief introduction to LDPC codes, decoding algorithms and trapping sets. In Section III, we prove our main theorem relating the column weight and girth to the size of variable node sets which expand by a factor of at least . We derive bounds on the size of fixed sets based on cage graphs in Section IV. We discuss numerical results in Section V. In Section VI, we prove that the parallel bit flipping algorithm for regular GLDPC codes can correct a linear number of errors in the code length if the underlying Tanner graph is a good expander. We conclude with a few remarks in Section VII.

B. Overview of the Results

II. PRELIMINARIES

In this paper, we adopt an approach similar to Tanner which is based on the girth of the underlying Tanner graph. We determine the size of variable node sets in a -left-regular Tanner graph which are guaranteed to expand by a factor of at least
, based on the Moore bound [16, p.180]. By using the well known relation between the expansion of the Tanner graph and

In this section, we first establish the notation and then proceed to give a brief introduction to LDPC codes and hard decision decoding algorithms. We then give the relation between the error correction capability of the code and the expansion of the underlying Tanner graph. We finally describe trapping sets for the algorithms.

the error correction capability, we establish lower bounds on the guaranteed error correction capability. Our results show that, for

A. Graph Theory Notation

a given column weight, the error correction capability grows ex- We adopt the standard notation in graph theory (see [20] for

ponentially in girth. However, we note that since the girth grows example).

denotes a graph with set of nodes

logarithmically in the code length, this result does not show that and set of edges . When there is no ambiguity, we simply

the bit flipping algorithms can correct a linear fraction of errors. denote the graph by . An edge is an unordered pair

To find an upper bound on the number of correctable errors, of nodes and is said to be incident on and . Two nodes

we study the size of sets of variable nodes which lead to de- and are said to be adjacent (neighbors) if there is an edge

coding failures. A decoding failure is said to have occurred if the

incident on them. The order of the graph is and

output of the decoder is not equal to the transmitted codeword. the size of the graph is .

denotes the set of neighbors

By saying that a decoding algorithm for a code with column of . The degree of ,

, is the number of its

weight and girth is not guaranteed to correct errors, we neighbors. A node with degree one is called a leaf node. A graph

mean that there exists a code with column weight and girth is -regular if all the nodes have degree . The average degree

for which the algorithm fails to correct an error pattern with

of a graph is the average over for all

. The

errors. The conditions that lead to decoding failures are well un- girth

of a graph , is the length of smallest cycle in .

derstood for a variety of decoding algorithms such as maximum A bipartite graph

is a graph with two sets

likelihood decoding, bounded distance decoding and iterative of nodes; variable (left) nodes and check (right) nodes and

decoding on the BEC. However, for iterative decoding on the edge set . Nodes in have neighbors only in and vice versa.

BSC and the additive white Gaussian noise channel (AWGNC), A bipartite graph is said to be -left-regular if all variable nodes

the understanding is far from complete. Two approaches have have degree , -right-regular if all check nodes have degree

been taken in this direction, namely trapping sets [17] and pseu- and

regular if all variable nodes have degree and all

docodewords [18]. We adopt the trapping set approach in this check nodes have degree . The girth of a bipartite graph is even.

paper to characterize decoding failures. Richardson introduced Note that while the same letter is used to denote bipartite

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1602

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

graphs, they are distinguished by the manner in which the set Definition 2: A graph is a

expander if it is a

of nodes is specified.

regular bipartite graph in which every subset of at most an

B. LDPC Codes and Decoding Algorithms

LDPC codes [1] are a class of linear block codes which can be

defined by sparse bipartite graphs [2]. Let be a bipartite graph

with two sets of nodes: variable nodes and check nodes.

This graph defines a linear block code of length and dimen-

sion at least

in the following way: The variable nodes

are associated with the coordinates of codewords. A vector

is a codeword if and only if for each check

node, the modulo two sum of its neighbors is zero. Such a graph-

ical representation of an LDPC code is called the Tanner graph

of the code [2]. An

regular LDPC code has a Tanner

graph with variable nodes each of degree (column weight)

and check nodes each of degree (row weight). This code

has length and rate

[1]. The bi-adjacency matrix

of gives a parity check matrix of . In this paper, we assume

that there are no multiple connections between a variable node

and a check node in the Tanner graph of a code or in other

words the Tanner graphs considered in this paper are simple.

fraction of the variable nodes expands by a factor of at least .

The following fact from [4] relates the expansion and error

correction capability of an

LDPC code with Tanner

graph when decoded using the parallel bit flipping decoding

algorithm.

Fact 1: [4, Theorem 11] Let be a

expander over variable nodes, for any . Then, the simple

parallel decoding algorithm will correct any

fraction of errors after

iterations.

Notes:

1) The serial bit flipping algorithm can also correct

fraction of errors if is a

expander.

2) The results hold for any left-regular code as expansion is

needed for variable nodes only.

From the above discussion, it is observed that finding the

number of variable nodes which are guaranteed to expand by a

factor of at least , gives a lower bound on the guaranteed

error correction capability of LDPC codes.

We now describe a simple hard decision decoding algorithm

known as the parallel bit flipping algorithm [3], [4] to decode D. Decoding Failures and Trapping Sets LDPC codes. As noted earlier, each check node imposes a con-

straint on the neighboring variable nodes. A constraint (check We now characterize the failures of the bit flipping decoders

node) is said to be satisfied by a setting of variable nodes if the using the notions of trapping sets [17], inducing sets and fixed

sum of the variable nodes in the constraint is even; otherwise sets [21]. While we only use the notion of fixed sets throughout

the constraint is unsatisfied.

the paper, we introduce other definitions for the sake of com-

pleteness of discussion. We adopt the the definitions of the

Parallel Bit Flipping Algorithm

terms eventually correct variable nodes, trapping sets and

failure sets from [17]. When the channel and the decoder sat-

• In parallel, flip each variable that is in more unsatisfied isfy certain symmetry conditions (see [22] for details), we can

than satisfied constraints.

assume, without loss of generality, that the all zero codeword

• Repeat until no such variable remains.

is transmitted. We make this assumption throughout the paper.

Note that when is even, a variable node that receives flip messages is not flipped. A serial version of the algorithm is also defined in [4] and all the results in this paper hold for the serial bit flipping algorithm also. The bit flipping algorithms are iterative in nature but do not belong to the class of message passing algorithms (see [5] for an explanation). In general, we assume that the parallel bit flipping algorithm is run for a maximum number of iterations.

The support of a vector

, denoted by

is defined as the set of all variable nodes for which

. Since the transmitted codeword is assumed to be the

all-zero-codeword, the support of the input to the decoder is

simply the set of variable nodes initially in error. A variable

node is said to be corrupt if it is different from its original sent

value. In our case, a variable node is corrupt if it is 1.

Let denote the input to the bit flipping decoder (serial or

parallel) and denote the codeword estimate of the decoder

C. Expansion and Error Correction Capability

at the end of th iteration. A variable node is said to be eventually correct if there exists a positive integer such that for

Sipser and Spielman [4] analyzed the performance of the bit all with

,

. For an input , the failure set

flipping algorithms using the expansion properties of the underlying Tanner graph of the code. We summarize the results from [4] below for the sake of completeness. We start with the following definitions from [4].

is defined as the set of variable nodes that are not even-

tually correct. The decoding on the input is successful if and

only if

. If

, then we say that

is a trap-

ping set and

is an inducing set. The size of an inducing

Definition 1: Let

with

. Then every set is its cardinality. It should be noted that a trapping set can

set of at most nodes expands by a factor of if, for all sets have multiple inducing sets associated with it. While the above

notions of inducing and trapping sets are fundamental in char-

acterizing the decoding failures, the definitions do not lead to

such that

the formulation of necessary and sufficient conditions for a set of variable nodes to be a trapping/inducing set for the parallel

We consider bipartite graphs and expansion of variable nodes bit flipping algorithm. We therefore define fixed sets, for which

only.

such conditions can be derived.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: ON TRAPPING SETS AND GUARANTEED ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF LDPC CODES AND GLDPC CODES

1603

G G G Fig. 1. (a) A bipartite graph . (b) : The reduced bipartite graph of .

G G 
 = 4 G Fig. 2. (a) A bipartite graph . (b) : The

augmented graph of .

Definition 3: [21] Let be the set of corrupt variable nodes at the beginning of a decoding iteration in the bit flipping (serial or parallel) algorithm. is a fixed set if the set of corrupt variable nodes at the end of the iteration is . A vector with
is called a fixed point.

It is clear from the above definition that if the input to the

decoder is a fixed point, then the output of the decoder is the

same fixed point. It follows that if is a fixed point and

, then

is a trapping set as well as an inducing

set. A fixed set is always a trapping set, but a trapping set need

not be a fixed set. It is clear that if the Tanner graph of a code

has a fixed set of size , then the code cannot correct all error

patterns with up to errors. We use this fact to establish upper

bounds on guaranteed error correction capability.

G G G Fig. 3. (a) A graph . (b) : The edge-vertex incidence graph of .

Definition 5: Let that bipartite graph edge set given by

be a bipartite graph such

. The augmented graph of is a

with vertex set

and

III. COLUMN WEIGHT, GIRTH, AND EXPANSION
In this section, we prove our main theorem which relates the column weight and girth of a code to its error correction capability. We show that the size of variable node sets which have the required expansion is related to the well known Moore bound [16, p. 180]. We start with a few definitions required to establish the main theorem. In this section, denotes a node (a variable node in case of bipartite graphs), denotes an even degree check node in a bipartite graph and denotes an odd degree check node in a bipartite graph.

A. Definitions

Definition 4: The reduced graph

of a

bipartite graph

is a graph with vertex set

and edge set given by

c is a leaf node

where

and

where

and

In other words, the augmented graph of a bipartite graph is obtained by adding leaf check nodes such that every variable node in the resulting graph has degree . This is illustrated in Fig. 2.

Definition 6: [4, Definition 4] The edge-vertex incidence

graph

of a graph

is the

bipartite graph with vertex set

and edge set

is an endpoint of

In other words, the reduced graph of a bipartite graph is obtained by removing all leaf check nodes from the graph. Fig. 1(a) shows a bipartite graph and Fig. 1(b) shows the corresponding reduced graph. From the definition it follows that

It can be seen that the edge-vertex incidence graph of a graph can be interpreted as follows: consider each edge in the original graph to be associated with a check node in the edge-vertex incidence graph. The neighbors of this check node are the endpoints of the corresponding edge in the original graph. Fig. 3 depicts

(1) a graph and its corresponding edge-vertex incidence graph. The

(2)

following facts follow from the above definition. Facts:

1) The edge-vertex incidence graph is right-regular with de-

Lemma 1:

with equality

gree two.

.

2)

.

Proof: See Appendix A.

3)

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1604

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

odd

even

G G v Fig. 4. (a) A bipartite graph . (b)

when is chosen as the root node

c G v c for the check . (c)

when is chosen as the root node for the check .

Definition 7: An inverse edge-vertex incidence graph

of a bipartite graph

is a graph with

vertex set and edge set which is obtained from the re-

duced graph

of the bipartite graph as

follows. For every

, label one node

as a root

node. Then

Note that for -regular graphs,

is an integer and the above

bound is known as the Moore bound [16, p.180]

Lemma 4: Let

be a

-left-regular

bipartite graph with

. Then for all

,

any set of variable nodes in expands by a factor of at least

.

Proof: Let

denote the subgraph

induced by a set of variable nodes

. Since is -left-

regular,

. Let

be the reduced

graph of . From (1) and (2), we have

is a root node, for some

(4)

The check nodes in are removed along with their unique edge. Fig. 4 shows a bipartite graph and two possible inverse edge-vertex incidence graphs. We characterize the important properties of the inverse edge-vertex incidence graph in the following lemma.

Lemma 2:

i) Given a graph, the inverse edge-vertex incidence graph

may not be unique.

ii)

.

iii)

.

iv)

with equality

.

Proof: See Appendix B

Notes: 1) The term inverse edge-vertex incidence is used for the fol-
lowing reason. Suppose all checks in have degree two. Then the edge-vertex incidence graph of is . 2) All the statements of Lemma 2 hold even if the graph has multiple connections between its nodes.

Since

, we have

(5)

We need to prove that

.

We begin with the following lemmas.

Lemma 5: Let

denote the maximum number of edges

in an arbitrary graph of order and girth . Then, for all

Proof: Since

, by Lemma 3, for all

, the average degree of a graph with nodes and

girth is less than . By (3), we have

B. The Moore Bound and Expansion

We now establish a lower bound on the size of variable node

sets that expand by a factor of at least

in a -left-regular

Tanner graph. We begin with a lemma which gives a bound on

the number of nodes in a graph with average degree and girth

. From the definition of the average degree of a graph, it follows

that

Lemma 6: The number of edges in , the reduced graph of

, cannot exceed

i.e.,

(6)

Proof: The proof is by contradiction. Assume that

. Consider

, an inverse edge vertex

incidence graph of . From Lemma 2 (iv), we have

(3)

Lemma 3: [23] The number of nodes

in a graph of

girth and average degree at least

satisfies

This is a contradiction as least and therefore,

is a graph of order .

Lemma 7: For some integer

, let

and girth at

where

(7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: ON TRAPPING SETS AND GUARANTEED ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF LDPC CODES AND GLDPC CODES

1605

Then,

Proof: The Theorem is now a consequence of Lemma 4 and Fact 1.

Proof: Substituting (7) in (5), we have

IV. CAGE GRAPHS AND TRAPPING SETS

Now, by Lemma 2 (iii), we have But we have Substituting (10) and (7) into (9), we get
Substituting (11) and (8) in (4), we get The lemma now follows as

(8) In this section, we first give necessary and sufficient conditions for a given set of variables to be a fixed set. We then proceed to define a class of interesting graphs known as cage graphs [24], [25] and establish a relation between cage graphs and fixed sets. We then give an upper bound on the error correction capability based on the orders of cage graphs. The proofs in this sec-
(9) tion are along the same lines as in Section III. Hence, we only give a sketch of the proofs.

Theorem 2: Let be an LDPC code with -left-regular

Tanner graph . Let be a set of variable nodes with induced (10) subgraph . Let the checks in be partitioned into two dis-

joint subsets; consisting of checks with odd degree and

consisting of checks with even degree. Then is a fixed set

for the bit flipping algorithm (serial or parallel) : (a) Every

variable node in has at least

neighbors in , and (b)

No

checks of share a neighbor outside .

(11)

Proof: We first show that the conditions stated are suffi-

cient. Let be the set of corrupt variable nodes at the begin-

ning of an iteration. The only unsatisfied constraints are in .

By the conditions of the theorem, we observe that no variable

node is involved in more unsatisfied constraints than satisfied

constraints. Hence, no variable node is flipped and by definition

is a fixed set.

To see that the conditions are necessary, observe that for

to be a fixed set, no variable node should be involved in more

unsatisfied constraints than satisfied constraints.

Remark: Theorem 2 is a consequence of Fact 3 from [17].

To determine whether a given set of variables is a fixed set, it

and therefore

is necessary to not only know the induced subgraph but also the neighbors of the odd degree checks. However, in order to

establish general bounds on the sizes of fixed sets given only

the column weight and the girth, we consider only condition a)

of Theorem 2 which is a necessary condition. A set of variable

nodes satisfying condition a) is known as a potential fixed set. It

Remark: The reader would notice that in the proof of Lemma is worth noting that a potential fixed set can always be extended

4, we have implicitly assumed that the girth of the subgraph

to a fixed set by successively adding a variable node till condi-

is . However, in general we have the girth

. tion b) is satisfied.

This does not affect the statement of Lemma 4, as the entire We now use the understanding of the notion of potential fixed

proof can be rewritten in terms of leading to the conclusion set to establish upper bounds on the guaranteed error correction

that for all

, any set of variable nodes in capability. Suppose there exits a -left-regular graph of girth

expand by a factor of at least . Since

, we have with variable node set that satisfies the condition a) of

and therefore Lemma 4 holds for all Theorem 2. Then, it is possible for a code with -left-regular

2.

Tanner graph of girth to contain a fixed set of size . In

We now state our main theorem.

other words, there exists at least one code with a -left-regular

Theorem 1: Let be an LDPC code with -left-regular

Tanner graph with

and girth

. Then the

bit flipping algorithm (serial or parallel) can correct any error

pattern of weight less than

.

Tanner graph of girth that contains a fixed set of size . The bit flipping decoder for this code is not guaranteed to correct all error patterns with up to errors.
We now define a class of graphs known as cage graphs and show how potential fixed sets can be constructed from the cage

2We would like to thank the reviewer for pointing out this subtlety in the proof graphs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1606

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

of the smallest length is always a fixed set (see [21] for the proof).

V. DISCUSSION

The bounds derived in this paper are similar to the bounds

derived by Tanner [2] on the minimum distance and by Orlitsky

et al. [15] on the minimum stopping set size. In [2] and [15] it

has been shown that the minimum distance and the minimum

stopping set size also grow exponentially with the girth. The

bounds derived in this paper also indicate that the guaranteed

Fig. 5. (a) The (3; 5) cage graph, also known as the Peterson graph. (b) A potential fixed set of size 10 for a code with Tanner graph of column weight 
 = 5 and girth 2g = 10.

error correction capability for codes with column weight greater than four grows exponentially with the girth of the Tanner graph. For codes with -left-regular Tanner graphs, the guaranteed

error correction capability grows linearly with the girth. How-

Definition 8: [24] A -cage graph,

, is a -reg-

ular graph with girth having the minimum possible number of

nodes.

ever, since the girth of the Tanner graph grows logarithmically with the code length, all the results do not establish the ability to correct a linear number of errors. While such bounds are not the best possible theoretical bounds, they are important as they do

A lower bound,

, on the number of nodes

in not rely on random graph arguments or ensemble analysis. The

a -cage graph is given by the Moore bound.

bounds depend on two parameters namely, the column weight

Lemma 8: The set of variable nodes in the augmented graph

of the edge-vertex incidence graph of a

cage graph

is a potential fixed set for a -left-regular Tanner graph of girth

.

Proof: For the sake of simplicity of notation let

denote a

cage graph, denote

the edge-vertex incidence graph of and denote the

augmented graph of . Since is a cage graph, we have

. First, observe that is a

-left-reg-

ular bipartite graph with variable node set and girth and

each check node in has degree two. It then follows that the

bipartite graph is a left-regular graph with variable node

set and girth . Furthermore, every variable node in has

even degree check node neighbors (in the graph ).

Hence, by Theorem 2, is a potential fixed set.

and the girth of the Tanner graph and both the parameters can be

determined for a given code with complexity in the code length.

Table I provides the lower and upper bounds on the error cor-

rection capability for a range of values of and girth . From

the table, one observes that the lower bounds derived appear

to be very weak (especially for higher values of and ) and

that the LDPC codes, in practice, correct more errors than the

provided bounds. This can be attributed to the fact that an ex-

pansion factor of

is a sufficient condition for error cor-

rection and not necessary. In fact, careful analysis of specific

cases might lead to better bounds. Also, the presence of very few

harmful subgraphs can affect the expansion of a graph. In fact,

in some cases the lower bounds derived in this paper can be tight

(this point is elucidated in Example 1). The Tanner graphs con-

structed in practice, in general, do not contain such graphs and

achieve sufficient expansion over larger sets of variable nodes.

Fig. 5 shows how a potential fixed set can be obtained from Avoiding a few extremal graphs can increase the size of vari-

a cage graph. The cage graph depicted in Fig. 5(a) is the

able node sets that have an expansion factor of at least .

cage graph (it is the unique

cage graph), also known as the Extremal graphs avoiding three, four and five cycles have been

Peterson graph. Fig. 5(b) shows a potential fixed set for a code studied in great detail (see [26], [27]) and these results can be

with Tanner graph of column weight five and girth ten.

used to derive tighter bounds when the girth is eight, 10, or 12.

Theorem 3: There exists an LDPC code with -left-regular

Tanner graph with

and girth for which the bit flipping

algorithm (serial or parallel) fails to correct

errors.

The upper bounds presented should be interpreted with cau-

tion. We have shown that for a -left-regular Tanner graph of

girth , a potential fixed set with

variable nodes

can be constructed from a

cage graph. This how-

Remarks:

ever does not imply that every -left-regular Tanner graph has

1) In order to use the Moore bound in Lemma 4, we needed a fixed set of size

. It only means that it is possible

or in other words

. The discussion in for a given -left-regular Tanner graph of girth to contain a

this section however require cage graphs of degree

. fixed set of size

. We also do not claim that it is

Since

cage graphs exist for

, we require

. the smallest possible potential fixed set. However, we point out

2) For Tanner graphs with

and

and girth , the the following facts. The order of a

cage graph

corresponding cage graphs are simply cycles of length . satisfies

. For the values of

and

The -augmented graph of the edge-vertex incidence graph which meet the lower bound,

is in fact a lower

of a simple cycle is a potential fixed set for

and bound on the size of the smallest possible potential fixed set.

. Since, a code with Tanner graph of girth always The discussion of these bounds is beyond the scope of the cur-

has a cycle of length , it follows that there always exists rent work.

a potential fixed set of size . In fact, for a code with

We also see that there is a considerable gap between the upper

or 4, and Tanner graph of girth greater than eight, a cycle and lower bound. The reason for this gap is that, if the size of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: ON TRAPPING SETS AND GUARANTEED ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF LDPC CODES AND GLDPC CODES
TABLE I LOWER AND UPPER BOUNDS ON THE GUARANTEED ERROR CORRECTION
CAPABILITY OF 
-LEFT-REGULAR LDPC CODES

1607

the smallest fixed set is , it does not imply the correction of all

error patterns with up to

errors. We illustrate this point

with an example.

Example 1: Consider the potential fixed set of a 5-left-reg-

ular Tanner graph of girth 8 shown in Fig. 6(a). The subgraph

shown is the 5 augmented graph of the edge-vertex incidence

graph of

cage. Assume that no three check nodes in the

subgraph share a variable node neighbor outside the subgraph.

Now assume that the variable nodes , and are initially

in error and all other variable nodes are correct. Observe that

Fig. 6. Illustration of oscillations in the bit flipping decoder. In this figure, a light-gray  represents a correct variable node, a dark-gray  represents a cor-
rupt variable node, a dark-gray represents an unsatisfied check node and a
light-gray represents a satisfied check node. (a) The set of corrupt variables fv ; v ; v g at the beginning of the first iteration. The check node neighbors of v ; v and v are all unsatisfied. (b) The set of corrupt variables fv ; v ; v g at
the beginning of the second iteration.

, and are connected to all unsatisfied checks, whereas

the variable nodes , and are connected to three unsatisfied checks each. By the rules of the parallel bit flipping al-

VI. GENERALIZED LDPC CODES

gorithm, it can be seen that the variable nodes , , , , In this section, we first consider the parallel bit flipping de-

and are flipped and no other variable node is flipped. At coding algorithm for regular GLDPC codes. We then establish a

the end of first iteration , and are in error. After the relation between expansion and error correction capability. We

first round of decoding, we see that , and are con- also establish a lower bound on the number of variable nodes

nected to five unsatisfied checks and , and are con- that have the required expansion. We then exhibit a fixed set

nected to three unsatisfied checks and hence, , , , , and as a consequence show that the bound on the required ex-

and are flipped. So, at the end of any iteration, either pansion cannot be improved when is even. We also establish

, and are in error or , and are in error. In this bounds on the size of trapping sets.

case, the parallel bit flipping algorithm cannot correct three er- GLDPC codes are also a class of codes defined on bipartite

rors. According to the terminology, we note that

, graphs. In GLDPC codes, the neighboring variable nodes at each

are inducing sets and

is a check node are constrained to be a codeword from some block

trapping set. It is also worth noting that if all the variable nodes code (known as the component code). While a large class of

in

are initially in error, then the set of codes can be defined in such a manner, we restrict our attention

variable nodes in error does not change as iterations progress to codes that are defined by left-regular Tanner graphs and the

and by Definition 3,

is a fixed set.

component code is the same for all the check nodes. Such codes

This example also shows that the lower bound for

and

, reported in Table I is tight. The exact relation between

the size of the smallest fixed set and error correction capability

are generally referred to as Tanner codes or regular GLDPC codes [2]. We state the formal definition of GLDPC codes by adopting the terminology from expander codes [4].

still remains an open problem.

Definition 9: [4, Definition 6]: Let be a

regular bipar-

Table I also list the values of

. It can be seen that all tite graph between variable nodes

and

set of variable nodes of size less than

expand by a factor check nodes

. Let

be a function de-

of at least and hence

provides a lower bound on the signed so that, for each check node , the variables neighboring

minimum distance as well as the minimum stopping set size. It are

. Let be an error correcting

is interesting to note that at high values of and , the size of code of block length . The GLDPC code

is the code of

a potential fixed set is much less than

.

block length whose codewords are the words

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1608

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

such that, for

,

is a codeword 4) Miladinovic and Fossorier in [12] considered a decoding

of .

algorithm where the decoding at every check either re-

The terms column weight, row weight, check nodes, variable nodes and trapping sets mean the same as in case of LDPC codes.

sults in correct decoding or a failure but not miscorrection. While this assumption is reasonable when the sub-code is a long code, it is not true in general. We however, point out that the methodology we adopt can be applied to this case

as well.

A. Decoding Algorithms

5) The work by Sipser and Spielman [4], Zemor [9], Barg and

Tanner [2] proposed different hard decision decoding algo-

rithms to decode GLDPC codes. We now describe an iterative

algorithm known as parallel bit flipping algorithm originally de-

scribed in [2], which is employed when the component-code is

of minimum distance at least

and capable of cor-

recting errors.

Zemor [10] and Janwa and Lal [11] focused on asymptotic results and explicit construction of expander codes. The proofs and constructions are based on spectral gap and as noted earlier, such methods cannot guarantee expansion factor of more than 1/2. Our proofs require a greater expansion factor.

Parallel bit flipping algorithm: Each decoding round consists of the following steps.

B. Expansion and Error Correction Capability
We now prove that the above described algorithm can correct a fraction of errors if the underlying Tanner graph is a good

• A variable node sends its current estimate to check nodes. expander.

• A check node performs bounded distance decoding on the incoming messages. If a codeword is found, then for all variable nodes which differ the codeword, the check node sends a flip message. If no codeword is found, then the

Theorem 4: Let

be a regular GLDPC code with a

-left-regular Tanner graph and -error correcting compo-

nent-code . Let be a

expander where

check node does not send any flip messages.

• A variable node flips if it receives more than flip

messages.

Then the parallel bit flipping decoding algorithm will correct

Remarks: Since bounded distance decoding is performed at each check node, if a codeword is found then there can be at most variable nodes which differ from the codeword. Hence, the maximum number of flip messages a check node can send in one iteration is . Also, note that if is even then a variable node that receives flip messages is not flipped.
The set of variable nodes which differ from their correct value are known as corrupt variables. The rest of the variable nodes are referred to as correct variables. Following the algorithms, we have the following definition adopted from [4]:
Definition 10: A check node is said to be confused if it sends flip messages to correct variable nodes, or if it does not send flip message to corrupt variable nodes, or both. Otherwise, a check

any

fraction of errors.

Proof: Let be the number of variable nodes in . Let be

the set of corrupt variables at the beginning of a decoding round.

Assume that

. We will show that after the decoding

round, the number of corrupt variables is strictly less than .

Let be the set of corrupt variables that fail to flip in one

decoding round, and let be the set of variables that were orig-

inally uncorrupt, but which become corrupt after one decoding

round. After one decoding round, the set of corrupt variables is

. In the worst case scenario, a confused check sends

flip messages to the uncorrupt variables and no flip message to

the corrupt variables. We now have the following lemma.

Lemma 9: Let be the set of confused checks, then

node is said to be helpful. (12)
Remarks:

1) For the parallel bit flipping decoding algorithm, a check node with sub-code of minimum distance at least can be confused only if it is connected to more than corrupt variable nodes.
2) The parallel bit flipping algorithm is different from the al-

Proof: The total number of edges connected to the corrupt variables is . Each confused check must have at least neighbors in . Let be the set of helpful checks that have at least one neighbor in . Then,

gorithm presented by Sipser and Spielman in [4] for ex-

(13)

pander codes, but is similar to the algorithm proposed by

Zemor in [9]. However, we note that the codes considered By expansion,

in [9] are based on -regular bipartite graphs and are a special case of doubly generalized LDPC codes [28], where

(14)

each variable node is also associated with an error cor- By (13) and (14), we obtain recting code.

3) Apart from helpful checks and confused checks, Sipser and

Spielman defined unhelpful checks. However, our defini-

tion of confused checks includes unhelpful checks as well.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: ON TRAPPING SETS AND GUARANTEED ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF LDPC CODES AND GLDPC CODES

1609

We now prove that

. The proof is by contra-

diction. Assume that

. Then there exists a subset

such that

. We observe that a variable

node in can have at most

neighbors that are not in .

Also, a variable node in must have at least

neigh-

bors in , and hence can have at most

neighbors

that are not in . Let

be the set of neighbors of

. Then

TABLE II
LOWER BOUNDS ON THE GUARANTEED ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF 
-LEFT-REGULAR, RIGHT-UNIFORM GLDPC CODES

(15) Substituting (12) into (15), we obtain
Now

which is a contradiction, as

and therefore

(by the expansion property in hypoth-

esis).

Remark: The above theorem proves that the parallel bit flip-

ping algorithm can correct a fraction of errors in linear number

of rounds (in code length). However, if we assume an expansion

of

, it can be shown that the number of errors decreases

by a constant factor with every iteration resulting in convergence

in logarithmic number of rounds.

The following lemma establishes a lower bound on the

number of nodes in a left-regular graph which expand by a

factor required by the above algorithm.

Lemma 10: Let be a -left-regular bipartite graph with

. Then for all

, any set of

variable nodes in expands by a factor of at least , where

Proof: The proof is similar to the proof of Lemma 4. Following the notation from Lemma 4, we note that for all
,

Since

, we have

Theorem 5: Let

be a regular GLDPC code with a

-left-regular Tanner graph and -error correcting compo-

nent-code . Let

. Then the parallel bit flipping

algorithm can correct any error pattern of weight less than

.

Table II provides lower bounds on the guaranteed error correction capability of GLDPC codes as a function of the column weight, girth and the error correction capability of the component code.
C. Fixed Sets of GLDPC Codes
We now exhibit a fixed set for the parallel bit flipping algorithm. By examining the expansion of the fixed set, we show that the bound given in Theorem 4 cannot be improved when is even.

Theorem 6: Let

be a regular GLDPC code with a

-left-regular Tanner graph and -error correcting compo-

nent-code . Let be a set consisting of variable nodes with

induced subgraph with the following properties: (a) The de-

gree of each check in is either 1 or ; (b) Each variable node

in is connected to

checks of degree

and

checks of degree 1; and (c) No

checks of degree

share a variable node outside . Then, is a fixed set.

Proof: Observe that all the checks of degree

in

are confused. Further, each confused check does not send flip

messages to variable nodes in . Since any variable node in is

connected to

confused checks, it remains corrupt. Also,

no variable node outside can receive more than

flip

messages. Hence, no variable node which is originally correct

can get corrupted. By definition, is a fixed set.

It can be seen that the total number of checks in is equal to

Note that the above theorem holds when

.

. Hence, the set of variable nodes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1610

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 4, APRIL 2010

reported by Miladinovic and Fossorier [12] based on the size of generalized stopping sets can also be derived.

A. Proof of Lemma 1 Proof: Since

APPENDIX is a bipartite graph,

Observe that

, hence

Fig. 7. Illustration of a fixed set for a GLDPC code with a Tanner graph of
regular left degree 5 and a single error correcting component code. In this figure, a dark-gray  represents a corrupt variable node, a light-gray represents a helpful check node and a dark-gray represents a confused check node.

expands by a factor of

when is even.

Hence, the bound given in Theorem 4 cannot be improved in

this case.

A set of variable nodes is a potential fixed set for a left-reg-

ular, right-uniform GLDPC code if the subgraph induced by the

set of variable nodes is such that every variable node is con-

nected to at least

check nodes of degree at least . Let

denote a

regular bipartite graph of girth

with the least number of variable nodes and let

denote this least number. By using arguments similar to the ones

in Section IV, we can see that it is possible to construct a po-

tential fixed set for a GLDPC code with left-regular Tanner

graph of girth and error correcting component code from

. Fig. 7 shows a fixed set for

and

and

constructed from

. The above ob-

servations lead to the following theorem.

Theorem 7: There exists a GLDPC code with a -left-regular

Tanner graph of girth

and error correcting compo-

nent code for which the parallel bit flipping algorithm fails to

correct

errors.

with equality

.

B. Proof of Lemma 2

Proof:

i) For a check node

, different choices of

may results in different inverse edge-vertex inci-

dence graph as, for example, in Fig. 4.

ii) The proof is by contradiction. Assume that

. Let the set of variable nodes

form the shortest length cycle,

in .

From the definition of , it can be seen that there exist

check nodes

not necessarily distinct, such

that there exists a path

in . This

implies that contains a cycle of length less than or equal

to , which is a contradiction.

iii) Consider

and let

. It

can be seen that

since for any choice

of the root node

, there are

choices

of such that

and

. Therefore

VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

We derived lower bounds on the guaranteed error correc-

tion capability of left-regular LDPC codes and regular GLDPC

codes by finding bounds on the number of nodes that have the

required expansion. The bounds depend on two important code

parameters namely: column weight and girth and in the case

of regular GLDPC codes on the error correction capability of

the component code. The results can be extended to message passing algorithms as well. Our approach can be used to derive

On the other hand,

bounds on the guaranteed erasure recovery capability for iter-

ative decoding on the BEC by finding the number of variable

nodes which expand by a factor of . In [15], the bounds on

the guaranteed erasure recovery capability were derived based

on the size of the smallest stopping set. Both approaches give

Therefore

.

the same bounds, which also coincide with the bounds given by iv) This is a consequence of iii) and Lemma 1.

Tanner [2] for the minimum distance. Results similar to the ones

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: ON TRAPPING SETS AND GUARANTEED ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF LDPC CODES AND GLDPC CODES

1611

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[3] V. V. Zyablov and M. S. Pinsker, “Estimation of the error-correction complexity for Gallager low-density codes,” Probl. Inf. Transm., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 18–28, 1976.
[4] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[5] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Expander graph arguments for messagepassing algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 782–790, Feb. 2001.
[6] J. Feldman, T. Malkin, R. A. Servedio, C. Stein, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding corrects a constant fraction of errors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, pp. 82–89, Jan. 2007.
[7] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[8] D. Burshtein, “On the error correction of regular LDPC codes using the flipping algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, pp. 517–530, Feb. 2008.
[9] G. Zemor, “On expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 835–837, Feb. 2001.
[10] A. Barg and G. Zemor, “Error exponents of expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1725–1729, Jun. 2002.
[11] H. Janwa and A. K. Lal, “On Tanner codes: Minimum distance and decoding,” Appl. Algebra Eng. Commun. Comput., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 335–347, 2003.
[12] N. Miladinovic and M. Fossorier, “Generalized LDPC codes with Reed-Solomon and BCH codes as component codes for binary channels,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, St. Louis, MO, Nov. 2, 2005, vol. 3, pp. 6–10.
[13] N. Alon, “Spectral techniques in graph algorithms,” in LATIN ’98: Proc. Third Latin American Symposium on Theoretical Informatics, London, U.K., 1998, pp. 206–215.
[14] C. Di, D. Proietti, T. Richardson, E. Telatar, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[15] A. Orlitsky, R. Urbanke, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping sets and the girth of Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun. 5, 2002, pp. 2–2.
[16] N. Biggs, Algebraic Graph Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
[17] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr. Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 1–3, 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[18] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, May 2007.
[19] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasic, “Error floors of LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 11–15, 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1089–1094.
[20] B. Bollobas, Extremal Graph Theory. New York: Academic, 1978. [21] S. K. Chilappagari and B. Vasic, “Error correction capability of
column-weight-three LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, pp. 2055–2061, 2009. [22] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001. [23] N. Alon, S. Hoory, and M. Linial, “The Moore bound for irregular graphs,” Graphs and Combinatorics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 53–57, 2002. [24] E. W. Weisstein, Cage Graph [Online]. Available: http://mathworld. wolfram.com/CageGraph.html [25] P. K. Wong, “Cages- a survey,” J. Graph Theory, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 1982. [26] D. K. Garnick, Y. H. H. Kwong, and F. Lazebnik, “Extremal graphs without three-cycles or four-cycles,” J. Graph Theory, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 633–645, 1993. [27] Y. Yuansheng, L. Xiaohui, D. Guocheng, and Z. Yongxiang, “Extremal graphs without three-cycles, four-cycles or five-cycles,” Utilitas Mathematica, vol. 66, pp. 249–266, 2004. [28] Y. Wang and M. Fossorier, “Doubly generalized LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 9–14, 2006, pp. 669–673.

Shashi Kiran Chilappagari (S’05–M’09) received the B.Tech. and M.Tech. degrees in electrical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India, in 2004 and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Arizona, Tucson, in 2008.
He was a Research Engineer in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Arizona, Tucson, from January 2009 to December 2009. He is currently with Marvell Semiconductor Inc., Santa Clara, CA. His research interests include error control coding and information theory with focus on the analysis of failures of various suboptimal decoding algorithms for LDPC codes.
Dung Viet Nguyen (S’07) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Arizona, Tucson, in 2007, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree. His research interests include digital communications and information theory.
Bane Vasic (S’92–M’93–SM’02) received the B.Sc., M. Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Nis, Nis, Yugoslavia (now Serbia), in 1989, 1991, and 1994, respectively.
From 1996 to 1997, he worked as a Visiting Scientist at the Rochester Institute of Technology and Kodak Research, Rochester, NY, where he was involved in research in optical storage channels. From 1998 to 2000, he was with Lucent Technologies, Bell Laboratories (Bell-Labs). He was involved in research in iterative decoding and low-density parity-check codes, as well as development of codes and detectors implemented in Bell-Labs chips. Presently, he is a Professor in the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Arizona, Tucson. His research interests include coding theory, information theory, communication theory, and digital communications and recording.
Dr. Vasic is a Member of the Editorial Board for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS. He served as Technical Program Chair of the IEEE Communication Theory Workshop in 2003 and as Co-Organizer of the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science (DIMACS) Workshops on Optical/Magnetic Recording and Optical Transmission, and Theoretical Advances in Information Recording in 2004. He was Co-Organizer of the Los Alamos Workshop on Applications of Statistical Physics to Coding Theory in 2004, the Communication Theory Symposium within the IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC 2006), and IEEE Communication Theory Workshop (CTW 2007).
Michael W. Marcellin (S’81–M’87–SM’93–F’02) was born in Bishop, CA, on July 1, 1959. He graduated (summa cum laude) with the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from San Diego State University, CA, in 1983, where he was named the most outstanding student in the College of Engineering. He received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Electrical Engineering from Texas A&M University, College Station, in 1985 and 1987, respectively.
Since 1988, he has been with the University of Arizona, where he holds the title of Regents’ Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering, and of Optical Sciences. His research interests include digital communication and data storage systems, data compression, and signal processing. He has authored or coauthored more than two hundred publications in these areas. He is a major contributor to JPEG2000, the emerging second-generation standard for image compression. Throughout the standardization process, he chaired the JPEG2000 Verification Model Ad Hoc Group, which was responsible for the software implementation and documentation of the JPEG2000 algorithm. He is coauthor of the book, JPEG2000: Image Compression Fundamentals, Standards and Practice, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. This book is intended to serve as a graduate level textbook on image compression fundamentals, as well as the definitive reference on JPEG2000. He served as a consultant to Digital Cinema Initiatives (DCI), a consortium of Hollywood studios, on the development of the JPEG2000 profiles for digital cinema. He is currently the International Foundation for Telemetering Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Arizona.
Prof. Marcellin is a Fellow of the IEEE, and is a member of Tau Beta Pi, Eta Kappa Nu, and Phi Kappa Phi. He is a 1992 recipient of the National Science Foundation Young Investigator Award, and a corecipient of the 1993 IEEE Signal Processing Society Senior (Best Paper) Award. He has received teaching awards from NTU (1990, 2001), IEEE/Eta Kappa Nu student sections (1997), and the University of Arizona College of Engineering (2000). In 2003, he was named the San Diego State University Distinguished Engineering Alumnus. He is the recipient of the 2006 University of Arizona Technology Innovation Award. From 2001 to 2006, he was the Litton Industries John M. Leonis Professor of Engineering.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

