IEEE/CIC ICCC 2015 Symposium on Communication and Control Theory

Flooding and Node-wise RBP Sequentially Concatenated Decoder for LDPC Codes

Hua Zhou, Peng Li, Jiao Feng, and Bo Ni, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Meteorological Observation and Information Processing
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, {hzhou, peng.li, jiao.feng, bni}@nuist.edu.cn

Abstract—A new strategy of belief propagation (BP) decoder for LDPC codes is presented by sequentially concatenating the scheduling algorithms of flooding and node-wise residual belief propagation (NW RBP) without increasing the complexity of hardware implementation. Compared to NW RBP, the concatenated BP decoder significantly decreases the decoding latency caused by computing and sorting the residual of each message in the factor graph of an LDPC code. As the signalto-noise ratio (SNR) increases, the decoding performance of the concatenated BP decoder outperforms that of purely applying flooding or NW RBP, and the average number of decoding iterations required for the concatenated decoder decreases and tends to be approximately the same as the other two.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] have been extensively investigated [2]-[11] and widely used in wireless communications. LDPC codes can be described by the factor graph [3], in which the belief propagation (BP) [4] decoder exchanges messages (the a posteriori probability in loglikelihood ratio) between variable nodes and check nodes.
The most basic scheduling of BP for decoding LDPC codes is flooding [1]. In each iteration, it simultaneously updates all the messages propagating from variable nodes to check nodes (V2C) followed by simultaneously updating all the messages propagating from check nodes to variable nodes (C2V).
Compared to flooding decoding, non-simultaneous (sequential) scheduling can improve the decoding performance with faster convergence speed and lower error rate [5]-[10]. A wellknown example is the layered belief propagation (LBP) [5]. It sequentially updates each check node by propagating all the incoming (V2C) messages followed by propagating all the outgoing (C2V) messages.
To further increase the convergence speed, Casado et al. [6] applied the concept of residual to belief propagation and presented two scheduling algorithms named residual BP (RBP) and node-wise residual BP (NW-RBP). Both RBP and NW-RBP converge faster than LBP, but with increased complexity and decoding latency caused by the computation of the residual of each message. Since then, many variants of sequential scheduling were introduced such as the efficient dynamic scheduling for LBP (EDS-LBP) [7], the variable-tocheck residual belief propagation (VC-RBP) [8], the informed

variable-to-check residual belief propagation (IVC RBP) [9], and the oscillating variable nodes based residual belief propagation (OV-RBP) [10]. All of these methods focus on two aspects: (1) increasing the convergence speed (requiring fewer decoding iterations) and (2) improving the decoding performance with respect to NW-RBP when the maximum number of decoding iteration is small.
However, we find that when a large number of decoding iteration is allowed, these methods present approximately the same decoding performance as NW-RBP [7]-[10]. Moreover, compared with flooding, though sequential scheduling algorithms require fewer decoding iterations, in practical the computation of residual queue for nodes or messages result in larger decoding latency1. Then, how to utilise the benefit (improved decoding performance) of sequential BP scheduling over flooding without introducing too much decoding latency motivates our work.
In this paper, we propose a new strategy of BP decoder for LDPC codes by sequentially concatenating the decoding algorithms of flooding and NW RBP. In this case, the decoding performance of the concatenated BP decoder outperforms that of applying flooding or NW RBP only. Also, compared to NW RBP, the concatenated BP decoder significantly decreases the decoding latency caused by computing and sorting the residual of each message in the factor graph at the expense of a few more decoding iterations. As the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) increases, the difference in the average number of decoding iterations among the concatenated decoder, flooding, and NW RBP gets smaller and tends to be approximately the same in the high SNR region. Moreover, the concatenated decoder does not increase the complexity of the hardware implementation as it sequentially runs flooding and NW RBP based on the same circuits as the circuits are somehow determined by the factor graph.
The rest of the paper is organised as follow: Section II reviews the definition of LDPC codes. The BP decoder for LDPC codes and different scheduling algorithms are discussed in Section III. Section IV gives the details of the concatenated decoder and discusses the complexity and decoding latency issues. Section V concludes the paper.

This work was supported by NSFC grant 61401216, by SRF for ROCS, SEM, and by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.

1Note that, in this paper convergence speed refers to the number of decoding iterations. Fast convergence speed is not equivalent to low decoding latency.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 978-1-5090-0243-6/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE

IEEE/CIC ICCC 2015 Symposium on Communication and Control Theory

II. LDPC BLOCK CODES

Low-density parity-check block codes (LDPC-BCs) with

rate R = k/n can be described as the set of binary sequences

v = (v0, v1, v2, . . . , vn−1) that satisfy the parity-check constraint v · HT = 0. The parity-check matrix H is of size

(n − k) × n and is defined as

⎡

h0,0

H = ⎣⎢⎢⎢

h1,0 ...

⎤

h0,1

···

h0,n−1

h1,1 ...

··· ...

h1,n−1 ...

⎦⎥⎥⎥ ,

(1)

hn−k−1,0 hn−k−1,1 · · · hn−k−1,n−1

where hi,j ∈ {0, 1}, i = 0, 1, . . . , n − k − 1, and j = 0, 1, . . . , n − 1. In the factor graph (also know bipartite graph
or Tanner graph) representation, a variable node denoted by
Vj corresponds to the j-th column of (1), while a check node denoted by Ci corresponds to the i-th row of (1). If hi,j = 1, there is an edge connecting the nodes Ci and Vj.

III. DECODING OF LDPC CODES
In this section, we review the BP decoding algorithm of LDPC codes and discuss the scheduling of BP.

A. Belief Propagation
Given the factor graph of an LDPC-BC, BP decoding exchanges messages (the a posteriori probability in loglikelihood ratio (LLR)) between variable nodes and check nodes. The message passing in different directions can be described as

L(Vj → Ci) = L(Vj) +

L(Ci → Vj), (2)

Ci ∈N (Vj )\Ci

L(Ci → Vj) = 2 tanh−1(

tanh

(

1 2

L(Vj

→ Ci)))

Vj ∈N (Ci)\Vj

(3)

where

L(Vj )

=

log

p(yj p(yj

|vj |vj

=0) =1)

is

the

channel

information

for

variable node Vj when yj is received given the transmitted

bit vj, the absolute value of L(·) denotes the reliability of a

message, while the sign of L(·) shows the preference of the

message to be “0” or “1”, the notation “→” in L(·) describes

the direction of the message passing, and N (Vj)\Ci denotes all the neighbours of variable node Vj except for check node Ci. Two nodes of different types connected by an edge in the

factor graph are considered as neighbours.

B. Scheduling of Belief Propagation
Flooding decoding [1], also known as simultaneous scheduling, is the most basic one for decoding LDPC codes. In each iteration of flooding, it simultaneously updates all the V2C messages using (2) which is followed by simultaneously updating all the C2V messages using (3).
RBP and NW-RBP are known as a type of sequential or informed dynamic scheduling based on the maximum residual [?], [6]. In the cases of RBP and NW RBP, the residual is defined as the magnitude (absolute value) of the difference between the C2V messages in LLR before and after an update

and is denoted by R(Ci → Vj). To obtain the message with the maximum residual, the residual queue Q is calculated to store the residual of each message in descending order. Then, as described in [?], RBP dynamically propagates the C2V message with the largest residual. As a result, the decoding performance of RBP outperforms LBP when the maximum number of decoding iterations is small. However, it fails to maintain such an improvement as the allowed maximum number of iterations increases. As an upgraded version of RBP, NW-RBP [6] is a check-node-based updating scheduling. It dynamically updates the check node containing the C2V message with the maximum residual. Simulation results in [6] show that the decoding performance of NW-RBP is consistent better than that of LBP with an arbitrary number of decoding iterations.
In this paper, an iteration of RBP or NW-RBP is defined as that it has propagated the same number of messages as flooding does in one iteration. At the end of one iteration, the value of vj in the decoded sequence v= (v0, v1, v2, . . . , vn−1) is determined by the sign of L(Vj), i.e.,

L(Vj) = L(Vj) +

L(Ci → Vj).

(4)

Ci ∈N (Vj )

The iterative process stops if the decoded sequence v satisfies the stopping rule, i.e., v · H = 0 or the maximum number of iterations is reached.
Later after RBP and NW-RBP, many derivatives were introduced to further increase the convergence speed. However, when sufficient number of decoding iteration is allowed, these derivatives present approximately the same bit-errorrate (BER) or frame-error-rate (FER) curves as NW-RBP. Moreover, sequential scheduling results in larger decoding latency than flooding as it requires to compute and sort the updating sequence of the messages or nodes. In this paper, we focus on applying the good aspects (lower BER or FER curves than flooding) of NW RBP, in the meanwhile ensuring practical low decoding latency by sequentially concatenating flooding and NW RBP.

IV. SEQUENTIALLY CONCATENATED BP DECODER
In this section, we present the concatenated BP decoder by sequentially concatenating the decoding algorithms of flooding and NW RBP. A register is used to store the received code sequence v. The code sequence is firstly decoded by the scheduling of flooding. If the maximum number of decoding iterations is reached and v · H = 0, then the second scheduling (NW RBP) is launched to decode v. When the concatenated BP decoder finishes the decoding of a code sequence, the register is cleared and updated by the next frame of received code sequence. Note that the concatenated decoder does not increase the complexity of the hardware implementation as it sequentially runs flooding and NW RBP based on the same circuits (factor graph). Details of the concatenated BP decoder for LDPC codes is described in Algorithm 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE/CIC ICCC 2015 Symposium on Communication and Control Theory

Algorithm 1 Sequentially concatenated decoder for LDPC codes: flooding + NW RBP

1: Assume the maximum number of decoding iterations for

both flooding and NW RBP are the same

2: Initialize each message L(Ci → Vj) = 0

3: Initialize each message L(Vj → Ci) = L(Vj) 4: for every i ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , n − k − 1} do

5: for every Vj ∈ N (Ci) do

6:

Generate and propagate L(Ci → Vj)

7: end for

8: end for

9: for every j ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , n − 1} do

10: for every Ci ∈ N (Vj) do

11:

Generate and propagate L(Vj → Ci)

12: end for

13: end for

14: if stopping rules are not satisfied then

15: Go back to line 4

16: end if

% end of flooding

17: if v · H = 0 then

18: Initialize each message L(Ci → Vj) = 0 19: Initialize each message L(Vj → Ci) = L(Vj)

20: Compute the residuals and obtain the residual queue Q

21: Let R(Ci → Vj) be the first one in Q

22: for every Vj ∈ N (Ci) do

23:

Generate and propagate L(Ci → Vj)

24:

Set R(Ci → Vj) = 0 and re-order Q

25:

for every Cp ∈ N (Vj)\Ci do

26:

Generate and propagate L(Vj → Cp)

27:

for every Vq ∈ N (Cp)\Vj do

28:

Compute R(Cp → Vq) and re-order Q

29:

end for

30:

end for

31: end for

32: if stopping rules are not satisfied then

33:

Go back to line 21

34: end if

35: end if

% end of NW RBP

A. Simulations
To compare the decoding performance, the Tanner (21,3,5) LDPC-CC is used as an example [11]. Fig. 1 presents the BER and FER curves of flooding, NW RBP, and sequentially concatenated decoder of them. All of the simulations in this paper were carried out assuming binary phase-shift keyed (BPSK) modulation on an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. The maximum number of iterations for flooding, NW RBP, and each sub-decoder in the concatenated decoder are all set to be 100.
In Fig. 1, we observe that (1) both the concatenated decoder and the NW RBP show consistently better decoding performance than the flooding scheduling. Such improvement mainly benefits from the application of NW RBP; (2) In the low SNR region, the BER and FER curves of the concatenated decoder are approximately the same as those of NW RBP;

BER and FER

100

10−1

10−2

10−3

10−4

10−5

BER: Flooding

BER: NW RBP

10−6

BER: Flooding+NW RBP FER: Flooding

FER: NW RBP

FER: Flooding+NWRBP

10−7

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

Eb/N0(dB)

Fig. 1: Decoding the (21, 3, 5) Tanner code by flooding, NW RBP, and the sequentially concatenated decoder.

(3) As the SNR increases, the concatenated decoder becomes superior to NW RBP, and the improvement tends to increase. For example, we see that the concatenated decoder has approximately 0.05 dB in SNR gain over the NW RBP for a FER of 10−4, and the gain increases significantly for a FER of 10−5. It means that though NW RBP is general superior to flooding with respect to BER or FER, there are still some code sequences that the NW RBP scheduling fails to decode, but the flooding algorithm succeeds; (4) As shown in Fig. 1, the single NW RBP decoder suffers from an error floor. Based on the above observation, we find that sequentially concatenating flooding and NW RBP strengthens the decoding performance for the (21, 3, 5) Tanner code.
B. Average number of decoding iterations
The proposed concatenated BP decoder shows lower BER and FER curves than both flooding and NW RBP at the cost of extra decoding iterations. Fig. 2 shows the average number of iterations consumed by decoding a frame when different decoding strategies are applied to the (21, 3, 5) Tanner code. At the SNR of 2 dB, flooding, NW RBP, and the concatenated decoder cost approximately 22.39, 12.38, and 33.49 number of iterations. In this case, the concatenated decoder takes approximately 1.5 and 2.7 times as many iterations as flooding and NW RBP required, respectively. As the SNR increases, the variance in the average number of decoding iterations for these three strategies gets small, and the curves in Fig. 2 merges at the SNR of 4 dB. Hence, for the (21,3,5) Tanner code, the concatenated decoder performs almost the same as flooding and NW RBP with respect to the average number of decoding iterations in the high SNR region. Note that, though in Fig. 2 NW RBP requires fewer iterations than the concatenated decoder, the actual decoding latency of NW RBP is far larger than that of the concatenated decoder as the latter significantly reduces the number of access to NW RBP.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE/CIC ICCC 2015 Symposium on Communication and Control Theory

Average Number of Decoding Iteration Required

40 35 30 25 20 15 10
5 0
2

Flooding NW RBP Flooding+NW RBP

2.5

3

3.5

4

Eb/N0(dB)

Fig. 2: The average number of decoding iterations consumed when flooding, NW RBP, and flooding+NW RBP are applied
to decode the (21, 3, 5) Tanner code.

C. Decoding latency
The main benefit of the concatenated BP decoder is decreasing the decoding latency of NW RBP by reducing the frequency of applying NW RBP. In the concatenated decoder, the priority of flooding is superior to that of NW RBP. The scheduling of NW RBP is launched only if the flooding algorithm fails. In this case, the concatenated decoder is a balance between the flooding and NW RBP algorithms with respect to the decoding latency, in addition, it takes the advantage of NW RBP over flooding to improve the BER (FER) decoding performance.
To compare the decoding latency of a single NW RBP and the concatenated decoder, we parallel run them to the (21,3,5) Tanner code on the AWGN channel, and consider two issues: (1) the decreased number of access to the sub-decoder NW RBP in the concatenated case compared to the scenario of purely applying NW RBP and (2) the extra iterations required for the concatenated decoder.
In terms of the first issue, we use the enumerators A1 and A2 to count the number of access to the sub-decoders in the concatenated decoder. Since the sub-decoder NW RBP only works after the failure of the sub-decoder flooding, therefore A2/A1 actually gives the FER of the scenario that only flooding is applied. Since the two decoding scenarios run in parallel, hence A1 is equal to the number of the single NW RBP decoder launched. As the FER curve of flooding in Fig. 1 shows, compared to the single NW RBP decoder, the latency of the concatenated decoder caused by computing the residual have been reduced to 15.4%, 6.21%, 1.69%, and 0.418% for the SNR value of 2 dB, 2.5 dB, 3 dB, and 3.5 dB, respectively.
Regarding the average number of iterations in Fig. 2, the NW RBP scheduling looks faster than flooding and the concatenated decoder as it requires the fewest iterations of

decoding. However, NW RBP sequentially update the node in the factor graph which is not as efficient as simultaneously updating in flooding. In addition, the concatenated decoder is still dominated by the flooding sub-decoder. Therefore, though the NW RBP scheduling requires the fewest iterations, it essentially is of the lowest efficiency among these three decoding scenarios.
The judgement of the lantency is also verified when doing simulations. We find that NW RBP runs rather longer than the other two, and the concatenated decoder takes negligible extra time over flooding in the high SNR region.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a new strategy of BP decoder is introduced by sequentially concatenating the decoding algorithms of flooding and NW RBP. Compared to NW RBP, the concatenated BP decoder significantly decreases the decoding latency caused by computing and sorting the residual of each message in the factor graph at the expense of a few more decoding iterations. As the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) increases, the difference in the average number of decoding iterations among the concatenated decoder, flooding, and NW RBP gets smaller and tends to be approximately the same in the high SNR region. Also, the concatenated decoder does not increase the complexity of the hardware implementation as it sequentially runs flooding and NW RBP based on the same circuits (factor graph). This work can also be extended to concatenate other different types of BP scheduling [12].
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IET Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] H. Zhou, D. G. M. Mitchell, N. Goertz, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Robust rate-compatible punctured LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 11, pp. 4428-4439, Nov. 2013.
[3] F. Kschischang, B. J. R. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498-519, Mar. 2001.
[4] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearls belief propagation” algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140-152, Feb. 1998.
[5] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Processing Systems, pp. 107-112, Oct. 2004.
[6] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470-3479, Dec. 2010.
[7] G. J. Han and X. C. Liu, “An efficient dynamic schedule for layered belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 950952, Dec. 2009.
[8] J.-H. Kim, M.-Y. Nam, and H.-Y. Song, “Variable-to-check residual belief propagation for LDPC codes, IET Electron. Lett., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 117118, Jan. 2009.
[9] Y. Gong, X. C. Liu, W. C. Ye, and G. J. Han, “Effective informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes, IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 26832691, Oct. 2011.
[10] X. Liu, Y. Zhang, and R. Cui, “Variable-node-based dynamic scheduling strategy for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes, IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 147150, Feb. 2015.
[11] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966-2984, Dec. 2004.
[12] H. Zhou et al. “Scheduling concatenated BP decoder for LDPC codes,” under preparation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

