IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

9401704

A Soft Decodable Concatenated LDPC Code
Shaohua Yang1, Yang Han1, Xuebin Wu1, Roger Wood2, Fellow, IEEE, and Rick Galbraith3
1Avago Technologies, San Jose, CA 95131 USA 2HGST a Western Digital Company, San Jose, CA 95138 USA 3HGST a Western Digital Company, Rochester, MN 55901 USA

In this paper, a concatenated low-density-parity-check (LDPC) coding scheme that is suitable for iterative soft decoding is introduced for magnetic recording systems. The concatenated code is constructed as the product of two linear codes, in which a conventional 4 kB LDPC code is used as the inner code and a single-parity check code serves as the outer code. The outer code in this concatenated construction spans many sectors, possibly an entire track, and the code rate and the block size can be flexibly configured. While individual sectors can be read and decoded independently, the full decoding power of the concatenated code can only be achieved by reading all the data sectors that are involved in the outer code. The concatenated code produces significant signal-to-noise gain over the baseline 4 kB LDPC. The soft decoding for the single-parity check code is very simple compared with the 4 kB LDPC code, and the concatenated code has a similar decoding complexity as the baseline 4 kB LDPC code. When the individual sectors within the outer code are updated in place, a read–modify–write procedure must be employed.

Index Terms— Concatenated code, error correction code, iterative decoding, low-density-parity-check (LDPC), product code, turbo iteration.
I. INTRODUCTION

L OW-DENSITY-PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) codes [1], [2] with iterative soft decoding [3] have been adopted as the primary error correction coding technology in data storage devices, e.g., hard disk drives and solid state drives.
Data storage normally has a stringent requirement for low probability of decoding failure, since there is no retransmission mechanism available as for the most other data communication applications. Typically, the error floor [4] of an LDPC code solution in a storage application should be below 10−12 in word (sector) error rate.
Recently, the adoption of 4 kB sector format has allowed the LDPC code word size to increase from 4096 user bits to 32 768 user bits. This increase in code word size has significantly enabled more code optimization and improved error correction power and noise tolerance margin. Further increases in LDPC code block size beyond 4 kB are expected to deliver further signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) gain but would be very expensive in terms of silicon area and circuit power consumption.
In this paper, a concatenated product coding [5] scheme that is suitable for iterative soft decoding is introduced. This concatenated coding construction involves two component codes, one of which is a normal 4 kB LDPC code. The code concatenation produces a significant SNR gain benefit over the 4 kB LDPC code alone. At the same time, its decoding complexity is similar to the 4 kB LDPC component code.
The outer code in this concatenated construction spans many sectors, possibly an entire or even multiple tracks. While individual sectors can be read and decoded independently by the inner LDPC code, the full decoding power of the concatenated code can only be achieved by read-
Manuscript received March 20, 2015; revised May 16, 2015; accepted May 26, 2015. Date of publication June 3, 2015; date of current version October 22, 2015. Corresponding author: S. Yang (e-mail: shaohua.yang@ gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2015.2441055

Fig. 1. Concatenated product code with a 4 kB LDPC C1 as the column code and a single-parity check code C2 as the row code.
ing all the data sectors that are involved in the code concatenation.
When sectors within the code concatenation are updated in place, a read–modify–write procedure must be employed to update and rewrite the concatenated code parity data. This requirement brings read–write operation overhead compared with normal 4 kB LDPC code. For the newly developed shingled magnetic recording programs, updated sectors are always rewritten in a new allocated location in the disk, and thus, there is no such read–modify–write performance impact due to the code concatenation.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we introduce the concatenated coding scheme and the encoding procedure. In Section III, the decoding method and flow are discussed. In Section IV, we discuss the tradeoff between the coding performance and decoding latency. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in Section V.
II. CONCATENATED LDPC CODING SCHEME
As shown in Fig. 1, the concatenated coding solution combines a 4 kB LDPC (inner) code C1 (N1, K1) and a single-parity check (outer) code C2 (N2, K2), and forms a product block code. The data are written column by column into media.

0018-9464 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:14:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9401704

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

The user data are normally cyclic redundancy check protected, scrambled, and modulated with certain run-lengthlimited (RLL) constraints. As shown in Fig. 1, each user data sector is first encoded by the 4 kB LDPC column code C1 to form user data sectors. The user data sectors are further encoded by a systematic encoder of the single-parity check row code C2.
Since both the column LDPC code C1 and the row singleparity check code C2 are linear codes, the row parity bits produced by a C2 encoder, which forms the parity sector, would also be a valid code word of the column LDPC code C1 [5].
In summary, all the user data sectors and the parity sectors are written into the recording media, and they are all the code words of the LDPC code C1. User data sectors and parity sectors together satisfy the row single-parity code C2.
We note that the RLL code constraints are generally nonlinear. Since the nonlinear constraints cannot be kept through the row single-parity check code C2 encoding, the parity sector would not satisfy the same modulation constraints as the user data sectors. The parity sector data resemble statistics as of a random sequence. As a result, the parity data sector generally has slightly worse performance than that of the user data sectors, and the performance gap depends on the strength of the modulation code being used in the user data sectors.
The simple single-parity check code C2 can have a very flexible block size and code rate. The concatenated product code can virtually support any number of user data sectors, e.g., a full track or multiple tracks depending on the applications.

III. ITERATIVE DECODING

As shown in Fig. 2, during a read operation, each sector is first decoded by the column LDPC code C1, involving turbo iterations between a soft input and soft output data detector, e.g., soft-output-Viterbi-algorithm [6], and maximum a posteriori [7]–[9] and a soft LDPC decoder [3].
Although the concatenated product code could contain many data sectors, the iterative message passing decoding can be simplified to only involve the data sectors that failed the column LDPC C1 decoding. If any sector fails the column LDPC C1 decoding, its equalized samples need to be buffered for later product code decoding involving both the column and row code constraints. On the other hand, if any sector converges during the column LDPC code C1 decoding, its decoded data are only used to compute the row code syndrome for later product/row code decoding.
For the j th row of the single-parity check code C2, we note the following parity check constraint equation:

i

i

i

ai, j =

ai, j +

ai, j = 0

(1)

all

failed

converged

sj

i

ai, j = s j

(2)

failed

Fig. 2. Product code soft turbo decoding is applied when there are failed code words from normal 4 kB LDPC C1 decoding.

where ai, j is the bit involved in the j th single-parity check constraint equation and the i th column/sector. Summations in (1) and (2) are modulo 2 based. As in (2), we separate the bits from failed and converged sectors of the column LDPC C1 decoding. The right-hand side of (2) is the partial syndrome accumulated from the bits in the converged sectors. Equation (2) defines a single-parity check coset code, of which the coded bits are from the failed sectors and the syndrome computed from the converged sectors.
Joint C1 and C2 product code iterative decoding is applied if any sector fails column LDPC code decoding. A failed sector is redecoded with the help of the soft information generated from the row coset code C2 as defined in (2). Following the min-sum decoding principle [3], the row code soft information Lk, j (C2) for the bit at the j th row in the kth failed sector can be computed as follows:

i

|Lk, j (C2)| =

min

(|Li, j (C1)|)

(3)

failed sector excluding k

i

sgn(Lk, j (C2)) = (2s j − 1)

sgn(Li, j (C1))

failed sector excluding k

(4)

where Li, j (C1) is for the total log-likelihood ratio (LLR) value from the column code C1 first turbo iteration

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:14:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: SOFT DECODABLE CONCATENATED LDPC CODE

9401704

detector output. For a single-parity check code, only one iteration is necessary to formulate the soft information Lk, j (C2) as shown in (3) and (4).
It has been observed that the overall decoding performance is insensitive to whether Li, j (C1) is taken from the first turbo iteration detector output or from the last turbo iteration decoder output. Although the last turbo iteration decoder output generally has higher reliability, taking Li, j (C1) from the first turbo iteration detector output can reduce the product code decoding latency.
The reliability of the row code soft information also depends on the number of failed sectors besides SNR. When there are few failed sectors, the row code soft information is generally more reliable than when there are many failed sectors.
The row code soft information Lk, j (C2), as computed in (3) and (4), is then applied as an additional prior soft information to the data detector during the LDPC code C1 turbo decoding for the kth failed sector. This additional row code soft information helps reduce the bit error rate (BER) at the data detector output and thus improves the chance of convergence for the column LDPC C1 code decoding.
We note that the single-parity check soft decoding mainly involves the partial syndrome accumulation as in (2) and generating the soft information by a minimization circuit as in (3) and (4). The main overhead of the single-parity check decoding is thus the memory used for storing the computed partial syndrome and minimum LLR values, which is much smaller than a typical high throughput 4 kB LDPC decoder.

Fig. 3. Proposed product code achieves a significant SNR gain over the conventional 4 kB LDPC code (T50/T = 1).

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The simulations use a user bit density of T50/T = 1 with 80% media noise and 20% stationary electronic noise. The signal waveform model varies the SNR from sector to sector based on statistics characterized from drive waveform captures. For SNR definition, the signal power is defined as the squared value of the saturation amplitude of the isolated step response.
We use a 4 kB LDPC code C1 with rate 0.8782 as a base error correction code. The code matrix is optimized by removing short cycles and small trapping set structures. The matrix also contains a quasi-cyclic structure for easy hardware implementation. For the row code, we use a single-parity check code C2 over a data track of 400 sectors, where 399 of them are user data sectors, and one parity sector is inserted by the row code C2 encoding. The concatenated product code rate 0.8760 is 0.25% lower than that of the 4 kB LDPC code rate due to the row code C2 redundancy. We adjust the channel bit density (T50/T/R) according to the overall code rate. Thus, the user bit density T50/T = 1 is kept the same in the simulations for the two code options.
The performance of the concatenated product code is benchmarked against the 4 kB LDPC code C1. The 4 kB LDPC code decoding includes up to 12 turbo iterations between the detector and the decoder. In each turbo iteration, one detector run is followed by seven LDPC decoder local iterations.
In each round of concatenated product code turbo decoding, the row code soft information is computed using the partial syndrome from the converged sectors as in (2) and the first

Fig. 4. Single-parity check (row) code soft information reduces failed sector detector raw BER (detector BER without prior soft LLR from LDPC).
turbo iteration detector soft outputs of failed sectors according to (3) and (4). The row code soft information is then used as an additional detector prior soft input during the failed sector 4 kB LDPC turbo decoding. The concatenated product code turbo iteration can be repeated if the number of failed sectors reduces. With fewer failed sectors, more reliable row code soft information can be generated. We allow up to three concatenated product code turbo iterations.
Assuming sufficient memory to buffer all failed sectors in each track, and sufficient decoding time and resource to redecode all the failed sectors, the concatenated product code achieves ∼0.7 dB SNR gain over the 4 kB LDPC code, as shown in Fig. 3.
In practical use, the codec memory size and decoding latency are both limited. We consider the case where the equalized samples of up to six failed sectors can be buffered and redecoded. If there are more than six failed sectors in a track, the codec memory does not have enough memory for equalized samples of all failed sectors. For those sectors

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:14:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9401704

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 5. LDPC decoding converges with few average turbo iterations with the help of row code soft information.

Fig. 4 shows the data detector BER improvement due to the help of the additional soft information generated by the row single-parity check code. By applying this additional prior soft information to the data detector, the detector BER reduces significantly and the column 4 kB LDPC decoder has a much better chance of recovering the data. As shown in Fig. 5, for sectors that failed the normal LDPC decoding with 12 turbo iterations, the LDPC decoding converges very fast and requires few turbo iterations during the concatenated product code decoding with the help of the row code soft information.
Fig. 6 shows the histograms of number of failed sectors for column 4 kB LDPC decoding and for the concatenated product code decoding. The number of failed sectors reduces as SNR increases. The concatenated product coding reduces or cleans up most of the failed sectors and significantly reduces the track error rate.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we developed a practical error correction coding solution that produces a significant coding gain over 4 kB LDPC codes. The proposed scheme concatenates a 4 kB LDPC code and a single-parity check code, and forms a larger concatenated product code. The concatenated product code decoding complexity is dominated by the 4 kB LDPC decoding. The additional soft information generated by the single-parity check component code boosts the LDPC code error correction capability and therefore the concatenated product code achieves a significant SNR gain over the LDPC code alone.

Fig. 6. Number of failed sectors before and after concatenated decoding.
that we cannot save into the code memory, we buffer from them an additional set of partial minimum LLR amplitude and corresponding sign using (3) and (4). The concatenated product decoding can be applied to the failed sectors whose equalized samples are saved in the codec memory. Further, to limit the decoding latency, only one round of concatenated product turbo decoding is allowed. As shown in Fig. 3, the concatenated product code achieves ∼0.3 dB SNR gain at a sector failure rate of 1e−5. At very poor (<11.95 dB) SNR conditions, the 4 kB LDPC performance curve crosses the concatenated coding scheme for the following two reasons. First, there are too many failed sectors in some data tracks and they overwhelm the memory size used for the concatenated product code decoding. Second, the channel bit density used for the 4 kB LDPC code is lower than that of the concatenated product code due to the slight code rate difference.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[3] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic´, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[4] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[5] P. Elias, “Error-free coding,” IRE Trans. Prof. Group Inf. Theory, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 29–37, Sep. 1954.
[6] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. Exhibit., Dallas, TX, USA, Nov. 1989, pp. 1680–1686.
[7] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate (Corresp.),” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[8] P. Robertson, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “A comparison of optimal and sub-optimal MAP decoding algorithms operating in the log domain,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, Seattle, WA, USA, Jun. 1995, pp. 1009–1013.
[9] M. P. C. Fossorier, F. Burkert, S. Lin, and J. Hagenauer, “On the equivalence between SOVA and max-log-MAP decodings,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 137–139, May 1998.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:14:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

