3950

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 63, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Dynamic Weighted Bit-Flipping Decoding Algorithms for LDPC Codes
Tofar C.-Y. Chang, Student Member, IEEE, and Yu T. Su, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Bit-flipping (BF) decoding of low-density paritycheck codes is of low complexity but gives inferior performance in general. To improve performance and provide new BF decoder options for complexity-performance tradeoffs, we propose new designs for the flipping function (FF), the flipped bit selection (FBS) rule and the checksum weight updating schedule. The new FF adjusts the checksum weights in every iteration while our FBS rules take more information into account. These two modifications represent efforts to track more closely the evolutions of both check and variable nodes’ reliabilities. Two selective update schedules are proposed to offer more performance and complexity tradeoffs. The combinations of the new FBS rule and known FFs result in new BF decoders with improved performance and a modest complexity increase. On the other hand, combining the new FF and FBS rule gives a new decoder with performance comparable to that of the normalized min-sum algorithm while if we use a much simpler FBS rule instead, the decoder suffers little performance loss with reduced complexity. We also present a simple decision-theoretical argument to justify the new checksum weight formula and a time-expanded factor graph model to explain the proposed selective weight-updating schedules.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, belief propagation, bit-flipping decoding, flipped bit selection.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been shown to asymptotically give near-capacity performance when the sum-product algorithm (SPA) is used for decoding [1]. Gallager proposed two alternatives that use only hard-decision bits [2]. These so-called bit-flipping (BF) algorithms flip one or a group of bits based on the values of the flipping functions (FFs) computed in each iteration. The FF associated with a variable node (VN) is a reliability metric of the corresponding bit decision and depends on the binary-valued checksums of the VN’s connected check nodes (CNs). Although BF algorithms are much simpler than the SPA, their performance is far from optimal. To reduce the performance gap, many variants of Gallager’s BF algorithms have been proposed. Most of them
Manuscript received December 25, 2014; revised May 20, 2015 and August 3, 2015; accepted August 12, 2015. Date of publication August 18, 2015; date of current version November 13, 2015. This work was supported in part by Taiwan’s Ministry of Science and Technology under Grant NSC100-2111-E-009-066-MY3. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was D. Declercq.
T. C.-Y. Chang is with the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan (e-mail: tofar.cm96g@ nctu.edu.tw).
Y. T. Su is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan (e-mail: ytsu@nctu. edu.tw).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2015.2469780

tried to improve the VN’s reliability metric (the FF) and/or the method of selecting the flipped bits, achieving different degrees of bit error rate (BER) and convergence rate performance enhancements at the cost of higher complexity.
The class of weighted bit-flipping (WBF) algorithms [3]–[7] assign proper weights to the binary checksums. Each weight can be regarded as a reliability metric on the corresponding checksum and is a function of the associated soft received channel values. Another approach called gradient descent bitflipping (GDBF) algorithm was proposed by Wadayama et al. [9]. Instead of using a weighted checksum based FF, the GDBF algorithm derives its FF by computing the gradient of a nonlinear objective function which is equivalent to the log-likelihood function of the bit decisions with checksum constraints. It was shown that the GDBF algorithm outperforms most known WBF algorithms when the VN degree is small. Sundararajan et al. [17] modified this FF by introducing a weighting on syndrome and a zero-mean Gaussian perturbation term. The resulting noisy GDBF (NGDBF) algorithm improves the performance of the GDBF algorithm which is further enhanced by adding a redecoding process [18].
For the WBF algorithms, the weights are decided by the soft received channel values and remain unchanged throughout the decoding process. Since the weights reflect the decoder’s belief on the checksums which, in turn, depend on those of the associated VNs’ FF and bit decisions, the associated checksum weights should be updated accordingly. In [19], a reliabilitybased schedule is used in the initial decoding iteration to forward only reliable VN and CN’s messages. Nguyen and Vasic´ [20] employed an extra bit to adaptively represent the reliabilities of VN and CN messages and developed a class of two-bit BF algorithms along with algorithm(s)-selection procedures. In this paper, we present dynamic weighted BF (DWBF) algorithms that assign dynamic checksum weights which are updated according to a nonlinear function of the associated VNs’ FF values. As we shall show, the nonlinear function has the effects of quarantining unreliable checksums (which is similar to the method used in the first decoding iteration of [19]) while dynamically adjusts the more reliable checksums’ weights. A simple decision theoretical interpretation is given to explain the effect of the nonlinear action and justify the threshold selection. We also suggest two selective weight-updating schedules which offer additional performancecomplexity trade-offs. A time-expanded factor graph model is used to illustrate the weight-updating schedules.
The single-bit BF algorithms flip only the least reliable bit thus result in slow convergence rates. For this reason, many a multiple-flipped-bit selection rule was suggested [9]–[18].

0090-6778 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licensSeede uhsttep:li/m/witwedwt.oie:eYeo.onrsge/ipUubnlivic. aDtioownnsl_osatadneddaorndsJ/punuebl2ic4a,2ti0o2n6s/aritg1h6ts:1/i7n:d0e8xU.hTtCmlfrofomr mIEoErEe Xinpfloorrme.atRioens.trictions apply.

CHANG AND SU: DYNAMIC WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC CODES

3951

By simultaneously flipping the selected bits, a BF decoder noise with two-sided power spectral density of N0/2 W/Hz. Let can offer rapid convergence but, sometimes, at the expense of y = (y0, y1, · · · , yN−1) be the sequence of soft channel values performance loss. A bit selection rule may consist of simple obtained at the receiver’s coherent matched filter output. The

threshold comparisons or include a number of steps involving sequence z = (z0, z1, · · · , zN−1), where zi ∈ {0, 1}, is obtained different metrics. It is usually designed assuming a specific FF by taking hard-decision on each components of y. Let uˆ =

is used and may not be suitable when a different FF or metric is involved. Moreover, the FF value may not provide sufficient information for making a tentative bit decision, we propose a new flipped bit selection (FBS) rule that takes into account both the FF value and other information from related CNs.

(uˆ0, uˆ1, · · · , uˆN−1) be the tentative decoded binary sequence at
the end of a BF decoding iteration. We compute the syndrome (checksum) vector s= (s0, s1, · · · , sM−1) by s = uˆ · HT (mod 2). We further denote the nth VN by vn, the set of indices of its connecting CNs by M(n), and the set of indices of the VNs

FF, checksum weight computing, weight-updating schedules, checked by the mth CN cm by N (m). The indices of CNs and FBS rule are major constituent parts of a DWBF decoder. in M(n) are determined by the nonzero elements of the nth

Our proposals on these parts offer a variety of new design column of H whereas those in N (m) are by the mth row of H.

options and tradeoffs. The efficiencies of using the proposed A generic BF decoding algorithm can be described by

schemes jointly or separately with existing designs are evalu- Algorithm 1 below which involves four important parameters:

ated by examining the corresponding numerical error rate and l, the iteration number; lmax, the maximum iteration number; convergence behaviors. We show that our single-bit DWBF En, the FF; and B, the index set of the flipped bits, or the flipped algorithm provides significant performance improvement over bit (FB) set for short. This algorithm performs two basic tasks:

the existing single-bit GDBF and WBF algorithms. Our FBS 1) computing En’s (Step 2) and 2) generating the FB set B rule works very well with different FFs and outperforms known (Step 3). Most earlier works focused on improving either 1) or 2).

FBS rules. Moreover, the selective weight-updating schedules

suffer little performance degradation while offer significant complexity reduction when the CN and VN degrees are small. Algorithm 1 A General BF Decoding Algorithm

Note that since the checksum weights are crucial parameters of a DWBF decoder’s FF and their updates depend in turn on the FF values computed at the previous iteration, we henceforth

Initialization Set l = 0 and uˆ = z. Step 1 ∀m ∈ OM {0, 1, . . . , M − 1}, compute

mean both the FF and the associated weight computing formula

whenever FF is mentioned. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we define the basic system parameters and give a brief overview

sm =

uˆnHmn(mod 2).

(1)

n∈N (m)

of various BF decoding algorithms, their FFs and FBS rules. In Section III, we introduce a new FF and its checksum weight-

If s = 0 or l = lmax, stop decoding and output uˆ ; otherwise, l ← l + 1.

updating formula. A simple decision theoretical justification Step 2 ∀n ∈ ON {0, 1, . . . , N − 1}, compute the FF En. is given. We consider single-bit BF decoders and present two Step 3 Use the FFs obtained in Step 2 to update the flipped

weight-updating schedules as well as their graphic models in

bit set B.

Section IV. The performance of the our single-bit DWBF algo- Step 4 Flip uˆn for all n ∈ B and go to Step 1. rithm and some known single-bit BF algorithms are compared

in the same section. We develop a new multi-bit FBS rule and present the error rate and convergence behaviors of various multi-bit BF decoder structures based on the new FBS rule in Section V. These decoders’ complexities are analyzed in details for evaluating various performance and complexity tradeoffs. Finally, conclusion remarks are drawn in Section VI.

An FF, sometimes referred to as cost function or inversion function [9], is used as a reliability metric on a VN’s tentative decision. Given the FF values and the FBS rule, we select a set of VNs and flip the corresponding tentative decisions (bits). Choosing the most unreliable bits or the bits whose FF values exceed a threshold are the two most popular rules. For

the former rule, usually only one bit is flipped if the soft-

II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS

valued channel information is employed in the FF, resulting in slow convergence. By contrast, the latter rule often gives faster

A. Notations and the Basic Algorithm

convergence rate but possibly at the cost of performance loss.

We denote by (N, K)(dv, dc) a regular binary LDPC code C with VN degree dv and CN degree dc, i.e., C is the null space of an M × N parity check matrix H = [Hmn] which has dv 1’s
in each column and dc 1’s in each row. Let u be a codeword of C and assume that the BPSK modulation is used so that a

We briefly review the known FFs and FBS rules in the following paragraphs.
B. Flipping Functions of BF Decoding Algorithms

codeword u = (u0, u1, · · · , uN−1), ui ∈ {0, 1}, is mapped into a bipolar sequence x = (x0, x1, · · · , xN−1) = (1 − 2u0, 1 − 2u1, · · · , 1 − 2uN−1) for transmission. The equivalent baseband transmission channel is a binary-input Gaussian-output
channel characterized by additive zero-mean white Gaussian

Gallager proposed that a simple sum of binary checksums be used as the FF [2]

En = −

(1 − 2sm).

(2)

m∈M(n)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3952

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 63, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

(2) implies that the FF value is inversely proportional to the bit decision reliability as it is an increasing function of the number of nonzero checksums (i.e., unsatisfied check nodes, UCNs).
By taking into account soft-valued channel information and assigning checksum weights, later modifications of Gallager’s FF can be described by the following general formula

reliability metric, a positive φ(uˆn, yn) helps increasing −En and preventing the uˆn from being flipped. In contrast, φ(uˆn, yn) is always positive (|yn|) in MWBF algorithms, which means that the MWBF algorithms tend to trust uˆn in spite of other
evidence.

En = −α1 · φ(uˆn, yn) −

wmn(1 − 2sm), (3)

m∈M(n)

where α1 > 0, φ(uˆn, yn) is a reliability metric involving channel value and/or bit decision, and, to be consistent with (2), wmn ≥ 0.
For the WBF algorithm [4], φ(uˆn, yn) = 0 and wmn is

wmn

=

n

min
∈N (m)

|yn

|,

(4)

The modified WBF (MWBF) algorithm [5] has φ(uˆn, yn) = |yn| while the improved MWBF (IMWBF) algorithm [6] uses the same φ(uˆn, yn) but replaces the checksum weight by

C. Flipped Bit Selection Rules
For the algorithms mentioned in the Section II-B, only the bit(s) related to the VN having the largest FF value En is (are) flipped in each iteration, i.e., the FB set is

B = {n|n = arg max Ei}.

(10)

i

As mentioned before, |B| = 1 and the corresponding convergence is often very slow if En has a soft-valued information term.
Flipping several bits in each iteration simultaneously can improve the convergence speed. The simplest FBS rule for multi-bit BF decoding uses the FB set

wmn

=

n

min
∈N (m)\n

|yn

|

(5)

B = {n|En ≥ },

(11)

where the threshold can be a constant or be adaptive. The

for the message passed from cm to vn should exclude that originated from vn. For the reliability ratio based WBF (RRWBF) algorithm [7], φ(uˆn, yn) = 0 and

wmn = 1/wmn =

β

maxn

|yn|
∈N (m)

|yn

|

−1
,

(6)

optimal adaptive threshold was derived by Gallager [2], assuming that no cycle appears in the code graph. Since practical finite-length LDPC codes usually have cycles and the optimal thresholds can only be found through time-consuming simulations, two ad-hoc methods which automatically adjust were suggested in [12] and [13]. In the adaptive threshold BF (ATBF) algorithm [12], the initial is found by simulation and subse-

where β is the normalizing factor to ensure that quent thresholds are a monotonically non-increasing function

n∈N (m) wmn = 1.

of the decoding iterations. The adaptive MWBF (AMWBF)

The GDBF algorithm of Wadayama et al. [9] applies the algorithm [13] adjusts the threshold by

gradient descent method to minimize

N−1

M−1

E(uˆ ) = − yn(1 − 2uˆn) − (1 − 2sm)

n=0

m=0

= E∗ − |E∗| 1 − wH(s) ,

(12)

M

(7) where E∗ = maxn En and wH(s) is the Hamming weight of the

syndrome vector s.

with respect to (1 − 2uˆn) and obtains the FF

Sometimes, a tentative decoded vector uˆ may reappear sev-

En = −yn(1 − 2uˆn) −

(1 − 2sm),

eral times during the decoding process and form a decoding (8) loop. This may be caused, for example, by the event that an

m∈M(n)

even number of bits associated with a CN are flipped, leading

which is equivalent to assigning α1 = 1, φ(uˆn, yn) = yn(1 − 2uˆn), and wmn = 1 in (3). Recently, Sundararajan et al. [17] introduced the so-called noisyGDBF (NGDBF) algorithm based on

to an unchanged checksum and then oscillating bit decisions. To eliminate the occurrence of loops, the AMWBF algorithm includes the loop detection scheme of [8] in its FBS rule so that if a loop is detected, the most reliable bit in B is removed. The

En = −yn(1 − 2uˆn) − w

(1 − 2sm) + qn,

m∈M(n)

parallel weighted BF (PWBF) algorithm [10] tries to reduce (9) the loop occurrence probability by having every UCN (sm =
1) send a constant flip signal (FS) to its least reliable linked

where qn’s in (9) are i.i.d. zero-mean Gaussian random perturbation with a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) dependent variance

VN (based on the FF of the IMWBF algorithm) and flips the bits in

and w is a constant syndrome weight. For the above two FFs, (8) and (9), φ(uˆn, yn) = yn(1 − 2uˆn)

B = {n|Fn ≥ FS},

(13)

is equal to |yn| when the bit decision uˆn is the same as the where FS is a constant optimized by simulations,

yn-based hard decision, zn; otherwise, its value is the same

as −|yn|. This is consistent with the intuition that uˆn = zn

Fn =

qmnsm,

(14)

implies that uˆn is likely to be correct and since −En is a VN

m∈M(n)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG AND SU: DYNAMIC WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC CODES

3953

and qmn is given by

⎧

⎨1, n = arg max En

qmn = ⎩0,

n ∈N (m)
otherwise.

(15)

Since the above remedy can only eliminate loops with a certain

probability, the improved PWBF (IPWBF) algorithm employs

the loop detection scheme of [8] and when a loop is detected, it removes the bit(s) receiving the smallest Fn from B. This algorithm also adds a bootstrapping step and a delay-handling

procedure to further improve the bit selection accuracy but

achieves limited improvement for the codes with high column

degrees such as Euclidean geometry (EG) LDPC codes.

A hybrid GDBF (HGDBF) algorithm was proposed in [9]. In

this algorithm, single- and multi-bit BF decoding is performed

alternatively and an escape process is used for preventing the decoding process from being trapped in local minima/loops. Two extensions of the HGDBF algorithm were considered in

Fig. 1. Conditional FF distributions for the IMWBF algorithm in decoding MacKay (816, 272)(4, 6) LDPC code (816.1A4.845 [21]), SNR (Eb /N0) = 4 dB.

[14] and [15] which require less complexity at the expense of inferior performance. A multi-bit GDBF algorithm with a probabilistic FBS rule was also suggested in [16] for harddecision decoding. With the FF (9) and FBS rule of [15], the

of the associated VNs’ decisions, the corresponding checksum weights should be updated according to the current FF values. A reasonable candidate checksum weight is therefore given by

multi-bit NGDBF (M-NGDBF) algorithm [17] achieves the same BER performance as that of the HGDBF decoder with

rm(l)n

=

n

min
∈N (m)\n

−En(l),

(16)

much less decoding iterations. However, [18] found that new trapping set conditions may exist in the M-NGDBF decoder but can be eliminated by re-decoding with a different perturbation sequence.

where En(l) is the FF value of vn in the lth iteration. However, (16) may result in negative weights which is inconsistent with (2) and (3); both are increasing functions of the nonzero checksum number. To have proper positive checksum weights based

on En, we consider the likelihood ratio

III. CHECKSUM RELIABILITY AND DYNAMIC WEIGHTS A. BF Decoding and Checksum Weights

(En)

=

f f

(En|H0) (En|H1)

,

(17)

In line with the belief propagation (BP) based SPA, En is similar to the total log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of vn and −wmn(1 − 2sm) in (3) is analogous to the belief sent to vn by cm. Unlike SPA, however, for (4)–(6), the latter remains unchanged unless an uˆn, n ∈ N (m) has been flipped, which leads to just a sign change of the belief. The general FF format,
(3), includes two major terms that represent the decoder’s
confidence on a VN’s tentative decision based respectively on

where H0 and H1 denote the hypotheses that uˆn = un and uˆn = un, respectively. The conditional probability density function (pdf), f (En|Hi), is the pdf of those En’s associated with a correct or incorrect tentative bit decision at a given iteration. It is to be interpreted as a conditional pdf averaged over all VNs. The basic decision theory tells us that the optimal decision rule is given by

its channel value (or the correlation of the channel value and tentative decision) and the reliabilities of the related checksums. Since the channel values remain fixed, the checksums should be given adjusted weights at least in the later iterations when the reliabilities of checksums change.
Although the flipping operation changes the reliability metric of uˆn and the related checksums, all the FFs used in known BF decoders use static wmn thereby can neither reflect the dynamic of VNs’ message passing nor offer self-adjustment capability in accurately updating bit reliability information. We present dynamic weight generation method in this section.
B. Flipping Function and Decision Reliability

(En)

H0
≷
H1

π1(C01 π0(C10

− C11) − C00)

(18)

where πi = Pr (Hi is true) and Cij is the “cost” for accepting Hi while Hj is true. Unlike the conventional Bayesian minimizing error probability setting, both the costs and the a priori probabilities are difficult to assess. For a BF decoder, a tentative decision, except for the initial iteration, is determined by the previous decision and the flipping decision. On the other hand, both conditional pdfs in (17) depend on the definition of En and the FBS rule. They vary from one iteration to another. Although the dependence between uˆn and En is implicit as other parameters are also intertwined and the conditional pdfs are thus difficult if not impossible to derive analytically, they can

The review on BF algorithms in Section II indicates clearly be estimated numerically by simulations. Assuming that the that the FF value is a proper explicit or implicit reliability all-zero codeword is transmitted in every frame, i.e., uˆn = 0 is metric of a VN’s decision. As a checksum in turn is a function the correct decision, we depict in Fig. 1 the evolutions of both

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3954

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 63, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

simulated conditional pdfs with all related factors considered

and averaged—for the IMWBF algorithm with En being the

updated FF values at, say the lth iteration, after the tentative

decision at the (l − 1)th iteration uˆn was made. This figure

indicates that En does reflect the correctness of the corre-

sponding tentative decision in that a smaller (negative) FF

value is more likely to be associated with a correct deci-

sion. The probability of correct inference on uˆn based on

En depends on the separation (distance) between two pdfs.

The figure, however, demonstrates that the separation does not

improve as the decoding iteration increases. We propose a new

FF in the next subsection and show in Section IV that this new

FF is capable of overcoming the shortcoming of the IMWBF

algorithm.

(a)

C. A New Flipping Function

Although πi and Cij are difficult to assess but the optimal

Bayesian test, (18), can be simplified to a threshold test based

on En. Given a suitable threshold η, Fig. 1 indicates that if −En > η, the decoder is more likely to have made a correct bit decision uˆn whose reliability is proportional to −En; otherwise,

the decision is probably incorrect.

The foregoing discussion and the aim to have a weight-

updating rule reflecting a more accurate relation among bit

decision, FF, and checksums, as elaborated in more details

below, suggest that we modify (16) as

(b)

rm(l)n =

n

min
∈N (m)\n

−En(l)

= min
n ∈N (m)\n

−En(l) ,

(19)

Fig. 2. The TEFGs for two different selective weight-updating schedules. (a) Selective weight-updating schedule A. (b) Selective weight-updating schedule B.

where

(x) = x − η, x ≥ η

0,

x < η.

in a local minimum. The above discourse confirms that (20) (20) does fulfill the goal that the weight updating should have FFs,
checksums, and bit decisions join a cohesive effort in improving

The clipping operator, (x), besides ensuring only positive weights are used, can be interpreted as the decision for a CN
to send no message to other linked VNs when the associated
FF values fail to exceed the threshold, which bears the flavor
of “stop-and-go” algorithms that pass a CN-to-VN message
only if it is deemed reliable. Note that a checksum sm is determined by dc bit decisions, and if sm = 0 and there is only one unreliable decision uˆn (−En < η) among VNs in N (m), the checksum is likely to be valid and the decision is in fact correct. Hence cm should modify En to increase (En) but not pass the message −rm(l)n (1 − 2sm) to other connected (reliable) VNs (n ∈ N (m) \ n). In doing so, En has a local (among N (m)) maximum FF decrease and the probability of reversing the bit decision is reduced. On the other hand, if sm = 1, uˆn is likely to be only local incorrect decision, the above rule will result in a local maximum FF increase and
thus a higher probability of being flipped. When more than one −En, n ∈ N (m) are clipped, no message is sent from cm as the checksum itself is unreliable. The temporary suspension of some message propagation induced by (x) also has the

the performance of a BF decoder. The FF defined by (3) using the recursive weight-updating
rule (19) tends to make the check reliability part of the FF, − m∈M(n) rmn(1 − 2sm), starts to grow exponentially after most of the correctable bits were flipped and the number of UCNs decreases to just a few. It is conceivable that these reliability estimates should be given different weight with more remote estimates having less weights. This can be done by having the check reliabilities multiplied by a forgetting factor, 0 < α2 < 1, as can be found in many recursive adaptive filters [22]. We are unable to determine the optimal clipping threshold η since a closed-form expressions for f (En|Hi) are practically unobtainable for reasons mentioned before. Some simulation efforts, however, indicate that η is close to 0 for several BF decoders, independent of SNR and the iteration of interest. With the above ideas in mind, we consider a new FF based on (19) and (20) using η = 0:

En(l) = −yn(1 − 2uˆn) − α2

rm(l−n 1)(1 − 2sm), (21)

m∈M(n)

desired effect of containing the damage an incorrect message where 0 < α2 < 1 is a positive damping (forgetting) constant may have done and preventing the decoder from being trapped to be optimized by numerical experiments.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG AND SU: DYNAMIC WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC CODES
TABLE I COMPLEXITY OF TWO WEIGHT-UPDATING SCHEDULES

3955

IV. NEW SINGLE-BIT BF DECODING ALGORITHMS
We define a (checksum) weight-updating schedule as a rule that selects a subset G of OM, which represents the set of CN indices, and updates only those rm(l)n, m ∈ G. Such a rule determines the message-passing paths in the decoding process (see Fig. 2) hence is called a schedule. When the updated CN index set G = OM, we call the schedule as the full weightupdating schedule (FWUS). Alternate schedules with G = OM provide trade-offs between computational complexity and error-rate performance. In this section, we introduce a class of single-bit dynamic weighted BF decoding methods based on (19), (21), and different weight-updating schedules.
A. Single-Bit DWBF Decoding and Weight-Updating Schedules
Combining (19) and (21) with the consideration of the choice of a weight-updating schedule, we obtain the class of DWBF algorithms or, for simplicity, Algorithm 2.

assigned to the checksums. We call the FWUS-based single-bit decoding algorithm as the S-DWBF-F algorithm for simplicity. To lessen the computing load of this algorithm, we reduce the size of G by prioritizing the CNs and update only those with a higher priority.
We first notice that, to ensure that the newest updated information be broadcasted, the weights of the flipped bits’ linked checksums should have the highest updating priority. Furthermore, for those VNs whose FF values change from one side of the clipping threshold η of (20) to the other side and undergo a reliability inversion, their related checksum weights should be renewed as well. With these considerations, the selective weight-updating schedule A (SWUS-A) updates only those checksums (CNs) whose indices lie in
GA(l) {m|m ∈ M(n), n ∈ B}
∪ m|m ∈ M(n), −En(l)−η −En(l−1)−η < 0, n ∈ ON . (22)

Algorithm 2 A Class of DWBF Decoding Algorithms

Initialization by (5) for all

Set l n∈

= 0, uˆ N (m),

= m

z, and ∈ OM.

G= Set

EBn(l=) =∅.−Inynit(i1al−ize2ruˆm(nl)n)

for all n ∈ ON.

Step 1 Compute sm for all m ∈ OM. If s = 0 or l = lmax, stop

decoding and output uˆ ; otherwise, l ← l + 1.

Step 2 ∀n ∈ ON, compute En(l) by (21). Step 3 Update B and ∀n ∈ B, flip uˆn and En(l) ← −En(l). Step 4 Update G. Then, update rm(l)n by (19) ∀n ∈ N (m), m ∈
G and set rm(l)n ← rm(l−n 1) ∀n ∈ N (m), m ∈ OM \ G and

go to Step 1.

The time-expanded factor graph (TEFG) shown in Fig. 2(a) is
a simple example illustrating how SWUS-A behaves, assuming that the only VN which generates GA(l) = {1, 2} is v4. We denote this VN by ●, the CNs visited (selected) by the schedule by ,
and the VNs which receive new CN messages by .
When SWUS-A is used in the S-DWBF algorithm, the
resulting algorithm is called the S-DWBF-A algorithm which at the lth iteration updates the CN index set G with GA(l).
Since only a few VNs received updated messages from the
selected CNs, some En’s are likely to remain constant for many iterations (e.g., v3) or even during the whole decoding process. To spread the updated messages to more VNs, we expand the updated CN set to include both GA(l) and

Algorithm 2 describes a general class of DWBF algorithms. For hard-decision decoding, −yn(1 − 2uˆn) in (21) is replaced by −(1 − 2zn)(1 − 2uˆn) and rm(l)n is initialized as 1. The FB set B in Step 3 is determined by the FBS rule used, it can be (10), Algorithm 3 or 4 presented in Section V. When (10) is used, Algorithm 2 is a single-bit DWBF algorithm and becomes a multi-bit DWBF algorithm if Algorithm 3 or 4 is used as the FBS rule. In this section, we consider only the FBS rule (10), which implies that only one bit is flipped (i.e., |B| = 1) at each iteration unless it is used for hard-decision decoding. Hence

GB(l) m|m ∈ M(n), n ∈ UA(l)

(23)

where UA(l) n|n ∈ N (m), m ∈ GA(l−1) and call this updating
schedule as the selective weight-updating schedule B (SWUS-B).
In other words, the updated messages received by the VNs connected to the CNs in GA(l) will also be forwarded to their connecting CNs in the following iteration, i.e., G ← GA(l) ∪ GB(l). Fig. 2(b) illustrates the expanded updating range by indicating the extra visited CNs (those whose indices blong to GB(l)) with the symbol . Similarly, when this weight-updating schedule

the resulting decoder is referred to as the single-bit dynamic is used, we call the resulting algorithm as the S-DWBF-B

weighted BF (S-DWBF) decoder.

algorithm.

As most FF values will change because of the recursive Table I lists the average number of visited CNs (to update

nature of (19) and (21) we may need to perform the FWUS checksum weights) and VNs (to compute FF) per iteration

in Step 4. This is one of the prices we have to pay when the dy- per flipped bit or FF inversion for the different weight updat-

namic weights instead of the conventional constant weights are ing schedules. As expected, the SWUS-A/B need much less

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3956

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 63, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 3. BER performance of several single-bit BF (S-BF) decoders as a function of SNR (Eb/N0) for Code 1.

structure. In contrast, the second code, the (1023, 781) (32, 32) rate-0.763 EG-LDPC code, is a high-rate, high-degree code
whose performance has been evaluated in several WBF-related works [6], [8], [10], and [11]. For convenience, we refer to the
above low- and high-rate codes as Code 1 and 2, respectively.
It has been shown by simulations [3] that BF decoding is very effective in decoding (high-rate, high-degree) EG-LDPC
codes. It would be interesting to examine the BF algorithms in
decoding low-rate, low-degree codes. The performance of the normalized min-sum (NMS) algorithm [23] is also given for
reference purpose. Fig. 3 shows the BER performance of Code 1 with lmax =
150. For the S-DWBF-A, S-DWBF-B, and S-DWBF-F decoders, the numerically-optimized α2 values are 0.68, 0.44, and 0.35 whereas for the IMWBF decoder, we found α1 = 0.2. Our extensive simulation concluded that the optimal reliability threshold η in (20) is close to 0, whence η = 0 is used for all DWBF algorithms. At BER = 10−5, we observe that the S-DWBF-B and S-DWBF-F algorithms have 2.5 dB and 2.6 dB gains against the RRWBF algorithm; the simple S-DWBF-A
algorithm achieves a much smaller 0.7 dB gain as it limit its
weight update to a very limited range. The performance of Code 2 with lmax = 50 is shown in Fig. 4. Unlike Code 1, Code 2 has a much higher dv, and the check reliability part of the GDBF algorithm’s FF, − m∈M(n)(1 − 2sm), thus dominates the FF value after a few iterations and its performance is similar to that
of Gallager’s BF algorithm, especially when SNR is high. To improve its performance we insert a damping factor α3 so that (8) becomes

En = −yn(1 − 2uˆn) − α3

(1 − 2sm). (24)

m∈M(n)

Fig. 4. BER performance of several S-BF decoder as a function of SNR for Code 2.
computational complexity and this reduction is more impressive when dc and dv are small. Note that for the expanded schedule SWUS-B, the VNs in UA(l) may be linked to a common set of CNs and GA(l) ∩ GB(l) can be nonempty if the code graph has short cycles. As a result, the practical average numbers of the visited CNs and VNs for SWUS-B is much less than those shown in Table I which assumes a cycle-free code. However, it can be shown that when the code girth is larger than 8 (10), the actual average visited CN (VN) number is equal to that of a cyclefree code.

This modification multiplies the second summation of (8) by α3, which is analogous to the Lagrange multiplier in (the checksum) constrained optimization and when α3 = 1, (24) degenerates to (8). The optimal α3 for (24) is close to 1/17 for Code 2. Referring to (3), the IMWBF algorithm uses α1 = 1.8 and the S-DWBF-A (B) decoder uses α2 = 0.33 (0.12) in (21). Due to the high VN/CN degrees of Code 2, almost all CNs are
updated by S-DWBF-B algorithm after two or three iterations,
yielding performance similar to that of the S-DWBF-F decoder.
The same figure shows that the S-DWBF-A decoder provides
about 0.25 dB performance gain with respect to the IMWBF decoder at BER = 10−5 and the S-DWBF-B algorithm offers additional 0.1 dB gain.
Table II presents the average number of CNs visited (in the as-
sociated ETFGs) by different schedules for Code 1 and Code 2
at selected iterations. Although the S-DWBF-F algorithm has
the best BER performance among the single-bit algorithms,

it requires higher computational complexity. By contrast, the

B. Performance of S-DWBF Decoding Algorithms

S-DWBF-A/B algorithms provide trade-offs between complexity and performance. Furthermore, for both selective weight-

We apply the known single-bit BF algorithms and S-DWBF- updating schedules, the number of visited CNs decreases when

A/B/F algorithms to decode two regular LDPC codes and pre- one proceeds with more iterations as the numbers of flipped bits

sent their performance in Figs. 3 and 4. The first code, MacKay’s and reliability-inverted VNs decreases. We plot the FF value

(816, 272)(4, 6) rate-0.333 LDPC code (816.1A4.845 [21]), is distributions for the S-DWBF-F algorithm in Fig. 5. In contrast

a typical low-rate, low-degree Gallager code with no special to Fig. 1, where the separation between the two conditional

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG AND SU: DYNAMIC WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC CODES

3957

TABLE II AVERAGE NUMBER OF VISITED CNS IN S-DWBF ALGORITHMS

Algorithm 3 Flipped Bit Selection Rule 1 (M1-FBS)
Step 1 Find B = {n|En ≥ }. If B = ∅, stop; otherwise, proceed to Step 2.
Step 2 Find B = {n|n = arg maxi Ei}

Recall that the PWBF algorithm uses the FF of the IMWBF algorithm as the VN reliability metric with the FB set (13) determined by the FS count Fn of (14). That is, a CN sends a flip signal to its most unreliable linked VN only and the VNs which receive sufficient number of reliability warnings (flip signals) shall be flipped. It turns out that, with this extra filtering of VN-to-CN messages (En’s) and selective CN-to-VN flip signal passing, the PWBF algorithm is able to outperform the IMWBF decoder in both convergence rate and error rate [10]. This performance gain motivates us to ponder if a more elaborated flipping decision strategy that uses more information can bring about further performance improvement for the BF decoders using either the proposed FF (21) or other FFs discussed in Section II.

A. Flipping Intensity

Fig. 5. Conditional FF distributions for the S-DWBF-F algorithm in decoding Code 1, SNR = 4 dB.

Let Un

m∈M(n) sm, μm maxn∈N (m) Un, λm

arg maxn∈N (m) En, and M (n) = {m|m ∈ M(n), λm = n}.

With these notations, we define the flipping intensity (FI) of

(received by) vn as

F˜ n =

θ0smδ(Uλm − μm) + θ1sm 1 − δ(Uλm − μm) ,

m∈M (n)

(25)

pdfs exhibits little variation, our DWBF algorithm is able to pull f (En|H0) away from f (En|H1) as the decoding process evolves. Since the reliability of a decoder’s decisions based on En depends on the separation (distance) between the two pdfs, the improved separation is certainly welcome. As mentioned before, we use η = 0 in (20) for all S-DWBF algorithms. Although the optimal clipping threshold is unknown. Fig. 5 does convince us that 0 is a valid and convenient choice and the FF with the proposed dynamic checksum weighting does give a much better VN reliability reference.
V. NEW FLIPPED-BIT SELECTION METHODS AND MULTI-BIT BF DECODING ALGORITHMS
Multi-bit BF decoding algorithms were developed to accelerate the convergence performance. Most of these algorithms use the simple threshold comparison FBS rule (11) discussed in Section II [9], [12], [13], [15]–[18]. Even if the threshold has been optimized by numerical experiments, we find that it is necessary to add the option B = {n|n = arg maxi Ei} in case B = ∅ whose occurrence probability during a decoding process is nonzero. In fact, simulation results indicate that, depending

where θ0 > θ1 ≥ 0 and δ(x) is the Kronecker delta function. For simplicity, both θ0 and θ1 are confined to be integers so that FI is integer-valued. The above definition implicitly implies that F˜ n = 0 if M (n) = ∅ and only UCNs have a say in deciding FI. It also implies that a VN has a nonzero FI only if it has the largest FF value among N (m) and if it is connected to the largest number of UCNs among its peers in N (m), the associated FI should be even higher (θ0 > θ1). In both cases, a UCN cm will send a non-negative message to the VN with the highest FF value in the set N (m). However, if cm is a passed CN (PCN) (sm = 0) and dc is small, it often implies that the tentative decisions of its linked VNs are all correct.
Hence if the flipped bits are to be selected by checking whether the associated FI is greater than a threshold, vλm should have a smaller probability of being chosen. This can be done by having the PCN send a drag message θ2(sm − 1). But if there is doubt that cm is connected to even incorrect bit decisions, the PCN has better not sending such a message. We decide that this is likely to be the case if Uλm = μm for this inequality means that at least one VN in N (m) has more connected UCNs than vλm. With UCNs and PCNs contributing opposite signals, we modify (25) for all n, 0 ≤ n < N as

on SNR and the decoding/schedule algorithms used it can be higher than 0.2 for Code 1. When this option is included in FB decision, the resulting FBS rule is called Algorithm 3 or the M1-FBS rule.

F˜ n =

[θ2(sm − 1) + θ0sm] δ(Uλm − μm)

m∈M (n)

+ θ1sm 1 − δ(Uλm − μm) , (26)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3958

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 63, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

where θ2 ≤ θ0 is a nonnegative integer. On the other hand, when dc is large, it is less likely that sm = 0 automatically implies correct decisions on all its linked bits and we thus
stick to (25), having no PCN to contribute to FI. Although the thresholds θi’s can be any nonnegative real numbers, to simplify implementation, we let θi’s be nonnegative integers such that the FI is integer-valued.

TABLE III SIMULATION PARAMETER SETTINGS

B. Flipped-Bit Selection Rule

A simple FI-based FBS rule is to flip the bits in the FB set B = {n|F˜ n ≥ FI}. But the optimal threshold FI is not
easy to determine especially for a code with low VN degree. (M2) FBS rule is adopted. The second field contains the abbre-

A smaller threshold may cause incorrect flipping decisions
while a large threshold tends to slow down the convergence or
even cause decoding failure as no VN meets the the flipping
requirement. To overcome this dilemma, we select a relative high FI threshold and use the FB set B = {n|F˜ n ≥ FI} if it is nonempty. Otherwise, B = {n|Un = maxi∈T Ui} where T {n|F˜ n = maxj F˜ j}. We summarize below the new FBS rule as Algorithm 4 which, for convenience of reference, is called the
M2-FBS rule.

viation of the known or proposed algorithm such as IMWBF, GDBF or DWBF whose FF is used. The third field tells whether a selective (A or B) or the full (F) weight-updating schedule is used. Since only the DWBF algorithms need to update checksum weights, the third field is omitted for non-DWBF based decoders. Hence, M1-DWBF-A represents the decoder that uses the M1-FBS rule, the DWBF FF, and SWUS-A, and M2-IMWBF(-GDBF) denotes the decoder that uses the M2-FBS rule and the IMWBF (GDBF) algorithm’s FF. For known constant weight algorithms without FBS modification

Algorithm 4 Flipped Bit Selection Rule 2 (M2-FBS)

and SWUS, we keep conventional abbreviations like AMWBF, IPWBF, and HGDBF only.

Step 1 For n = 0, 1, . . . , N − 1, compute F˜ n by (25) or (26). Step 2 Find B = {n|F˜ n ≥ FI}. If B = ∅, stop; otherwise,
proceed to Step 3. Step 3 Update T and find B = {n|Un = max Ui}.
i∈T

2) Parameter Values Used: For the decoders based on M2-FBS rule, we use the FI weights θ0 = 3, θ1 = 2, and θ2 = 1. Other major parameter values for different multi-bit BF algorithms are listed in Table III. The remaining parameters needed for the IPWBF algorithm follow those suggested in [11], and those associated with the escaping process in the

Note this FBS rule is independent of the FF and can be used in conjunction with different FFs no matter whether the checksum weights are constant or not.
Loop-detection/breaking procedures can be included in our FBS algorithm if necessary. The loop detection scheme used [8] is an appropriate choice. When a loop is detected, we generate a disturbance on the tentative decoded sequence by switching to the FB set

HGDBF algorithm are also optimized. For simplicity, the FF clipping threshold η in (20) and the threshold used in (11) in M1-DWBF-A/B algorithms are set to zero.
Note that the parameters associated with a decoder are correlated, i.e., if the optimal value of a parameter is dependent on other parameters’ values used, although the correlation may not be very high. Hence, we try to jointly optimize these parameters to minimize the converged error rate. Furthermore, simulation results indicate that the optimal parameter values are insensitive

B = {n|Un = max Ui}.
i

to SNR. (27) 3) BER and FER Performance: Fig. 6 shows the BER per-
formance of different multi-bit BF algorithms for Code 1 when

C. Numerical Results

lmax = 50. The effectiveness of the M2-FBS rule can also be verified by comparing the required Eb/N0 for BER = 10−5: the

Different combinations of the FBS rule, the FF, and the M2-IMWBF decoder outperforms the IPWBF decoder by ap-

weight-updating schedule, used lead to different decoding al- proximately 1.7 dB and the M2-GDBF algorithm has a 0.4 dB

gorithms. The error-rate performance and decoding speed of gain over the HGDBF algorithm. The DWBF algorithms yields

various decoders are presented in this subsection.

better BER performance even with the simple M1 rule and,

1) Abbreviations: For convenience of reference, we adopt a when the M2 rule is used, its performance becomes closer

systematic labeling scheme similar to that used in Section IV-B (0.4 dB) to that provided by the NMS algorithm. The conver-

to describe a decoding method. We denote a decoder by groups gence behaviors of these algorithms are shown in Figs. 7 and 8.

of capital letters separated by hyphens, specifying respectively The results show that the M2 rule gives better BER performance

the FBS rule, the FF and the weight-updating schedule used and, for both the DWBF and M2-GDBF algorithms, the conver-

with the 3-field form, FBS rule-FF-weight updating schedule. gence rate is improved as well.

That is, the first filed is used to indicate if single (S) or multiple Note that in Figs. 6–8, loop-detecting/breaking schemes are

(M) bits are to be flipped in an iteration and, for the latter case, activated for all but the M2-DWBF-B algorithm. In general,

if the simple FF based (M1) or the more complicated FI-based loops are much less likely to occur in a DWBF decoder than in a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG AND SU: DYNAMIC WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC CODES

3959

Fig. 6. BER performance of various multi-bit BF (M-BF) decoding algo- Fig. 9. BER performance of various M-BF decoding algorithms as a function

rithms as a function of SNR for Code 1.

of SNR for Code 2.

Fig. 7. Frame error rate (FER) convergence performance of various M-BF decoding algorithms using conventional or M2-FBS rule; Code 1, SNR = 5 dB.

Fig. 10. FER convergence performance of several M-BF decoding algorithms; Code 2, SNR = 3.4 dB.

static CN weight decoder. When the FWUS or SWUS-B is used

to decode Code 2, our simulations detect no loop for both codes

whence there is no need for a loop breaker. This is because the

time-varying checksum weights of the DWBF algorithm and

wider message magnitude propagation ranges of the FWUS or

SWUS-B schedule have made the BF decision related variables, En, Un, μm, and F˜ n, to have much larger dynamic ranges; see

also Figs. 1 and 5.

The BER (with lmax = 20) and frame error rate (FER) con-

vergence performance of various multi-bit BF decoders for

Code 2 are respectively presented in Figs. 9 and 10. By compar-

ing the two sets of BER curves, M2-GDBF versus HGDBF and

M2-IMWBF versus AMWBF, we verify the effectiveness of the

new FBS (M2) rule. Although the M2-IMWBF algorithm yields

the same converged BER as that of the IPWBF decoder for this

code, it gives better FER performance in the first few iterations.

We further notice that the M2-DWBF-A (B) decoder is superior

Fig. 8. FER convergence performance of multi-bit DWBF (M-DWBF) decod- to the M1-DWBF-A (B) decoder in both BER performance and

ing algorithms; Code 1, SNR = 3.25 dB.

decoding speed. The former yields performance very close to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3960

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 63, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

that of the NMS algorithm while the latter suffers only about and PCNs while the latter involves only UCNs, all M CNs have

0.1 dB performance degradation against the NMS decoder at BER = 10−5. Figs. 9 and 10 also show that the performance gap between the M1/M2-DWBF-A and M1/M2-DWBF-B decoders is smaller than that for Code 1. This is due to the high VN/CN degrees of Code 2: the high VN degree increases the probability that a CN is visited by the SWUS-A while the high CN degree helps spreading the updated weights to more VNs.
We want to remark that a) only the AMWBF and HGDBF decoders need a loop-breaker in decoding Code 2 since for the other decoders, loops are rarely detected and b) although the M1-FBS rule is simpler, our simulations indicate that the M2-FBS rule can significantly reduce the probability of decoding loops when it is used in conjunction with the DWBF, GDBF, or IMWBF algorithms. This is particular useful when using conventional FFs to decode low-degree codes.
D. Complexity Analysis

to perform all the above operations when decoding Code 1 in contrast to M1(l) CNs for Code 2. Moreover, N integer comparisons are required in Step 2 for deciding the FB set. The average complexity of Step 3 is approximately equal to P(Sl3)N integer comparisons, where P(Sl3) is the probability that Step 3 is activated at the lth iteration.
2) Weight Update Complexity: Updating the weights asso-
ciated with CN cm in the M1-DWBF-A/B decoders require 2dc − 3 real comparisons for finding the indices associated with the smallest and second smallest −En’s, n ∈ N (m). For M2-DWBF-A/B decoders, however, most of λm’s have been found in the FBS step, hence only the second smallest ones
remain to be found for computing new weights. A more detailed
analysis is given in the next two paragraphs.
We first consider a low CN degree code such as Code 1. After CNs compute λm’s and VNs compute their FIs via (26), the flipped bits are decided and flipped. The M2-DWBF-A/B
algorithms then invert the associated FF values (Step 3 of

Besides the syndrome computing, which is the same for all Algorithm 2) and update the CN weights (Step 4 of Algorithm 2).

algorithms, the computational complexity of a BF decoding algorithm consists mainly of three parts: i) FF update, ii) flipped bits selection, and iii) weight/message update. Once new CN messages, −wmn(1 − 2sm) in (3) or −rmn(1 − 2sm) in (21), are available, the FF update is just adding all returned CN messages and −α1|yn| or −yn(1 − 2uˆn). There is little difference among the BF decoders in FF computing. The only exception is that

As only a small portion of the visited CNs are connected to the flipped bits, most visited CNs require only dc − 2 real comparisons for finding the second smallest −En. For a visited CN that links to flipped bits, we only need to compare the connected flipped bits’ En’s with the original smallest −En to find a new minimum −En since only the flipped bits’ En’s are changed between the bit flipping and weight updating. As a

used by GDBF algorithms, both (8) and (24) require integer additions only. iii) is needed for DWBF algorithms but not other BF algorithms which require only a sign change. Therefore, in the next three subsections, we consider ii) first, followed by the discussion of iii), the extra complexity requirement for DWBF algorithms, and finally compare the combined computational complexity of ii) and iii). The additional complexity such as that associated with a loop-breaking scheme, is addressed at the end of this section as well. Since most algorithms, except those using the M2-FBS rule, which need additional integer operations and memory for storing the FIs and UCN numbers, require approximately the same storage space, we discuss only the computational complexity.
1) FBS Complexity: The HGDBF decoder needs only N real comparisons in (11) in selecting the flipped bits. For the IPWBF decoder, dc − 1 real comparisons are required to find the most unreliable connected VN per UCN and a total of M1(l) integer additions and N integer comparisons are needed to compute the FS and decide the FB set (13), where M1(l) is the average UCN number in the lth iteration.

result, for a visited CN linking to t flipped bits, only additional
t real comparisons are required for updating the smallest −En before finding the second smallest −En. If we denote by MW(l)U and NF(lB) the average numbers of visited CNs and flipped bits at the lth iteration, respectively, we need, on the average, at most MW(l)U(dc − 2) + NF(lB) dv real comparisons for updating weights, where NF(lB) dv accounts for the sum of all additional (t) comparisons.
Decoding a high CN degree code requires 2dc − 3 real
comparisons for updating the weight of a visited PCN and
dc − 2 + t for an UCN, as the FI formula (25) involves only
UCNs. Denote the average numbers of visited PCNs and UCNs at the lth iteration by MW(l)U,0 and MW(l)U,1. We observe from simulations that almost all UCNs are visited (i.e., MW(l)U,1 = M1(l)). Hence, M2-DWBF-A/B decoders require an average of MW(l)U,0(2dc − 3) and at most M1(l)(dc − 2) + NF(lB) dv real comparisons per iteration for computing new CN weights of visited
PCNs and UCNs, respectively. For both cases we ignore the
complexity of the threshold comparison in (19) since η = 0.

For the M1-FBS rule, the complexity of Step 1 is ignored
since we use = 0 and a threshold comparison needs a signbit check only. The average complexity of Step 2 is P(Sl2)(N − 1) real comparisons, where P(Sl2) is the probability that Step 2 is activated in the lth iteration. For the M2-FBS rule (Algorithm 4),
Step 1 needs dc − 1 real and dc − 1 integer comparisons per CN in finding λm and checking if vλm has the most connected UCNs. Each CN has to send an integer-valued message, θ0, θ1, or −θ2, to one of its connected VNs, implying an integer
addition in (26) or (25). Since the former involves both UCNs

3) Complexity Summary: Table IV presents the simulated average numbers of M1(l), MW(l)U, MW(l)U,0, NF(lB) , P(Sl2), and PS(l3) at selected iterations for the IPWBF, M2-IMWBF/GDBF,
M1-DWBF-A/B, and M2-DWBF-A/B algorithms. Since the
simulation results indicate that when decoding Code 2 with the
M1-DWBF-A/B decoders, Step 2 of the M1-FBS rule is never activated, we list the P(Sl2) values for Code 1 only. Similarly, Step 3 of the M2-FBS rule is needed only if the M2-IMWBF algorithm is used to decode Code 1, we thus specify the P(Sl3) values for this case only.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG AND SU: DYNAMIC WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC CODES
TABLE IV AVERAGE UCN AND VISITED CN NUMBERS AT SOME SELECTED ITERATIONS

3961

TABLE V COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITIES FOR VARIOUS DECODING ALGORITHMS (C1: CODE 1, C2: CODE 2)
TABLE VI AVERAGED OVERALL PER FRAME COMPLEXITIES (×103) FOR ACHIEVING FER = 10−3 (REAL:
REAL COMPARISON OR ADDITION; INT: INTEGER COMPARISON OR ADDITION)

Considering both the FBS rules and weight updating, we and real operations and the maximum iteration number (lmax) summarize the computational complexity which includes real/ needed.

integer additions and comparisons per iteration for various BF Tables IV–VI and Figs. 6–10 provide useful information

and the NMS algorithms in Table V. As computing the total for studying tradeoffs between performance, complexity, and

LLRs in the NMS algorithm requires the same efforts as that of convergence rate when combining different FBS rules, FFs and

computing FF values in BF decoders, only the efforts needed weight-updating schedules. In particular, Table VI shows that

for computing the CN-to-VN and VN-to-CN messages are when decoding Code 1, both M1-DWBF-A and M1-DWBF-B

listed in the table.
Table VI presents the simulated average complexity of vari-
ous DWBF and the NMS algorithms for decoding a frame with a target FER of 10−3 at different SNRs. As an integer (or real)

algorithms need less computational complexity to achieve FER = 10−3 than that needed by the NMS algorithm in higher SNR (say, >3.625 dB) region. The M2-DWBF-A algorithm
also needs less real operations in comparison with the NMS al-

comparison requires about the same computational complexity gorithm. For decoding Code 2, the M1-DWBF-A, M1-DWBF-

as that of an integer (or real) addition (hardware implementation B, and M2-DWBF-A algorithms need less total (real + integer) of comparison can even be simpler than addition). Both are operations to achieve the FER requirement while the required

thus counted equally. We show in this table the average integer iteration numbers are also comparable to that needed for the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3962

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 63, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

NMS algorithm in higher SNR region. Furthermore, based on

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Tables IV, V, and Fig. 6, we conclude that the M2-IMWBF and M2-GDBF algorithms require far less complexity than that of the IPWBF algorithm in decoding Code 1.
Among the the decoding algorithms compared in Table V, the IPWBF algorithm uses a simpler FBS operation but it has

The authors would like to thank the editor, anonymous reviewers, and Jian-Jia Weng for their valuable comments and suggestions to improve the quality and readability of the paper.

to perform a delay-handling process in every iteration plus an

initial bootstrapping step. These two extra operations need off-

REFERENCES

line computing effort in searching for the corresponding optimal parameter values. They also require additional storage and computational complexity. Although the HGDBF algorithm does not have to sort the FF values, three real thresholds, one for the multi-bit flipping mode and two for the escape (loopbreaking) process are required in its FBS rule, resulting extra off-line search and random variable generations. Other off-line efforts include the searches for α1 (M2-IMWBF), α2 (M1- and M2-DWBF-A/B), and FI (∈ [−dvθ2, dvθ0]). As mentioned before, they must be jointly optimized. For the M2-GDBF algorithm, only the optimal FI has to be found.
Our loop-breaking scheme (27) is simpler than those used by other decoding algorithm and more effective than the methods used by the IPWBF and AMWBF algorithms which remove the bit(s) having maximum Fn or En from B; when B = ∅, the decoding process will be forced to terminate after the removal. Instead of reducing |B|, the escape process (27) and that used by the HGDBF algorithm perturb the tentative decoded sequence to break a loop. The latter, however, has to generate Gaussian random variables.
VI. CONCLUSION
We divide a typical BF LDPC code decoding algorithm into three major components, namely 1) VN decision reliability (FF) computing and the associated CN reliability (checksum weight) update formula; 2) the FBS rule; and 3) the checksum weight-updating schedule. These three components determine the performance and complexity of a BF decoder. We develop novel FF and FBS rules to improve the BF decoding performance. On the other hand, the checksum weight update operation is a complexity concern for the DWBF decoders, we propose selective weight-updating schedules to reduce the implementation complexity with little performance loss.
Different combinations of FF, checksum weight-updating method and schedule, FBS rule, result in different decoder structures. We simulate the error rate and convergence performance of various decoders, and the resulting numerical behaviors confirm the effectiveness of our new design proposals. We show that the combinations of the new multi-bit FBS rules with known BF algorithms achieve significant performance gain especially for a high-rate code. Detailed complexity analysis on various decoder structures is provided for complexity and performance tradeoff studies. We find that, compared with the NMS algorithm, the combination of the new FBS rules with our DWBF algorithms require less complexity in achieving a target FER if SNR is sufficiently high. We also find that the convergence rates are comparable when decoding a highrate code.

[1] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009, ch. 10, pp. 430–481.
[4] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[5] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[6] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Shi, and Y. Chen, “An improvement on the modified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814–816, Sep. 2005.
[7] F. Guo and L. Hanzo, “Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 40, no. 21, pp. 1356–1358, Oct. 2004.
[8] T. Ngatched, F. Takawira, and M. Bossert, “A modified bit-flipping decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Glasgow, U.K., 2007, pp. 653–658.
[9] T. Wadayama et al., “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1610–1614, Jun. 2010.
[10] X. Wu, C. Zhao, and X. You, “Parallel weighted bit-flipping decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 671–673, Aug. 2007.
[11] G. Li and G. Feng, “Improved parallel weighted bit-flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IET Commun., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 91–99, Jun. 2009.
[12] J. Cho and W. Sung, “Adaptive threshold technique for bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 857–859, Sep. 2010.
[13] T. Chen, “Adaptive-weighted multibit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes based on ordered statistics,” IET Commun., vol. 7, no. 14, pp. 1517–1521, Jul. 2013.
[14] R. Haga and S. Usami, “Multi-bit flip type gradient descent bit flipping decoding using no thresholds,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl., Honolulu, HI, USA, 2012, pp. 6–10.
[15] M. Ismail et al., “Low latency low power bit flipping algorithms for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Symp. Pers., Indoor, Mobile Radio Commun., Instanbul, Turkey, 2010, pp. 278–282.
[16] O. A. Rasheed et al., “Fault-tolerant probabilistic gradient-descent bit flipping decoder,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 1487–1490, Sep. 2014.
[17] G. Sundararajan, C. Winstead, and E. Boutillon, “Noisy gradient descent bit-flip decoding for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 3385–3400, Oct. 2014.
[18] T. Tithi, C. Winstead, and G. Sundararajan, “Decoding LDPC codes via noisy gradient descent bit-flipping with re-decoding,” 2015, to be published. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.08913
[19] A. Nouh and A. H. Banihashemi, “Reliability-based schedule for bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2038–2040, Oct. 2004.
[20] D. V. Nguyen and B. Vasic´, “Two-bit bit flipping algorithms for LDPC codes and collective error correction” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1153–1163, Apr. 2014.
[21] D. J. C. MacKay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
[22] S. Haykin, “Recursive least-square adaptive filters,” in Adaptive Filter Theory, 4th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2002, ch. 9, pp. 436–465.
[23] J. Chen and M. Fossorier “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG AND SU: DYNAMIC WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC CODES

3963

Tofar C.-Y. Chang (S’09) received the B.S. degree in communications engineering from the National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2007. Currently, he is pursuing the Ph.D. degree at the National Chiao Tung University. His current research interests include channel coding and wireless communications.

Yu T. Su (S’81–M’83–SM’06) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Tatung Institute of Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1974, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA, in 1983. From 1983 to 1989, he was with LinCom Corporation, Los Angeles, CA, USA, where his last position was a Corporate Scientist and was involved in various satellite communication systems design and verification. Since late 1989, he has been with the National Chiao Tung University (NCTU), Hsinchu, Taiwan, where he is currently a Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. He was an Associative Dean of the College of Electrical and Computer Engineering from 2004 to 2007, and Head of the Communications Engineering Department from 2001 to 2003. He is also affiliated with the Microelectronic and Information Systems Research Center of NCTU and served as a Deputy Director during 1997–2000. From 2005 to 2008, he was the Area Coordinator of the National Science Council’s Telecommunications Programme. His main research interests include communication theory and statistical signal processing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:17:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

