Received November 22, 2018, accepted December 10, 2018, date of publication December 19, 2018, date of current version January 11, 2019.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2886738

Joint VMIMO and LDPC Decoders for IR-UWB Wireless Body Area Network
ALBASHIR ADEL YOUSSEF 1, (Student Member, IEEE), BASSANT ABDELHAMID 2, (Member, IEEE), S. H. ELRAMLY2, (Senior Member, IEEE), HUSSEIN M. ELATTAR 1, (Member, IEEE), AND HAZEM HASSAN ALI1, (Member, IEEE)
1Department of Electronics and Communications Engineering, Arab Academy for Science, Technology and Maritime Transport, Cairo, Egypt 2Department of Electronics and Communications Engineering, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt
Corresponding author: Albashir Adel Youssef (albashir.adel@aast.edu)

ABSTRACT A complete impulse radio-ultra wide band (IR-UWB) system is proposed to mitigate the impairments concerning on-body to off-body Wireless Body Area Networks (WBAN). The proposed system maintains the practical communication link between on-body sensors to the fusion center or the monitoring device held by the medical representative. Also, these sensors are assigned a recently proposed pulse shaping to mitigate the noise that existed in the IR-UWB WBAN channel. Furthermore, virtual multiple-input multiple-output (VMIMO) is proposed to perform spatial multiplexing between various sensors transmitted data. Moreover, low complex low density parity check (LDPC) encoding/decoding algorithms, including a new low complex hybrid LDPC decoding algorithm, are proposed to reduce the complexity and to enhance the bit error rate of the on-body sensors. Interestingly, low energy consumption at every sensor participating in the on-body to off-body WBAN was achieved by adopting the combination between LDPC decoders and VMIMO technique. According to simulation results, the new system enhanced the BER performance and reduced the complexity of the on-body to off-body IR-UWB communication system effectively.
INDEX TERMS Low density parity check codes, wireless body area network, forward error correction, turbo codes, hybrid decoding, IR-UWB, virtual MIMO.

I. INTRODUCTION Impulse Radio-Ultra Wide Band (IR-UWB) communication is recommended for Wireless Body Area Networks (WBANs) in case of medical applications that require high bit rate, low transmission power to save battery life, and minimum hardware complexity [1]. IR-UWB involves pulse shaping in the range of nano seconds resulting in ultra wide frequency band to obtain accurate medical measurements of vital signs for patients. The proposed system by IEEE WBAN 802.15.6 standard involves pulse shaping adopting second derivative Gaussian pulse that has a width of nano seconds. Various published studies [2], [3] proposed alternative pulse shaping using Hermite pulses instead of second derivative Gaussian pulse to achieve higher spectral efficiency and better mitigating channel impairments in UWB WBAN.
Virtual Multiple Input Multiple Output (VMIMO) is the latest technique used for Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) cooperation [4], [5]. It was reported in [6] that IR-UWB WBANs consist of on-body multi-sensors transmitting medical information. It also keeps the benefits of MIMO

systems such as mitigating Rayleigh fading and differentiates between transmitted medical data from on-body sensors. In [6], VMIMO is proposed for WBAN as it results in recovery of sensors’s data of on-body sensors for transmitting medical data effectively. In addition, the authors proposed VMIMO for enhancing diversity gain of operating sensors. Ding et al. [6] consider network layer in their study and they did not study the physical layer. Neither the performance evaluation for each sensor participating in the WBAN nor the effect of channel coding techniques were evaluated. In addition they built their system for evaluating VMIMO using the recommended components by IEEE standard only.
Some papers in literature introduced the usage of error control techniques for WBANs. Jeong and Sunwoo [7] and Ahmed and Kohno [12] proposed a BCH coding technique for WBAN. Also, Kaythry et al. [13] proposed Raptor codes for WBAN. In [8], they proposed a fountain channel coding technique for WBAN channel. These techniques are characterized by high complexity compared to LDPC decoding algorithms. In addition, experimental results in [9] and [10]

4400

2169-3536 
 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

VOLUME 7, 2019

A. A. Youssef et al.: Joint VMIMO and LDPC Decoders for IR-UWB WBAN

proved that LDPC codes are able to fulfill WSN applications performance requirements due to their high coding gain compared to Reed Solomon (RS) codes, Convolutional codes and Turbo codes.
Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) encoding/decoding algorithms proved that it will be the best error control for IR-UWB WBAN [10]. The most challenging aspect in LDPC is its decoding algorithms. LDPC decoding algorithms are divided into three categories: hard decision, soft decision and hybrid decision. LDPC encoding and decoding algorithms completely depend on using sparse matrices to reduce the decoding time, the required power and the hardware complexity [15]. An adaptive Belief Propagation (BP) LDPC decoding algorithm proposed in [16] is classified as soft decision algorithm to save the drained energy by the decoder in WBAN sensors.
A new low complexity hybrid LDPC decoding algorithm named Modified Bootstrapped Modified Implementation Efficient Weighted Bit Filliping (MBMIERRWBF) is proposed in [11] for WBAN characterized by good BER performance and low complexity. It operates in MICS band of WBAN with frequency band 402 to 405 MHz. Besides, it only considers SISO case i.e, the connection between implant to implant with low bit rate medical applications. In contrast to the previous work in [11] that dealt with implant to implant communications, this work deals with on-body to off-body wireless communication channel as seen in Figure 1. In this case, the path loss and shadowing parameters are modified to the standard paramters in [1]. In addition we take into consideration the Rayleigh fading effect. To the extent of our knowledge, there is no attempt to implement IR-UWB WBAN system using virtual MIMO technique to multiplex the data of the sensors including the pulse shaping using Hermite pulse combined with LDPC decoding algorithms.
In this paper, the main contributions are: (1) Proposing Virtual MIMO for IR-UWB WBAN system to perform spatial multiplexing for on-body sensors. (2) Evaluating the system using a recent proposed pulse shaping for each sensor participates in IR-UWB WBAN to enhance mitigation of noise. (3) Proposing BPSK as a modulation technique for IR-UWB system. (4) Comparing low complex LDPC decoding algorithms for the proposed system. (5) Proposing a new low complex hybrid LDPC decoding algorithm for more enhancement in BER performance besides lowering the complexity of the whole system.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses the on-body to off-body IR-UWB WBAN channel model. Section III illustrates briefly the low complexity LDPC encoding and decoding algorithms. Furthermore, it presents a new hybrid LDPC decoding algorithm. Section IV discusses the pulse shaping for IR-UWB WBAN. Section V presents the Virtual MIMO technique. Section VI delineated the complete proposed system. Finally, sections VII and VIII display the simulation results and conclusion.
VOLUME 7, 2019

FIGURE 1. WBAN sensors for on-body to off-body communication link with separation distance (d).

II. ON-BODY TO OFF-BODY CHANNEL MODEL On-body sensors to off-body fusion center link used in WBANs is described in the IEEE WBAN 802.15.6 standard [1]. It is composed of path loss combined with log-normal shadowing due to the continuous movement and change in postures of the body, leading to an excessive fading of the transmitted signal power, in addition to Rayleigh fading due to separate sensors placed on body to sense and measure vital signs of the patient.
IEEE standard reports that the on-body to off-body communication channel can be expressed as follows [1], [17], [18]:

d

PL = PLo + 10 n log10 do + S

(1)

where PL and PLo are the path loss at distance d and reference distance do in dB as d is the separation distance between on-body sensor, and off-body sink or fusion center, n is the path loss exponent and S represents the log normal shadow fading in dB with normal distribution having mean (µ) equal to zero and standard deviation (σdB) [17], [18].
In this paper, the on-body to off-body sensors are classified according to their transmission direction and their position on the body [1].

III. LDPC ENCODING AND DECODING ALGORITHMS LDPC is a distinguishing channel coding technique that has impressive performance approaching the Shannon limit. It was proposed by Gallager [15] in 1960. It gained high attention and became extremely competitive to turbo codes [19]. It has been selected by some distinctive digital communication standards as an error control coding technique, such as in DVB-S2 [20], DVB-T2 [21], IEEE 802.16 [22] and IEEE 802.11 [23].
LDPC codes are generated by their parity check matrices only with sparse property. Therefore, an adequate encoding procedure using parity check matrix (H) will be performed

4401

A. A. Youssef et al.: Joint VMIMO and LDPC Decoders for IR-UWB WBAN

instead of converting a parity check matrix to its generator matrix, which leads to loose the sparseness property belonging to H matrix which leads to extra complexity [24]. The encoding procedure maintained in the simulations is motivated by [24].
Decoding proceeds by using M × N parity check matrix H to obtain a 1 × M syndrome vector bits which can be elucidated as [15]:

s = z HT

(2)

where z are the hard (binary) values extracted from soft vector y which is the received vector from the channel. The syndrome is used to check if the received code word is decoded successfully or if it needs further processing.
LDPC decoding algorithms are iterative techniques, using a predetermined number of iterations to reach either zero syndrome (no error exists) or an enhanced version of code word sent by the transmitter with fewer number of errors. Decoding algorithms are classified into three classes: Hard decision, Soft decision and Hybrid decision [15]. Hard decision algorithms depend on hard (binary) information about receiving code word in both detecting and correcting errors, while in soft decision, it depends on soft values (raw values) received from channel to result in either successful detection or correction of errors. Hard decision algorithms are characterized by very low hardware complexity as reported in [25]. The overall complexity of all iterations for these algorithms equals O((M ρ + N γ ) × Nh) where ρ is the number of ones per row, γ represents the number of ones per column in H and Nh is the number of hard descision iterations. The Soft ones are characterized by impressive performance plus high hardware decoding complexity in all iterations which equals O((2M ρ + 4N γ ) × Ns) where Ns is the number of soft descision iterations [25]. Hybrid decision algorithms are introduced to compromise between complexity and BER performance of hard and soft decision algorithms. It has hardware decoding complexity of O((2M ρ +4N γ )+(M ρ + N γ ) × Nh) where M < M , N < N and Ns = 1. The M and N are unrealible check nodes and variable nodes predetermined by bootstrap step [27] and modified bootstrap step [11]. As illustrated, the hardware decoding commplexity is divided in two parts. First part is the bootstrap step which is inspired by the soft descion algorithms while, it is only processed on unrealible variable nodes. The second part will be for the hard decision algorithm represented by MIERRWBF algorithm. Thus, the latest variant of Bit-Flipping (BF) algorithms is the Modified Implementation Efficient Reliability Ratio Weighted Bit-Flipping (MIERRWBF) algorithm was illustrated in [26]. It is characterized by low complexity plus fast decoding procedure. Bootstrapped Modified Implementation Efficient Reliability Ratio Weighted Bit Flipping (BMIERRWBF) [27] and Modified Bootstrapped Modified Implementation Efficient Reliability Ratio Weighted Bit Flipping (MBMIERRWBF) [11] algorithms are the most recent hybrid LDPC decoding algorithms. These algorithms combine between very good BER performance of soft decision

4402

algorithms represented by bootstrap step and low complexity of hard decision algorithms by maintaining MIERRWBF algorithm. Soft decision algorithms are derived from original Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm proposed in [15]. There are many variants of BP algorithm that have been proposed in literatures [28]–[30]. All these algorithms have very good BER performance while they suffer from high hardware complexity, leading to drain the available power and wasting the sensor’s battery life.
Some low complexity decoding algorithms can be derived from the sum product algorithm that could acheive the requirements of WBANs, as it has the lower complexity compared to other soft decision algorithms [25]. One of the most distinguished low complexity soft decision algorithms is min-sum algorithm. It is extracted from sum product algorithm as stated in [25].

PROPOSED LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM (NEW MBMIERRWBF)
The MBMIERRWBF algorithm proposed in [11] solves the problem of offline calculation of threshold β to differentiate between unreliable and reliable messages. It uses a bootstrap step based on min-sum algorithm which needs more improvement to enhance the whole algorithm. The procedure of MBMIERRWBF algorithm initiated by extracting unreliable check nodes by applying (2). Then, obtaining indexes of non-zero syndrome elements sm which are equivalent to unreliable check nodes. After that extracting N (m) which represents variable nodes linked to each unreliable check node. Calculation of the lowest variable node belonging to every unreliable check node using [n¯, yn¯ ] = {min | yn |: n ∈ N (m)} where n¯ represent the index of the variable node with minimum received value yn¯ . Update all extracted unreliable variable nodes using bootstrap step with new more reliable soft values using eq. (3). Finally, MIERRWBF algorithm procedures is applied.

yn¯

=

yn¯

+

sgn(yk ).
m∈M(n) k∈N (m)\n¯

min
i∈N (m)\n¯

|

yi

|

(3)

where M(n) is the unreliable check nodes connected to variable node n and N (m)\n¯ are unreliable variable nodes connected to the unreliable check node m except the variable node n¯.
A new bootstrap is proposed to improve the one in [11]. The new bootstrap will be:

yn¯ = yn¯ +

2 tanh−1

tanh yk

(4)

2

m∈M(n)

k∈N (m)\n¯

The complete procedure of the proposed algorithm is illustrated by the flow chart in Figure 2. The main difference between the algorithm in [11] and the proposed one in this paper is maintaining the bootstrap step which is completely changed. The bootstrap step maintained in [11] used a bootstrap step with ‘‘signum’’ function while in the new algorithm presented in this paper, we are using another function

VOLUME 7, 2019

A. A. Youssef et al.: Joint VMIMO and LDPC Decoders for IR-UWB WBAN

FIGURE 3. Second order derivative Gaussian pulse. FIGURE 4. nth order derivative of Hermite pulse.

FIGURE 2. Proposed algorithm flow chart.
which is the ‘‘Tanh’’ function. This modification according to simulation results enhanced the algorithm at all maintained parameters.
The codeword at the final stage will be extracted in its hard values which is presented by Q(yn).

IV. UWB PULSE SHAPING In IR-UWB WBAN, the recommended pulse shape is the Gaussian pulse [31] and its time domain representation can be expressed as follows:

w(t )

=

(−2π
e

t2 2tp2

)

(5)

where tp is the pulse width. The second derivative of Gaussian pulse is plotted in Figure 3 and expressed by:

v(t) =

8

1 − 4π ( t )2

e

−2π

(

t tp

)2

(6)

3

tp

Gaussian pulse and its derivative are used due to their homogeneity in implementation within short interval [31]. It is able to spread the energy of the signal from near DC to a few GHz. Moreover, it efficiently complies with Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations, whereas Laplacian and cubic monopolies do not exhilarate the FCC

VOLUME 7, 2019

FIGURE 5. Spectrum of nth order derivative of Hermite pulse.

spectral mask without the carrier signal. Generating B-spline pulses are rather complex. Moreover, its baseband signal is not appropriate with FCC mask [31]. Therefore, the second derivative Gaussian pulse as seen in Figure 3 is a commonly used pulse for UWB communication [31].
Hermite polynomials were proposed by Charles Hermite (1822-1901). Hermite pulses are a set of orthogonal polynomials that occur over a domain (-∞,∞).
Hermite polynomial can be expressed by the Rodrige’s formula as:

hn (t )

=

(−τ

)n

e

t2 2τ 2

dn dt n

t2
e− 2τ 2

(7)

where n

=

0, 1, 2, 3, ..... and

dn dt n

is the nth

derivative.

The

parameter τ is the time scaling factor. Thus, according to

the study performed in [2] and [3], the Hermite pulse proved

its superiority in reducing noise compared to by the second

derivative Gaussian pulse.

In Figures 4 and 5, the time domain and the spectrum con-

cerning Hermite pulse are exhibited. The orthogonality of all

derivatives reside Hermite pulses is presented in Figure 4 and

4403

A. A. Youssef et al.: Joint VMIMO and LDPC Decoders for IR-UWB WBAN

it occupies the required UWB bandwidth by center frequency approximately equal to 7 GHz as delighted in Figure 5. For the new proposed system utilizing Hermite pulses as its pulse shaping, it will be more robust against Rayleigh fading combined with shadowing to gain a boost in its performance over the recommended pulse by IEEE WBAN 802.15.6 standard for UWB communication represented by second derivative Gaussian pulse.

V. VIRTUAL MIMO IN IR-UWB WBAN

Multi-Input Multi-Output (MIMO) is one of the imperative

advances for the wireless communication systems to increase

channel capacity under fading conditions. Presently, the time

comes to make sense of its utility in WSN to get energy effi-

cient network. MIMO implementation requires more transmit

and receive antennas. In normal WSN, a sensor node has just

a single transmit antenna system which naturally represents

Single Input Single Output (SISO) communication. In the

transmitter side of WSN every transmit antenna must be put

adequately

far

separated

by

λ 2

where

λ

is

the

wavelength

of transmitted signal, to get uncorrelated signals [34]. For a

tiny sensor node due to space impediment and to minimize

circuit complexity, a new proposed concept termed Virtual

MIMO (VMIMO) is proposed for WSN in [5]. In VMIMO,

numerous sensor nodes are utilized to work cooperatively

to accomplish multiple transmitting antenna systems, hence

called a virtual antenna array. Thus, in a group of sensor nodes

and cluster head there ought to be cooperative nodes.

The VMIMO technique is expected to limit the energy

consumption of a sensor network as opposed to centering

in minimization of energy consumption of individual nodes.

In WSN for a successful full transmission and reception

of information, WSN has both a transmitter and a receiver

circuits. For short range communication in a sensor network

circuitry, energy utilization is ruling the transmission energy

consumption [35]. Under VMIMO with a higher order mod-

ulation scheme, it can be ready to transmit information in

smaller time, besides it makes the circuit off for additional

time. As, a result, we can save the sensor node energy and

increment the lifetime of a WSN.

The only attempt to implement VMIMO for IR-UWB

WBAN is in [6]. They perform comparison between SISO

and MIMO modes by attaining BER performance of the

network in both cases. According to [6] the pulse shaping

used in IR-UWB system is the second derivative Gaussian

pulse. In addition, the channel model maintained in [6] is

the Rayleigh fading only without taking into account the

shadowing exists in IR-UWB WBAN links. The study in [6]

concentrates on proving the contribution imposed by using

VMIMO by analyzing network layer parameters only with

no consideration of the influence of its physical layer param-

eters. Even their obtained results do not show the VMIMO

effect on the performance at each sensor participating in

the VMIMO scheme. In addition Ding et al. [6] proposed

VMIMO to improve only the diversity gain of the sensors in

the WBAN.

4404

FIGURE 6. Proposed system body model with unequal seperation distance between sensors and monitoring device.

Thus in this paper, VMIMO is maintained in LDPC coded system using new pulse shaping. Additionally, VMIMO is proposed to perform spatial multiplexing for all sensors operating On-body. All simulation results illuminate the effect of LDPC coded VMIMO system especially on all sensors

participated in WBAN. As VMIMO implemented for the on-body sensors it

requires an efficient receiver to manage these various medical information. Layered space time (LST) codes are proposed to distinguish between on-body sensors or hub transmissions successfully. LST perform differentiation using Minimum Mean Square Error (MMSE) decoder for the various received

medical information all over the body. The decoder function is illustrated as follows:

W

=

[HH H

+

Eb

1 /No

IM

×N

]−1HH

(8)

where IM×N and H are identity matrix and channel matrix with size of M × N . MMSE decoder is used in IR-UWB VMIMO system for WBANs to mitigate Rayleigh fading imposed by various on-body sensors.

Combining VMIMO with new pulse shaping portrayed by Hermite pulses, results in remarkable mitigation for noise of

transmitting medical data. Each sensor is assigned a particular nth derivative Hermite pulse. Thus, Hermite pulses have orthogonality property between its nth derivatives.

VI. PROPOSED IR-UWB WBAN SYSTEM As per our Knowledge, no attempt to implement IR-UWB WBAN using the later discussed elements of the physical layer of WBAN sensors. This work proposes a system for IR-UWB WBAN maintaining the later components concerning the physical layer of the sensors or hubs to enhance the performance of the one proposed in [6] which used the recommended components by IEEE WBAN 802.15.6 [31].
As demonstrated in Figure 6, different applications of WBAN sensors are presented by unequal communication

VOLUME 7, 2019

A. A. Youssef et al.: Joint VMIMO and LDPC Decoders for IR-UWB WBAN

FIGURE 7. Proposed VMIMO IR-UWB WBAN system.

FIGURE 8. BER Comparision between proposed system and IEEE system in [6] employing PAM for different pulse shaping.

separation distances. In the proposed IR-UWB WBAN system, as shown in Figure 7, each component in its physical layer is enhanced by improved one as illustrated in the later sections. This system in Figure 7 presents the proposed physical layer for each sensor starting from new modulation/demodulation, new pulse shaping, VMIMO, low complexity LDPC encoding algorithm and new low complexity hybrid LDPC decoding algorithm. The new system maintains a realistic situation of IR-UWB WBAN by wavering the separation distance between on-body sensors or hubs and the device or fusion center held by medical representative.
VII. SIMULATION RESULTS The selected channel model for the new LDPC coded VMIMO IR-UWB WBAN system consists of path loss and shadowing as reported in [1] representing Electroencephalogram (EEG), Electromyogram (EMG) and other medical measurements require high data rate information. From the point of view of biological safety, the highest transmitting power level is 0.55 mW or −2.55 dBm [1]. The 2 × 2 VMIMO case was chosen to prove the proposed idea and can be extended to higher number of transmitting sensors. The path loss of the maintained sensors in simulations is PLo = 43 dB, n = 3.75 and σdB = 7.5 dB plus Rayleigh fading representing the radiating sensed data by unequal separation distance between sensors and the fusion center. The machine capabilities used for simulations are 2.7 GHz Intel Core i7 with 16 GB random access memory (RAM).
The uncoded system is first evaluated to check the best pulse shaping and modulation over WBAN channel. As delighnated in Figure 8, BER performance comparison for two-level PAM modulation between the proposed system
VOLUME 7, 2019

FIGURE 9. BER comparision between proposed system and IEEE system in [6] employing Hermite pulse for different modulation techniques.
employing Hermite pulse and the one in [6] using the second derivative Gaussian pulse (proposed by the IEEE standard of WBANs). The figure shows that Hermite pulse is superior over second derivative Gaussian pulse in mitigating channel impairments imposed in IR-UWB WBAN channel.
As shown in Figure 9, BPSK has better performance than PAM for Hermite pulse. This is because BPSK depends on the phase variations which has better immunity to noise.
4405

A. A. Youssef et al.: Joint VMIMO and LDPC Decoders for IR-UWB WBAN

FIGURE 10. BER comparison between uncoded and coded proposed system using LDPC decoders.

FIGURE 11. Number of consummed iterations comparison between proposed system with LDPC decoders.

The proposed system is evaluated using LDPC coding and BPSK modulation for on-body to off-body link. The regular PEG LDPC code is utilized with size N = 504 columns and M = 252 rows [32]. The BER of different LDPC decoders are plotted for both sensors in Figure 10 where the maximum number of iterations equals 600, the separation distance between the fusion center and sensor (1) is set to be 20 cm and sensor (2) is set to be 30 cm. It is observed that the proposed algorithm maintains the lowest BER in hybrid decoders which is close to soft decoder (Min-Sum) in both sensors. Although the min-sum algorithm achieves the lowest level in BER, however it is characterized by its excessive complexity that does not suit WBAN [25]. It is also clear that the BER for sensor (2) is worse than sensor (1), this is because the path loss increases as the distance increases.
Figure 11 shows the number of iterations required by the decoding algorithms for successful decoding. It is observed that the proposed algorithm has the lowest number of iterations in comparison with other algorithms. This is due to the usage of the proposed new bootstrap which enhanced the process of improving the reliability of unreliable received data from the channel.
The successful recovery time for all decoding algorithms in the proposed system is presented in Figure 12. As shown in Figure 12, MIERRWBF algorithm has the lowest successful recovery time where this algorithm is hard decision algorithm. For hybrid algorithms, the proposed one has the lowest successful recovery time due to the usage of the new bootstrap step.
The effect of the separation distance on the successful recovery time is presented in Figure 13 where sensor (1)
4406

FIGURE 12. Successful recovery time comparison between proposed system with LDPC decoders.
attained shorter successful recovery time than sensor (2). This is because long separation distances impose sever impairments causing errors on the transmitted medical data and require higher number of iterations for successful recovery.
VOLUME 7, 2019

A. A. Youssef et al.: Joint VMIMO and LDPC Decoders for IR-UWB WBAN

FIGURE 13. Successful recovery time comparison for different sensors located at different distances.

FIGURE 15. Throughput comparison of proposed system with LDPC decoders.

FIGURE 14. Number of operations between proposed system with LDPC decoders.
As shown in Figure 14, the system employing the proposed algorithm occupies the lowest number of operations relative to other algorithms delineated at all Eb/Nos. In addition, the proposed system using MBMIERRWBF algorithm occupies the second lowest place in the number of operations consumed as shown in Figure 14.
Figure 15 presents the throughput of all algorithms. The proposed algorithm achieved the highest level of throughput at both sensors. Thus, according to simulation results, the pro-
VOLUME 7, 2019

posed algorithm proved its ability to operate successfully in sever channel impairments.
VIII. CONCLUSION In this paper, new IR-UWB system is proposed for practical situation using low complex LDPC encoding, new hybrid decoding algorithm with pulse shaping. Furthermore, VMIMO technique is utilized to distinctively improve spatial multiplexing between on-body sensors. The proposed system conserves time and energy which are excessively indispensable in WBAN. Furthermore, the proposed system maintaining proposed algorithm has superior BER over all hybrid decision algorithms and approaches to soft decision algorithm. Moreover, it has the lowest number of iterations, successful recovery time, and number of operations and the highest throughput compared to other algorithms. Simulation results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed system over previous one.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Wang and Q. Wang, Body Area Communications: Channel Modeling, Communication Systems, and EMC, 1st ed. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2013.
[2] D. K. Rout and S. Das, ‘‘Interference mitigation in wireless body area networks using modified and modulated MHP,’’ J. Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 1343–1361, 2014.
[3] D. K. Rout and S. Das, ‘‘Multiple narrowband interference mitigation using hybrid Hermite pulses for body surface to external communications in UWB body area networks,’’ J. Wireless Netw., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 387–402, 2017.
4407

A. A. Youssef et al.: Joint VMIMO and LDPC Decoders for IR-UWB WBAN

[4] K. G. Panda, D. Agrawal, and A. Hossain, ‘‘Virtual MIMO in wireless sensor network—A survey,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Green Eng. Technol. (ICGET), Coimbatore, India, 2016, pp. 1–4.
[5] S. Hussain, A. Azim, and J. H. Park, ‘‘Energy efficient virtual MIMO communication for wireless sensor networks,’’ Int. J. Telecommun. Syst., vol. 42, nos. 1–2, pp. 139–149, 2009.
[6] J. Ding, E. Dutkiewicz, and X. Huang, ‘‘Performance evaluation of virtual MIMO for UWB based body area networks,’’ in Proc. 7th Int. Symp. Med. Inf. Commun. Technol. (ISMICT), Tokyo, Japan, 2013, pp. 28–32.
[7] S. L. Jeong and M. H. Sunwoo, ‘‘Low power BCH decoder using early termination scheme for WBAN standard,’’ in Proc. 7th Int. SoC Design Conf. (ISOCC), Seoul, South Korea, 2017, pp. 260–261.
[8] V. Praveena, P. Kaythry, and R. Kishore, ‘‘Fountain code based error control technique in wireless body area network,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Commun., Signal Process. Netw. (WiSPNET), Chennai, India, 2017, pp. 430–434.
[9] E. Shih, S. Cho, F. S. Lee, B. H. Calhoun, and A. Chandrakasan, ‘‘Design considerations for energy-efficient radios in wireless microsensor networks,’’ J. VLSI Signal Process. Syst. Signal, Image Video Technol., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 77–94, 2004.
[10] S. L. Howard, C. Schlegel, and K. Iniewski, ‘‘Error control coding in low-power wireless sensor networks: When is ECC energy-efficient?’’ EURASIP J. Wirelless Commun. Netw., vol. 2006, no. 2, p. 29, Apr. 2006.
[11] A. A. Youssef, B. Abdelhamid, S. H. El-Ramly, H. M. ElAttar, and H. H. Ali, ‘‘LDPC decoding algorithms for implant to implant wireless body area network,’’ IEEE Access J., vol. 6, pp. 13200–13212, 2018.
[12] E. Ahmed and R. Kohno, ‘‘Error control coding and decoding with medical QoS constraints for WBAN end-to-end connection via UMTS channel,’’ in ICT Express. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2018.
[13] P. Kaythry, R. Kishore, and V. Praveena, ‘‘Energy efficient raptor codes for error control in wireless body area networks,’’ J. Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 103, no. 2, pp. 1133–1151, 2018.
[14] B. Jajodia, A. Mahanta, and S. R. Ahamed, ‘‘Mixed-signal demodulator for IEEE 802.15.6 IR-UWB WBAN energy detection-based receiver,’’ IET J. Circuits, Devices, Syst., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 523–531, 2018.
[15] R. G. Gallager, ‘‘Low-density parity-check codes,’’ IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[16] N. Javaid, O. Rehman, N. Alrajeh, Z. A. Khan, B. Manzoor, and S. Ahmed, ‘‘AID: An energy efficient decoding scheme for LDPC codes in wireless body area sensor networks,’’ Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 21, pp. 449–454, 2013.
[17] Y. Liao, Y. Han, Q. Yu, Q. Ai, Q. Liu, and M. Leeson, ‘‘Wireless body area network mobility-aware task offloading scheme,’’ IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 61366–61376, 2018, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS2018.2876311.
[18] Z. Liu, B. Liu, and C. W. Chen, ‘‘Joint power-rate-slot resource allocation in energy harvesting-powered wireless body area networks,’’ IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., to be published, doi: 10.1109/TVT.2018.2872960.
[19] N. Okubo, N. Miki, Y. Kishiyama, K. Higuchi, and M. Sawahashi, ‘‘Performance comparison between turbo code and rate-compatible LDPC code for evolved UTRA downlink OFDM radio access,’’ IEICE Trans. Commun., vol. 92, no. 5, pp. 1504–1515, 2009.
[20] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications, document, ETSI, EBU, 2005.
[21] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB): Frame Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Digital Terrestrial Television (DVB-T), document, ETSI, ETS, 1997.
[22] C. Eklund, R. B. Marks, K. L. Stanwood, and S. Wang, ‘‘IEEE standard 802.16: A technical overview of the WirelessMAN/sup TM/ air interface for broadband wireless access,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 98–107, Jun. 2002.
[23] J. Weinmiller, M. Schlger, A. Festag, and A. Wolisz, ‘‘Performance study of access control in wireless LANs IEEE 802.11,’’ Mobile Netw. Appl., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 55–67, 1997.
[24] T. J. Richardson, J. Thomas, and R. L. Urbanke, ‘‘Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,’’ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[25] G. D. Forney, Jr., ‘‘On iterative decoding and the two-way algorithm,’’ in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, 1997.
[26] R. Hany Zeidan and M. Maha Elsabrouty, ‘‘Low complexity iterative decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,’’ in Proc. 1st IFIP, Wireless Days (WD), 2008.
4408

[27] A. A. Mohamed, M. M. Elsabrouty, and S. H. El-Ramly, ‘‘Bootstrapped iterative decoding algorithms for low density parity check (LDPC) codes,’’ in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Syst. Netw. Commun. (ICSNC), Nice, France, 2010, pp. 335–339.
[28] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, ‘‘Improving LDPC decoders via informed dynamic scheduling,’’ in Proc. Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Tahoe City, CA, USA, 2007, pp. 208–213.
[29] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, ‘‘Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Glasgow, Scotland, 2007, pp. 932–937.
[30] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, ‘‘LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470–3479, Dec. 2010.
[31] A. Astrin, IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Part 15.6: Wireless Body Area Networks, IEEE Standard 802.15.6, 2012.
[32] J. C. D. MacKay, ‘‘Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes,’’ Citeseer, to be published.
[33] W. E. Weisstein, ‘‘Hermite polynomial,’’ Wolfram Res., Inc., Champaign, IL, USA, Tech. Rep., 2002.
[34] S. Joshi, D. Gupta, S. Haque, N. Kothari, and P. Bapna, ‘‘Effect of antenna spacing on the performance of multiple input multiple output LTE downlink in an urban microcell,’’ Int. J. Wireless, Mobile Netw., vol. 4, no. 6, 2012.
[35] S. Cui, A. J. Goldsmith, and A. Bahai, ‘‘Energy-efficiency of MIMO and cooperative MIMO techniques in sensor networks,’’ IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1089–1098, Aug. 2004.
[36] H. Xu, L. Huang, C. Qiao, W. Dai, and Y.-E. Sun, ‘‘Joint virtual MIMO and data gathering for wireless sensor networks,’’ IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1034–1048, Apr. 2015.
ALBASHIR ADEL YOUSSEF received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronics and communications engineering from the Arab Academy for Science, Technology and Maritime Transport (AASTMT), Cairo, Egypt, in 2008 and 2011, respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Electronics and Communications Department, Faculty of Engineering, Ain Shames University, Cairo. He has been a Graduate Teaching Assistant, from 2008 to 2011. Since 2011, he has been a Teaching Assistant with the Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, AASTMT.
BASSANT ABDELHAMID received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in communications and electronic engineering from Ain Shams University, Egypt, in 2006 and 2010, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in communications and electronic engineering from E-JUST University, in 2013. She was with Ain Shams University, as a Demonstrator, a Teaching Assistant, and an Assistant Professor, in 2006, 2010, and 2013, respectively. During her Ph.D. studies, she was a Special Research Student at Kyushu University, Japan. She is specialized in communications engineering, digital signal processing, mobile communications, and statistical signal processing.
VOLUME 7, 2019

A. A. Youssef et al.: Joint VMIMO and LDPC Decoders for IR-UWB WBAN

S. H. ELRAMLY received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from the Faculty of Engineering, Ain Shams University, Egypt, in 1967 and 1972, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from Nancy University, France, in 1976. She is currently a Professor Emeritus with the Electronics and Communications Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering, Ain Shams University; where she was the Head of the Department, from 2004 to 2006. She has published more than 200 scientific papers and has supervised more than 100 M.Sc. and Ph.D. thesis. Her research field of interest is wireless communication systems and signal processing, language engineering, coding, encryption, and radars. She is the IEEE Signal Processing Chapter Chair in Egypt. She received the Ain Shams Award of Appreciation in Engineering Sciences, in 2010, the Award of Excellence from the Society of Communications Engineers, in 2009, and the Award of Excellence from the Egyptian Society of Language Engineering and the Award of Excellence from the National Radio Science Committee in Egypt. She participated in the establishment of the Egyptian Society of Language Engineering, in 1996, where, is currently the President.
HUSSEIN M. ELATTAR received the B.Sc. degree from the Arab Academy for Science, Technology and Maritime Transport (AASTMT), Cairo, Egypt, in 1998, the M.Sc. degree from Ain Shams University, Egypt, in 2004, and the Ph.D. degree from Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt, in 2011, all in electrical engineering (electronics and communications). He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electronics and Communications Engineering, AASTMT. His current research interests include radio resource management, cognitive networks, optimization techniques, the IoT and 5G applications.

HAZEM HASSAN ALI received the bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from Kuwait University, Kuwait, in 1987, the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering (electrophysics: physical electronics) and the Ph.D. degree in systems and circuits from The George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA, in 1990 and 1993, respectively. He joined the faculty of the Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, AASTMT, in 1993. He has been a Professor with the Electronics and Communication Engineering Department, AASTMT, Cairo Campus, since 2002. In 2002, he became an Associate Dean at the College of Engineering, Cairo Campus for Student Affairs. In 2006, he became the Chairman of the Electronics and Communication Engineering Department, Cairo Campus, and then in 2011 he became the Dean of Education and Research Cairo Campus. In 2012, he became the Director of AASTMT Smart Village Campus. In 2014, he became the Director of AASTMT Misr Algadida Campus. His research interests are integrated circuits and systems and microelectromechanical Systems.

VOLUME 7, 2019

4409

