Improved iterative decoding of QC-MDPC codes in the McEliece public key cryptosystem

Irina E. Bocharova1, Thomas Johansson2, and Boris D. Kudryashov1

1 Dept. of Information Systems

2 Dept. of Electrical and Information Technology,

St. Petersburg Univ. of Information Technologies,

Lund University

Mechanics and Optics

P. O. Box 118, SE-22100 Lund, Sweden

St. Petersburg 197101, Russia

Email:thomas.johansson@eit.lth.se

and Tartu University, Estonia

Email: {irinaboc, boriskud}@ut.ee

Abstract—We improve iterative decoding of the moderate density parity-check codes, recently suggested as code candidates in the McEliece public key cryptosystem. In case of bit-flipping (BF) decoder failure, the code parity-check matrix is extended by adding auxiliary variable nodes based on reliability information from the BF decoder. Then iterative decoding is applied to the extended parity-check matrix. The proposed decoding algorithm is analyzed and its frame error rate performance is compared to the same performance of both the best implementations of BF decoding and its modifications. It is demonstrated an improved performance for the iterative decoding step in decryption, which allows to increase the resistance against recent attacks based on taking advantage of the somewhat large failure probability of the BF algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
The McEliece public key cryptosystem (PKC) is a codebased system whose underlying idea is that by proper permutations and linear transformations, a generator matrix of a structured linear code becomes indistinguishable from the generator matrix of a random linear code. This unstructured matrix is used as a public key and to discover the secret message a potential attacker has to decode a random linear code, which may involve solving an NP-complete problem [1]. Originally, the McEliece cryptosystem uses Goppa codes. However, relatively recently, a new version of this PKC was proposed, based on so-called moderate density parity-check (MDPC) codes [2]. The version using quasi-cyclic codes (QC-MDPC) [2] improves in several directions, one being the simplified description of a code-based PKC without a permutation matrix; another one being the reduced size of the public key. Since then, a large number of different schemes based on this new idea of using iterative decoding have been published.
One of the shortcomings of the system in [2] is its high block error probability (frame error rate (FER)), correcting a given number of errors when a legitimate user decodes a received message. The main reason for the unsatisfactory decoding performance is that iterative decoding was developed for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and is less powerful on denser parity-check matrices, since they include short cycles in the corresponding Tanner graph. On the other hand, direct use of LDPC codes in the McEliece PKC is
This work is supported by the Estonian Research Council grant PRG49.

insecure (too low Hamming weight in the dual code). The use of MDPC codes does ensure a required level of security for the corresponding public key and still allows for efficient decoding.
In coding theory, improvements of belief propagation (BP) decoding are mainly studied for the binary erasure (BEC) channel. There are a few approaches to iterative decoding of general linear codes. All of them are based on extending the code parity-check matrix either by adding redundant paritychecks (RPCs) (see, for example, [3] and [4]) or by adding to it both redundant rows and redundant columns (auxiliary variable nodes (AVN)) [5] and [6]. The FER of BP decoding based on RPCs over the BEC provably converges to the FER of maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding when the number of RPCs tends to the number of codewords of the dual code. The distinguishing feature of the AVN technique is that it introduces auxiliary variable nodes and the related redundant parity-checks in such a way that the length four cycles in the code Tanner graph are destroyed.
There were a number of attempts to improve iterative decoding of linear codes on channels other than the BEC. One method called multi-bases iterative decoding is analyzed in [7]. In [7] BP decoding on the additive white Gaussian (AWGN) channel is applied to a set of parity-check matrices obtained from the set of codewords of the dual code with respect to the WiMAX standard code. This method requires a few trials of BP decoding. Another method which combines the AVN and RPC based techniques followed by choosing orthogonal, with respect to each symbol, subsets of parity checks is suggested in [8].
One more approach to improving BP decoding by using post-processing is considered in [9]. It implies that in case of BP decoding failure, the original channel is converted into the BEC channel by introducing erasures and then ML decoding on the BEC channel is performed. If one succeeds to erase all error positions, then an ML decoding decision over the BEC is guaranteed. Notice that the same approaches are suitable for the so-called bit-flipping (BF) decoding, which can be interpreted as a hard-decision version of BP decoding. Recently, an approach to improving BF technique in application to the MDPC-McEliece cryptosystem was analyzed in [10].
A serious shortcoming of the RPC based approach in cryptographic application is a necessity to find low-weight

978-1-5386-9291-2/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

1882

ISIT 2019

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:59:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

codewords of a dual code for the (MDPC) code used as a the secret key. This step is time and memory consuming and not practical. The AVN technique, typically, leads to extremely large extended parity-check matrices, especially for cryptographic applications where secret keys are long.
The decoding technique suggested in this paper is free of these shortcomings since here, the AVN extension is fulfilled on an adaptively chosen small number (about a few hundreds) of columns of the code parity-check matrix. It does not require any preliminary computations and is performed in case of BF decoding failure.
The new decoding algorithm lowers the FER about 100 – 300 times compared to the BF decoding FER performance, while its decoding complexity remains a linear function of the code length. It also outperforms the recently suggested algorithm in [10]. A specific feature of the new algorithm is that it significantly lowers error probability on the set of selected error patterns used for the key recovery reaction attack in [11], [12].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A brief description of the QC-MDPC codes based McEliece system and an upper bound on the minimum distance of the underlying QC-MDPC codes are given in Section II. The AAVN iterative decoding algorithm improving the BF technique is considered in Section III. Complexity issues are discussed in Section IV. Simulation results are presented and comparisons are performed in Section V.

II. QC-MDPC BASED MCELIECE CRYPTOSYSTEM
In this paper we consider the MDPC (n, k) codes of rate R = k/n determined by a parity-check matrix

H = C1 C2 . . . Cm ,

(1)

where r × r submatrices Ci, i = 1, 2, . . . , m are circulant

matrices with Notice that

row weight wi, r = n −

m i=1

wi

is

chosen

to

be

of

k, and√m = n/r. order n log n. In

the sequel, for simplicity, we analyze only the case of equal

weights wi = w, for i = 1, 2, . . . , m.

If Cm is not degenerated then a k × n generator matrix can

be found in the form G = (Ik|Q), where Ik is the identity

matrix and

 (Cm−1C1)T 

Q

=

 



(Cm−1C2)T ...

 

,



(2)

(Cm−1Cm−1)T

where T denotes matrix transposition. It is easy to show that another generator matrix of the code
can be obtained in the form

 C2T C1T 0 0 0

...

0



 0 C3T C2T 0 0

... 0 

 

...

...

...

... ...

...

...

 

,

(3)

 

0

0

0

. . . CmT−1 CmT−2 0

 

0 0 0 0 ...

CmT

CmT −1

where 0 denotes the r × r all-zero matrix.

For circulant matrices with row weight w it immediately follows from (3) a simple upper bound on the minimum distance of the corresponding MDPC code,

dmin ≤ 2w.

(4)

Next we analyze only the special case of (n, k = n/2)

MDPC codes of rate R = 1/2 determined by the block parity-

check matrix

H = C1 C2 ,

(5)

where n/2×n/2 submatrices C1 and C2 are circulant matrices with row weight w. Specifically, code parameters n = 9602 and w = 45 are suggested in [2] for the McEliece cryptosystem with security level 280 under the condition that t = 84 errors are inserted in encryption. Although the minimum distance of the code is rather small (dmin ≤ 90), it can be easily verified that the contribution of minimum-weight codewords to the decoding error is negligible.
The corresponding generator matrix can be found as

G = Ik (C2−1C1)T

Ik Q .

(6)

The matrix Q is a circulant matrix representing a part of the public key. Unlike C1 and C2 it is not sparse but it is determined by only the k bits describing its first row. Matrix (2) is used for encoding.
Another generator matrix of the same code is

G = C2T C1T .

(7)

The QC-MDPC PKC implies performing the following steps (see [2] for more details):
1) Key Generation: Generate two random sequences c1 and c2 of length r = k = n/2 and Hamming weight w. Form circulant matrices C1 and C2 as cyclic shifts of c1 and c2. Construct submatrix Q according to (2). The public key is the first row of Q and the private key is the pair (c1, c2).
2) Encryption: Generate a random sequence e of length n and Hamming weight t. The ciphertext x for the plain text m is x = u + e , where u = (m, mQ).
3) Decryption: Perform BF decoding of x by using the known matrix H (5). Obtain the plaintext m as first k bits of the decoded sequence.

III. AAVN-BASED DECODING ALGORITHM
The new decoding algorithm is based on re-decoding of the input sequence in case of BF decoding failure. The second stage decoder uses a modified parity-check matrix with adaptively introduced auxiliary variable nodes (AAVN) and redundant parity-checks.
Unlike codes for data transmission, where parity checks as well as columns of parity-check matrix, typically, have at most one common position, the matrix H constructed as in (5) has many pairs of columns sharing 2 or 3 positions. This phenomenon reduces the total number of correctable errors compared to the LDPC code of the same length and rate. On

1883
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:59:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the other hand, it allows for an efficient post-processing of the decoded sequence.
This post-processing consists of an “orthogonalization” of parity checks in a way similar to [5]. However being applied straightforwardly, the approach in [5] would lead to an astronomic size of the extended matrix. A new idea behind the suggested technique is to apply decorrelation to a small part of H. This part is selected depending on both the input sequence and the result of BF decoding.
There are four routines used in the algorithm:
1) A Bit-Flipping decoder (u˜, s) = BF(x, Imax) which computes a decoded sequence u˜ and the syndrome s = u˜HT under restriction Imax on the number of iterations.
2) Selection of unreliable positions S = SSUP(x, u˜, s) targeted to choose a set of positions to which the orthogonalization procedure will be applied. Unreliable positions are marked by ones in the output binary sequence u of length n.
3) Extension of the parity check matrix HE = EXT(H, S). The new parity-check matrix HE of size rE × nE is generated given original matrix H and the set of unreliable positions S.
4) Belief-Propagation decoding of the MDPC code by using the extended parity-check matrix u˜ = BP(x, HE, Imax).
The overall decoding procedure is presented as Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 General AAVN decoding algorithm for MDPC codes
Input: Ciphertext x, secret parity-check matrix H. Step 1: BF decoding (u˜, s) = BF(x, H, Imax). if s = 0 then
Step 2: Select the set of unreliable positions S = SSUP(x, u˜, s)
Step 3: Construct the extended matrix HE = EXT(H, S)
Step 4: Perform BP decoding u˜ = BP(x, HE, Imax) end if return Plain text m as the first k bits of u˜
In simple words, first, the decoder attempts to decode the received ciphertext by using a version of the BF decoder. In case of BF decoding failure, the available decoding result together with the ciphertext are used to select a list of positions which contains some of the unknown positions of the errors. Next, the AVN-algorithm is applied to the set of unreliable positions. Finally, BP decoding on the extended parity-check is performed. These steps are described below in detail.
A. AVN and AAVN algorithms
We start with explaining the technique of introducing auxiliary variable nodes (AVN) by the following simple example. It is known that the most critical (from iterative decoding point

of view) structures in the code Tanner graph are cycles of

length 4. Let

1 0 1 1 1 0

H = 0 1 0 1 1 1 .

(8)

101 0 11

There are several length 4 cycles in the Tanner graph (one is

shown in bold). In order to remove a cycle we introduce a

new variable node and a new check node. The new auxiliary codeword symbol is equal to the sum of the 4th and 5th code

symbols of the original codeword. By replacing the sum of the 4th and 5th codeword symbols for the new one (7th), we get

one more row and one more column to add to H, resulting in

1 0 1 0 0 0 1

H

=

0 1

1 0

0 1

0 0

0 1

1 1

1 0

.

(9)

0001101

This matrix has one more length 4 cycle in the corresponding Tanner graph. By adding sum of the 1st and 3rd codeword
symbols as a new variable, we obtain

0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1

0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0

H = 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 .

(10)

0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0

10100001

The first n = 6 codeword symbols are actually transmitted.

At the receiver, the soft decision values of the 7th and 8th

symbols are initially set to 0 (erasure). After the first decoding

iteration, the auxiliary symbols are set to some reliability

values as it follows from the last two parity-check equations.

To understand how the AVN helps in error correction, let us

assume that for some parity-check matrix two error positions

correspond to two columns of weight 4 overlapping in two

nonzero elements:

... ...

11

 

1

1

 

 

1

1

0 0

  

.

 

0

1

 

0 1

... ...

Notice that inversions of these positions does not change

syndrome weight and therefore BF decoding will not flip them.

By applying the AVN algorithm we change these columns and

introduce a new one ... ... ... ...

0 0 ... 1





 0 0 ... 1 

 

1

0

...

0

 

 1 0 ... 0  .





 0 1 ... 0 

 

0

1

...

0

 

... ... ... ...

1 1 ... 1

In this fragment of the parity-check matrix, columns overlap at most in one position and the corresponding error positions will be flipped.

1884
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:59:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

It is known (see [5]) that the error correction performance does not necessarily improve monotonically by increasing the number of AVNs since with addition of new nodes the number of “erased” positions increases as well. Matrices (8) – (10) can correct (or not correct) different error patterns. Moreover, the number of AVNs needed for excluding all length 4 cycles is prohibitively large for practically important cases.
Algorithm 2 Adaptive AVN matrix extension
Input: Set S. parity-check matrix H, maximum allowed number of columns nmax of the extended matrix HE. Initialization: nE = n, rE = r, HE = H while there exist length 4 cycles in HE and nE ≤ nmax do
Find a pair (i, j) ∈ S such that the corresponding columns overlap in at least 2 positions. if such (i, j) exists then
nE ← nE + 1, rE ← rE + 1 New row rE contains 1s on positions i, j, nE. New column nE contains 1s on positions where columns i and j coincide. In columns i and j set to 0 coinciding positions. end if end while return matrix HE

integers. Positions u˜i and u˜j are called relatives if they belong to the same parity check or, equivalently, nonzero elements of the corresponding columns of H coincide at least in one position.
Cycles of length 4 in the Tanner graph determined by the parity-check matrix H lead to BF decoding errors in one of the following cases:
• For the columns corresponding to errors, due to their overlapping, their number of unreliable parity-checks (NUPC) is too small σi ≤ wi/2.
• Error-free positions due to high correlation with error positions have NUPC values σi > wi/2 which leads to flipping of correct positions and thereby increasing number of errors to be corrected.
From these considerations we conclude that not only positions with high σˆi, but also their relatives are to be included into the SUP.
The pseudo-code of the SSUP procedure used in our experiments is shown as Algorithm 3. Two parameters (np, nt) represent the number of pre-selected unreliable positions based on their NUPC vector σ = (σ1, ..., σn), and the total size of the SUP nt = |S|, respectively. In our experiments we use (np = t, nt = 3t), where t is the number of errors inserted by the encryptor.

The idea is now to make the choice of nodes to be added dependent on a particular error pattern. Information about positions with errors can be extracted from both the input sequence and from the BF decoding result. For a given input sequence (ciphertext) in case of BF decoding failure, a set of unreliable positions (SUP) is constructed. Details of constructing the SUP will be discussed in the next subsection.
Only length 4 cycles in Tanner graph determined by columns of the parity-check matrix specified by SUP are used for constructing the extended parity-check matrix. The procedure of constructing the extended parity-check matrix for adaptive AVN (AAVN) is shown in Algorithm 2.
It is intuitively clear that if an error pattern of a certain weight w was not corrected, then correcting even a very few of these w errors might lead to correcting of the entire pattern by applying iterative decoding to the modified error pattern. Thus, even if the SUP covers a small subset of erroneous positions, then the entire error pattern can be corrected with high probability. The recent key recovery attacks [11], [12] are based on BF decoding failures for a specific set of error patterns corresponding to short cycles in the Tanner graph of the code. By destroying such structures the AAVN significantly increases the probability of correct decoding of the error patterns from the set used in such attacks.
B. Selection of unreliable positions
Let s = u˜HT be a syndrome vector for a given decoder output sequence u˜. For each position u˜i, denote by hi the corresponding column of H of Hamming weight wi. Let σi = (hi, s) denote the number of unsatisfied parity checks (NUPC) for u˜i, where the scalar product is computed over the ring of

Algorithm 3 Constructing SUP
Input: Ciphertext x, BF decoder output u˜, parameters (np, nt) Step 1: Compute syndrome s and the vector of NUPCs σ Step 2: Construct subset Sp as a set of np positions with largest σi. Let S = {1, ..., n} \ Sp. Step 3: Generate S by excluding from S those positions which do not have relatives among positions in Sp. Step 4: Construct S as a union of Sp and a set of (nt − np) elements of S with largest values σi return set S

C. BF and BP decoding

There are many implementations of BF decoding which

differ both in complexity and error correcting performance.

For the detailed overview see [13]. We have chosen a version

of BF decoder whose pseudo-code is shown as Algorithm 4.

Algorithm 4 flips bits with the maximum NUPC value if

this flipping reduces the syndrome weight. After each flipping

the syndrome is correspondingly modified.

For decoding of the ciphertext with HE we use sum-product

(SP) BP decoding instead of BF decoding. The reason is

that the decoder alphabet is {0, 1, z}, where z correspond to

”erasures”. We assign zero reliabilities to auxiliary variable

nodes z and reliabilities −λ and +λ to binary symbols 0 and

1,

respectively,

where

λ

=

log

n−t t

.

IV. COMPLEXITY CONSIDERATIONS

In this section we show that the complexity of the AAVN decoder is of the same order as the complexity of the standard BF decoding. Number of decoding steps is proportional to the

1885
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:59:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 4 BF decoding for a regular code

100

Input: Ciphertext x, Maximum number of iterations Imax.

Initialization: I = 0; s = xHT

while I < Imax and s = 0 do

I ← I + 1;

10-2

Compute σi, i = 1, ..., n and σmax = maxi=1,..,n σi

for i = 1 : n do

FER

if σi = σmax and wH(hi + s) < wH(s) then

10-4

Flip xi and recompute s ← hi + s

end if

end for

10-6

if s = 0 then

break;

end if

end while

10-8 90

return Decision u˜ = x, and syndrome s

FER, BF decoding FER, AAVN decoding FER, REMP decoding

95

100

105

110

115

Number of errors t

code length n and complexity of each step is proportional to the column weight w, i.e. overall complexity is proportional to nw. This estimate is definitely true for BF decoding and BP decoding stages. Let us consider other stages, SSUP and EXT, of the AAVN decoder.
1) SSUP complexity: Consider Algorithm 3. Computing of the syndrome is performed with complexity wn. Along with computing syndrome, the NUPC is computed for each position, and lists of positions with a certain NUPC are created. Step 2 has complexity of order w (we assume that size of Sp is about the same as the number of errors done by the encryptor, i.e. of order 2w).
To find relatives at Step 3, first, ‘’syndrome” s is computed by multiplying a vector with ones on positions from Sp and zeros on all other positions by sparse matrix H. The complexity is about w2. Next, we compute a union of all sets of 2w variable nodes corresponding to nonzero positions of s. The complexity is at most r × 2w = nw. The complexity of Step 4 is proportional to w.
2) Complexity of matrix extension: In Algorithm 2 the most complicated step is finding length 4 cycles in the submatrix HS, consisting of columns of H indexed by S. By taking into account the quasi-cyclic structure of the codes, this step can be performed with complexity of order wn.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
The simulated FER performances of BF decoding and decoding with AAVN are shown in Fig. 1. Random codes were selected and 1000 trials with each code were performed. Simulation lasted until at least 100 decoding errors of the AAVN algorithm occurred. The FER performance of the random erasure message passing (REMP) algorithm in [10] is presented in the same figure for comparison.
VI. CONCLUSION
The new iterative decoding significantly lowers the FER performance compared to the same performance of both the BF decoding and the REMP decoding while keeping the same order of complexity. It allows to increase the number of errors

Fig. 1. Simulated FER performance of BF, REMP and AAVN decoding
inserted in encrypted messages and can be functioning reliably under a rather large noise level.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Berlekamp, R. McEliece, and H. Van Tilborg, “On the inherent intractability of certain coding problems (Corresp.),” IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 384–386, 1978.
[2] R. Misoczki, J.-P. Tillich, N. Sendrier, and P. S. Barreto, “MDPCMcEliece: New McEliece variants from moderate density parity-check codes,” in IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2013, pp. 2069–2073.
[3] M. Schwartz and A. Vardy, “On the stopping distance and the stopping redundancy of codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 922– 932, 2006.
[4] J. Han, P. H. Siegel, and A. Vardy, “Improved probabilistic bounds on stopping redundancy,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1749– 1753, 2008.
[5] J. S. Yedidia, J. Chen, and M. P. Fossorier, “Generating code representations suitable for belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. of the annual Allerton Conference on Commun. Control and Computing, vol. 40, no. 1, 2002, pp. 447–456.
[6] S. Sankaranarayanan and B. Vasic, “Iterative decoding of linear block codes: A parity-check orthogonalization approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 3347–3353, 2005.
[7] T. Hehn, J. B. Huber, and S. Laendner, “Improved iterative decoding of LDPC codes from the IEEE WiMAX standard,” in International ITG Conference on Source and Channel Coding (SCC), 2010, pp. 1–6.
[8] I. E. Bocharova, B. D. Kudryashov, V. Skachek, and Y. Yakimenka, “Improved redundant parity-check based BP decoding of LDPC codes,” in IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2018, pp. 1161–1165.
[9] ——, “Low complexity algorithm approaching the ML decoding of binary LDPC codes,” in IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2016, pp. 2704–2708.
[10] H. Bartz and G. Liva, “On Decoding Schemes for the MDPC-McEliece Cryptosystem,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05659, 2018.
[11] Q. Guo, T. Johansson, and P. Stankovski, “A key recovery attack on MDPC with CCA security using decoding errors,” in International Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and Information Security. Springer, 2016, pp. 789–815.
[12] Q. Guo, T. Johansson, and P. S. Wagner, “A Key Recovery Reaction Attack on QC-MDPC,” IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, 2018.
[13] I. V. Maurich, T. Oder, and T. Gu¨neysu, “Implementing QC-MDPC McEliece encryption,” ACM Trans. on Embedded Computing Systems (TECS), vol. 14, no. 3, p. 44, 2015.

1886
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:59:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

