2019 IEEE 20th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC)

MIND: Model Independent Neural Decoder

Yihan Jiang ECE Department
University of Washington Seattle, United States
yij021@uw.edu

Hyeji Kim Samsung AI Center
Cambridge Cambridge, United
Kingdom
hkim1505@gmail.com

Himanshu Asnani ECE Department
University of Washington Seattle, United States
asnani@uw.edu

Sreeram Kannan ECE Department
University of Washington Seattle, United States
ksreeram@uw.edu

Abstract— Standard decoding approaches rely on model-based channel estimation methods to compensate for varying channel effects, which degrade in performance whenever there is a model mismatch. Recently proposed Deep learning based neural decoders address this problem by leveraging a model-free approach via gradient-based training. However, they require large amounts of data to retrain to achieve the desired adaptivity, which becomes intractable in practical systems. In this paper, we propose a new decoder: Model Independent Neural Decoder (MIND), which builds on the top of neural decoders and equips them with a fast adaptation capability to varying channels. This feature is achieved via the methodology of Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML). Here the decoder: (a) learns a ’good’ parameter initialization in the meta-training stage where the model is exposed to a set of archetypal channels and (b) updates the parameter with respect to the observed channel in the meta-testing phase using minimal adaptation data and pilot bits. Building on top of existing state-of-the-art neural Convolutional and Turbo decoders, MIND outperforms the static benchmarks by a large margin and shows minimal performance gap when compared to the neural (Convolutional or Turbo) decoders designed for that particular channel. In addition, MIND also shows strong learning capability for channels not exposed during the meta training phase.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Motivation
Ever since the ground-breaking work in [1], capacityapproaching codes for Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel such as Turbo codes [2], Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes [3] and Polar codes [4] have been proposed and extensively studied in the last few decades and have been used widely in Long Term Evolution (LTE) and 5G standards. Efficient decoding methods are known for the capacity-approaching codes, and they exhibit nearoptimal performance on the Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. However, the performance on non-AWGN channels is not uniformly optimal. Designing the corresponding decoders to deal with non-Gaussianity is hard, primarily owing to a two-fold deficit: (a) model-deficit, which implies the inability of accurately expressing the observed data by a clean mathematical model, and (b) algorithm deficit, which implies even under a clean abstraction, the optimal decoding algorithm is not known [32]. Thus while resorting to using the optimal codes designed under simplified models such as the AWGN channel, designing a decoder that can adapt to the non-AWGN channel effects faces challenges on both these

fronts: there is a model mismatch and furthermore, most non-AWGN channels do not permit closed-form optimal decoders.
Tremendous amount of effort has been invested to develop a suite of handcrafted algorithms to circumvent these deficits. These comprise of model-based methods in channel estimation, signal preprocessing, as well as robust decoding under unexpected channel effects [7], so as to make the AWGN-designed capacity-approaching decoders operate with minimal degradation [5]. Few pilot bits known by both the transmitter and the receiver are used to estimate the channel effects to compensate for their varying nature, while handcrafted decoding algorithms have been applied to improve the decoder’s robustness [5]. However they lack in two respects: (1) Channel estimation and channel-effect equalizing algorithms are model-based, hence when the underlying mathematical abstraction suffers from model-deficit, there is a suboptimal performance. (2) AWGN-designed decoders are not robust to unexpected and uncompensated noises.
B. Prior Art : Neural Decoding
In the past decade, data-driven deep learning based methods have changed the landscape of several engineering fields such as computer vision and natural language processing, with revolutionary performance benchmarks [16] [17]. Applying general purpose deep learning models to channel coding design has received intensive attention recently [25] [26]. Designing such neural decoders naturally fits well with the data-driven supervised learning approaches, since both the received signals and the target messages can be simulated from the underlying encoder and channel models. In this way, both the model-deficit and algorithm-deficit are navigated by directly training a neural decoder on the sampled data.
Designing neural decoder for several classes of codes such as LDPC codes, Polar codes and Turbo codes with versatile deep neural networks has seen a growing interest within the channel coding community. Imitating Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm via learnable neural networks shows promising performance for High-Density Parity-Check (HDPC) codes and LDPC codes [27] [28] and Polar codes [29] [30]. Near optimal performance of Convolutional Code and Turbo Code under AWGN channel is achieved via Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) for arbitrary block lengths [31], which

978-1-5386-6528-2/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:04:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE 20th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC)

also shows robust and adaptive performance under nonAWGN setups. A further extension of RNN encoders (and decoders) reveal state-of-the-art performance for feedback channels [35] and low latency schemes [32]. Thus while neural decoders show the promise of alleviating model and algorithm deficits, compared to the traditional decoding methods which utilize limited amount of pilot bits to adapt, neural decoders require a huge amount of data (information complexity) and long computation time (computational complexity) to adapt to the new channel. This serious drawback renders them quite intractable and far from practical deployment. The relevant question we ask here is the following: Can we design neural decoders that strengthen their adaptive property, so that only minimal re-training is necessary? In what follows, this question is investigated and answered in affirmative.
C. Our Contribution
We introduce meta learning to navigate the data-hungry nature of the neural decoder. Meta learning operates in two steps: (a) it firstly performs meta training phase by learning on a wide range of archetypal tasks, and then (b) during the meta testing phase enables learning new tasks faster, while consuming less adaptation data than learning from scratch [9]. Supervised meta learning has a natural connection to adaptive decoder design, as we can consider different channels as different tasks in our meta learning framework.
RNN-based meta learning considers the whole meta learning approach as a large-scale RNN with tasks as inputs [18]. However, this requires complex modeling and thus shows degradation in performance with respect to scalability. Model Agnostic Meta Learning (MAML) [11] is a gradient-based meta-learning algorithm that learns a sensitive initialization for fast adaptation. MAML trained model performs well on new tasks with limited gradient update steps and few-shot adaptation data. Compared to other meta learning methods, MAML has much less complexity. Moreover, theoretically MAML is shown to be able to approximate any meta learning algorithm [12] and when faced with out-of-domain tasks, MAML shows fast capability to adapt, despite the fact that the out-of-domain tasks may not be close to the meta-trained tasks [11].
In this work, we present a MAML-based neural decoder: Model Independent Neural Decoder (MIND), which admits fast adaptation with few shot adaptation data utilizing the gradient-based training. Compared to the adaptive neural decoders which require large amounts of gradient training steps and data to adapt to new channel settings, MIND can adapt to a new channel with small amount of pilot bits and few gradient descent steps. Compared to the traditional adaptive decoding method, MIND offers a model-free gradient-based meta-learning approach built on the top of neural decoders, resolving both the model and the algorithm deficit. Thus, MIND enhances the advantages of neural decoders with data and computational efficiency.

The paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses the details of MAML which builds on the top of neural decoders to results in our proposed decoder: MIND. Section III analyzes the performance of MIND which shows very nearoptimal performance with few shot adaptation data, under both trained and untrained channels. Section IV concludes with the scope and limitations of MIND and discussion on the future directions.

II. MODEL INDEPENDENT NEURAL DECODER
We consider the two neural decoders for Convolutional Code and Turbo Code respectively [31] to develop MIND (for details refer to the Appendix in our extended version [41]). Both these neural decoders have larger number of parameters compared to the traditional algorithms [36] [2] to deal with the issues of model deficit and algorithm deficit. However, training neural decoders till convergence requires large amounts of data. This leads to a slow adaptation with costly computations. In what follows, we propose the remedy through MAML, which are described below along with the choice of Loss function and the hyper-parameters:
Loss Function: For neural decoders, the loss function is Binary CrossEntropy (BCE) since decoder is a classification task. fθ is the neural decoder with parameter θ . Formally speaking, we are given a collection of M training channels {T } = {Ti, i ∈ 1, ..., M}. For a specific channel Ti with sampled received signal xi( j) and target message yi( j), as ( j) indicates the datapoint index in specific channel, the loss function associated with a particular channel Ti can be represented as:

∑ LTi ( fθ ) =

BCE( fθ (x( j)), y( j)).

(1)

x( j),y( j)∼Ti

Meta Training Phase: The meta training objective is to learn a sensitive initial weight for all the training channels. This operates as per the following two sub-steps:

• Task Update: For each channel Ti, MIND updates the model weights θ to θi = θ − α∇θ LTi ( fθ ) with adaptation learning rate α. This is called task update as the update for the parameter is done for each task, here channel. The updated weights θ should learn themselves to be close to the optimal decoder for each channel Ti.
• Meta Update: Here, the goal is to do a meta update or to minimize the following loss for all training channels with respect to θ :

∑ ∑ min LTi (θi ) = min LTi (θ − α∇θ LTi ( fθ )) (2)

θi

θi

which via gradient descent with meta learning rate β , is equivalent to the following update:

∑ θ ← θ − β ∇θ

LTi ( fθi )

(3)

Ti∈{T }

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:04:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE 20th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC)

Computing the above gradient is equivalent to computing the gradient of gradient of the BCE loss. Second order gradients as in Eq. (3) are expensive. In this paper, we use First-Order MAML (FOMAML) [39], which treats higher order gradients as constant and operates in two steps: (1) compute the update θi = θ − α∇θ LTi ( fθ ), (2) compute the gradient ∇θ ∑Ti∈{T } LTi ( fθi ) by directly computing the gradient using updated θi to ignore the second-order terms. FOMAML has comparable performance, and needs far less computation compared to MAML. Note that training phase with the vanilla average learning, known as Multi-task Learning (MTL) [19], use the following assignment via the average of gradients on all the channels instead of Eq. (3):

∑ θ ← θ − β ∇θ

LTi ( fθ ).

(4)

Ti∈{T }

Meta Testing Phase:
During the meta testing phase, firstly pilot bits from the new channel Ti are collected. Then the θ is updated via gradient descent θ = θ −α∇θ LTi ( fθ ). MIND’s meta training and testing phase is depicted in our extended version [41].
Note: During the meta training phase, the data to compute task update ∇θ LTi ( fθi ) and the data for computing meta update θ ← θ − β ∇θ ∑Ti∈{T } LTi ( fθi ) are different. Using the same data for both the task update and the meta update leads to meta-overfitting [11]. It is due to this reason for training each Ti, we need to sample twice for meta training, while during the meta testing phase each step only requires to sample once.

Parameters
Neural Decoder Number of Neural Units Batch Size B Meta Batch Size P Meta Learning Rate β Adaptation Learning Rate α Number of Meta Update Steps Block Length L Train SNR Code Rate

Convolutional Code
2 layer bi-GRU 200 100 10 0.00001 0.001 50000 100 0 to 4dB 1/2

Turbo Code
2 layer bi-GRU 200 100 10 0.00001 0.0001 50000 100 -1.5 to 2dB 1/3

Fig. 1. MIND Hyperparameters

Hyperparameters: The MIND trained Neural Decoders for Convolutional and Turbo Code are trained with the following hyper-parameters as shown in Figure 1. Batch size B refers to the number of blocks sampled from one specific channel for training (also referred as mini-batch size), which is the same for both meta training and meta testing phase. Meta batch size P refers to the number of random channels utilized for each meta training update step. Meta training is expensive, which uses 50000 training steps to conduct Meta Update. The adaptation rate α in the task update of meta training phase is larger than the meta learning rate β of the meta update, which allows MIND to adapt faster. We use smaller adaptation learning

Testing Method Fine-tune MIND-1 Meta Testing MIND-10 Meta Testing

Adaptation Data 1000000 100 1000

Task Update Steps K 10000 1 10

Fig. 2. Adaptation cost between MIND and full adaptation

rate α for neural Turbo decoder, due to its sensitive iterative decoding structure with shared model weights [31].
The data and computation cost for the meta testing phase is shown in Figure 2. The task update step refers to the number of gradient steps K required before testing on the new channel. Here we use the trained batch size B = 100. Fine-tuning neural decoder without MIND to adapt to new channel requires K = 10000 steps (each step need B = 100 blocks) to converge. Compared to the fine-tuning, MIND only requires K = 1 or K = 10 gradient steps to conduct fast adaptation, with far less pilot data during the meta test phase. In what follows for the evaluation of MIND’s performance, MIND-K refers to MIND with K gradient update steps in the meta testing phase. A detailed discussion on the effects of hyper-parameters is deferred to our extended version [41].
III. MIND PERFORMANCE
In this section, we investigate the performance of MINDK for convolution code and turbo code against several benchmarks.
A. Channel Settings and Benchmarks
The channels used in this paper are: • AWGN channel: y = x + z, z ∼ N(0, σ 2). • Additive T-distribution Noise (ATN) channel: y = x + z,
where z ∼ T (ν, σ 2). • Radar Channel: y = x + z + w. where z ∼ N(0, σ12) is
a background AWGN noise, and w ∼ N(0, σ22), with probability p is the radar noise with high variance and low probability. σ1 << σ2.
B. Benchmarks
For both the convolutional code and turbo code, we compare MIND-K decoder against the following benchmarking decoders:
• Canonical Optimal Decoders for AWGN Channel: For convolutional code, Viterbi algorithm has optimal BER performance for AWGN channels [36]. For Turbo code, iterative Turbo decoder based on BCJR [2] shows capacity-approaching performance. When decoding on AWGN channels, the above two decoders serve as useful benchmarks to be compared against. When testing on non-AWGN channels, the canonical optimal decoders are treated as static benchmarks, since AWGN-designed optimal method without adaptation is sub-optimal on non-AWGN channels.
• Adaptive Neural Decoders: Under non-AWGN channels, generally there doesn’t exist a close-form optimal decoding scheme. On the other hand, in these cases, neural decoders outperform most state-of-the-art heuristic decoders [31]. Adaptive Neural Decoders are trained with nearly infinite data and computing resources on a particular channel and thus provide another useful benchmark especially for the non-AWGN channels.
• Multi-task Learning (MTL) based Decoders: This is a benchmark for naive adaptation, termed as MTLK, which updates weights via K-step gradient descent

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:04:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE 20th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC)

directly from MTL trained weight (Eq. 4), with the same adaptation data batch size and learning rate as MIND-K.
C. MIND-K for Convolutional Code
We evaluate the fast adaptation ability under 4 different channels shown in Figure 3: (1) AWGN channel, (2) Radar Channel (σ2 = 2.0 and p = 0.05), (3) ATN (ν = 3.0), and (4) untrained Radar (σ2 = 100.0, p = 0.05). The first three channels aim at testing the fast adaptation ability on metatrained channels, where the fourth channel aims at testing learning ability on unexpected channel with dramatically different parameters.

D. MIND-K for Turbo Code
As MTL-1 performs poorly, in this section we ignore MTL-1. On Turbo code, the channels tested shown below in Figure 4 are: (1) trained Radar channel (σ2 = 2.0, p = 0.05), and (2) untrained Radar channel (σ2 = 100.0, p = 0.01).

Fig. 3. MIND for Convolutional Code: Trained AWGN (up left);Trained ATN (ν = 3) (up right);Trained Radar(σ2 = 2.0, p = 0.05) (down left). and untrained Radar(σ2 = 100.0, p = 0.05)(down right).
The MIND performance on Convolutional Code shows on trained channels:
• Among static methods without adaptation ability, MIND-0 and MTL-0 show similar performance. MIND without adaptation still performs well.
• MIND-1 performs better than MTL-1, MIND-0, and MTL-0. MTL-1 shows a degradation indicating that a naive learning via average performance on all channels is not stable.
To show the continued learning property on untrained channel, we also consider MIND-10 to compare. Here we observe:
• MIND-1 outperforms MTL-1, MTL-0, MIND-0. On untrained channel, MIND still shows improvement with solely gradient.
• MIND-10 outperforms MTL-1.On untrained channel, apply more gradient steps can further improve performance.

Fig. 4. Neural Turbo Decoder with MIND. Trained Radar(σ2 = 2.0, p = 0.05) (left), and untrained Radar(σ2 = 100.0, p = 0.01)(right)
The performance on MIND with neural Turbo decoder shows the same trend as with Convolutional Code. The performance of MIND is consistent for both neural decoders as follows:
• Without adaptation ability, MIND-0 shows robust performance, comparable to neural decoder trained on multiple channels.
• With limited data and computation, MIND-1 outperforms static methods and shows performance close to optimal or adaptive algorithms.
• On untrained channels, applying MIND with more gradient steps continually improves accuracy.
Note that on trained channels shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4, MIND-1 performs very close to optimal algorithms. Comparing to deploying MTL-trained neural decoders, MIND shows comparable performance without adaptation ability, and can conduct fast adaptation with minimal re-training on both trained and untrained channels. For further detailed discussion as well as experiments on other channels, please refer to our extended version [41].
IV. DISCUSSION
While we have designed MIND particularly for convolutional and Turbo codes, the methodology is not limited to these codes. In fact, the overall methodology is independent on the code structure or the neural network architecture, and thus can be adapted with equal felicity to other neural-based decoding problems. We note that MIND is not expected to be a universal decoder for all channels, rather that the learnt initialization is good for a class of channels which are related to the archetypal channels, with experiments shown in full version [41]. A precise characterization of this class is an interesting direction for future research. Furthermore, MIND still requires more samples than maybe available in a typical training channel. We expect neural method for joint channel estimation and data detection to perform better - this is left for future work.
Among future directions, it is worth considering to combine other neural decodes with MIND, such as neural

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:04:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE 20th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC)

LDPC [27] [28] and Polar [30] decoders. Beyond neural decoder design, MAML can also be applied to Channel Autoencoder [25] design, which deals with designing adaptive encoder and decoder. MAML is a growing area of interest in terms of its standalone research [15] [13] [14] [39] [10], with promising directions combining with online learning [40]. These can usher new directions of remarkable improvements in decoder design.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by NSF awards 1651236 and 1703403, as well as a gift from Intel. The authors want to thanks Liyuan Zheng with helpful discussion and help on this project.
REFERENCES
[1] Shannon, Claude Elwood. ”A mathematical theory of communication.” Bell system technical journal 27.3 (1948): 379-423.
[2] Berrou, Claude, Alain Glavieux, and Punya Thitimajshima. ”Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes. 1.” ICC 1993.
[3] MacKay, David JC, and Radford M. Neal. ”Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes.” Electronics letters 32.18 (1996): 1645-1646.
[4] Arikan, Erdal. ”A performance comparison of polar codes and ReedMuller codes.” IEEE Communications Letters 12.6 (2008).
[5] Richardson, Tom, and Ruediger Urbanke. Modern coding theory. Cambridge university press, 2008.
[6] N. Farsad, M. Rao, and A. Goldsmith, Deep learning for joint sourcechannel coding of text, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2018
[7] Tse, David, and Pramod Viswanath. Fundamentals of wireless communication. Cambridge university press, 2005.
[8] Sesia, Stefania, Matthew Baker, and Issam Toufik. LTE-the UMTS long term evolution: from theory to practice. John Wiley Sons, 2011.
[9] Vanschoren, Joaquin. ”Meta-learning: A survey.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.03548 (2018).
[10] Riemer M, Cases I, Ajemian R, Liu M, Rish I, Tu Y, Tesauro G. Learning to Learn without Forgetting By Maximizing Transfer and Minimizing Interference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.11910. 2018 Oct 29.
[11] Finn, Chelsea, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. ”Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks.” ICML 2017
[12] Finn, Chelsea, and Sergey Levine. ”Meta-learning and universality: Deep representations and gradient descent can approximate any learning algorithm.” ICLR 2018
[13] Finn C, Xu K, Levine S. Probabilistic model-agnostic meta-learning. NeurIPS 2018.
[14] Yoon J, Kim T, Dia O, Kim S, Bengio Y, Ahn S. Bayesian modelagnostic meta-learning. NeurIPS 2018.
[15] Al-Shedivat M, Bansal T, Burda Y, Sutskever I, Mordatch I, Abbeel P. Continuous adaptation via meta-learning in nonstationary and competitive environments. ICLR 2018.
[16] Deng J, Dong W, Socher R, Li LJ, Li K, Fei-Fei L. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. CVPR2009.
[17] Devlin J, Chang MW, Lee K, Toutanova K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805. 2018 Oct 11.
[18] Santoro A, Bartunov S, Botvinick M, Wierstra D, Lillicrap T. Metalearning with memory-augmented neural networks. ICML 2016.
[19] Ruder S. An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05098. 2017 Jun 15.
[20] Li, Junyi, Xinzhou Wu, and Rajiv Laroia. OFDMA mobile broadband communications: A systems approach. Cambridge University Press, 2013.
[21] Safavi-Naeini HA, Ghosh C, Visotsky E, Ratasuk R, Roy S. Impact and mitigation of narrow-band radar interference in down-link LTE. ICC 2015.
[22] Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A, Bengio Y. Deep learning. Cambridge: MIT press; 2016 Nov 18.

[23] Han, Song, Huizi Mao, and William J. Dally. ”Deep compression: Compressing deep neural networks with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding.” ICLR 2016.
[24] Hinton, Geoffrey E., and Ruslan R. Salakhutdinov. ”Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks.” science 313.5786 (2006): 504-507.
[25] O’Shea, Timothy J., Kiran Karra, and T. Charles Clancy. ”Learning to communicate: Channel auto-encoders, domain specific regularizers, and attention.” Signal Processing and Information Technology (ISSPIT), 2016 IEEE International Symposium on. IEEE, 2016.
[26] O’Shea, Timothy, and Jakob Hoydis. ”An introduction to deep learning for the physical layer.” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking 3.4 (2017): 563-575.
[27] Nachmani, Eliya, Yair Be’ery, and David Burshtein. ”Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning.” Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), 2016 54th Annual Allerton Conference on. IEEE, 2016.
[28] Nachmani E, Marciano E, Lugosch L, Gross WJ, Burshtein D, Be’ery Y. Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing. 2018 Feb;12(1):11931.
[29] Gruber T, Cammerer S, Hoydis J, ten Brink S. On deep learning-based channel decoding. In2017 51st Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS) 2017 Mar 22 (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
[30] Cammerer S, Gruber T, Hoydis J, ten Brink S. Scaling deep learningbased decoding of polar codes via partitioning. InGLOBECOM 20172017 IEEE Global Communications Conference 2017 Dec 4 (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
[31] Kim, Hyeji and Jiang, Yihan and Rana, Ranvir and Kannan, Sreeram and Oh, Sewoong and Viswanath, Pramod. ”Communication Algorithms via Deep Learning” ICLR 2018.
[32] Jiang Y, Kim H, Asnani H, Kannan S, Oh S, Viswanath P. LEARN Codes: Inventing Low-latency Codes via Recurrent Neural Networks. ICC 2019.
[33] Aoudia, Faycal Ait, and Jakob Hoydis. ”End-to-End Learning of Communications Systems Without a Channel Model.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02276 (2018).
[34] Felix A, Cammerer S, Dorner S, Hoydis J, Ten Brink S. Ofdmautoencoder for end-to-end learning of communications systems. In2018 IEEE 19th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC) 2018 Jun 25 (pp. 1-5). IEEE.
[35] Kim H, Jiang Y, Kannan S, Oh S, Viswanath P. Deepcode: Feedback codes via deep learning. NeurIPS 2018.
[36] Viterbi, Andrew. ”Error bounds for convolutional codes and an asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm.” IEEE transactions on Information Theory 13.2 (1967): 260-269.
[37] Bahl L, Cocke J, Jelinek F, Raviv J. Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate (corresp.). IEEE Transactions on information theory. 1974 Mar;20(2):284-7.
[38] Chung J, Gulcehre C, Cho K, Bengio Y. Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555. 2014 Dec 11.
[39] Nichol, Alex, and John Schulman. ”Reptile: a Scalable Metalearning Algorithm.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02999 (2018).
[40] Chelsea Finn, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sham Kakade, and Sergey Levine. ”Online Meta-Learning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.08438 (2019)
[41] Jiang Y, Kim H, Asnani H, Kannan S. ”MIND: Model Independent Neural Decoder”, on arXiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.02268

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:04:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

