Received February 9, 2019, accepted February 27, 2019, date of publication March 11, 2019, date of current version April 2, 2019. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2904173

Improved Decoding Algorithms of LDPC Codes Based on Reliability Metrics of Variable Nodes
XINGCHENG LIU 1,2, (Senior Member, IEEE), LI’E ZI3, DONG YANG1, AND ZHONGFENG WANG 4, (Fellow, IEEE)
1School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China 2School of Information Science, Xinhua College of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510520, China 3Guangdong Airport Baiyun Information Technology Co., Ltd., Guangzhou 510006, China 4School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Corresponding author: Xingcheng Liu (isslxc@mail.sysu.edu.cn)
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61572534 and Grant 61873290, in part by the Special Project for Promoting Economic Development in Guangdong Province under Grant GDME-2018D004, and in part by the Opening Project of Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology under Grant 2017B030314131.
ABSTRACT The informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) strategies for decoding of low-density parity-check codes obtained superior performance in error correction performance and convergence speed. However, there are still two problems existing in the current IDS algorithms. The first is that the current IDS algorithms only preferentially update the selected unreliable messages, but they do not guarantee the updating is performed with reliable information. In this paper, a two-step message selecting strategy is introduced. On the basis of the two reliability metrics and two types of variable node residuals, the residual belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm, short for TRM-TVRBP, is proposed. With the algorithm, the reliability of the updatingmessages can be improved. The second is the greediness problem, prevalently existed in the IDS-like algorithms. The problem arises mainly from the fact that the major computing resources are allocated to or concentrated on some nodes and edges. To overcome the problem, the reliability metric-based RBP algorithm (RM-RBP) is proposed, which can force every variable node to contribute its intrinsic information to the iterative decoding. At the same time, the algorithm can force the related variable nodes to be updated, and make every edge have an equal opportunity of being updated. The simulation results show that both the TRM-TVRBP and the RM-RBP have appealing convergence rate and error-correcting performance compared with the previous IDS decoders over the white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.

INDEX TERMS Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, dynamic selection strategies, dynamic updating strategies, residuals of variable nodes.

I. INTRODUCTION Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were first invented in 1962 [1] but were soon ignored until they were re-invented in 1995 [2]. LDPC codes can approach the channel capacity when belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm is utilized [3]. When a conventional log-likelihood ratio belief propagation (LLR BP) decoding algorithm is applied to an LDPC code, the decoding messages are iteratively exchanged between variable and check nodes. Flooding, which is also called parallel scheduling, is a commonly used decoding algorithm, which is the most straightforward scheduling method, where all the variable-to-check (V2C) messages and
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Bora Onat.

all the check-to-variable (C2V) messages are updated successively. However, the convergence rate is low because the latest information is not available until the next iteration is performed. To accelerate the convergence rate and improve the error-correcting performance, a method of sequential scheduling was presented, with which the sequence of updates is predetermined and fixed [4]–[6]. This sequential scheduling strategy is different from the flooding in that the latest information is available in the current iteration for the sequential scheduling.
Even though the convergence rate of sequential scheduling is twice as fast as that of parallel scheduling [7], both of them allocate the computing resources to each node fixedly and equally. As the decoding processing goes on, different

VOLUME 7, 2019

2169-3536 
 2019 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

35769

X. Liu et al.: Improved Decoding Algorithms of LDPC Codes Based on Reliability Metrics of Variable Nodes

variable nodes have different reliabilities. In general, the more reliable the nodes are, the less computing resources that the nodes need as they do not change during decoding process in the following iterations. Thus, the equal computational distribution for all nodes and edges results in a waste of limited computing resources. To make good use of the dynamic characteristics of the decoding information, the informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) strategy [8] was introduced. With the strategy, the residual belief propagation (RBP) algorithm, where the updating sequence is determined based on the residual of the C2V messages, was improved uninterruptedly. However, the RBP is greedy because it only updates the C2V messages with the maximum C2V messages’ residual. Thus, although the convergence rate of the RBP decreased very fast for the first few iterations, its overall converging performance in error-correcting is worse than that of the flooding or the sequential. In order to achieve a superior convergence performance, the node-wise RBP (NW RBP) was also presented, where all the messages of the C2V edges connected to the check node having the maximum C2V residual are updated simultaneously [8]. And IDS strategy not only has excellent performance in LPDC block codes, but also has good effect in LDPC convolutional codes [9].
Gradually, the IDS aroused much attention for its excellent performance. Since then an increasing number of dynamic decoding algorithms based on different message selecting and updating strategies were presented [10]–[14], such as the variable-to-check RBP (VC RBP) [10], the silent-variablenode-free RBP (SVNF) [11], the dynamic-silent-variablenode-free scheduling(D-SVNFS) [12], the tabu search-based dynamic scheduling (TSDS) [13], and residual-decayingbased residual belief-propagation (RD RBP) [14]. In the VC RBP algorithm, the V2C message with the maximum V2C message residual is propagated preferentially, and the SVNF RBP algorithm aims at the issue of silent variable nodes, selects and updates each C2V message with the maximum C2V message residual generated by the check node connecting with each variable node in turn. Contrary to the SVNF scheme where the participation sequence of variable node is fixed, the D-SVNFS scheme allows a dynamic participation sequence of variable node. The TSDS algorithm placed some nodes into the tabu list based on the residual. Since the nodes in the tabu list cannot be updated, the impact of the greediness of the IDS algorithm is accordingly reduced. The RD RBP algorithm also focuses on the greediness of the IDS algorithm, where the value of C2V residual that has been updated will be decayed in a degree. Hence, the probability that this edge is selected will be reduced, avoiding the greediness of the IDS algorithm. In the above dynamic decoding algorithms, the message selecting is only based on the message residual. In addition, the edgebased dynamic decoding algorithms [15], [16] were proposed. In the edge-based BP (EBBP) [15], the check nodes are split into 3 distinct types, and the edges that connect reliable variable nodes and some type of check nodes will not be updated. Meanwhile, the method with which a bet-
35770

ter threshold is selected [16] can split check nodes into distinct types elegantly. There are other dynamic decoding algorithms [17]–[19] proposed based on the message residuals and/or judgment criteria. Since the performance of dynamic scheduling decoding algorithms is so promising, the research topic accordingly shifted to decreasing the decoding complexity, which was also investigated [20]–[22]. For the algorithm of the reliability-based-layered belief propagation (RBL-BP) [20], the absolute value of the logarithmic likelihood ratio from the channel (ABS-LLR-CH) was employed to select nodes to be updated in each iteration. Whereas, in the reliability-based residual belief propagation (REL-RBP) [21], the node with the highest benefit is updated based on the reliability of the LLRs exchanged in the message passing, where, a different measure for each iteration is also presented. A threshold parameter is incorporated in a posteriori probability residual belief propagation (APPRBP) [22] to treat the performance-complexity trade-off. This threshold parameter will determine if a variable node needs to be updated or remain as it is. All of these algorithms can achieve the same error correction performance and greatly reduce the decoding complexity.
Although these algorithms discussed above have attractive performance in error-correction and convergence rate, two problems still exist in decoding. The first is about the message updating strategy. After selecting the unreliable messages, the currently-employed IDS algorithms do not guarantee to update the selected unreliable messages with the reliable information. Aiming at the problem, we proposed the dynamic scheduling decoding algorithm of LDPC codes based on two reliability metrics and two types of variable node residuals (TRM-TVRBP). With the proposed algorithm, the most unreliable message and the most reliable message are first selected, and then the most unreliable message is updated with the most reliable one. This algorithm can achieve a much better convergence rate and error-correcting performance while the complexity increases a little.
The second problem is the greediness existing in the IDS decoders prevalently. The problem arises mainly because the major computing resources are concentrated on some nodes and edges, causing some variable nodes to have no chances of contributing their intrinsic information and some edges have no chances of being updated. To tackle the problem, we proposed the RM-RBP algorithm, with which every variable node is forced to contribute its intrinsic information. At the same time, the variable node related to it is forced to be updated. In this way, every edge is allocated an equal opportunity of being updated with the novel dynamic updating strategies. Our simulation results show that the proposed RM-RBP achieves a better convergence rate and error- correcting performance while having a lower computing complexity and message-searching complexity compared to the previously presented schedules.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the LLR BP, the RBP and the RBP with message selecting strategies not only based on residuals but some
VOLUME 7, 2019

X. Liu et al.: Improved Decoding Algorithms of LDPC Codes Based on Reliability Metrics of Variable Nodes

other judgment criteria. Sections III and IV introduce the proposed TRM-TVRBP and RM-RBP decoding algorithms respectively. Section V compares the error-correcting performance, the convergence rate and the complexity of the two proposed algorithms with those of the previous algorithms. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.

II. PRELIMINARY WORK A. LLR BP DECODING ALGORITHM
A binary LDPC code can be described using a Tanner graph consisting of N variable nodes and M check nodes, where vj denotes the j-th variable node and ci denotes the i-th check node. When the LLR BP decoding algorithm is applied to LDPC codes, the initial LLR information of every variable node vj, Cvj, is firstly initialized according to

Cvj = log

p yj|vj = 0 p yj|vj = 1

,

(1)

where yj denotes the channel information of the j-th variable node, vj denotes the j-th code bit. After initialization, the V2C and C2V messages are then updated. The V2C message mvj→ci that propagates from vj to ci is calculated as

mvj→ci =

mca→vj + Cvj ,

(2)

ca∈N (vj)\ci

where N (vj)\ci denotes the neighboring check nodes that are connected to variable node vj, except for check node ci. The C2V message mci→vj that propagates from ci to vj is generated according to





mci→vj = 2 tanh−1 

tanh mvb→ci , (3) 2

vb∈N (ci)\vj

where N (ci)\vj denotes the neighboring variable nodes that are connected to check node ci, excluding variable node vj. After generating and propagating all the V2C and C2V mes-
sages, a hard decision L(vj) of variable node vj is made based on the LLR value, which is calculated as

L vj =

mca→vj + Cvj ,

(4)

ca∈N (vj)

where N (vj) denotes all the neighboring check nodes that are connected to variable node vj.
Flooding is the most straightforward LLR BP-based algorithm, which updates all V2C messages first using (2), and then updates all C2V messages using (3). Therefore, the newly generated information in the current iteration can only be used in the coming iteration. In sequential scheduling algorithm, the new information can be generated and immediately used in the same iteration. The message-propagation decoding process will not stop until all the check equations are satisfied or the predefined maximum number of iterations is reached.

VOLUME 7, 2019

B. RBP DECODING ALGORITHM

The updates to messages in the flooding algorithm and the sequential scheduling algorithm follow a predefined order. In contrast, the IDS dynamically adjusts the order of message updates. As the first presented IDS algorithm, RBP determines the order of message updating based on the C2V residual. The C2V residual is defined as the magnitude of the difference between the C2V messages before and after an update. The C2V [8] residual can be defined as

rci→vj = mcpir→e vj − mci→vj ,

(5)

where mcpir→e vj is the pre-computation of the next updated C2V message. As mentioned above, this algorithm only updates
the C2V edge with the maximum C2V messages residual.
Hence, all the C2V messages are computed at the beginning
of decoding in order to find the C2V edge necessary to
be updated. Assuming that the edge from check node ci to variable node vj has the maximum C2V residual. Firstly, the message mpcir→e vj is propagated to variable node vj. Then, variable node vj generates new V2C messages and propagates them to its neighbor check node ca, where ca ∈ N (vj)\ci. The check nodes ca receive the new V2C messages, refresh the pre-computed C2V messages mpcare→vb and the residual rca→vb , where vb ∈ N (ca)\vj. Finally, the residual of the message currently being updated, rci→vj , is set to 0, and the C2V message with the largest residual is selected for the next
update.

C. RELATED WORK
As has been known, decoding algorithms affect the errorcorrecting performance of codewords while the message selecting and updating strategy play an important role in decoding algorithms. To further improve the error-correcting performance, some message selecting strategies are proposed [17]–[19] not only based on residuals but some other judgment criteria.
If the sign of the Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) of a variable node is changed before and after an update, the variable node is said to be unstable [17]. An unstable variable node means that its decoding results will change before and after an iteration of decoding. Hence, more information is needed to correct decoding errors. Accordingly, it is required that the unstable node is updated first. The unstable decision is introduced and combined with V2C residual to determine the sequence of messages to be updated first in the IVC RBP algorithm [17]. In brief, the message selecting strategy of IVC RBP firstly judges whether each variable node is an unstable node with the unstable decision. Then, the stable nodes are grouped into the stable set and the unstable nodes are placed in the unstable set. If there is more than one unstable variable node in the unstable set, and the most unstable variable node should be selected for updating. Hence, the variable node with the maximum V2C residual in the unstable set is searched and selected as the most unstable node and then the predefined update operation is performed. If there is no unstable variable node, the variable node with the maximum V2C

35771

X. Liu et al.: Improved Decoding Algorithms of LDPC Codes Based on Reliability Metrics of Variable Nodes

residual in all of the variable nodes is searched and then the predefined update operation is performed.
Based on the unstable decision, a new dynamic selection strategy with a more accurate criterion is proposed [18]. In the OV RBP algorithm, it is necessary to determine whether all variable nodes are stable, just like those in the IVC RBP. If the variable nodes are unstable, they are placed in the unstable set denoted with C; otherwise, they are put into the stable set. If set C is empty, the variable node having the largest residual among all variable nodes is chosen as the next to be updated. Hence, there is only one variable node in set C. Accordingly, the most unreliable node is found and updated. Finally, the rest of the result is considered. In this case, there is more than one variable node in set C. However, which node is the most unreliable one cannot be determined. Hence, a new measurement is introduced in the algorithm, where we calculate the number of unsatisfied parity check equations of each variable node, and the largest number among these numbers will be found and denoted with P. Based on the judgment stated below, the set, C, can be divided into two subsets. If the number of the unsatisfied parity check equations of a node reaches P, the variable node is put into set C1; otherwise, into set C2. In this way, the variable nodes in C1 can be considered to be more unreliable than the nodes in C2. If subset C1 is nonempty, the variable node having the largest residual in C1 is to be chosen to be updated since it is just the one, the most unreliable variable node; otherwise, the variable node having the largest residual in subset C2 is to be selected for updating. The combination of the unstable decision, the judgment of the unsatisfied parity check equations and the message residual of variable node makes the selection of the least reliable variable node more accurate.
Unlike the above two algorithms, a method termed as the stability criterion [19] is employed to judge whether a variable node is reliable or not. During the iterative decoding of LDPC codes, if the LLR sign of a variable node remains unchanged in three consecutive iterations, it indicates that the variable node is stable. After partitioning, all variable nodes into two sets, the variable node set N1, which dissatisfies the conditions of this method, and another one N2, which satisfies the conditions of this method. If Set N1 is not empty, the most unreliable variable node having the maximum-node-residual is found from N1. Otherwise, it will be found in N2. Finally, the edge with the largest residual will be found among all the edges connected to the most unreliable variable node. And the edge is taken as the most unreliable edge. The most unreliable variable node and the most unreliable edge will be updated first in this paper [19]. Through the above operation, the triple-judgment-based dynamic selection strategy was proposed.
III. PROPOSED TRM-TVRBP ALGORITHM BASED ON RESIDUAL AND METRICS A. RELIABILITY METRICS The proposed strategy is constructed based on two reliability metrics, one of which is designed to select the most
35772

FIGURE 1. The vicinal variable nodes.

unreliable message, named the Reliability Metric I (RM-I), and the other of which is designed to select the most reliable message, termed as Reliability Metric II (RM-II).
Firstly, for each variable node, all the check equations, in which the variable node participates, are calculated, and the number of equations that do not satisfy the check relation is recorded as U (v). The maximum value of U (v) is defined as max(U ) and its minimum value is denoted as min(U ). As we know, the more check equations a variable node does not satisfy, the more unreliable it becomes. Hence, all variable nodes are divided into two sets based on whether U (v) is equal to max(U ) or not. If it is, the variable node is placed into set N1; otherwise into set N2. Therefore, set N1 is a set consisting of all most unreliable variable nodes, and set N2 is a set consisting of the remaining variable nodes. If there are a number of variable nodes in set N1, we cannot distinguish which node is more unreliable than another. Then, a novel metric is proposed, which can be defined as

dv

M (vj) = T (ci) · UMAX (v(vj)),

(6)

i=1

where T (ci) denotes the result of parity check node (equation) ci, ci ∈ N (vj), i means the index of check nodes and the maximum value of i corresponds to the total number, dv, of check nodes connected with this variable node (in other words,
dv denotes the degree of this variable node). T (ci) equals 0 If the check is correct, and it equals 1 if the check is incorrect.
v(vj) is a set that contains all vicinal variable nodes being connected to variable node vj through check node ci, except variable node vj, i.e. v(vj) ∈ N (ci)\vj, as shown in Fig. 1. UMAX (v(vj)) denotes the largest number of check equations in error, in which each vicinal variable node, participates. If the
value of UMAX (v(vj)) is bigger, the probability of the error bit in v(vj) is also higher while the probability that the error bit is vj is lower. When T (ci) = 1, there are odd number of bits occurring in error in N (ci). The probability that there are 3 or more bits occurring in error in N (ci) is very low at the region of medium to high signal to noise ratio (SNR). Hence, in most
instances, we consider the case that there is only one error
in N (ci). In conclusion, the bigger value of M (vj) means the variable node vj is more reliable. Then, the value M (vj) of

VOLUME 7, 2019

X. Liu et al.: Improved Decoding Algorithms of LDPC Codes Based on Reliability Metrics of Variable Nodes

the variable nodes in set N1 are calculated, and the maximum value of M (vj) is defined as max(M ) and the minimum value is denoted as min(M ). Based on the above knowledge, the nodes in set N1 are further divided into two sets based on whether or not the value M (vj) of these nodes vj is equal to min(M ). If the condition is true, the variable node is grouped into set N11; otherwise, set into set N12. Obviously, the most unreliable set is the one, N11, and the next is set N12, while the last is set N2. The whole process is stated as RM-I.
For the RM-II, there is a little difference from the RM-I. All variable nodes in the RM-II are divided into sets N3 and N4 depending on whether the number U (v) is equal to the minimum value min(U ) of all U (v), where set N3 consists of all stable variable nodes and set N4 the remaining variable nodes. If N3 is non-empty, the variable nodes in N3 are further divided into sets N31 and N32, where set N31 consists of these variable nodes whose M (v) reaches the maximum and set N32 the remaining variable nodes. Clearly, the sets are sorted into N31, N32 and N4 in the order of deceasing reliability.
FIGURE 2. The procedure of two-step message selecting strategy.
B. THE PROPOSED TRM-TVRBP ALGORITHM The TRM-TVRBP algorithm is developed based on the combination of the RM-I, the RM-II and the message residuals of variable nodes. Figure 2 shows the two-step message selecting strategy of the TRM-TVRBP algorithm. Firstly, all variable nodes are classified into 3 sets (N11, N12 and N2) with RM-I. Then, the variable node with the largest message residual regarded as the most unreliable node can be found in the most unreliable set. Assuming that vj is the most unreliable variable node selected in the first step, and the message used to update the selected unreliable variable node vj must be reliable. Hence, the following step is to select the most reliable variable node from a vicinal variable node set v(vj),
VOLUME 7, 2019

which is related to vj and meets the relationship in a way v(vj) ∈ N (ci)\vj, ci ∈ N (vj). After categorizing the set v(vj) with RM-II, we select the variable node message with the minimum residual as the most reliable message in the nonempty and most reliable set.
FIGURE 3. Core decoding procedure for TRM-TVRBP algorithm.
After selecting the most unreliable and the most reliable messages, followed is the update of the selected unreliable messages with the selected reliable messages. Figure 3 shows the decoding process of the TRM-TVRBP algorithm. Assuming that vj is the selected most unreliable variable node, vk is the selected most reliable variable node. In the first step, the message from check nodes ca to variable nodes vd is generated and propagated, where ca ∈ N (vk ), and vd ∈ N (ca)\vk . Meanwhile, the LLR values and the variable node residuals r(vd ) of the variable nodes vd are calculated. Then, the V2C messages are updated from the variable node vj to its partial neighbor check nodes cm, where {cm ∈ N (vj)} & {cm ∈/ [N (vj) ∩ N (vk )]}. Through the two steps, the most unreliable node, vj, is updated by its most reliable vicinal variable node vk , so the messages mvj→cm for the next update will be more reliable. At last, the C2V messages from check nodes cm to their partial neighboring variable nodes vt are updated, where the partial variable nodes vt satisfy {vt ∈ N (cm)} &{vt ∈/ N (ca)\vk }. In order to prepare for the message-selecting of the next iteration, the LLR values and the residuals r(vt ) of variable nodes vt are calculated. After finishing the updating steps, the variable node residual r(vj) is set to zero in order to avoid being selected in the next followed iteration. The detailed decoding process for the TRM-TVRBP algorithm with pseudo-code is described in Algorithm 1.
IV. RELIABILITY METRIC-BASED RBP (RM-RBP) ALGORITHM In order to reduce the greediness of the IDS algorithms, we propose the RM-RBP algorithm, it is based on a novel dynamic message-updating strategy and the above-stated RM-I. The problem of the greediness is caused by the structure of LDPC codes since many circles exist in the LPDC codes. And a phenomenon has been found in our investigation, in the error frame, the message updating process only concentrates on a set of some nodes and edges, which will form a circle,. Hence, the wrong information is continuously transmitted in this circle, and the correct information outside the circle cannot be transmitted into the circle to modify the wrong information. In other words, it is forced to continue
35773

X. Liu et al.: Improved Decoding Algorithms of LDPC Codes Based on Reliability Metrics of Variable Nodes

Algorithm 1 TRM-TVRBP Algorithm 1: Initialize all mci→vj = 0, mvj→ci = L(0)(vj)and Itermax 2:for i = 1 to Itermax do 3: Find the largest r(vj) with the RM-I in all variable nodes 4: Find the least r(vk ) with the RM-II in particular partial variable nodes 5: Let r(vj) = 0 6: for every ca ∈ N (vk ) do 7: for every vd ∈ N (ca) vk do 8: Generate and Propagate mca→vd 9: Calculate L(vd ) for all vd and r(vd ) for all vd except vj 10: end for 11: end for 12: for every cm do 13: Generate and Propagate mvj→cm 14: for every vt do 15: Generate and Propagate mcm→vt 16: Calculate L(vt ) and r(vt ) 17: end for 18: end for 19: if stopping rule is not satisfied then 20: Go back to line 3 21: end if 22:end for
FIGURE 4. Core decoding procedure for RM-RBP.
selecting another node in this circle when the most unreliable node is chosen the next time, which wastes most of the computing resources. In order to solve this problem, the most unreliable vicinal variable node related to each variable node in the proposed RM-RBP algorithm is selected through using the RM-I and the message residual of variable node. Then, the specific messages are updated. Hence, each variable node can contribute its inherent information to iterative decoding, and message updating process cannot fall into these circles. In this way, the computing resources consumed in those circles over and over again are avoided being wasted.
The decoding steps of the RM-RBP algorithm are shown in Fig. 4 Firstly, all variable nodes are classified by using RM-I. Then, for variable node vj, the set of check nodes connected with variable node vj, is searched, i.e., set ci ∈ N (vj) is found. Accordingly, the unreliable variable node vk is found from the set v(vj). Followed are the updates to be performed as follows. The C2V messages from check nodes ca to variable node vk are updated, where ca ∈ N (vk ).
35774

After receiving the updated messages, variable node vk generates and propagates new V2C messages to its neighbor check nodes ca. Then, the C2V messages from check nodes ca to their neighbor variable nodes vd and vj except for vk are updated, where vd ∈ N (ca)\vk , and ca ∈ N (vk ). At last, the LLR values and the residuals r(vd ) are calculated in order to prepare for the message-selecting of the next iteration, while the variable node residual r(vk ) is set to zero in order to avoid being selected in the next followed iteration. Afterwards, the same selecting and updating operations are performed as stated above for the variable nodes from the second to the last. After the above steps performed, each variable node updates the most unreliable vicinal variable node through its intrinsic information, which continues to play a role in the subsequent decoding. The detailed decoding process for the RM-RBP algorithm with pseudo-code is described in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 RM-RBP Algorithm
1: Initialize all mci→vj = 0, mvj→ci = L(0)(vj) and Itermax 2:for i = 1 to Itermax do 3: for every vj do 4: Find the largest r(vk ) with the Reliability Metric in particular partial variable nodes 5: Let r(vk ) = 0 6: for every ca ∈ N (vk ) do 7: Generate and Propagate mca→vk 8: Calculate L(vk ) 9: end for 10: for every ca ∈ N (vk ) do 11: Generate and Propagate mvk →ca 12: for every vd ∈ N (ca) vk do 13: Generate and Propagate mca→vd 14: Calculate L(vd ) and r(vd ) 15: end for 16: end for 17: end for 18: if stopping rule is not satisfied then 19: Go back to line 3 20: end if 21:end for
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION In this section, the decoding performance of the proposed TRM-TVRBP and RM-RBP algorithms is obtained through a large number of simulations. The computation complexity of these algorithms is evaluated according to the number of computations required in each step of decoding. All simulations are performed over the AWGN channel with the BPSK modulation. The codes used in the simulation are denoted with (N , M ), where N is the block length and M denotes the number of parity check bits. Codes (256, 128) and (1008, 504) are the regular LDPC codes constructed with the progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm [23]. Codes (576, 144), (576, 288) and (1152, 576) are the irregular LDPC
VOLUME 7, 2019

X. Liu et al.: Improved Decoding Algorithms of LDPC Codes Based on Reliability Metrics of Variable Nodes
codes constructed based on the IEEE 802.16e standard [24]. In order to demonstrate the performance of these algorithms, the proposed algorithms are compared with other IDS algorithms, including Flooding [1], CSBP [5], NW RBP [8], VC RBP [10], IVC RBP [17] and OV RBP [18]. In the paper the maximum number of iterations is set to 5 unless otherwise specified.

FIGURE 7. Performance of BER vs Eb/N0 of decoding algorithms: Flooding, CSBP, VCRBP, NWRBP, OVRBP, TRM-TVRBP and RM-RBP for LDPC code with rate 1/2 block-length 1152.
FIGURE 5. Performance of BER vs Eb/N0 of decoding algorithms: Flooding, CSBP, VCRBP, NWRBP, OVRBP, TRM-TVRBP and RM-RBP for LDPC code with rate 3/4 block-length 576.

FIGURE 6. Performance of BER vs Eb/N0 of decoding algorithms: Flooding, CSBP, VCRBP, NWRBP, OVRBP, TRM-TVRBP and RM-RBP for LDPC code with rate 1/2 block-length 1008.
A. ERROR CORRECTING PERFORMANCE Figures 5, 6 and 7 show the bit error ratio (BER) performance and frame error ratio (FER) performance of the decoding algorithms for LDPC codes of block-lengths 576, 1008 and 1152, where, the dashed lines represent the FER and the solid lines represent the BER. In Fig. 5, it is obvious that the error-correcting performance of the proposed algorithms is better than any of the other compared algorithms. It can be observed that with the increase of signal to noise ratio, the performance advantage is becoming more prominent.
VOLUME 7, 2019

FIGURE 8. Performance of BER vs the number of iterations of decoding algorithms: Flooding, CSBP, VCRBP, NWRBP, OVRBP, TRM-TVRBP and RM-RBP for LDPC code with rate 1/2 block-length 256 at Eb/N0 = 3.5dB.
Especially, when Eb/N0 = 4dB, the proposed RM-RBP and TRM-TVRBP algorithms behave the best and the second, respectively in terms of the BER and FER. Compared with the OV RBP [18], the proposed TRM-TVRBP can gain a half of BER, as low as 7×10−7, while the proposed RM-RBP algorithm is better than the TRM-TVRBP in BER, low to 4×10−7. The simulation results for larger block sizes, 1008 and 1152, are shown in Figs. 6 and 7. It is clear that the proposed TRM-TVRBP and RM-RBP roughly obtain the same BER and FER performance as that in Fig. 5. The FER performance of the TRM-TVRBP is slightly better than that of OVRBP while the RM-RBP still has considerable advantages. Even at lower SNR, there is a clear advantage for both of the proposed algorithms if compared with the others. The performance is getting more attractive as the block length of codes increases.
In order to demonstrate that both of the proposed algorithms converge faster than any of the other compared algorithms, the BER performance versus the number of iterations is simulated and shown in Figs. 8, 9 and 10. Figure 8 shows
35775

X. Liu et al.: Improved Decoding Algorithms of LDPC Codes Based on Reliability Metrics of Variable Nodes

FIGURE 9. Performance of BER vs the number of iterations of decoding algorithms: Flooding, CSBP, VCRBP, NWRBP, OVRBP, TRM-TVRBP and RM-RBP for LDPC code with rate 3/4 block-length 576 at Eb/N0 = 3.5dB.

B. COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS In this subsection, we evaluated the decoding complexity for the proposed TRM-TVRBP and RM-RBP algorithms. For convenience, a variable node updated by C2V messages and a check node updated by V2C messages are termed as the C2V updating and V2C updating, respectively. For some decoding algorithms, the residual calculation is necessary for updating. The computational complexity of this part is regarded as the pre-computation. In addition, if an algorithm need find the most unreliable variable nodes among all variable nodes, a certain amount of searching complexity is required. This decoding complexity is indispensable in each iteration of LDPC decoding, where one iteration means the process of selecting and updating all edges in the Tanner graph. The total number of edges in the entire Tanner graph is E = dc · M = dv · N , where dc and dv denote the average degree of check nodes and variable nodes, respectively.
TABLE 1. Complexity of different decoding algorithms.

FIGURE 10. Performance of BER vs the number of iterations of decoding algorithms: Flooding, CSBP, VCRBP, NWRBP, OVRBP, TRM-TVRBP and RM-RBP for LDPC code with rate 1/2 block-length 576 at Eb/N0 = 2.5dB.
the BER performance vs the number of iterations for the (256, 128) LDPC code at Eb/N0 = 2.5dB. It can be seen that the RM-RBP algorithm has the highest convergence rate. After the first iteration, the TRM-TVRBP algorithm and RM-RBP algorithm both get a much lower BER than other algorithms. When the iteration number is less than 20, the error-correcting performance of the RM-RBP algorithm gets most quickly improved and the TRM-TVRBP algorithm ranks the second among the algorithms of interest. For the RM-RBP algorithm, its BER performance always ranks the first no matter how many iterations the algorithms run, which shows RM-RBP has a considerable advantage over other algorithms. Figures 9 and 10 show the BER performance versus the number of iterations for (576, 144) LDPC codes at Eb/N0 = 3.5dB, and the (576, 288) LDPC codes at Eb/N0 = 2.5dB. The simulations for both of them demonstrate that the proposed RM-RBP and TRM-TVRBP algorithms have the fastest and the second convergence speed, respectively. In other words, the RM-RBP and the TRM-TVRBP not only have better error correction performance but have faster convergence speed.
35776

In Table 1, the updating complexity is presented, which consists of the number of C2V updating, V2C updating and pre-computations for different decoding algorithms. In Table 2, different searching complexities are demonstrated for different algorithms. For the NW RBP and the OV RBP algorithms, the pre-computations are actually the calculations of C2V messages, while for the IVC RBP algorithm, the pre-computations are the computations of V2C messages. Therefore, the pre-computations of the algorithms mentioned above can be added to the corresponding C2V update and V2C update. The results can be classified into the complexity of C2V and V2C calculations as shown in the 4th and 3rd columns in Table 2, respectively. For the proposed TRM-TVRBP and RM-RBP algorithms, the computations of the residuals in them are performed with the variable node messages. Hence, we classify the pre-computations of the two algorithms into an individual item as presented in 5th column of Table 2.
For the updating complexity of the proposed algorithms, it is shown in Fig. 4 that there are dv C2V messages to be used for updating the most unreliable variable node, and then the updated variable node updates the check nodes with dv V2C messages. Finally, there are dv · (dc − 1) C2V messages for these check nodes to use and update the variable nodes connected to them, except the most unreliable variable node in the RM-RBP algorithm. Hence, the number of V2C, C2V and pre-computations for updating in the RM-RBP is [N ·dv], {N · [dv + dv · (dc − 1)]} and {N · [dv + dv · (dc − 1)]},
VOLUME 7, 2019

X. Liu et al.: Improved Decoding Algorithms of LDPC Codes Based on Reliability Metrics of Variable Nodes

TABLE 2. Equivalent complexity of different decoding algorithms.
respectively, which can be reduced to E, E · dc and E · dc. As has been discussed before, the pre-computations of the RM-RBP should be classified to an individual calculation which is different from the C2V and V2C computations because they are performed with the variable nodes residuals. Thus, there are E V2C computations, E·dc C2V computations and E · dc calculations of r(v) in the RM-RBP algorithm. For the TRM-TVRBP, when the updating processes come into the phase of V2C updates, the number of check nodes cm is related to the structure of codes, where, the maximum of cm is dv − 1, and the minimum is 1. For convenience of computations, we take the half value, dv/2, as the number of neighboring check nodes cm. Similarly, we take the value (dc − 1)/2 as the number of partial neighboring variable nodes vt . Thus, there are dv/2 V2C messages and [dv · (dc − 1)] × 5/4 C2V messages being propagated in each updating process. Equivalently, there are E/2 V2C computations, (5E/4) (dc − 1) C2V computations and (5E/4) (dc − 1) calculations of r(v) in the TRM-TVRBP algorithm.
The search complexity is listed in the second column in Table 2. For the proposed RM-RBP, the most unreliable variable node is selected among the variable nodes that are connected to some check nodes, which are connected to a certain variable node. Assuming that vi is just the certain variable node, and vk is the selected variable node with the maximum node residual. Then, the C2V edges to be updated are selected among all the edges, ca2 vk , where ca ∈ N (vk ), vk ∈ N (cj), cj ∈ N (vi). Thus, for the RM-RBP, the number of comparisons in each decoding is dv · (dc − 1), and the number of compare operations for each iteration is N · dv · (dc − 1) = E(dc − 1).
For the proposed TRM-TVRBP algorithm, the most unreliable variable node is firstly selected among all variable nodes. Then, the variable node with the minimum node residual is selected from some variable nodes. Assuming that the selected unreliable node is vi, then the reliable variable node is selected from dv · (dc − 1) variable nodes. Thus, N · (N − 1) comparisons are needed in the selection of the most unreliable messages, and N · dv · (dc − 1) = E(dc − 1) comparisons
VOLUME 7, 2019

are needed in the selection of the most reliable messages. As a result, the total search complexity of the TRM-TVRBP is [N (N − 1) + E(dc − 1)].
Because the value of dc is much smaller than that of M , the search complexity of the RM-RBP is less than that of the VC RBP and NWRBP as indicated in Table 2. The complexity of the IVC RBP and OV RBP algorithms can be expressed as O(E2) and O(N 2), respectively. While the complexity of the RM-RBP algorithm can be expressed as O(E). It is clear that the complexity of the RM-RBP is much less than that of the IVC RBP and OV RBP algorithms. That is to say, the proposed RM-RBP algorithm has the lowest search complexity with O(E) when compared with other IDS algorithms. In conclusion, the proposed RM-RBP algorithm has the same updating complexity and the lower search complexity when compared with the OV RBP algorithm. In addition, the RM-RBP is also superior in computational complexity.
VI. CONCLUSION In this paper, we present two innovative IDS algorithms, TRM-TVRBP and RM-RBP, in order to overcome the problems in message-updating and greediness, respectively. The TRM-TVRBP algorithm can make sure that the unreliable messages are updated by the reliable messages through employing the proposed two-step message selecting scheme. The RM-RBP enables all variable nodes and all edges to have the opportunity of being updated with the suggested messageupdating scheme to overcome the greediness of IDS. Both of the proposed algorithms can achieve much better BER performance and convergence rate. Especially, the RM-RBP algorithm is outstanding. In addition, the complexity of the RM-RBP algorithm and TRM-TVRBP algorithm can be decreased significantly since the pre-computations are not required for them, especially the RM-RBP algorithm. Our simulation results and analyses show that the two proposed algorithms behave much better than the prior arts when considering the BER, convergence rate, and decoding complexity as a whole.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, ‘‘Low-density parity-check codes,’’ IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, ‘‘Good codes based on very sparse matrices,’’ in Proc. 5th IMA Conf. Cryptogr. Coding, vol. 1025, Dec. 1995, pp. 100–111.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, ‘‘Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,’’ IEEE Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[4] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, ‘‘Shuffled belief propagation decoding,’’ in Proc. 26th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Pacific Grove, CA, USA, vol. 1, Nov. 2002, pp. 8–15.
[5] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, ‘‘An efficient message-passing schedule for LDPC decoding,’’ in Proc. 23rd IEEE Conv. Elect. Electron. Eng., Tel-Aviv, Israel, Sep. 2004, pp. 223–226.
[6] D. E. Hocevar, ‘‘A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,’’ in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., Austin, TX, USA, Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[7] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, ‘‘Efficient serial message-passing schedules for LDPC decoding,’’ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4076–4091, Oct. 2007.
35777

X. Liu et al.: Improved Decoding Algorithms of LDPC Codes Based on Reliability Metrics of Variable Nodes

[8] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, ‘‘Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Glasgow, U.K., Jun. 2007, pp. 932–937.
[9] H.-C. Lee, Y.-H. Su, and Y.-L. Ueng, ‘‘A rate-compatible low-density parity-check convolutional coding scheme using informed dynamic scheduling,’’ in Proc. IEEE 85th Veh. Technol. Conf., Sydney, NSW, Australia, Nov. 2017, pp. 1–5.
[10] J. H. Kim, M. Y. Nam, and H. Y. Song, ‘‘Variable-to-check residual belief propagation for LDPC codes,’’ Electron. Lett., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 117–118, Jan. 2009.
[11] H. C. Lee, Y. L. Ueng, S. M. Yeh, and W. Y. Weng, ‘‘Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886–896, Mar. 2013.
[12] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, K. Cai, and G. Han, ‘‘Low-complexity beliefpropagation decoding via dynamic silent-variable-node-free scheduling,’’ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 28–31, Jan. 2017.
[13] X. Liu, C. Fan, and X. Chen, ‘‘Dynamic scheduling decoding of LDPC codes based on tabu search,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 11, pp. 4612–4621, Nov. 2017.
[14] H. Zhang and S. Chen, ‘‘Residual-decaying-based informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,’’ IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 23656–23666, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2899106.
[15] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, ‘‘Edge-based dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC and RS codes,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 525–535, Feb. 2017.
[16] Q. Xie, ‘‘Comments on ‘edge-based dynamic scheduling for beliefpropagation decoding of LDPC codes,’’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 3707–3708, Aug. 2018. doi: 10.1109/TCOMM.2017.2783968.
[17] Y. Gong, X. Liu, W. Ye, and G. Han, ‘‘Effective informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2683–2691, Oct. 2011.
[18] X. Liu, Y. Zhang, and R. Cui, ‘‘Variable-node-based dynamic scheduling strategy for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,’’ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 147–150, Feb. 2015.
[19] X. Liu, Z. Zhou, R. Cui, and E. Liu, ‘‘Informed decoding algorithms of LDPC codes based on dynamic selection strategy,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1357–1366, Apr. 2016.
[20] R. Sun, X. Hou, J. Sun, H. Guan, and Z. Zhao, ‘‘Reliability-based-layered belief propagation for iterative decoding of LDPC codes,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Vail, CO, USA, Jun. 2018, pp. 1156–1160.
[21] C. Healy, Z. Shao, R. M. Oliveira, R. C. de Lamare, and L. L. Mendes, ‘‘Knowledge-aided informed dynamic scheduling for LDPC decoding of short blocks,’’ IET Commun., vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 1094–1101, May 2018.
[22] T. Xia, H.-C. Wu, and S. C.-H. Huang, ‘‘A novel fast LDPC decoder using APP-based dynamic scheduling scheme,’’ in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., San Diego, CA, USA, Dec. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[23] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, ‘‘Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,’’ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[24] LDPC Coding for OFDMA PHY, Standard IEEE C802.16e-05/0066r3, Jan. 2005.
XINGCHENG LIU (SM’12) was born in Jiangxi, China. He received the B.E. and M.E. degrees in electrical engineering from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, and the Ph.D. degree from Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU), Guangzhou, China.
He received the Royal Society KC Wong Fellowship of the U.K. for his Postdoctoral research with the University of Southampton, Southampton, U.K., from 2002 to 2003. He was a Visiting Scientist with Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA, from 2004 to 2005. He is currently a Full Professor with the School of Electronics and Information Technology, SYSU. He is also with the School of Information Science, Xinhua College of SYSU as a Leader in the field of electrical engineering and automation. He is currently the Primary Investigator of several projects on wireless communications and networking. He has authored over 100 peer-reviewed papers in journals and conferences. His main research interests include channel coding theory and applications, mobile communications, wireless sensor networks, and Internet of Things. Dr. Liu is a Senior Member of the China Institute of Communications.
35778

LI’E ZI was born in Fengqing, Yunnan, China. She received the B.E. degree in electrical engineering from Yunnan University, Kunming, China, in 2015, and the M.E. degree in electrical engineering from Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China, in 2018. She is currently an Engineer with the Guangdong Airport Baiyun Information Technology Co., Ltd., Guangzhou, China. Her main research interests include channel coding theory and mobile communications.
DONG YANG was born in Jiangxi, China. He received the B.E. degree in electrical engineering from the Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China, in 2011, and the M.E. degree in electrical engineering from Shenyang Aerospace University, Shenyang, China, in 2016. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. His main research interests include channel coding theory and mobile communications.
ZHONGFENG WANG (F’16) received the B.E. and M.S. degrees from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA, in 2000. He was with National Semiconductor Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, USA.
He was an Assistant Professor with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. He served as a leading VLSI Architect with Broadcom Corporation, Irvine, CA, USA, for nearly nine years, where he has contributed significantly on 10 Gb/s and beyond high-speed networking products. In addition, he has made critical contributions in designing FEC coding schemes for 100 Gb/s and 400 Gb/s Ethernet standards. His technical proposals have been adopted by many international networking standards. He joined Nanjing University as a Distinguished Professor, in 2016. He is a world-recognized expert on VLSI for signal processing systems. He has authored over 180 technical papers, edited one book (on VLSI), and has filed tens of U.S. patent applications and disclosures. His current research interests include digital communications, machine learning, and efficient VLSI implementation. Dr. Wang was a Technical Program Committee Member (or Co-Chair), the Session (or Track) Chair, and a Review Committee Member for tens of international conferences. He was a recipient of the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society VLSI Transactions Best Paper Award in 2007. In 2013, he served in the Best Paper Award Selection Committee for the IEEE Circuits and System Society. Since 2004, he has been serving as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS-I (TCAS-I), TCAS-II, and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VLSI SYSTEMS for multiple terms. He was a Guest Editor for a special issue of the IEEE JOURNAL ON EMERGING AND SELECTED TOPICS IN CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS.
VOLUME 7, 2019

