Received January 21, 2019, accepted February 1, 2019, date of publication February 13, 2019, date of current version March 5, 2019. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2899106
Residual-Decaying-Based Informed Dynamic Scheduling for Belief-Propagation Decoding of LDPC Codes
HUILIAN ZHANG AND SHAOPING CHEN
Hubei Key Laboratory of Intelligent Wireless Communications, South-Central University for Nationalities, Wuhan 430074, China
Corresponding author: Shaoping Chen (spchen@scuec.edu.cn) This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, under Grant 61571467.

ABSTRACT Belief-propagation (BP) algorithm and its variants are well-established methods for iterative decoding of LDPC codes. Among them, residual belief-propagation (RBP), which is the most primitive and representative informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) strategy, can significantly accelerate the convergence speed. However, RBP decoding suffers from a poor convergence error-rate performance due to its greedy property, which is one of the challenging issues in the design of IDS strategies. To tackle this problem, a novel IDS scheme, namely residual-decaying-based residual belief-propagation (RD-RBP) algorithm, is presented in this paper. In RD-RBP, a decaying mechanism is introduced to manipulate the residuals of those check-to-variable messages, preventing the decoding resources from being unreasonably occupied by a small group of edges in the Tanner graph. The greediness is therefore alleviated and better performance of convergence error-rate is achieved. Besides, a two-stage scheduling scheme combining prior-art variablenode and variable-to-check-edge RBP (V-VCRBP) with RD-RBP, named V-VC-RD-RBP, is proposed for achieving both fast convergence speed and a low convergence error-rate. The simulation results validate the advantages of the proposed schemes.
INDEX TERMS LDPC codes, belief-propagation decoding, informed dynamic scheduling, residualdecaying, greediness.

I. INTRODUCTION Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have aroused widespread attention due to their capacity approaching performance achieved by decoding with low complexity belief-propagation (BP) algorithm [1], [2]. BP decoding is conventionally performed by repeating the flooding schedule, where all variable-to-check (V2C) messages are updated in parallel, and then all check-to-variable (C2V) messages are updated synchronously. Due to the small cycles in the Tanner graph [3], an error-floor occurs in BP decoding [4], [5], preventing it from achieving an Maximum-Likelihood (ML) performance. Ever since the introduction of BP decoding for LDPC codes, a great deal of research efforts have been made to mitigate the error-floor effects [6]–[8] or to accelerate the convergence speed [9]–[16] or to handle them concurrently [17]. Researches in [9]–[17] have demonstrated that
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Mingjun Dai.

sequentially scheduled message updates can facilitate the utilization of the most newly generated messages such that the convergence speed of BP decoding can be significantly accelerated. Among those sequential scheduling strategies, the standard sequential scheduling (SSS) strategies [9]–[12] can accelerate the convergence speed to twice as fast as that of flooding by updating the messages in a predetermined order, e.g., Layered-BP (LBP) [10], and Shuffled-BP [11]. But the acceleration gain is limited by the fixed (not dynamically scheduled) order of message updates. To further speed up the convergence, many informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) strategies have been proposed, among them, residual beliefpropagation (RBP) decoding [13], [14] is the most primitive and representative one. Actually, the inspiring idea of RBP was first presented in [18] and later used for LDPC decoding [13].
RBP algorithm prioritizes the message updates based on a metric called residual, which is the absolute difference between the values of the C2V messages before and after

23656

2169-3536 
 2019 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

VOLUME 7, 2019

H. Zhang, S. Chen: Residual-Decaying-Based IDS for BP Decoding of LDPC Codes

an update. The underlying idea behind RBP is that the preferential propagation of C2V message with the largest residual will have the largest contribution to the decoding. Hence, a faster convergence speed can be achieved if this C2V message is propagated first. However, RBP is a greedy algorithm [9], [13], where the messages of certain small group of edges in the Tanner graph may be updated for a large number of times while some of other edges have no or little chance of updating. Such greediness will prevent RBP from converging to a low error-rate since the intrinsic information from some variable nodes cannot be fully utilized.
Aimed at achieving a fast convergence speed while allowing a low convergence error-rate, many improved versions of RBP have hitherto been derived. The Node-wise RBP (NW-RBP) [13] proves to be an effective technique for alleviating the greediness of RBP by propagating simultaneously all the C2V messages originating from the selected check node with the maximum C2V residual. In fact, NW-RBP achieves a relatively lower convergence errorrate at a cost of slower convergence speed. Instead of using C2V residual for scheduling, the Variable-to-Check RBP (VC-RBP) algorithm [19] employs V2C residual as the metric for prioritizing the message updates. Since VC-RBP doesn’t require precomputation for residual computation, it has a lower complexity but a slower convergence speed compared to that of the RBP and NW-RBP.
In order to improve the IDS performance, Liu et.al. presented a serial of effective scheduling strategies, e.g., Informed Variable-to-Check RBP (IVC-RBP) and Adaptive Informed Variable-to-Check RBP (AIVC-RBP) [20], Oscillating Variable Nodes based Residual Belief-propagation (OV-RBP) [21], Variable-Node and Variable-to-Check-Edge RBP(V-VCRBP), Variable-Node and Check-to-VariableEdge RBP (V-CVRBP) [22], and Tabu Search based Dynamic Scheduling (TSDS) algorithm [23]. IVC-RBP employs a dual-decision strategy to find the unstable variable node for post processing and to locate the V2C message for preferential update. AIVC-RBP is an improved version of IVC-RBP, allowing a better BER performance. OV-RBP employs a selection strategy based on triple-judgment-strategy to speed up the convergence and mitigate the effects of trapping sets [5]. TSDS mitigates the greediness by employing a tabu mechanism.
Lee et al. found in [9] that the poor convergence error-rate performance of RBP is mainly caused by two phenomena, the greedy-group and the silence of certain variable-nodes in RBP. Based on this finding, they proposed two effective algorithms, Quota-based RBP (Q-RBP) and Silent-VariableNode-Free RBP (SVNF) [9]. The idea behind Q-RBP is to limit the number of updates for each C2V message, forcing the edges within a greedy group to release some occupied resources such that more variable nodes have a chance to propagate their intrinsic information to the decoding. To guarantee that each variable node has a chance to contribute its intrinsic information to the decoding, SVNF selects for each variable node an edge with the maximum
VOLUME 7, 2019

C2V residual from all the C2V edges originating from the neighboring check nodes of this variable node for preferential update. Since the fairness is introduced by SVNF, the greedy effect is significantly mitigated. Recently, an improved version of SVNF with a low complexity, called Dynamic Silent-Variable-Node-Free scheduling (D-SVNF), is presented in [24]. D-SVNF tries to guarantee that the latest updated variable node contributes its newly updated message preferentially, and preferentially chooses the C2V message update from the unsatisfied check nodes. It can reduce the computational complexity while maintaining an error-rate performance close to that of SVNF.
In conclusion, efficient IDS strategies play an important role in improving the performance of LDPC decoding. It is possible that a fast convergence speed and a low convergence error-rate can be achieved by a specifically designed IDS strategy. Its design should take into account, partly or jointly, the following issues: (1) Those messages that will provide the greatest contribution to the decoding should be propagated preferentially. (2) The greediness should be alleviated. (3) Each of the variable nodes should have a chance to contribute its intrinsic information to the decoding. (4) The influence of trapping sets should be mitigated if it is possible. The first two aspects may contradict to each other, and a tradeoff is usually needed. In this paper, we mainly focus on tackling the second issue, i.e., mitigating the greediness of RBP.
The main contributions of this paper are twofold. First, a simple yet effective IDS scheme, called Residual-DecayingBased Residual Belief-Propagation (RD-RBP), is proposed for alleviating the greediness of RBP. The kernel of RD-RBP is a newly designed residual-decaying mechanism, where the value of C2V residuals will be decayed in a degree according to the times that the corresponding C2V messages have already been updated. This decaying mechanism can effectively manipulate the C2V residuals such that the message update resources are less likely to be unreasonably occupied by certain small part of edges and the greediness is therefore mitigated. Second, a two-stage scheduling algorithm combining prior-art variable-node and variable-tocheck-edge RBP (V-VCRBP) with the proposed RD-RBP, referred to as V-VC-RD-RBP, is presented. It achieves both a fast convergence speed and a low convergence error-rate.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section II, the BP and RBP algorithms for LDPC decoding are briefly introduced. The proposed RD-RBP scheme and V-VC-RD-RBP scheme are presented in section III. In section IV, simulations and complexity analysis are provided to evaluate the performance of the proposed schemes and compare them with those of the prior-art scheduling strategies. Finally, Section V concludes this paper.
II. BP AND RBP DECODING OF LDPC CODES A. BP DECODING A bipartite graph, named Tanner graph, consisting of N variable nodes vj, j = 1, 2, · · · , N , and M check
23657

H. Zhang, S. Chen: Residual-Decaying-Based IDS for BP Decoding of LDPC Codes

nodes ci, i = 1, 2, · · · , M , is used to facilitate the description of LDPC decoding. Due to its low computational complexity, BP decoding working in log-domain is usually adopted, which is realized by iteratively exchanging messages between the two categories of nodes through the connecting edges in the Tanner graph. The conventional BP decoding is a parallel algorithm and the message update in each iteration can be divided into two phases. In the first phase, all the V2C messages will be updated, specifically, the V2C message mvj→ci propagated from variable node vj to check node ci is calculated from

mvj→ci =

mca→vj + Cvj ,

(1)

ca∈N (vj)\ci

where N (vj)\ci denotes the set that is composed of all neighboring check nodes connecting to variable node vj, excluding ci, Cvj is the intrinsic Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) of variable node vj, which is obtained from the channel and can be calculated with Eq. (2) according to [25]

2

Cvj = σn2 yj,

(2)

where σn2 is the variance (double-sided noise power spectral density) of the noise and yj is the received discretetime signal corresponding to variable node vj. Subsequently, in the second phase, all the C2V messages will be updated

using the received V2C messages, and the C2V message

mci→vj propagated from check node ci to variable node vj is obtained as

mci→vj = 2arctanh(

tanh( mvb→ci )),

(3)

2

vb∈N (ci)\vj

where N (ci)\vj denotes the set composed of all neighboring variable nodes connecting to check node ci, excluding vj.
The above procedure repeats until the predefined stopping criterion is met, i.e., either all of the parity-check constraints are satisfied or the predefined maximum number of iterations is reached. The LLR of variable node vj after the decoding can be calculated as

Lvj =

mci→vj + Cvj ,

(4)

ci∈N (vj)

then the transmitted bits xj, j = 1, 2, · · · , N , are estimated from the hard decision according to

xj =

0, 1,

if Lvj ≥ 0 otherwise.

(5)

B. RBP DECODING In the flooding schedule, a node in the Tanner graph will not generate its messages until it has received the updated messages from all of its neighboring nodes and the newly updated messages cannot be fully utilized in flooding schedule. While in sequential schedules, the order of message updates is decided according to their contributions to the

23658

decoding and one node generates its new messages as soon as it receives the messages from any of its neighboring nodes. Hence, the message with largest contribution will be propagated preferentially and the newest available extrinsic messages can be utilized sufficiently. Thus, the acceleration of decoding is achieved. RBP decoding algorithm is a seminal IDS algorithm [13], where the message with the largest C2V residual is updated first. The C2V residual is the absolute difference between the message to be propagated now mncie→w vj and that propagated in the last time mocil→ d vj :

r (mci→vj ) = mcnie→w vj − mcoil→ d vj .

(6)

RBP decoding algorithm starts with the initialization of all the C2V messages mci→vj = 0, i = 1, 2, · · · , M , j = 1, 2, · · · , N , then, all of the initial V2C messages received from the channel mvj→ci = Cvj are propagated from the variable nodes to all of their connecting check nodes. Based on the received V2C messages, the C2V messages mcnie→w vj are precomputed from Eq. (3) and the residuals r(mci→vj ) are computed according to Eq. (6) to form the residual set R. The C2V message with the largest residual, namely mcmax→vmax , is selected from set R and propagated from check node cmax to its connecting variable node vmax, and the residual r(mcmax→vmax ) is set to zero immediately. Then, variable node vmax generates its V2C messages and propagates them to the corresponding neighboring check nodes, excluding cmax. Based on the received V2C messages, all of the neighboring check nodes, excluding cmax, compute their C2V messages and obtain the refreshed residuals. Then, another C2V edge with the largest residual will be selected from the refreshed residual set R for the next update.
The idea behind RBP is that the C2V message associated with the largest residual means that this message, which is very likely to be located in a certain part of the decoding graph that has not converged yet, has the most important contribution to the decoding and its preferential propagation will speed up the convergence. It was shown in [9], [13], and [14] that in most cases, when a received codeword error cannot be corrected using RBP decoding, there is very like to be a small group of edges whose messages have been repeatedly updated while some of other variable nodes have no or little chance to contribute their intrinsic messages to the decoding. This feature is called greediness, which will lead an algorithm to converge fast after a small number of message updates, but the convergence error-rate performance is unsatisfactory even after a large number of iterations. To alleviate the greedy problem of RBP decoders, a simple yet efficient informed dynamic scheduling strategy is presented in the following section.

III. THE PROPOSED SCHEMES A. MOTIVATION AND EXPLORATION Since the contributions of messages vary significantly from node to node during the iteration of decoding, it is therefore intuitive that a better decoding performance may be achieved

VOLUME 7, 2019

H. Zhang, S. Chen: Residual-Decaying-Based IDS for BP Decoding of LDPC Codes

if the order of message updates is scheduled properly. But how to optimally assign the order and the times to each message update is a NP-hard problem. If a small group of edges consume most of the decoding resources while some of other variable nodes have no chance to contribute their intrinsic messages to the decoding process, RBP will allows a poor error-rate performance even after a large number of iterations although it converges fast during the first few iterations. Note that it is justified for those researches mentioned above to aim at ‘‘alleviating’’ rather than ‘‘eliminating’’ the greediness of RBP algorithm.
FIGURE 1. Convergence performance comparison of the plain RBP and the modified RBP, where each C2V message is limited to be updated once per iteration. Simulation is done with LDPC code (WiMAX) of length-576 rate-1/2 at Eb/No=2.5dB.
In fact, greediness is a double-edged factor, i.e., it facilitates the most important messages to be preferentially propagated, speeding up the convergence rate, while it also deprives some variable nodes from propagating their intrinsic messages to the connecting nodes, resulting in a poor convergence error-rate performance. To illustrate this, consider a ‘‘fair’’ RBP (F-RBP) algorithm, where each edge in the Tanner graph is offered equally one time to update their messages in one iteration such that the greediness of RBP is almost eliminated. Fig. 1 shows the convergence performance comparison of F-RBP and the plain RBP. We can find that although the F-RBP allows a slightly lower error-rate after a large number of iterations (more than 40 iterations), its convergence speed is markedly inferior to that of the plain RBP. Obviously, in order to achieve a substantially low convergence error-rate while maintaining satisfactory convergence speed, the greediness of RBP algorithm should not be eliminated indiscreetly but be alleviated appropriately. Therefore, we would like to control the greediness of RBP algorithm in a specifically designed manner. The proposed RD-RBP is motivated by this viewpoint and we think it is also worthy of consideration in other efficient IDS strategy design.

B. THE RESIDUAL-DECAYING-BASED RESIDUAL BELIEF-PROPAGATION (RD-RBP) ALGORITHM

To alleviate the greediness of RBP, we propose a residualdecaying-based RBP (RD-RBP) algorithm, it alleviates the greedy property by decaying the residuals of those C2V messages using a simple yet effective decaying mechanism. In RD-RBP, the initialization of the V2C and C2V messages is the same as that of RBP. The main difference is that in RD-RBP, the values of C2V residuals during the iterations will be decayed according to the number of times that the corresponding C2V messages have already been updated, while no decaying is performed in the conventional RBP. Specifically, we count the number of times that the C2V message have been propagated from check node ci to variable node vj with a counter nci→vj , which is initialized to zero before the iteration. Once the message mci→vj is updated, the value of counter nci→vj will be incremented by one, i.e., nci→vj = nci→vj + 1, and the forthcoming residual value of message mci→vj will be computed by:

r (mci→vj ) = βnci→vj · mcnie→w vj − mocil→ d vj ,

(7)

where β is the decaying factor and takes the value within

(0, 1]. The intuitive idea behind RD-RBP is that the more

times a C2V message along an edge is updated, the greater

degree the corresponding C2V residual will be decayed in

the later selections. This means that a C2V message that

have been updated several times before will be unlikely to

be selected again for preferential updating during the current

iteration. Thus, the greediness problem that a small group

of edges consume most of the updating resources will be

alleviated.
In RBP, all mncie→w vj are computed according to Eq. (3), which is a heavy computation burden. According

to [9] and [13], the computational complexity for residual

computation can be significantly reduced by using approx-

imate adopt

computation this method

twohoebretaimncnime→wncvie→ jw ivnj .

In this paper, we also Eq. (7) are computed

approximately as

mci→vj

=

vb∈N (ci)\vj

sgn(mvb

→ci

)

vb

min
∈N (ci)\vj

(|mvb→ci

|).

(8)

Note that this method is adopted only for residual computation and those propagated C2V messages are still computed by Eq. (3). Therefore, as has been demonstrated in [9] and [13], such an approximation method induces only negligible performance degradation.
We define ‘‘one iteration’’ as the case where the times of C2V message updates reach to E, the total number of edges in the Tanner graph. Fig. 2 illustrates the scheduling process in RD-RBP algorithm. In the beginning of each iteration, RD-RBP selects the maximal C2V residual, say r(mci→vj ), from the residual set R, R = {r(mci→vj )|1 ≤ i ≤ M , 1 ≤ j ≤ N }, as shown in Fig. 2 (a), the C2V message mci→vj is selected to be preferentially updated, node ci generates and

VOLUME 7, 2019

23659

H. Zhang, S. Chen: Residual-Decaying-Based IDS for BP Decoding of LDPC Codes

FIGURE 2. Diagram of the scheduling process in RD-RBP algorithm.
propagates C2V message mci→vj to node vj, then, node vj generates and propagates V2C messages to all of its neighboring check nodes excluding node ci, namely, node ca1 and c2a. We call this procedure one time of update. Then, it moves to the next selection-and-propagation procedure.
Considering a circumstance, as shown in Fig. 2 (b), that the residual r(mci→vj ) has been elected as the maximum for several times, namely, the C2V message mci→vj has been updated several times during the current iteration, which means a certain portion of C2V messages have no chance to be propagated during this iteration in RBP, because the total number of times for C2V updates is fixed to E in one iteration. If the residuals are not manipulated appropriately, the situation will get worse. But with the help of the decaying processing, the value of residual r(mci→vj ) computed from Eq. (7) will be decayed to a smaller value and is less likely to be the maximum. Thus, there is very likely to be another residual, e.g. r(mci→vj ), becoming the maximum. Consequently, the decoding resources will be released from the small group of edges corresponding to the edge of ci → vj. This is how the proposed decaying mechanism works.
In addition, to prevent the occurrence that certain edges may be decayed unduly, making them have no chance to update its messages again, we introduce a reset strategy in the algorithm design. Specifically, we use a counter e to count the number of C2V message updates during the decoding procedure, the value of e is set to zero in the beginning, once there is a C2V message update during the iteration, the value of counter e will be incremented by one, say e = e + 1. The reset strategy for the proposed RD-RBP scheme is that once the value of counter e is equal to E, meaning that one iteration has been finished, then the values of counter e and counter nc→v will be reset to zero, i.e., e = 0, and nci→vj = 0, for i = 1, 2, · · · , M , j = 1, 2, · · · , N . With the reset value of counters, it moves to the next iteration, and the decoding process repeats until the stopping criterion is satisfied, i.e., either all of the parity-check constraints are satisfied or the predefined maximum number of iterations is reached.

Algorithm 1 Proposed RD-RBP Algorithm

1: Initialize all mc→v = 0, mvj→ci = Cvj 2: Set all {nci→vj = 0, 1 ≤ i ≤ M , 1 ≤ j ≤ N }, e = 0

3: Compute all r(mc→v) using Eq. (6) to get set R

4: Find the largest residual r(mci→vj ) from set R

5: Update the counters nci→vj = nci→vj + 1, e = e + 1

6: Generate and propagate mci→vj and set r(mci→vj ) = 0

7: for every ca ∈ N (vj)\ci do

8: Generate and propagate mvj→ca

9: for every vb ∈ N (ca)\vj do

10:

Compute r(mca→vb ) using Eq. (7)

11: end for

12: end for

13: if e equals E then
14: Reset all {nci→vj = 0, 1 ≤ i ≤ M , 1 ≤ j ≤ N }, e = 0 15: end if

16: if stopping criterion is not satisfied then

17: Position=4

18: end if

From the above description, the proposed RD-RBP scheme can be concisely expressed by pseudo code as shown in algorithm 1.
Finally, here comes the question of how to select an appropriate value of β. Intuitively, on one hand, the proposed decaying mechanism should manipulate effectively the residuals to prevent the decoding resources from being occupied excessively by certain small groups of edges (to mitigate the greediness of RBP), ensuring a better error-rate performance to be achieved. On the other hand, the proposed decaying mechanism need to hold, to some extent, the ‘‘greediness’’ which we refer to as the ‘‘autonomy’’ of RBP, to ensure that the convergence speed during the first few iterations will not be degraded distinguishably.
In other words, the value of β is determined by a tradeoff between the convergence rate and the convergence error-rate performance. If the value of β is too small, e.g., very close to zero, the value of the residual corresponding to a C2V message that has been updated more than once before will be unduly decayed, and the greediness is mitigated significantly. Thus, the decoding will converge to a distinctly lower error-rate after a large enough number of iterations, but the convergence speed in the first few iterations will be inferior to that of RBP. Otherwise, if the value of β is too large, e.g., very close to one, the value of the residual corresponding to a C2V message that has been updated more than once before will be decayed insufficiently, and the convergence speed in the first few iterations will stay in a fast manner, but the error-rate after convergence will not be as low as expected. Particularly, when β = 1, the proposed RD-RBP algorithm will degenerate into the plain RBP scheme, showing that RBP is a special case of the proposed scheme. In a word, β is a key parameter that impacts significantly the performance of RD-RBP. Therefore, a suitable value of β should be selected for RD-RBP such that

23660

VOLUME 7, 2019

H. Zhang, S. Chen: Residual-Decaying-Based IDS for BP Decoding of LDPC Codes
it can mitigate the greedy property while maintaining a fast convergence speed. We will find out an appropriate value for β through Monte-Carlo simulation.

FIGURE 4. Convergence performance of the RD-RBP scheme when decaying factor β varies from 0.85 to 0.9999 for LDPC code (WiMAX) of length-576 rate-1/2 at Eb/No=2.5dB.

FIGURE 3. Convergence performance of the RD-RBP scheme when decaying factor β varies from 0.1 to 0.9 for LDPC code (WiMAX) of length-576 rate-1/2 at Eb/No=2.5dB.

Fig. 3 shows the convergence performance of the proposed RD-RBP scheme for different decaying factors. Specifically, for the value of β changing from 0.1 to 0.9 with a step of 0.1, then, we obtain nine curves of FER versus the number of iterations, and compare them to that of the plain RBP scheme. It is shown that RD-RBP outperforms the RBP in terms of the error-rate performance after convergence. For a small β taking the value from 0.1 to 0.5, the convergence speed of RD-RBP is inferior to that of the RBP in the first few iterations. For a larger β taking the value from 0.6 to 0.9, the convergence speed of RD-RBP is superior to that of the RBP. We also observe from Fig. 3 that the comprehensive performance, namely, the convergence speed in conjunction with the convergence error-rate performance is getting better when the value of β increases from 0.1 to 0.9.
But it’s worth noting that a larger value of β doesn’t necessarily means a better comprehensive performance. As shown in Fig. 4, we track the performance evolution of RD-RBP with the value of β varying from 0.85 to 0.9999, we can find that the comprehensive performance of RD-RBP is getting worse, gradually approaches the performance of plain RBP scheme as β draws near 1.
Fig. 5 shows the convergence performance curves of the RD-RBP scheme under different number of iterations with the decaying factor β varying from 0.1 to 1, we find that the comprehensive performances of RD-RBP under the values of β varying from about 0.85 to 0.95 are more satisfactory. Interestingly, it is observed that the performance of RD-RBP is getting less sensitive to the variation of β when the number of iterations increases. In the following of this paper, β = 0.9 is selected for RD-RBP unless otherwise specified.

FIGURE 5. Convergence performance curves of the RD-RBP scheme under different number of iterations when decaying factor β varies from 0.1 to 1 for LDPC code (WiMAX) of length-576 rate-1/2 at Eb/No=2.5dB.
C. TWO-STAGE SCHEDULING ALGORITHM COMBINING V-VCRBP WITH RD-RBP (V-VC-RD-RBP) In the previous subsection, we have introduced the proposed RD-RBP algorithm for LDPC decoding, with the aid of a newly designed decaying mechanism, the greediness inherited from the RBP can be significantly alleviated. In this subsection, we attempt to design an IDS strategy that can improve the convergence speed performance and the convergence error-rate performance concurrently.
Actually, as we have discussed earlier, an efficient IDS strategy usually needs to attain a tradeoff between the convergence speed and the convergence error-rate, in other words, it’s hard for an individual IDS strategy to achieve these two performances concurrently. However, a properly designed hybrid IDS strategy may have the potential to optimize these two performances jointly. This motivates us to design a

VOLUME 7, 2019

23661

H. Zhang, S. Chen: Residual-Decaying-Based IDS for BP Decoding of LDPC Codes

two-stage IDS strategy, which tries to converge fast in the first few iterations, and achieve lower error-rate during the subsequent iterations. Intuitively, if there is a prior-art IDS strategy that has a preeminent convergence speed but a dissatisfactory convergence error-rate, we may combine it with our proposed RD-RBP using a specially designed switch criterion to form the two-stage IDS strategy. Fortunately, we find from the literatures that the prior-art V-VCRBP algorithm [22] meets the above requirement.
By introducing a well-designed dynamic selection strategy in conjunction with a stability criterion, V-VCRBP algorithm exhibits impressively good performance in locating the message that should be preferentially propagated, such that it converges very rapidly in the first few iterations. However, its convergence error-rate performance is not so satisfactory, and needs to be further improved. Actually, this phenomenon is caused by the greediness to some extent. Note that V-VCRBP locates the message to be preferentially propagated by locating firstly the variable node with the maximal node residual and then locating the maximal V2C residual originating from the selected variable node. Since the number of times for each variable node to be selected vary distinctly from node to node and a small group of variable nodes will occupy a large portion of decoding resources, thus, the selection mechanism of V-VCRBP is essentially a greedy scheme.
Based on these observations, a two-stage scheduling algorithm combining V-VCRBP with RD-RBP, referred to as V-VC-RD-RBP, is proposed. Its objective is to achieve a fast convergence speed in early iterations, while allowing a low convergence error-rate in the later iterations. In a nutshell, V-VC-RD-RBP algorithm is composed of two phases, where the decoding starts with the first phase by executing the prior-art V-VCRBP algorithm until a Switch Criterion is met and then goes into the second phase, performing RD-RBP algorithm. The proposed V-VC-RD-RBP algorithm can be described by pseudo code as shown in algorithm 2.

decoding process, and will not reach to zero. Inspired by this observation, we designed the Switch Criterion:
Switch Criterion: If either of the following two conditions holds, the decoding will switch from phase 1 to phase 2: (1) The number of unsatisfied checks in the end of the τ −th iteration is greater than the number of unsatisfied checks in the end of the (τ − 1)−th iteration, where τ is a predefined integer, and τ ≥ 2. (2) The number of iterations reaches a predefined positive integer λ, and the number of unsatisfied checks is still greater than a predefined positive integer ε.
The values of τ , λ, ε may significantly affect the performance of the V-VC-RD-RBP algorithm. However, there is unlikely to be a group of optimal values that can be applied to all LDPC code ensembles. Actually, they are related to the structure of LDPC codes, the coding rate, the SNR, the error performance requirement and computational complexity, etc. Therefore, we decide to determine these parameters through Monte-Carlo simulation. In the experiments, the LDPC code for WiMAX [26] of length-576 rate-1/2 is used, and we track the variation of the number of unsatisfied checks under different SNR conditions. In the end of the simulations, the average number of unsatisfied checks after different iterations are calculated for the correct frames and the erroneous frames, respectively. In the simulations, the total numbers of transmitted frames are set to be 1 × 105, 1 × 105, 1.5 × 105, at the SNR of 2.25dB, 2.5dB, 2.75dB, respectively, the numbers of detected erroneous frames are 279, 39, 6, respectively, for these SNRs.

Algorithm 2 Proposed V-VC-RD-RBP Algorithm 1: Execute the V-VCRBP decoding [22] 2: if Switch Criterion is reached then 3: Terminate the first stage and discard the current de4: coding results 5: Switch to the proposed RD-RBP decoding with the 6: original information obtained from the channel 7: end if
Before introducing the Switch Criterion, let’s first investigate how the number of unsatisfied checks changes with the iterations of LDPC decoding. Generally speaking, as for a frame that is correctly decoded eventually, the number of unsatisfied checks decreases as the number of iterations increases, and eventually decreases to zero. However, for a frame that is incorrectly decoded eventually, the number of unsatisfied checks oscillates throughout the
23662

FIGURE 6. The variation curves of the average number of unsatisfied checks of the correct frames and the erroneous frames under V-VCRBP decoding for different SNRs. The LDPC code (WiMAX) of length-576 rate-1/2 is used for simulation.
It can be observed from Fig. 6 that, for those correct frames, the average number of unsatisfied checks are distinctly small throughout the decoding and reaches to zero after a small number of iterations. However, for those erroneous frames, the average number of unsatisfied checks oscillates throughout the decoding, especially for Eb/No=2.75dB, and Eb/No=3dB, the detected number of erroneous frames
VOLUME 7, 2019

H. Zhang, S. Chen: Residual-Decaying-Based IDS for BP Decoding of LDPC Codes

are small and the oscillations exhibit more obviously than the case for Eb/No=2.5dB, where the curve looks relatively smooth and the oscillation is not obvious, due to more detected erroneous frames. Intuitively, according to the simulation results in Fig. 6, the characteristics of the variation trends of the average number of unsatisfied checks for the correct frames and that for the erroneous frames under the same SNR are easily distinguishable, which makes the Switch Criterion operable under the circumstance that the three parameters therein are properly chosen. Here, according to the simulation results, it is justified that the values are set to be τ = 2, λ = 5, ε = 10, respectively, for the simulated SNRs. It is worth noting that this group of values is not necessarily applicable to other conditions. These parameters can be decided with the aid of similar experimentations for other cases.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION In this section, extensive simulation results are provided to evaluate the performances of the proposed RD-RBP and V-VC-RD-RBP algorithms, and compare them with those of the previous scheduling strategies, including the LLR-BP (Flooding) [25], VC-RBP [19], Layered-BP [10], Shuffled-BP [11], RBP and NW-RBP [13], Q-RBP and SVNF [9], V-VCRBP [22] and D-SVNF [24] algorithms. Then, we analyze the computational complexity of these different schemes. Throughout the simulations, additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) transmission are assumed, and the simulations are performed on the MATLAB platform using double-precision float-point format.

length-576 rate-1/2 LDPC code used for simulation is generated according to the IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX) standard [26], the simulation is performed at Eb/No=2.5dB, and the maximal number of iterations is set to 50. We can find that the proposed RD-RBP with a decaying factor β = 0.9 converges as fast as that of RBP in the early 4 iterations and it later reaches a lower FER than RBP under the same number of iterations, and eventually reaches a FER of 1.1 × 10−4, while the RBP eventually reaches a FER of 5.1 × 10−4, indicating that the RD-RBP algorithm has significantly alleviated the greediness compared to the RBP algorithm. Besides, we can see that RD-RBP reaches lower convergence error-rate, but converges slower during the first 7 iterations, compared to SVNF and D-SVNF and V-VCRBP. In a nutshell, RD-RBP can effectively mitigate the greediness, thus, its convergence errorrate performance is satisfactory, but its convergence speed in the first few iterations is not so desirable. The proposed V-VC-RD-RBP algorithm, which is a two-stage scheduling algorithm combining the prior-art V-VCRBP with the proposed RD-RBP, exhibits satisfactory performance. It not only converges faster in the early iterations, but also reaches lower convergence error-rate eventually, compared to the existing scheduling strategies. In other words, the V-VC-RD-RBP algorithm can selectively take the advantages of the fastconvergence property of the V-VCRBP scheduling in the first stage, and the low-convergence-error-rate property of the RD-RBP scheduling in the second stage via the specifically designed Switch Criterion.

FIGURE 7. Convergence performance comparison of the proposed schemes and the prior-art sequential scheduling strategies for LDPC code (WiMAX) of length-576 rate-1/2 at Eb/No=2.5dB.
A. SIMULATIONS This subsection provides some simulation results to compare the performance of the proposed schemes with that of the existing schemes. Fig. 7 shows the performance of the frame error-rate (FER) versus the number of iterations, where the
VOLUME 7, 2019

FIGURE 8. BER performance comparison of the proposed schemes and the prior-art sequential scheduling strategies for LDPC code (WiMAX) of length-576 rate-1/2. The maximal number of iterations is set to 6.
Fig. 8 compares the BER performances of the proposed schemes with those of the existing schemes, where the length-576 rate-1/2 LDPC code for WiMAX is still used for simulation and the maximal number of iterations is set to 6. We can see that the proposed RD-RBP algorithm outperforms the existing sequential scheduling strategies except for the V-VCRBP algorithm as expected. As we mentioned earlier, despite its unsatisfactory convergence error-rate, the V-VCRBP exhibits remarkable performance in terms of
23663

H. Zhang, S. Chen: Residual-Decaying-Based IDS for BP Decoding of LDPC Codes
the convergence speed in the first few iterations, therefore, it can reach lower BER than other schemes when the maximal number iterations are uniformly set to be small (only 6) for all strategies. In addition, the proposed V-VC-RD-RBP algorithm outperforms the V-VCRBP algorithm. This can be explained by the fact that some of the errors that cannot be corrected in the first stage due to the greediness of V-VCRBP can be overcomed by RD-RBP decoding in the second stage.

FIGURE 10. Convergence performance comparison of the proposed schemes and the prior-art sequential scheduling strategies for LDPC code (WiMAX) of length-1152 rate-3/4 at Eb/No=3.5dB.

FIGURE 9. Convergence performance comparison of the proposed schemes and the prior-art sequential scheduling strategies for LDPC code (WiMAX) of length-576 rate-3/4 at Eb/No=3.75dB.
Fig. 9 also shows the frame error-rate (FER) performances of different scheduling schemes, where the simulation is performed at Eb/No=3.75dB with a length-576 rate-3/4 LDPC code for WiMAX [26]. It is observed that the convergence curve of the proposed RD-RBP in the first 20 iterations almost overlaps with that of the Q-RBP (QF =15), after that, RD-RBP reaches lower FER than the existing schemes. But the convergence speed of RD-RBP in the early iterations is distinctly inferior to those of the SVNF, D-SVNF and V-VCRBP algorithms. Nevertheless, the V-VC-RD-RBP algorithm exhibits concurrently a faster convergence speed and a lower convergence error-rate than other schemes. In addition, similar results can be observed in Fig. 10, where longer LDPC code of length-1152 and rate-3/4 is used for simulation.
B. COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS In this subsection, we analyze the computational complexity of the proposed schemes, i.e., the RD-RBP and V-VC-RD-RBP algorithms, and compare them with those of the existing scheduling strategies mentioned above. Firstly, let’s review some notations that will be used in the following analysis. Define E as the total number of edges in the Tanner graph with M check nodes and N variable nodes, and E = d¯v · N = d¯c · M holds, where the d¯v and d¯c denote the average variable-node degree and average check-node degree, respectively.
As shown in Table I, by convention, we use the computational complexities in one iteration as the metric,
23664

including the number of V2C updates, the number of C2V

updates, the number of operations required for residual com-

putation, and the number of operations required for real-value

comparison. The conventional LLR-BP (Flooding) has the

same computational complexity as that of the Layered-BP

and Shuffled-BP, the latter two belong to SSS strategies.

These three strategies need E V2C updates and E C2V

updates per iteration, they don’t need residual computation

and real-value comparison. RBP, Q-RBP and SVNF have

the same number of C2V updates, E, the same number of

V2C updates, E(d¯v − 1), and the same number of residual

computations, E(d¯c − 1)(d¯v − 1). Besides, both RBP and

Q-RBP require E(E − 1) times of real-value comparison for

selecting the maximal C2V residual, while the number of

real-value comparisons required by the SVNF is E[d¯v(d¯c −

1) − 1]. NW-RBP requires E C2V updates for regular LDPC

codes and E(d¯v − 1) V2C updates, E(d¯c − 1)(d¯v − 1) resid-

ual computations and M (E − 1) real-value comparisons for

regular or irregular LDPC codes. VC-RBP prioritizes the

message updates according to the V2C residuals, it requires

E C2V updates. Since those V2C messages used to calcu-

late V2C residuals can be directly used to update the C2V

messages, VC-RBP doesn’t require precomputation. And it

can be derived that the required numbers of V2C updates

and real-value comparisons in VC-RBP are

E d¯c−1

(d¯c −

1)(d¯v − 1) and M (E − 1), respectively. D-SVNF requires

the same number of V2C and C2V updates as SVNF, but

the numbers of operations for residual computation and real-

value comparison required by D-SVNF are smaller than those

of SVNF. In addition, the numbers of C2V updates, opera-

tions for residual computation and operations for real-value

comparison required by V-VCRBP are E[(d¯c − 1) + (d¯v − 1)],

E · d¯v(d¯c − 1) and E(N − 1)(d¯v − 1), respectively.

RD-RBP is an improved version of RBP with a spe-

cially designed residual-decaying mechanism. The difference

between RD-RBP and RBP lies in the calculation of the

VOLUME 7, 2019

H. Zhang, S. Chen: Residual-Decaying-Based IDS for BP Decoding of LDPC Codes TABLE 1. Computational complexity comparison.

C2V residual. Specifically, the C2V residuals are calculated by Eq. (6) in RBP, while in RD-RBP, they are calculated by Eq. (7). Meaning that the C2V residual calculated by Eq. (7) equals the product of the C2V residual calculated by Eq. (6) and the coefficient βnci→vj . Since the power of β can be calculated off-line and the results can be stored for online use, the complexity of additional product operations of RD-RBP is trivial. Remember that an approximation method is incorporated into RD-RBP to reduce the computational complexity of residual computation, hence the overall computational complexity of RD-RBP is actually lower than that of RBP.
As a combination of V-VCRBP and RD-RBP, the computational complexity of V-VC-RD-RBP is affected by parameters τ , λ and ε, as long as they are selected appropriately, the chance for the switch operation to be triggered will be very low. For example, in the simulation results of Fig. 7, only 479 frames trigger the switch operation among 3 × 105 frames. Similarly, only 231 in 3×105 and 356 in 1×105 trigger the switch operation in the simulation results of Fig.9 and Fig.10, respectively. Accordingly, the proportions of switch operation in these three circumstances are 0.16%, 0.08% and 0.36%, respectively. Note that V-VC-RD-RBP has the same computational complexity as that of V-VCRBP unless the switch operation is triggered. Therefore, the computational complexity of V-VC-RD-RBP is approximately equal to that of the V-VCRBP algorithm.
V. CONCLUSION In this paper, two novel IDS strategies, RD-RBP and V-VC-RD-RBP, are proposed. By introducing a decaying mechanism to manipulate the C2V message residuals, RD-RBP can effectively alleviate the greediness inherited from RBP and therefore a better performance of convergence error-rate is achieved. By inheriting the advantages of V-VCRBP and RD-RBP, V-VC-RD-RBP exhibits the advantages of both a fast convergence speed and a low convergence error-rate, with the aid of a specially designed switch operation. Simulation results and complexity analysis are provided
VOLUME 7, 2019

to demonstrate the advantages of the proposed schemes over the existing scheduling strategies.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, ‘‘Low-density parity-check codes,’’ IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, ‘‘Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,’’ Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, 1997.
[3] R. M. Tanner, ‘‘A recursive approach to low complexity codes,’’ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[4] T. Richardson, ‘‘Error floors of LDPC codes,’’ in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[5] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, ‘‘Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, Jun. 2009.
[6] J. Kang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, ‘‘An iterative decoding algorithm with backtracking to lower the error-floors of LDPC codes,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 64–73, Jan. 2011.
[7] S. Zhang and C. Schlegel, ‘‘Controlling the error floor in LDPC decoding,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 3566–3575, Sep. 2013.
[8] X. Zhang and S. Chen, ‘‘A two-stage decoding algorithm to lower the errorfloors for LDPC codes,’’ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 517–520, Apr. 2015.
[9] H. C. Lee, Y. L. Ueng, S. M. Yeh, and W. Y. Weng, ‘‘Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886–896, Mar. 2013.
[10] D. E. Hocevar, ‘‘A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,’’ in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS), Austin, TX, USA, Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[11] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, ‘‘Shuffled iterative decoding,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[12] Y.-L. Ueng, C.-J. Yang, K.-C. Wang, and C.-J. Chen, ‘‘A multimode shuffled iterative decoder architecture for high-rate RS-LDPC codes,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2790–2803, Oct. 2010.
[13] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, ‘‘Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Glasgow, U.K., Jun. 2007, pp. 932–937.
[14] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, ‘‘LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470–3479, Dec. 2010.
[15] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, ‘‘Improving the belief-propagation convergence of irregular LDPC codes using column-weight based scheduling,’’ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1283–1286, Aug. 2015.
[16] T. C.-Y. Chang and Y. T. Su, ‘‘Adaptive group shuffled decoding for LDPC codes,’’ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 2118–2121, Oct. 2017.
[17] H.-C. Lee and Y.-L. Ueng, ‘‘LDPC decoding scheduling for faster convergence and lower error floor,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3104–3113, Sep. 2014.
23665

H. Zhang, S. Chen: Residual-Decaying-Based IDS for BP Decoding of LDPC Codes

[18] G. Elidan, I. McGraw, and D. Koller, ‘‘Residual belief propagation: Informed scheduling for asynchronous message passing,’’ in Proc. 22nd Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., Cambridge, MA, USA, Jul. 2006, pp. 165–173.
[19] J. H. Kim, M. Y. Nam, and H. Y. Song, ‘‘Variable-to-check residual belief propagation for LDPC codes,’’ Electron. Lett., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 117–118, Jan. 2009.
[20] Y. Gong, X. Liu, W. Ye, and G. Han, ‘‘Effective informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2683–2691, Oct. 2011.
[21] X. Liu, Y. Zhang, and R. Cui, ‘‘Variable-node-based dynamic scheduling strategy for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,’’ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 147–150, Feb. 2015.
[22] X. Liu, Z. Zhou, R. Cui, and E. Liu, ‘‘Informed decoding algorithms of LDPC codes based on dynamic selection strategy,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1357–1366, Apr. 2016.
[23] X. Liu, C. Fan, and X. Chen, ‘‘Dynamic scheduling decoding of LDPC codes based on tabu search,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 11, pp. 4612–4621, Nov. 2017.
[24] C. Aslam, Y. Guan, K. Cai, and G. Han, ‘‘Low-complexity beliefpropagation decoding via dynamic silent-variable-node-free scheduling,’’ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 28–31, Jan. 2017.
[25] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D. M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, ‘‘Efficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,’’ in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Antonio, TX, USA, Nov. 2001, p. 1036E.
[26] IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks Part 16: Air Interface for Broadband Wireless Access Systems, IEEE Standard 802.16-2009, (Revision IEEE Std 802.16-2004), May 2009, pp. 1–2080.

HUILIAN ZHANG received the B.S. degree in communication engineering, and the M.S. degree in communication and information systems from the South-Central University for Nationalities, Wuhan, China, in 2015 and 2018, respectively. His research interests include channel coding theory and adaptive modulation and coding techniques.
SHAOPING CHEN received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 1987 and 1990, respectively, both in electrical engineering, and the Ph.D. degree in information and communication engineering from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, in 2004. He is currently a Professor with the Hubei Key Laboratory of Intelligent Wireless Communications, South-Central University for Nationalities, Wuhan. His research interests include the communications and signal processing, including transceiver design, detection and estimation, and wireless and optical communication systems.

23666

VOLUME 7, 2019

