576

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 4, APRIL 2019

Cell-State-Distribution-Assisted Threshold Voltage Detector for NAND Flash Memory
Zhengqin Fan, Guofa Cai , Guojun Han , Senior Member, IEEE, Wenjie Liu, and Yi Fang , Member, IEEE

Abstract— The process scaling as well as the multi-level cell technology greatly increase the storage density of NAND flash memory. Unfortunately, the high-density flash memory suffers from severe noise such that its performance will be dramatically deteriorated. In this letter, we propose a cell-state-distributionassisted threshold voltage detection (CSD-TVD) to optimize read reference voltages. Specifically, the proposed detection method exploits the variation of a number of cells within each subwindow of the overlap region to detect the voltage shift and analyze its distribution. Afterward, the mean of the voltageshift distribution is viewed as the optimal voltage shift, which is used to boost the accuracy of the read reference voltage. Based on the retention characteristics, we also conceive a novel low-latency (LL) CSD-TVD to reduce the detection range of the CSD-TVD. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed CSD-TVD and LL-CSD-TVD achieve better error performance than the state-of-the-art retention-optimizedreading (ROR) and nonuniform detection methods. In addition, the LL-CSD-TVD significantly reduces the read latency with respect to the CSD-TVD and ROR.
Index Terms— NAND flash memory, retention noise, read reference voltage, error performance, read latency.
I. INTRODUCTION

as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with soft-decision decoding [4], were applied to improve the reliability of flash memory.
The flash controller reads the stored data by sensing the region of threshold voltage. To optimize the read reference voltage, a variety of methods were proposed in recent years [5]–[9]. More specifically, a nonuniform quantization strategy in the voltage overlap region was conceived to enhance the system performance [5]. Wang et al. [6], [7] developed a scheme to optimize the read reference voltage by maximizing mutual information. Consider the retention time and P/E cycles, an entropy-function-aided optimization scheme was presented for the read reference voltage in [8]. Nonetheless, the optimization methods in [5]–[8] must estimate the threshold-voltage distribution in the presence of channel noise. Another related read-voltage design, referred to as retention-optimized-reading (ROR), was introduced in [9]. The ROR optimizes the read reference voltage with the lowest raw BER. However, it does not substantially take the a-priori information of the threshold voltages (i.e., the distribution characteristics of the voltage shifts on different wordlines)

N AND flash memory is widely used in mainstream electronic products due to its high performance, low power consumption, non-volatility and high storage capacity. With the gradual reduction in feature size and more bits stored in each cell, NAND flash memory cells become more vulnerable to various channel noises, including data retention, cell-tocell interference (CCI), program/erase (P/E) cycles and read disturb [1]–[3]. The above noises significantly degrades the data-storage reliability. As a result, the data-storage lifetime is dependent on retention time and P/E cycles. Retention and CCI are recognized as the main sources of noise, which lead to

into consideration, and thus cannot achieve desirable BER performance.
With an aim to acquire high-reliability log-likelihoodratio (LLR) for LDPC decoder, this letter proposes a threshold voltage detection (TVD) method based on cell-state distribution (CSD). In the proposed CSD-TVD, the overlap region of threshold voltage is divided into several sub-windows with a width of Δ, and the sub-window with the fewest number of cells is used to estimate the shift of threshold voltage. Furthermore, we conceive a latency-reduction approach to reduce the number of read operations in the CSD-TVD.

significant performance deterioration of flash memory systems. To address this issue, powerful error-correcting codes, such

II. BACKGROUND

A. Main Channel Noises

Manuscript received January 22, 2019; accepted February 14, 2019. Date of publication February 21, 2019; date of current version April 9, 2019. This work was partially supported by the NSF of China (Nos. 61871136, 61471131, 61771149, 61701121), the Project of the Education Department of Guangdong Province under Grants 2017KZDXM028 and 2017KTSCX060, and the Open Research Fund of National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University under Grant 2018D02. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was C. Feng. (Corresponding author: Guojun Han.)
Z. Fan, G. Cai, G. Han, and W. Liu are with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: fanzhengqin1992@163.com; caiguofa2006@126.com; gjhan@gdut.edu.cn; wenjie_liu@yeah.net).
Y. Fang is with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China, and also with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China (e-mail: fangyi@gdut.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2019.2900677

1) Erase and Program Operation: In NAND flash memory

channel, each memory cell can be classified into erased

state and programmed state. The threshold voltage of the

erased state follows a normal distribution [10], which can be

modeled as

pe

(x)

=

√1

e−

(x−μe 2σe2

)2

σe 2π

,

(1)

where μe and σe are the mean and standard deviation, respectively.

To program each memory cell, an incremental step pulse

program (ISPP) technique is usually applied [11]. The thresh-

old voltage of the k-th programmed state follows a uniform distribution over [Vpk, Vpk + ΔVpp], which can be written as

1558-2558 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:06:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FAN et al.: CSD-ASSISTED THRESHOLD VOLTAGE DETECTOR

577

⎧ ⎨

1

p(pk) (x) = ⎩0ΔVpp

if Vpk ≤ x ≤ Vpk + ΔVpp, (2) otherwise,

where Vpk and ΔVpp denotes the verify voltage of the k-th programmed state and the incremental programmed step voltage, respectively.
2) CCI: Due to the parasitic capacitance-coupling effect [5],
the threshold voltage shift F can be estimated as

F = ΔVtkγk,

(3)

where ΔVtk denotes the threshold-voltage shift of the k-th interfering cell during programming operation, and γk denotes

the coupling ratio between the victim cell and interfering cell.

3) Retention Noise: Retention noise, arising from charge

leakage over time, results in the threshold-voltage shift to the left. These noises follow a normal distribution N μt, σt2 according to [12], where the mean and standard deviation are

respectively given by

μt = (x − x0)·[At (P E)αi + Bt (P E)αo ]·log (1 + t), (4)

σt = 0.3 · |μt| ,

(5)

Fig. 1. Voltage distribution for 2-bit/cell NAND flash after programming, CCI, retention, and optimization.

where x0, At, Bt, αi, and αo are constant parameters, and t and P E are the retention time and P/E cycles, respectively.

B. LLR Calculation for LDPC Decoder

To improve the accuracy of the LLR values for LDPC decoder, a higher sensing accuracy is required in the overlap

region. For an MLC flash memory channel, the threshold voltage can be divided into four regions. The four regions

corresponds to four different states, i.e., the ER (11), P1 (10),
P2 (00), and P3 (01) states. The probability density function (PDF) pk (v) of each state in the presence of CCI can be obtained in [5], where v denotes the read-back voltage. The initial LLR corresponding to the i-th bit can be calculated as

L (bi) = log Rr
Rl

k

pk

Rr Rl
(v)

k∈Si pk

dv −

Rr Rl

(v) dv
k∈Si

pk

(v)

dv

,

(6)

where Rl and Rr are two adjacent read reference voltages, and Si denotes the set of states whose i-th bit is 1.

C. Effect of Read Reference Voltage

Fig. 1 shows the threshold-voltage distribution for 2-bit/cell
NAND flash after programming, CCI, and retention, where Vr1ead, Vr2ead, and Vr3ead denote the three default read reference voltages. We assume that the LLR values are pre-calculated
and stored in a look-up table. It can be seen that the threshold
voltage of each programmed state moves from right to the
left with retention noise. The principle of read operation is
to sense the region of threshold voltage by exploiting read
reference voltage.
In general, the read reference voltage can be optimized
to mitigate the negative effect of noise. The optimized read
reference voltage located in the overlap region between ER and P1 states (i.e., Vo1pt) and that between P2 and P3 states (i.e., Vo3pt) are used to read the least-significant-bit (LSB) page, while optimized read reference voltage located in the overlap region between P1 and P2 state (i.e., Vo2pt) is used to read the most-significant-bit (MSB) page.

Fig. 2. Variation of the means over retention time at P E = 5K (solid lines) and P E = 10K (dotted lines).
III. PROPOSED THRESHOLD-VOLTAGE DETECTION METHOD
A. Effect of Retention Noise
To analyze the effect of the retention noise, we simulate the variation of the means for P1, P2 and P3 states in the presence of retention noise and show the results in Fig. 2. It is observed that the mean of the erased state remains the same. Moreover, a higher programmed state shifts faster than a lower programmed state, and thus ΔV1 < ΔV2 < ΔV3. The reason is that the threshold-voltage shift is directly proportional to the variation of the number of electrons stored in the cell’s floating-gate.
B. CSD-TVD Method
Through the above analysis, a CSD-TVD is proposed to mitigate the effect of random noise and improve the system reliability. For convenience, Fig. 3 shows the distribution of the threshold voltage in NAND flash memory. In this figure, Δ denotes the width of the voltage sub-windows, ΔNji (i=1,2,3, j=1,2,…,n) denotes the number of cells whose threshold voltages are located in [Vji, Vji−1), Vji = Vriead − j × Δ, and Vriead denotes the default read reference voltage of the i-th overlap region. In addition, let ΔVik denote the voltage shift of i-th overlap region on the k-th wordline. Subsequently, the proposed CSD-TVD can be divided into two steps, i.e., calculating the voltage shifts and evaluating the distribution of voltage shifts.
1) Step 1: When sliding the voltage sub-window from the default read voltage Vriead to the left in the i-th overlap region, the number of cells in the voltage sub-window will

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:06:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

578 Fig. 3. Distribution of the threshold voltage in NAND flash memory.

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 4, APRIL 2019

Algorithm 1 CSD-TVD Method

Input: The width of the voltage sub-windows Δ, the number of wordline in a block M , and the default read reference voltage Vriead;
Output: For 0 < i < 2nb , the optimal voltage shift of the i-th overlap region ΔVoipt; 1: for k = 1 : M do 2: for i = 1 : 2nb − 1 do

3:

Set j ← 0;

4:

while ΔNji+1 < ΔNji do

5:

j ← j + 1;

6:

end while

7:

ΔVik = j × Δ;

8: end for

9: end for 10: Compute ΔVoipt = ΔVik; 11: End

Fig. 4. PDFs of ΔVik in the three overlap regions before and after parameter estimation.

in which the number of read operations in the (i+1)-th (i > 0)

overlap

region

is

reduced

by

ΔVi Δ

,

to

reduce

the

read

latency

of the proposed CSD-TVD. For a nb-bit/cell flash channel,

the detailed steps of the proposed LL-CSD-TVD are outlined

in Algorithm 2.

be first decreased and then increased. Thus, we stop sliding
the voltage sub-window once the number of cells is increased. Then, the voltage sub-window including the fewest number of cells can be obtained, and thus yielding the voltage shift ΔVi. Compared with the existing ROR [9], the CSD-TVD possesses
similar detection range, which leads to almost the same read latency.
2) Step 2: Consider a 2-bit/cell flash channel and assume the parameters as follows: the number of page in a block is 256, cell-to-cell coupling strength factor s is 1.4, retention time is 105 hours, P/E cycles is 20K, and the number of wordlines M is 128. Fig. 4 compares the PDFs of ΔVik in the three overlap regions before and after parameter estimation. In particular, the PDF after parameter estimation follows a normal distribution N (μΔV , σΔ2 V ), where μΔV and σΔ2 V denotes the mean and variance of all voltage shifts on M wordlines. It can be seen that the actual PDF of the voltage shifts well matches with the idea normal distribution. Based on
the above observations, we can conclude that the voltage shifts on different wordlines approximately follow a normal distri-
bution and will use this conclusion from this point onwards.
Now, we propose a CSD-TVD, which can substantially exploit the normal-distribution property to improve the accuracy of
read reference voltage. The detailed steps of the proposed CSD-TVD are outlined in Algorithm 1.

C. Low-Latency CSD-TVD Method

As mentioned in [9], the flash read latency is proportional

to the number of read operations, and the number of read

operations of the i-th overlap region can be defined as Ni =

( ) Vriead −Voipt
Δ

+

1.

According

to

the

retention

characteristics,

the voltage of the (k + 1)-th programmed state shifts faster

than that of the k-th programmed state as the retention age

increases. The default read reference voltage of the (i + 1)-

th overlap region can be optimized by utilizing the following equation: Vrie+a1d = Vrie+a1d − ΔVi. Based on above optimization
method, we develop a low-latency CSD-TVD (LL-CSD-TVD),

Algorithm 2 LL-CSD-TVD Method

Input: The width of the voltage sub-windows Δ, the number of wordline in a block M , and the default read reference voltage Vriead;
Output: For 0 < i < 2nb , the optimal voltage shift of the i-th dominating overlap region ΔVoipt; 1: for k = 1 : M do

2: Set j ← 0; 3: for i = 1 : 2nb − 1 do

4:

j ← j;

5:

while ΔNji+1 < ΔNji do

6:

j ← j + 1;

7:

end while

8:

ΔVik = j × Δ;

9: end for

10: end for 11: Compute ΔVoipt = ΔVik; 12: End

To elaborate a little further, an example is provided to show

the principle of the LL-CSD-TVD. In an MLC flash memory

channel, there are three overlap regions in total. We can first

obtain ΔV1 by sliding the voltage sub-window from Vr1ead.

Second, we further get ΔV2 by sliding the voltage sub-window

from Vr2ead − ΔV1 . Finally, we can get ΔV3 by sliding the voltage window from Vr3ead − ΔV2 . Therefore, by exploiting

the above method, the number of read operations is reduced

by

ΔV1+ΔV2 Δ

compared with the

original CSD-TVD.

D. Calculation of Optimal Voltage Shift
By subtracting the ΔVoipt, the noise of the flash channel can be compensated without estimating the threshold-voltage distribution. For a soft-decision reference voltage, ΔVoipt is subtracted from the read reference voltages located in the i-
th overlap region. For instance, if the optimal voltage shift and original read reference voltage are given by ΔVoipt = {0.101, 0.150, 0.186} and Vread = {2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.9, 3.0, 3.1, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7}, respectively, then the optimized read reference voltage can be formulated as Vopt = {2.199, 2.299, 2.399, 2.75, 2.85, 2.95, 3.314, 3.414, 3.514}.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:06:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FAN et al.: CSD-ASSISTED THRESHOLD VOLTAGE DETECTOR

579

Fig. 5. FER performance of the proposed CSD-TVD, ROR, and conventional

detection methods over an NAND flash memory channel.

Fig. 7. The number of read operations on each wordline required by the

LL-CSD-TVD, CSD-TVD, and ROR over an NAND flash memory channel.

Fig. 6. The average number of iterations required by the proposed CSDTVD, ROR, and conventional detection methods over an NAND flash memory channel.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In our simulations, the parameters of the MLC flash channel are set as μe = 1.4, σe = 0.35, Vpk ∈ {2.6, 3.2, 3.8}, ΔVpp = 0.2, At = 0.000035, Bt = 0.000235, αi = 0.62, αo = 0.30. The CCI coupling strength factor s is set to 1.4. A rate-0.9014 (4544, 4096) QC-LDPC code and the min-sum (MS) algorithm are used for coding and decoding, respectively. The maximum number of iterations Imax is set to 30. The conventional detection method in [5] and the ROR in [9] are considered as benchmarks.
Fig. 5 shows the frame-error-rate (FER) versus the retention time for the proposed CSD-TVD and the two existing methods over a flash memory channel.1 Referring to this figure, the proposed CSD-TVD significantly outperforms the ROR and conventional detection methods. For instance, at FER = 10−3 and P E = 20K, the flash memory only has a retention age of about 700 hours by using the ROR, while it can achieve a retention age of about 1500 by using the proposed CSD-TVD. Furthermore, for a given retention time, the proposed CSD-TVD has a one-order-of-magnitude gain over the ROR.
Fig. 6 presents the average number of iterations for MS algorithm required by the above three detection methods. It can be observed that the average number of iterations increases as either the P/E cycles or retention time becomes larger. Moreover, the proposed CSD-TVD has better convergence performance (i.e., faster convergence speed) compared with the two existing methods, especially for the conventional detection method.
1The FER and average number of iterations of LL-CSD-TVD are not included in Figs. 5 and 6 because they are identical as those of CSD-TVD.

Fig. 7 compares the number of read operations required by
the LL-CSD-TVD, CSD-TVD, and ROR over a flash memory channel. We can see that the CSD-TVD and ROR have almost
the same number of read operations. Moreover, the number of the read operations required by the LL-CSD-TVD is only a
half of those required by the other two methods.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this letter, a dynamic CSD-TVD has been proposed to obtain high-reliability LLRs for LDPC decoder in NAND flash
memory systems. The proposed CSD-TVD can optimize the voltage shift by analyzing the distribution characteristics of
the voltage shifts on different wordlines. We have further proposed a LL-CSD-TVD, which can significantly reduce the
number of read operations. With respect to the state-of-the-
art ROR, both proposed detection methods can achieve oneorder-of-magnitude performance improvement. Moreover, the
LL-CSD-TVD is amenable to much lower read latency.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Cai et al., “Error characterization, mitigation, and recovery in flashmemory-based solid-state drives,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1666– 1704, Sep. 2017.
[2] Y. Cai et al., “Read disturb errors in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, mitigation, and recovery,” in Proc. DSN, Jun. 2015, pp. 438–449.
[3] X. Wang et al., “Error correction codes and signal processing in flash memory,” Flash Memories. Rijeka, Croatia: InTech, 2011.
[4] R. G. Gallager et al., ” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1963.
[5] G. Dong et al., “On the use of soft-decision error-correction codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[6] J. Wang et al., “Soft information for LDPC decoding in flash: Mutualinformation optimized quantization,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[7] J. Wang et al., “Enhanced precision through multiple reads for LDPC decoding in flash memories,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 880–891, May 2014.
[8] C. A. Aslam et al., “Read and write voltage signal optimization for multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1613–1623, Apr. 2016.
[9] Y. Cai et al., “Data retention in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, optimization, and recovery,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Symp. High Perform. Comput. Archit., San Francisco, CA, USA, Feb. 2015, pp. 551–563.
[10] K. Takeuchi et al., “A double-level-Vth select gate array architecture for multilevel NAND flash memories,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 602–609, Apr. 1996.
[11] K.-D. Suh, et al., “A 3.3 V 32 Mb NAND flash memory with incremental step pulse programming scheme,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 1149–1156, Nov. 1995.
[12] G. Dong et al., “Enabling NAND flash memory use soft-decision error correction codes at minimal read latency overhead,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2412–2421, Sep. 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:06:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

