A Study on Replica Generation Using LUT based on Information Bottleneck for MF-GaBP
in Massive MIMO Detection
Liwen Wang∗, Takumi Takahashi∗, Shinsuke Ibi†, and Seiichi Sampei∗ ∗Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, 565-0871, Japan † Faculty of Science and Engineering, Doshisha University, 1-3 Tataramiyakodani, Kyotanabe, 610-0394, Japan Email: ∗wang@wcs.comm.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp, {takahashi, sampei}@comm.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp, †sibi@mail.doshisha.ac.jp

Abstract—This paper proposes a symbol replica generation method using look-up table (LUT) based on the information bottleneck (IB) theory in matched filter Gaussian belief propagation (MF-GaBP) for massive multi-input multi-output (MIMO) detection. MF-GaBP serves as an iterative signal detection scheme with low computational complexity by utilizing massive MIMO simplification owing to the law of large numbers. However, when the internal mathematical processes in MF-GaBP are conducted in double precision, a severe processing delay is inevitable. To avoid the impairment, we propose a quantized MF-GaBP detection scheme using predesigned LUTs. The quantization threshold is designed based on the sequential IB (sIB) method for minimizing the mutual information loss. Finally, computer simulations demonstrate that the proposed method significantly reduces the memory occupancy on the basis of table-based processing while suppressing error floor level of the bit error rate (BER) performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the dramatic growth of popularization of mobile devices and services, uplink massive multi-user multi-input and multi-output (MU-MIMO) systems are gaining attention for supporting a massive amount of simultaneous wireless links. Thanks to the spatial multiplexing gain and spatial diversity gain [1], massive MIMO (M-MIMO) system has been proved to achieve high spectral efficiency. In massive MU detection (MUD), however, the optimal maximum likelihood detection (MLD) is infeasible due to prohibitively high complexity involved.
To reduce the computational cost while keeping the detection capability, message passing (MP) algorithms such as probabilistic data association (PDA) [2]–[4] and expectation propagation (EP) [5], [6] have been proposed, where a multimodel Gaussian mixture probability of MIMO signals is approximated by a single-variate Gaussian distribution with the assistance of soft interference cancellation. However, MP algorithms still require an inverse matrix operation in each iteration, leading to high computational burden. Gaussian belief propagation (GaBP) [7], [8] takes advantage of the law of large numbers to avoid high-dimensional matrix operations. More specifically, as the number of transmit (TX) and receive (RX) antennas increases, a Gram matrix of channel matrix H, denoting HHH, approaches a diagonal matrix: this statistical behavior is referred to as channel hardening effect [1]. With the aid of the above-mentioned statistical property, GaBP may achieve near-optimal performance. For further computational reduction, matched filter GaBP (MF-GaBP) was proposed in

[9], where the computation of log likelihood ratio (LLR) is replaced by using the output value of MF with the assistance of strong channel hardening effect. Despite the reduced computational burden, MF-GaBP is still able to maintain good convergence property of iterative detection by applying adaptively scaled belief (ASB) [9].
As the transmission rate gets faster, however, the delay of signal processing faces a fatal problem in M-MIMO systems even by utilizing MF-GaBP. The sophisticated detection algorithm still comes at a price in hardware complexity, as all mathematical processes after the MF are conducted in double precision. Inspired by [10], [11], where LLRs in low density parity check (LDPC) decoder are quantized using Information Bottleneck (IB) method, we consider replacing the computation of beliefs and soft symbol replicas in GaBP with searching them in look-up table (LUT) in M-MIMO detection. The table-based processing allows us to significantly reduce the computational complexity and memory occupancy required for the iterative detection process.
After the MF outputs are quantized, in the proposed method, the soft symbol replica is generated on the basis of integer arithmetic according to the LUT. As LUT quantization rules, a channel-adaptive method based on quantization for maximal entropy and a fixed LUT method utilizing Information Bottleneck (IB) [12], [13] are proposed. Computer simulations are conducted to characterize the validity of the proposed methods.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
A. Mathematical Notations
Throughout this paper, vectors and matrices are denoted by lower- and upper-case bold-face letters, respectively. · indicates the ceil function. Furthermore, ·T and ·H are transpose and conjugate transpose operators, respectively. Pa|b(a|b) and pa|b(a|b) denote the conditional probability mass function (PMF) and probability density function (PDF) of a realization a for random variable a given the occurrence of a realization b for random variable b. Pa,b(a, b) and pa,b(a, b) indicate the joint PMF and PDF. Fa(a) denote the cumulative distribution function (CDF), respectively. Ea {·} denotes the expectation of random variable a. IK is an identity matrix of size K × K. Ca×b denotes complex fields of size a × b. {·} and {·} indicate real and imaginary parts of complex values.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-7o2w8n1lo-a1d2e2d0o-n6/J1u9ne/$2341,2.00026©a2t 1021:904I:E41EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. MF-GaBP detector.

B. MIMO System Model

In this paper, we consider massive multi-user detection
(MUD) with multiple TX and RX antennas, where the numbers of TX and RX antennas are denoted by M and N , respectively. Information bits are modulated to symbol xm using quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) modulation. The average power density of constellations is denoted by Es. Let x = [x1, . . . , xm, . . . , xM ]T and y = [y1, . . . , yn, . . . , yN ]T denote TX and RX symbol vectors, respectively. Assuming flat Rayleigh channels, the RX vector y is given by

y = Hx + z,

(1)

where the n-th element of y is expressed as

yn = hnx + zn.

(2)

H ∈ CN×M is an N × M MIMO channel matrix, whose n-th row vector of H is denoted by hn = [hn,1, . . . , hn,m, . . . , hn,M ], hn,m obeys hn,m ∼ CN (0, 1). The vector z is a complex additive white Gaussian noise

(AWGN) vector, whose entries zn are independent identically
distributed (i.i.d.) complex Gaussian distribution with zero
mean and N0 variance, where N0 is the noise power spectral density and the covariance matrix is given by Ez zzH = N0IN .

The soft symbol replica xˆn,m is obtained from the previous iteration process and the derivation will be explained later, thus xˆn,m = 0 at the first iteration.
As mentioned before, we utilize the MF output as a belief αn,m, instead of traditional LLR.

αnI ,m = h∗n,my˜n,m , αnQ,m = h∗n,my˜n,m . (5)

Assuming the effective noise included in αiφ,m (φ ∈ {I, Q}) are independent, the joint belief βmφ is given by the maximum
ratio combining (MRC) as

N

βmφ =

αnφ,m.

(6)

n=1

To prevent the negative impacts of noise propagation in the
iterative detection, a prior belief is typically provided by an extrinsic belief βnφ,m, which is defined by

βnφ,m = βmφ − αnφ,m.

(7)

With the use of the extrinsic belief βnφ,m, the soft symbol replica in the case of Gray coded QPSK is readily given by
using the following activation function: [9]

xˆn,m =

Es 2

tanh

wn,m βnI ,m

+ j tanh

wn,m βnQ,m

,

(8)

where we have

2

a

wn,m = Es hnhnH − |hn,m|2 .

(9)

The scaling parameter a linearly increases from 1.0 to 2.0 with the iteration step, which is expressed as

k

a=1+ , K

(10)

where k is the current iteration step whereas K is the maximum number of allowed iterations. The scaling parameter is appropriately chosen for improving convergence behavior of the iterative detection [9].

C. MF-GaBP with ASB

A schematic of MF-GaBP iterative receiver with soft interference cancellation (SC) is illustrated in Fig. 1. In [9], a simplified approach for generating beliefs that uses the MF output is introduced. For ease of mathematical notations, we assume Gray coded quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) signaling (X = {±wx ± jwx}, wx = Es/2)1. Es is averaged energy of transmit symbols.
First, a soft interference cancellation for the n-th RX symbol y˜n,m is carried out with the aid of soft symbol replica xˆn,m. In the detection of an arbitrary TX symbol xm, the cancellation process is expressed as

y˜n,m = yn − hnxˆn + hn,mxˆn,m,

(3)

where we have

xˆn = [xˆn,1, . . . , xˆn,m, . . . , xˆn,M ]T.

(4)

1MF-GaBP can be extended to QAM signaling after some appropriate mathematical manipulations [14].

III. QUANTIZED MF-GABP USING LUT

We focus on the signal processing required for generating the soft symbol replica from the MF outputs in order to further reduce the computational complexity and memory occupancy. The three modules included in this part, the belief combiner (6), extrinsic belief generator (7), and soft symbol replica generator (8), will be replaced by three corresponding LUTs, namely joint belief mapper, extrinsic belief mapper, and soft symbol replica mapper, respectively. In this section, each structure of LUTs is explained. An appropriate quantization threshold design for LUT will be explained in the next section.
As a preliminary step, the MF outputs αnI ,m and αnQ,m are independently quantized to one of Q = 2B representative integer values with B bits, which are expressed as

αˆnI ,m = Q(αnI ,m) ∈ {0, 1, . . . Q − 1},

αˆnQ,m = Q(αnQ,m) ∈ {0, 1, . . . Q − 1},

(11)

where Q(·) indicates a quantization function.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:04:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 4. Extrinsic belief generation.

Fig. 2. Quantized MF-GaBP detector using LUT.

Fig. 3. Multi-layer two-to-one LUT.

A. Joint belief mapper (LUT1)

The first LUT is designed to imitate the computation of joint belief in (6). The simplest way for replacing the belief combining process using table-based processing is to construct an N -to-one LUT. The LUT processing is defined as

βˆmφ = T αˆ m φ .

(12)

βˆmφ ∈ {0, 1, . . . Q − 1} is the resultant discrete joint belief. In this case, however, it can be found that the above LUT requires BQN bits memory, leading to a considerable memory
occupancy in massive MUD.

In order to limit the LUT size, we design a multi-layer two-

to-one LUT illustrated in Fig. 3. For the simplicity, let N be

2L, where L indicates the number of layers. As can be seen in

the figure, there are

L l=1

2l−1

nodes.

Each

node

indicates

a

two-to-one LUT. In the first layer, for example, N MF beliefs

are divided into N/2 groups and each group makes a node.

The i-th node has a two-to-one LUT with cˆ = Ti aˆ, ˆb ∈

{0, 1, . . . Q−1}, where aˆ and ˆb are discrete inputs of the LUT,

and cˆ is output. As a result, the total number of bits required

for LUT1 is reduced to BQ2 ·

L l=1

2l−1.

The

resultant

joint

belief βˆm should reasonably imitate the joint belief βmφ in (6).

B. Extrinsic belief mapper (LUT2)

To imitate the extrinsic belief βnφ,m in (7) using table-based processing, a similar two-to-one node operation as shown in
Fig. 4 is conducted, where the number of nodes is N . In each node, the joint belief βˆmφ (output of the final L-th layer in LUT1) is used as one of the inputs in each node, while the other input is αˆnφ,m, which is denoted by

βˆnφ,m = En(βˆmφ , αˆnφ,m).

(13)

Consequently, the total number of bits required for LUT2 is BN Q2. The mapping function En(·, ·) imitates the role of (7).

C. Soft symbol replica mapper (LUT3)

In the last LUT, quantization indices yielded from LUT2 are
turned back to double-precision values via one-to-one LUT.
To generate the soft symbol replica from the discrete extrinsic belief βˆnφ,m, the hyperbolic function is utilized as in the case of the conventional MF-GaBP. In analogy with the activation
function in (8), the soft symbol replica is readily given by

xˆn,m = Sk (βˆnI ,m) + jSk (βˆnQ,m),

(14)

where we have a LUT of soft replica mapper as

Sk (βˆnφ,m) =

Es 2

 tanh κ · k

βˆnφ,m

− Q

Q−1 2

 .

(15)

κ is a predetermined constant parameter, k = k/∆ , and k is the current iteration step. In LUT3, the required number of bits is 64Q( K/∆ ), where K is the maximum number of iterations. ∆ is utilized for reducing memory space.

IV. DESIGN OF QUANTIZATION THRESHOLD
In this section, the quantization function Q(·) for MF output, two-to-one LUT function Ti (·, ·) for joint belief, and En (·, ·) for extrinsic belief generation are designed. To prevent the information loss, a representative value αˇm φ ,n ∈ R for the discrete MF output αˆm φ ,n ∈ {0, 1, . . . Q − 1} in double precision is used during the LUT design. Here, we denote the design function for the i-th node in joint belief mapper as cˇ = Tˇi aˇ, ˇb , where aˇ ∈ R, ˇb ∈ R, and cˇ ∈ R are representative values of two inputs and one output of the LUT.
So as to imitate the role of (6), the design function can be rewritten as cˇ = Qi aˇ + ˇb , where Qi (·) is the quantization function to derive the representative value for the i-th node
in LUT1. For extrinsic belief mapper, we define the design function as βˇnφ,m = Eˇn(βˇmφ , αˇnφ,m) which can be rewritten as βˇnφ,m = Qn βˇmφ − αˇnφ,m . Qn (·) is the quantization function for n-th node in LUT2.

A. Channel-adaptive quantizer and LUT settings

In the channel-adaptive method, the quantization threshold
for the MF output as well as the LUT are optimized according
to the instantaneous channel state. To maximize the entropy
of quantizer output, quantization function Q (·), Qi (·), and Qn (·) are designed so that the quantized outputs obey a discrete uniform distribution.
The PDF of αnφ,m at the first iteration without soft interference cancellation is given by

paφn,m (αnφ,m) =

Pxm [xm]panφ,m|xm (αnφ,m|xm),

xm ∈χ

(16)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:04:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where the conditional PDF of αnφ,m given xm in (16) is expressed as

paφn,m|xm (αnφ,m|xm)

1 = π|hn,m|2N0 exp

−

αnφ,m − |hn,m|2xm |hn,m|2N0

2

.

(17)

According to the PDF of (16), the quantization threshold of

αnφ,m can be easily found under Gaussian approximation while

maintaining equal probability of Pαˆφn,m [αˆnφ,m] = 1/Q, result-

ing in the maximum entropy of αˆnφ,m. The representative value

αˇnφ,m takes the corresponding value, where Fαφn,m [αnφ,m] =

2q+1 2Q

,

q

∈

[0,

Q

−

1]

is

a

corresponding

CDF

of

PDF

in

(16).

Since the resultant quantized MF belief αˆnφ,m is uniformly

distributed, the inputs of LUT1 and LUT2 obey obviously

a uniform distribution. In the same way, the quantization

thresholds for Qi (·) and Qn (·) are designed, respectively.

B. Fixed quantizer and LUT settings based on Information Bottleneck theory

Fitting the MF quantization rule and LUT to each channel realization is still troublesome due to reconstruction and update of the LUT. Therefore, we consider finding a common rule for optimal quantization that can be applied without recalculation even when the channel state changes by utilizing average threshold over possible channel conditions.
To determine the quantization threshold for MF, a general MF belief distribution over different Rayleigh fading channel realizations H is utilized as

paφn,m (αnφ,m) = EH paφn,m (αnφ,m) ,

(18)

Unfortunately, pαnφ,m (αnφ,m) cannot be approximated by a simple Gaussian distribution. Therefore, we use a histogram

obtained by computer simulations instead of the mathematical
model of pαφn,m (αnφ,m). According to the derived histogram, we can find a common quantization rule of the MF belief αnφ,m
without any dependency of the instantaneous channel states.

To find the optimal LUT, we utilize the IB method pro-

posed in [12], [13]. Given a joint distribution pa,b (a, b), IB determines a compressed representation of b, bˆ, which results

in the least information loss of the original information a. The

concept of IB method can be formulated by

min I b; bˆ − ηI a; bˆ .

(19)

pˆb|b (ˆb|b)

The parameter η is for adjusting the preference between compression rate and information loss. To understand the meaning of this function, let us trace back to the rate distortion function about random variable b:

R (D) =

min

I b; bˆ ,

(20)

pˆb|b(ˆb|b): d(b,ˆb) ≤D

where distortion function d b, bˆ measures the cost of rep-
resenting b by its quantized version bˆ. Given a prescribed distortion, the quantization mapper with maximal compression rate is asked for. (20) can be solved by introducing a Lagrange

multiplier η, thus,

min I b; bˆ + ηd b, bˆ .

(21)

pˆb|b (ˆb|b)

In the rate distortion scenario, b is the original information source. On the other hand, in the IB scenario, b serves as an observation value and therefore we have to additionally handle with the original value a. During the construction of fixed LUT, quantization setting is not set optimal due to the use of average threshold, thus, a part of information is lost every time when quantization is conducted. So as to limit the information loss, not only distribution of the observed value b, but also the original information of interest a should be

utilized. By setting the distortion function as the lost mutual information of bˆ and a, we have

R (D) =

min

I b; bˆ .

(22)

pˆb|b(ˆb|b): I(a,ˆb) ≥D

In the same way as (21), (19) is obtained. (19) can also be viewed so that the first term indicates the compression rate and the second term how much information bˆ contains about a. The IB method optimizes quantization rule that causes minimum mutual information loss as we set η = ∞. To solve the optimization problem of (19), several algorithms have been proposed in [13].

In our LUT settings, the corresponding variable of interest is xm, while the observed value is the MF output αnφ,m as well as the joint belief βmφ and extrinsic belief βnφ,m.
The algorithm for achieving an average threshold setting every layer in joint belief mapper with the multi-layer twoto-one LUT structure using the IB method is presented in Algorithm 1.

As the input of Algorithm 1, the joint probability pxm,ˆaφn,m (xm, αˆnφ,m) is required. All inputs are divided into groups of two to make two-to-one LUT nodes and the joint probability of xm and the sum of two inputs in each node is calculated as input for IB algorithm. Here, we utilize the modi-
fied sequential IB (sIB) algorithm for channel output quantiza-
tion designed in [10] to obtain the quantization threshold and
representative value for each TX antenna in every two-to-one
LUT node. The average threshold and representative value are then calculated over M TX antennas and all nodes in this layer
in order to construct the fixed LUT. For the next layer, the joint
probability is recalculated according to the resultant average
quantization threshold, and it is used as the input to new sIB
for the subsequent node operation further. Finally, the LUT of each layer and joint probability pxm,βˆm φ (xm, βˆmφ ) is obtained. For computing the extrinsic belief, we set L = 1, and input pxm,ˆbφm (xm, βˆmφ ) and pxm,ˆanφ,m (xm, αˆnφ,m). The quantization rule can be found through Algorithm 1 in the same way.
In the proposed algorithm, the number of LUTs for each
layer becomes only one, leading to a significant reduction of
the required memory amount. Furthermore, the quantization
rule keeps for the same system setting over different channel
realizations.

The mathematical formulation of memory occupancy re-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:04:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 fixed LUT construction for joint belief mapper (LUT1) using IB method

Input: joint probability pxm,˜an,m,k (xm, αˆn,m,k) ; Output: LUT of each layer, pxm,ˆbφm (xm, βˆmφ );
1: for each layer l ∈ [1, L] do

2: for each m ∈ [1, M ] do

3:

divide all inputs into groups of two to make two-

to-one LUT nodes

4:

for each node in layer l do

5:

calculate the joint probability of xm and the

sum of two inputs

6:

conduct sIB algorithm;

7:

end for

8: end for

9: calculate the average threshold and representative

value for this layer, save the corresponding LUT

10: recalculate the joint probability of xm and the quan-

tized sum of two inputs

11: end for

TABLE I LUT MEMORY OCCUPANCY.

(a) Channel-adaptive settings

N = 64 N = 128 N = 256

M = 64 0.50 MB 1.00 MB 2.00 MB

M = 128 1.00 MB 2.00 MB 4.00 MB

M = 256 2.00 MB 4.00 MB 8.00 MB

N = 64 N = 128 N = 256

(b) Fixed settings

M = 64 1.375 KB 1.500 KB 1.625 KB

M = 128 1.375 KB 1.500 KB 1.625 KB

M = 256 1.375 KB 1.500 KB 1.625 KB

quired for LUT with channel-adaptive setting is formed as

L

BQ2 · M

2l−1 + 1 + 64Q( K/∆ ), (23)

l=1

and the memory occupancy with fixed LUT settings as

BQ2 · (L + 1) + 64Q( K/∆ ).

(24)

In Tab. I, the memory occupancy required for LUT with channel-adaptive and fixed quantization settings are presented. The number of quantization bits is 4 bit, and the predetermined parameters for replica generation is set as (K, ∆) = (16, 4). Since the second term of (23) is negligibly small as compared to the first term, therefore, the LUT size is roughly proportional to both N and M in channel-adaptive method. By contrast, the LUT size is only roughly proportional to L = log2(N ) in the first term in fixed LUT method, thus, the total size of fixed LUT is much smaller as compared to the LUT size in channel-adaptive method. In massive MUD scenarios, a significant reduction of memory occupancy can be realized by using fixed LUT setting.

V. COMPUTER SIMULATIONS
In order to characterize the validity of the proposed methods, computer simulations have been conducted. Simulation

TABLE II SIMULATION CONDITIONS.

Channel model Channel estimation Num. of TX antennas Num. of RX antennas
Modulation Num. of GaBP iterations Num. of quantization bits Parameters for replica generation Es/N0 for LUT construction

Rayleigh fading Perfect M = 64
N = 64, 128, 256 Gray coded QPSK
K = 16 B=4 (κ, ∆) = (2.0, 4.0) −8 dB

100

10-2

BER

MF-GaBP w/o ASB

MF-GaBP w.ASB

10-4

adaptive LUT

fixed LUT w.IB

fixed LUT for max. entropy

-17 -15 -13 -11

-9

-7

-5

-3

Es/N0 [dB]

Fig. 5. BER performance for QPSK (N, M ) = (64, 64).

conditions are summarized in Tab. II. We assume MIMO channels to be uncorrelated flat fading, and the channel estimation is perfect on the receiver side. Gray coded QPSK without channel coding is utilized. The number of quantization bits for MF output as well as for LUT is 4 bit per axis. The MF quantization threshold and LUT is designed at Es/N0 = −8 dB. The number of iterations in MF-GaBP is 16. The predetermined parameters for replica generation are set to κ = 2.0 and ∆ = 4.0, respectively.
Figs. 5, 7, and 8 show the BER performances of proposed quantized detection schemes. The performances are compared with the conventional MF-GaBP and MF-GaBP belief with ASB [9], where all of which are simulated in double-precision. Note that while error floor appears when using conventional MF-GaBP in double precision system for MIMO system with antenna configuration (N, M ) = (64, 64), the quantized MF-GaBP using adaptive LUT suppresses the error floor significantly as the instantaneous channel state information is taken full use of. The performance of using adaptive LUT approaches that of MF-GaBP with ASB. Compared to the adaptive LUT, the penalty caused by using fixed LUT is about 1 dB at BER= 10−4 due to the generalized setting.
Normalizing the average mutual information at the first layer as 1.0, the normalized mutual information at each layer under sIB-based quantization and quantization for entropy maximization is shown as in Fig. 6. The difference between sIBbased method and quantization for maximal entropy at the first layer is negligible. However, as quantization is sequentially conducted in a multi-layer structure of LUT, the differences become no longer negligible due to error propagation. During fixed LUT construction, as the number of layer increases, the difference of mutual information loss between two methods also grows due to error propagation. This explains the reason

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:04:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1

100

normalized average MI

0.95

0.9

10-2

BER

0.85

0.8

Quantization for max. MI

Quantization for max. Entropy

0.75

1

2

3

4

5

6

number of layer

Fig. 6. Normalized average mutual information at each layer for (N, M ) = (64, 64).

100 MF-GaBP w/o ASB

MF-GaBP w.ASB

adaptive LUT

fixed LUT w.IB

10-2

fixed LUT for max. entropy

MF-GaBP w/o ASB

MF-GaBP w.ASB

10-4

adaptive LUT fixed LUT w.IB

fixed LUT for max. entropy

-23 -21 -19 -17 -15 -13 -11 -9 Es/N0 [dB]

Fig. 8. BER performance for QPSK (N, M ) = (256, 64).

caused by the lack of channel state information can be well suppressed by using the IB method.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT A part of this work was financially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP18H03765, Japan.

BER

10-4
-17 -15 -13 -11 -9 -7 -5 -3 Es/N0 [dB]
Fig. 7. BER performance for QPSK (N, M ) = (128, 64).
why the sIB-based method can achieve better performance than quantization for maximal entropy.
As the proportion of N and M increases to 2.0, the gap between two quantization methods becomes larger as shown in Fig. 7. In the case of (N, M ) = (256, 64), as the performance of quantized methods further approaches the result in double precision due to strong channel hardening effect, the gap between the above-mentioned methods decreases. At BER = 10−5, error floor does not appear for either of the proposed quantization methods. Moreover, below BER = 10−4, the performance of MF-GaBP with ASB calculated in double precision is almost the same as the performance under channeladaptive quantization settings, and the gap with IB method is only about 0.3 dB.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a novel quantized MF-GaBP using LUT for massive MIMO systems is proposed to generate soft symbol replica in integer arithmetic. As LUT quantization rule, a channel-adaptive method based on quantization for maximal entropy and a fixed LUT method utilizing IB is proposed. In computer simulations, we confirmed that by using channeladaptive LUT, the BER performance approaches that of MFGaBP with ASB in double precision due to the optimization with the aid of instantaneous channel state information. In comparison, a fixed LUT follows a common quantization rule and thus takes up much less memory space. The penalty

REFERENCES
[1] A. Chockalingam and B. S. Rajan, Large MIMO systems. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
[2] T. Datta, N. A. Kumar, A. Chockalingam, and B. S. Rajan, “A novel monte-carlo-sampling-based receiver for large-scale uplink multiuser MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 3019– 3038, Sept. 2013.
[3] P. Li and R. D. Murch, “Multiple output selection-LAS algorithm in large MIMO systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 399– 401, May 2010.
[4] S. K. Mohammed, A. Chockalingam, and B. S. Rajan, “Low-complexity near-MAP decoding of large non-orthogonal STBCs using PDA,” in Proc. ISIT 2009, Seoul, Korea, pp. 1998–2002, Jun. 2009.
[5] T. P. Minka, “Expectation propagation for approximate Bayesian inference,” in in Proc. the Seventeenth conference on Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, 2001, pp. 362–369.
[6] J. Cespedes, P. M. Olmos, M. Sanchez-Fernandez, and F. Perez-Cruz, “Expectation Propagation Detection for High-Order High-Dimensional MIMO Systems,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 2840– 2849, 2014.
[7] A. Chockalingam, “Low-complexity algorithms for large-MIMO detection,” in Proc. ISCCSP 2010, Limassol, Cyprus, pp. 1–6, Mar. 2010.
[8] W. Fukuda, T. Abiko, T. Nishimura, T. Ohgane, Y. Ogawa, Y. Ohwatari, and Y. Kishiyama, “Low-complexity detection based on belief propagation in a massive MIMO system,” in Proc. VTC 2013-Spring, Dresden, Germany, pp. 1–5, Jun. 2013.
[9] T. Takahashi, S. Ibi, and S. Sampei, “Design of criterion for adaptively scaled belief in iterative large MIMO detection,” IEICE Trans. on Commun., vol. E102.B, no. 2, pp. 285–297, Feb. 2019.
[10] J. Lewandowsky and G. Bauch, “Trellis based node operations for ldpc decoders from the information bottleneck method,” in Proc. 9th ICSPCS, pp. 1–10, 2015.
[11] G. Bauch, J. Lewandowsky, M. Stark, and P. Oppermann, “InformationOptimum Discrete Signal Processing for Detection and Decoding,” in Proc. VTC 2018-Spring, Porto, pp. 1–6, 2018.
[12] N. Tishby, F. C. Pereira, and W. Bialek, “The information bottleneck method,” in Proc. 37th Allerton Conference on Communication and Computation, pp. 368–377, 1999.
[13] N. Slonim, “The information bottleneck: Theory and applications,” Ph.D. dissertation, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 2002.
[14] T. Takahashi, S. Ibi, and S. Sampei, “Design of adaptively scaled belief in multi-dimensional signal detection for higher-order modulation,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 1986–2001, Mar. 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:04:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

