Deep Learning-based Polar Code Design
Moustafa Ebada, Sebastian Cammerer, Ahmed Elkelesh and Stephan ten Brink
Institute of Telecommunications, Pfaffenwaldring 47, University of Stuttgart, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
{ebada,cammerer,elkelesh,tenbrink}@inue.uni-stuttgart.de
Abstract—In this work, we introduce a deep learning-based
polar code construction algorithm. The core idea is to represent
the information/frozen bit indices of a polar code as a binary
vector which can be interpreted as trainable weights of a neural
network (NN). For this, we demonstrate how this binary vector
can be relaxed to a soft-valued vector, facilitating the learning
process through gradient descent and enabling an efficient code
construction. We further show how different polar code design
constraints (e.g., code rate) can be taken into account by means
of careful binary-to-soft and soft-to-binary conversions, along
with rate-adjustment after each learning iteration. Besides its
conceptual simplicity, this approach benefits from having the
“decoder-in-the-loop”, i.e., the nature of the decoder is inherently
taken into consideration while learning (designing) the polar
code. We show results for belief propagation (BP) decoding over
both AWGN and Rayleigh fading channels with considerable
performance gains over state-of-the-art construction schemes.
Index Terms—Polar Code Construction, Frozen Bit Vector,
Machine Learning, Deep Learning, Binarizer.
I. INTRODUCTION
Deep learning (DL) methods have been recently applied
in many domains of communications. Examples span from
trainable channel decoders [1]–[7], neural network (NN)-based
detectors, e.g., for multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) [8]
or for molecular channels [9] up to end-to-end learning of
a complete communication system [10]. Unfortunately, in
particular in the field of channel (de-)coding, the exponen-
tial training complexity [5] typically prevents from practical
applications of a naive learning approach (i.e., fully learned
without any given structure; see [5]). Therefore, the authors
of [1], [3], [11] proposed to exploit the given code structure
and pre-initialize the NN structure which reduces the training
significantly. Hereby, the most common approach is to inter-
pret the unrolled graph of the belief propagation (BP) decoder
as a trainable NN [1] which turns out to work well for short
length codes even with (relatively) dense decoding graphs.
However, besides the implementation of DL during run-
time (online complexity), i.e., the replacement or refinement
of classical signal processing components by NNs, DL can be
also used during design-time (offline complexity), e.g., to find
good codes by the help of DL tools as in [7]. This work focuses
on the later one, i.e., we use DL to design the polar code but
use the classical decoders without any further modification.
Although completely different, the previously mentioned
approaches have in common that they optimize real-valued
weights. However, in communications and, particularly, chan-
nel coding, many essential problems boil down to the task of
This work has been supported by DFG, Germany, under grant BR 3205/5-1
and BR 3205/6-1.
finding binary representations that are omnipresent in today’s
digital communication systems. Thus, its worth mentioning
that the proposed techniques from this work can be also
applied to other communications (and signal processing) tasks.
On the other hand, polar codes [12] have recently attracted
a lot of research as they were selected to be among the error-
correcting codes used in the control channel of the enhanced
Mobile Broadband (eMBB) service [13] in the 5th generation
mobile communication (5G) standardization process. They are
also a potential candidate for ultra-reliable low-latency com-
munications (URLLC) which faces the two major challenges
of ultra high reliability and ultra low latency. They are the
first class of error-correcting codes theoretically proven to
be asymptotically capacity-achieving under successive can-
cellation (SC) decoding. However, the problem of finding
polar decoders that fulfill the practical constraints (e.g., target
latency, error-rate, hardware-complexity, etc.) in the finite-
length regime is not yet fully solved. Furthermore, the problem
of polar code design that fits other types of decoders that are
of completely different decoding characteristics than SC is still
open. Nonetheless, the problem description is relatively simple
and from a DL perspective the fundamental problem of polar
code design is how to learn a binary vector optimizing the
error-rate performance for a given practical decoder.
Polar codes are typically decoded by the successive cancel-
lation list (SCL) decoder [14], while using a high-rate cyclic
redundancy check (CRC) code to select the correct codeword
from the list. The increased implementation complexity (e.g.,
hardware complexity, memory requirements, etc.) of the SCL
decoder raised the urge for more simplified variants, e.g.,
[15], [16]. However, the persistent drawback is the absence
of soft-in/soft-out information processing, due to their se-
quential hard-decoding nature, which prevents their effective
deployment in iterative detection/decoding schemes. Besides
SCL decoding, polar codes can also be decoded with itera-
tive decoders [17], which do not have these aforementioned
problems. This class of decoders could be potentially suitable
for high data rate applications (i.e., decoding throughput
and latency, from an implementation perspective). In [18], a
belief propagation list (BPL) decoder was introduced, with
an error-rate performance close to maximum likelihood (ML).
Unfortunately, existing variants of BP-based decoders have an
error-rate performance which is inferior to that of the CRC-
aided SCL decoder. However, due to their unique advantages,
further performance enhancements (i.e., code properties and
decoding performance) are worth considering. Existing polar
code construction methods that are tailored to the BP decoder
2019 57th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing
(Allerton)
Allerton Park and Retreat Center
Monticello, IL, USA, September 24-27, 2019
978-1-7281-3151-1/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
177
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
appear to be few (cf. [19] and the discussion therein).
In this work, we propose a deep learning-based polar code1
construction algorithm. Following the same spirit as [19], [20],
we learn the polar code (i.e., frozen and non-frozen indices)
for a given decoder and a specific channel. This showed to be a
rather simpler code construction method than explicitly finding
the analytical solution for general channels while taking the
decoder properties into account. Therefore, we follow the
general idea of Nachmani et al. [1], i.e., we apply iterative loop
unrolling (deep unrolling [21]) and interpret the graph as a
trainable NN. However, unlike [1] we do not add any trainable
weights to the graph itself but interpret the frozen/non-frozen
positions as trainable weights of the NN. As the unrolled graph
is completely differentiable, we can apply standard stochastic
gradient descent (SGD)-based training of these weights with
the only exception that the frozen positions itself need to be
carefully transformed from a binary vector into a soft one.
Opposed to [7], our approach explicitly makes use of a
given code structure (i.e., the Hadamard structure) and only
learns the location of the frozen bit-channels. The benefits
are a reduced training complexity and the availability of
well-understood classical decoders. Therefore, our approach
only introduces offline training complexity, however, once
the design is fixed, the decoding complexity itself is the
same as for any other classical design scheme. The decoding
complexity may even be reduced as less iterations, for a fixed
error-rate performance, can be sufficient, especially if the code
design is well-suited for the BP algorithm. Also the channel
and its noise statistics (e.g., additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) or Rayleigh) is inherently taken into account, as the
SGD-based training directly operates based on the actual data,
rather than information theoretic approximations that may
be inaccurate (e.g., the Bhattacharyya bound for the AWGN
channel). Furthermore, this allows optimizing the code with
respect to a fixed number of iterations and for any given finite
block length.
II. POLAR CODES AND BP DECODING
Polar codes are conventionally based on the concept of
channel polarization assuming that an SC decoder is used.
As the code length N = 2n gets larger, the resulting bit-
channels become purely noiseless or purely noisy (i.e., po-
larize). Afterwards, information and frozen (known) bits are
transmitted over the noiseless and the noisy bit-channels,
respectively. The outcome from the polar code construction (or
design) phase is the set of bit-channels used for information
transmission. We denote the information and the frozen bit-
channels by the sets A and ¯A, respectively. Since a bit-channel
is either used for information or frozen bit transmission,
thus, merging the two sets (i.e., A and ¯A) into one binary
vector A = [a1,...,ai,...,aN] ∈FN
2 is straightforward. The bit-
channel i is described by the value of ai (e.g., ai = 1 means
that bit-channel i is used for information transmission).
1Strictly speaking this is not an original polar code as no channel polar-
ization is involved (cf. SC decoding). However, it follows the same concepts
and can be encoded/decoded alike.
(a) Factor graph
Rin,1
Lout,1
Rout,1
Lin,1
Rout,2
Lin,2
Rin,2
Lout,2
Lin,2 +Rin,2
f (Rin,1,Lin,1)
(b) Processing element (PE)
Fig. 1: Original BP factor graph for a P(8,4)-code with A = {4,6,7,8}.
Red nodes denote frozen positions and green nodes denote the LLRs of the
channel output Lch.
Polar codes are based on a (polarization) matrix F, an N ×N
matrix constructed based on the 2 × 2 Arıkan kernel F2 as
F = F⊗n
2 , where F2 =

1
0
1
1

and F⊗n
2
denotes the n-th
Kronecker power of F2. Since polar codes are linear codes,
encoding to find a codeword x is just a vector u by the matrix F
multiplication. The vector u consists of the k information bits
in the A positions and N −k frozen (known) bits. Throughout
this work, we use the notation P(N,k)-code to denote a polar
code of length N and code dimension k.
The BP decoder of polar codes is a message passing decoder
with an iterative decoding strategy. The underlying factor
graph depends on the polarization matrix F of the polar code.
The frozen bits (i.e., the positions ¯A and the frozen values
u ¯A) are known to the decoder and this is used as the a priori
information. The channel output in terms of log-likelihood
ratio (LLR) Lch is the second input to the decoder. All other
LLR messages are initialized to zero.
LLRs are updated in the factor graph (Fig. 1a) from left-
to-right (R-messages) and from right-to-left (L-messages)
according to equations (1)-(4) till reaching a predefined max-
imum number of iterations Nit or fulfilling a certain early
stopping condition. A single processing element (PE) is shown
in Fig. 1b. The L- and R-messages are updated in each PE as
follows:
Rout,1
= f(Rin,1,Lin,2 +Rin,2)
(1)
Rout,2
= f(Rin,1,Lin,1)+Rin,2
(2)
Lout,1
= f(Lin,1,Lin,2 +Rin,2)
(3)
Lout,2
= f(Rin,1,Lin,1)+Lin,2
(4)
where f(x,y) = x ⊞y is commonly referred to as boxplus
operator defined as
f(x,y) = x⊞y = ln 1+ex+y
ex +ey .
After some user-defined number of iterations Nit, the LLRs
that represent the estimated information vector ˆu and estimated
codeword vector ˆx are given as:
L( ˆui)
= Li,1 +Ri,1
L(ˆxi)
= Li,n+1 +Ri,n+1.
178
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
SGD(ℓ)
Loss ℓ= ℓBER +λ1ℓrate +λ2ℓconv
Aso ft
∆A
Binarizer (Fig. 3)
A
y
Lch
Compute
LLR
LLRmax
iteration 1
R
L
iteration 2
R
L
.. .
.. .
.. .
iteration Nit
R
L
Compute ℓBER
ℓBER
BP decoding (forward)
Training (backward)
Fig. 2: Learning framework over the unrolled BP factor graph of a polar code with codelength N = 8 (i.e., a P(8,k)-code).
Besides, BP decoding can be performed over permuted fac-
tor graphs which greatly enhances the error-rate performance
over both Binary Erasure Channel (BEC) and AWGN channel
[18], [22], [23]. The polar code factor graph can be trans-
formed into a low-density parity-check (LDPC)-like Tanner
graph and, thus, LDPC sum product algorithm (SPA) decoding
is possible after applying some graph-pruning techniques [24].
Throughout this work, we use the BP decoder over the
encoding polar factor graph (Fig. 1a) with the flooding update
rule. We use a fixed number of BP iterations Nit without any
further early stopping condition.
III. CODE CONSTRUCTION MISMATCH PARADIGM
The state-of-the-art polar code constructions (e.g., [12],
[25]–[29]) assume that a hard-output SC decoder is used. Thus,
these algorithms are not optimal for iterative decoding and list
decoding [30]–[32]. The BP decoder has a different decoding
strategy when compared to the SC decoder. A proper design
tailored to BP decoding should take into consideration the
LLR update schedule, the number of BP iterations and the
underlying specific permutation of the polar code factor graph.
These parameters directly give an indication about the cycles,
stopping and trapping sets in the graph.
In [30], the authors track the evolution of the LLRs in the
polar code factor graph during BP decoding to find some bad
information bit-channels and some good frozen bit-channels.
Then these bit-channels are swapped enhancing the error-rate
performance of the BP decoder. In [19], a Genetic Algorithm
(GenAlg)-based method is used which takes into account the
real decoding behavior (i.e., “decoder-in-the-loop” concept).
The resulting polar codes are tailored to both the considered
decoder and the channel. It was observed that different polar
codes are optimal depending on the considered decoder. In
[17], it was shown that using the Reed–Muller (RM) rule
leads to codes with poor performance under BP decoding,
thus, the minimum distance of the code dmin is not the
(only) parameter to be maximized in order to design codes
suitable for iterative decoding. In this paper, we focus on
designing polar codes tailored to iterative decoding using some
deep learning techniques, but extensions to SCL-tailored polar
codes are possible.
Most of the available polar code construction techniques are
assuming a BEC or an AWGN channel. However, designing
a polar code, e.g., for the Rayleigh fading channel is an in-
teresting on-going research problem in the coding community.
Our proposed algorithm depends on real Monte-Carlo error-
rate simulations at a specific channel condition and, thus, can
be used to efficiently construct polar codes tailored to the
Rayleigh channel at a certain design SNR.
IV. LEARNING TO CONSTRUCT POLAR CODES
As shown in Fig. 2, we apply iterative loop unrolling
[1], [21] and replace the frozen/non-frozen bit vector A by
trainable weights. All BP operations are differentiable and,
thus, a standard SGD-based training can be applied to find the
best weights with the only exception that the frozen positions
vector itself should be a binary vector. To overcome this soft-
to-binary conversion, we re-interpret the real-valued weights
as the probability that a specific position is frozen and evaluate
it based on random realizations of A. With some modifications
in the backward-propagation of SGD, this method allows to
learn the frozen bit positions. Further, our approach shares
the same advantages as in [1], and, as such, training with the
all-zero codeword is possible. In the following, we assume
without loss of generality that a frozen position is set to 0.
For details on the loop unrolling for BP decoding, we refer
the reader to [1] and, in particular, for polar codes to [33].
A. From “classical” to stochastic code constructions
The fundamental problem is that the optimization target
(here the frozen/non-frozen positions A) is a binary decision
and, therefore, a position is either frozen or non-frozen. In
the following, we introduce a soft trainable frozen/non-frozen
position vector Asoft that simply denotes the LLRs (cf. logits
in the deep learning domain) of the probability that a position
is frozen2.
2Strictly speaking the BP decoder would also work with soft-A inputs,
however, this does not lead to any meaningful interpretation at the encoder
side as the code itself needs to be binary.
179
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
≤
σ(.)
Pu ∼U(0,1)
Asoft ∈RN
A ∈FN
2
stochastic binarizer
backward path
“Hard vector”
“Soft vector”
Fig. 3: Block diagram of the proposed stochastic binarizer.
A common method for hard threshold activations (e.g.,
a binary neuron) in deep learning literature is the so-called
straight-through estimator [34]. This simply means that the
gradient during back-propagation is set as if the forward-
direction had been the identity function. To further speed-up
the convergence, we follow the approach from [35] where the
authors propose a stochastic binarizer layer, i.e., the samples
of A within a batch are randomly assigned with probability
pi = σ(Asoft,i) of being non-frozen. Hereby σ(.) denotes the
sigmoid function.
The binarizer-layer behaves as an identity function in the
backward-direction while in the forward-direction the output
is
Ai =
(
+1
with probability pi = σ(Aso ft,i)
0
with probability 1−pi.
This procedure ensures that the resulting code construction A
describes one valid realization of a conventional binary polar
code. Note that the same hard A-vector is used multiple times
during decoding (after each iteration) and, thus, needs to be the
same realization after each iteration as shown in Fig. 2. As a
result, pi = σ(Asoft,i) denotes the probability that bit-position
i is non-frozen and, thus, the average coderate is given by
Rc,avg = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
σ(Aso ft,i).
(5)
The choice of the right loss function has to ensure that
the training converges to the desired design rate. However,
after training, the N −k largest values of Asoft are considered
as frozen positions to ensure that the final code rate exactly
matches the target rate and the code itself is deterministic.
B. Loss function and training methodology
After having defined the basic setup, the detailed choice
of the hyperparameters is given in Tab. I which essentially
follows the common choice in the literature (cf. [1], [5],
[7], [10]). Further gains may be achievable by extensive
optimization of these hyperparameters, e.g., by means of
heuristic search algorithms such as evolutionary algorithms
[36]. However, one crucial hyperparameter is the design of the
right loss function suited to the polar code design problem. We
propose the weighted addition of multiple individual losses to
fulfill all constraints, which are:
1) Low error-rates. A good selection of the A-vector should
minimize the error-rate after decoding either for infor-
mation bits in u or codeword bits in x. Thus, the binary
cross-entropy loss is used
ℓBER(A)
=
1
k∑
i∈A

−(ui)log(σ(L( ˆui)))
−(1−ui)log(1−σ(L( ˆui)))

.
Alternatively, the mutual information (MI) of the decoder
output LLRs could be maximized (e.g., based on the MI
estimation in [37]).
2) Target rate / rate adjustment. It turns out to be beneficial
if the code rate can be adjusted during training (i.e., first
force convergence to higher rate codes and afterwards
successively freeze more and more positions; similar to
slack variables). Let Rtarget denote the desired code rate
and with (5) it follows
ℓrate(Asoft,Rtarget)
= (Rc,avg −Rtarget)2
(5)
=
  1
N ∑N
i=1 σ(Asoft,i)−Rtarget
2 .
3) Convergence towards deterministic behavior. Although
the training process is done based on stochastic real-
izations of A, the final output of the training algorithm
should be a deterministic solution (i.e., the learned code
Aopt) and, thus, Asoft,i →±∞. Therefore, we propose the
additional loss
ℓconv(Asoft) = 1
N ∑e−|Asoft,i|.
4) Avoiding local minima. Unfortunately, the proposed
losses are partly contradictive (e.g., the all-frozen vector
obviously minimizes the bit error-rate (BER) but does
not fulfill the rate requirement). Thus, we introduce
weighting factors λi to adjust the individual impact per
loss component during the training progress (e.g., in the
beginning a relaxed rate loss penalty may be tolerable to
allow more degrees of freedom).
This leads to the final loss function:
ℓ= ℓBER(A)+λ1ℓrate(Asoft,Rtarget)+λ2ℓconv(Asoft)
where λi denotes the additional training hyperparameters.
Now, training is conducted in three phases:
• Phase 1 (Initialization), where an intermediate number of
epochs is required to push the possibly randomly/weakly
initialized A-vector Ainit towards a reasonably proper one.
In this phase, λ1 and λ2 are set to 0, i.e., a relaxed loss
penalty, as only BER acts as a loss in this phase and,
thus, more degrees of freedom are provided.
• Phase 2 (Optimization), where a reasonably large number
of epochs is required to train the A-vector given the target
code rate. In this phase, ℓrate is activated to constrain the
training of the A-vector by the target rate. Balancing both
losses ℓBER(A) and ℓrate(Asoft,Rtarget) can be adjusted by
careful choice of λ1, while keeping λ2 set to 0 (i.e.,
non-deterministic values of Asoft are still allowed in this
phase).
• Phase 3 (Saturation), where a large number of epochs
is required to fine-tune the A-vector by pushing the soft
180
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
probabilities towards their extreme values. In this phase,
ℓconv(Asoft) is activated and allowed to dominate the loss
function to push towards a more deterministic solution.
Phase 2 and 3 can be combined without a significant perfor-
mance loss with the drawback of more difficult hyperparameter
tuning. For a given number of BP iterations Nit, training is
performed over 2 · Nit · (n + 1) layers, where the factor of 2
accounts for the 2-way propagation in the iterative decoding
algorithm.
C. Approaches for non-differentiable decoders
As SGD relies on the availability of the gradient per layer,
the proposed idea is limited to BP-based decoders. However,
the general idea of the soft Asoft-vector in combination with
the straight-through estimator can also be applied with rein-
forcement learning (e.g., see [38]) and, thus, also works for
non-differentiable decoders. This will facilitate learning on
SCL-based decoders for a specific list size over a user-defined
channel state. The authors in [19] showed that this is critical, as
a plain SCL-tailored polar code was able to achieve the same
error-rate performance of a CRC-aided polar code under SCL
decoding. This relieves some complexity and brings back the
pure structure of polar codes without requiring a CRC/parity-
check code in the loop.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this work, training was performed for a P(256,128)-
code under BP decoding limited to Nit = 5 iterations (i.e.,
corresponding to an equivalent of 90 NN-layers). This lim-
itation was induced by some complexity constraints (e.g.,
huge size of the NN and its memory requirements) and,
thus, pushed forward for a future study. However, gains were
still observed for a slightly larger number of iterations. The
results for training over AWGN and Rayleigh fading channels
are presented next. Extension of the current framework to
accommodate different parameters (e.g., different codelengths,
channel types, decoders, etc.) is straightforward. In this work,
we focus on the BP decoder-tailored design which, to the
best of our knowledge, still misses a systematic/analytical
approach.
A. AWGN channel results
We learn (i.e., design) a P(256,128)-code under BP de-
coding with BER as the error-rate cost function (i.e., ℓBER).
The newly obtained code is compared to the 5G polar code
without the CRC-aid [13] under BP decoding with Nit = 5
iterations. As depicted in Fig. 4, the BER performance of the
learned code outperforms the performance of the 5G polar
code under Arıkan’s conventional BP decoder with Nit = 5
iterations, leading to a performance gain in terms of BER.
However, the gains are reduced for Nit = 20 iterations due to
the aforementioned training complexity constraints.
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
Eb/N0 [dB]
BER
Construction
Nit
5G Polar [13]
5
NN-designed
5
5G Polar [13]
20
NN-designed
20
5G Polar [13]
200
Fig. 4: BER performance of the learned P(256,128)-code over the AWGN
channel under BP decoding with number of iterations Nit.
Tab. I: Hyperparameters used for training the P(256,128)-code under BP
decoding limited to Nit = 5 BP iterations
Parameter
Value
Optimizer
SGD with Adam
Learning rate Lr
0.001
Training SNR Eb/N0
2 dB, 4 dB and 5 dB
Trainable parameters
256
Effective number of layers
90
B. Rayleigh fading channel results
There exist limited amount of work on Rayleigh-specific
polar codes (e.g., [39]). Next, same as before, a learned
P(256,128)-code is compared to the 5G polar code without
the CRC-aid [13] under BP decoding with Nit = {5,20}
iterations. The system model is given by:
y = α ·x+n
where y is the channel output, n is the Gaussian noise
attributed to the channel such that n ∼N (0,σ2
ch) and α > 0
is the fading coefficient which follows a Rayleigh distribution
with E[α2] = 1. Assuming perfect Channel State Information
(CSI) (i.e., α is known to the receiver at each received bit
position), the corresponding channel LLRs, namely Lch, are
computed as
Lch(y) = log P(y|α,x = +1)
P(y|α,x = −1) = 2
σ2
ch
·α ·y.
As depicted in Fig. 5, the BER performance of the learned
code outperforms the performance of the 5G polar code under
Arıkan’s conventional BP decoder for both scenarios with
Nit = {5,20} iterations in terms of BER.
As a reference, in both Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, we compare the
performance of the obtained codes to that of the 5G polar
code under Arıkan’s conventional BP decoder with Nit = 200
iterations. It can be seen that the learned codes below Nit = 20
iterations can possibly benefit from a reduced decoding latency
and complexity (i.e., reduced number of BP iterations) without
any loss in error-rate performance.
181
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Eb/N0 [dB]
BER
Construction
Nit
5G Polar [13]
5
NN-designed
5
5G Polar [13]
20
NN-designed
20
5G Polar [13]
200
Fig. 5: BER performance of the learned P(256,128)-code over the Rayleigh
fading channel under BP decoding with number of iterations Nit.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE AVENUES
A deep learning-based polar code design framework was
introduced by inherently taking the actual decoder and channel
into account. We have showcased that the DL toolkit itself can
be not just used to completely learn new structures but also to
support classical system design, namely the selection of frozen
bit-positions of a polar code. This renders DL techniques into
a universal toolkit that deserves further analysis of its capabil-
ities but also its limitations in the context of communications.
The major constraint of the binary vector representation
of the information/frozen sets was relaxed to a soft-valued
vector which can be regarded as training weights of a neural
network. Proper loss functions and corresponding weights
were also proposed to satisfy various design constraints (e.g.,
BER performance, code rate, etc.) while tailoring the code
to the decoder and the channel. Results were shown for
BP decoding under limited iteration count over both AWGN
and Rayleigh fading channels with considerable performance
gains over state-of-the-art construction schemes. Extending the
current framework to setups with different parameters (e.g.,
codelengths, channels, decoders, etc.) is straightforward. The
reason why we focused on the BP decoder-tailored design is
(besides the easy access of the gradients) that, to the best of
our knowledge, it still misses a systematic/analytical approach.
It is also possible to deploy the proposed framework to design
codes other than polar codes (e.g., LDPC codes) given the
binary-to-soft conversion, rate adjustment, LLR saturation and
other mentioned schemes. This is of particular significance
for short codes, short LDPC codes for instance, that miss an
analytical understanding and, thus, deep learning can prove to
be most useful here. Several future aspects might be interesting
to look into, e.g., the impact of different rate adjustment
schemes and the effect of optimizing the intermediate loss
functions on the overall training performance.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear
codes using deep learning,” in 54th Annual Allerton Conf. on Commun.,
Control, and Computing, 2016, pp. 341–346.
[2] Y. Jiang, H. Kim, H. Asnani, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath,
“Deepturbo: Deep turbo decoder,” arXiv:1903.02295, 2019.
[3] H. Kim, Y. Jiang, R. Rana, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Com-
munication algorithms via deep learning,” arXiv:1805.09317, 2018.
[4] Y. Jiang, H. Kim, H. Asnani, and S. Kannan, “Mind: Model independent
neural decoder,” arXiv:1903.02268, 2019.
[5] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink, “On deep learning-
based channel decoding,” in CISS, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[6] W. Lyu, Z. Zhang, C. Jiao, K. Qin, and H. Zhang, “Performance
evaluation of channel decoding with deep neural networks,” in ICC,
2018, pp. 1–6.
[7] Y. Jiang, H. Kim, H. Asnani, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Learn
codes: Inventing low-latency codes via recurrent neural networks,”
arXiv:1811.12707, 2018.
[8] N. Samuel, T. Diskin, and A. Wiesel, “Deep MIMO detection,” in
SPAWC, 2017, pp. 1–5.
[9] N. Farsad and A. Goldsmith, “Detection algorithms for communication
systems using deep learning,” arXiv:1705.08044, 2017.
[10] T. O’Shea and J. Hoydis, “An introduction to deep learning for the
physical layer,” IEEE Trans. on Cognitive Commun. and Networking,
vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 563–575, 2017.
[11] S. Cammerer, T. Gruber, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink, “Scaling deep
learning-based decoding of polar codes via partitioning,” in IEEE Global
Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[12] E. Arıkan, “Channel Polarization: A Method for Constructing Capacity-
Achieving Codes for Symmetric Binary-Input Memoryless Channels,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, July 2009.
[13] “Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network,” 3GPP, 2018,
TS 38.212 V.15.1.1. [Online]. Available: http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/
archive/38 series/38.212/
[14] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List Decoding of Polar Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2213–2226, May 2015.
[15] B. Li, H. Shen, and D. Tse, “An Adaptive Successive Cancellation
List Decoder for Polar Codes with Cyclic Redundancy Check,” IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 2044–2047, Dec. 2012.
[16] S. A. Hashemi, M. Mondelli, S. H. Hassani, C. Condo, R. L. Urbanke,
and W. J. Gross, “Decoder Partitioning: Towards Practical List Decoding
of Polar Codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 9, pp. 3749–3759,
Sep. 2018.
[17] E. Arıkan, “A Performance Comparison of Polar Codes and Reed-Muller
Codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 447–449, June 2008.
[18] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, and S. ten Brink, “Belief Prop-
agation List Decoding of Polar Codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22,
no. 8, pp. 1536–1539, Aug. 2018.
[19] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, and S. ten Brink, “Decoder-
Tailored Polar Code Design Using the Genetic Algorithm,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 4521–4534, July 2019.
[20] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, L. Schmalen, and S. ten Brink,
“Decoder-in-the-Loop: Genetic Optimization-based LDPC Code De-
sign,” IEEE Access, 2019.
[21] J. R. Hershey, J. L. Roux, and F. Weninger, “Deep unfolding: Model-
based inspiration of novel deep architectures,” arXiv:1409.2574, 2014.
[22] N. Hussami, S. B. Korada, and R. Urbanke, “Performance of Polar Codes
for Channel and Source Coding,” in IEEE Inter. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT),
June 2009, pp. 1488–1492.
[23] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, and S. ten Brink, “Belief Propa-
gation Decoding of Polar Codes on Permuted Factor Graphs,” in IEEE
Wireless Commun. and Networking Conf. (WCNC), Apr. 2018.
[24] S. Cammerer, M. Ebada, A. Elkelesh, and S. ten Brink, “Sparse Graphs
for Belief Propagation Decoding of Polar Codes,” in IEEE Inter. Symp.
Inf. Theory (ISIT), June 2018, pp. 1465–1469.
[25] R. Mori and T. Tanaka, “Performance of Polar Codes with the Construc-
tion using Density Evolution,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 7, pp.
519–521, July 2009.
[26] P. Trifonov, “Efficient Design and Decoding of Polar Codes,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 3221–3227, Nov. 2012.
[27] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “How to Construct Polar Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 6562–6582, Oct. 2013.
182
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[28] G. He, J. C. Belfiore, I. Land, G. Yang, X. Liu, Y. Chen, R. Li, J. Wang,
Y. Ge, R. Zhang, and W. Tong, “β-expansion: A Theoretical Framework
for Fast and Recursive Construction of Polar Codes,” in IEEE Global
Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[29] C. Sch¨urch, “A Partial Order For the Synthesized Channels of a Polar
Code,” in IEEE Inter. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), July 2016, pp. 220–224.
[30] M. Qin, J. Guo, A. Bhatia, A. G. i Fabregas, and P. Siegel, “Polar Code
Constructions Based on LLR Evolution,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21,
no. 6, pp. 1221–1224, June 2017.
[31] M. Mondelli, S. H. Hassani, and R. L. Urbanke, “From Polar to Reed-
Muller Codes: A Technique to Improve the Finite-Length Performance,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3084–3091, Sep. 2014.
[32] V. Bioglio, C. Condo, and I. Land, “Design of Polar Codes in 5G New
Radio,” ArXiv e-prints, Apr. 2018.
[33] N. Doan, S. A. Hashemi, E. N. Mambou, T. Tonnellier, and W. J.
Gross, “Neural Belief Propagation Decoding of CRC-Polar Concate-
nated Codes,” arXiv e-prints, 2018.
[34] G. Hinton, “Neural networks for machine learning,” Coursera, video
lectures, 2012.
[35] I. Hubara, M. Courbariaux, D. Soudry, R. El-Yaniv, and Y. Bengio,
“Binarized neural networks: Training neural networks with weights and
activations constrained to +1 or -1,” arXiv:1602.02830, 2016.
[36] M. Jaderberg et al., “Population based training of neural networks,”
arXiv:1711.09846, 2017.
[37] P. Hoeher, I. Land, and U. Sorger, “Log-likelihood values and Monte
Carlo simulation-some fundamental results,” in 2nd Inter. Symp. on
Turbo Codes and Related Topics, 2000, pp. 43–46.
[38] F. A. Aoudia and J. Hoydis, “End-to-end learning of communications
systems without a channel model,” in 52nd Asilomar Conf. on Signals,
Systems, and Computers, 2018, pp. 298–303.
[39] P. Trifonov, “Design of Polar Codes for Rayleigh Fading Channel,” in
Inter. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst. (ISWCS), Aug. 2015, pp. 331–335.
183
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
