 
 
Parallel Concatenated Gallager Code with Single 
Encoder for Cognitive Radio Applications 
Aswathy G P 
K Gopakumar 
Imthias Ahamed T P 
Department of ECE  
Department of ECE  
Department of ECE  
TKM College of Engineering 
TKM College of Engineering 
TKM College of Engineering 
Kollam, India 
Kollam, India 
Kollam, India 
aswathygp19@gmail.com 
gopakumar@tkmce.ac.in 
imthiasa@gmail.com 
 
Abstract—Recently, 
wireless 
communication 
operators 
identify the spectrum scarcity as a major problem to be solved. 
The revolutionary concept of Cognitive radio addresses this issue 
by providing opportunistic access of licensed bands to unlicensed 
users. The technology offers many challenges among which the 
reliable transmission of secondary user data is the significant one. 
The constant interference from the licensed users affects the 
secondary user communication thereby affecting the reliable 
communication in cognitive radio networks. Error control coding 
can be used to reduce the impact of interference from incumbent 
users. Low density parity check codes are used in cognitive radio 
networks for ensuring reliable data transmission. However, as the 
block length increases, these codes have high encoding and 
decoding complexity. Parallel concatenated Gallager codes 
overcome these drawbacks. We analyse the performance of 
proposed parallel concatenated Gallager codes with single encoder 
for secondary users in a dynamic network. Results confirm that 
these codes attained the performance of a dedicated code with 
reduced complexity and less decoding delay. 
Keywords— Cognitive radio, Reliable communication, Low-
density parity-check codes, Secondary users, Parallel concatenated 
Gallager codes. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
The electromagnetic radio frequency (RF) spectrum is a 
limited and expensive resource which has substantially 
contributed to wireless communication. While the available 
radio spectrum is assigned for licensed users on a long term 
basis, secondary users are rushing for spectrum. Thus spectrum 
scarcity has become a major challenge faced by new wireless 
services. Meanwhile, the Federal Communication Commission 
(FCC) recently reported that the local geographic and temporal 
spectral utilisation is low ranging between 15-85% [1]. For 
efficient utilisation of the RF spectrum, new spectral policies 
were formulated by the FCC. Accordingly, a new technology 
called Cognitive radio [2] has been developed which allowed the 
secondary (unlicensed) users to opportunistically access the 
underutilized licensed bands when the primary users are absent. 
Cognitive radio consequently emerged as the most promising 
solution for spectrum scarcity. 
However, cognitive radio technology provides several 
challenges, for instance, reliable communication received very 
little attention among researchers. The secondary users use the 
spectrum sensing techniques [3] to identify the white spaces. 
When the primary users are not active, the secondary users can 
utilise these spectrum holes for their operation. Due to the static 
allocation policy, licensed users always have a higher priority on 
the spectrum. Therefore the secondary users should immediately 
undergo spectral handoff when the primary users become active. 
The unlicensed users should perform continuous sensing for 
ensuring uninterrupted handoff between the operational 
spectrum. Spectral handoff causes perpetual intervention in data 
transmission leading to data loss or errors. Thus reliable 
communication is a major problem faced by secondary users in 
cognitive radio networks. Error correction codes mitigate the 
effect of interference and ensure reliable communication in 
cognitive radio networks [4]. 
With its capacity approaching performance (near to Shannon 
limit), low density parity check (LDPC) codes received wide 
attention among researchers [5, 6]. Cognitive radio networks 
often use these codes for reliable data transmission. In order to 
solve the dynamic spectrum access problem, [7] uses insertion-
deletion codes and LDPC codes. Cognitive radio devices in [8] 
use LDPC codes for their data transmission. [9] discusses 
adaptable and efficient LDPC decoders designed for dynamic 
cognitive radio networks. [10] introduces short erasure 
correction codes in cognitive devices for recovery of erased data. 
Notably, there exists a trade-off among the code properties, user 
activities and maximum achievable efficiency. Recently, the 
concatenated kernel codes are introduced in [11] for reliable 
transmission of secondary user data. [11] reports that LDPC 
codes can be algebraically build using Kernel codes. As the 
block length increases, the capacity approaching performance of 
LDPC codes increases. However, these codes possess certain 
limitations. Encoder complexity quadratically increases with 
block length [12] and decoder complexity increases with 
widespread connections in bipartite graph [13]. Above 
drawbacks are addressed using quasi-cyclic LDPC codes [14] 
and parallel concatenated Gallager codes [15-22]. 
In this work, we focus on the application of parallel 
concatenated 
Gallager 
codes 
(PCGCs) 
for 
reliable 
communication in cognitive radio networks. We propose PCGC 
with single encoder suitable for resource-constrained low power 
secondary devices and examine their performance for cognitive 
radio applications. Performance is evaluated using some 
parameters of interest including extrinsic information transfer 
(EXIT) chart analysis and bit error rate (BER) analysis. 
The organisation of this paper is as follows. Section II 
describes PCGCs. Proposed PCGC with single encoder is 
86 
978-1-7281-5523-4/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
introduced in Section III. The system model is presented in 
Section IV and simulation results are presented in Section V. 
Section VI discusses the concluding remarks. 
II. PARALLEL CONCATENATED GALLAGER CODES 
After the discovery of Turbo codes in 1993, parallel 
concatenation of codes gained more attention in coding theory. 
Later in 2000, H. Behairy and S. C. Chang propose PCGC [15]. 
The motivation behind this development was to use ‘very good’ 
LDPC codes in the Turbo code architecture. Conventional 
PCGC in [15] uses two component LDPC codes which are 
connected in a parallel architecture. Multiple PCGC [16] is a 
generalisation of conventional PCGC which comprises multiple 
component codes. Multiple PCGC offers several advantages 
including scalability and excellent performance. Structured 
PCGCs, however, reduces the inherent complexity by using 
structured LDPC component codes. Component codes are 
obtained either by using projection geometry [17] or Cayley 
graphs [18]. Most of these attempts for parallel concatenation of 
LDPC codes have not gained wide attention due to their 
drawbacks. Almost all of these techniques did not achieve the 
performance of a dedicated LDPC. Moreover, decoders use 
serial decoding which increases the overall delay. Further, 
component codes are selected according to optimally chosen 
mean column weights (MCWs). 
In [19], PCGC with single encoder is proposed which 
comprises a single component code. It provides reduced 
complexity and improved performance. However, 
the 
interconnecting check nodes increases the decoding delay and 
hardware complexity. Further, it did not attain the performance 
of a dedicated code with same code rate and frame length. [20] 
discusses existing non-zero syndrome PCGC which comprises a 
zero syndrome component code and non-zero syndrome 
component code. This PCGC also fails to provide the coding 
gain of a dedicated code. This is due to the correlation among 
the extrinsic information received by the bit nodes of the 
decoder. In order to overcome this drawback, [21] introduces 
PCGC with random interleaver. In this PCGC, the component 
encoders produce two independent and distinct parity sets each 
corresponding to original message bits and interleaved message 
bits. Interleaver provides several benefits for this PCGC. It 
avoids the requirement of two distinct encoders thereby 
reducing the hardware complexity. Further, it improves the 
performance and surpasses the dedicated codes.  It is justified by 
the fact that the interleaver ensures that the bit nodes receive 
totally independent extrinsic information during the decoding 
process. Random interleaver, however, have an inherent 
limitation in practical application. It is difficult to implement this 
interleaver in hardware. To reduce complexity, structured 
interleavers can be used. In the next section, we describe the 
proposed PCGC with single encoder [22]. 
III. PROPOSED PCGC WITH SINGLE ENCODER 
PCGC with single encoder [19] comprises of a single LDPC 
encoder, thus reducing the required hardware resources 
compared 
to 
conventional 
PCGCs. 
However, 
the 
interconnecting check nodes are redundant and increases the 
decoding delay and decoder complexity. Besides, they did not 
outperform a dedicated code in terms of BER and coding gain. 
Proposed PCGC with single encoder overcome these limitations 
by modifying the decoder and its algorithm. Nevertheless, the 
encoder architecture for both existing as well as proposed 
PCGCs are the same [19]. 
 
 
Fig. 1. (a) Encoder (b) Concatenated codeword for 
proposed PCGC [19], [22] 
 
Fig. 2. Proposed PCGC decoder architecture [22] 
Both existing, as well as proposed PCGC with single 
encoder [19], [22], comprises of a single component mother 
code which is optimally chosen based on MCW. Fig. 1(a) shows 
the encoder for proposed PCGC while the concatenated code 
pattern is shown in Fig. 1(b). Here x represents the systematic 
information bits and p represents the parity bits produced by 
Encoder 1. In the code pattern, p is transmitted twice. The 
decoder for the proposed PCGC is shown in Fig. 2. It comprises 
of two component decoders constructed using the same parity 
check matrix. Both the decoders operate concurrently. In 
proposed PCGC, the interconnecting check nodes are removed 
to reduce the hardware complexity. In [19], the likelihood ratios 
are transferred between the component decoders after the 
operations performed by interconnecting check nodes. 
87 
2019 9th International Conference on Advances in Computing and Communication (ICACC)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
During a super iteration, both the component decoders 
independently perform a single local iteration and produce the 
posterior likelihood information. At the end of each super 
iteration, the likelihood ratios generated are exchanged by the 
decoders and are used as prior information in the succeeding 
super iteration. Conventional PCGC in [15] transfer only the 
extrinsic information corresponding to message bits. This is 
because, in conventional PCGC, the parity sets for each 
component codewords are different. However, in proposed 
PCGC, both the component codewords are the same. So the 
component decoders are trying to decode the same codeword. 
Thus in proposed PCGC, the posterior likelihood information 
(which includes channel information along with extrinsic 
information) for parity sets are also been transferred.  Thus the 
exchange of independent likelihood information enables the 
successful recovery of valid codewords. 
Let tr = (tr1 , tr2 , .., trk , trk+1,… trN , trN+1 …trL)  be the 
concatenated codeword transmitted and rx = (rx1 , rx2 , .., rxk , 
rxk+1,… rxN , rxN+1 …rxL) be the vector received at the decoder 
input. Here, L represents the length of the concatenated 
codeword, N is the length of the component codeword and k is 
the length of information bits. Once it is received, it is 
demultiplexed into two component vectors. The vector 
corresponding to first component codeword is loaded to the first 
decoder and the other is loaded to the second decoder. Assume 
𝑟𝑥𝑥
0 as the sequence corresponding to information bits, x and 
𝑟𝑥𝑝
1 and 𝑟𝑥𝑝
2 as the sequence representing the parity sets p1 = p 
and p2 = p respectively. The received sequence for first 
component codeword is r1 = [𝑟𝑥𝑥
0 , 𝑟𝑥𝑝
1] and that of second 
component codeword is r2 = [𝑟𝑥𝑥
0 , 𝑟𝑥𝑝
2].  Let LLRr1 and LLRr2 
be the log-likelihood ratios of r1 and r2 respectively. 
We use minimum sum algorithm (MSA) [12] to describe the 
proposed decoding algorithm. The algorithm is explained as 
follows.  
1. The bit nodes of component decoder 1 are loaded with 
LLRr1 while that of decoder 2 is loaded with LLRr2.  
2. Both the component decoders independently perform a 
single local iteration and produces the posterior log- 
likelihood ratios.  
In this stage, initially, the intrinsic information stored in the 
bit nodes are transferred to the adjoining check nodes. 
                     𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑣⟶𝑢
𝑤
= 𝑀𝑟𝑣
𝑤− 𝐸𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑢⟶𝑣
𝑤
 
     (1) 
where 𝑀𝑟𝑣
𝑤  represents the intrinsic information associated 
with bit node v, 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑣⟶𝑢
𝑤
 denotes the intrinsic information 
transferred by bit node v to check node u of decoder w and 
𝐸𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑢⟶𝑣
𝑤
 represents the extrinsic information returning from 
check node u to bit node v of decoder w in the former super 
iteration (It is to be noted that 𝐸𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑢⟶𝑣
𝑤
= 0   for super 
iteration count, SI = 1). 
Once the intrinsic information is received, the check node u 
computes the extrinsic information (𝐸𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑢⟶𝑣
𝑤
) and transfer it 
to the neighbouring bit nodes v of decoder w. 
𝐸𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑢⟶𝑣
𝑤
= ∏
 
𝒗′𝜖 𝑉𝑢𝑤,𝑣′≠𝑣 sign (𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑣⟶𝑢
𝑤
) . 
 
 
min | 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑣⟶𝑢
𝑤
|    
 
(2) 
where 𝑉𝑢
𝑤  indicates a subset of bit nodes which are connected 
to a particular check node u.  
In the end, the intrinsic information (log-likelihood ratios) 
stored in the bit nodes of decoder 1 and decoder 2 are updated 
as follows.  
                    𝑀𝑟𝑣
𝑤=  𝐿𝐿𝑅𝑣
𝑤 + ∑
 
𝑢 𝜖 𝑈𝑣𝑤  𝐸𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑢⟶𝑣
𝑤
    (3) 
where 𝑈𝑣
𝑤 indicates a subset of check nodes connected to a 
particular bit node v. 
3. 
Find the syndrome vector for codewords corresponding to 
each component decoder.  
4. 
If zero syndrome condition is not satisfied by either of the 
codewords, then increment the super iteration count and 
exchange the a posteriori log likelihood information 
between decoder 1 and decoder 2and repeat the decoding 
process.  
 
The decoding process continues until the super 
iteration count reaches its maximum (SI = SImax) or stops when 
valid codewords are obtained. In the former case, the output 
from decoder 2 is declared as the estimated component 
codeword.  
Algorithm 1: Decoding algorithm for proposed PCGC 
Input: (LLRr1, LLRr1, HMXN) 
Stopping criteria: Syndrome = 0 or SI = SImax  
Output: Codewords, 𝐶̂ 
1 and 𝐶̂ 
2 
Procedure: 
1. Initialize SI = 1. Assign 𝐸𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑢⟶𝑣
𝑤
 = 0; w=1, 2; 
u=1:M; v=1:N 
2. Loading received likelihood ratios to bit nodes of 
decoder 1 and decoder 2. 
𝑀𝑟𝑣
𝑤 = 𝐿𝐿𝑅𝑣
𝑤 
3. Transfer of intrinsic messages from bit nodes to 
neighbouring check nodes. 
𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑣⟶𝑢
𝑤
=  𝑀𝑟𝑣
𝑤  − 𝐸𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑢⟶𝑣
𝑤
 
4. Check nodes transfer the extrinsic messages 
𝐸𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑢⟶𝑣
𝑤
= ∏
 
𝒗′𝜖 𝑉𝑢𝑤,𝑣′≠𝑣 sign (𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑣⟶𝑢
𝑤
)  
min | 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑣⟶𝑢
𝑤
| 
5. Update information in bit nodes of decoder 1 and 
decoder 2. 
𝑀𝑟𝑣
𝑤=  𝐿𝐿𝑅𝑣
𝑤 + ∑
 
𝑢𝜖 𝑈𝑣𝑤  𝐸𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑢⟶𝑣
𝑤
 
6. Hard decision 
88 
2019 9th International Conference on Advances in Computing and Communication (ICACC)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
𝐶̂𝑣
𝑤= {1,
𝑀𝑟𝑣
𝑤> 0
0,
𝑀𝑟𝑣
𝑤≤0 
7. Check stopping criteria. 
H(𝐶̂ 
1)T = 0 (or) H(𝐶̂ 
2)T = 0 (or) SI = SImax 
8. Increment SI. 
9. Update the bit nodes of decoder 1 and decoder 2 
after exchanging the a posteriori log likelihood 
ratios 
𝐿𝐿𝑅𝑣
𝑤=  𝐿𝐿𝑅𝑣
𝑤  +  𝐿𝐿𝑅𝑣
𝑤′  , where w’={1,   𝑤= 2
2,   𝑤= 1 
repeat  
end procedure 
 
 
Each component decoder simultaneously performs a local 
iteration and transfer the posterior likelihood information. This 
interexchange process improves the reliability of component 
codewords and allows the quick convergence of decoders. The 
decoding delay in conventional PCGC [15] is more as it 
performs several local iterations per super iteration. If the size 
of the component code parity check matrix is given by M x N, 
then existing PCGC with single encoder [19] requires 3M check 
nodes while proposed PCGC requires only 2M. This reduces the 
decoder complexity, hardware resources and overall delay. 
IV. SYSTEM MODEL 
 
 
Fig. 3 Communication system model [23] 
Fig. 3 depicts the communication system model presented in 
[23]. This model comprises of a secondary user transmitter-
receiver pair which exists within the receiver range of licensed 
users. It is also assumed that the original primary user in the 
secondary user frequency is also returning. Both of these factors 
provide constant interference to secondary users. Interference 
from licensed users generates errors in secondary user data. In 
Fig. 3, the data is encoded using the proposed PCGC encoder. 
The coded data is then modulated and transmitted to the 
receiver. The communication channel noise and the interference 
from licensed users are assumed to be additive white Gaussian 
noise (AWGN). At the receiver, the erroneous data is received 
which is demodulated and finally decoded using PCGC 
decoding algorithms. 
V. SIMULATION RESULTS 
In this section, we present the simulation results for rate 1/3 
proposed PCGC with single encoder. We consider a dynamic 
cognitive radio network where the secondary users are prone to 
continuous interference from licensed users. Performance of rate 
½ LDPC codes of frame lengths 600 and 400 respectively are 
compared against rate 1/3 PCGC of frame length 600. Short 
length codes are preferred over lengthy codes to reduce the 
overall latency of simulation. Table I shows the details of the 
codes chosen. 
TABLE I.  
CODE PARAMETERS 
Codes 
Parameters 
Local 
iterations 
Super 
iterations 
 
Dedicated LDPC-1 
 
N=600, r = 1/3, 
MCW=2.997  
 
 
5 
 
- 
Component mother 
code-1 
N=400, r = 1/2,  
MCW=3  
 
5 
- 
Conventional 
PCGC  
N=600, r = 1/3, 
MCW=2.67, 2  
 
15 
25 
Existing PCGC  
 
N=600, r = 1/3, 
MCW=3  
- 
25 
Proposed PCGC 
N=600, r = 1/3, 
MCW=3  
- 
25 
 
The bit error rate performance of the dedicated code is 
compared against proposed PCGC and its component codes. 
The secondary user data is designed as a random binary {0, 1} 
sequence. Binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) is used to modulate 
the encoded data. As mentioned earlier, the interference and 
channel noise are assumed to be AWGN. At the receiver, the 
erroneous data is demodulated and is then decoded using the 
proposed decoding algorithm. For component codes and 
dedicated LDPC, conventional MSA algorithm is used. We use 
a Monte-Carlo simulation with 1000 data frames to evaluate the 
average BER performance. 
Fig. 4 depicts the BER performance of rate 1/3 proposed 
PCGC. We compare the performance of proposed PCGC against 
an optimum dedicated code and various other PCGCs. We see 
that proposed PCGC surpasses existing PCGC and conventional 
PCGC in terms of BER and coding gain. It is to be noted that 
conventional PCGC outperform all other codes at very low 
signal to noise ratios (SNRs). This is due to MCW=2 component 
code. Codes with lower MCWs provide exceptional 
performance in low SNRs. Remarkably, dedicated LDPC and 
proposed PCGC almost achieved similar performance. This 
demonstrates the robustness of proposed PCGC against licensed 
user interference. We also evaluated the BER performance of 
rate ½ component mother code. Comparative study reveals that 
proposed PCGC outperform these codes in all SNRs. Further, it 
is observed that the error floor is negligible for proposed PCGC. 
Fig. 5 presents the EXIT chart analysis for rate 1/3 dedicated 
LDPC, existing PCGC and proposed PCGC with single encoder. 
For simulation, we consider an AWGN channel with SNR=1 
89 
2019 9th International Conference on Advances in Computing and Communication (ICACC)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
dB. EXIT chart provides a simple graphical description about 
the decoding process and it predicts the SNR at which the 
component decoders start to converge. EXIT charts evaluate the 
effect of various parameters, for instance, decoder structure and 
decoding algorithms on the system performance. With EXIT 
charts, we can analyse two component decoders independently 
and their results can be united to evaluate the overall 
performance of the PCGC decoder. For the decoders to converge 
to valid codewords, EXIT chart with a clear trail between the 
decoder curves needs to be ensured.      In Fig. 5(a), existing 
PCGC with single encoder shows an EXIT chart with their 
decoder curves intersecting each other. While EXIT charts for 
proposed PCGC and dedicated LDPC shown in Fig. 5(b) and 
5(c) have non-intersecting decoder curves. 
 
Fig. 4 BER analysis (a) AWGN channel (b) Rayleigh fading 
channel 
 
Fig. 5 EXIT chart analysis for (a) Existing PCGC (b) 
Proposed PCGC (c) Dedicated LDPC 
Table II shows the SNR values at which various codes 
achieved a BER of 10-5. In AWGN channel, proposed PCGC 
attained 0.5 dB coding gain more compared with existing PCGC 
while it achieved 0. 8 dB in fading channel. Besides, it achieved 
the performance of dedicated LDPC – 1. The decoding delay 
and complexity of various codes are studied in Table III. 
Decoding delay for each code is considered as the time taken for 
completing a single super iteration. From Table III, we observe 
that decoding delay is very less for the proposed PCGCs. This is 
due to the avoidance of interconnecting check nodes in the 
proposed PCGCs. 
90 
2019 9th International Conference on Advances in Computing and Communication (ICACC)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TABLE II.  
SNR AT WHICH A BER OF 10-5 IS ACHIEVED 
Codes 
SNR in dB 
(Rayleigh) 
SNR in dB 
(AWGN) 
 
 
Dedicated LDPC-1 
 
4.8 
 
2.8 
  
Component 
mother code-1 
 
6.7 
 
4.3 
Conventional 
PCGC  
 
6.0 
 
3.8 
Existing PCGC  
 
5.6 
3.3 
Proposed PCGC  
4.8 
 
2.8 
 
TABLE III.  
COMPLEXITY AND DECODING DELAY 
Codes 
Complexity Analysis 
Decoding 
Delay 
(s) 
Bit 
node 
Check 
node 
Addition 
Multiplic
ation 
Dedicated 
LDPC-1 
N+M 
2M 
(N+M)wc 
2Mwr 
0.173  
Conventional 
PCGC 
2N 
2M 
2Nwc 
2Mwr 
0.666  
Existing PCGC  
2N 
3M 
2Nwc 
3Mwr 
0.269  
Proposed 
PCGC 
2N 
2M 
2Nwc 
2Mwr 
0.098 
 
VI. CONCLUSION 
In this work, we analysed the performance of proposed 
PCGC with single encoder for dynamic cognitive devices. Due 
to the dynamic nature of channel occupancy, the primary users 
always provide continuous interference to the secondary users. 
This delivers adverse effects upon secondary user data. 
Simulation results confirm that proposed PCGC with single 
encoder is suitable for low power resource-constrained devices 
and surpasses a dedicated code. Further, it offers several 
advantages, for instance, less decoding delay, reduced encoder 
and decoder complexity, lower error floor, limited hardware 
resources and exceptional performance. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
     This work was supported by the Centre for Engineering 
Research and Development (CERD) of A P J Abdul Kalam 
Technological University, Kerala, India. 
REFERENCES 
[1] FCC, ET Docket No 03-222 Notice of proposed rule making and order, 
December 2003. 
[2] I. Mitola J. and J. Maguire G. Q., “Cognitive radio: making software 
radios more personal,” IEEE Personal Commun. Mag., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 
13–18, Aug. 1999. 
[3] Aswathy G P and K. Gopakumar, “Sub-Nyquist wideband spectrum 
sensing techniques for cognitive radio: A review and proposed 
techniques,” AEU Int. Journal of Electronics and Communications, vol. 
104, pp. 44-57, 2019. 
[4] El-Bardan R, Masazade E, Ozdemir O, Han Y. S and Varshney P. K, 
“Permutation trellis coded multi-level FSK signaling to mitigateprimary 
user interference in cognitive radio networks,” IEEE Trans. on 
Communications, vol. 64, pp. 104–116, 2016. 
[5] R. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” Cambridge, MIT Press, 
1963. 
[6] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of 
low density parity check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 32, no. 18, 
pp.1645-1646, 1996.  
[7] C. Nicola, H. Mercier and V. K. Bhargava, “Error-Correcting Codes for 
Dynamic Spectrum Allocation in Cognitive Radio Systems,” Int. 
Symposium on Signals, Systems and Electronics, 2007, pp. 247-250. 
[8] Aswathy G P and K. Gopakumar, "Cognitive Radio Network with 
Wideband Spectrum Sensing and Reliable Data Transmission,"IEEE 
Recent Advances in Intelligent Computational Systems, 2018, pp. 70-74. 
[9] A. Baker, S. Ghosh, A. Kumar and M. Bayoumi, “LDPC Decoder: A 
Cognitive Radio Perspective for Next Generation (XG) Communication,” 
IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine, Third Quarter 2007, Vol. 7, Issue 
3, pp. 24-37. 
[10] M. M. Azeem, A. B. Khan and U. Azeem, “Application of Short Erasure 
Correcting Codes for Cognitive Radio,” Proc. IEEE 86th Vehicular 
Technology Conference, 2017, pp. 1-5. 
[11] Pavan Kumar C and Selvakumar R, “Performance of Concatenated 
Kernel Code in Cognitive Radio Networks, 7th Int. Conf. on Advances in 
Computing & Communications, Elsevier, 2017, pp. 330-337. 
[12] Sarah J. Johnson, Iterative Error Correction, Cambridge University Press, 
2010. 
[13] R. Pravin Kumar, “Parallel Concatenation of LDPC codes and its 
applications”, M. Tech. Thesis, IIT Guwahati, April 2013.  
[14] Q. Huang, L. Tang, and Z. Wang, "A low-complexity encoding of quasi-
cyclic codes based on Galois Fourier transformation," IEEE Trans. 
Commun., vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 1757-1767, Jun. 2014. 
[15] H. Behairy and S. C. Chang, “Parallel Concatenated Gallager Codes”, 
Electronics Letters, vol. 36, no. 24, pp. 2025 -2026, Nov 2000.  
[16] H. M. Behairy and M. Benaissa, “Multiple Parallel Concatenated Gallager 
Codes: Code Design and Decoding Techniques”, IETE Journal of 
Research, vol: 59, issue: 6, pp. 659-664, Nov-Dec 2013. 
[17] J. C. Serrato and T. O’Farrell, “Parallel Concatenated Gallager Codes 
using Euclidean and Projective Geometry LDPC Codes”, London 
Communications Symposium, September 2004.  
[18] J. C. Serrato and T. O’Farrell, “Structured Parallel Concatenated LDPC 
Codes”, London Communications Symposium, September 2006.  
[19] R. P. Kumar and R. S. Kshetrimayum, “An Efficient Methodology for 
Parallel Concatenation of LDPC codes with reduced complexity and 
decoding delay”, National Conference on Communications, pp. 1-5, 
2013.  
[20] Aswathy G P and Niyas K Haneefa, Non zero Syndrome Parallel 
Concatenated Gallager Codes, IEEE Int. Conf. on Circuit, Power and 
Computing Technologies, pp. 1-6, 2017. 
[21] Aswathy G P, K. Gopakumar and N. K. Haneefa, "Performance 
Comparison of Parallel Concatenated Gallager Codes with Different 
Types of Interleavers,"IEEE Int. Conf. on Control, Communication, and 
Computing, pp. 210-215, 2018. 
[22] Aswathy G P and Niyas K Haneefa, Efficient Implementation of Parallel 
Concatenated Gallager Codes with Single Encoder, IEEE Int. Conf. on 
Communication Systems and Networks, pp. 39-43, July 2016. 
[23] Aswathy G.P., K. Gopakumar, Imthias Ahamed T.P., Parallel 
concatenated Gallager codes for reliable data transmission in cognitive 
radio networks, Physical Communication, Volume 37, 2019.
 
91 
2019 9th International Conference on Advances in Computing and Communication (ICACC)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
