A Novel Recovery Data Technique on MLC NAND Flash Memory

Tran Van Dai Department of Computer Science and
Engineering Soongsil University
Seoul, Korea tranvandai@soongsil.ac.kr

Jingi Park School of Computer Science and
Engineering Soongsil University
Seoul, Korea rlqkrwls@naver.com

Dong-Joo Park Department of Computer Science and
Engineering Soongsil University
Seoul, Korea djpark@ssu.ac.kr

Abstract - Flash memory today is more popular because of its advantages, such as low power consumption, high mobility and fast data access. In NAND flash memory, a solution called Flash Translation Layer (FTL) was proposed to solve its disadvantages like erase-before-write and unsymmetrical read or write response time. During the process of using the data, the data might be lost on the power failure in the systems. In some systems, the data is very important. Hence, recovery of data in the event of the system crash or a sudden power outage is of prime importance. One of the methods to fix is the error code correction (ECC), supplied with the flash device by the manufacturer. In the process of power off failure recovery, there have been previous schemes such as In-Page Backup, InBlock Backup, Hybrid Backup, A-PLR (Accumulation based Power Loss Recovery), HYFLUR (Hybrid FLUsh Recovery), and C-HYFLUR (Compression scheme for HYFLUR). In this paper, we introduce a technique based on the page leveling mapping using the spare area in FTL divided into ECC, map information, and reserved. To estimate the performance of this technique, we compare the recovery time and mapping information management cost of our approach with those of previous schemes such as In-Block Backup and In-Page Backup.
Keywords - Data recovery, Flash memory, FTL, PLR
I. INTRODUCTION Nowadays, flash memory is more popular in most areas of the world, because of the benefits such as fast data access and low power consumption. It also has some weaknesses including erase-before-write or limited life cycle (e.g., the maximum number of erase is around 10000 ~ 100000 times per each block). To address the shortcomings of flash memory, scientists have come up with solutions to the problem such as Flash Translation Layer (FTL). Figure 1 shows the organization of 2GB MLC (multi-level cell) NAND flash memory.
Figure 1. 2GB MLC NAND Flash organization
FTL [1] has three functionalities like wear-leveling, garbage collection and address mapping. Up until now, several FTL schemes have been introduced to overcome the physical limitations and enhance the general effectuation of flash memory. Although the flash memory effectuation has
978-1-7281-3003-3/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

been upgraded according to use FTL algorithms, it can experience effectuation degeneration while performing Btree direct indexes as the frequent overwriting flash memory activity for updating nodes. To overcome this problem, some of the B-tree versions have been introduced. They use some resources of the main memory like buffers to slow down the updating on the B-tree. Each record added is provisionally saved in the buffer. When the buffer is filled, most of the records in the buffer are transferred to the flash memory. Those B-tree versions provide great performance as the amount of flash activity decreases. Nevertheless, if a power outage happens, there will a problem of data loss because the records are stored in the main memory. Furthermore, they use several resources of the main memory whose size is restricted according to different embedded systems.
In the process of power off recovery, many schemes have been proposed, such as In-Page Backup, In-Block Backup, and Hybrid Backup.
The backup area of every data page in In-Page Backup scheme used to save parity the ECC bits and the information of management of FTL. Following the general regulation, backup area size usual equal 1/32 to the page size also for the user, it is not visible. The redundant areas are able to program/read in which a write/read command with no operating costs. In redundant areas, the backup operation saves the information of mapping in a uniformly delivered manner [2]. As this technique adopts redundant areas, the running backups are not spending any overhead. Nevertheless, during the recover procedure, the repository manager must scan the whole page of the repository resource; it is the reason the recover lag able more time.
In-Block Backup scheme uses a group of blocks named map blocks to save backup data. Firstly, in flash memory, map blocks save the information of mapping are prepared to be used when mapping the generated information. This technique creates extra writing operations, it able to incur an extra cost. In flash memory, while a power outage occurs, the recover algorithm scans the map blocks which create mapping tables. The recovery response time of the In-Page Backup scheme is larger than In-Block Backup scheme.
Hybrid Backup scheme is an association of the two solutions In-Page Backup and In-Block Backup and decreases recovery time and backup budget. In addition, the page level mapping updates writing to every page which is observed in the backup area for the pages of correlating, also the tables of page mapping are counted after that update the block leveling map, and stored in the block map. During the restore process, the mappings of page leveling and block leveling are restored to the map blocks also the redundant

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:03:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

areas of the generic pages. This scheme enhances recover process through In-Block Backup and cut down recover response time when correlated to In-Page Backup. The cost of runtime backup in this technique is as insufficient as the In-Block Backup due to the read or writes response time for the backup zone is imperceptible. Aforementioned techniques own drawbacks of the restore timetable also the overhead manage of the mapping information. To overcome these shortcomings, in this paper, we propose a technique based on the page-level mapping using spare area in FTL divided into ECC (Error Correction Code), map information, and reserved and aim to solve the disadvantages of PLR (Power Loss Recovery).
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
A. ECC
The purpose of the ECC is to add surplus terms to messages, so that a reading can detect errors and recover the most writable messages. Correction of block error code is laid on sub-sectors of the data. Relying upon the error repair schema used, there should be a different number of redundancies called the parity bit.
In Hamming inequality can calculate the minimum parity bit, as shown-in (1)
≤ 2 
Where n are code words, k bits information, and t bits for error correction.
This minimum number is not always possible because the amount of parity bits able as close to this number as possible. In addition, the size of the sub-sector is so large that is lowers the size of the square area. Therefore, there is a the same construction of collision for the flash die size codes both BCH (Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem) and Reed Solomon [9], but BCH code requires fewer bits than the other and the reason why it is preferred for ECC [10].
B. In-page management of ECC for NAND Flash memory
Flash controller often uses the BCH algorithm for ECC. The BCH algorithm needs 13 bits of ECC code to fix an error bit in 512 bytes sector. Whilst the redundancy size in flash raises sequentially, the amount of bits needed to fix errors for the NAND flash memory will conduce exponential growth.
The MLC technique naturally produces the error of each sector, requiring ECC spare area code bits to maintain the ECC code. To deal with this, the ECC algorithm with the new ECC bit recovery constitution in the flash device would be improved. With the LDPC (low density parity check) [7] proposed for flash memory systems, the required code length is inversely proportional to the algorithm processing time [8]. On the other hand, if the defect is corrected and the defect is completed with a less cost, the code word will able long and need plenty of space in the spare area like the BCH.
Conventional ECC management (C-ECM) [6] able to perform of correcting high-fault NAND flash memory using effectively handling short BCH codes with unique a loss of performance substantial.

ECC in-page management idea (IP-ECM) [6] holds several spaces of the data area to saving not many a page sector that could intern also usage space for save long BCH code by every sector. When sectors, BCH codes are saved together with the identical page, sector data and ECC bit code are programmable. This technique reduces sector number saved in a page to increase the storage space of BCH bit codes. While those techniques using the spare are to store short ECC code bits. It is easy to see that IP-ECM is less affected by the requirement to reduce the size by one page size. Nevertheless, this issue is not so important because of the current mechanic tendency in SSD (Solid State Drive), that is, the well-known 8KB of page size in NAND flash memory or larger and the SSD is expected to organize more than 8 pages within one clustered page to cut down organization costs. Indeed, page gathering is an ordinary approach for handling the cost of a SSD with 10 NAND flash chips and to cut down the amount of the mapping table size using the FTL.
C. PLR ( Power Loss Recovery )
Jung et al. [3] introduced advanced In-Page Backup scheme named A-PLR (Accumulation based Power Loss Recovery). This technique saves the information of mapping inside the spare area as In-Page Backup. Unlike In-Page Backup, information of mapping in this technique is saved in a different way, which can overcome the disadvantage of the In-Page Backup. The procedure is like the following. Firstly, this technique uses a buffer inside its own RAM named MIB (mapping information buffer), whose size is steady, and where the accumulation of the information of mapping is stored. Because this technique saves mapping information, the number of the filled slots in MIB increases. If MIB fills, it will saves in the spare area named the intermediate page.
During the recovery procedure executed due to a power outage, A-PLR needs an intermediate page, so A-PLR browses only the intermediate page, not all pages. Hence, recovery latency is less than In-Page Backup because APLR uses a re-mapping table by browsing intermediate pages.
HYFLUR [4] is based on the page-level mapping scheme. This technique classifies into three flush operations for moving information between RAM and flash memory are mapping table flush (MTF), update RAM flush (URF) and spare write flush (SWF).
MTF
Figure 2. Flush processes in HYFLUR
Figure 2 shows three flush processes executed by the timeline of this technique are MTF, URF and SWF implemented with reasonable guidelines. SWF operation is very clear. For instance when the page is upgraded, the data will be saved on other page. This case suggests altering the information of mapping like ppn (physical page number); in this technique, both the old ppn and the new ppn alternates are saved in the spare area in the RAM.
URF operation is the procedure of recording for both the old and the new ppn due to certain pages of blocks named

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:03:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MSB (Map information Store Block). As explained before, while a page is restored, ppn information is recorded to RAM. This technique attaches 6 bytes for each ppn so it can write 1365 ppns inside 8 KB of memory. Hence, it stores 1365 pages for the information of mapping. Figure 3 briefly describes the URF operation.
Figure 3. URF operation
With 8KB of full memory, the URF operation implemented can restore around 1.3GB of flash memory. Therefore, URF operating executes and then most of the information saves onto the MSB pages. Hence MSB can store around 30.8% of flash memory for the information of mapping.
In flash memory, MTF operating start recording all information of mapping by saving the table of mapping, which uses 3 bytes to write ppn. Thus, it can record 2730 ppns for 8 KB of pages. It executes while the MSB filled due to the URF operating. Therefore, while the MTF executes, the new mapping is output for both the table of mapping and the MSB. Hence, this operation saves the new information of the table of mapping as shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4. MTF operation
While MTF operating implement, ppn write to pages. Also the index pages turn into lpn (logical page number) so this technique is able to build the table of mapping by browsing TSB (Table Store Block).
Recovery procedure is consisted of three situations. To address the restoration of the information of mapping, it needs reading the MSB pages generated by the URF operation, the TSB generated by the MTF operation, or reading both MSB also TSB.
In the first situation, while a power outage happens, TSB do not created. So, it scans the table of mapping and the MSB pages to restore the table of mapping. In addition, it scans the space area which contain the page for the information of mapping because most of the mapping information is generated by the SWF operation.
In the second situation, while a power outage happens, the TSB is created. In this case, this scheme scans the TSB to create the table of mapping because all the mapping information is saved in the TSB. So it does not require scanning MSB and this scheme works best.
In the last situation, the power outage happens before the new TSB is created. In this case, the recovery technique scans the current TSB and the MSB pages to catch the

information of mapping which are generated by the SWF operation.
C-HYFLUR (Compression scheme for HYFLUR) [5] was introduced including the compression algorithm adapted for the HYFLUR restore algorithm suggested for the former part. The algorithm LZSS, with the improvement from LZ77 [12], is applied to the recovery algorithm of HYFLUR to address the spatial cost, a weakness of the mapping of the page level scheme.
This scheme performs on open SSD board [13] with the special device like the following. The platform adopts 64GB NAND flash and compressed memory of 8 KB of pages, and 128 pages for blocks of memory. Briefly, NAND flash contains 66,432 blocks, including 64MB of SDRAM. Furthermore, this technique supplies a block of memory like a positive RAM to save the information of mapping. In addition, the block does not save the data. C-HYFLUR saves 15 blocks of mapping and 25 blocks of table data. The compression rate of LZSS is around 31%, 8KB data able to save around 2.5 KB. Thus, in the information of mapping stored by HYFLUR, MSB can update around 31% of the flash memory, although the C-HYFLUR upgrade is around threefold larger than HYFLUR's. In addition, TSB needs 25 blocks for save most of the tables of mapping, although CHYFLUR might save most the tables of mapping within nine blocks. So, it is able to address disadvantageous cost of FTL page mapping [5].
Recovery procedure consists of three situations. To address the problem of restoring the information of mapping it needs to scan the MSB pages generated by the URF operation and decompression processes, the TSB generated by the MTF operation and decompression processes, or both MSB also TSB with decompression procedures.
In the first situation, while a power outage happens, TSB do not created. So, it reads the table of mapping and pages of the MSB to recover the table of mapping. In addition, the pages which contain the information of mapping compress, and then the decompression procedures are implemented. And it scans the spare area which contain the page for the information of mapping because all the mapping information is generated according to the SWF operating.
In the second situation, while a power outage happens, the TSB is created. In this case, this technique reads the TSB to make a table of mapping because all the information of mapping is saved in the TSB. So it does not require reading MSB. Besides, this procedure requests decompression of the compressed pages to finish. And this scheme works best.
In the last situation, the power outage occurs before the new TSB is created. In this case, the recovery technique scans the current TSB and the MSB pages. It includes a decompression procedure after that scans the spare area to catch the information of mapping in the SWF operating.
III. PROPOSED TECHNIQUE
Our technique uses the spare area divided into ECC part, mapping information, and reserved. Each page has a number called Logical Page Number (LPN), and the mapping information includes block information and allocation sequence number (ASN). While a new page write, LPN is also written to the spare area replacing the previous one.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:03:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

And our scheme also uses memory register mapping information buffer for each write operation. When the unexpected power outage happens the technique restores page mapping entry by the sequence of ASN. The recover procedure performs on the block that has the topmost ASN (mapping table recovery place in order whole block in downward sorting). The manager reads the accumulated page mapping entry from at the beginning page to the last page. If the spare area in the block has evidences of writes, the page mapping entry recovers from LPN of that page. Otherwise, the controller finds the last update of the spare area by the page set. When the controller does not discover one evidence of writes else, it means the block is free. Figure 5 displays the structure of the spare area and Figure 6 shows the flowchart of our proposed algorithm.
ECC Block Information ASN Mapping Information Reserved
Figure 5. Structure of the spare area
In order to verify the validity of the proposed technique, we compare the recovery time of our algorithm with those of In-Page and In-Block scheme. In the calculation of the recovery time, we suppose that the page size is 4224 bytes including 4096 bytes user area and 128 bytes spare area, the block consists of 128 pages, and using the BCH algorithm (4 bits ECC in 1024 bytes deal with the MLC datasheet [11]), a 63 bytes in the space area is allocated for ECC storage [6]. The testing device has a 2 GB address space with a 4KB page unit.

Begin

NO Able to scan
first page

This block is free

YES
NO Able to scan second page
YES
NO Able to can third page

Discovery the last update in second page set
Discovery the last update in third page set

YES NO
Able to scan fourth page

Discovery the last update in fourth page set

YES NO
Able to scan last page
YES

Discovery the last update in last page set

Recovery finish

Figure 6. The Process of data recovery

Table 1 list the NAND flash specification used for the recovery time calculation.

Table 1. NAND flash Specification [11]

Page size

(4K + 128) bytes

Pages per block

128 pages

The number of blocks

4096 blocks

Capacity

2GB

Data transfer time from cell to register (tD) 60 s

Program time

800 s

Block erase time

1.5 ms

Write/ Read time (tW/tR)

25 ns

Spare page size

128 bytes

We calculate the recovery time for each scheme in consideration
1) In-page backup scheme:
Since the mapping information in the space areas is 4 bytes long, read operation time is
tR1 = tD + (tR x 4) = 60.1 (s) A block map table complete time is
tB1 = tR1 x 128 = 7.6928 (s) There are 4096 blocks in a device, and total block map table recovery time is
tsum1 = tB1x4096 = 31,510 (ms) 2) In-block backup scheme:
Read operation time is
tR2 = tD + (tR x 4k) = 162.4 (s) Total recovery time is
tsum2 = tR2 x 128 x 4 = 80 (ms) 3) Our technique:
In case all of pages per a block are written, the complete processes should scan five representative pages. Since, the mapping store consists of 63 bytes, the read operation time is
tR3 = tD + (tR x 63) = 61.575 (s) And the block map table complete time is
tB3 = tR3 x 5 = 307.875 (s) The total map table recovery time is
tsum3 = tB3 x 4096 = 1,270 (ms) 4) Discussion of the results:
We compare our technique with per page method and the map block method which has more effect time of power-loss recovery. The results exhibit that our technique is as good as In-Page in the read time and very competitive in the total time, as shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:03:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 7. Read time comparison
Figure 8. Total time comparison
IV. CONCLUSION In this paper, we introduce the technique using the spare area for accumulating the mapping information. The algorithm can read the data by reducing the map table recovery time in the event of the power-loss without full recovery of data in the flash memory, thereby enhancing the performance of MLC flash memory. In the near future, we plan to apply the algorithms of data recovery to the flash-based applications and explore the effectiveness of recovery performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT This research was supported by the MSIP (Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning), Korea, under the National Program for Excellence in SW) (2018-0-00209-001) supervised by the IITP (Institute for Information & communications Technology Promotion)
REFERENCES
[1] T.-S. Chung, D.-J. Park, S. Park, D.-H. Lee, S.-W. Lee, and H.-J. Song. A Survey of Flash Translation Layer. Journal of Systems Architecture. No. 55, Vol. 5-6, 2009, pp. 332-343.

[2] Tae-Sun Chung, Myungho Lee, Yeonseung Ryu, and Kangsun Lee. PORCE: An efficient power off recovery scheme for flash memory. Journal of Systems Architecture. No. 54, Vol. 10, 2008, pp. 935-943.
[3] S. Jung, and Y-H. Song. Data loss recovery for power failure in flash memory storage systems. Journal of Systems Architecture. No. 61, Vol. 1, 2015, pp. 12-27.
[4] J.-H. Chung, and T.-S. Chung. HYFLUR: recovery for power-off failure in flash memory storage systems using HYbrid FLUsh recovery. Information science and applications (ICISA 2016). No. 376, 2016, pp. 501-510.
[5] Ji-Hwan Chung, Sungsoo Kim, and Tae-Sun Chung. C-HYFLUR: Recovery for Power-off Failure in Flash Memory Storage Systems Using Compression Scheme for HYbrid FLUsh Recovery. International Conference on Mobile and Wireless Technology (ICMWT 2017): Mobile and Wireless Technologies. 2017, pp. 284294.
[6] Sanghyuk Jung, Sangyong Lee, Hoeseung Jung, and Yong Ho Song. In-page management of error correction code for MLC flash storage systems, IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. No. 56, Vol. 2, 2010, pp. 339-347.
[7] Y. Maeda and H. Kaneko. Error control coding for multilevel cell flash memories using nonbinary low-density parity-check codes. IEEE International Symposium on Defect and Fault Tolerance in VLSI Systems, pp. 367-375, Oct. 2009.
[8] Y-H Chang and T.-W. Kuo. A reliable MTD design for MLC flash memory storage systems. The International Conference on Embedded Software, pp. 179-188, Oct. 2010.
[9] R. Micheloni, A. Marelli, and R. Ravasio. Error Correction Codes for Non-Volatile Memories, Springer-Verlag, 2008.
[10] R. Micheloni et al., “A 4Gb 2b/cell NAND Flash Memory with Embedded 5b BCH ECC for 36MB/s System Read Throughput”, IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference Dig. Tech. Papers, pp. 142-143, Feb. 2006.
[11] Samsung Electronics, K9LCG08U1A Data sheet online, http://www.datasheet-pdf.com/PDF/K9LCG08U1A-Datasheet-Samsung-704175. (accessed, August 20, 2019).
[12] J. Ziv, and A. Lempel. A universal algorithm for sequential data compression. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 23. No. 23. Vol. 3, 1977, pp. 337-343.
[13] Indilinx Jasmine Platform Specification. http://www.openssdproject.org/wiki/Jasmine_OpenSSD_Platform. (accessed, August 20, 2019).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:03:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

