Reliability Variance based Weighted Bit Flipping Algorithms for LDPC

Harita D Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
Amrita School of Engineering, Coimbatore, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, India.
Abstract- Low density parity check codes is decoded by bit flipping algorithm and sum product algorithm. Bit flipping algorithm has low complexity and poor performance. To achieve trade-off between performance and complexity weights of the inversion function modified by using variance of the received values. These modifications improve performance with mild increase in the computations. It decreases in average number of iterations for maintaining high reliability and higher speed decoding.
Keywords: LDPC, bit flipping decoding, flipping function, sum product algorithm
I. INTRODUCTION
Messages are transmitted through the noisy channel. Error correcting codes are used to overcome the noisy effect of the channel. LDPC and Turbo codes approach Shannon capacity coding for wide range of channels. LDPC is constructed using a sparse bipartite graph. It can be decoded using a simple iterative bit flipping (BF) algorithm and Sum Product algorithm [3]. In the BF unreliable bits are flipped to get the corrected bits for efficient communication.
In this paper, different algorithms are performed for better error rate performance and is compared to find the efficient method. Noisy Gradient Descent bit flipping is demonstrated to be the best performance through simulation results and requires less number of iterations. Using this new algorithm, it can recognize and correct hard decision bits with less complexity and high speed decoding performance.
II. LITERATURE SURVEY
The ever–increasing need for faster and reliable communication have inspired many researchers to develop an algorithm. Gallagher, gave an explanation about construction of LDPC codes and decoding. Tanner rediscovered graphical representation of decoding using probabilistic method for regular and irregular LDPC codes. J. H. Van Lint explained the coding theory fundamentals. Benjamin Levine suggested LDPC Codes for wireless communication which allows transportation of large data using the same spectrum,
using minimum transmission power, better data security and compression.

Parguna Rajan K Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
Amrita School of Engineering, Coimbatore, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, India.
Jain Son found LDPC codes which have low complexity computation. parity check equation is flipped. In the former one, a metric which improves the BER performance of the decoder is used. Each parity check equation is assigned a reliability value, which is the [6] minimum of the absolute value of all of the received values of the connected variable bits. After the reliability values are assigned, the flipping metric is calculated for each bit.
Zhang & Fossorier made a slight improvement in weighted bit flipping algorithm, which used variable bit reliability for calculation of the flipping metric. The flipping metric depends on both the minimum reliability values in the parity check equation and the reliability of the bit that the metric was calculated. The current bit reliability is weighed with a multiplicative constant α that can be determined via Monte Carlo simulations.
Modified Weighted Bit Flipping (MWBF) showed a better BER performance [5]. Jiang et al improved the flipping metric using the extrinsic information idea. The parity check equation reliability is selected from a set that excludes the variable bit that the metric is being calculated.
The observation showed that Improved Modified Weighted Bit Flipping (IMWBF) performs better when compared to MWBF for some LDPC codes with some complexity.
Another bit flipping algorithm that used soft information is reliability ratio based bit flipping algorithm. In this decision of bit flipping was about the ratio of the reliabilities of the variable bits that are element of a parity check equation. But the complexity was high. So, Lee and Wolf found the easiest method to reduce the complexity of the algorithm. In this method, every variable bit in a parity check [6] equation was assigned with a metric based on the ratio of the sum of the reliability values of the variable bits in that parity check matrix to the reliability value of the variable bit considered.
The RRBF algorithm has been shown to outperform than MWBF for various codes [6] in AWGN channels with a comparable complexity.
Liu & Pados found an algorithm for finite geometry LDPC codes. This used less reliability and the most reliability bit in a parity check equation to calculate the metric. This method has got good performance - complexity trade-off for finite geometry LDPC codes.
Another BF algorithm[6] was suggested based on selfreliability. The metric is computed from the parity check

978-1-5386-5933-5/19/$31.00 c 2019 IEEE

593

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

equations, and the self-reliability values of the variable bits. There was a good performance and showed the importance of the self -reliability in the flipping decision.
An algorithm based on the storage of a changed vector bits for detection and prevention of loops. It compares the number of unacceptable parity check equations before and after the flipping of every bit. The flipped bit is changed when there is an increase in the unsatisfied parity check conditions. The bit with the highest flipping metric, excluding the initially flipped bit is inverted. This showed an effective coding gain.
III. PRELIMINARIES
A. Notation
Let ‘C’ be the binary linear code [7] formed from sparse parity check matrix H of size m*n where m represents number of rows and n represents number of columns is defined by C= {cF2n: cHT=0} where F2 denotes binary Galois field. We introduce a bipolar codeword Ć as [5] follows: {(1-2c1), (1-2c2), . . . , (1-2cn):c=C} which is of the form {+1,-1}n.
The additive white Gaussian noise is added to the transmitted codeword which is defined by y = c + z, where c € Ć and z = (z1, z2, . . . , ,zn ) is the white Gaussian noise vector with zero mean and variance σ2 .
Let N(i)={j € [1,n]:hij=1, I € [1,m]} finds the number of ones in all the columns of each row and M(j)={I € [1,m]:hij=1, j €[1,n]} finds the number of ones in all the rows of each column where hij is ij element of parity check matrix. [5]Syndrome is obtained by Si=ς௝̀ேሺ௜ሻ ‫ݔ‬ሺ݆ሻ (i €[1,m]) where Si €(+1,1)is ith bipolar syndrome component of x. There is said to be no error when Si=1.
B. Description about Bit Flipping Algorithms
a) Weighted bit flipping (WBF) algorithm This algorithm is the simplest of all bit flipping. It flips only one bit at a time [4]. It is based only check message for each position. The concept of this algorithm is summarized below:
Single bit flipping algorithm
Step 1: For j €[1,n],let xj:=sign(yj) where sign(y)=ሼ൅ͳǡ ‫ ݕ‬൒ Ͳ െ ͳǡ ‫ ݕ‬൏ Ͳሽ. Set the number of iterations(Imax).
Step 2: If Si= ς௝̀ேሺ௜ሻ ‫ݔ‬௝ ൌ ൅ͳ for I €[1,m], find the output x and exit.
Step 3: If Si ≠+1, inversion function is found to find which bit to be flipped.
l = arg ݉݅݊௞̀ሾଵǡ௡ሿ∆k(x)

At the position l , the signal is changed to xl = -xl
The inversion function ∆k(x) =σ௜̀ெሺ௞ሻ ߚ௜ ς௝̀ேሺ௜ሻ ‫ݔ‬௝ … (1)
where βi= min j € N(i) (yj).
The value βi (I € [1, m]) defines the reliabilities of bipolar syndrome. The bit of minimum inversion function value is flipped.
Step 4: Repeat the steps from step 2 till it reaches the iteration Imax. x is shown as the output and then the process is stopped.
b) Modified weighted bit flipping algorithm
This algorithm is similar to bit flipping algorithm. It provides better performance when compared to WBF and requires less iterations [4] for decoding the code word. The modified WBF (MWBF) algorithm has weight |yn|.
The algorithm for MWBF is summarized below:
MWBF Algorithm
Inversion functions are updated as follows.
The inversion function:
∆k(x)=α|yk|+σ௜̀ெሺ௞ሻ ߚ௜ ς௝̀ேሺ௜ሻ ‫ݔ‬௝ … (2)
where βi=minj€N(i)(yj).
The bit with minimum of the inversion function is flipped. The weighting factor α should be a positive real number. Improved MWBF algorithm replaces checksum weight by min n_‫ א‬N(m)\n |yn_ |.
c) Gradient Descent bit flipping algorithm(GDBF). The objective function of this algorithm [1] is derived from maximum likelihood theorem where decoding is performed by maximizing the correlation between hard decision codeword and received codewords. Syndrome components are introduced as a penalty to incorporate channel effects.
The objective function is defined as:
f(x)= arg maxσ௡௞ୀଵ ‫ݔ‬௞‫ݕ‬௞ +σ௜௠ୀଵ ς௝̀ேሺ௜ሻ ‫ݔ‬௝ , … (3)
This non-linear function has many local maxima. Maximization is achieved only when both the terms in the equation is maximized. Local maxima are major source of sub-optimality.
Maximizing [1] is computed by performing partial derivative cost function with respect to xk and multiplying derivative with xk.

594

9th International Conference on Cloud Computing, Data Science & Engineering (Confluence)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The algorithm for GDBF is summarized below:
GDBF Algorithm
There is a small variation only in the inversion function. Flipping position are selected such that magnitude of the partial derivative is maximum.
The inversion function:
∆k(x)=xkyk+σ௜̀ெሺ௞ሻ ς௝̀ேሺ௜ሻ ‫ݔ‬௝ , … (4)
The bit of the minimum of the inversion function is flipped.
d) Noisy Gradient Bit Flipping Algorithm(NGDBF) It is a single bit flipping algorithm. This helps in escaping from unacceptable local maxima [2] but increases complexity. To reduce complexity, a noise factor is added. Variance helps in determining how much the noise has been distributed as noise affects the signal mostly.
NGDBF Algorithm
Noise factor qk is added with flipping function to ensure local maxima is skipped
∆k(x)= xkyk +σ௜̀ெሺ௞ሻ ς௝̀ேሺ௜ሻ ‫ݔ‬௝+qk … (5)
The minimum inversion function bit is flipped. The ‫ ݇ݍ‬in
the above equation is distribution of Gaussian random variable. It has mean zero and variance to be η2N0/2.
GDBF Algorithm with received variance(GDBF1)
It is a single bit flipping algorithm. Received sequence variance gives some influence of snr. This helps in escaping from unacceptable local maxima but increases complexity. To reduce complexity, a noise factor is added. f(x)= arg maxσ௞௡ୀଵ ‫ݔ‬௞‫ݎܽݒ‬ሺ‫ݕ‬௞ሻ +σ௠௜ୀଵ ς௝̀ேሺ௜ሻ ‫ݔ‬௝
∆k(x)=1.73*var(y)*xkyk+var(y)*σ௜̀ெሺ௞ሻ ς௝̀ேሺ௜ሻ ‫ݔ‬௝+qk …… (6)
Variance helps in determining how much the noise has been distributed as noise affects the signal mostly.
IV. SIMULATIONS The regular LDPC codes of size 408*816 selected in this simulation uses BPSK modulation with AWGN channel. The maximum iteration is set to 100. Fig1 shows that the noisy gradient bit flipping algorithm with 1.73 times of variance has BER of 10-3 for SNR 5dB whereas gradient bit flipping has BER of 10-2.8 for SNR 5dB. Received sequence variance gives some influence of SNR.

V. CONCLUSION Simulation results shows that the noisy GDBF algorithm shows better decoding performance with an improved decoding performance close to Shannon limit for better communication. Since this algorithm is a heuristic approach, we can use this for high speed decoding performance for confidential data in future applications as this gives a better efficiency. This algorithm will outweigh the soft decision decoding process.
Fig.1 BER plot of (408, 816) code for various algorithms.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments and suggestions to improve the readability of the paper.
REFERENCES
[1]. T.Wadayama , “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1610–1614, Jun. 2010.
[2]. G. Sundararajan, C. Winstead, and E. Boutillon, “Noisy gradient descent bit-flip decoding for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 3385–3400, Oct. 2014.
[3]. K. Sunil, K. P. Soman, P. Jayaraj, "Message Passing Algorithm: A Tutorial Review", International Organisation of Scientific Research, vol. 2, pp. 12-24, 2012.
[4]. J.Zhang, and M.P.C.Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit- flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, pp.165–167, vol.8, Mar. 2004.
[5]. Roberts, M. K., & Jayabalan, R. “An improved low complex hybrid weighted bit-flipping algorithm for LDPC codes,” Wireless Personal Communications, 82, 327–339,2014.
[6]. X. Sun and Y. Wei, "A new simplified RRWBF decoding algorithm for LDPC decoder in CMMB," 2014 7th International Congress on Image and Signal Processing, Dalian, 2014, pp. 831-835. doi: 10.1109/CISP.2014.7003892
[7]. S. Neha, K. Pargunarajan, "Hybrid sub-optimal decoding technique for LDPC codes", 2016 International Conference on Circuit Power and Computing Technologies (ICCPCT), pp. 1-5, 2016.

9th International Conference on Cloud Computing, Data Science & Engineering (Confluence)

595

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

