2920

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Error-Prediction LDPC and Error-Recovery Schemes for Highly Reliable Solid-State Drives (SSDs)
Shuhei Tanakamaru, Student Member, IEEE, Yuki Yanagihara, and Ken Takeuchi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Highly reliable solid-state drives (SSDs) with error-prediction low-density parity-check (EP-LDPC) and error-recovery schemes are proposed. Since the reliability of the NAND flash memory of the SSD is seriously degraded as the scaling, the conventional error-correction scheme is becoming useless. Thus, LDPC error-correcting code (ECC) is considered to be the next-generation ECC for SSD. However, many read cycles are required and the LDPC scheme consumes an unacceptably long read time. To solve this problem, the proposed EP-LDPC scheme realizes the 7 fewer sequential read cycles than the conventional LDPC scheme. Instead of reading repeatedly, the EP-LDPC scheme estimates errors from , write/erase cycles, data-retention time, and inter-cell coupling information. The bit error rate (BER) estimation is based on the prerecorded table which stores the relations among write/erase cycles, data-retention time, neighboring cell data, and BER. As a result, the acceptable data-retention time of the SSD increases by more than 10 . Additionally, the proposed error-recovery scheme is executed and reduces the bit error if the BER of the data exceeds the error-correction capability of EP-LDPC scheme. Program-disturb error-recovery pulse and data-retention error-recovery pulse reduce the BER of the NAND flash memory by 76% and 56%, respectively.
Index Terms—Error-correcting code (ECC), low-density paritycheck code (LDPC), NAND controller, NAND flash memory, reliability, solid-state drive (SSD).
S I. INTRODUCTION OLID-STATE drives (SSDs) have been widely spread, replacing hard-disk drives (HDDs) because the read/write performance of SSDs outperforms that of HDDs. The superior performance of an SSD is realized by utilizing NAND flash memories instead of rotating disks. To increase the capacity and reduce the bit-cost of the SSD, the feature size of the NAND flash memory has been drastically scaled down to 19 nm [1], [2]. A 3-D illustration of nine NAND flash memory cells is shown in Fig. 1. Each memory cell is placed with the minimum pitch. As design rules shrink, floating gate (FG) capacitive coupling
Manuscript received August 22, 2012; revised February 19, 2013; accepted August 07, 2013. Date of publication September 17, 2013; date of current version October 19, 2013. This paper was approved by Associate Editor Kenneth Shepard. This work was supported in part by CREST/JST.
S. Tanakamaru is with the Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Communication Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo 112-8551, Japan, and also with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Graduate School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan (e-mail: tanakamaru@takeuchi-lab.org).
Y. Yanagihara is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Graduate School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan.
K. Takeuchi is with the Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Communication Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo 112-8551, Japan.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2013.2280078

Fig. 1. A 3-D illustration of nine memory cells of the NAND flash memory.

Fig. 2. Structure of ECC.

among neighboring memory cells seriously degrades the re-

liability [3]. Moreover, other coupling effects such as FG-to-

channel coupling has been reported in [4], suggesting further

reliability degradation of the NAND flash memory below 20 nm.

Currently, to correct bit errors of the NAND flash memory,

Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) error-correcting code

(ECC) is used [5]. Fig. 2 gives the definition of the codeword

and code rate (CR) for ECC. Generally, an ECC consists of

-bit user data and

-bit parity bits, resulting in -bit

code length codeword in case of a block code with systematic

encoding. CR is defined as . BCH ECC can correct up to

-bit errors in the codeword regardless of whether the error is

in the user data or in the parity. Fig. 3 shows the dependence

of the acceptable bit error rate (BER) of BCH ECC on the de-

sign rule of the NAND flash memory. The codeword and cor-

rectable bits in each generation of the NAND flash memory is dis-

cussed in [6] and [7]. Acceptable BER is calculated by finding

the raw BER (RBER) where uncorrectable BER (UBER) be-

comes

. UBER is defined as follows [8];

BER is

the requirement from the market:

(1)
where is the code length of the codeword, is the correctable error number, RBER is the raw BER of the data which is read from the NAND flash memory, and is the user data size per codeword. The numerator of (1) is the frame error rate (FER)

0018-9200 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: ERROR-PREDICTION LDPC AND ERROR-RECOVERY SCHEMES FOR HIGHLY RELIABLE SSDs

2921

Fig. 3. Dependence of the acceptable BER of BCH ECC on the design rule of the NAND flash memory.

Fig. 4. Number of of (a) BCH ECC or proposed EP-LDPC scheme and (b) conventional soft-decision LDPC scheme.

which represents the failure probability of a codeword. The

dominator is explained as follows. In the SSD, 1-bit error

causes malfunction. For example, when the FER is 1/100, the

fatal error will happen when

-bit is read in average.

Thus, UBER is defined as FER divided by . By increasing

ECC efficiency, the acceptable BER can be improved. Obvi-

ously, from Fig. 3, stronger ECC is used due to the reliability

degradation with scaling. However, since the required accept-

able BER of ECC will reach close to a few percent in NAND

flash memory below 20 nm, an advanced ECC is necessary to

satisfy the reliability specifications. To enhance the error-cor-

rection capability, a low-density parity-check (LDPC) ECC

[9] is considered to be applied to sub-20-nm flash memories

[7]. LDPC ECC realizes a highly efficient error-correction

capability which is close to the theoretical limit. An LDPC

ECC is defined by a sparse parity-check matrix. By an itera-

tion of probabilistic decoding with a sum-product algorithm,

the error number in the codeword decreases. To achieve the

highest reliability, the probabilistic information of each data bit

is needed for soft-decision decoding scheme. Log-likelihood

ratio (LLR) is transferred to the LDPC decoder as the data bit

information. LLR is calculated as follows [7]:

(2)

where is the original data which are s transferred from the

host, and is the conditional probability of if the received read

data from the NAND flash memory are equal to . LLR is used to

save hardware of the LDPC codec because the multiplication is

changed to addition. If the received data bit is likely to be “0,”

LLR is large. On the other hand, in the case that the received

data bit is likely to be “1,” LLR becomes small.

In a 2-bit-per-cell NAND flash memory, three reference volt-

ages

, are needed for the BCH ECC, as shown in Fig. 4(a).

In the conventional soft-decision LDPC scheme for NAND flash

memory, each LLR value for each is predetermined be-

fore shipping [7]. For example, precise information is ob-

tained from 21 , as shown in Fig. 4(b) [10]. However, the

increasing number of requires more sequential read cy-

cles than the conventional BCH ECC scheme. Assuming 50- s

cell read time and 21 , the read access time is as much as

1050 s. In case of the 3-bit-per-cell or 4-bit-per-cell NAND

flash memory, 49 or 105 are needed for read oper-

ation. As a result, the read access time increases by 2.3 or

5 , respectively, compared with 2 bit per cell. This is unac-

ceptably long. Moreover, the power consumption also increases

due to the multiple reading and, thus, the number should

be carefully adjusted according to the raw BER of the NAND

[11]. Furthermore, the estimation of distribution is required

for optimum soft-decision decoding [12]. To realize both fast

read and high reliability, the error-prediction LDPC (EP-LDPC)

using 3 is proposed [13]. The sequential read cycle is 7

less than the conventional LDPC scheme and the same as the

conventional BCH scheme. The EP-LDPC effectively corrects

errors because, in addition to the

and the inter-cell cou-

pling information, the write/erase cycles

and the data-

retention time

are considered for the calibration

of the LLR. The conventional soft-decision LDPC scheme re-

ported in [14] calculates inter-cell coupling effects from phys-

ical/mathematical formulations. On the other hand, in the pro-

posed EP-LDPC scheme, the inter-cell coupling effect is cal-

culated with the pre-recorded measurement data of the NAND

flash memory. Recently, many novel cell-to-cell interference ef-

fects have been discovered in sub-30-nm NAND flash memories

and the origins of some of these effects have not been well un-

derstood [15]–[19]. Even if such an unknown cell-to-cell inter-

ference effects occur due to the continuous scaling, EP-LDPC

deals with these unknown effects by the error-prediction based

on the measurement results.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The

EP-LDPC is described in Section II. Next, the measurement re-

sults of the EP-LDPC scheme are shown in Section III. The ef-

fects of variations over chips and the reliability improvement by

considering inter-cell coupling information and data-retention

time are also discussed. In Section IV, an error-recovery scheme

which reduces errors of both program disturb and data-retention

errors is introduced [13]. Conclusions are given in Section V.

II. ERROR-PREDICTION (EP)-LDPC SCHEME
The hardware architecture of the proposed SSD is shown in Fig. 5. First, the error correction is executed by the proposed EP-LDPC architecture. If the error correction is successful, the data is transferred to the host. If the error correction fails, then, error-recovery pulses are applied to the corresponding NAND flash memory cells. The error correction is performed again to the data with reduced errors. The error-recovery scheme is a one-time, temporary error-reduction scheme, which is explained in Section IV. After the error recovery, the data are copied to another block to save the data. The error-prediction and error-recovery sequences are realized with simple logic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2922

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Fig. 5. Proposed hardware architecture of SSD.

gates in the NAND controller of the SSD. The additional NAND

controller circuit area over the conventional LDPC is negligibly

small.

The key technology to realizing the EP-LDPC is to estimate

by measuring errors and referring to the prerecorded

tables. Figs. 6 and 7 describe the programming and reading flow

of EP-LDPC. During the program, the number of “1”s in the

initial lower page write-data

is counted. To secure

the high reliability,

is triplicated and stored with the

user data after BCH ECC encoding because the EP-LDPC is

not performed for

as shown in Fig. 6. During the

read, the error-prediction unit estimates the BER by referring

to the prerecorded tables (

,

,

, and

EP tables). These tables are stored in a flash memory during the

test process before shipping.

The EP-LDPC operation for sequential read consists of eight

steps, according to Fig. 7. In Step1, the data is read from the

NAND flash memory. As a result, the target cell , neigh-

boring cell , and

are obtained. In Step2, the

number of “1”s in the lower page is counted

.

In Step3, the BER of the lower page

is estimated

from

and

.

shift and data error

with program-disturb and data-retention are shown in Fig. 8.

Since the lower page data is “1 1 0 0” from the lowest state

to the highest [Fig. 8(a)],

is the sum of the number

in the lowest and the second lowest state cells. In the pro-

gram-disturb error, the electron injection to the FG increases

the . As a result, the number of “1”s in the lower page de-

creases and

appears to be smaller than

as shown in Fig. 8(b). On the other hand, the data-retention

error increases the number of “1”s in the lower page because

the electron ejection from FG decreases the . As a result,

Fig. 6. Programming flow of the proposed EP-LDPC scheme.

is larger than

, as shown in Fig. 8(c)

[20]. These characteristics of

and

is

used to find out if the error mode is the program-disturb error or

the data-retention error. This error mode detection is utilized for

error-recovery scheme, which is explained in Section IV. For

the maximum BER case which is the worst case and requires

the powerful ECC, two scenarios are considered where the

program-disturb error or the data-retention error dominates.

When

is close to 0, the shift of

the due to the program-disturb and the data-retention are

compensated and the BER becomes smaller, which does not

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: ERROR-PREDICTION LDPC AND ERROR-RECOVERY SCHEMES FOR HIGHLY RELIABLE SSDs

2923

Fig. 7. Reading flow and calculation algorithm of the proposed EP-LDPC scheme.

require EP-LDPC. If either program-disturb error or data-reten- In Step4,

is estimated from

,

,

tion error is dominant,

is estimated as follows:

and

table. The

table represents the rela-

tion among

,

, and the data-retention time as

shown in Table I. The

table stores the relation between

(3)

and the block number of the NAND flash memory as

shown in Table II. The

table is shared with the wear-lev-

eling scheme which is commonly used in SSDs. Since the reli-

where denotes the page size. The on-chip randomizers are ability of the NAND flash memory is strongly related to

,

not suitable for EP-LDPC because

is estimated under the wear-leveling scheme equalizes

of the blocks in the

the assumption that the programmed data corresponds to the NAND flash memories. After

estimation,

states in Fig. 8(a). If needed, the randomizing should be can be calculated by comparing with the

table. BERs

performed by a NAND controller so that the number of each with various

(

to

) and data-retention

states is countable. As an alternative method, at least one time (

to

) are stored in the

table. The

lower page in a block can be kept unrandomized to calculate estimation flow of

is described below. Suppose the

.

retrieved

from the

table is

and the esti-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2924

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

TABLE I TABLE STORES BER WITH VARIOUS

AND

TABLE II TABLE SHARED WITH WEAR-LEVELING SCHEME

Then,

is searched which satisfies

. Estimated

is

represented as follows:

(5)

The equations above are based on the assumption that the depen-

dence of the BER on

and the data-retention time is linear

or the number of the points of the table is sufficiently large to

be assumed to be linear.

Then, the total BER

is estimated from the

and

table in Step5. The proportion of

to

, , is defined as follows:

(6)

Fig. 8. (a) Data assignments of the lower and upper pages to the

(b) Decrease of

with program-disturb error. (c) Increase of

data-retention error.

states. with

where ,

, and

are functions of

and

. The

table stores the dependence

of “ ” on

with various

, as shown in

Fig. 9. From the

table,

,

,

and

are calculated as follows:

(7)

mated

is

isfies

BERs,

lowing equation:

. First, is found which sat. Then, the group of
are calculated from the fol-

Fig. 10 shows the

dependence on the data-retention

time with various

. The estimated

realizes the

great reproduction of the measured BER. In Step6, the effect of

the inter-cell coupling is estimated from

,

,

and the EP table. The EP table and its contents are shown in

Fig. 11. The EP table stores the dependence of the target cell

error number per block on the neighboring cell data, as shown

in Fig. 11(a). The EP table also stores these dependences with

various

and data-retention time, as shown in Fig. 11(b).

The training procedure to make the EP table in Fig. 11(a) is

(4) depicted in Fig. 11(c). The training is carried out before shipping. The write/erase stress is applied to the NAND flash memory

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: ERROR-PREDICTION LDPC AND ERROR-RECOVERY SCHEMES FOR HIGHLY RELIABLE SSDs

2925

Fig. 9. Measured dependence of the proportion of

to

on data-retention time.

where is the bit width of each ,

is the number of

the states, “4” is due to the upper, lower, left, and right cell

data, and

and

are the numbers of the mea-

surement points of

and

, respectively. When

the page size is 16 KByte and the page number of a block is

256, the block size is 4 MByte. Twenty–five bits are needed to

express the number of errors in a block at maximum. Assuming

that is 25,

is 4 (2 bit per cell),

is 100, and

is 10,

is around 195 KByte, which is negli-

gibly small compared with the SSD capacity (e.g., 512 GB).

The cell error rate (CER) of each memory cell is estimated

from

and inter-cell coupling in Step7. Fig. 12

shows the definition of CER of each

state and the as-

sumption of the shift. Although LLR calculation method

is proposed for data-retention error dominant situation in this

paper, LLR can be calculated for program-disturb error domi-

nant condition similarly. The estimation of CER

is

as follows:

(9)

(10)

Fig. 10. Comparison of the estimated

and

sured

with various

.

and mea-

where is the cell error number per block in Fig. 11(a).

and the random data are s written before the training procedure.

At certain

and

, the target cell data and the

data of neighboring cells are read from the NAND flash memory

as the first step. Then, if the read data has an error, the value

of is incremented. The symbol # corresponds to the read

cell data and its neighboring cell data according to Fig. 11(a).

If the read data has no error, the EP table is not updated. Fi-

nally, another cell data is read. This procedure is repeated in

various

and

. As a result, the EP table is cre-

ated. Since the proposed EP-LDPC estimates errors are based on

data which contain errors, this method to extract the EP table is

suitable for the proposed scheme. Fig. 11(d) visualizes a part of

the EP table when

is 2 k cycles,

is 24 days,

and the target cell data is “01.” It is obvious that the inter-cell

coupling effect caused significant differences of the target-cell

error number. When the of the neighboring cell is high, the

target-cell increases due to the inter-cell coupling, resulting

in fewer data-retention errors. Since the memory cells are pro-

grammed from the lower cell to the upper cell, the effect from

the lower cell data to the target-cell error number is small. From

and

, the dependence of the target-cell error

number on the neighboring cells with all of the target cell data

is extracted from the EP table in the same manner as

estimation, which assumes the linearity. The size of the EP table

is calculated as follows:

when the left cell data is {11 01 00 10}, respec-

tively. Similarly,

,

,

and

when the right, upper, and lower

cell data is {11 01 00 10}, respectively.

when the

target cell data is {11 01 00 10}, respectively. First, the total

CER

according to the target cell data is esti-

mated from (9). Then,

is calculated. Each fraction in

(10) expresses the weight to the

according to the

neighboring cell data. For example, suppose

when the left cell data is {11 01 00 10} and

the target cell data is “01”. If the left cell data is “10”, the dom-

inator of the second term of (9) is 200, which is the average

value of to . The numerator is

. As a result,

the second term of (9) is 2.5. This means that the CER of the

target cell is 2.5 as large as that with no dependence on neigh-

boring cell data. In Step8, LLR is calculated for the input of the

LDPC decoder by error prediction which is based on

.

Table III shows the estimated BER

for each data bit

for all of the read data patterns. When the data-retention error is

dominant, it is assumed that the of the memory cell mainly

shifts to the adjacent

state. Two or three

state shift

occurs rarely and assumed to be only a few bits in a block. The

possibility for a cell to move more than two states is defined

and fixed as

. In addition, program-disturb BER is also

defined and fixed as

when the data-retention error is

dominant. If the data read from NAND is “11”,

of the

upper page data is

, while

of the lower page

(8) data is

. This is because the dominant error is “01”

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2926

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Fig. 11. EP table. (a) Cell error number per block with various target and neighboring cell data. (b) Architecture of the EP table. (c) Training procedure to make

the EP table. (d) EP table when

is 2 k, and

is 24 days.

to “11” where error only occurs in upper pages. When the read

(12)

cell data is “10” and the data-retention error is dominant, most

of the data must be correct unless there were program-disturb

errors. Both upper and lower page

of “10”-data are set

to

.

is obtained as follows from

:

where is the read data bit.After that, the LDPC decoding is applied. The corrected data are finally transferred to the host if the decoding is successful. The error-recovery sequence is fol-

lowed if the decoding fails. In the real-world failure, various

(11)

effects happen at once, that is, increase due to the capacitive interference and the decrease caused by the data-reten-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: ERROR-PREDICTION LDPC AND ERROR-RECOVERY SCHEMES FOR HIGHLY RELIABLE SSDs

2927

Fig. 12. Definition of CER. TABLE III
BER ESTIMATION OF THE LOWER AND UPPER PAGE DATA
Predetermined value.

Fig. 13. Measurement setup.

tion failure occur simultaneously. Moreover, the shift due

to the data retention strongly depends on

and

.

This scheme is most efficient because these various effects are

considered by estimating

and using different EP table

values for each

and

.

Since the error prediction is more effective when all of the

neighboring cells are read, EP-LDPC is most suitable for the ap-

plication which contains a lot of sequential read. As for random

read, the error-prediction can be executed using only left and

right cell data. The read cycle is in average 2 larger than the

conventional BCH scheme. This could be suitable in some ap-

plications. Note that the EP-LDPC scheme can be applied with

soft-decision decoding. However, cooptimization of error pre-

diction and soft decision is needed and is kept as future work.

III. MEASUREMENT RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
The measurement system is shown in Fig. 13. First, the data are encoded on the PC as an LDPC code and transferred to the SSD system. Then, the data are read from the NAND and decoded. The technology node of the NAND flash memory measured here is 3X nm where “3X nm” denotes that the design rule of the NAND flash memory is in the range of 30 to 40 nm. The architecture of the LDPC codec is the same as the conventional system because the proposed scheme aims at the creation of LLR values. Since the error prediction can be applied to most of the LDPC codecs which accept LLR, the performance and the power consumption of the LDPC codec is not an issue in

this paper. The effectiveness of the EP-LDPC is clearly and

experimentally proven by using a NAND flash memory in the

measurement system in Fig. 13. Since adjustment cannot

be realized in the measurement SSD system, it was unable to

compare with soft-decision LDPC, moving read for threshold

adjustment, or cell-to-cell interference cancellation technique

[21]. Although the reliability of the soft-decision LDPC should

be the highest, the read access time issue is unacceptable. More-

over, EP-LDPC scheme, as well as error-recovery scheme, has

an advantage that it can be applied by NAND controller manu-

facturers which cannot use adjustment. Cell-to-cell inter-

ference cancellation can be combined with both EP-LDPC and

error-recovery schemes because cell-to-cell interference cancel-

lation is applied during the programming while the proposed

techniques are the reading schemes. Fig. 14 shows the measured

error-correction results of the conventional BCH ECC and the

proposed EP-LDPC ECC when the code rate is 9/10 [Fig. 14(a)]

and 2/3 [Fig. 14(b)]. Measurements are executed with several

(2 k, 3 k, 4 k, 5 k, 6 k, 8 k, and 10 k cycles). The data-re-

tention temperature is 85 C. The code length of the LDPC is

8100 Byte. When the code rate is 9/10, the user and parity data

are 7290 and 810 Byte, respectively. Similarly, if the code rate

is 2/3, the user and parity data are 5400 and 2700 Byte, respec-

tively. Fig. 15 shows the data in a page when the code rate is

9/10. The encoded LDPC ECC is stored in the page. To eval-

uate and fairly compare the reliability of BCH ECC with the

proposed EP-LDPC scheme, BCH ECC is emulated with the

same data as LDPC ECC. Since the BCH ECC can correct up

to arbitrary errors, BCH error-correction capability can be es-

timated by extracting the data with the assumed code length.

The ECC is assumed to be successful if the error number is not

more than . Since BCH ECC with 1024-Byte user data is com-

monly used in the SSD, 1024-Byte user data with the additional

ECC parity bits is assumed as a codeword. If the code rate is

9/10, 1024-Byte user data and 910-bit parity BCH ECC which

can correct up to 65 bit is assumed. On the other hand, when

the code rate is 2/3, the correctable bit is 293 bit and the parity

bits are 4102 bit. Five emulated ECC units are extracted so as

not to exceed the LDPC code length with both code rates. In

this method, since the number of compared user data bits of the

EP-LDPC is larger than that of BCH ECC, the measured im-

provement due to the EP-LDPC scheme is rather pessimistic.

Pass/fail is decided whether ECC succeeds or not in 80 pages

of a block. This does not cover the uncorrectable BER of

but the reliability of the conventional BCH and the proposed

EP-LDPC are compared at exactly the same condition. More-

over, to measure the FER of , at least 10 000 000 frames

(pages) are needed to be measured. This requires more than

76-GByte ECCs for one measurement, which is not realistic.

As for simulation, the NAND channel should be carefully mod-

eled based on a large amount of measurement results and phys-

ical equations so that it is remained as a future work. The ob-

jective of this paper is that to propose and prove the effective-

ness of EP-LDPC and error-recovery scheme. The actual num-

bers claimed below as the improvements are not the critical

issues because they should be technology dependent. Fig. 16

shows the measured reliability improvement on the view point

of acceptable data-retention time, BER and

. Fig. 16(a)

shows the measured dependence of the acceptable data-reten-

tion time of the SSD at 85 C. The acceptable data-retention

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2928

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Fig. 14. Measured error-correction result of the conventional BCH ECC and EP-LDPC scheme. (a) Code rate is 9/10. (b) Code rate is 2/3.

with 9/10 code rate. This is because the data-retention condition

is significantly accelerated by the high temperature. Fig. 16(b)

shows the dependence of the acceptable BER on

. The ac-

ceptable BER is increased by 3.7 and 1.8 at maximum when

the code rate is 2/3 and 9/10, respectively. The acceptable BER

is defined as the largest BER while the ECC decoding succeeds.

The acceptable

is also defined as the largest

while

the ECC decoding succeeds. As shown in Fig. 16(c), the accept-

able

improves by 1.6 and 1.5 when the code rate is

Fig. 15. Data programmed to the NAND flash memory to evaluate the reliability of ECCs.

9/10 and 2/3, respectively. These measured results demonstrate that EP-LDPC is more effective for the smaller code rate and thus it is more useful for the future reliability degraded flash

memories. Fig. 17 shows the measured error performance of

time is defined as the last data-retention time before the ECC EP-LDPC. BER after EP-LDPC is calculated by the total error

fails. The acceptable data-retention time drastically decreases number divided by the total user data bits in 80 pages.

as

increases. The acceptable data-retention time is ex- The remainder of this section discusses the advantages of

tended by 11-times and 2.8-times at maximum when the code considering neighboring cell information and how to handle the

rate is 2/3 and 9/10, respectively. The acceptable data-retention variations among NAND flash memory chips. Further improve-

time is below 100 days even when

is 3 k in BCH ECC ment of the EP-LDPC is discussed in the condition that the more

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: ERROR-PREDICTION LDPC AND ERROR-RECOVERY SCHEMES FOR HIGHLY RELIABLE SSDs

2929

Fig. 18. Measured dependence of the acceptable data-retention time on with (a) proposed EP-LDPC, (b) conventional BCH, and (c) LDPC decoded after Step5.

Fig. 19. Measured BER comparison of the table data and the measured data.

Step7. To evaluate the advantage of taking the neighboring cell information into account, LDPC decoding is performed just after Step5. LLR is calculated from the following equations.

(13)

(14)

Fig. 16. Measured reliability improvement of the proposed EP-LDPC. (a) Ac-

ceptable data-retention time versus

. (b) Acceptable BER versus

.

Fig. 18 shows the dependence of the acceptable data-retention

(c) Acceptable

versus

.

time on

with proposed EP-LDPC, conventional BCH,

and LDPC decoded after Step5. If the code rate is 9/10, the ac-

ceptable data-retention times of the BCH and LDPC after Step5

are the same when

are 5 k, 6 k, and 8 k because the

measurement interval is coarse. There were at least 1.3 and

2.0 improvement of the acceptable data-retention times when

the code rates are 9/10 and 2/3, respectively. Consider that the

neighboring cell information significantly impacts on increasing

the efficiency of the EP-LDPC.

The effect of the process variation is discussed. Fig. 19 shows

the dependence of the BER on the data-retention time. The

squares and the triangles are the dependences of the

in

table data and the measured

.

table data and the measured data were obtained from different

Fig. 17. Error performance of EP-LDPC.

NAND flash memory chips. There is approximately a 20%

difference between the

table data and the measured

data due to the variations between the NAND flash memory

accurate error prediction is achieved. Additionally, the relia- chips. In the case of Fig. 19, the data-retention time is estimated

bility of reading random data is discussed.

to be shorter than the actual data-retention time. For example,

In the proposed EP-LDPC, the total BER is estimated in when the actual data-retention time is 24 days, the estimated

Step4, and then error is predicted from the neighboring cells in data-retention time is 16.7 days when

is 3 k. Although

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2930

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Fig. 21. Measured acceptable data-retention time comparison of the proposed EP-LDPC and EP-LDPC with ideal error estimation.

among EP table (estimation) and actual data, target CER is used for comparison. The target CER is defined as follows:

(15)

where

is the effective block size which is the total bit

number written in a block. Fig. 20(a) shows the result of day

2, and Fig. 20(b) shows that of day 24. The target CER when

the target cell data is “10” (the highest state) is not shown

because the data-retention error is dominant and there were al-

most no errors in the “10” data. Due to the data-retention time

estimation, the estimated data shows good reproduction of the

actual data.

Fig. 21 shows the comparison of the dependence of the

acceptable data-retention time between the EP-LDPC scheme

which estimates errors from tables (Proposed EP-LDPC) and

which estimates errors from the real data (LDPC with ideal

estimation). If there is no die-to-die process variations among

NAND chips, the errors are perfectly estimated as “LDPC with

ideal estimation.” Since the correct data which is programmed

to the NAND flash memory is known in the evaluation system,

it is able to first compare the read data with the correct data

and make EP tables and then calculate the LLRs and decode.

This method shows the effect of the EP-LDPC scheme when

the errors are perfectly estimated. The acceptable data-reten-

tion time can be improved with the ideal estimation by 1.8

and 1.3 when the code rate is 9/10 and 2/3, respectively.

The error-correction performance of the proposed EP-LDPC

with EP tables is close to the ideal case. This result indicates

that the high reliability is realized even only with one set of

prerecorded tables, based on a measurement of one chip, is

kept in the SSD. This is because the proposed scheme shows

Fig. 20. Comparison of the actual and estimated target CER versus neighboring the immunity to variations. If the process variations such as

cell data. (a) Day 2. (b) Day 24.

die-to-die or wafer-to-wafer variations can be obtained, further

improvement can be achieved.

Finally, the acceptable data-retention times of EP-LDPC with

the reliability degradation is caused by many effects which estimation by four neighboring cells (upper/lower/left/right)

increase program-disturb error and data-retention error, it is and by only left/right cells are compared in Fig. 22. To minimize

assumed that, when the BER of the table data and the mea- the read cycles during random read, the error-prediction is exe-

sured data are same, the physical memory cell conditions are cuted with using only left and right cell data. The effect of the

equivalent considering those various inter-cell coupling effects. neighboring cell is larger in the left/right cells than upper/lower

Fig. 20 shows the comparison of the actual and estimated target cells as shown in Fig. 20. As a result, the reliability degradation

CER versus neighboring cell data. Since the total data size during random read is minimized. However, it is still important

which was used to analyze the cell error number is different to consider upper/lower cells, and even diagonal cells, because

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: ERROR-PREDICTION LDPC AND ERROR-RECOVERY SCHEMES FOR HIGHLY RELIABLE SSDs

2931

Fig. 24. Bias conditions of (a) PDRP and (b) DRRP.
Fig. 22. Comparison of measured acceptable data-retention time by error estimation from four and two neighboring cells.

Fig. 25. Error-recovery mechanism. (a) Error is reduced by electron de-trapping by PDRP. (b) Error is reduced by electron injection by DRRP.

Fig. 23. Flowchart of the error-recovery scheme.

the correlation between the target cell and the upper/lower cells would be larger in the future nand flash memories.

IV. ERROR-RECOVERY SCHEME

Fig. 26. Measured error reduction and convergence by PDRP.

Fig. 23 shows the error-recovery flowchart. Error-recovery

is executed only when the EP-LDPC fails. Since both pro- the block which needed DRRP is not set as a bad block and

gram-disturb error-recovery pulse (PDRP) and data-retention prepares for storing the next data.

error-recovery pulse (DRRP) described blow are time-con- Bias conditions of PDRP and DRRP are shown in Fig. 24.

suming schemes, the error-recovery scheme is used as an The bias condition of PDRP is the program inhibit condi-

emergency scheme. First, the error mode is determined to the tion [Fig. 24(a)] and that of DRRP is the read condition

program-disturb or the data-retention error. The error mode [Fig. 24(b)]. The error-recovery mechanism is illustrated in

depends on the location of memory cell (word-line number), Fig. 25. Electrons at the interface between control gate (CG)

and

. If the program-disturb error is dominant and inter-poly dielectric (IPD) are de-trapped with PDRP as

as shown in Fig. 8(b),

is larger than

. shown in Fig. 25(a). As a result, PDRP decreases the and

PDRP is applied to the memory cells in this condition. After improves the program-disturb error. With DRRP, electrons are

that, the data with reduced errors is transferred to the EP-LDPC injected into the floating gate. DRRP increases the

and

unit. After successful LDPC decoding, the corrected data is mitigates the data-retention error as shown in Fig. 25(b).

copied to another block in a NAND flash memory and set the Fig. 26 shows the measured dependence of the program-dis-

block which needed PDRP as a bad block. When a block is set turb BER on the time after PDRP with and without PDRP.

as a bad block, the block is omitted and never used again. This is The technology node of the NAND is 3X nm. Each data point

because the program-disturb error exceeds the error-correction is an average of ten measurements. First, the program-disturb

capability when

is too large due to the excessive stress BER decreases by 48% by applying PDRP. Then, the BER with

to the tunneling dielectric. When

is smaller than PDRP converges to the BER without PDRP in 200 ms. This con-

, the data-retention error is dominant as shown in vergence implies that since the electrons are easily retrapped,

Fig. 8(c) and DRRP is applied to the memory cells. EP-LDPC the de-trapping is from the interface between CG and IPD and

and page copying are followed as well as PDRP. This time, not from the inside of IPD as reported [22]. The dependence of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2932

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Fig. 27. Measured program-disturb error-recovery.

Fig. 29. Photograph of the measured SSD system [20].
TABLE IV SUMMARY OF THE EP-LDPC SCHEME

Fig. 28. Data-retention BER versus DRRP number.

the program-disturb BER on

of 4X nm NAND is shown

in Fig. 27. The program-disturb BER significantly increases as

increases. The PDRP realizes 76% recovery of the pro-

gram-disturb error. PDRP scheme is effective only within a few

milli-seconds after PDRP is applied. Moreover, PDRP induces

program-disturb error after 200 ms. As a result, PDRP can be

applied to the memory cells only once otherwise program-dis-

turb destroys data. Fig. 28 shows the data-retention BER dependency on DRRP number with 3X nm NAND. The data-retention BER gradually decreases as the DRRP number increases

TABLE V SUMMARY OF THE ERROR-RECOVERY SCHEME

due to the electron injection to the floating gate. The data-reten-

tion BER is recovered by 56% with 500 DRRPs. Contrary to

PDRP scheme, DRRP scheme does not increase data-retention

error after DRRP so that DRRP can be applied multiple times.

The comparison of the proposed error-recovery scheme and the

moving read for threshold adjustment was impossible because

it was unable to adjust .

reliability issues, EP-LDPC and error-recovery scheme are pro-

posed. The sequential read cycles of the proposed EP-LDPC is

V. CONCLUSION

7-times less than that of the conventional soft-decision LDPC scheme and same as the conventional BCH scheme. The per-

Fig. 29 depicts the photograph of the measured SSD system formance improvement is achieved by estimating the BER of

[20]. The whole system in this paper was constructed of a PC each data bit from inter-cell coupling,

, and

.

and the SSD system. If they are implemented in ASIC, the gate The acceptable data-retention time, BER, and

of the pro-

count of the EP-LDPC codec in the NAND controller is similar posed SSD are increased by more than 10 , 3.7 and 1.6 ,

to the conventional LDPC thanks to the simple additional func- respectively. The measurement results indicate that EP-LDPC

tions. Additionally, it is reported that the LDPC codec is twice works more effectively for nand flash memories, whose reli-

as large as the BCH ECC [23]. The key features of the pro- ability is more degraded and requires smaller code rate com-

posed SSD are summarized in Tables IV and V. The reliability pared with the conventional technique. Furthermore, the error-

of NAND flash memories has been seriously degraded due to recovery scheme with PDRP and DRRP improves the program-

the scaling. Inter-cell coupling effect has been significantly in- disturb and data-retention errors up to 76% and 56%, respec-

creased due to the proximity of the memory cells. To solve these tively. The results show the proposed highly reliable schemes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: ERROR-PREDICTION LDPC AND ERROR-RECOVERY SCHEMES FOR HIGHLY RELIABLE SSDs

2933

can be powerful error-correcting or recovering tools for future SSDs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank K. Johguchi and S. Hachiya for their support. The authors would also like to thank A. Esumi, M. Ito, and K. Li of SIGLEAD Inc. for their support.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Shibata et al., “A 19 nm 112.8 mm 64 Gb multi-level flash memory with 400 Mb/s/pin 1.8 V toggle mode interface,” in IEEE Int. SolidState Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2012, pp. 422–423.
[2] Y. Li et al., “128 Gb 3 b/cell NAND flash memory in 19 nm technology with 18 MB/s write rate and 400 Mb/s toggle mode,” in IEEE Int. SolidState Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2012, pp. 436–437.
[3] J. D. Lee, S. H. Hur, and J. D. Choi, “Effects of floating-gate interference on NAND flash memory cell operation,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 264–266, May 2002.
[4] M. Park et al., “Direct field effect of neighboring cell transistor on cell-to-cell interference of NAND flash cell arrays,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 174–177, Feb. 2009.
[5] H. Choi, W. Liu, and W. Sung, “VLSI implementation of BCH error correction for multi-level cell NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Very Large-Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 843–847, May 2010.
[6] K. Prall and K. Parat, “25 nm 64 Gb MLC NAND technology and scaling challenges,” in IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting Tech. Dig., Dec. 2010, pp. 102–105.
[7] R. Motwani, Z. Kwok, and S. Nelson, “Low density parity check (LDPC) codes and the need for stronger ECC,” in Flash Memory Summit, 2011 [Online]. Available: http://www.flashmemorysummit.com/
[8] N. Mielke, et al., “Bit error rate in NAND flash memories,” in IEEE Int. Reliabil. Phys. Symp., Apr. 2008, pp. 9–19.
[9] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[10] C. Kim et al., “A 21 nm high performance 64 Gb MLC NAND flash memory with 400 MB/s asynchronous toggle DDR interface,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 981–989, Apr. 2012.
[11] J. Kim and W. Sung, “Low-energy error correction of NAND Flash memory through soft-decision decoding,” Eurasip J. Adv. Signal Process., vol. 2012, no. 1, p. 195, Sep. 2012.
[12] D. Lee and W. Sung, “Estimation of NAND flash memory threshold voltage distribution for optimum soft-decision error correction,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 440–449, Jan. 2012.
[13] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Yanagihara, and K. Takeuchi, “Over-10 -extended-lifetime 76%-reduced-error solid-state drives (SSDs) with error-prediction LDPC architecture and error-recovery scheme,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2012, pp. 424–425.
[14] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[15] J. D. Lee, C. K. Lee, M. W. Lee, H. S. Kim, K. C. Park, and W. S. Lee, “A new programming disturbance phenomenon in NAND flash memory by source/drain hot-electrons generated by GIDL current,” in Proc. IEEE Non-Volatile Semicond. Memory Workshop, May 2006, pp. 31–33.
[16] M. Park et al., “NAND flash reliability degradation induced by HCI in boosted channel potential,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Reliabil. Phys. Symp., Apr. 2010, pp. 975–976.
[17] S. Seo, H. Kim, S. Park, S. Lee, S. Aritome, and S. Hong, “Novel negative Vt shift program disturb phenomena in 2X 3X nm NAND flash memory cells,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Reliabil. Phys. Symp., Apr. 2011, pp. 641–644.
[18] Y. S. Kim et al., “New scaling limitation of the floating gate cell in NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Reliabi. Phys. Symp., Apr. 2010, pp. 599–603.
[19] C. M. Compagnoi, A. Ghetti, M. Ghidotti, A. S. Spinelli, and A. Visconti, “Data retention and program/erase sensitivity to the array background pattern in deca-nanometer NAND flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 321–327, Jan. 2010.

[20] S. Tanakamaru, C. Hung, and K. Takeuchi, “Highly reliable and low power SSD using asymmetric coding and stripe bitline-pattern elimination programming,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 85–96, Jan. 2012.
[21] D. Lee and W. Sung, “Least squares based cell-to-cell interference cancelation technique for multi-level cell NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., 2012, pp. 1601–1604.
[22] A. Serov et al., “Statistical retention modeling in floating-gate cell: ONO scaling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Reliabil. Phys. Symp., Apr. 2009, pp. 887–890.
[23] J. Yang, “High-efficiency SSD for reliable data storage systems,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit, 2011 [Online]. Available: http://www. flashmemorysummit.com/
Shuhei Tanakamaru (S’09) received the B.E. and M.E. degrees in engineering from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2009 and 201, respectively, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree.
He has been engaged in a research on low power DRAM, SRAM and highly reliable solid-state drives.
Mr. Tanakamaru was the recipient of the 2009 IEEE Electron Device Society Japan Chapter Student Award.
Yuki Yanagihara received the B.E. degree in engineering from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2012, where he is currently working toward the M.E. degree.
His current research interests are in the field of CMOS dc–dc converters.
Ken Takeuchi (M’01) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in applied physics and Ph.D. degree in electric engineering from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 1991, 1993, and 2006, respectively, and the M.B.A. degree from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, in 2003.
He is currently a Professor with the Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Communication Engineering, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan. He is now working on the database storage system for big-data application, VLSI circuit design, signal processing and devices such as the emerging nonvolatile memories, 3D-integrated SSDs, low-power 3D-LSI circuits, and ultralow-voltage SRAMs. After joining Toshiba in 1993, he led Toshiba’s NAND flash memory circuit design for 14 years. He was an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Graduate School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, from 2007 to 2012. In 2012, he joined Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan. He designed six of the world’s highest density NAND flash memory products such as 0.7 m 16 Mbit, 0.4 m 64 Mbit, 0.25 m 256 Mbit, 0.16 m 1 Gbit, 0.13 m 2 Gbit, and 56 nm 8 Gbit NAND flash memories. He holds 215 patents worldwide including 115 U.S. patents. In particular, with his invention, “multipage cell architecture,” presented at the Symposium on VLSI Circuits in 1997, he successfully commercialized the world’s first multi-level cell NAND flash memory in 2001. Dr. Takeuchi was the recipient of the Takuo Sugano Award for Outstanding Paper at International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC) 2007. He has served on the program committee member of the ISSCC, the Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference, the International Memory Workshop, and the Non-Volatile Memory Technology Symposium. He served as a tutorial speaker at ISSCC 2008, SSD forum organizer at ISSCC 2009, 3D-LSI forum organizer at ISSCC 2010, Ultra-low voltage LSI forum organizer at ISSCC 2011, and Robust VLSI System forum organizer at ISSCC 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:07:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

