Efficient Forced Convergence Algorithm for Low Power LDPC Decoders

Byung Jun Choi and Myung Hoon Sunwoo
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering Ajou University San 5, Woncheon-Dong, Yeongtong-Gu Suwon, 443-749, Korea
bjchoi0117@ajou.ac.kr, sunwoo@ajou.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper proposes an efficient Forced Convergence (FC) algorithm to reduce the computational complexity of LDPC decoders. To reduce the computational complexity, the proposed algorithm uses only one threshold value and two conditions of variable nodes (VNs) while the existing FC algorithm uses two threshold values and two conditions. The simulation results show that the proposed algorithm achieves the bit error rate (BER) performance close to the typical Min-Sum algorithm. however, it can significantly reduce the computational complexity compared to the existing FC algorithm.
Keywords-low density parity check (LDPC); error correction codes; forced convergence; low power decoder
I. Introduction
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were first introduced by Gallager [1]. They have been adopted as forward error correction (FEC) codes in the communication standards such as Wi-Fi [2], Wigig [3], 10Gbase-T Ethernet [4], etc. Recently, reducing the computational complexity is a key issue to implement low power LDPC decoders.
The existing FC algorithm [5]-[7] results in the deactivated nodes that are satisfied with two conditions in each node. It can reduce the computational complexity by deactivating nodes. However, the proposed algorithm can remove the condition of check nodes (CNs) and it uses only one threshold value instead of two threshold values in the existing FC algorithm. Since the proposed algorithm efficiently produces deactivated nodes, it can significantly reduce the unnecessary computations and memory accesses, which give low power consumption.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II gives the existing FC algorithm. The proposed algorithm is presented in Section III, and the simulation results are described in Section IV. Finally, conclusions are given in Section V.
II. Existing FC algorithm
The FC algorithm reduces decoding complexity by exploiting the fact that a large number of VNs converge to a strong belief after few iterations, since these VNs have already

been reliably decoded and the FC algorithm can skip updating

their belief in subsequent iterations.

In order to explain the iterative decoding, we define the

following notations with the iteration:

· h ji : the element of parity check matrix (H) at the j-th row

and i-th column

· λ ch : The soft information from the channel output

(Log-Likelihood Ratio value)

· λ C → V ( j , i ) : the soft information of the j-th CN to the i-th

VN

· λ V → C ( j , i ) : the soft information from the i-th VN to the

j-th CN

In this algorithm, the i-th VN will be deactivated for the

following iterations if it satisfies

¦ | λ ch ( i ) +

λ C → V ( j , i ) | > t v (1)

j : h ji = 1

Then, the j-th CN updated with the Min-Sum algorithm will be

deactivated if it satisfies

min{| λV→C ( j, i) |} > tc , i : hji = 1 (2)

where tv and tc are the predefined threshold values [7].

III. Proposed Algorithm
This section proposes an efficient FC algorithm. The existing FC algorithm uses two threshold values, however, the proposed algorithm uses only one threshold value tv because the proposed algorithm does not use the conditions of CNs. In contrast, the existing FC algorithm compares the minimum values of CNs with tc. The calculations in CNs are approximated by taking only into account the incoming message with the minimum value. The small tc deactivates even the minimum value of the activated CNs. If tc the limiting minimum value is small, the reasonable performance cannot be achieved. In contrast, if tc is large enough, then good performance can be expected. The optimal tc is suggested as 5 in the existing FC algorithm using the MS algorithm and the performance is good [7]. However, the probability that is satisfied with (2) is significantly low. Therefore, (2) is excluded in the proposed algorithm.
The proposed algorithm adds the following condition. | λ ch ( i ) | > t v ( 3 )

ċ˅,(((



,62&&

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:05:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

From (3), we see that the i-th VN is deactivated by the condition. If the absolute value of the initial LLR is larger than tv, it is satisfied with the condition. In the proposed algorithm, the i-th VN will be deactivated if it satisfies either (1) or (3).
The decoding steps of the proposed algorithm are as follows. The first iteration of the proposed algorithm makes VNs deactivated both by (1) and by (3). Then, the subsequent iterations uses only (1). Because the proposed algorithm starts form the condition using the initial LLR value, it can increase the number of the deactivated VNs compared to the existing FC algorithm, and therefore, the required computation can greatly be reduced.
The proposed algorithm can produce not only the deactivated VNs but also the deactivated CNs based on the location of the deactivated VNs. The results of VN computation are used to CN computation. The results of deactivated VNs have relatively large values. The results of deactivated VNs are not required in the CN computation using the minimum value. In other words, the deactivated VNs can deactivate the adjacent CNs. As a result, the proposed algorithm can find the deactivated CNs by using both (1) and (3). The proposed algorithm shows almost equal BER performance to that of the existing FC algorithm. The proposed algorithm can significantly reduce the computation and to find the optimized value compared to the existing FC algorithm .

0
10

BPSK

MS

proposed

-2

Existing FC

10

TABLE I

The complexity reduction of VN and CN compared the FC

algorithm with proposed algorithm

(tv , tc )

VN complexity CN complexity

reduction

reduction

MSA

(-, -)

0%

0%

Existing FC algorithm[7]

(5, 5)

51%

1%

Proposed algorithm

(5, -)

59%

59%

SNR is 6.0dB in this table. Because the proposed algorithm uses both (1) and (3), it can reduce the VN computational complexity about 8% compared to the existing FC algorithm [5]-[7]. The proposed algorithm can reduce the computations of CNs by deactivated VNs. Consequentially, the proposed algorithm can reduce the CN computations about 58% compared to the existing FC algorithm.

V. Conculsions
This paper proposes an efficient FC algorithm to reduce the computational complexity that can realize low power LDPC decoders. Based on the simulation results, the proposed algorithm can reduce up to 8% of the VN computations and up to 58% of the CN computations compared to the existing FC algorithm at SNR = 6.0dB. Moreover, it can achieve similar BER performance compared with the existing FC algorithm.

Acknowledgment

BER

This work was partly supported by the IT R&D program of

-4
10

MOTIE/ KEIT. [10044092, Development of Core IPs of

OFDM PHY and RF Transceiver for 60GHz Wireless LAN/

PAN in application of 7Gbps Wireless Multimedia Services]

-6

and Mid-career Researcher Program through the NRF grant

10

funded by the MEST (2013031132).

-8
10 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8 Eb/No
Fig. 1 BER performance of the LDPC decoder with a (6,32) regular (2048,1723) LDPC code. (Max iter. = 5)
IV. Simulation Results
We performed extensive simulations to compare the algorithms in terms of the BER and the complexity. We use the (6,32) regular (2048,1723) LDPC code defined in [4] and the code bits are BPSK modulated and are passed through the AWGN channel. Fig. 1 shows simulation results of the BER performance of the MS algorithm, the proposed algorithm and the existing FC algorithm. As shown in Fig. 1, two BER curves are quite similar. The performance difference between the proposed algorithm and the existing FC algorithm is about 0.1dB at a BER of 10−6 .
Table I shows the computational complexity of VN and CN. The threshold values tv and tc in the FC algorithm are (5, 5) [5][7]. The number of decoding iterations is limited to 5 and the

References
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] IEEE 802.11n. Wireless LAN Medium Access Control and Physical Layer specifications: Enhancements for Higher Throughput. IEEE P802.16n/D1.0, Mar 2006.
[3] IEEE Draft Std 802.11ad, Nov. 2011. [4] IEEE P802.3an, 10GBASE-T task force. [5] E. Zimmermann, G. Fettweis, P. Pattisapu and P. K. Bora,
“Reduced complexity LDPC decoding using forced convergence,” 7th Int. Symp. On Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications, Sep. 2004. [6] E. Zimmermann, W. Rave and G.K. Fettweis, “Forced convergence decoding of LDPC Codes --- EXIT chart analysis and combination with node complexity reduction techniques,” 11th Eur. Conf.Wireless (EW'2005), Apr. 2005. [7] Fan J X, Yang H W, “A new forced convergence decoding scheme for LDPC codes,” IEEE International Conference on Communications Technology and Applications (ICCTA), Beijing, 2009.

ċ˅,(((



,62&&

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:05:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

