2013 IEEE Military Communications Conference

Anti-Jam Communications using Frequency-Hopped OFDM and LDPC with Erasures (‘Minotaur’)

Laurence Mailaender
LGS Innovations LLC Florham Park, NJ USA lm@lgsinnovations.com

Abstract—We consider frequency-hopped OFDM (FH-OFDM) as the basis for anti-jam communications achieving very high processing gain. A conventional OFDM signal is hopped across a number of frequency sub-bands. Our design hops a 1 MHz bandwidth OFDM waveform to one of 400 frequencies (26 dB processing gain), occupying a large total bandwidth of 400 MHz. On each hop we assume an independent channel realization and jammer state. Employing 16-QAM and rate-1/2 coding, we achieve a data rate of 1.22 Mbps after accounting for all overheads, such as cyclic prefix, pilots, and peak-to-average control. We examine the impact of coding across hops in fading channels to achieve frequency diversity, and design custom LDPC codes for the resulting short block length (1248 information bits). We find that under jammed conditions erasure decoding improves BER by an order of magnitude, and develop a simple yet effective “in-band” approach to jammer state estimation. A non-real-time prototype was tested in the lab, sending the 400 MHz signal over a wired channel. Jamming levels high enough to completely preclude non-hopped communication degrade our system by only 2-5 dB, depending on channel conditions.
Keywords—FH-OFDM, erasure decoding, jammer state estimation
I. INTRODUCTION TO FH-OFDM
Tactical communications links use spread spectrum techniques to provide an anti-jam (AJ) capability. Future links require support for data rates above 1 Mbps, while maintaining or increasing the current level of AJ protection. We assume that single-antenna transmitters/receivers are used, so AJ protection derives entirely from the spread spectrum (SS) and modulation/coding design.
The military has typically used the Frequency-Hopping (FH) form of SS, because Direct-Spreading (DS) over large bandwidth requires high sampling rate, and imposes highly complex channel estimation and excessive power consumption. While FH-DS hybrids are possible, we restrict ourselves to pure FH.
The most robust AJ systems use “slow-hopping,” meaning that less than one information bit is transmitted per hop [1]. This necessitates non-coherent detection, as bit information across independently faded channels must be combined.
This material is based upon work supported by the Office of Naval Research under Contract No. N00014-10-C-0052.

However, to increase the data rate, we would like to make use of coherent detection and higher-order signaling alphabets. This motivates use of OFDM.
Frequency-Hopped OFDM (FH-OFDM) has been proposed in several other works. [2,3] consider the carrier and timing synchronization problem, [4] examines an all-digital hopping architecture, and [5] discusses a tone-permutation scheme to increase diversity. Our work differs in that we have designed a complete physical layer (channel estimation, peak-to-average (PAPR) reduction, coding, etc.) and show the jamming resistance under erasure decoding.
II. MINOTAUR PHY DESIGN
Our system design aims for an instantaneous bandwidth of about 1 MHz. As over-sampling is beneficial in OFDM, we use a sampling rate of 1.25 Msps, and choose an FFT length of 172 tones. Hence, the OFDM body duration is 172/1.25 Msps=138 usec, and the inter-tone spacing is 1.25M/172=7.27 kHz. We reserve 36 central tones as unused; the occupied band is then 7.27kHz*(172-36)=988.4 kHz.
The 172-36=136 occupied tones are divided among pilots, PAPR control, and data. After testing several configurations, we chose: 12 pilots, 19 PAPR, and 104 for data. The DC tone is unused. Note 104+12+19+1+36=172. The PAPR approach is from [6].
A cyclic prefix (CP) of 20 samples, or 16 usec is added. The total OFDM symbol duration is 138+16=154 usec. We add pre/post guard times of 10 samples, or 8 usec, hence the hop duration is 8+8+154=170 usec, giving a hop rate=5.9 kHop/sec. Note that with 2 bits/tone, and 104 tones/hop, we achieve an actual data rate= 2*104/170 usec=1.22 Mbps.
A critical design parameter is the number of hops per FEC coded block. When this value is 2 or more, the error correction can potentially compensate for a bad fading state, or being hit by the jammer. Generally, increasing hops/block increases the frequency diversity (which improves decoded BER), but adds latency as transmission cannot begin until all the bits comprising the block are present. Our design uses 6 hops/block. Assuming 16-QAM and rate ½ coding, there are 4 *1/2*104*6=1248 info bits/block.
An early use of LDPC codes in FH systems is found in [7], where long channel interleavers are used. [8] also uses LDPC

978-0-7695-5124-1/13 $31.00 © 2013 IEEE

84

DOI 10.1109/MILCOM.2013.24

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:09:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

codes in a FH system. A modern overview of coding for jamming resistance is found in [9] which considers LDPC as well as RS and rateless codes. It is known that very short LDPC codes are not “capacity achieving” [10]. In general, the choice of “best” code depends on rate and block length [11]. [12] finds a small gain for TPC over LDPC at short block lengths, and both are better than a convolutional code. The BER performance of our code was essentially the same as a standard convolutional code (k=7), though the BLER was superior. [13] compares RS to LDPC for block lengths similar to ours and finds a 4-5 dB gain for LDPC over RS. We achieved a similar result. The method we used for designing the short LDPC code is in Section IV.
Figure 1 shows a block diagram of the Minotaur PHY.
III. CHALLENGE FOR FREQUENCY-FOLLOWER JAMMERS
A potential draw-back for FH-OFDM is its vulnerability to “repeat-back”(RB) jamming. The RB jammer listens to detect the current hop frequency and then sends a jamming signal on that frequency, potentially defeating the gain from hopping. However, if the time of flight to and from the jammer is longer than the hop duration, RB jamming is ineffective. Hence there is an elliptical “vulnerability region” [1], and the RB jammer must be inside this region to have an impact exceeding randomly- hopped jamming. For a Tx/Rx pair at 1 km distance, a 6 kHop/sec produces a large vulnerability radius of about 50 km. However, this is not the whole story.
A RB jammer must first listen, and then transmit. In the “delay-repeat” strategy, the jammer stores the entire wideband waveform it has received, and later re-transmits it. In the ”follower” strategy, the jammer has an energy detector for each hop frequency and uses this to make decisions which band to jam. The wideband signal makes the delay-repeat strategy less effective: the received signal is largely noise, and the transmitter ends up wasting much of its power sending out-of band noise. The “follower” strategy requires a receiver with 400 matched filters. This is possible, but it seems unlikely that an adversary would devote so much attention to a jammer that works only on this one waveform. In summary, the threat from RB cannot be completely discounted, and we recommend that a separate fast hopping mode be activated when RB jamming is detected.
IV. LDPC CODE DESIGN
We initially used an irregular LDPC design, but then switched to the simple “Semi-Random” code design [14], which is compatible with the Matlab LDPC decoder.
The method of [14] is very sensitive to the choice of the parameter, t, which here can be any integer factor of 1248. We experimented and found best results with smaller values. We chose t=4, generated 15 random codes, simulated them to estimate performance, and chose the best one.
LDPC codes can be improved via the “loop removal” procedure [15], however we did not do this.

V. NOISE AND JAMMER ESTIMATION
MMSE equalization and soft-decision decoding of 16QAM require an estimate of the noise variance. We used a simple noise estimator based on the 36 “unused” tones in the OFDM signal. The average power of the 36 tones is computed, and this is input to a first-order IIR filter to create a long-term average.
Much of the literature assumes erasure of individual symbols or “tones”; however, we assume each hop is either jammed or clear, and erase an entire hop at a time. Originally we based jammer detection on an “out-of-band” approach that looked for large differences between the instantaneous and long-term average noise power to indicate the presence of a jammer. However, that metric had false alarms when the jammer was in a band adjacent to the OFDM signal. Our receiver uses the following “in-band” approach. After channel equalization, each data tone should contain a 16-QAM constellation. As seen in Figure 2, we define a square region outside the constellation, and count the number of signal points falling there. Note that noise and multipath will often create errors “within” the constellation, but it takes considerable excess power to move points outside the box: this power is supplied by the jammer. Our jammer state estimator decides the jammer is present when the number of points outside the box (“outliers”) exceeds a threshold.
VI. HARDWARE TESTING
We created a non-real time testbed from lab equipment and commercially-available eval boards. Our baseband Tx and Rx processing were performed in Matlab. Baseband Tx samples from Matlab were stored in files and sent to an Arbitrary Waveform Generator. The baseband analog output was upconverted using a pair of AD4350 local oscillators and a ADL5375 mixer, covering 1.8-2.2GHz. At the receive side the same LOs are used again, along with an LTM9004 mixer/ADC, and a logic analyzer to capture the sampled data. Files from the logic analyzer were sent to Matlab for receiver processing. A programmable Pattern Generator controlled the timing of the hops. Figure 3 shows the RF circuitry for the transmitter. Delay was calibrated and receiver delay synchronization was ideal (fixed).
To create the hop duration of 170 usec using the AD4350 requires use of 2 LOs. Each LO has a frequency tune time of about 120 usec. Hence we used two in a ping-pong arrangement: while one is processing the current hop, the second is pre-tuning to the next hop frequency.
In order to create multipath for a 400 MHz signal, the multipath was generated in Matlab and included in the transmitted signal, and likewise for the thermal noise. The receiver performance with the hardware in the loop is indeed a bit worse than a pure simulation, mainly due to RF carrier frequency offset dynamics, and I/Q imbalances.
The jamming signal was created by an analog noise generator; the bandwidth was set to 1x (or 4x) the instantaneous OFDM bandwidth, and jammer power was hand adjusted via a spectrum analyzer.

85 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:09:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VII. NUMERICAL RESULTS
Figure 4 shows decoded BER for convolutional coding and a PedB multipath channel, where we varied the codeword length. As seen, longer codewords bring additional frequency diversity, and begin to approach the AWGN case. We chose 6 hops/codeword as a tradeoff between BER performance and latency.
Figure 5 shows the performance with the LDPC code as we vary the number of pilots tones, with pilot tone power fixed at 3 dB above the traffic tone power. With only 6 pilots, we do not learn the channel well enough, and performance is poor. With 18 pilots, the performance is about the same as with 12. Note that to make a fair comparison, the total OFDM symbol power is held constant; more power in the pilots means less is available for the data. This justifies 12 pilots as a good choice for PedB channels, as the data rate is higher than the 18 pilot case.
Figures 6-8 show performance with jamming. We assume a noise jammer whose power is 6 dB above the power of the average OFDM symbol. When only 1 sub-band is jammed, the jammer hits the signal one time in 400 (prob=0.0025), and if 4 sub-bands are jammed, he hits the signal with prob=0.01. Figure 6 assumes an AWGN channel, and shows the BER with and without jamming. When jamming is active we compare 3 cases: no erasures, ideal (“genie”) erasure, and the jammer detector of Section V (“outlier”). Note that with no erasures, the BER shows an error floor behavior, with BER value essentially equal to the jam probability. With genie erasures this error floor disappears and BER improved by an order of magnitude or more. The BER degradation compared to no jamming is only 1-2 dB. The performance with ‘outlier’ is equal to ‘genie’ in this case.
Figure 7 repeats this but with a non-fading multipath channel (channel impulse response is equal to the average, real, delay-power profile on all hops). We again see a strong errorfloor behavior with no erasures, and this disappears when we use erasures. (Note the BER with no jamming went to “zero” above 7.5 dB.) The performance with the outlier method is similar to the genie case. Erasures again improved the BER by an order of magnitude or more.
Figure 8 repeats this with independent fading on each hop. In general, the same conclusions hold and we can see a roughly 5 dB performance loss due to jamming. The BER curves with erasures seem to show an error floor in this case. We think this indicates a very interesting “jamming-fading” interaction. The FEC is trying to overcome errors from jamming and fading and has a finite ability to do so. For example, the code may be powerful enough to correct for jamming, or fading, but not both together; hence the error floor reappears. The code provides a degree of redundancy, but if the jammer hits the redundant bits you are left unprotected against the fading. In effect, the jammer lowers the diversity order by “1” part of the time. We conjecture that a lower-rate code should be used on such channels.
We also investigated lower jammer power levels, while holding the “region” and “count” detection parameters constant. Weaker jammers can be harder to detect and actually

cause larger degradation than strong jammers in our system. However, precise jammer power control seems unlikely as the receiver location is unknown to the jammer. (If the receiver location is known, military personnel have more pressing concerns than jamming.) To quantify this, at J/S=0 dB, the proposed jamming estimator still gives a 5x-reduction in BER, while at J/S= -3 it is only 2x. These results could perhaps be improved if the detection parameters were made adaptive, which we leave for future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author thanks his LGS colleagues who contributed to the success of this project: S. Nossen, T. Hoerning, N. Jacobsen, and J. Poirier.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Barry Felstead, “The vulnerability region of frequency hoppers against follower jammers,” MILCOM 2009.
[2] John E Kleider, Steve Gifford, Ghassan Maalouli, Scott Chuprun, “Synchronization for RF carrier frequency hopped OFDM: analysis and simulation,” MILCOM 2003.
[3] John E. Kleider, Ghassan Maalouli, Steve Gifford, and Scott Chuprun, “Preamble and embedded synchronization for RF carrier frequencyhopped OFDM,” IEEE Journal on Sel. Areas in Comm., vol 23, No. 5, May 2005.
[4] Qicun Shi, Zhixing Yang, Lifeng He, and Kewu Peng, “All digital baseband frequency hopping OFDM system,” ICCS 2008.
[5] T. Scholand, T. Faber, A. Seebens, J. Lee, J. Cho, H. W. Lee, and P. Jung,”Fast frequency hopping OFDM concept,” IEEE Electronics Letters, vol 41, No. 13, June 2005.
[6] J. Tellado and J. Cioffi, “Peak power reduction for multicarrier transmission,” GLOBECOM 1998.
[7] Scott H. Schremmer, “Low density parity check codes in a frequency hopped communication system with partial band jamming,” MILCOM 2002.
[8] Farid Ghani and Abid Yahya, “Multi-carrier frequency hopping spread spectrum system with girth-six low-density parity-check codes,” IMPACT 2009.
[9] Guosen Yue, “Antijamming coding techniques,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, Nov 2008.
[10] Lei Wei, “Several properties of short LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans on Comm., vol 52, No. 5, May 2004.
[11] Uwe-Carsten Fiebig, and Patrick Robertson, “Soft-decision and erasure decoding in fast frequency-hopping systems with convolutional, turbo, and Reed-Solomon codes,” IEEE Trans on Comm., vol. 47, No. 11, Nov 1999.
[12] Mohamed Adnan Landolsi, “A comparitive performance and complexity study of short-length LDPC and turbo product codes,” ICTTA 2006.
[13] Ce-lun Liu, Xiang-yaun Bu, and Hong-jian Wang, ”Nonbinary LDPC coded FH systrems over partial-band jamming channels,” WiCom 2009.
[14] Li Ping, W.K. Leung, and Nam Phamdo, ”Low density parity check codes with semi-random parity check matrix,” IEEE Electronic Letters, vol 35, No 1, 1999.
[15] James A. McGowen and Robert C. Williamson,”Loop removal from LDPC codes,” ITW2003.

86 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:09:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 1: PHY Block Diagram

Constellation Points 6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

Figure 2: Jammer detection region (Jammer present)

Figure 3: Transmiter RF circuit

87 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:09:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 4: Varying hops/codeword (CC)

Figure 5: Varying number of pilot tones

Figure 6: AWGN with Jammer

Figure 7: PedB/no fade with Jammer

`

Figure 8: PedB with Jammer

88 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:09:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

