IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

2277

Windowed Decoding of Spatially Coupled Codes
Aravind R. Iyengar, Member, IEEE, Paul H. Siegel, Fellow, IEEE, Rüdiger L. Urbanke, and Jack Keil Wolf, Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Spatially coupled codes have been of interest recently owing to their superior performance over memoryless binary-input channels. The performance is good both asymptotically, since the belief propagation thresholds approach the Shannon limit, as well as for finite lengths, since degree-2 variable nodes that result in high error floors can be completely avoided. However, to realize the promised good performance, one needs large blocklengths. This in turn implies a large latency and decoding complexity. For the memoryless binary erasure channel, we consider the decoding of spatially coupled codes through a windowed decoder that aims to retain many of the attractive features of belief propagation, while trying to reduce complexity further. We characterize the performance of this scheme by defining thresholds on channel erasure rates that guarantee a target erasure rate. We give analytical lower bounds on these thresholds and show that the performance approaches that of belief propagation exponentially fast in the window size. We give numerical results including the thresholds computed using density evolution and the erasure rate curves for finite-length spatially coupled codes.
Index Terms—Belief propagation (BP), erasure channels, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check codes (LDPC), spatial coupling, windowed decoding (WD).
I. INTRODUCTION
S PARSE graph codes have been of great interest in the coding community for close to two decades, after it was shown that statistical inference techniques on graphical models representing these codes had decoding performance that surpassed that of the best known codes. One class of such codes are low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, which although
Manuscript received March 18, 2012; revised November 03, 2012; accepted November 11, 2012. Date of publication December 05, 2012; date of current version March 13, 2013. This work was supported in part by the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-0829865, and in part by the Swiss National Science Foundation under Grant 200021-121903. This paper was presented in part at the 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
A. R. Iyengar was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA. He is now with Qualcomm Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA 95051 USA (e-mail: ariyengar@qti.qualcomm. com).
P. H. Siegel is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA (e-mail: psiegel@ucsd.edu).
R. L. Urbanke is with the School for Computer and Communication Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne CH-1015, Switzerland (e-mail: ruediger.urbanke@epfl.ch).
J. K. Wolf (deceased) was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA.
Communicated by D. Burshtein, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2231465

introduced by Gallager in the 1960s [2] were rediscovered in the 1990s after the advent of Turbo Codes [3] and iterative decoding. Luby et al. showed [4], [5] that a decoder based on belief propagation (BP) [6] had very good performance for these codes over the binary erasure channel (BEC). This superior performance of LDPC codes was shown by Richardson and Urbanke [7] to be true over a broader class of binary-input, memoryless, symmetric-output (BMS) channels. Furthermore, these codes were optimized to approach capacity on many of these BMS channels [8], [9].
The convolutional counterparts of LDPC block codes were first introduced by Felstrom and Zigangirov in [10]. There is considerable literature on the constructions and analysis of these ensembles [11]–[14]. The BP thresholds for these ensembles were reported in [15] and shown to be close to capacity in [16]. In [17], the authors construct regular LDPC convolutional codes based on protographs [18] that have BP thresholds close to capacity. In [19], Kudekar et al. considered convolutional-like codes which they called spatially coupled codes and showed that the BP thresholds of these codes approached the maximum a posteriori (MAP) thresholds of the underlying unstructured ensembles over the BEC. This observation was made for protograph-based generalized LDPC codes in [20]. Evidence for similar results over general BMS channels was given in [21], and proven recently in [22]. Moreover, this phenomenon, termed threshold saturation, was shown to be a more generic effect of coupling by showing an improvement in performance of systems based on other graphical models: the random -SAT, -COL problems from computation theory, Curie–Weiss model from statistical mechanics [23], and LDGM and rateless code ensembles [24]. Nonbinary LDPC codes obtained through coupling have also recently been investigated [25].
The good performance of spatially coupled codes is apparent when both the blocklength of individual codes and the coupling length becomes large. However, as either of these parameters becomes large, BP decoding becomes complex. We therefore consider a windowed decoder (WD) that exploits the structure of the coupled codes to reduce the decoding complexity while maintaining the advantages of the BP decoder in terms of performance. An additional advantage of the WD is the reduced latency of decoding. The WD scheme studied here is the one used to evaluate the performance of protograph-based codes over erasure channels with and without memory [26]–[28]. The main result of this paper is that the WD thresholds approach the BP thresholds exponentially in the size of the window . Since the BP thresholds are themselves close to the MAP thresholds for spatially coupled codes, WD thus gives us a way to achieve close to ML performance with complexity reduced further beyond that of the BP decoder.

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2278
TABLE I BP THRESHOLDS

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

follows. Set the initial constellation to be

and evaluate the constellations

according to

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II gives a brief introduction to spatially coupled codes. In Section III, we discuss the WD scheme. We state here the main result of this paper which we prove in Section IV. We give some numerical results in Section V and conclude in Section VI. Much of the terminology and notation used in the paper is reminiscent of the definitions in [19] and we often refer the reader to this paper.

II. SPATIALLY COUPLED CODES

We describe the

spatially coupled ensemble that

was introduced in [19] in terms of its Tanner graph. There are

variable nodes at each position in

. We will

assume that there are

check nodes at every integer posi-

tion, but only some of these interact with the variable nodes.

The variable (check) nodes at position constitute the sec-

tion of variable (check, resp.) nodes in the code. The sections

of variables are together referred to as the chain and is called

the chain length. For each of the edges incident on a vari-

able at position , we first choose a section uniformly at random

from the set

, then choose a check uni-

formly at random from the

checks in the chosen section,

and connect the variable to this check. We refer to the param-

eter as the coupling length. It can be shown that this proce-

dure amounts roughly to choosing each of the connections

of a check node at position uniformly and independently from

the set

. Observe that when

,

this procedure gives us copies of the

-regular uncou-

pled ensemble. Since we are interested in coupled ensembles,

we will henceforth assume that

. Further, we will typi-

cally be concerned with this ensemble when

, in which

case the design rate given by [19]

(1) This is called the parallel schedule of the BP FDE.
For ease of notation, we will write the equation

as

(2)

It is clear that the function ments.

is monotonic in each of its argu-

Definition 2 (FP of BP FDE): Consider the parallel schedule

of the BP FDE for the

spatially coupled code

over a BEC with erasure rate . It can be easily seen from

the monotonicity of in (2) that the sequence of constel-

lations

are ordered as

, i.e.,

(the ordering is pointwise).

Since the constellations are all lower bounded by the all-zero

constellation , the sequence converges pointwise to a limiting

constellation , called the fixed point (FP) of the FDE.

It is clear that the FP of FDE

satisfies

.

Definition 3 (BP Threshold): Consider the parallel schedule

of the BP FDE for the

spatially coupled code over

a BEC with erasure rate . The BP threshold

is defined as the supremum of the channel erasure rates

for which the FP of FDE is the all-zero constellation, i.e.,

.

is close to

.

A. BP Performance

In the following, we will briefly state known results that are

relevant to this work. See [19] for detailed analysis of the BP

performance of spatially coupled codes. The BP performance of

the

spatially coupled ensemble when

can

be evaluated using density evolution (DE). Denote the average

erasure probability of a message from a variable node at position

as . We refer to the vector

as the

constellation.

Table I gives the BP thresholds evaluated from BP FDE

for the

coupled ensemble for a few

values of and rounded to the sixth decimal place. The

MAP threshold of the underlying

-regular ensemble is

. We see from the table that

the BP thresholds for

spatially coupled codes are

close to the MAP threshold of the

-regular unstructured

code ensemble. Note that some of the threshold values in

Table I are larger than the MAP threshold of the underlying

-regular ensemble. This is because the rates of the spa-

tially coupled ensembles are smaller than the

-regular

ensemble, and depend on the values of and as stated in the

beginning of this section.

It was shown in [19] that the BP thresholds satisfy

Definition 1 (BP Forward DE): Consider the BP decoding of

a

spatially coupled code over a BEC with channel

erasure rate . We can write the forward DE (FDE) equation as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF SPATIALLY COUPLED CODES

2279

This means that the BP threshold saturates to the MAP threshold, and we can obtain MAP performance with the reduced complexity of the BP decoder. Later, when we analyze the WD, we will want to keep the coupling length finite and hence will be concerned with the quantity
(3)
as a measure of the performance of the BP decoder. It immediately follows from [19, Th. 10] that

respectively. Finally, when the constellation after a particular number of iterations of DE is to be specified, we write
, where the iteration number appears as a superscript within parentheses . Although would be the most general way of specifying the window constellation for the window configuration with a window of size after iterations of DE, for notational convenience, we will write as few of these parameters as possible based on the relevance to the discussion.
A. Complexity and Latency

III. WINDOWED DECODING

The WD exploits the structure of the spatially coupled codes

to break down the BP decoding scheme into a series of subop-

timal decoding steps—we tradeoff the performance of the de-

coder for reduced complexity and decoding latency. When de-

coding with a window of size , the WD performs BP over the

subcode consisting of the first sections of the variable nodes

and their neighboring check nodes and attempts to decode a

subset of symbols (those in the first section) within the window.

These symbols that we attempt to decode within a window are

referred to as the targeted symbols. Upon successful decoding

of the targeted symbols (or when a maximum number of itera-

tions have been performed), the window slides over one section

and performs BP, attempting to decode the targeted symbols in

the window in the new position.

More formally, let be the constellation representing the av-

erage erasure probability of messages from variables in each of

the Section I through . Initially, the window consists only of

the first sections in the chain. We will refer to this as the first

window configuration, and as the window slides to the right, we

will increment the window configuration. In other words, when

the window has slid through

sections to the right (when

it consists of sections

), it is said to be in

the window configuration. The window constellation,

denoted , is the average erasure probability of the variables

in the window configuration. Thus

For the BP decoder, the number of iterations required

to decode all the symbols in a

spatially cou-

pled code depends on the channel erasure rate . Whereas

when

, this required number of it-

erations can be fixed to a constant number, and when

, the number of itera-

tions scales as

[29]. Therefore, in the waterfall region, the

complexity of the BP decoder scales as

. For the WD

of size , if we let the number of iterations performed scale

as

, the overall complexity is of the order

.

Thus, for small window sizes

, we see that the

complexity of the decoder can be reduced. A larger reduction

in the complexity is possible if we fix the number of iterations

performed within each window.

Another advantage of using the WD is that the decoder only

needs to know the symbols in the first sections of the code

to be able to decode the targeted symbols. Therefore, in la-

tency-constrained applications, the decoder can work on the fly,

resulting in a latency which is a fraction that of the BP de-

coder.

B. Asymptotic Performance

The asymptotic performance of the

spatially

coupled ensemble with WD can be analyzed using DE as was

done for the BP decoder. We will consider the performance of

the ensemble with

when the transmission happens

over a BEC with channel erasure rate

. Further, we

will assume that for each window configuration, infinite rounds

of message passing are performed.

for

, where we assume that

. Thus, the

window constellation, , represents the “active” sections

within the constellation . While referring to the entire constel-

lation after the action of the window, we will write .

When the window configuration being considered is clear from

the context, with some abuse of notation, we drop the from

the notation and write

to denote the window

constellation.

Definition 4 (WD FDE): Consider the WD of a spatially coupled code over a BEC with channel erasure rate with a window of size . We can write the FDE equation as follows. Set the initial constellation according to

For every window configuration

. , let

Remark 1 (Note on Notation): When we wish to emphasize

the size of the window when we write the constellation, we and evaluate the sequence of window constellations

write

. Note that the using the update rule

window configuration and the window size are specified as

subscripts within curly brackets and angle brackets ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2280

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

where for every , for indices

, we set

on the right-hand side. Then, set as

.

Discussion: Note that the constellation keeps track of

the erasure probabilities of targeted symbols of all window con-

figurations up to the , followed by erasure probability of 1 for

the variables in sections

through , and zeros for sections

outside this range. As defined, discards all information ob-

tained by running the WD in its configuration apart from the

values corresponding to the targeted symbols. In practice, it is

more efficient to define

otherwise.

In the sequel, we will stick to Definition 4. We do this for

two reasons: first, discarding some information between two

window configurations can only perform worse than retaining

all the information; and second, this assumption makes the

analysis simpler since we then have

.

Definition 4 implicitly assumes that the limiting window con-

stellations exist. The following guarantees that the updates

for

are well defined.

Lemma 5 ( Window Configuration FP of FDE): Consider

the WD FDE of a

spatially coupled code over a

BEC with erasure rate with a window of size . Then, the

limiting window constellation

exists for each

. We

refer to this constellation as the window configuration FP

of FDE.

Proof: As noted earlier,

, and

. By induction, from the monotonicity of , this

implies that

are lower bounded by , the

FDE

exists for every

. Since these constellations window configuration FP of .

The window configuration FP of FDE therefore satisfies

(4)

Lemma 6 (Maximum of ): The vector

obtained at

the end of WD FDE satisfies

. Moreover,

independent of such that

.

Proof: By definition,

. The claim

is true for

since

. For

the window configuration, it is clear from Definition 4 that

. By induction, from the

monotonicity of , it follows that

for in

this range.

For

, the aforementioned claim is

not valid because we defined

for

and we

cannot make use of the monotonicity of since some ar-

guments (corresponding to sections up to the section) are

increasing and others (corresponding to the sections beyond

the section) decreasing. Nevertheless, we can still claim

that

where

is the vector of

erasure probabilities obtained after WD for a spatially coupled

code with an infinite chain length, i.e.,

. For

,

the sequence

is nondecreasing and since the

are probabilities, they are in the bounded, closed interval .

Consequently, the limit

exists in the interval

, and

.

As a consequence of Lemma 6, we can say that the WD is

successful when

. This definition of the success of WD

is independent of the chain length and allows us to compare

the performance of WD to that of the BP decoder through the

thresholds defined in (3). Note that although the upper bound

for in Lemma 6 is a trivial bound, we will in the following

give conditions when can be made smaller than an arbitrarily

chosen , thereby characterizing the WD thresholds.

Definition 7 (WD Thresholds): Consider the WD of a

spatially coupled code over a BEC of era-

sure rate with a window of size . The WD threshold

is defined as the supremum of channel

erasure rates for which

.

Discussion: Since we defined the WD threshold based on ,

it is clear that this is independent of the chain length . On the

other hand, if we used

as the condition for

success of the WD in our definition, we would obtain an -de-

pendent threshold. But denotes the “worst case” remanant era-

sure probability after WD, and imposing constraints on there-

fore guarantees good performance for codes with any .

Note that keeping

is sufficient to guarantee an a poste-

riori erasure probability smaller than because

for every

. Since the

vector has nonzero values

by definition, from the continuity of the WD FDE equations,

so do the vectors

. Hence, cannot satisfy (4), i.e.,

cannot be the window configuration FP of FDE. Therefore,

. This means that WD can never reduce the erasure probability of the symbols of a spatially coupled code to zero, although it can be made arbitrarily small by using a large

We will now state the main result in this paper and prove it in the following section.

enough window. Therefore, an acceptable target erasure rate

Theorem 8 (WD Threshold Bound): Consider WD of the

forms a part of the description of the WD. We say that the WD

spatially coupled ensemble over the BEC. Then,

is successful when

.

for a target erasure rate

, there exists a positive integer

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF SPATIALLY COUPLED CODES

2281

such that when the window size WD threshold satisfies

, the

WD THRESHOLDS

TABLE II

(5)

Here,

, and are strictly positive constants that de-

pend only on the ensemble parameters

, and .

Theorem 8 says that the WD thresholds approach the BP

threshold

defined in (3) at least exponentially fast

in the ratio of the size of the window to the coupling length

for a fixed target erasure probability

. Moreover, the sen-

sitivity of the bound to changes in is small in the exponent in

(5) owing to the

factor, but larger in the first term in the

Fig. 1. First window configuration FP of FDE for the

ensemble with a window of size

for

. The left

and the right boundaries are fixed at 0 and 1, respectively. The sections within

the window are indexed from 1 to

. The first section has a FP erasure

probability

.

product on the right-hand side of (5) where it is roughly linear

in . However, since we intend to set to be very small, e.g.,

, the first term does not influence the bound heavily. The

requirement that

is necessary to keep the term

within parentheses in the exponent nonnegative. Therefore, the

minimum window size required,

, also depends on the

constants , and and, in turn, on the ensemble parameters

, and .

The bound guaranteed by Theorem 8 is fairly loose. Numer-

ical results suggest that the minimum window size

is

actually much smaller than the bound obtained from analysis

(cf., Section IV). DE also reveals that for a fixed window size,

the WD thresholds are much closer to the BP threshold than the

bound obtained from Theorem 8.

We note here that the gap between analytical results and nu-

merical experiments is mainly due to the reliance on bounding

the DE function in (2) using the counterpart for regular unstruc-

tured LDPC ensembles, which proves to be easier to handle

than the multivariate (2) (see, e.g., the bound in (11)). However,

the scaling of the WD thresholds with the window size and the

We will establish that for the variables in the first section of

the window, the FP erasure probability can be made small at

least double exponentially in the size of the window. We will

show that this is possible for all channel erasure rates smaller

than a certain , which we will call the first window threshold

, provided the window size is larger than a

certain minimum size.

Once we have this, we consider the performance of the

window configuration for

. In this case also, we will

show that the FP erasure probability of the first section within

the window is guaranteed to decay double exponentially in the

window size. As for the first window configuration, this result

holds provided the window size is larger than a certain minimal

size and this time the minimal size is slightly larger than the

minimal size required for the first window configuration. More-

over, such a result is true for channel erasure rates smaller than

a value which is itself smaller than the first window threshold,

and this value will be our lower bound for the WD threshold.

target erasure probability seems to be as dictated by the bound in (5), suggesting that Theorem 8 captures the essence of the

A. First Window Configuration

WD algorithm.

From Definition 4, FDE for the first window configuration

Table II gives the WD thresholds obtained through FDE for amounts to the following. Set

and evaluate the se-

the

spatially coupled ensemble for quence of window constellations

different target erasure rates and different window sizes .

according to

These thresholds have been rounded to the sixth decimal point. A few comments are in order. As can be seen from the table, the thresholds are close to

(6) .

even for window sizes that are much smaller than the

obtained analytically, e.g.,

. Moreover, the WD thresh-

Since

is nondecreasing, i.e.,

, so is the

olds are more sensitive to changes in for small window sizes first window configuration FP, , by induction and mono-

where the bound in Theorem 8 is not valid. It is obvious that the tonicity of .

thresholds decrease as is decreased. Also note that for a fixed Fig. 1 shows the first window configuration FP of FDE for

target erasure rate, the window size can be made large enough the

ensemble with a window of size

to make the WD thresholds close to the BP threshold.

for a channel erasure rate

.

IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS

The scheduling scheme used in the definition of the window configuration FPs is what is called the parallel schedule. In gen-

In this section, we prove Theorem 8 in steps. First, we an- eral, we can consider a scheduling scheme where, in each step,

alyze the performance of the first window configuration. We a subset of the sections within the window are updated. We say

will characterize the first window configuration FP of FDE. that such an arbitrary scheduling scheme is admissible if every

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2282

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

section is updated infinitely often with the correct boundary con-

ditions, i.e., with the correct values set at the left and the right

ends of the window. It is easy to see from the standard argument

of nested computation trees (see, e.g., [19]) that the FP is inde-

pendent of the scheduling scheme.

We know that the first window configuration FP of FDE,

, is nondecreasing, i.e.,

. The fol-

lowing shows the ordering of the FP values of individual sec-

tions in windows of different sizes. With the understanding that

we are considering only the first window configuration in this

section, we will drop the window configuration number from

the notation for window constellations throughout this section

for convenience.

Lemma 9 (FPs and Window Size): Let

and

de-

note the first window configuration FPs of FDE with windows

of sizes and

, respectively, for

. Then

where

denotes the FP erasure probability of the sec-

tion in a window of size .

Proof: Consider the following schedule. Set

and evaluate the sequence of window constellations

according to (6). Clearly, we have

size , we have moved closer to the left end of the window while maintaining the distance from the right end.

We now give some bounds on the FP erasure probabilities of individual sections within a window.

Lemma 10 (Bounds on FP): Consider the WD of the

ensemble with a window of size over a

channel with erasure rate and

. The first window

configuration FP satisfies

for

, where

.

We relegate the proof to Appendix I. The following shows that once the FP erasure probability of a section within the window is smaller than a certain value, it decays very quickly as we move further to the left in the window.

Lemma 11 (Double Exponential Tail of the FP): Consider

WD of the

ensemble with a window of size

over a channel with erasure rate

. Let

and let

be the first window configuration FP of FDE. If there exists an

such that

, then

so that the sequence

is pointwise nonincreasing by

induction. We claim that this schedule is admissible. This is

true because the DE updates are first performed infinitely many

where

and

.

Proof: Since the FP is nondecreasing, we have

times over the first sections to obtain

, and then over

all the

sections infinitely many times again. Therefore,

the updates are performed over all sections infinitely often with the correct boundary conditions. The limiting FP must hence be

(7)

exactly

and the first inequality in the statement of the

lemma holds. Intuitively, this is true because in going from

to

and checking the section, we have moved further

which can be applied recursively to obtain

away from the right end of the window (where

) while

remaining at the same distance from the left end (where

).

To prove the second inequality, consider the following

schedule. Set

and evaluate

(8)

the sequence of constellations

according to (6). Since

, we must have

and

by induction the sequence of constellations thus obtained is

also pointwise nonincreasing. Again we claim that the afore-

mentioned schedule is admissible. This is true because we first

update all sections within the window and also the zeroth

section infinitely often, and then set the boundary condition

that the zeroth section also has all variables completely known.

In all, every section within the window gets updated infinitely

often with the correct boundary conditions. The limiting FP

where and are as defined in the statement. It is worthwhile

to note that is a lower bound on the breakout value for the

-regular ensemble [30]. The emergence of the breakout

value in this context is not entirely unexpected since it is known

that for the

-regular ensemble, the erasure probability

decays double exponentially in the number of iterations below

the breakout value, and in case of spatially coupled ensembles,

the counterpart for the number of iterations is the number of

sections (cf. (7)).

must hence be exactly

and the second inequality claimed We now show that the FP erasure probability of a message

in the statement of the lemma follows. As in the previous case, from a variable node in the first section, , can be made small

this is intuitively true because in going from the

by increasing the window size for any

.

section with window size

to the section with window Assuming that the window size is “large enough,” we will count

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF SPATIALLY COUPLED CODES

2283

the number of sections, starting from the right, that have a FP

erasure probability larger than a small for a channel erasure

rate

.

Definition 12 (Transition Width): Consider WD of a

spatially coupled code over a BEC of erasure rate

. Let be the first window configuration FP of FDE. Then, we

define the transition width

of as

blow up and the upper bound will be useless. It is there-

fore necessary to keep the minimum of E strictly larger than

and the value chosen in the above was motivated by

our intent to ensure that the first window threshold was closer to

than to

. Note that the increase in the

upper bound for

with decrease in is purely an artifact

of the upper bounding technique we have employed, i.e., it is

obvious that as we decrease ,

also decreases.

Note that from the definition of the transition width, it de-

pends on the window size . We first upper bound

such that the upper bound is independent of the window

size , and then claim from Lemma 9 that by employing a

window whose size is larger than

, we can guarantee

.

Definition 13 (First Window Threshold): Consider WD of the

spatially coupled ensemble with a window of size

over a BEC with erasure rate . The first window threshold

is defined as the supremum of channel era-

sure rates for which the first window configuration FP of FDE

satisfies

.

From Definitions 12 and 13, we can see that by ensuring that

, we can bound

.

Proposition 14 (Maximum Transition Width): Consider the

first window configuration FP of FDE for the

spatially coupled ensemble with a window of size

for

E. Then

B. Window Configuration,
We now evaluate the performance of the WD scheme when the window has slid a certain number of sections from the left end of the code. We arrive at conditions under which is guaranteed to be smaller than while operating with a window of size . We start by establishing a property of .
Lemma 15 (FP Equation Involving ): Consider the function where

where

.

Then, there exists a solution to the equation

such

that

. Moreover, is the smallest such constellation, i.e.,

if

, then

.

Proof: We have

provided

. Here,

, and

,

and are strictly positive constants that depend only on the

ensemble parameters

, and .

The proof is given in Appendix II. This means that the

smallest window size that guarantees

for a channel

erasure rate

is

Hence, if we define

as follows:

then it is clear that

.

where we have

. When

Note that any FP of the function has to satisfy

,

for the same channel erasure rate

from the

monotonicity of . In particular,

. From the con-

tinuity of the DE equations in Definition 4, it follows that is

the least solution to the equation

, since it is the lim-

(9) iting constellation of the sequence of nondecreasing constella-

Discussion: We restricted

E in Proposition 14 to ob- tions

.

tain constants that are independent of . As can be seen from We defer the proof of the following proposition to

the proof of the proposition, these constants are dependent on , Appendix III, which is the central argument in the proof

unless each is optimized in the range E. As we let the minimum of Theorem 8. Using the bound on the maximum transition

in E approach

, the constants in the expression for width from Proposition 14, we obtain an upper bound on for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2284

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

Fig. 2. Bit erasure probability of the

spatially coupled code with

achieved with a WD of window sizes

and 8.

a given window size and erasure rate E. From this, we

Fig. 3. Average number of iterations for BP and WD as a function of the channel erasure rate is shown for each window size in solid lines. For the WD, we show in dashed lines, the average number of iterations required within each window configuration.

arrive at a lower bound for that guarantees

when is an

arbitrarily chosen value smaller than (which depends only

on

) and the window size is larger than

(which

depends only on the code parameters

, and ). This

gives us our lower bound on the WD threshold.

Proposition 16 (WD and FW Thresholds): Consider WD of

the

spatially coupled ensemble with a window of

size

over a BEC with erasure

rate . Then, we have

From Table I, the BP threshold for the ensemble to which this

code belongs is

.

Fig. 2 shows the bit erasure rates achieved by using win-

dows of length

, i.e., the number of bits within each

window was

and 8192, respectively. From

the figure, it is clear that good performance can be obtained for

a wide range of channel erasure rates even for small window

lengths, e.g.,

. In performing the simulations above,

we let the decoders (BP and WD) run for as many iterations as

possible, until the decoder could solve for no further bits. For

the WD, this meant that within each window configuration, the

provided the first window threshold.

, where

is

decoder was allowed to run until it could solve no further bits within the window. Fig. 3 plots the average number of itera-

tions for the BP decoder and the average number of iterations

within each window configuration times the chain length (which

From Proposition 16 and (9), we immediately have that

corresponds to the average number of iterations) for the WD. We can see that for randomly chosen spatially coupled codes, a

modest reduction in complexity is possible by using the WD in

the waterfall region. Interestingly, the average number of itera-

tions required per window configuration is independent of the

provided

. By making the substitution

we see that this proves Theorem 8.

chain length below certain channel erasure rates. The number , of iterations required decreases beyond a certain value of be-
cause for these higher erasure rates, the decoder is no longer

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

able to decode and gets stuck quickly. Although the smaller window sizes have a large reduction in complexity and a decent

In this section, we give results obtained by simulating WD BER performance, the block erasure rate performance can be

of finite-length spatially coupled codes over the BEC. The code fairly bad, e.g., for the window of size 4, the block erasure rate

used for simulation was generated randomly by fixing the pa- was 1 in the range of erasure rates considered in Fig. 2. How-

rameters

,

, with coupling length ever, the block erasure rate improves drastically with increasing

and chain length

. The blocklength of the code window size—for the window of size 8, the block erasure rate

was hence

and the rate was

. at

was

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF SPATIALLY COUPLED CODES

2285

The aforementioned illustration suggests that for good performance with reduced complexity via WD, careful code design is necessary. For a certain variety of spatially coupled codes—protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes—certain design rules for good performance with WD were given in [28], and ensembles with good performance for a wide range of window sizes (including window sizes as small as ) over erasure channels with and without memory were constructed. For these codes constructed using PEG [31] and ACE [32] techniques, not only can the error floor be lowered but also the performance of a medium-sized WD with fixed number of iterations can be made to be very close to that of the BP decoder [28]. It is for such codes that the windowed decoder is able to attain very good performance with significant reduction in complexity and decoding latency.

APPENDIX I PROOF OF LEMMA 10
For the lower bound, we have

where follows from the fact [19, Lem. 24(iii)] that

where sively for

. Applying this bound recur, we get

VI. CONCLUSION

We considered a WD scheme for decoding spatially coupled

codes that has smaller complexity and latency than the BP where

and

.

decoder. We analyzed the asymptotic performance limits of When

, since

such a scheme by defining WD thresholds for meeting target

erasure rates. We gave a lower bound on the WD thresholds and

showed that these thresholds are guaranteed to approach the BP

threshold for the spatially coupled code at least exponentially with

.

in the window size. Through DE, we showed that, in fact, the For the upper bound

WD thresholds approach the BP threshold much faster than is

guaranteed by the lower bound proved analytically. Since the

BP thresholds for spatially coupled codes are themselves close

to the MAP threshold, WD gives us an efficient way to trade off

complexity and latency for decoding performance approaching

the optimal MAP performance. Since the MAP decoder is

capacity-achieving as the degrees of variables and checks are

increased, similar performance is achievable through a WD scheme for a target erasure floor.
Through simulations, we showed that WD is a viable scheme

for

, where

follows from [19, Lem. 24(i)]

. Here,

for decoding finite-length spatially coupled codes and that even

for small window sizes, good performance is attainable for a

wide range of channel erasure rates. However, the complexity Note that for

,

, the FDE up-

reduction for randomly constructed spatially coupled codes is date equation for the

-regular ensemble. This proves the

not as significant as that obtained for protograph-based LDPC Lemma. We now discuss the utility and limitations of the upper

convolutional codes with a large girth. Thus, characterizing bounds derived here.

good spatially coupled codes within the ensemble of randomly Fig. 4 plots the bounds

for the

coupled codes is a question that remains.

ensemble for two values of , one below and the

The WD scheme was analyzed here for the BEC and, there- other above the BP threshold

. As is clear from the

fore, the superior performance of these codes and the low com- figure, the tightest bounds are obtained for

. Note that

plexity and latency of the WD scheme make these attractive for the bound when

can be recursively computed to obtain

applications in coding over upper layers of the internet protocol. a universal upper bound on all the window constellation

Furthermore, the same scheme can be employed for decoding points for a given

ensemble, given by the FP of

spatially coupled codes over any channel. However, for chan- the equation

nels that introduce errors apart from erasures, the WD scheme

can suffer from error propagation. This effect would be sim-

ilar to what occurs in decoding convolutional codes using a

Viterbi decoder with a fixed traceback length. Analysis of the which is plotted in Fig. 5. As can be seen from the plot, these

WD scheme and providing performance guarantees over such upper bounds are only marginally tighter than the trivial upper

channels will play a key role in making spatially coupled codes bound of . In general, we can write

and use the other

and the WD scheme practical.

upper bounds

to obtain better bounds for other sections

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2286

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

Fig. 4. Upper bounds ensemble.

for two values of : for the

Fig. 6. Upper bound, with a window of size
,

, for the . The channel erasure rate , and

ensemble . Note that
.

where

. This bounding

is particularly useful when

when the FP of

the

upper bound is zero. It is sometimes possible that

, in which case we can re-

tain the tighter upper bound

. Fig. 6 shows an ex-

ample of the upper bound on graphically. As a consequence

of this upper bound, as

, we have that

for

. However, for

, these upper

bounds are not very useful since the FP of the

upper

bound is nonzero (cf., Fig. 4).

APPENDIX II PROOF OF PROPOSITION 14
In the following, we will use some results from [19] summarized below. We define

where

Fig. 5. Universal upper bounds on the constellation points as a function

of for the

ensemble. These bounds are only

marginally tighter than the straightforward upper bound . Also, the bounds are

nondecreasing in .

as follows. In the sequel, we shall write

note

and similarly define

to de-

the DE update equation for randomized

-regular ensem-

bles. For

, the equation

has ex-

actly three roots in the interval , given by

and

. Between 0 and , is negative, attaining a unique

minimum at

. Between

and , is positive,

attaining a unique maximum at

. Beyond , is

negative again. Between 0 and

, is upper bounded

by a line through the origin with slope

Thus, for

, we can write

. The FP value of the erasure probability

of a variable node in the first section can therefore be bounded

in terms of the window size as

i.e., the line

. Between

and

is upper bounded by a line passing through

slope

, with a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF SPATIALLY COUPLED CODES

2287

Fig. 7. Plot of

(in solid blue) for the

ensemble for

illustrating the properties stated previously. We have dropped the

dependence of all the parameters on from the notation. The tangents at ,

and are shown as dashed red lines. The other lines used in bounding

are shown as dash-dotted green lines. The ’s,

, are shown in

the same color as the lines, whose absolute values of slopes they represent, that

bound

in various regions.

Fig. 8. Unstable and stable FPs of DE for the

-regular en-

semble as given by (10).

is shown as the thick blue curve and

as the

thin red curve. By definition,

and

. and

are also shown. Note that

.

Between through

and

,

is lower bounded by a line

with a slope

for some .

so that

Between through

and , with slope

is lower bounded by the line

The values and are referred to as the unstable and stable

FPs of DE for the

-regular ensemble, respectively. This

is because both these values satisfy

or

. The for which the FP is

is

given by

Beyond

,

is upper bounded by the line through

with slope

The BP threshold is hence the smallest value of ,

i.e.,

. The value

of that achieves this minimum is denoted . Then,

, the unstable and stable FPs are given by

Each of the ’s,

, defined previously is strictly

positive for in the specified range. For a general , we will drop

(10)

the dependence of each of these parameters on from the nota-

tion. When

, the corresponding parame-

ters are themselves shown with ’s. These properties of are

illustrated in Fig. 7. We can lower bound as

,

and the slope as
Further, ,
, where

.
. We have .

Fig. 8 plots these stable and unstable FPs. The reason why is

called the stable FP (and the unstable FP) can be explained

through Fig. 8. For

, when the FDE updates

are performed, the value monotonically decreases from 1 and

converges to the first solution of the equation

, which

happens to be

for in this range. Therefore, performing

BP always results in the FP and hence the adjective “stable.”

Similarly for , which is a solution never reached through BP,

it can be shown that a small perturbation from the value of

will result in convergence to either or 0. Therefore, ’s are

“unstable” FPs.

and

We can define the derivatives and of and , respec-

tively, with respect to for

. It is easy to see

.

that is monotonically decreasing and is monotonically increasing in . For details and proofs of the aforementioned prop-

From Rolle’s Theorem,

. We first give some

simple bounds for the ’s defined earlier which will be useful

in the proof.

Lemma 17 (

Bounds): For

have

.

Proof: Since

for

ically decreases in this interval. Thus,

, we

,

monoton-

.

erties, see [19, Appendix II] and [33].

We are now ready to prove the proposition. Note that when

is smaller than the claimed upper bound on the transition width,

the claim is trivially true, i.e., the transition width cannot be

longer than the window size. However, in this case, we cannot

guarantee

. Hence, we will assume that is larger than

the bound. In the following, we will often use the bound

From the mean value theorem, we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2288

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

We now define a schedule that results in a FP window con-

stellation that dominates the FP of the parallel schedule, , for

a channel erasure rate E. We then upper bound the actual

transition width by the transition width of the dominating FP.

We generate the dominating FP in steps.

1) Set

and evaluate the sequence of window con-

stellations

according to (6), but with the boundary

conditions

for some

. We can lower bound this as

where the first inequality follows from the fact that is de-

creasing in in the interval

and the second

from

. Therefore, this width is no more

than

.

We have the FP in this case, , satisfying

by

induction. Further

(11)

so that

. Note that

cannot happen since,

starting from 1, will equal the first solution of (11),

which from the continuity of the DE equations is guaran-

teed to have a solution no smaller than . Starting from

the right end, we now count the number of sections until

where we choose

. Recall that

the -ed values correspond to

. We first

observe that

Hence

sections, since

.

2) From the definition of , we have

.

Let be the largest index for which

. Set

and evaluate the sequence of window constella-

tions

according to (6) performing the updates only

for those sections with indices

. Further, perform

the updates for the channel erasure rate since we only

require an upper bound on the transition width. We set the

left end of the window to perform these updates to 0, i.e.,

. Let denote the FP window constel-

lation at the end of this procedure. By induction, we have

. Also,

so

that

where the last inequality assumes that

. Note

that there is no loss of generality in this assumption, for if it

were not true, we have that the number of sections with FP

values between

and is smaller than the upper

bound we derive in the following. The aforementioned in-

equality implies that

which implies that From similar reasoning, we can show that

. Similarly, it can be shown that as long as

Since

from Lemma 17, the aforementioned differ-

ence is decreasing in . From the definition of (note

that this upper bound is valid even for the boundary con-

ditions specified here) in the proof of Lemma 10, it is easy

to see that

so that the right-hand side of the

aforementioned chain of inequalities is nonnegative. Thus,

if

and by induction

Note that since

from Lemma 17, the aforemen-

tioned difference is increasing in . Thus, there are no

more than

Let

E . Then, we can write from the

mean value theorem

sections with

.

3) Let

be the largest index such that

. We

define

and count the number of sections with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF SPATIALLY COUPLED CODES

FP values between

and

, we have

. Since

2289
. From similar reasoning as earlier, as long as

where we again assume without loss of generality that . The aforementioned inequality implies
that
Again by induction

and by induction

Since

, the aforementioned difference is increasing

in . By letting

E and noting that

we have that there are no more than

as long as

. Since

, the afore-

mentioned difference is decreasing in , and consequently,

if

sections with FP values in the interval 5) Let be the largest index such that
ceeding as earlier, we have

Writing

and by induction

. . Pro-

from the mean value theorem for some bound this as

, we can

Thus, between and , there are no more than

where the first inequality follows because

is de-

creasing in in the interval

and the second

because

. This implies that there are

no more than

sections with FP values in the interval

, since

and

.

6) Let be the largest index such that

. From

Lemma 11, we know that the tail decays double expo-

nentially for

. From (8), we have

, where

sections with FP values between

and .

4) From the definition of , we have

.

Let be the largest index such that

. Set

and evaluate

according to (6) performing

the updates only for sections with indices

with

channel erasure rate . Again, we set the left end of the

window to 0 while performing the updates. Denote the FP

obtained at the end of this procedure as . Clearly,

. Since

, we have

and Thus, there are no more than

so that

sections with

.

Finally, collecting all these terms, we conclude that the tran-

sition width of the FP obtained from the procedure highlighted

in the steps 1) through 6) is upper bounded by

Here, we assume that

in order to obtain

an upper bound on the number of sections in the range

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2290
where the constants , and are as follows:

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013
Let us write

and

The constant is as given in (12) shown at the bottom of the page. Note that these constants depend only on the ensemble for

parameters

, and . Since it is clear that the FP obtained

through the procedure in steps 1) through 6) earlier dominates

pointwise the first window configuration FP of FDE with a

window of size for channel erasure rate , we can guarantee

that the transition width is upper bounded by the aforemen-

tioned expression. This completes the proof.

. For in this range, consider

APPENDIX III PROOF OF PROPOSITION 16

We start with the first window configuration FP of FDE when

the channel erasure rate is and show that this FP dominates the

window configuration FP of FDE for every for a smaller

channel erasure rate

. To prove this, it suffices to show

that the FP defined in Lemma 15 for channel erasure rate is

dominated pointwise by the first window configuration FP for

channel erasure rate . This establishes as being a lower bound

on the WD threshold .

Set

, the first window configuration FP of FDE

for channel erasure rate . Evaluate

according to

(14)

where

and

. Here,

mean value theorem. We have

follows from the

Since

, we focus on . When expanded out, the

expression for can be written as

where rate

is as defined in Lemma 15, but for channel erasure . Then, the following are true:
where

and Clearly,
. For
(13)

. . Therefore

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(12)

IYENGAR et al.: WINDOWED DECODING OF SPATIALLY COUPLED CODES

2291

Here,

holds because . This implies that

REFERENCES

Here, the inequality labeled is true because

,

follows from the observation that

, which is

in turn true since and

were nondecreasing. Substi-

tuting back in (14), we have for

Thus, if dominates

, pointwise. Recall that

, and hence

.

It therefore follows by induction that the limiting constellation

exists, and is also dominated by

. It is clear that

satisfies

From Lemma 15,

and hence

.

If the window size is chosen to be

, then for the first window, we can guarantee

for some

for all channel erasure rates smaller than

. From the aforementioned

argument, it follows that we can ensure

for all erasure

rates smaller than

. As long as

this erasure rate is a nontrivial lower bound on the WD threshold .
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the anonymous reviewer for help to improve the presentation of the paper. A. R. Iyengar would like to thank S. Kudekar for pointing out Lemma 11 and for helpful suggestions in proving parts of Proposition 14.

[1] A. R. Iyengar, P. H. Siegel, R. L. Urbanke, and J. K. Wolf, “Windowed

decoding of spatially coupled codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf.

Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Jul.–Aug. 31–5, 2011, pp. 2552–2556.

[2] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1963.

[3] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit

error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes. 1,” in Proc. IEEE

Int. Conf. Commun., Geneva, Switzerland, May 23–26, 1993, vol. 2,

pp. 1064–1070.

[4] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Effi-

cient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no.

2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.

[5] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Im-

proved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.

[6] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of

Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

[7] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density

parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans.

Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

[8] A. Amraoui, “Asymptotic and finite-length optimization of LDPC

codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne,

Lausanne, Switzerland, 2006.

[9] A. Amraoui and R. Urbanke, LDPCOpt 2012 [Online]. Available:

http://ipgdemos.epfl.ch/ldpcopt/

[10] A. J. Felstrom and K. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolu-

tional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.

[11] K. Engdahl and K. S. Zigangirov, “On the theory of low-density con-

volutional codes I,” Probl. Peredachi Inf., vol. 35, pp. 12–27, 1999.

[12] K. Engdahl, M. Lentmaier, and K. Zigangirov, “On the theory of

low-density convolutional codes,” in Applied Algebra, Algebraic

Algorithms and Error-Correcting Codes Transl.:Lecture Notes in

Computer Science. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1999, vol.

1719, , pp. 77–86.

[13] M. Lentmaier, D. V. Truhachev, and K. S. Zigangirov, “To the theory

of low-density convolutional codes. II,” Probl. Inf. Transmiss., vol. 37,

pp. 288–306, 2001.

[14] R. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. Fuja, and D. Costello, “LDPC

block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.

[15] A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Con-

vergence analysis of a class of LDPC convolutional codes for the era-

sure channel,” in Proc. 42nd Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control

Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep.–Oct. 29–1, 2004, pp. 953–962.

[16] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “It-

erative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.

[17] M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello,

“Approaching capacity with asymptotically regular LDPC codes,” in

Proc. Inf. Theory Appl., San Diego, CA, 2009, pp. 173–177.

[18] J. Thorpe, Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from

protographs California Inst. Technol., Pasadena42-154, 2003.

[19] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold satura-

tion via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform

so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp.

803–834, Feb. 2011.

[20] M. Lentmaier and G. Fettweis, “On the thresholds of generalized LDPC

convolutional codes based on protographs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.

Inf. Theory, Austin, TX, Jun. 13–18, 2010, pp. 709–713.

[21] S. Kudekar, C. Measson, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke,

“Threshold saturation on BMS channels via spatial coupling,” CoRR,

vol. abs/1004.3742, 2010.

[22] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled en-

sembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” CoRR,

vol. abs/1201.2999, 2012.

[23] H. Hasani, N. Macris, and R. Urbanke, “Coupled graphical models and

their thresholds,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Dublin, Ireland,

Aug.-Sep. 30–3, 2010, pp. 1–5.

[24] V. Aref and R. Urbanke, “Universal rateless codes from coupled LT

codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Oct. 2011, pp. 277–281.

[25] H. Uchikawa, K. Kasai, and K. Sakaniwa, “Terminated LDPC convo-

lutional codes over

,” CoRR, vol. abs/1010.0060, 2010.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2292

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

[26] M. Papaleo, A. R. Iyengar, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, and G. Corazza, “Windowed erasure decoding of LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Cairo, Egypt, Jan. 2010, pp. 78–82.
[27] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, G. Liva, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, and G. E. Corazza, “Protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes for correlated erasure channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Cape Town, South Africa, May 2010, pp. 1–6.
[28] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[29] P. Olmos and R. Urbanke, “Scaling behavior of convolutional LDPC ensembles over the BEC,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Jul.–Aug. 31–5, 2011, pp. 1816–1820.
[30] M. Lentmaier, D. Truhachev, K. Zigangirov, and D. Costello, “An analysis of the block error probability performance of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3834–3855, Nov. 2005.
[31] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[32] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, and R. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[33] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
Aravind R. Iyengar (S’09–M’12) received his B.Tech degree in Electrical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, in 2007; his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Electrical Engineering from the University of California in San Diego, La Jolla, where he was affiliated with the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, in 2009 and 2012 respectively. He is currently with Qualcomm Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, where he is involved in the design of baseband modems. In 2006, he was a visiting student intern at theÉcole Nationale Supérieure de l’Electronique et de ses Applications (ENSEA), Cergy, France. He was a visiting doctoral student at the Communication Theory Laboratory at theÉcole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland in 2010. His research interests are in the areas of information and coding theory, and in signal processing and wireless communications.
A. R. Iyengar was the recipient of the Sheldon Schultz Prize for Excellence in Graduate Student Research at the University of California, San Diego in 2012.
Paul H. Siegel (M’82–SM’90–F’97) received the S.B. and Ph.D. degrees in mathematics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, in 1975 and 1979, respectively.
He held a Chaim Weizmann Postdoctoral Fellowship at the Courant Institute, New York University. He was with the IBM Research Division in San Jose, CA, from 1980 to 1995. He joined the faculty at the University of California, San Diego in July 1995, where he is currently Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering in the Jacobs School of Engineering. He is affiliated with the Center for Magnetic Recording Research where he holds an endowed chair and served as Director from 2000 to 2011. His primary research interests lie in the areas of information theory and communications, particularly coding and modulation techniques, with applications to digital data storage and transmission.
Prof. Siegel was a member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Society from 1991 to 1996 and from 2009 to 2011. He was re-elected for another 3-year term in 2012. He served as Co-Guest Editor of the May 1991 Special Issue on “Coding for Storage Devices” of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY. He served the same Transactions as Associate Editor for Coding Techniques from 1992 to 1995, and as Editor-in-Chief from July 2001 to July 2004. He was also Co-Guest Editor of the May/September 2001 two-part issue on “The Turbo Principle: From Theory to Practice” of the IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS.
Prof. Siegel was co-recipient, with R. Karabed, of the 1992 IEEE Information Theory Society Paper Award and shared the 1993 IEEE Communications Society Leonard G. Abraham Prize Paper Award with B.H. Marcus and J.K. Wolf. With J.B. Soriaga and H.D. Pfister, he received the 2007 Best Paper Award in Signal Processing and Coding for Data Storage from the Data Storage Technical Committee of the IEEE Communications Society. He holds several patents in the area of coding and detection, and was named a Master Inventor at IBM Research in 1994. He is an IEEE Fellow and a member of the National Academy of Engineering.

Rüdiger L. Urbanke received the Diplomingenieur degree from the Vienna Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria, in 1990 and the M.Sc. and PhD degrees in electrical engineering from Washington University, St. Louis, MO, in 1992 and 1995 respectively.
From 1995 to 1999, he held a position at the Mathematics of Communications Department at Bell Labs. Since November 1999, he has been a faculty member at the School of Computer & Communication Sciences of EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, where he is the head of the Communications Theory Lab as well as the head of the Doctoral Program of the School of Computer and Communication Sciences (comprising roughly 250 PhD students).
Dr. Urbanke’s research is focused on the analysis and design of coding systems and, more generally, graphical models.
Dr. Urbanke is a recipient of a Fulbright Scholarship. From 2000–2004 he was an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY and he has been elected in October 2012 to the Board of Governors of IEEE Information Theory Society. He is also currently on the board of the series Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information Theory. He is a co-recipient of the IEEE Information Theory Society 2002 Best Paper Award and a co-recipient of the 2011 IEEE Kobayashi Computers and Communications Award. He is co-author of the book Modern Coding Theory published by Cambridge University Press.
Jack Keil Wolf (S’54–M’60–F’73–LF’97) received the B.S.E.E. degree from the University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, in 1956, and the M.S.E., M.A., and Ph.D. degrees from Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, in 1957, 1958, and 1960, respectively. He was the Stephen O. Rice Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering and a member of the Center for Magnetic Recording Research at the University of California-San Diego, La Jolla. He was a member of the Electrical Engineering Department at New York University from 1963 to 1965, and the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn from 1965 to 1973. He was Chairman of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Massachusetts, Boston, from 1973 to 1975, and he was Professor there from 1973 to 1984. From 1984 to 2011, he was a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering and a member of the Center for Magnetic Recording Research at the University of California-San Diego. He also held a part-time appointment at Qualcomm, Inc., San Diego. From 1971 to 1972, he was an NSF Senior Postdoctoral Fellow, and from 1979 to 1980, he held a Guggenheim Fellowship. His most recent research interest was in signal processing for storage systems.
Dr. Wolf was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 1993. He was the recipient of the 1990 E. H. Armstrong Achievement Award of the IEEE Communications Society and was co-recipient with D. Slepian of the 1975 IEEE Information Theory Group Paper Award for the paper “Noiseless coding for correlated information sources.” He shared the 1993 IEEE Communications Society Leonard G. Abraham Prize Paper Award with B. Marcus and P.H. Siegel for the paper “Finite-State Modulation Codes for Data Storage.” He served on the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Group from 1970 to 1976 and from 1980 to 1986. Dr. Wolf was President of the IEEE Information Theory Group in 1974. He was International Chairman of Committee C of URSI from 1980 to 1983. He was the recipient of the 1998 IEEE Koji Kobayashi Computers and Communications Award, “for fundamental contributions to multi-user communications and applications of coding theory to magnetic data storage devices.” In May 2000, he received a UCSD Distinguished Teaching Award. In 2004 Professor Wolf received the IEEE Richard W. Hamming Medal for “fundamental contributions to the theory and practice of information transmission and storage.” In 2005 he was elected by the American Academy of Arts and Sciences as a Fellow, and in 2010 was elected as a member of the National Academy of Sciences. He was co-recipient with I.M. Jacobs of the 2011 Marconi Society Fellowship and Prize. Prof. Wolf passed away on May 12, 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

