IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

1981

Stochastic Belief Propagation: A Low-Complexity Alternative to the Sum-Product Algorithm
Nima Noorshams and Martin J. Wainwright, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The belief propagation (BP) or sum-product algo-

rithm is a widely used message-passing method for computing

marginal distributions in graphical models. At the core of the BP

message updates, when applied to a graphical model involving

discrete variables with pairwise interactions, lies a matrix-vector

product with complexity that is quadratic in the state dimension

, and requires transmission of a

-dimensional vector of

real numbers (messages) to its neighbors. Since various applica-

tions involve very large state dimensions, such computation and

communication complexities can be prohibitively complex. In this

paper, we propose a low-complexity variant of BP, referred to as

stochastic belief propagation (SBP). As suggested by the name, it

is an adaptively randomized version of the BP message updates in

which each node passes randomly chosen information to each of

its neighbors. The SBP message updates reduce the computational

complexity (per iteration) from quadratic to linear in , without

assuming any particular structure of the potentials, and also

reduce the communication complexity significantly, requiring

only

bits transmission per edge. Moreover, we establish a

number of theoretical guarantees for the performance of SBP,

showing that it converges almost surely to the BP fixed point for

any tree-structured graph, and for any graph with cycles satisfying

a contractivity condition. In addition, for these graphical models,

we provide nonasymptotic upper bounds on the convergence rate,

showing that the norm of the error vector decays no slower

than

with the number of iterations on trees and the

normalized mean-squared error decays as

for general

graphs. This analysis, also supported by experimental results,

shows that SBP can provably yield reductions in computational

and communication complexities for various classes of graphical

models.

Index Terms—Graphical models, low-complexity belief propagation (BP), randomized algorithms, stochastic approximation,
sum-product algorithm.

I. INTRODUCTION
G RAPHICAL models provide a general framework for describing statistical interactions among large collections of random variables. A broad range of fields—among them error-control coding, communication theory, statistical signal

Manuscript received November 03, 2011; revised April 18, 2012; October 14, 2012; accepted November 19, 2012. Date of publication December 03, 2012; date of current version March 13, 2013. This work was supported in part by Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative grant N00014-11-1-0688 to M. J. Wainwright. The material in this paper was presented at the Allerton Conference on Communications, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, September 2011.
N. Noorshams is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-1650 USA (e-mail: nshams@eecs.berkeley.edu).
M. J. Wainwright is with the Department of Statistics and the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-1650 USA (e-mail: wainwrig@eecs.berkeley.edu).
Communicated by P. O. Vontobel, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2231464

processing, computer vision, and bioinformatics—involve problems that can be fruitfully tackled using the formalism of graphical models. A computational problem central to such applications is that of marginalization, meaning the problem of computing marginal distributions over a subset of random variables. Naively approached, these marginalization problems have exponential complexity and, hence, are computationally intractable. Therefore, graphical models are only useful when combined with efficient algorithms. For graphs without cycles, the marginalization problem can be solved exactly and efficiently via an algorithm known as the belief propagation (BP) algorithm or sum-product algorithm. It is a distributed algorithm, in which each node performs a set of local computations and then relays the results to its graph neighbors in the form of so-called messages. For graphs with cycles, the BP algorithm is no longer an exact method, but nonetheless is widely used and known to be extremely effective in many settings. For a more detailed discussion of the role of the marginalization problem and the use of the BP algorithm, we refer the reader to various overview papers (see, e.g., [2], [17], [18], and [32]).
In many applications of BP, the messages themselves are high dimensional in nature, either due to discrete random variables with a very large number of possible realizations (which will be referred to as the number of states), due to factor nodes with high degree, or due to continuous random variables that are discretized. Examples of such problems include disparity estimation in computer vision, tracking problems in sensor networks, and error-control decoding. For such problems, it may be expensive to compute and/or store the messages, and as a consequence, BP may run slowly and be limited to small-scale instances. Motivated by this challenge, researchers have studied a variety of techniques to reduce the complexity of BP in different applications (e.g., see the papers [6], [9], [14], [15], [19], [26], [27], and references therein). At the core of the BP message passing is a matrix-vector multiplication, with complexity scaling quadratically in the number of states . Certain graphical models have special structures that can be exploited so as to reduce this complexity. For instance, when applied to decode low-density parity-check codes for channel coding (see, e.g., [10] and [17]), the complexity of message passing, if performed naively, would scale exponentially in the factor degrees. However, a clever use of the fast Fourier transform over reduces this complexity to linear in the factor degrees (e.g., see [25] for details). Other problems arising in computer vision involve pairwise factors with a circulant structure for which the fast Fourier transform can also reduce complexity [9]. Similarly, computation can be accelerated by exploiting symmetry in factors [15], or additional factorization properties of the distribution [19].

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

In the absence of structure to exploit, other researchers have

proposed different types of quantization strategies for BP mes-

sage updates [6], [14], as well as stochastic methods based on

particle filtering or nonparametric BP (see, e.g., [3], [7], and

[27]) that approximate continuous messages by finite numbers

of particles. For certain classes of these methods, it is possible to

establish consistency as the number of particles tends to infinity

[7], or to establish nonasymptotic results inversely proportional

to the square root of the number of particles [13]. As the number

of particles diverges, the approximation error becomes negli-

gible, a property that underlies such consistency proofs. Re-

searchers have also proposed stochastic techniques to improve

the decoding efficiency of binary error-correcting codes [21],

[30]. These techniques, which are based on encoding messages

with sequences of Bernoulli random variables, lead to efficient

decoding hardware architectures.

In this paper, we focus on the problem of implementing BP in

high-dimensional discrete spaces and propose a novel low-com-

plexity algorithm, which we refer to as stochastic belief prop-

agation (SBP). As suggested by its name, it is an adaptively

randomized version of the BP algorithm, where each node only

passes randomly selected partial information to its neighbors at

each round. The SBP algorithm has two features that make it

practically appealing. First, it reduces the computational cost

of BP by an order of magnitude; in concrete terms, for arbi-

trary pairwise potentials over states, it reduces the per itera-

tion computational complexity from quadratic to linear—that is,

from

to

. Second, it significantly reduces the mes-

sage/communication complexity, requiring transmission of only

per edge as opposed to

real numbers in the

case of BP.

Even though SBP is based on low-complexity updates, we

are able to establish conditions under which it converges (in a

stochastic sense) to the exact BP fixed point and, moreover, to

establish quantitative bounds on this rate of convergence. These

bounds show that SBP can yield provable reductions in the com-

plexity of computing a BP fixed point to a tolerance

. In

more precise terms, we first show that SBP is strongly consis-

tent on any tree-structured graph, meaning that it converges al-

most surely to the unique BP fixed point; in addition, we provide

nonasymptotic upper bounds on the norm (maximum value)

of the error vector as a function of iteration number (Theorem

1). For general graphs with cycles, we show that when the or-

dinary BP message updates satisfy a type of contraction condi-

tion, the SBP message updates are strongly consistent and con-

verge in normalized mean-squared error at the rate

to

the unique BP fixed point, where is the number of iterations.

We also show that the typical performance is sharply concen-

trated around its mean (Theorem 2). These theoretical results

are supported by simulation studies, showing the convergence

of the algorithm on various graphs, and the associated reduction

in computational complexity that is possible.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We begin

in Section II with background on graphical models as well as

the BP algorithm. In Section III, we provide a precise descrip-

tion of the SBP, before turning in Section III-B to statements

of our main theoretical results, as well as discussion of some of their consequences. Section IV is devoted to the proofs of our results, with more technical aspects of the proofs deferred to the appendix. In Section V, we demonstrate the correspondence between our theoretical predictions and the algorithm’s practical behavior.

II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we provide some background on graphical models as well as the BP algorithm.

A. Graphical Models

Consider a random vector

, where

for each

, the variable takes values in

some discrete space

with cardinality . An

undirected graphical model, also known as a Markov random

field, defines a family of joint probability distributions over

this random vector by associating the index set

with the vertex set of an undirected graph

. In

addition to the vertex set, the graph consists of a collection

of edges

, where a pair

if and only if

nodes and are connected by an edge.1 The structure of the

graph describes the statistical dependencies among the different

random variables—in particular, via the cliques2 of the graph.

For each clique of the graph, let

be a

function of the subvector

of the random

variables indexed by the clique, and then, consider the set of all

distributions over that factorize as

(1)

where is the set of all cliques in the graph. As a concrete example, consider the 2-D grid shown in
Fig. 1(a). Since its cliques consist of the set of all vertices together with the set of all edges , the general factorization (1) takes the special form
(2)

where

is the node potential function for node

, and

is the edge potential function

for the edge

. A factorization of this form (2) is known

as a pairwise Markov random field. It is important to note that

there is no loss of generality in assuming a pairwise factorization

of this form; indeed, any graphical model with discrete random

variables can be converted into a pairwise form by suitably aug-

menting the state space (e.g., see [33] or [32], Appendix E.3).

Moreover, the BP message updates can be easily translated from

the original graph to the pairwise graph, and vice versa. Accord-

ingly, for the remainder of this paper, we focus on the case of a

pairwise MRF.

1It should be noted that by

, we mean an unordered tuple of vertices.

2A clique of a graph is a subset of vertices that are all joined by edges and so form a fully connected subgraph.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOORSHAMS AND WAINWRIGHT: STOCHASTIC BELIEF PROPAGATION: A LOW-COMPLEXITY ALTERNATIVE TO THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

1983

computing marginals for a posterior distribution can be cast3 as an instance of computing marginals for a pairwise Markov random field (2).
Our focus in this paper is on the marginalization problem, meaning the computation of the single-node marginal distributions

(3)

and more generally, higher order marginal distributions on

edges and cliques. Note that to calculate this summation, brute

force is not tractable and requires

computations. For

any graph without cycles—known as a tree—this computation

can be carried far more efficiently in only

operations

using an algorithm known as the BP, to which we now turn.

Fig. 1. Examples of pairwise Markov random fields. (a) Two-dimensional

grid: the potential functions and are associated with nodes and ,

respectively, whereas the potential function is associated with edge

.

(b) Hidden Markov model including both hidden variables

,

represented as white nodes, and observed variables

, represented

as shaded nodes.

In various application contexts, the random vector

is an unobserved or “hidden” quantity, and

the goal is to draw inferences on the basis of a collection of

observations

. The link between the observed

and hidden variables is specified in terms of a conditional

probability distribution, which in many cases can be written in

the product form

. For instance,

in error-control coding using a low-density parity-check code,

the vector takes values in a linear subspace of

,

corresponding to valid codewords, and the observation vector

is obtained from some form of memoryless channel (e.g., bi-

nary symmetric, additive white Gaussian noise, etc.). In image

denoising applications, the vector represents a rasterized

form of the image, and the observation corresponds to a

corrupted form of the image.

In terms of drawing conclusions about the hidden variables

based on the observations, the central object is the posterior dis-

tribution

. From the definition of the conditional prob-

ability and the form of the prior and likelihoods, this posterior

can also be factorized in pairwise form

B. BP Algorithm

BP is an iterative algorithm consisting of a set of local mes-

sage-passing rounds, for computing either exact or approximate

marginal distributions. For tree-structured (cycle-free) graphs,

it is known that BP message-based marginals converge to the

exact marginals in a finite number of iterations. However, the

same message-passing updates can also be applied to more gen-

eral graphs and are known to be effective for computing ap-

proximate marginals in numerous applications. Here, we pro-

vide a very brief treatment, referring the reader to various stan-

dard sources [2], [17], [32], [33] for further background.

In order to define the message-passing updates, we require

some further notation. For each node

, let

denote its set of neighbors, and let

denote the set of all directed edges

emanating from . Finally, we define

, the

set of all directed edges in the graph; note that has cardi-

nality . In the BP algorithm, one message

is

assigned to every directed edge

. By concate-

nating all of these -dimensional vectors, one for each of the

members of , we obtain a -dimensional vector of mes-

sages

, where

.

At each round

, every node

calculates

a message

to be sent to its neighbor

.

In mathematical terms, this operation can be represented as an

update of the form

, where

is

the local update function of the directed edge

. In more

detail, for each

, we have4

(4)

3For illustrative purposes, we have assumed here that the distribution has a product form, but a somewhat more involved reduction also applies to a general observation model.

where

is the new node compat-

ibility function. (Since the observation is fixed, there is no

need to track its functional dependence.) Thus, the problem of

4It is worth mentioning that

is only a function of the messages

for

. Therefore, we have

, where is

the degree of the node . Since it is clear from the context and for the purpose of

reducing the notation overhead, we say

instead of

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

is known to be a useful approximation for many classes of graphical models.

III. ALGORITHM AND MAIN RESULTS
We now turn to a description of the SBP algorithm (see Section III-A), as well as the statement of our main theoretical guarantees on its behavior (see Section III-B).

Fig. 2. Graphical representation of message-passing algorithms. (a) Node

transmits the message

, derived from (4), to its neighbor . (b)

Upon receiving all the messages, node updates its marginal estimate.

where is a normalization constant chosen to ensure that

. Fig. 2(a) provides a graphical representa-

tion of the flow of information in this local update.

By concatenating the local updates (4), we obtain a global

update function

of the form

(5)

Typically, the goal of message passing is to obtain a fixed point,

meaning a vector

such that

and (4) can

be seen as an iterative way of solving this fixed-point equation.

For any tree-structured graph, it is known that the update (5)

has a unique fixed point. For a general graph (with some mild

conditions on the potentials; see [33] for details), it is known

that the global update (5) has at least one fixed point, but it is no

longer unique in general. However, there are various types of

contraction conditions that can be used to guarantee uniqueness

on a general graph (see, e.g., [12], [20], [23], and [29]).

Given a fixed point , node computes its marginal (ap-

proximation) by combining the local potential function

with a product of all incoming messages as

(6)

A. Stochastic Belief Propagation

When applied to a pairwise graphical model with random

variables taking states, the number of summations and mul-

tiplications required by the original BP algorithm is

per

iteration and per edge, as can be seen by inspection of the mes-

sage update (4). This quadratic complexity—which is incurred

on a per iteration, per edge basis—is prohibitive in many ap-

plications, where the state dimension may be on the order of

thousands. As discussed earlier in Section I, although certain

graphical models have particular structures that can be exploited

to reduce the complexity of the updates, not all problems have

such special structures, so that a general-purpose approach is of

interest. In addition to computational cost, a standard BP mes-

sage update can also be expensive in terms of communication

cost, since each update requires transmitting

real num-

bers along each edge. For applications that involve power lim-

itations, such as sensor networks, reducing this communication

cost is also of interest.

SBP is an adaptively randomized form of the usual BP

message updates that yields savings in both computational

and communication cost. It is motivated by a simple obser-

vation—namely, that the message-passing update along the

directed edge

can be formulated as an expectation over

suitably normalized columns of a compatibility matrix [see (7)].

Here, the probability distribution in question depends on the

incoming messages and changes from iteration to iteration. This

perspective leads naturally to an adaptively randomized variant

of BP: instead of computing and transmitting the full expec-

tation at each round—which incurs

computational cost

and requires sending

real numbers—the SBP algorithm

simply picks a single normalized column with the appropriate

(message-dependent) probability and performs a randomized

update. As we show, each such operation can be performed in

time and requires transmitting only

, so that the

SBP message updates are less costly by an order of magnitude.

With this intuition in hand, we are now ready for a precise

description of the SBP algorithm. Let us view the edge poten-

tial function as a matrix of numbers

, for

. For the directed edge

, define the collection

of column vectors5

(7)

where is a normalization constant chosen so that

. See Fig. 2(b) for an illustration of

this computation. For any tree-structured graph, the quantity

is equal to the single-node marginal

, as pre-

and marginal weights

, for

. We assume that the column vectors

and normalization constants

have been precomputed and

stored, which can be done in an offline manner and requires

viously defined (3). For a graph with cycles, the vector

5The columns of the compatibility matrix

represents an approximation to the single-node marginal and i.e.,

for all

are normalized to sum to one: .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOORSHAMS AND WAINWRIGHT: STOCHASTIC BELIEF PROPAGATION: A LOW-COMPLEXITY ALTERNATIVE TO THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

1985

Fig. 3. Specification of SBP.

operations. In addition, the algorithm makes use of a pos- The remainder of this paper is devoted to understanding

itive sequence of step sizes

. In terms of these quantities, when, and if so, how quickly the SBP message updates con-

the SBP algorithm consists of the steps shown in Fig. 3.

verge to a BP fixed point. Let us provide some intuition as to

The per iteration per edge computational complexity of the why such a behavior might be expected. Recall that the update

SBP algorithm lies in calculating the probability mass function (10) is random, depending on the choice of index chosen in

, defined in (9), generating a random index according step II(b). Suppose that we take expectations of the update (10)

to the mass function (9) and performing the weighted update only over the distribution (9), in effect conditioning on all past

(10). Denoting the maximum degree of the graph by , we randomness in the algorithm. (We make this idea precise via

require at most

multiplications to compute . the notion of -fields in our analysis.) Doing so yields that the

Moreover, an additional operations are needed to compute expectation of the update (10) is given by

the probability mass function . On the other hand, generating

a random index can be done with less than operations by

picking a number uniformly at random from

and set-

ting6

. Finally, the update

(10) needs

operations. Adding up these contributions, we Recalling the definitions (7) and (9) of the matrix and mass

find that the SBP algorithm requires at most

function , respectively, and performing some algebra, we see

multiplications and/or summations per iteration per edge to up- that, in an average sense, the SBP message update is equiva-

date the messages. As can be seen from (4), the regular BP lent to (a damped version of the) usual BP message update. The

complexity is

. Therefore, for graphs with bounded de- technical difficulties lie in showing that despite the fluctuations

gree (of most interest in practical applications), the SBP mes- around this average behavior, the SBP updates still converge to

sage updates have reduced the per iteration computational com- the BP fixed point when the step size or damping parameter

plexity by a factor of . In addition to computational efficiency, is suitably chosen. We now turn to precisely this task.

SBP provides us with a significant gain in message/communication complexity over BP. This can be observed from the fact B. Main Theoretical Results

that the normalized compatibility matrix is only a function

of edge potentials , hence known to the node . Therefore,

node has to transmit only the random column index to

node , which can be done with

. Thus, we obtain a

significant reduction in communication complexity relative to

standard BP, which requires transmitting a

-dimensional

vector of real numbers per edge at every round. Here, we sum-

marize the features of our algorithm that make it appealing for

practical purposes.

1) Computational complexity: SBP reduces the per iteration

complexity by an order of magnitude from

to .

2) Communication complexity: SBP requires transmitting

only

per edge in contrast to transmitting a

-dimensional vector of real numbers in the case of

BP.

Thus far, we have proposed a stochastic variant of the usual

BP algorithm. In contrast to the usual deterministic updates, this

algorithm generates a random sequence

of message

vectors. This randomness raises two natural questions.

1) Is the SBP algorithm strongly consistent? More precisely,

assuming that the ordinary BP algorithm has a unique fixed

point , under what conditions do we have

almost surely as

?

2) When convergence occurs, how fast does it take place?

The computational complexity per iteration is significantly

reduced, but what are the tradeoffs incurred by the number

of iterations required?

The goal of this section is to provide some precise answers

to these questions, ones which show that under certain condi-

tions, there are provable gains to be achieved by the SBP algo-

6It is known that for any distribution function has the distribution .

, the random variable rithm. We begin with the case of trees, for which the ordinary BP message updates are known to have a unique fixed point

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1986

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

for any choice of potential functions. For any tree-structured

problem, the upcoming Theorem 1 guarantees that the SBP mes-

sage updates are strongly consistent and, moreover, that in terms

of the elementwise norm, they converge in expectation at

least as quickly as

, where is the number of itera-

tions. We then turn to the case of general graphs. Although the

BP fixed point need not be unique in general, a number of con-

tractivity conditions that guarantee uniqueness and convergence

of ordinary BP have been developed (see, e.g., [12], [20], [23],

and [29]). Working under such conditions, we show in The-

orem 2 that the SBP algorithm is strongly consistent, and we

show that the normalized mean-squared error decays at least

as quickly as

. In addition, we provide high probability

bounds on the error at each iteration, showing that the typical

performance is highly concentrated around its average. Finally,

in Section III-B3, we provide a new set of sufficient conditions

for contractivity in terms of node/edge potentials and the graph

structure. As we discuss, our theoretical analysis shows not only

that SBP is provably correct, but also that in various regimes,

substantial gains in overall computational complexity can be ob-

tained relative to the ordinary BP.

1) Guarantees for Tree-Structured Graphs: We begin with

the case of a tree-structured graph, meaning a graph that con-

tains no cycles. As a special case, the hidden Markov chain

shown in Fig. 1(b) is an instance of such a tree-structured graph.

Recall that for some integer

, a square matrix is said to

be nilpotent of degree if

. (We refer the reader to [11]

for further background on nilpotent matrices and their proper-

ties.) Also recall the definition of the diameter of a graph ,

denoted by

, as the length (number of edges) of the

longest path between any pair of nodes in the graph. For a tree,

this diameter can be at most , a bound achieved by the chain

graph. In stating Theorem 1, we make use of the following def-

inition: for vectors ,

, we write

if and only if

for all

. Moreover, for an arbitrary

, let denote the vector obtained from taking the ab-

solute value of its elements. With this notation in hand, we are

now ready to state our first result.

Theorem 1 (Tree-Structured Graphs): For any tree-structured

Markov random field, the sequence of messages

gen-

erated by the SBP algorithm with step size

has

the following properties:

a) The message sequence

converges almost surely

to the unique BP fixed point as

.

b) There exists a nilpotent matrix

of degree at

most

such that the -dimensional error

vector

satisfies the elementwise inequality

(11)

upper bound on the rate of convergence: in expectation, the

norm of the error vector is guaranteed to decay at the rate

. As noted by a helpful reviewer, the upper bound in

part (b) is likely to be conservative at times, since the inverse

matrix

may have elements that grow exponentially

in the graph diameter . As shown by our experimental results,

the theory is overly conservative in this way, as SBP still be-

haves well on trees with large diameters (such as chains). In-

deed, in Section IV, we provide less conservative results for

general graphs under a certain contractivity condition.

2) Guarantees for General Graphs: Our next theorem ad-

dresses the case of general graphs. In contrast to the case of tree-

structured graphs, depending on the choice of potential func-

tions, the BP message updates may have multiple fixed points

and need not converge in general. A sufficient condition for both

uniqueness and convergence of the ordinary BP message up-

dates, which we assume in our analysis of SBP, is that the update

function , defined in (5), is contractive, meaning that there ex-

ists some

such that

(12)

Past work has established contractivity conditions of this form when the BP updates are formulated in terms of log messages[12], [20], [23], [29]. In Section III-B3, we use related techniques to establish sufficient conditions for contractivity for the BP message update that involves the messages (as opposed to log messages).
Recalling the normalized compatibility matrix with columns , we define its minimum
and maximum values per row as follows:7

(13) The prefactor in our bounds involves the constant

(14)

With this notation, we have the following result:

Theorem 2 (General Graphs): Suppose that the BP update

function

Satisfies the contraction condition (12).

a) Then, BP has a unique fixed point , and the SBP mes-

sage sequence

, generated with the step size

, converges almost surely to as

.

b) With the step size

for some fixed

, we have

for all iterations

.

(15)

Remarks: The proof of this result is given in Section IV-A.

Part (a) shows that the SBP algorithm is guaranteed to con-

for all iterations

.

verge almost surely to the unique BP fixed point, regardless of the choice of node/edge potentials and the initial message vector. Part (b) refines this claim by providing a quantitative

7As will be discussed later, we can obtain a sequence of more refined (tighter)

lower

and upper

bounds by confining the space of

feasible messages.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOORSHAMS AND WAINWRIGHT: STOCHASTIC BELIEF PROPAGATION: A LOW-COMPLEXITY ALTERNATIVE TO THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

1987

c) With the step size

, we have

(16)

also for every

and

, we have

(17)

with probability at least

.

Remarks: The proof of Theorem 2 is given in Section IV-B.

Here, we discuss some of the various guarantees that it pro-

vides. First, part (a) of the theorem shows that the SBP algorithm

is strongly consistent, in that it converges almost surely to the

unique BP fixed point. This claim is analogous to the almost sure

convergence established in Theorem 1(a) for trees. Second, the

bound (15) in Theorem 2(b) provides a nonasymptotic bound

on the normalized mean-squared error

.

For the specified choice of step size

, the first

component of the bound (15) is dominant; hence, the expected

error (in squared -norm) is of the order8 . Therefore, after

iterations, the SBP algorithm returns a solution

with MSE at most . Finally, part (c) provides bounds, both

in expectation and with high probability, for a slightly different

step size choice. On one hand, the bound in expectation (16)

is of the order

, and so includes an additional loga-

rithmic factor not present in the bounds from part (b). However,

as shown in the high probability bound (17), the squared error

is also guaranteed to satisfy a sample-wise version of the same

bound with high probability. This theoretical claim is consis-

tent with our later experimental results, showing that the error

exhibits tight concentration around its expected behavior.

Let us now compare the guarantees of SBP to those of BP.

Under the contraction condition of Theorem 2, the ordinary

BP message updates are guaranteed to converge geometrically

quickly, meaning that

iterations are sufficient to

obtain -accurate solution. In contrast, under the same condi-

tions, the SBP algorithm requires

iterations to return a

solution with MSE at most , so that its iteration complexity is

larger. However, as noted earlier, the BP message updates re-

quire

operations for each edge and iteration, whereas the

SBP message updates require only

operations. Putting the

pieces together, we conclude that:

1) on one hand, ordinary BP requires

op-

erations to compute the fixed point to accuracy ;

2) in comparison, SBP requires

operations to

compute the fixed point to expected accuracy .

Consequently, we see that as long the desired tolerance is not

too small—in particular, if

—then SBP leads to com-

putational savings. In many practical applications, the state di-

mension is on the order of to , so that the precision

can be of the order

to

before the complexity of SBP

becomes of comparable order to that of BP. Given that most

graphical models represent approximations to reality, it is likely that larger tolerances are often of interest.
3) Sufficient Conditions for Contractivity: Theorem 2 is based on the assumption that the update function is contractive, meaning that its Lipschitz constant is less than one. In past work, various authors have developed contractivity conditions, based on analyzing the log messages, that guarantee uniqueness and convergence of ordinary BP (see, e.g., [12], [20], [23], and [29]). Our theorem requires contractivity on the messages (as opposed to log messages), which requires a related but slightly different argument. In this section, we show how to control and thereby provide sufficient conditions for Theorem 2 to be applicable.
Our contractivity result applies when the messages under consideration belong to a set of the form

(18)

for some choice of the upper and lower bounds—namely,

and

, respectively. For instance, for all iterations

, the messages always belong to a set of this form9

with

and

, as previously

defined (13). Since the bounds

do not involve

the node potentials, one suspects that they might be tightened

at subsequent iterations, and indeed, there is a progressive

refinement of upper and lower bounds of this form. Assuming

that the messages belong to a set at an initial iteration, then

for any subsequent iterations, we are guaranteed the inclusion

(19)

which then leads to the refined upper and lower bounds

and

where we recall the quantity

previously defined (8). While such refinements are possible, in

order to streamline our presentation, we focus primarily on the

zeroth-order bounds

and

.

Given a set of the form (18), we associate with the directed

edges

and

(where

) the non-

negative numbers

(20)

8At least superficially, this rate might appear faster than the

rate estab-

lished for trees in Theorem 1(b); however, the reader should be careful to note

that Theorem 1 involves the elementwise -norm, which is not squared, as

opposed to the squared -norm studied in Theorem 2.

9It turns out that the BP update function on the directed edge

a convex combination of the normalized columns

for

Therefore, we have

, for all

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

is .
.

1988

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

and where and

For the Potts model, we have

,

and hence, is a symmetric matrix with

(21) if

if

Some straightforward algebra shows that the second largest sin-

gular value of is given by

, whence

(22)

The next step is to find upper bounds on the terms

and

, in particular by upper bounding the quantities

and

, as defined in (22) and (23) respectively.

(23) In Appendix A, we show that the Lipschitz constant of is

upper bounded as

Recall the normalized compatibility matrix

on

the directed edge

, as previously defined in (7). Since

has positive entries, the Perron–Frobenius theorem [11]

guarantees that the maximal eigenvalue is equal to one, and is

associated with a pair of left and right eigenvectors (unique up to

scaling) with positive entries. Since is column-stochastic,

any multiple of the all-one vector can be chosen as the left

eigenvector. Letting

denote the right eigenvector with

positive entries, we are guaranteed that

, and hence,

we may define the matrix

. By construc-

tion, this matrix has all of its eigenvalues strictly less than 1 in

absolute value (see [11, Lemma 8.2.7]).

Proposition 1: The global update function defined in (5) is Lipschitz with constant at most

where is the degree of node . Therefore, a sufficient condition for contractivity in the case of the Potts model is

(25)

To gain intuition, consider the special case in which the node

potentials are uniform, so that

for

. In this case, for any graph with bounded node

degrees, the bound (25) guarantees contraction for all in an

interval . For nonuniform node potentials, inequality (25) is

weaker, but it can be improved via the refined sets (19) discussed

previously.

(24)

IV. PROOFS

where

denotes the maximum singular value of a matrix.

In order to provide some intuition for Proposition 1, let us

consider a simple but illuminating example.

Example 1 (Potts Model): The Potts model [9], [16], [28] is often used for denoising, segmentation, and stereo computation in image processing and computer vision. It is a pairwise Markov random field that is based on edge potentials of the form

if

and

if

We now turn to the proofs of our two main results, namely Theorems 1 and 2, as well as the auxiliary result, Proposition 1, on contractivity of the BP message updates. For our purposes, it is convenient to note that the ordinary BP update can be written as an expectation of the form
(26)

for all

. Here, the index

is chosen randomly

according to the probability mass function (9).

A. Proof of Theorem 1

for all edges

and ,

. The parameter

can be tuned to enforce different degrees of smooth-

We begin by stating a lemma that plays a central role in the proof of Theorem 1.

ness: at one extreme, setting

enforces no smoothness, Lemma 1: For any tree-structured Markov random field,

whereas a choice close to zero enforces a very strong type of there exists a nilpotent matrix

of degree at most

smoothness. (To be clear, the special structure of the Potts model

such that

can be exploited to compute the BP message updates quickly; our motivation in considering it here is only to provide a simple

(27)

illustration of our contractivity condition.)

for all ,

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOORSHAMS AND WAINWRIGHT: STOCHASTIC BELIEF PROPAGATION: A LOW-COMPLEXITY ALTERNATIVE TO THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

1989

The proof of this lemma is somewhat technical, so that we

defer it to Appendix B. In interpreting this result, the reader

should recall that for vectors ,

, the notation

denotes inequality in an elementwise sense—i.e.,

for

.

An immediate corollary of this lemma is the existence

and uniqueness of the BP fixed point. Since we may iterate

inequality (27), we find that

Subtracting the unique fixed point to

from both sides then leads (30)

for all iterations

, and arbitrary messages , ,

where

denotes the composition of with itself times.

The nilpotence of ensures that

, and hence

for all messages , and . Let

de-

note the common value. The claim is that is the unique fixed

point of the BP update function . This can be shown as fol-

lows: from Lemma 1, we have

where we have introduced the convenient shorthand . We may apply the triangle inequality to each element of this vector equation; doing so and using Lemma 1 to upper bound the terms
, we obtain the element-wise inequality
Since is the all-zero matrix, unwrapping the last inequality times yields the element-wise upper bound

(31)

Iterating the last inequality for the total of times, we obtain

where the terms for

are defined via the recursion , with initial conditions

and hence

. On the other hand, the uniqueness

of the BP fixed point is a direct consequence of the facts that

for any fixed point we have

, and for all

arbitrary messages , we have

. Ac-

cordingly, we see that Lemma 1 provides an alternative proof of

the well-known fact that BP converges to a unique fixed point

on trees after at most

iterations.

We now show how Lemma 1 can be used to establish the two

claims of Theorem 1.

1) Almost Sure Consistency: We begin with the almost sure

consistency claim of part (a). By combining all the local up-

dates, we form the global update rule

(28)

for iterations

, where

is the -dimensional vector obtained from stacking up all the

normalized columns

. Defining the vector

, we can rewrite the update (28) as

.

It remains to control the sequences

for

. In order to do so, we first establish a mar-

tingale difference property for the variables

defined

prior to (29). For each

, define the -field

, as generated by the randomness in

the messages up to time . Based on the representation (26),

we see that

, showing that

forms

martingale difference sequence with respect to the filtration

. From the definition, it can be seen that the entries

of

are bounded; more precisely, we have

for all iterations

, and all states

.

Consequently, the sequence

is a bounded martingale

difference sequence.

We begin with the term . Since is a bounded mar-

tingale difference, standard convergence results [8] guarantee

that

almost surely. Moreover, we have the

bound

. Recalling the definition of

from (30), we conclude that

converges to the

all-zero vector almost surely as

. In order to extend

our argument to the terms for

, we make

use of the following fact: for any sequence of real numbers

such that

, we also have

(e.g., see [24]). Consequently, for any realization such that the

deterministic sequence

converges to zero, we are

also guaranteed that the sequence

, with elements

, converges to zero. Since we have

(29) shown that

, we conclude that

as well. This

argument can be iterated, thereby establishing almost sure con-

for

. With our step size choice

, vergence for all of the terms . Putting the pieces together, we

unwrapping the recursion (29) yields the representation

conclude that the vector

converges almost surely to

the all-zero vector as

, thereby completing the proof of

part (a).

2) Bounds on Expected Absolute Error: We now turn to part

(b) of Theorem 1, which provides upper bounds on the expected

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1990

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

absolute error. We establish this claim by exploiting some mar-

tingale concentration inequalities [5]. From part (a), we know

that

is a bounded martingale difference sequence, in

particular with

. Applying the Azuma–Hoeffding

inequality [5] yields the tail bound

for all

, and

. By integrating this tail

bound, we can upper bound the mean: in particular, we have

With this notation, we can write the message update of the SBP algorithm in the compact form

(33)

valid for

, and suitable for application of the Rob-

bins–Monro theorem. (See Appendix C for further details.)

In order to apply this result, we need to verify its hypotheses.

First of all, it is easy to see that we have a bound of the form

for some constant . Moreover, the conditional distribution of the vector , given the past, depends only on ; more precisely, we have

and hence Turning to the term , we have

Finally, defining the averaged function

(32)

, the final requirement is to

verify that the fixed point satisfies the stability condition

(34)

where step (i) uses inequality (32), and step (ii) is based on the

elementary upper bound

. By repeating this same argument in a recursive manner, we

conclude that

for

.

Taking the expectation on both sides of the inequality (31) and

substituting these upper bounds, we obtain

where

denotes the Euclidean inner product, and de-

notes the compact set in which the messages lie. Using the

Cauchy–Schwartz inequality and the fact that is Lipschitz

with constant

, we obtain

(35)

where we have used the fact that

.

B. Proof of Theorem 2
We now turn to the proof of Theorem 2. Note that since the update function is contractive, the existence and uniqueness of the BP fixed point is an immediate consequence of the Banach fixed-point theorem [1].
1) Almost Sure Consistency: We establish part (a) by applying the Robbins–Monro theorem, a classical result from stochastic approximation theory (see, e.g., [4] and [22]). In order to do so, we begin by writing the update (10) in the form

where the strict inequality holds for all

. Since is a

fixed point, we must have

, which

concludes the proof.

2) Nonasymptotic Bounds on Normalized Mean-Squared

Error: Let

denote the renormal-

ized error vector. In order to upper bound

for all

, we first control the quantity

,

corresponding to the increment in the squared error. Doing

some simple algebra yields

Recalling the update (33), we obtain

where for any realization

, the mapping

should be understood as a function

from to . By concatenating together all of these map-

pings, one for each directed edge

, we obtain a family

of mappings

from to , one for each realization of column indices.

(36)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOORSHAMS AND WAINWRIGHT: STOCHASTIC BELIEF PROPAGATION: A LOW-COMPLEXITY ALTERNATIVE TO THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

1991

Now taking the expectation on both sides of (36) yields

Setting

and unwrapping this recursion yields

(40)

where we have adopted the convention that the inside product

is equal to one for

. The following lemma, proved

in Appendix D, provides a useful upper bound on the products

(37) arising in this expression:

Lemma 2: For all

, we have

where we used the facts that

and

. We continue by upper bounding the term

and lower bounding the term

.

Lower Bound on : Recalling (35) from our proof of part

(a), we see that

(38)

Substituting this upper bound into the inequality (40) yields

Upper Bound on : From the definition of the update function, we have

Recalling the bounds (13) and using the fact that vectors

and

sum to one, we obtain

It remains to upper bound the term

function

is decreasing in for

tegral upper bound

yields

. Since the , we have the in-
, which

On the other hand, we also have

If we now focus on the range of

, which yields the

fastest convergence rate, some simple algebra yields the form

of the claim given in the theorem statement.

3) High Probability Bounds: Recall the algebra at the begin-

ning of Section IV-B2. Adding and subtracting the conditional

mean of the second term of (36) yields

Combining the pieces, we conclude that the term bounded as

is upper

(39) where we have denoted the term

Since both and are nonnegative, the bounds (39) and (38) also hold in expectation. Combining these bounds with representation (37), we obtain the upper bound
, or equivalently

Recalling the bounds on

and from part (b), we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1992
or equivalently
Substituting the step size choice unwrapping this recursion yields

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013
Moving on to the first term , we exploit the Cauchy–Schwartz inequality in conjunction with the fact that the martingale difference sequence is bounded to obtain
and then
Taking the expectation on both sides of the inequality (41) yields , and hence, we have

for all

. Moreover, since

(41)

Note that by construction, the sequence

is a

martingale difference sequence with respect to the fil-

tration

that is

and accordingly

for

. We continue by controlling the stochastic

term

—namely its variance

the initial term bounded by we obtain

is upper . Finally, putting all the pieces together,

where inequality (i) follows from elementary inequality

Since we have

and the fact that

. Consequently, we may apply

Chebyshev’s inequality to control the stochastic deviation

. More specifically, for any

,

a quantity to be specified shortly, we have

(42)

for all

, the cross product term vanishes. On

the other hand, the martingale difference sequence is

bounded. This can be shown as follows: from part (b) we

know

; also using

the fact that

is convex, Jensen’s inequality yields

; therefore, we have

We now combine our earlier bound (41) with the tail bound (42), making the specific choice

for a fixed

, thereby concluding that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOORSHAMS AND WAINWRIGHT: STOCHASTIC BELIEF PROPAGATION: A LOW-COMPLEXITY ALTERNATIVE TO THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

1993

with probability at least obtain

. Simplifying the last bound, we Lemma 3: For all

, we have

for all

, with probability at least

.

C. Proof of Proposition 1

Recall the definition (9) of the probability mass function

used in the update of directed edge

. This

probability depends on the current value of the message, so we

can view it as being generated by a function that performs the mapping

. In terms

of this function, we can rewrite the BP message update (4)

on the directed edge

as

,

where the renormalized compatibility matrix was defined

previously (7). We now define the

block diagonal

matrix

, as well as the function

obtained by concatenating all of the functions

, one for each directed edge. In terms of these quantities,

we rewrite the global BP message update in the compact form

.

With these preliminaries in place, we now bound the Lips-

chitz constant of the mapping

. Given an arbi-

trary pair of messages ,

, we have

(45)

where the quantities

and

were previously de-

fined in (20) and (21).

As the proof of Lemma 3 is somewhat technical, we defer it

to Appendix E. Combining the upper bound (45) with the earlier

bound (44) completes the proof of the proposition.

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we present a variety of experimental results that confirm the theoretical predictions, and show that SBP is a practical algorithm. We provide results both for simulated graphical models and real-world applications to image denoising and disparity computation.

A. Simulations on Synthetic Problems

We start by performing some simulations for the Potts model,

in which the edge potentials are specified by a parameter

, as discussed in Example 1. The node potentials are gen-

erated randomly, on the basis of fixed parameters

satisfying

, as follows: for each

and label

, we generate an independent random variable uni-

formly distributed on the interval

, and then set

For a fixed graph topology and collection of node/edge

(43)

potentials, we first run BP to compute the fixed point .10 We then run the SBP algorithm to find the sequence of

By the Perron–Frobenius theorem [11], we know that has

a unique maximal eigenvalue of 1, achieved for the left eigen-

vector

, where denotes the vector of all ones. Since the

-dimensional vectors

and

are both probability

distributions, we have

. Therefore,

we conclude that

messages

and compute the normalized squared

error

. In cases where the normalized

mean-squared error is reported, we computed it by averaging

over 20 different runs of the algorithm. (Note that the runs are

different, since the SBP algorithm is randomized.)

In our first set of experiments, we examine the consistency of

the SBP on a chain-structured graph, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b),

representing a particular instance of a tree. We implemented the

SBP algorithm with step size

and performed

simulations for a chain with

, state dimension

, node potential parameters

, and for

two different choices of edge potential

. The

resulting traces of the normalized squared error versus iteration

where denotes the right eigenvector of corresponding to the eigenvalue one. Combining this equality with the representation (43), we find that

number are plotted in Fig. 4; each panel contains ten different sample paths. These plots confirm the prediction of strong consistency given in Theorem 1(a)—in particular, the error in each sample path converges to zero. We also observe that the typical

performance is highly concentrated around its average, as can

be observed from the small amount of variance in the sample

paths.

Our next set of simulations are designed to study the effect

of increasing of the state dimension on convergence rates. We

(44) performed simulations both for the chain with

,

as well as a 2-D square grid with

. In all

It remains to upper bound the Lipschitz constant of the mapping cases, we implemented the SBP algorithm with step sizes

previously defined.

10We stop the BP iterations when

becomes less than

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1994

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

Fig. 4. Panels illustrate the normalized squared error

versus the number of iterations for a chain of size

and state dimension

. Each plot contains ten different sample paths. Panel (a) corresponds to the coupling parameter

, whereas panel (b) corresponds to

. In

all cases, the SBP algorithm was implemented with step size

, and the node potentials were generated with parameters

.

Fig. 5. Effect of increasing state dimension on convergence rates. Plots of the normalized mean-squared error

versus the number of

iterations for two different graphs: (a) chain with

, and (b) 2-D square grid with

. In both panels, each curve corresponds different

state dimension

. All simulations were performed with step sizes

, and the node/edge parameters were generated with

parameters

and

, respectively.

and generated the node/edge potentials with whereas the larger problems

exhibit linear

parameters

and

, respectively. In convergence on the log-log scale.

Fig. 5, we plot the normalized mean-squared error (estimated As discussed previously, the SBP message updates are less

by averaging over 20 trials) versus the number of iterations for expensive by a factor of . The top two rows of Table I show the

the chain in panel (a), and the grid in panel (b). Each panel con- per iteration running time of both BP and SBP algorithms, for

tains four different curves, each corresponding to a choice of different state dimensions as indicated. As predicted by theory,

state dimension

. For the given step the SBP running time per iteration is significantly lower than BP,

size, Theorem 2 guarantees that the convergence rate should be scaling linearly in in contrast to the quadratic scaling of BP.

upper bounded by

with the number of iterations To be fair in our comparison, we also measured the total com-

. In the log-log domain plot, this convergence rate manifests putation time required for either BP or SBP to converge to the

itself as a straight line with slope . For the chain simulations fixed point up to a -tolerance, with

. This comparison

shown in panel (a), all four curves exhibit exactly this behavior, allows for the fact that BP may take many fewer iterations than

with the only difference with increasing dimension being a SBP to converge to an approximate fixed point. Nonetheless, as

vertical shift (no change in slope). For the grid simulations shown in the bottom two rows of Table I, in all cases except

in panel (b), problems with smaller state dimension exhibit one (chain graph with dimension

), we still see signifi-

somewhat faster convergence rate than predicted by theory, cant speedups from SBP in this overall running time. This gain

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOORSHAMS AND WAINWRIGHT: STOCHASTIC BELIEF PROPAGATION: A LOW-COMPLEXITY ALTERNATIVE TO THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

1995

Fig. 6. Image denoising application, (a) original image, (b) noisy image, (c) refined image obtained from BP after

iterations, and (d) refined image obtained

from SBP after

iterations. The image is 200 200 with

gray-scale levels. The SBP step size, the Potts model parameter, and noise standard

deviation are set to

,

, and

, respectively.

TABLE I

COMPARISON OF BP AND SBP COMPUTATIONAL COST FOR TWO DIFFERENT

GRAPHS EACH WITH

Nodes. FOR EACH GRAPH TYPE, THE TOP

TWO ROWS SHOW PER ITERATION RUNNING TIME (IN SECONDS) OF THE BP

AND SBP ALGORITHMS FOR DIFFERENT STATE DIMENSIONS. THE BOTTOM

TWO ROWS SHOW TOTAL RUNNING TIME (IN SECONDS) TO COMPUTE THE

MESSAGE FIXED POINT TO

ACCURACY

shown in Fig. 6(a). We then contaminate every pixel with an

independent Gaussian random variable with standard deviation

, as shown in Fig. 6(b). Enforcing the Potts model with

smoothness parameter

as the edge potential, we run

BP and SBP for the total of

and

iterations, re-

spectively, to obtain the refined images (see panels (c) and (d),

respectively, in Fig. 6). Fig. 7 illustrates the mean-squared error

versus the running time for both BP and SBP denoising. As one

can observe, despite smaller jumps in the error reduction, the

per-iteration running time of SBP is substantially lower than

BP. Overall, SBP has done a marginally better job than BP in a

substantially shorter amount of time in this instance.11

Finally, in our last experiment, we apply SBP to a computer

vision problem. Graphical models and message-passing algo-

rithms are popular in application to the stereo vision problem

becomes especially pronounced for larger dimensions, where [28], [16], in which the goal is to estimate objects depth based

these types of savings are more important.

on the pixel dissimilarities in two (left and right view) images.

B. Applications in Image Processing and Computer Vision

Adopting the original model in Sun et al. [28], we again use a form of the Potts model in order to enforce a smoothness prior,

In our next set of experiments, we study the SBP on some and also use the form of the observation potentials given in the

larger scale graphs and more challenging problem instances, Sun et al.’s paper. We then run BP and SBP (with step size

with applications to image processing and computer vision.

) for a total of

and

iterations, respec-

Message-passing algorithms can be used for image denoising, tively, in order to estimate the pixel dissimilarities. The results

in particular, on a 2-D square grid where every node corre- for the test image “map” are presented in Fig. 8. Here, the max-

sponds to a pixel. Running the BP algorithm on the graph, one imum pixel dissimilarity is

, which makes stereo vision

can obtain (approximations to) the most likely value of every

pixel based on the noisy observations. In this experiment, we

consider a 200 200 image with

gray-scale levels, as

11Note that the purpose of this experiment is not to analyze the potential of SBP (or for that matter BP) in image denoising, but to rather observe their relative performances and computational complexities.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1996

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

Fig. 7. Mean-squared error versus the running time (in seconds) for both BP and SBP image denoising. The simulations are performed with the step size

, and the Potts model parameter

on a 200 200 image with

gray-scale levels. The noise is assumed to be additive, independent

Gaussian random variables with standard deviation

.

Fig. 8. Stereo vision, depth recognition, application. (a) Reference image, (b) ground truth, (c) BP estimate after

iterations, and (d) SBP estimate after

iterations. The algorithms are applied to the standard “map” image with maximum pixel dissimilarity

. The SBP step size is set to

.

a relatively low-dimensional problem. In this particular appli- linearly in the state dimension , as opposed to the quadratic

cation, the SBP is faster by about a factor of 3–4 times per it- dependence of BP, and a communication cost of

per

eration; however, the need to run more iterations makes it com- edge and iteration, as opposed to real numbers for standard

parable to BP. This is to be expected since the state dimension BP message updates. SBP is also easy to implement, requiring

is relatively small, and the relative advantage of SBP only random number generation and the usual distributed up-

becomes more significant for larger state dimensions .

dates of a message-passing algorithm. Our main contribution

was to prove a number of theoretical guarantees for the SBP

VI. DISCUSSION

message updates, including convergence for any tree-structured problem, as well as for general graphs for which the ordinary

In this paper, we have developed and analyzed a new and BP message update satisfies a suitable contraction condition. In

low-complexity alternative to BP message passing. The SBP al- addition, we provided nonasymptotic upper bounds on the SBP

gorithm has per iteration computational complexity that scales error, both in expectation and in high probability.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOORSHAMS AND WAINWRIGHT: STOCHASTIC BELIEF PROPAGATION: A LOW-COMPLEXITY ALTERNATIVE TO THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

1997

The results described here suggest a number of directions for future research. First, the ideas exploited here have natural generalizations to problems involving continuous random variables and also other algorithms that operate over the sum-product semi-ring, including the generalized BP algorithm [33] as well as reweighted sum-product algorithms [31]. More generally, the BP algorithm can be seen as optimizing the dual of the Bethe free energy function [33], and it would be interesting to see if SBP can be interpreted as a stochastic version of this Bethe free energy minimization. It is also natural to consider whether similar ideas can be applied to analyze stochastic forms of message passing over other semi-rings, such as the max-product algebra that underlies the computation of maximum a posteriori configurations in graphical models. In this paper, we have developed SBP for applications to Markov random fields with pairwise interactions. In principle, any undirected graphical model with discrete variables can be reduced to this form [33], [32]; however, in certain applications, such as decoding of LDPC codes over nonbinary state spaces, this could be cumbersome. For such cases, it would be useful to derive a variant of SBP that applies directly to factor graphs with higher-order interactions. Moreover, the results derived in this paper are based on the assumption that the codomain of the potential functions do not include zero. We suspect that these condition might be relaxed, and similar results could be obtained. Finally, our analysis for general graphs has been done under a contractivity condition, but it is likely that this requirement could be loosened. Indeed, the SBP algorithm works well for many problems where this condition need not be satisfied.

where we have denoted the degree of the node by . Substituting these inequalities into expression (24) and noting that
, we find that the global update function has Lipschitz constant at most

as claimed.

B) Proof of Lemma 1: By construction, for each directed

edge

, the message vector belongs to the proba-

bility simplex—that is,

, and

. From

(26), the vector

is a convex combination of the columns

of the matrix . Recalling bounds (13), we conclude that the

message vector must belong to the set , as defined in (18), in

particular with

and

. Note

that the set is compact, and any member of it has strictly pos-

itive elements under our assumptions.

For directed edges

and

, let

denote the Jacobian matrix obtained from taking the par-

tial derivative of the update function with respect to the

message vector . By inspection, the function is con-

tinuously differentiable; consequently, the function

is continuous, and hence must achieve its supremum over the

compact set . We may use these Jacobian matrices to define a

matrix

with entries

APPENDIX
A) Details of Example 1: In this appendix, we verify the sufficient condition for contractivity (25). Recall the definition (13) of the zeroth-order bounds. By construction, we have the relations

for all

and

. Substituting these bounds

into the definitions (22) and (23) and doing some simple algebra

yields the upper bounds

We then use these matrices to define a larger matrix

,

consisting of

sub-blocks each of size , with the

sub-blocks indexed by pairs of directed edges

. In

particular, the matrix

occupies the sub-block indexed by

the edge pair

and

. Note that by the structure

of the update function , the matrix

can be nonzero only

if

and

.

Now let

denote the Jacobian matrix of the up-

date function . By the integral form of the mean value theorem,

we have the representation

Applying triangle inequality separately to each component of this -dimensional vector and then using the definition of , we obtain the elementwise upper bound

and

It remains to show that is nilpotent: more precisely, we

show that is the all-zero matrix, where

denotes

the diameter of the graph . In order to do so, we first let

be the “block indicator” matrix—that is, its entries

are given by

if otherwise.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1998

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

Based on this definition, it is straightforward to verify that if where we used the fact that

for

.

for some positive integer , then we also have

. Since the function is decreasing, we have

Consequently, it suffices to show that

for

.

Fix a pair of directed edges

and

, and

some integer

. We first claim that the matrix entry is nonzero only if there exists a backtrack-

(47)

less directed path of length

from to that includes both

and , meaning that there exist nodes that

such Substituting inequality (47) into (46) yields

We prove this claim via induction. The base case

is true

by construction. Now supposing that the claim holds at order ,

we show that it must hold at order . By definition of matrix

multiplication, we have

from which the claim stated in the lemma follows.

E) Proof of Lemma 3: Let

denote the

Jacobian matrix of the function

evaluated at .

Since is differentiable, we can apply the integral form of the

mean value theorem to write

From this representation, we obtain the upper bound

In order for this entry to be nonzero, there must exist a directed

edge

that forms a

-directed path to

, and

moreover, we must have

and

. These con-

ditions are equivalent of having a backtrackless directed path of

length

from to , with and as intermediate nodes,

thereby completing the proof of our intermediate claim.

Finally, we observe that in a tree-structured graph, there can

be no directed path of length greater than

. Con-

sequently, our intermediate claim implies that

for any

tree-structured graph, which completes the proof.

C) Version of Robbins–Monro Theorem: Here we state a

version of the Robbins–Monro theorem suitable for our proof

of Theorem 2. Denoting the expected vector field function by

, suppose there exists a vector

such that

Now suppose that

1) the vector field function

has a bounded second

moment—that is

for some

constant ,

2) the conditional distribution of the random vector

knowing the past depends only on —that is

,

and finally,

3) the step size sequence

satisfies the conditions

, and

.

Then, the sequence

, generated by (33), is guaranteed

to converge to

D) Proof of Lemma 2: Noting that it is equivalent to bound

the logarithm, we have

showing that it suffices to control the quantity

.

Let

be the

matrix of partial derivatives of

the function

obtained from taking the partial

derivatives with respect to the message vector

. We

then define a

-dimensional matrix with the entries

if

and

otherwise.

(48)

Our next step is to show that

.

Let

be an arbitrary -dimensional vector,

where each subvector is an element of . By exploiting the

structure of

and , we have

(46)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOORSHAMS AND WAINWRIGHT: STOCHASTIC BELIEF PROPAGATION: A LOW-COMPLEXITY ALTERNATIVE TO THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

1999

where bound (i) follows by triangle inequality; bound (ii) fol-

lows from definition of the operator norm; and the final in-

equality (iii) follows by definition of .

Defining the vector

with the entries

,

we have established the upper bound

,

and hence that

and
Thus, by applying inequality (49) with clude that

, we con-

where the final equality uses the fact that

by con-

struction. Since both the message and vector were arbitrary,

we have shown that

, as claimed.

Our final step is to control the quantities

that define the entries of . In this argument, we make repeated

use of the elementary matrix inequality [11]

(49)

Since this bound holds for any message

, we conclude

that each of the matrix entries

satisfies the

same inequality. Again applying the basic matrix inequality

(49), this time with

, we conclude that

is upper

bounded by

valid for any

matrix.

Recall the definition of the probability distribution (9) that

defines the function

, as well as our shorthand

notation

. Taking the deriva-

tives and performing some algebra yields

which concludes the proof.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Alekh Agarwal for helpful discussions on stochastic approximation and optimization at the initial phases of this research, the anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback, as well as Associate Editor Pascal Vontobel for his careful reading and detailed suggestions that helped to improve the paper.

for

, and

. For

, we have

REFERENCES

Putting together the pieces leads to the upper bounds and

Recalling the definitions (22) and (23) of

and

respectively, we find that

[1] R. P. Agarwal, M. Meehan, and D. O’Regan, Fixed Point Theory and

Applications. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2004.

[2] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.

[3] M. S. Arulampalam, S. Maskell, N. Gordon, and T. Clapp, “A tu-

torial on particle filters for online nonlinear/non-Gaussian Bayesian

tracking,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 174–188,

Feb. 2002.

[4] A. Benveniste, M. Metivier, and P. Priouret, Adaptive Algorithms and

Stochastic Approximations. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1990.

[5] F. Chung and L. Lu, “Concentration inequalities and martingale in-

equalities: A survey,” Internet Math., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 79–127, 2006.

[6] J. Coughlan and H. Shen, “Dynamic quantization for belief propagation

in sparse spaces,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 106, no. 1, pp.

47–58, 2007.

[7] A. Doucet, N. de Freitas, and N. Gordon, Sequential Monte Carlo

Methods in Practice. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001.

[8] R. Durrett, Probability: Theory and Examples. New York: Duxbury

Press, 1995.

[9] P. F. Felzenszwalb and D. P. Huttenlocher, “Efficient belief propaga-

tion for early vision,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 41–54,

2006.

[10] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, 1963.

[11] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson, Matrix Analysis. Cambridge, U.K.:

,

Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985. [12] A. T. Ihler, J. W. Fisher, and A. S. Willsky, “Loopy belief propagation:

Convergence and effects of message errors,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol.

6, pp. 905–936, May 2005.

[13] A. T. Ihler and D. McAllester, “Particle belief propagation,” in Proc.

Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., Clearwater, FL, 2009, pp. 256–263.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2000

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

[14] M. Isard, J. MacCormick, and K. Achan, “Continuously-adaptive discretization for message-passing algorithms,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2009, pp. 737–744.
[15] K. Kersting, B. Ahmadi, and S. Natarajan, “Counting belief propagation,” presented at the 25th Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., Montreal, QC, Canada, 2009.
[16] A. Klaus, M. Sormann, and K. Karner, “Segment-based stereo matching using belief propagation and a self-adapting dissimilarity measure,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Hong Kong, 2006, pp. 15–18.
[17] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[18] H.-A. Loeliger, “An introduction to factor graphs,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 28–41, Jan. 2004.
[19] J. J. McAuley and T. S. Caetano, “Faster algorithms for max-product message passing,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 1349–1388, 2011.
[20] J. M. Mooij and H. J. Kappen, “Sufficient conditions for convergence of the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 4422–4437, Dec. 2007.
[21] A. C. Rapley, C. Winstead, V. C. Gaudet, and C. Schlegel, “Stochastic iterative decoding on factor graphs,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Brest, France, 2003, pp. 507–510.
[22] H. Robbins and S. Monro, “A stochastic approximation method,” Ann. Math. Statist., vol. 22, pp. 400–407, 1951.
[23] T. G. Roosta, M. J. Wainwright, and S. S. Sastry, “Convergence analysis of reweighted sum-product algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 4293–4305, Sep. 2008.
[24] H. L. Royden, Real Analysis. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1988. [25] H. Song and J. R. Cruz, “Reduced-complexity decoding of q-ary LDPC
codes for magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 1081–1087, Mar. 2003. [26] L. Song, A. Gretton, D. Bickson, Y. Low, and C. Guestrin, “Kernel belief propagation,” presented at the Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., Ft. Lauderdale, FL, 2011. [27] E. B. Sudderth, A. T. Ihler, W. T. Freeman, and A. S. Willsky, “Nonparametric belief propagation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Madison, WI, 2003, vol. 1, pp. 605–612. [28] J. Sun, H. Y. Shum, and N. N. Zheng, “Stereo matching using belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 787–800, Jul. 2003.

[29] S. Tatikonda and M. I. Jordan, “Loopy belief propagation and Gibbs measures,” in Proc. 18th Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., Edmonton, AB, Canada, Aug. 2002, vol. 18, pp. 493–500.
[30] S. S. Tehrani, W. J. Gross, and S. Mannor, “Stochastic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 716–718, Oct. 2006.
[31] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “A new class of upper bounds on the log partition function,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2313–2335, Jul. 2005.
[32] M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan, Graphical Models, Exponential Families, and Variational Inference. Hanover, MA: Now Publishers, 2008.
[33] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Constructing free energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2282–2312, Jul. 2005.
Nima Noorshams received his B.Sc. degree from Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2007. He is currently pursuing his Ph.D. degree in the department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, and his M.Sc. in the department of Statistics at University of California, Berkeley. His current research interests include stochastic approximation methods, graphical models, message-passing algorithms, and statistical signal processing.
Martin J. Wainwright (SM’11) is currently an associate professor at University of California at Berkeley, with a joint appointment between the Department of Statistics and the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences. He received a Bachelor’s degree in Mathematics from University of Waterloo, Canada, and Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EECS) from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). His research interests include coding and information theory, machine learning, mathematical statistics, and statistical signal processing. He has been awarded an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Fellowship, an NSF CAREER Award, the George M. Sprowls Prize for his dissertation research (EECS department, MIT). He is the co-recipient of Best Paper Awards from the IEEE Signal Processing Society (2008), the IEEE Communications Society (2010), Joint Paper Award from the IEEE Information Theory and Communications Societies (2012), and was awarded a Medallion Lectureship (2013) from the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

