2013 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC): PHY

BICM Performance Improvement via Online LLR Optimization
Jinhong Wu, Mostafa El-Khamy, Jungwon Lee and Inyup Kang Samsung Mobile Solutions Lab San Diego, USA 92121
Email: {Jinhong.W, Mostafa.E, Jungwon2.Lee, Inyup.Kang}@samsung.com

Abstract—We consider bit interleaved coded modulation (BICM) receiver performance improvement based on the concept of generalized mutual information (GMI). Increasing achievable rates of BICM receiver with GMI maximization by proper scaling of the log likelihood ratio (LLR) is investigated. While it has been shown in the literature that look-up table based LLR scaling functions matched to each specific transmission scenario may provide close to optimal solutions, this method is difficult to adapt to time-varying channel conditions. To solve this problem, an online adaptive scaling factor searching algorithm is developed. Uniform scaling factors are applied to LLRs from different bit channels of each data frame by maximizing an approximate GMI that characterizes the transmission conditions of current data frame. Numerical analysis on effective achievable rates as well as link level simulation of realistic mobile transmission scenarios indicate that the proposed method is simple yet effective.
Index Terms—BICM, generalized mutual information, LLR optimization
I. INTRODUCTION
Bit interleaved coded modulation (BICM) has been widely adopted in wireless standards, e.g. 3GPP High Speed Packet Access (HSPA) and Long-Term Evolution (LTE) [1, 2]. For multi-level modulation schemes, BICM transmission can be decomposed into multiple parallel bit channels by which each bit channel is capable of transmitting at certain rates according to the bit channel’s transition probability density function. Achievable rates of BICM can be characterized by the generalized mutual information (GMI) [3], which is equivalent to the sum of GMI of individual bit channels. With the assumptions of perfect channel state information and optimum detection, BICM capacity has been shown to be achievable [3] [4].
In real systems, however, with imperfections in the receiver, e.g., limited depth interleaving, imperfect channel estimation, sub-optimal detection, etc., the actual achievable rate may be substantially lower than the BICM capacity. Such characteristics are categorized as BICM with mismatched decoding [3]. On the other hand, by certain LLR correction prior to decoding, the achievable rate can be improved [4] [5]. As shown in [5] [4], optimal correction is to obtain LLRs that are consistent with the overall bit-channel transition probability between each coded bit and the detector output LLR. It is suggested in above references that LLR correction may be performed by off-line data analysis to first find empirical probability density function (PDF) of LLRs from each bitchannel, then numerically scale the LLRs. Specifically, a lookup table (LUT) with scaling factors matched to LLRs from

each bit channel can be generated. For simpler processing, uniform scaling factors may be used instead of LUTs. Generally, such off-line analysis based scaling methods are valid to scenarios where transmission conditions are known to the receiver. In typical mobile communication systems, however, accurate identification of transmission scenarios in real-time is difficult due to rapid changes in channel conditions. As a result, such methods may not be applicable, as applying mismatched scaling factors to LLRs can degrade decoder performance.
In this paper, we consider an adaptive method for linear LLR optimization of a mismatched BICM receiver. We follow the GMI concept and seek to linearly optimize LLRs by scaling factors obtained from simple online numerical search. In this process, decoder decision feedback is used to calculate an approximate GMI to search for scaling factors. As will be shown, this online search method provides uniform scaling factor(s) per bit channel that can adapt to time-varying transmission scenario without explicitly knowing the channel conditions.
The paper is organized as follows. Section-II introduces the BICM system model and discusses achievable rates by practical receivers. Section-III reviews and discusses existing scaling methods based on off-line channel analysis. Section-IV introduces the proposed scaling algorithm. Section-V presents simulation results. Finally, Section-VI concludes the paper.
II. BICM SYSTEM MODEL AND ACHIEVABLE RATES
We consider bit-interleaved channel-coded modulation transmitted over memoryless channel. Information bit sequence u = [u0, u1, · · · , uK−1] is encoded to produce coded bit sequence c = [c0, c1, · · · , cK/R−1], where R is code rate. Proper interleaving and possibly scrambling of c produces a new bit sequence b = [b0, b1, · · · , bK/R−1], which is then mapped into symbols from a M -ary signal constellation χ, producing x = [x0, x1, · · · , xN−1], where xn ∈ χ. For simplicity, we consider quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM), but extension to other modulation schemes is straightforward. The modulated signals are transmitted over the wireless channel via single or multiple antennas after layer mapping and precoding. At the receiver side, following detection of received signal, y = [y0, y1, · · · , yN−1], a general process of descrambling, rate de-matching, and de-interleaving recovers the LLR sequence to match that of the coded bits. The channel

978-1-4673-5939-9/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

3850

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:27:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

decoder then takes these LLRs as input. A generic description achievable data rates. By (3) it has been shown that the max-

of such a process is shown in Fig. 1.

imum achievable rate is the generalized mutual information

(GMI) defined as [3] [4]

Fig. 1. A simplified block diagram of BICM receiver
The total BICM channel may be decomposed into m = log2 M parallel binary-input channels. Note that for square QAM with Gray mapping, bit loading in the real and imaginary dimensions of the complex signal are identical. Therefore, we only need to consider m/2 distinct bit channels.
A. Achievable rates of BICM with matched and mismatched decoding metrics
The BICM capacity is given by [3]

m
CBICM = I(Bj ; Y )

j=1

m−1

=−

EX,Y

i=0

log pBi (b)
b∈B

pY |Bi (Y |b) pY |Bi (Y |bi(X))
(1)

where I(Bj; Y ) is the mutual information between the random variable of transmitted bit through j-th bit channel, Bj, and the received signal Y , pBi (b) is the probability of bit b transmitted through the i-th bit channel, and pY |Bi (Y |b) is the conditional PDF of receiving Y given b is transmitted. The above rate is
achievable from the argument of random coding with typical
sequences. Note that (1) indicates that the capacity of BICM
systems is the sum of capacities of the modeled individual
bit channels. With perfect interleaving and optimal detection,
the detector output LLRs are sufficient statistics of transition probabilities pY |X (y|x). For optimal detection, the definition of LLR is

LoBpit,Y

= ln pBi|Y (b = 1|y) . pBi|Y (b = 0|y)

(2)

In real systems, however, decoding metrics in form of detection output LLRs, are generally mismatched to the true channel transition probabilities pY |Bi (y|bi). Another decoding metric is introduced that works as an estimate of the bit channel transition probability

qBi,Y (bi(x), y) = pˆY |Bi (y|bi)

(3)

and the available LLR is therefore an expression of

LBi,Y

=

ln

pˆBi|Y pˆBi|Y

(bi (bi

= 1|y) = 0|y) .

(4)

Decoding with mismatched metric qBi,Y (bi(x), y) instead of pY |Bi (y|bi) causes performance degradation in terms of

IqGXM,YI

=

max
s>0

IqX,Y

(s)

(5)

with

IqX,Y (s)

m−1

=−

EX,Y

i=0

m−1

log2 pBi (b)
b∈B

qBi,Y (b, Y ) s qBi,Y (bi(X), Y )

= (1 − EX,Y {log2 (1 + exp(− sgn(bi(X))LBi,Y s))})
i=0 m−1

=

IqBi,Y (s)

i=0

(6)

where LBi,Y is the detector output LLR that will be input to the channel decoder.
The above shows that the GMI is the sum of IqBi,Y (s) of all bit channels. IqBi,Y (s) is defined as I-curve of the i-th bit channel with regard to variable s, while s that maximizes
IqBi,Y (s) is called the critical point. Furthermore, it is shown that [4]

m−1

m−1

I GMI
qX,Y

≤

I GMI
qBi ,Y

≤

I(Bi, Li) ≤ CBICM . (7)

i=0

i=0

B. Iterative decoding and critical point

It is well known that iterative decoding with the LogMAP algorithm for turbo codes (or the sum-product algorithm for LDPC codes) is approximately a maximum likelihood (ML) decoding solution when channel LLRs are optimized. However, while a non-iterative ML decoder does not need to restrict the critical point’s value, iterative LogMAP decoding requires the critical point of the total I-curve to be one in order to perform well. On the other hand, iterative Max-LogMAP decoding will not be affected by changing the critical point. A shift of the total I-curve’s critical point therefore has an effect equivalent to a fixed SNR mismatch. For best performance by Max-LogMAP for turbo codes (or min-sum algorithm for LDPC codes), it is sufficient to align critical points of bit channel I-curves so that they become harmonic1. For LogMAP decoding, however, we need to not only align critical points to be the same, but also align them at one. Note that if optimal MAP detection is applied, it will produce harmonic I-curves with all critical points achieved at one.

III. OFF-LINE BASED SCALING FUNCTIONS FOR LLR
OPTIMIZATION
In recent literature, LLR scaling functions for GMI maximization based on off-line analysis are presented [5] [4]. Below we review the processes of finding scaling factors followed by a discussion on the connection between the GMI and the consistency condition.

1Two I-curves sharing the same critical point is called harmonic [4].

3851
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:27:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A. Optimal scaling based on off-line histogram analysis

By knowledge of the given transmission scenario, two con-
ditional PDFs can be obtained by off-line histogram estimator for LLRs from each bit channel. Denote pL(l|b = 1) and pL(l|b = 0) as conditional PDFs of generating LLR l when bit b = 1 and b = 0 are transmitted, respectively. The optimal scaling factor for l is

s(l)

=

ln

pL (l|b=1) pL (l|b=0)

.

l

(8)

For simple implementation, a LUT may be generated so that s(l) is approximated by a piece-wise linear function and the

two coefficients of each linear segment are stored for a certain range of l values. In summary, this method is carried out in

the following steps for each bit channel:

1) Collect a sufficient amount of data of transmitted bits

and detector generated LLRs of i-th bit channel.

2) Calculate pL(l|b = 1) and pL(l|b = 0) by histograms.

3)

Obtain

ideal

scaling

function

si(l)

=

ln

pL (l|b=1)
. pL (l|b=0)
l

4) Approximate si(l) by piece-wise linear function sˆi(l)

and store linear function coefficients in a LUT.

5) In real receiver processing, after detector generates chan-

nel LLRs l’s, apply a linear scaling function on each l

according the LUT, then continue with decoding.

based scaling increases GMI more than uniform scaling does. However, both scaling methods result in the critical point achieved at s = 1.
3.75 3.7
3.65

B. Uniform LLR scaling based on off-line GMI maximization
Uniform scaling of LLRs of each bit channel corresponds to a shifting of the I-curve’s critical point without changing the peak value. By aligning I-curves from different bit channels to be harmonic, total GMI of BICM receiver may be increased. The following steps summarize the process of how to apply linear scaling:
1) Collect a sufficient amount of data of transmitted bits and detector generated LLRs of each bit channel.
2) Calculate and plot the I-curve IqBi,Y (s) as given in (6). 3) Obtain a scaling factor si that maximizes IqBi,Y (s). 4) In real receiver processing, after detector generates chan-
nel LLRs l’s, apply scaling factor si on each l generated from i-th bit channel, then continue with decoding.
For illustration, I-curves of each bit channels obtained from link level simulation of LTE user equipment (UE) receiver are plotted in upper part of Fig. 2. The simulated channel profile is extended typical urban (ETU) channel. Channel model parameters include excess tap delay [0, 50, 120, 200, 230, 500, 1600, 2300, 5000]ns with relative power [−1.0, −1.0, −1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, −3.0, −5.0, −7.0]dB, and Doppler frequency 300Hz [6]. Transmission scheme is MCS17 (64-QAM with code rate 0.4). As can be seen, critical points of each bit channel’s I-curve do not align at the same value, linear scaling of LLRs can therefore increase total GMI by aligning 3 I-curves at the same s. For comparison, I-curves of the total BICM channel generated from detector output LLRs without any processing, LLRs after above mentioned LUT based scaling and uniform scaling, are plotted in lower part of Fig. 2. Clearly, LUT

I−curve

3.6

3.55

3.5

no correction

3.45

scaling via online GMI

2−level scaling via online GMI

3.4

LUT per bit channel

uniform scaling per bit channel

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

s

Fig. 2. Top: Bit channel I-curves without LLR scaling. Bottom: total I-curves before and after scaled by scalar functions found off-line and online

C. Consistency condition and GMI maximization
Below we discuss the connection between GMI maximization and the consistency condition. The consistency condition can be defined for the random variable L as [7] [8]

ln

pL(l|b pL(l|b

= =

1) 0)

=

l.

(9)

While Lopt (i.e., LLR generated from a true bit channel transition probability) satisfies (9), L generated from (4)

generally does not. For example, in turbo decoding, consider

BCJR decoding of a constituent convolutional code. As can

be proven, optimal demodulation/detection generates output

LLRs that satisfy consistency condition, which in turn will

allow the BCJR decoder to achieve maximum a posteriori

(MAP) decoding for the constituent code. In comparison,

suboptimal demodulation/detection introduces two types of

3852
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:27:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I SCALING FACTORS BY GMI AND AVERAGING BY CONSISTENCY
CONDITION

method/channel bit-0,1 bit-2,3 bit-4,5 total

s′ by GMI

1.46 1.39 1.04 1.33

s′ = EL{s(l)} 1.40 1.45 1.04 1.32

imperfection. T ype-I: it produces less reliable estimates of

transmitted coded bits, which can be modeled as a worse bit

channel; T ype-II it may violate the consistency condition,

which can further degrade decoding performance due to the

LLR’s inaccurate representation of bit probabilities. Correction

of mismatched LLRs does not improve the bit channel, but

can correct/reduce the inaccuracy of bit probabilities contained

in the LLR values. In other words, potential performance

improvement is from reducing negative effects of T ype-II

but not of T ype-I.

Regarding optimal scaling function that maximizes GMI

(i.e.,

s(l)

=

, as shown ln

pL (l|b=1) pL (l|b=0)

l

in [5]

[4]), we

see it is

equivalent to process the LLRs such that the scaled LLRs

satisfy the consistency condition. For optimal uniform scaling

factors, we conjecture that the uniform scaling per bit channel,

that aligns each bit channels to be harmonic at s = 1, is equal

to the mean value of the optimal scaling function as

s′

=

EL{s(l)}

=

EL

  ln


pL (l|b=1) pL (l|b=0)
l

 


.

(10)

In other words, when uniform scaling is considered, the
mean value from scaling function satisfying the consistency
condition not only maximizes GMI but also aligns I-curves of bit channels to be harmonic at s = 1. Although proof of this conjecture seems difficult, numerically we have found it is
supported. For example, we test max-LogMAP demodulation of 64 − QAM signals over fast Rayleigh fading channel at SNR= 7dB, uniform scaling factors found by using method as Section III-B and by using s′ = EL{s(l)} give us the results as in TABLE. I.

IV. DECODER DECISION-AIDED ONLINE LLR SCALING FOR GMI MAXIMIZATION
Due to different statistical characteristics of LLRs obtained from different transmission scenarios, LUTs obtained in one case may be substantially different from the desirable ones for another case. The same problem occurs for the mean scaling factors obtained off-line. Therefore it is desirable to obtain scaling functions adaptive to the channel, transmission scheme, and other variations that the receiver may experience. Below we consider online uniform scaling based on GMI maximization. By adopting this approach, we may anticipate performance similar to previous off-line uniform scaling per bit channel based on GMI maximization but with real-time adaptation to channel conditions.

Fig. 3. Receiver scheme flowchart.

A. Uniform scaling per bit channel

To enable online calculation of the scaling factor for each transport block or code block, we can again apply decoder hard decisions to provide estimates of bi(X), ˆbi(X). As a result, we have an approximation of (6) for each transport block that characterizes current transmission conditions. For this purpose, we can calculate an approximate I-curve function for any specific s as

IˆqBi,Y (s) = 1 − EX,Y log2 1 + exp(− sgn(ˆbi(X))LBi,Y s)

≈

1

−

1 Ni

Ni −1 i=0

log2

1 + exp(− sgn(ˆbi,n)Li,ns)

(11)

where Ni is the total number of bits transmitted through the i-th bit channel. The optimal scaling factor for the i-th bit
channel is therefore

si

=

arg

max
s>0

IˆqBi,Y

(s)

(12)

Based on (12), the flowchart of the proposed receiver

scheme after detection is shown in Fig. 3.

In practice, to identify an approximately maximized GMI,

we may search for s that IˆqBi,Y (s) is convex with

maximizes IˆqBi,Y (s). Note regard to s. To search for

that the

3853
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:27:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

optimal s, we can initially set s = 1, and a multiplicative coefficient α > 1, e.g., α = 1.05, then compare IˆqBi,Y (s) with IˆqBi,Y (αs) or IˆqBi,Y (s/α) to determine whether to increase or to decrease s, then recursively set s = αs or s = s/α until the peak of the convex curve by IˆqBi,Y (s) is identified. The search process is summarized in the following 4 steps:

Initialization: set s = 1, α = 1.05.

1) Calculate IˆqBi,Y (s) and IˆqBi,Y (αs) according to (11).

2) 3)

ICIˆfqaBIlˆcqi,BuYlia(,Ytse)(s=Iˆ)qB>Iˆiq,BYIˆqi(,BYαi(s,Yα).(sα)I,fss)Iˆe,qtsBesit,=Yα(αs=)s.1>/αI.ˆqOBtih,Yer(wαiss)e,:

let set

si = (s + αs)/2. Stop. 4) Otherwise, let IˆqBi,Y (s) = IˆqBi,Y (αs), set s = αs. Go

back to Step 3.

For verification, we numerically calculate the I-curve ob-

tained from the above scaling factor search algorithm for

MCS17 over ETU300 with real channel and noise variance

estimation. Estimation in the link level simulator is based on

frequency domain minimum mean square error (MMSE) esti-

mation using pilot symbols. It is then compared with I-curves

from LLRs without scaling, off-line LUT based scaling, and

off-line uniform scaling. Fig. 2 verifies that uniform scaling

based on online GMI maximization can slightly increase GMI,

while at the same time maximizes the I-curve approximately at s = 1.

B. Uniform scaling of positive and negative LLRs separately per bit channel
For 16-QAM and 64-QAM, due to bit loading by Graymapping and max-log type detection, optimal scaling functions by (9) for LLRs from the first bit channel are symmetric around 0, but not so for LLRs from the second and/or the third bit channels. For the second and third bit channels, it becomes reasonable to search for one scaling factor for positive LLRs and another for negative LLRs. For verification, we plot I-curve obtained by applying different uniform scaling for positive and negative LLRs separately, and then compare with the results we obtained in Fig. 2. We denote the new scaling method as ”2-level scaling via online GMI”. The results show a substantial increase in GMI is obtained by 2level scaling and online GMI maximization.

C. Accuracy of scaling factors by decision feedback

We next study the deviation of scaling factors found by

decoder decision feedback from “genie-aided” scaling factors

that can be obtained assuming true transmitted bits are avail-

able. To quantify the extent of errors incurred by decoder

decisions,

we

define

a

normalized

mean

error

as

E{

|s−sˆ| s

}

where s is the desired scaling factor and sˆ is the actual

available scaling factor. Numerical comparisons are carried

out for the MCS17 over ETU300 channel at various SNRs.

In Fig. 4, the top figure shows the mean values of the “genie”

scaling factors at different SNRs, while the bottom one plots

the normalized mean error of the actual scaling factors. In

these figures there is only one curve for bit channel 0,1

because by Gray-mapping this channel’s transition probability

is symmetric for positive and negative LLRs. We make the following remarks based on Fig. 4. Firstly, the mean value of the scaling factor of each bit channel gradually decreases and approaches one. This is consistent with the fact that at very high SNR, channel estimation becomes more reliable while the output by sub-optimal MLM detection also approaches that by optimal MAP detection. Secondly, overall the reliability of scaling factors from online decisions become more reliable as SNR increases, while the convergence rate toward “genie” decision-aided results varies by each bit channel and the sign of the LLRs.

Mean value of scaling factors

ETU300 2x2, MCS17 2.8

bit0,1

2.6

bit2,3: Positive LLRs

bit2,3: Negative LLRs

2.4

bit4,5: Positive LLRs

bit4,5: Negative LLRs

2.2

2

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1 14 14.5 15 15.5 16 16.5 17 17.5 18
SNR dB

Normalized mean error of scaling factors

0.2

bit0,1

0.18

bit2,3: Positive LLRs

bit2,3: Negative LLRs

0.16

bit4,5: Positive LLRs

bit4,5: Negative LLRs

0.14

average of all LLRs

0.12

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0 14 14.5 15 15.5 16 16.5 17 17.5 18
SNR dB

Fig. 4. Top: Mean scaling factors of each bit channel. Bottom: Normalized mean error of scaling factors by decoder decisions

V. SIMULATIONS
We test the performance of the proposed scaling method under realistic channel conditions for an LTE system. Simulations are based on the link level simulator of LTE downlink 2 × 2 MIMO channel with open loop spatial multiplexing transmission. The system occupies 10 MHz bandwidth using frequency division duplexing (FDD). Tested channel profiles include Extended Vehicular A (EVA) and Extended Typical

3854
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:27:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2x2, EVA70, MCS10, NPRB=50 100

2x2, ETU300, MCS17, NPRB=50 100

no scaling, S−MLM decoder

no scaling, S−MLM decoder

no scaling, LM decoder

no scaling, LM decoder

scaled, S−MLM decoder

scaled, S−MLM decoder

scaled, LM decoder

scaled, LM decoder

10−1

10−1

FER FER

10−2

10−2

10−3

7

7.5

8

8.5

9

9.5

10 10.5 11

SNR dB

10−3 16 16.5 17 17.5 18 18.5 19 19.5 20 SNR dB

Fig. 5. FER: EVA70 channel, MCS10, number of physical resource block Fig. 6. FER: ETU300 channel, MCS17, number of physical resource block

= 50, Bandwidth 10Mhz

= 50, Bandwidth 10Mhz

Urban (ETU) channels [6]. Modulation and coding sets (MCS) include MCS10 and MCS17, which correspond to 16-QAM and 64-QAM modulation and code rates around 0.3 and 0.4, respectively. At the receiver, a max-log type detector is applied. The channel decoder can be either LogMAP (LM) or scaled max-LogMAP (S-MLM) decoder. The maximum number of iterations performed by turbo decoding is 8. For the S-MLM decoder, extrinsic LLRs of each constituent decoder are scaled by 0.7 before being used as a priori LLR by the other constituent decoder in order to improve decoding performance [9]. As described in Fig. 3, in order to apply the proposed LLR scaling, one initial iteration of S-MLM decoding is applied. After LLR scaling, a maximum of 7 iterations is continued with either LM or S-MLM decoding. Frame error rate (FER) comparisons include decoding with LM or S-MLM algorithms without scaling LLRs, and decoding with the proposed scaling method. Fig. 5-6 show the results. Without scaling, LM decoding performs usually worse than S-MLM decoding due to LM’s sensitivity to imperfect input LLRs. However, with proper scaling, while S-MLM decoding’s performance improves slightly, LM decoding’s performance is improved significantly. This is consistent with the observation of I-curves in Fig. 2 where LLR scaling not only increases total GMI but also aligns the critical point at one. As expected, after LLR scaling, LM decoding outperforms S-MLM decoding substantially. From above cases, LLR scaling provides more gains over the ETU300 channel, which indicates that the proposed method is more effective when transmission conditions are more severe.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
As the next generation mobile communication systems are expected to provide high throughput at expanded coverage and in versatile environments, receiver adaptation to the changing environment is important for system performance. In this work, based on the relationship between the BICM achievable

rates and the GMI, we introduce a simple and effective method of LLR optimization to improve receiver performance. In order to perform LLR scaling that is adaptive to various transmission conditions, an online GMI maximization based scaling factor searching algorithm is developed. Specifically, an approximate I-curve function is calculated by using decoder decisions after certain initial decoding iteration(s), followed by a numerical search of the scaling factor that aligns the critical point of each bit channel’s I-curve at one. While the effectiveness of this method depends on decoder decisions’ reliability, we note that in practical operating SNR regions, the decoder decisions provide reasonable accuracy in determining the scaling factors. Increases in GMI by the proposed method are confirmed by numerical analysis. Performance improvement in realistic systems is further verified in link level simulation of LTE downlink transmissions.
REFERENCES
[1] 3GPP, “High Speed Downlink Packet Access: Physical Layer Aspects (Release 5),” TR 25.858, Tech. Rep., 2002.
[2] ——, “Evolved universal terrestrial radio access (E-UTRA); multiplexing and channel coding (Release 10),” TS 36.212, Tech. Rep., 2011.
[3] A. Martinez, A. G. i Fabregas, G. Caire, and F. M. J. Willems, “Bitinterleaved coded modulation revisited: A mismatched decoding perspective,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 55, pp. 2756–2765, Jun. 2009.
[4] T. T. Nguyen and L. Lampe, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation with mismatched decoding metrics,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, pp. 437– 447, Feb. 2011.
[5] J. Jalden, P. Fertl, and G. Matz, “On the generalized mutual information of bicm systems with approximate demodulation,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), Cairo, Jan. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[6] 3GPP, “Evolved universal terrestrial radio access (E-UTRA); user equipment (ue) radio transmission and reception (relasase 8),” TS 36.101, Tech. Rep., 2008.
[7] J. Hagenauer, “The exit chart - introduction to extrinsic information transfer in iterative processing,” in European Signal Processing Conference, Vienna, Austria, Sep. 2004, pp. 1541–1548.
[8] A. Alvarado, V. Nunez, L. Szczecinski, and E. Agrell, “Correcting suboptimal metrics in iterative decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. on Com., Dresden, Germany, Jun. 2009, pp. 1–6.
[9] J. Vogt and A. Finger, “Improving the max-log-map turbo decoder,” Electronics letters, vol. 36, no. 23, pp. 1937–1939, 2000.

3855
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:27:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

