Uzamsal Bag˘lı Kodların ˙Ilintili Silme Kanalı Üzerinde Bas¸arım Analizi
Performance Analysis of Spatially Coupled Codes over the Correlated Erasure Channel

Reza A. Ashrafi and Ali E. Pusane Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering
Bog˘aziçi University Istanbul, Turkey
Email: {reza.ashrafi, ali.pusane}@boun.edu.tr

—Uzamsal bag˘lı düs¸ük-yog˘unluklu es¸lik-denetim (LDÖPzCet)çekodlarının düs¸ük gerçekles¸tirme karmas¸ıklıg˘ı, düs¸ük gecikme ve çes¸itli haberles¸me kanalı üzerindeki eniyiye yakın hata bas¸arımı gibi özellikleri bu kodları gelecek nesil kablosuz haberles¸me standartları için uygun bir aday yapmaktadır. Öte yandan, ilintili silme kanalı gibi bellek içeren kanallarda bu kodları çözmek için kullanılan pencere tabanlı kod çözücü bas¸arım kaybına ug˘ramaktadır. Geleneksel olarak bu tarz problemlere blok serpis¸tiriciler yardımıyla çözüm bulunmaktadır. Ancak, blok serpis¸tiriciler sisteme yüksek miktarda bir gecikme kattıklarından her uygulama için iyi bir çözüm olamamaktadırlar. Bu çalıs¸mada, uzamsal bag˘lı kodların da sahip oldug˘u katlamalı yapıya sahip çok düs¸ük gecikmeli katlamalı serpis¸tiriciler ele alınmıs¸tır. Ele alınan haberles¸me sisteminin hata bas¸arımı yog˘unluk gelis¸imi teknig˘i aracılıg˘ıyla incelenmis¸ ve elde edilen bas¸arım iyiles¸tirmesi, sistemin bas¸tan-sona gecikmesinin bir is¸levi olarak yinelemeli kod çözme es¸ik deg˘erleri cinsinden gösterilmis¸tir.
— Anahtar Kelimeler Uzamsal bag˘lı kodlar; Yog˘unluk gelis¸imi teknig˘i; I˙lintili silme kanalı; Katlamalı serpis¸tirici.
—Desirable characteristics of spatially-coupled lowdenAsibtystrpaacrtity-check (LDPC) codes including low implementation complexity, low-delay, and close-to-optimal performance over a wide variety of channels make them a noticeable candidate for the next-generation wireless communication standards. However, error performance of the sliding window decoding scheme used to decode these codes is considerably degraded over channels with memory, such as the burst erasure channel. Traditionally, communication over channels with memory is achieved through the use of block interleavers but as it introduces a large amount of delay, it is not always a viable option. In this paper, employing a convolutional interleaver which benefits from the inherent convolutional nature of the spatially-coupled codes with very low overall delay is considered. The performance of the proposed combination is analyzed using the density evolution technique. The performance improvement of using a convolutional interleaver is demonstrated as a function of the added interleaving delay in terms of iterative decoding thresholds.
— Keywords Spatially coupled codes; Density evolution; Corre-
This work was supported in part by TÜB˙ITAK Career Award (Grant no. 111E276) and European Union FP7 Marie Curie International Reintegration Grant (Grant no. 268264).
978-1-4673-5563-6/13/$31.00 c 2013 IEEE

lated erasure channel; Convolutional interleaver.
I. INTRODUCTION
Spatially-coupled (SC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) coding has gained considerable research interest recently. SC codes are in fact terminated versions of LDPC convolutional codes, which were first introduced in [1]. Thus, SC codes inherit very good characteristics, including capability of lowdelay decoding, simplicity of code construction and encoding (decoding) processes, and superior error performance compared to the underlying block LDPC codes.
It has been shown that SC code ensembles exhibit the “threshold saturation” phenomenon, which means that their error performance over the binary erasure channel (BEC), assuming belief-propagation (BP) decoding, can increase to maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding performance [2]. In this paper, we examine the error performance of SC codes over the correlated erasure channel and propose a communication system, which considerably mitigates the severe degradations caused by burst of erasures while maintaining low decoding delay at the same time. We begin, in Section II, by reviewing the basic code construction technique for SC codes that the paper focuses on. The proposed low-delay communication system, which is the main contribution of the paper, is presented in same section. In Section III, error performance analysis of the proposed system is conducted and finally Section IV concludes the paper.
II. CONVOLUTIONAL-INTERLEAVER-BASED SC CODING
One of the most efficient ways of constructing SC codes is based on the concept of protograph which has been reviewed in [3]. However, the ribbon-shaped structure of the derived paritycheck matrix results in several observations. The first one relates to the degrees of the check nodes that are places in the first and last ms positions. Due to the special structure of the matrix, these check nodes have fewer connections to variable nodes, which, in turn, results in a special irregularity of the row

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 1. Block diagram of a low-delay spatially-coupled system for correlated erasure channels.
weights. This slight irregularity of SC codes resulting from the termination of the underlying LDPC convolutional code has been shown to be the main reason for SC codes having better BP decoding thresholds compared to corresponding block code ensembles [2]. The ribbon-shaped structure of SC codes also allows them to be decoded via a low-delay decoding scheme called window decoding [4]. In contrast to a block decoder, the window decoder does not need to wait for the entire (possibly corrupted) codeword to arrive at the receiver before starting the decoding process, which considerably lowers the delay. In other words, it can start decoding process once a small portion of the codeword is received at decoder. In summary, the ribbonshaped structure of the SC code parity-check matrix brings along several advantages, however, its limited width make these codes vulnerable when transmitting over the channels with memory, e.g., correlated erasure channels. A burst of erasures that could be encountered over a correlated erasure channel has the potential to renders a number of successive variable nodes (and associated check nodes) useless and can diminish the entire purpose of the use of a window decodes, i.e., propagating reliable information from one side of the graph to the other.
Employing a block interleaver would seem as an immediate solution to overcome the burst by converting the burst of erasures into a number of random erasures. However, in order perform its task, the block interleaver would introduce a large interleaving delay that would dominate the overall decoding delay and minimize the advantages of using a low-delay decoding scheme. In the literature, the problem of transmitting over channels with memory has been tackled in the way of designing a special code structure and choosing the code parameters in a way to disperse the effects of the bursts of erasure [4], [5]. As a result, ensemble D with B0 = [2 2], B1 = [0 1] and B2 = [1 0] (where, ensemble B is made up of B0 = [2 2] and B1 = [1 1]) has been proposed as a robust solution. However, this solution imposes several constraints in the code construction step that could otherwise be relaxed to optimize iterative decoding thresholds, desired code properties, etc. In this paper, we propose to separate the code design and erasure burst dispersion tasks and design a spatially-coupled coding system that has high error performance and design flexibility. The proposed system employs a convolutional interleaver, which is used to disperse the erasure burst over a window that is wider than decoding window so that the window decoder can observe the consecutive erasures of the channel as random. The corresponding block diagram is presented in Fig. 1. It is clear that the interleaving and deinterleaving steps cannot be achieved without causing some delay, but we will show next that this delay can be kept to a minimum while achieving a great improvement in error performance. The block diagrams of convolutional interleavers

Figure 2. Schematic of three different convolutional interleavers ⇡1, ⇡2 and ⇡3.
Table I. DELAY PROFILE OF THE CONVOLUTIONAL INTERLEAVER ⇡1

clk 1 2 5 8

9 10 10 10 10 10

v

v1 v2 v3 v4

v5

v6 v7 v8 v9 v10

v0

v1 v4 v7 v2 v10 v5 v8 v3 v6

v9

T

0220

1

0000

0

employed in this paper are given in Fig. 2. As can be seen, a convolutional interleaver is composed of ⇤ delay lines where the -th delay line consists of 1 + ( 1) ⇤ delay elements,
= 1, 2, . . . , ⇤ [6]. For instance, the convolutional interleaver ⇡1 corresponds to the case of ⇤ = 3 and = 2. The first delay element in each delay line is initialized with data, whereas the remaining ones are assumed to be initialized with zeros.
There are two practical issues faced when a convolutional interleaver is used to interleave a finite-length sequence. The first one is the zeros present within the delay elements when the interleaver is initialized. The second issue relates to the end of the data sequence. Since there are unequal number of delay elements on each delay line, some portion of data still remain in the delay elements, even after the last code symbol has been input to the interleaver. In order to flush this portion out of the interleaver, several dummy symbols (zeros) must be padded at the end of each input symbol stream. As a result, there will be several deterministic zero symbols among the output symbols that need to be filtered out.
As an example, assume that a codeword v = (v1, v2, . . . , v10) of length of 10 is the input to the convolutional interleaver ⇡1. The output is then determined as
⇡1(v) = (v1, 0, 0, v4, 0, 0, v7, v2, 0, v10, v5, 0,
0, v8, v3, 0, 0, v6, 0, 0, v9, 0, 0, . . .).
In order not to waste transmission resources by transmitting non-information-carrying symbols, zeros are punctured before transmitting the data over the channel.
We then observe that the deinterleaver to be used to recover v from v0 is
v = ⇡1 1(v0) = (v10 , v40 , v70 , v20 , v10 0, v50 , v80 , v30 , v60 , v90 )
i.e. ⇡ = ⇡ 1 and the same interleaver can be used as a deinteirleaverito recover the original codeword. This gives the system designer an advantage in the form of reduced memory requirements to store the interleaver and deinterleaver and also allows the reuse of the same hardware block to interleave and deinterleave data for two-way communications. Table I gives the delay analysis of the interleaver ⇡1. v and v0 denote original and interleaved symbol sequences, respectively. clk

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

shows the current time instant and T is the delay introduced in current time instant. At the first time instant (clk = 1), the interleaver assigns the first input symbol to the first output symbol without any delay. At the second time instant (clk = 2), the fourth input symbol is assigned to the second output symbol, but since the second and third symbols of the input have not arrived yet, the interleaver waits for two more instants in order to access the fourth input symbol, which causes T = 2 units of delay and makes the clock clk = 4. At the next time instant (clk = 5), the interleaver waits for two more instants to output the seventh input symbol. Once clk = 10 is reached, there is no additional delay.
In this simple example, the total delay (T ) equals to 5
total
time instants and is actually upper bounded by the number of zero elements in the delay elements at the time of initialization, which is 6. For a larger code of length 80 (L = 40, M = 1, and K0 = 2) the total delay is indeed verified to be equal to 6. Similarly, the total delay of convolutional interleavers ⇡2 and ⇡3 is calculated to be 3 and 2 time instants, respectively. This helps us in demonstrating that the delay introduced by the interleaver (and deinterleaver) is almost negligible when compared to the block length of the code.

III. ERROR PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE PROPOSED CODING SYSTEM

In this section, we first evaluate the asymptotic performance of the protograph-based SC code ensembles B and D under window decoding over the BEC. This is determined by density evolution (DE) analysis [7]. In our analysis, L is set to 40 and therefore, the base matrix is of size 41 ⇥ 80 for ensemble B and 42 ⇥ 80 for ensemble D, since ensemble D has code memory m = 2. The maximum number of iterations
s
is 1000. The window size is chosen to be W = 4 and the target erasure probability for the target symbols is = 10 6.

The window decoding threshold over the standard BEC are

calculated as ✏⇤ = 0.4843 and ✏⇤ = 0.4766 for ensembles B

and D, respectwivdely. However, wwe dare interested in calculating

the window decoding threshold of this code ensemble over the

correlated erasure channel, where we assume a single burst of

erasures occurs at consecutive intervals and the rest of the

codeword is degraded by the channel’s standard erasure rate.

We consider erasure bursts of length 4 with a burst erasure

rate of ✏ = 0.61. We sweep this burst along the code-

words of i = 1, . .

B
length N = 80, i.e.,
p
. , 77 are erased with

4-tuples (v0, v0+1,

probability

i
✏

i
=

v0+2, v0+3),

i
0.6

andi

the

B

remaining symbols are erased with probability ✏. Using the DE

technique, we look for the largest erasure rate ✏ that allows for

successful decoding.

The results are presented in Fig. 3(a), where the iterative decoding thresholds of the code ensembles are demonstrated to be severely degraded due to the presence of consecutive high probability erasures. The top plot in this figure shows the iterative decoding thresholds of the code ensembles when no bursts are present. It can be seen that, whereas ensemble B can overcome channel erasures with probability ✏⇤ = 0.4843 without any erasure bursts, the threshold valueswdfall in the

1The burst length of 4 is defined on the protograph. When the expansion factor is chosen to be nontrivial (M > 1) for a practical code, this analysis corresponds to having a single burst of 4M high probability erasures.

region 0.2182  ✏  0.2790 when bursts of erasures are present. This is a large loss of performance due to the correlated nature of erasures. For ensemble D, threshold values fall in the region 0.2972  ✏  0.3107, which is better than those of ensemble B. This observation verifies the effect of the code design criteria given in [4], [5] on mitigating degradation caused by the burst of erasures.

As can be seen from the figure, iterative decoding thresholds are dependent on whether a burst starts at an odd or even position of the codeword. A burst that starts at an odd position (e.g. first burst that happens on symbols 1 4), affects three check nodes connected to these variable nodes. Two of these check nodes are partially affected and the third one is completely erased (assuming that the erasures within a burst are highly probable). This will decrease the threshold since there is a loss of connectivity in the graph. This makes threshold to be is at its minimum. For the even start positions (e.g. second burst that happens on symbols 2 5), four check nodes are affected, but none of the check nodes are completely erased and this causes a slightly higher iterative decoding threshold compared to that of an odd start position. This behavior describes the alternating nature of the plot. Note that the burst covering the last symbols of a codeword does not severely affect the targeted symbols and that is why pseudo-high thresholds are observed on those burst locations. Furthermore, since it is more likely that a burst of erasures hits the middle regions of a codeword (for large L values), their threshold improvement is more concerning.

Fig. 3(b) shows the iterative decoding thresholds of ensemble B under three different convolutional interleavers. For an exhaustive comparison of the trade-offs by using convolutional interleavers, iterative decoding threshold of ensemble B with a block interleaver is also provided. Note that for the interleaved burst, each burst location indicates the interleaved values of the consecutive burst location. For instance, under convolutional interleaver ⇡1, burst location 1 (which indicates a burst at symbols 1, 2, 3, and 4) means that high probable erasures ✏ happens at locations 1, 4, 7, and 2.
B
It is clear from the obtained iterative decoding thresholds that by employing a convolutional interleaver, the error performance of the system increases considerably. Although this gain comes at cost of introducing an interleaving delay, this delay is almost negligible when the codeword is long enough (corresponding to large L values). The figure also demonstrates the effect of decreased delay (convolutional interleavers ⇡2 and ⇡3) on the performance. Although these interleavers do not perform as well as ⇡1, their improved performance compared to the case without interleaving comes at a minimal interleaving delay.

Another important observation is the performance of the

block interleaver. Clearly, employing a block interleaver results

in higher threshold values since it is expected that a block

interleaver assigns adjacent members of an erasure burst to dis-

tant positions, effectively turning them into random erasures.

However, Fig. 3 shows that there is not a serious loss between

the iterative decoding threshold of ensemble B with block

interleaver and its threshold under convolutional interleaver

⇡1. It is crucial if we notice that, while the total delay of the

block interleaver is T  80 units, convolutional interleaver

total

⇡1

introduces

a

total

delay

of

T
total

=

6

units

only.

This

means

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Threshold Threshold

0.5
No Burst (ensemble B)

0.55

No Burst (ensemble D)

Consecutive Burst (ensemble B)

Consecutive Burst (ensemble D)

0.45

0.5

0.4 0.45

0.4

0.35

0.35 0.3

0.3

Interleavered burst under π1

0.25

Interleavered burst under π2

0.25

Interleavered burst under π3

Block interleaved burst

0.2

Consecutive Burst (D)

0.2

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Burst Location

Burst Location

(a)

(b)

Figure 3. DE analysis of the code ensembles B and D, where (a) shows results for data transmission over the correlated erasure channel for ensembles B and D. Also provided is the window decoding threshold of the code ensembles when erasures occur randomly, (b) results for interleaved data transmission over the correlated erasure channel for code ensemble B under different convolutional interleavers ⇡1, ⇡2, and ⇡3 and also a block interleaver. Non-interleaved decoding threshold of the code ensemble D over is also provided.

that by sacrificing a small portion of the performance, we can gain almost 13 times of improvement in delay reduction of the interleaving system by employing the convolutional interleaver ⇡1. Even for some certain applications in which low delay is of the first priority, the use of convolutional interleavers ⇡2 and ⇡3 is also reasonably justified since they have almost 26 and 40 times lower interleaving delays compared to the block interleaver, respectively. It is important to note that the error performance of the system even under convolutional interleavers ⇡2 and ⇡3 is still higher than the non-interleaving approach with relies on the code design criteria given in [4], [5].
IV. CONCLUSION
Excellent error performance over the BEC and the associated low-complexity and low-delay sliding window decoding architecture make SC codes an interesting candidate for upcoming communication standards. However, their performance shows a major degradation over the correlated erasure channel, where bursts of erasures corrupt the transmitted codeword. In the literature, mitigating the effects of a burst on the error performance of SC codes is achieved through additional code design constraints. However, these additional constraints limit the ability of a code designer who needs to consider the existence of problematic issues in the code structure. In this paper, we propose an alternative technique that employs convolutional interleavers in order to break up the bursts of erasures. We do not consider a block interleaver as a solution, since it introduces a very large amount of delay, which may ruin the low-delay characteristic of SC codes. Through asymptotic performance analysis, we show that the proposed system provides a considerable amount of improvement in the error performance while maintaining reduced latency. Furthermore, it is also inferred that the coding performance under the weakest convolutional interleaver scheme (with almost negligible delay), still outperforms the approach purely based on additional code design constraints. The error performance under block interleaving is also evaluated to demonstrate how much additional gain would be possible if we allowed much larger decoding delays.

REFERENCES
[1] A. Jiménez-Feltström and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-45, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[2] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.
[3] R. A. Ashrafi and A. E. Pusane, “Asymptotically regular spatially coupled codes with low decoding delay,” in Proc . Signal Processing and Communications Applications Conference (SIU), Mugla, Turkey, Apr. 2012, pp. 1–4.
[4] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[5] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, G. Liva, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, and G. E. Corazza, “Protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes for correlated erasure channels,” in Proc. IEEE Intl. Conference on Commun., Cape Town, South Africa, May 2010, pp. 1–6.
[6] S. Vafi and T. Wysocki, “Weight distribution of turbo codes with convolutional interleavers,” IET Communications, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 71– 78, Feb. 2007.
[7] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

