IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

2293

The Cycle Consistency Matrix Approach to Absorbing Sets in Separable Circulant-Based LDPC Codes
Jiadong Wang, Member, IEEE, Lara Dolecek, Member, IEEE, and Richard D. Wesel, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—For low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes operating over additive white Gaussian noise channels and decoded using message-passing decoders with limited precision, absorbing sets have been shown to be a key factor in error floor behavior. Focusing on this scenario, this paper introduces the cycle consistency matrix (CCM) as a powerful analytical tool for characterizing and avoiding absorbing sets in separable circulant-based (SCB) LDPC codes. SCB codes include a wide variety of regular LDPC codes such as array-based LDPC codes as well as many common quasicyclic codes. As a consequence of its cycle structure, each potential absorbing set in an SCB LDPC code has a CCM, and an absorbing set can be present in an SCB LDPC code only if the associated CCM has a nontrivial null space. CCM-based analysis can determine the multiplicity of an absorbing set in an SCB code, and CCM-based constructions avoid certain small absorbing sets completely. While these techniques can be applied to an SCB code of any rate, lower rate SCB codes can usually avoid small absorbing sets because of their higher variable-node degree. This paper focuses attention on the high-rate scenario in which the CCM constructions provide the most benefit. Simulation results demonstrate that under limited-precision decoding the new codes have steeper error-floor slopes and can provide one order of magnitude of improvement in the low-frame-error-rate region.
Index Terms—Absorbing set, cyclic consistency matrix, error floor, quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were introduced by Gallager and are well known for approaching capacity with iterative decoding. However, in the low-frameerror-rate (FER) region, a flattening of the FER curve called the error floor usually occurs for LDPC codes with moderate block lengths and high code rates. This performance degradation is
Manuscript received September 19, 2011; revised December 04, 2012; accepted December 05, 2012. Date of publication December 20, 2012; date of current version March 13, 2013. This work was supported by a gift from the Inphi Corporation, UC Discovery Grant 192837, and in part by the National Science Foundation under Grants CCF-1029030, 1161798, and 1150212. This paper was presented in part at the 2010 IEEE International Symposium on Turbo Codes, in part at the Information Theory and Its Applications Workshop, San Diego, CA, 2010 and 2011, in part at the 2011 IEEE International Conference on Communications, and in part at the 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
J. Wang is with Qualcomm Technologies, Inc., San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail: wjd1226@gmail.com).
L. Dolecek and R. D. Wesel are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA (e-mail: dolecek@ee.ucla.edu; wesel@ee.ucla.edu).
Communicated by D. Burshtein, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2235122

due at least in part to the suboptimality of message passing in a graph with cycles.
This paper focuses on one class of regular LDPC codes: separable circulant-based (SCB) codes. SCB codes include array-based LDPC codes as well as many common quasi-cyclic (QC) codes. SCB codes retain standard properties of QC LDPC codes such as girth, code structure, and compatibility with existing high-throughput hardware implementations. These codes might be applicable for high-throughput data storage applications when message passing decoding is used with limited precision.
This paper introduces the cycle consistency matrix (CCM) as a powerful analytical tool for characterizing and avoiding any graphical structure in SCB LDPC codes that contains a well-defined cycle structure. For LDPC codes operating over additive white Gaussian noise channels and decoded using message-passing decoders with limited precision, absorbing sets have been shown in [1]–[3] to be a key factor in error floor behavior. As a consequence of its cycle structure, each potential absorbing set in an SCB LDPC code has a CCM, and an absorbing set can be present in an SCB LDPC code only if the associated CCM is not full column-rank.
For a specified circulant matrix, all SCB codes share a common mother matrix. For a specified absorbing set, the CCM approach yields with relative ease (because testing for a nontrivial nullspace is straightforward) a complete characterization (as to which codes have the absorbing set) for the entire family of SCB codes of a specified rate obtained by selecting a specified number of rows from a specified SCB mother matrix. The CCM-based analysis shows that QC code families described in [4]–[6] include codes with good absorbing-set spectra with a proper choice of parameters. This paper also identifies absorbing-set-spectrum equivalence classes within a family of SCB codes, significantly simplifying this characterization.
Larger absorbing sets are more difficult to avoid, and our characterizations reveal that absorbing sets of large enough size occur in every code in the family. A specific code avoiding as many small absorbing sets as possible can be selected for further improvement. This can be accomplished by existing construction techniques such as [7], [8] described in Section II. Alternatively, a CCM-based code shortening technique that we introduce in this paper can remove variable nodes (VNs) so as to force the null space of the CCM to have zero dimension thereby avoiding the target absorbing set while still precluding the smaller absorbing sets already absent before shortening. Compared to other algorithm-based code construction

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2294

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

methods, the CCM approach is a systematic way to analyze a

broad family of codes. Once the CCMs are formulated, one can

identify the best SCB code in the SCB family with the parame-

ters of interest without requiring additional trial and error steps.

Section II reviews trapping sets, absorbing sets, and prior

work on designing LDPC codes that avoid these structures.

Section III introduces SCB codes and the CCM.

For SCB codes with column weights

, Section IV con-

siders selected-row (SR) SCB codes, which are constructed by

selecting

appropriate row groups from the SCB mother

matrix. This section identifies the CCMs for the smallest ab-

sorbing sets for

SR-SCB codes and uses these CCMs to

select rows that avoid all (4,8), (5,9), and (6,8) absorbing sets.

Recognizing equivalence classes of SR-SCB codes that have

the same absorbing sets greatly simplifies analysis and permits

a complete characterization of

SR-SCB codes with re-

spect to the smallest absorbing sets. Section IV concludes with

an example characterization of all

SR-SCB codes with

respect to (4,8), (5,9), and (6,8) absorbing sets for code length

.

Section V identifies the CCMs for the smallest absorbing sets

for

SCB codes. These configurations are (6,4) absorbing

sets. In this section, the ability to characterize an entire SR-SCB

family is utilized to show that one of the three configurations is

necessarily present in every

SR-SCB code regardless of

code length. The other two configurations can be avoided by

proper row selection. This section concludes by showing how

the CCM approach can guide the removal of specific columns

from an SR-SCB parity-check matrix to eliminate the trouble-

some (6,4) configuration, producing a shortened SR-SCB code

with no (6,4) absorbing sets.

Section VI briefly remarks on the

case, completing an

analysis of small absorbing sets in SCB codes with

.

It is important to recognize that the CCM approach itself easily

generalizes to any . This paper focuses on

to pro-

vide illustrative examples and because

and

are

important for high-rate codes that are of interest to the authors.

Section VII provides simulation results demonstrating perfor-

mance improvement in the error floor position and slope ob-

tained by the newly identified codes. Section VIII delivers the

conclusions.

Conference presentations of parts of this paper appear in

[9]–[12], and [13].

II. TRAPPING SETS AND ABSORBING SETS
Prior work indicates that certain subgraphs called trapping sets [14], [15], and, in particular, a subset of trapping sets called absorbing sets [16] is a primary cause of the error floor in practical implementations. Absorbing sets are trapping sets that are stable under bit-flipping decoding. For LDPC codes operating over additive white Gaussian noise channels and decoded using message-passing decoders, some absorbing sets can be successfully overcome with sufficient precision. However, in the practically important scenario of limited precision, absorbing sets have been shown in [1]–[3] to be a key factor in error floor behavior.

We refer to the smallest absorbing sets (in terms of the number of VNs in the set) as dominant because an absorbing set is activated when all of its VNs are in error and this activation is more likely for a smaller number of VNs than a larger number of VNs. Our simulation results also show that when precision is sufficiently limited, error performance is dominated by the smallest absorbing sets in the cases that we studied. However, there may be situations in which a relatively large absorbing-set structure with high multiplicity could be more important to performance than an extremely rare absorbing set that is, nonetheless, smaller. Even in the cases where the larger absorbing sets are important, the avoidance of smaller absorbing sets is often sufficient to eliminate certain larger absorbing sets.
Since the performance degradation due to trapping sets (including absorbing sets) is partially due to the suboptimality of the iterative decoding algorithm (especially under limited precision), one possible direction to mitigate the effect of trapping sets is to improve the decoding algorithm. More effective message-passing algorithms [17], [18], better iteration averaging schemes [19], more efficient quantizations [3], [20], and postprocessing for absorbing sets [2] all can improve the error floor.
A complementary direction for improving the error floor, and the focus of this paper, is to design a parity-check matrix to avoid the smallest trapping sets and absorbing sets. Numerous previous papers have taken this approach. The Approximate Cycle EMD1 (ACE) algorithm [21] or the Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) algorithm [22] can be used for a column-by-column constructions. Algebraic methods for constructing LDPC codes also demonstrate good error floors as compared to randomly constructed codes. Results in [23]–[27] and [28] present some notable work in this area.
Recent papers have proposed methods to improve the absorbing-set spectrum. Introducing additional check nodes [29] or increasing the girth [30] eliminates small trapping sets for some codes. The algorithm in [27] and [28] constructs QC codes from Latin squares so that the Tanner graph does not contain certain trapping sets. In [7] and [8], a deterministic construction of structured LDPC codes free of dominant trapping sets was developed by carefully swapping edges in the lifted graph of the original code to provably eliminate the presence of detrimental trapping sets.
Several of these approaches have taken advantage of the cycle structure of the target objects. For example, the ACE algorithm avoids stopping sets (and incidentally trapping sets and absorbing sets) by ensuring that all small cycles have sufficient extrinsic message degree. The cycle structure of trapping sets is utilized in [7] and [8] to guide the edge swapping in the lifted graph. In [16], Dolecek et al. used the cycle structure to study absorbing sets in array-based LDPC codes.
Our work builds on [16] by capturing the relevant cycle structure of a specific absorbing set with a CCM and ultimately by whether the nullspace of that matrix is zero or not. A unique feature of the CCM approach is that it allows the characterization of an entire family of SCB codes rather than focus on constructing a single code by a column-by-column construction as in ACE or PEG or by a specific lifting as in [7] and [8]. On the
1EMD is the acronym for Extrinsic Message Degree.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CYCLE CONSISTENCY MATRIX APPROACH TO ABSORBING SETS

2295

other hand, in this paper, the CCM approach restricts attention to SCB codes, while ACE, PEG, and the approach of [7] and [8] can be applied in principle to any LDPC code. While the rest of the paper applies the CCM approach to absorbing sets, it can as well be applied to any trapping set or more generally any graphical object that is comprised of specific cycles connected in a specific way.

III. SCB CODES AND THE CCM
Section III-A introduces SCB codes. Section III-B introduces absorbing sets and then puts forth the main concept of this paper: the CCM. Section III-C uses graph theory to identify efficient CCMs that have the smallest possible number of rows. Section III-D shows how the VN-graph approach simplifies the identification of efficient CCMs when the check-node degree of the graphical structure is constrained to be two or less. Finally, Section III-E presents a theorem providing necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of a given absorbing set in SCB codes in terms of its CCM.

A. SCB LDPC Codes

Circulant-based LDPC codes are composed of circulant ma-

trices and form a subset of

regular LDPC codes, where

is the VN degree and is the check-node degree. Each circulant

matrix is a

matrix, where is a prime number. Parameters

and are positive integers and are at most . The structure of

these codes is compatible with high-throughput hardware im-

plementations [3].

The parity-check matrix of circulant-based LDPC codes can

be described as follows:

...

...

...

...

Parity-check matrices of SCB codes with a specified circulant

matrix (i.e., a specified ) can be viewed as originating from a

common SCB mother matrix

with

.

The functions

and

effectively specify which rows

and columns of the mother matrix are selected for the resultant

SCB matrix. The ranges of

and

are both

.

SCB codes include, for example, the constructions in [4]–[6].

The girth of all SCB codes is guaranteed to be at least 6 by

the SCB constraint on the submatrix exponent value

(since all entries in each of and are distinct,

[16]).

The SCB structure imposes certain conditions [16] on the

variable and check nodes:

Bit Consistency: The neighboring check nodes of a VN must

have distinct row group labels.

Check Consistency: The neighboring VNs of a check node

must have distinct column group labels.

Pattern Consistency: (As shown in [16].) Since every entry in

a row and a column

in the SCB mother matrix with

the value 1 satisfies

, if two VNs corresponding

to columns

and

share a check node in row group

, they must satisfy:

(1)

Converse of Pattern Consistency: If (1) is satisfied, then the

two VNs

and

share a check node in row group

of the SCB mother matrix.

Cycle Consistency: As shown in [16], the equations of the

form (1) for any length- cycle in an SCB mother matrix, which

involve VNs with column-group labels through and

check nodes with row-group labels through , show that the

cycle must satisfy:

(2)

where is the following

circulant matrix:

... ...

... ...

and

is any function mapping the (row-index, column-

index) pairs to the integers

.

A column (or row) group is a column (or row) of circulant

matrices. Each VN has a label

with

being the index of the corresponding column group and with

identifying the specific column within the

group. Similarly, each check node has a label

where

and

.

This paper focuses on SCB codes, which are defined as fol-

lows.

Converse of Cycle Consistency: If (2) is satisfied, a series

of equations of the form (1) must also hold for some set

with

. For example, selecting any

value of

forces the values of

. These

equations of the form (1) force the presence of the cycle by the

converse of the pattern consistency condition above.

One particular type of SCB code considered in this paper is

formed by selecting a set of rows from the SCB mother matrix.

We call such codes SR SCB codes. Using the converse of cycle

consistency, we can establish that all SR-SCB codes with

have a girth of 6 (i.e., the smallest cycles are always length-6

cycles.)

Lemma 1: All SR-SCB codes with

have girth 6.

Proof: It is known that the girth of such codes must be at

least 6 (see [6] and [16]). That the girth is exactly 6 follows from

the fact that if

, there is always a solution to

Definition 1 (SCB Code): An SCB code is a circulant-based

(3)

LDPC code with the parity-check matrix

in which

is separable, i.e.,

.

which is

,

, and

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2296

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

Note that it may be possible to remove these length-6 cycles by removing columns from the SR-SCB code (i.e., by shortening the code). Although already established in [6] and [16], cycle consistency shows that length-4 cycles are not possible in any SCB codes because

After reviewing absorbing sets below, (2) is used to construct a matrix equation based on the cycles contained in an absorbing set that must be satisfied if that absorbing set is present in the SCB code.

B. Applying the CCM to Absorbing Sets

This section introduces the CCM as a way to capture the cycle

behavior of a graphical structure. While the CCM approach is

generally applicable to graphical structures that contain cycles

in SCB codes, we provide the specific example of absorbing sets

to illustrate the technique since the absorbing sets are the focus

of the analysis in the rest of the paper.

An LDPC code with the parity-check matrix is often

viewed as a bipartite (Tanner) graph

, where

the set represents the VNs, the set represents the check

nodes, and the set corresponds to the edges between variable

and check nodes.

For a VN subset

, analogous to , let

be the bipartite graph of the edges

between the VNs and their neighboring check nodes

. Let

be the neighbors of with odd degree

in and

be the neighbors of with even de-

gree in . We refer to the nodes in

as “satisfied check

nodes” because they will satisfy their parity-check equations

when all the nodes in are in error.

Definition 2 (Absorbing Set (cf., [16])): An

ab-

sorbing set is a set

with

and

,

where each node in has strictly fewer neighbors in

than in

.

Fig. 1. Depiction of a

absorbing set. Black circles are the four VNs (bit

nodes) of the absorbing set. The white squares are the satisfied neighboring

check nodes, and the black squares are the eight unsatisfied neighboring check

nodes.

where is the length of that cycle. Note that the sequence of

check-node row groups

will be different for dif-

ferent cycles reflecting the particular cycle trajectories.

Every cycle in the absorbing set satisfies an equation of the

form (5). Taken together, these equations produce a matrix equa-

tion:

, where

is the coefficient of in

(5) for the cycle.

Definition 3 (CCM): A CCM of a graphical structure containing cycles in a bipartite graph of an SCB LDPC code, for example an absorbing-set graph , has a number of columns one less than the number of VNs in the structure. Each row in
corresponds to a cycle in the structure, specifying the coefficients of in (5) for the corresponding cycle. Furthermore,
completely characterizes the requirement that every cycle in the structure satisfies (5).

C. Efficient Cycle Consistency Matrices

Moreover, if each VN in

has strictly fewer neighbors A key property of a CCM is that

completely

in

than in

, an

absorbing set is called characterizes the requirement that every cycle in the structure

an

fully absorbing set [16]. An important property of satisfies (5). Even so, it is not necessary for to include a row

fully absorbing sets is that they are stable under bit-flipping de- for every cycle in the structure. A cycle need not be included in

coding in which the bit values of VNs are flipped if a majority

if it is a linear combination of cycles already included in .

of their neighboring check nodes are not satisfied.

Thus, the number of rows needed in is the number of linearly

Fig. 1 shows an example of a

absorbing set, which has independent cycles in the structure.

four VNs and eight unsatisfied check nodes.

The notion from graph theory [31] of an incidence matrix

Suppose there are VNs in an absorbing set. Let

is useful for establishing the number of linearly independent

be the column-group labels of these nodes in the SCB mother cycles in a graphical structure.

matrix. Define

Definition 4 (Incidence Matrix): For a graph with vertices

(4)

and edges, the (unoriented) incidence matrix is an matrix

with

if vertex and edge are incident and

and define

. For each cycle in the absorbing otherwise.

set, by replacing the difference of ’s with the difference of ’s, Note that since each edge is incident to exactly two vertices,

(2) may be written as

each column of has exactly two ones.

The incidence matrix of a graph is useful for identifying the

(5) cycles in the graph because every cycle has the property that the indicator vector of the edges in the cycle satisfies

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CYCLE CONSISTENCY MATRIX APPROACH TO ABSORBING SETS

2297

. In fact, the edges identified by the vector cycle (or a union of cycles) if and only if is formalized in the definition below.

form a . This

Definition 5 [Binary Cycle Space (bcs)]: The bcs of a graph

is the set of binary indicator vectors of the edges in a cycle or

a union of cycles. The bcs is the null space over

of the

graph’s incidence matrix.

An efficient CCM is the one with the least possible number of rows, which is the dimension of the bcs .

Definition 6 (Efficient CCM): An efficient CCM of a

graph has

rows. The rows of correspond to

linearly independent cycles in . Each row has the coefficients

of in (5) for the corresponding cycle.

For any bipartite graph, the check nodes and VNs together

can be the nodes used to construct an incidence matrix whose

nullspace is the bcs. As an example, for the absorbing set of

Fig. 1, an 18 20 incidence matrix

can be formed from

the 18 nodes (14 check nodes and 4 VNs) and 20 edges in that

graphical structure. The rank of

is 17 which indicates that

. Thus, there are three linearly independent

cycles in the

absorbing set of Fig. 1 and an efficient CCM

for this absorbing set will have three rows.

Fig. 2. VN graph of the

absorbing set of Fig. 1.

but not all of these cycles need to be explicitly represented in

the CCM. The incidence matrix of the VN graph shown in

Fig. 2 with

edges and

nodes is

(6)

The VN-graph incidence matrix is simply the transpose of the submatrix of the parity-check matrix whose rows correspond to satisfied check nodes of (a subset of ) and whose columns correspond to the VNs in :

D. VN Graph Approach to Finding

The smallest absorbing sets for the SCB codes we study below all share the property that within the absorbing set, the

(7)

check nodes all have degrees of two or less. This is consistent

with work such as [32] in which elementary trapping sets,

defined to have check-node degrees of two or less [33], are shown to dominate the code performance.
The constraint that the check-node degree be two or less permits a simpler technique for identifying the smallest number of rows needed for a CCM than what was presented above. Our examples of this technique are all absorbing sets, but the technique applies to elementary trapping sets and more generally to any graphical structure in which the check nodes all have degrees of two or less.
For any bipartite graph in which check nodes all have degree two or less a VN graph can be constructed whose only vertices

The rank of in (6) is 3 under

. Thus, the dimension

of the bcs is

, which means

that three linearly independent cycles span the bcs. This is the

same answer we found above, but the VN graph approach uses a

4 6 incidence matrix rather than an 18 20 incidence matrix.

Applying (5) to the following three linearly independent cy-

cles in Fig. 2:

,

,

(here and in the remainder corresponds to the VN labeled

in Fig. 1) produces the three rows of the CCM in (8) and

its determinant in (9) as follows:

are the VNs of the original graph and for which two vertices

in the VN graph are connected iff there is a check node that

(8)

connects them in the original graph. Under this constraint, for

codes with girth greater than 4 (including all SCB codes), multiple edges are not allowed between vertices of the VN graph and

since they would correspond to a length-4 cycle.

As long as the check-node degree is constrained to be two

or less, the null space of the incidence matrix for the VN graph

(9)

identifies the same bcs for the absorbing set as the null space of the incidence matrix for the original bipartite graph. However,

E. Necessary and Sufficient Conditions for Absorbing Sets

the VN graph greatly simplifies the process.

Recall that the elements of as defined in (4) contain dif-

The

absorbing set provides an example of how to use ference information about the column groups involved in the

the VN-graph approach to construct the CCM for a given ab- absorbing set: the value of the first column group is subtracted

sorbing set. The absorbing-set graph in Fig. 1 induces the VN from each of the others. The vector cannot be an all-zero

graph shown in Fig. 2. There are five cycles in the VN graph, vector because the Check Consistency condition requires that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2298

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

VNs sharing a check node have distinct column groups, and a

zero entry indicates that the VN is in the first (

) column

group. Thus, a necessary condition for the existence of a given

absorbing set in an SCB code is that its CCM matrix does

not have full column-rank in

.

Definition 7 (Extensible VN Graph): If the VN graph of an absorbing set is a subgraph of the VN graph of at least one other absorbing set with the same number of VNs, then the VN graph of is extensible.

Note that the incidence matrix of absorbing set is then the incidence matrix of absorbing set with some additional columns.
Equipped with these definitions, the next theorem gives necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of absorbing sets in SCB codes.

Theorem 1: Given a proposed

absorbing-set graph

, where every VN is involved in at least

one cycle,2 given specified column group labels of the VNs in

in the SCB mother matrix, and given specified row-group la-

bels of the check nodes in in the SCB mother matrix, the fol-

lowing are necessary conditions for the proposed absorbing set

to exist in each daughter SCB LDPC code (with the parity-check

matrix that includes the specified row and column groups of

that SCB mother matrix): 1) The CCM for does not have

full column-rank; 2) VNs in satisfy the Check Consistency

condition and can form a difference vector in the null space of

the CCM; and 3) each check node in satisfies the Bit Consis-

tency condition. Taken together, these conditions are also suffi-

cient if the VN graph of this absorbing set is not extensible.

Proof: Each of the three conditions has already been shown

above to be a necessary condition for the existence of in an

SCB. Consider the sufficiency of the three conditions.

If all three conditions are satisfied, all the cycles corre-

sponding to the rows of the CCM exist in because they

can be constructed as follows: Conditions 1 and 2 ensure a

sequence of VN column groups

that form a

vector

in the null space of the CCM. For any fixed

, we can compute

using the converse of cycle

consistency. Any linear combination of these cycles exists in

as well.

These cycles cover every edge except edges that connect a

VN to a degree-1 check node in . If 1) a VN’s unsatisfied

check node is actually the same as another VN’s unsatisfied

check node, or 2) a VN’s unsatisfied check node is actually the

same as a satisfied check node in the graph, or 3) two of the sat-

isfied check nodes are actually the same, then there exist other

independent cycles in the VN graph which extend the VN graph.

In these cases, the original structure is extensible and the three

conditions are not sufficient to establish the existence of the

absorbing set originally considered. The three conditions

might instead be caused by the presence of an absorbing set

whose VN graph contains the VN graph of the originally con-

sidered absorbing set as a subgraph. However, if the original VN

graph is not extensible, the above constructed solution must es-

2If the VN degree is at least 2, then each VN in a given absorbing set must be a part of at least one cycle.

tablish the existence of the proposed absorbing set In this case, the three conditions are sufficient.

in .

Corollary 1: Suppose a nonextensible

ab-

sorbing-set graph

has the VN graph

that is a subgraph of the VN graph of another

absorbing-set graph

. (Note that since

the VN graph of is nonextensible,

.) Then, the

existence of is a necessary condition for the existence of

.

Proof: Suppose the CCMs of and are and

, respectively. If the VN graph of is a subgraph of the

VN graph of , the independent cycles of will also be

independent in . Thus at least one valid has as a

submatrix:

(10)

where the submatrix

represents the other linearly inde-

pendent cycles in , which are not included in . Therefore,

if there exists a valid such that

, the first

elements would also be a valid such that

.

Because is nonextensible, a valid such that

is sufficient to force the existence of . This shows

that the existence of is a necessary condition of the exis-

tence of .

IV. ANALYTICAL RESULTS FOR

SCB CODES

We consider

,

, and

SCB codes, but we

begin with the

case because simple row selection elim-

inates the smallest absorbing sets in this case. Thus, this sec-

tion considers

(five row groups) and shows how to de-

sign an SCB code with a specified circulant matrix that elim-

inates the smallest absorbing sets by selecting rows from the

SCB mother matrix to force the CCMs associated with the dom-

inant absorbing sets to be full column-rank.

This example of SCB code design involves two classes of

SCB codes.

1) Array-based codes [6] are the most elementary SCB

codes in which the first rows of the SCB mother matrix

comprise the parity-check matrix.

We will refer to this class as the elementary array-based

(EAB) codes.

2) As shown in [10], a careful selection of the row groups

from the overall SCB mother matrix can improve per-

formance over the EAB codes. Thus, SR-SCB codes

are our second class of SCB codes. The parity-check

matrix for these codes is

where

is called the row-selection function

(RSF). We will often represent an RSF as the vector

.

Theorem 1 shows that an absorbing set may be avoided ei-

ther by forcing the associated CCM to have a zero-dimensional

nullspace or by precluding from being in the null space of .

Corollary 1 shows that if a nonextensible absorbing set does

not exist, then all absorbing sets whose VN graphs contain the

VN graph of this absorbing set also do not exist. The CCM ap-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CYCLE CONSISTENCY MATRIX APPROACH TO ABSORBING SETS

2299

proach carefully selects the RSF [and possibly also an analogous Corollary 2: Consider an SCB mother matrix with a spec-

column selection function (CSF)] to preclude small absorbing ified . The existence of a selection of integers for row group

sets, in the order of the size (the value of ) of the VN graph labels

satisfying the Bit Consistency conditions as-

of the absorbing sets.

sociated with the absorbing set shown in Fig. 1 and satisfying

Section IV-A establishes that

absorbing sets are the

(with

given in (9)) is necessary and

smallest possible for a general

code family. Then, Corol- sufficient for the existence of the

absorbing set of Fig. 1

lary 2 shows that

absorbing sets indeed exist for this

in the bipartite graph of the SCB mother matrix.

array-based code family for each set of row group labels that sat-

Proof: Since the VN graph in Fig. 2 of the

absorbing

isfy the Bit Consistency conditions and

. This sets is a fully connected graph, it is not extensible without in-

theoretical result is also consistent with previous experimental troducing a parallel edge, which would in turn imply a length-4

results of a sum–product decoding algorithm implemented in cycle in the corresponding bipartite graph. This property would

software and on a hardware emulator [3] for which it was shown violate Lemma 1. Because the VN graph is nonextensible, The-

that decoding errors due to

absorbing sets dominate the orem 1 applies. Hence

and Bit Consistency

low-bit-error-rate (BER) region of certain

array-based are both necessary conditions. If the Check Consistency is also

codes.

satisfied, the three conditions together are sufficient by Theorem

Sections IV-A and IV-C, respectively, show that ,

1. The rest of the proof shows that identifying a selection of in-

and

absorbing sets exist in the EAB code with

and tegers for row group labels

satisfying the Bit Consis-

that carefully selecting row groups from the SCB mother ma- tency conditions and satisfying

implies the

trix can preclude all these absorbing sets. Section IV-D provides existence of

satisfying the Check Consistency con-

several good RSFs that preclude these absorbing sets for

ditions.

SCB codes. Section IV-E explores the absorbing-set spectrum Consider the Bit Consistency conditions associated with each

of the existing QC LDPC codes with the Tanner et al. construc- of the four VNs in Fig. 1. Our concern is only regarding Bit Con-

tion [4]. Section IV-F identifies equivalence classes among SCB sistency conditions that involve satisfied check nodes. Hence,

codes and uses the equivalence-class approach to enumerate all the six row-group labels of interest are

. For ex-

of the RSFs for

and

that preclude all ,

ample, the Bit Consistency conditions applied to

require

and

absorbing sets.

that

,

, and

.

There are six different row-group labels of interest, but only

five possible row groups since

. At least one pair of row-

A.

Absorbing Sets

group labels must share the same row group. The inequalities

implied by the Bit Consistency conditions allow only

,

In this section, we analyze

absorbing sets. The main

result states that

absorbing sets exist in SCB codes

and specifically in EAB codes (Corollary 3), but that

absorbing sets can be provably eliminated from SR-SCB codes

using a suitable RSF, as shown in Corollary 4. These theo-

retical results will be substantiated by experimental results in

Section VII.

Since Lemma 1 establishes that all SR-SCB codes have girth

6,

absorbing sets are the smallest possible for SR-SCB

codes with VN degree

. (Also see [9].) To see why this is

true, note that the cases with

are not possible because

each of VNs needs to have at least three satisfied checks

but this would require a girth of four. When

, the girth

constraint and the need for three satisfied checks prevent check-

node degrees larger than two and prevent any VN from sharing

more than three checks with other VNs in the absorbing set.

Hence,

and each pair of VNs in the absorbing set shares

a distinct satisfied check. Therefore, the

absorbing set in

Fig. 1 is the smallest possible absorbing set in the code family

described by the parity-check matrix

. More general

results regarding the minimality of absorbing sets are provided

in [9].

, and

.

As shown in [16] for

absorbing sets, if all three of these

equalities are satisfied, the Cycle Consistency conditions ap-

plied to the three length-8 cycles involving two pairs of same-

row-group check nodes (i.e.,

,

, and

), yield three equa-

tions that require all VNs to have the same column group. This

violates the Check Consistency conditions.

Visualizing the

absorbing set as a triangular-base

pyramid with the four VNs as vertices, every point is sym-

metric to every other point and the three possible equalities

allowed by the Bit Consistency conditions are all isomorphisms.

Thus, we only need to consider one case of one equality being

satisfied and one case of two equalities being satisfied.

Thus, there are only two possible nonisomorphic row-group

labelings for the

absorbing set as follows: for any bijective

assignment of five distinct row group labels to

,

can be either

(Assignment

1, where two equalities are satisfied) or

(Assign-

ment 2, where only one equality is satisfied). A more detailed

discussion of the possible assignments can be found in [10]. Ap-

plying (9) to these two assignments yields the following:

This section shows that the

absorbing set always ex-

ists in

EAB codes. However, by carefully selecting row

(11)

groups from the SCB mother matrix,

SR-SCB codes can

preclude all

absorbing sets.

for Assignment 1, and

Using Fig. 1 and (9), Theorem 1 leads to the following corol-

lary regarding

absorbing sets.

(12)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2300

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

for Assignment 2.

Suppose

. Then, there exists a nonzero

solution to

, where

. With

either Assignment 1 or Assignment 2, the resulting has six

nonzero entries such that if one of

is nonzero, all

three must be nonzero. Furthermore, the structure of ensures

that any nontrivial solution to

will have

, , and all distinct. Thus, for a fixed , we can find ,

, and without contradiction to Check Consistency (since

all are distinct). Fixing one specific value will determine all

other ’s according to Cycle Consistency, yielding the VNs of

absorbing sets in the code. Therefore, a row-group la-

beling that satisfies Bit Consistency and

is a necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of

absorbing sets.

We will examine how Corollary 2 applies to all SR-SCB

codes. To begin, consider the special case of EAB codes, which

select the first five rows so that

.

For Assignment 1 there are no solutions that achieve

for prime large enough

. However,

for Assignment 2 there are 8 solution sets for

:

Note that in these solutions , the value of

. , is always 2.

Remark 1: The eight Assignment 2 solutions above imply a

relatively simple structure. The six edges of the VN graph in

Fig. 2 include three pairs of edges such that the edges in each

pair do not share any VNs. Each pair of edges corresponds to a

pair of check nodes in Fig. 2. The check-node pairs are

,

, and

. Including isomorphisms, the eight solu-

tions above imply that one of the pairs of check nodes has both

check nodes in row group 2, a second pair of labels must have

check nodes in row groups 0 and 4, and the third pair must have

check nodes in row groups 1 and 3. The eight solutions above

assume that the

pair has both check nodes in row group

2, but choosing one of the other pairs to have both check nodes

in row group 2 merely produces an isomorphism.

As an example, let us find one set of ’s and ’s so that

. Among the EAB Assignment 2 solutions

above, consider the last one:

so that

. For this solution set

specifying any and leads directly to a solution that identi-

fies a specific absorbing set.

Continuing with this particular choice of

,

there are

ways to select , each of which yields a distinct

nonzero solution to

. (Selecting

gives

the all-zeros solution.) For each of these solutions, there are

ways to select each of , and , yielding a total of

solutions.

Thus, there are there

such solutions. Here and in the

remainder of the paper, we use the standard asymptotic notation

for : a positive function is

if there exist constants

and such that

for which

for all

. For each of the eight Assignment 2 solutions

above there are

absorbing sets. The overall number of

absorbing sets is thus

.

To avoid the

absorbing set, we need to consider alterna-

tives to the EAB selection of row-group labels in

.

In general, SR-SCB codes can select the row-group labels to

force the CCM for the

absorbing sets to have a zero-di-

mensional nullspace (equivalent to forcing the determinant to

be nonzero for this square CCM). The goal is to identify a set

of five (since

) row-group labels such that any valid as-

signment of those labels to through satisfies

in both (11) and (12). One such example is the RSF

given by

. For a valid assignment of

to through , recall that the Bit Consistency conditions allow

only

,

, and/or

. Any such valid assign-

ment of these labels has

in both (11) and (12)

for any prime greater than 23. Therefore, in SR-SCB codes

with a well-chosen RSF, there are no

absorbing sets for

sufficiently large . Another example is the RSF

which avoids all

absorbing sets for

and certain

other ’s as described in [10].

The above analysis proves the following corollaries.

Corollary 3: The

absorbing sets exist in all

SCB

mother matrices and in particular in all EAB codes described

by the parity-check matrix

, and their multiplicity scales

as

in the EAB codes.

Corollary 4: There are no

absorbing sets in the

SR-SCB codes described by the parity-check matrix

,

for prime large enough and with a proper choice of .

B.

Absorbing Sets

Assuming an RSF that avoids the

absorbing sets, this

section proves that the

absorbing sets are the smallest re-

maining. The CCM approach shows that the

absorbing

(13) sets always exist in the EAB codes (Corollary 8), but are avoided

and

for SR-SCB codes by some of the RSFs that precluded the

absorbing sets (Corollary 9). We start by establishing a series of (14) intermediate results, proven in Corollaries 5–7.

As shown in (14), . Solving

for any . Suppose

gives us

and

and Corollary 5: For an . Se- absorbing sets do not exist,

SR-SCB code in which absorbing sets do not exist for

lecting

gives

and

. From Pattern

.

Consistency, taking

gives

and

Proof: For

, the total number of edges in a

. Thus, once a nonzero solution to

is spec- absorbing set is 25. The number of edges that connect to satis-

ified (for example by selecting and solving for as above), fied check nodes is even, with two such edges associated with a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CYCLE CONSISTENCY MATRIX APPROACH TO ABSORBING SETS

2301

pair of connected VNs. Since the girth is six for SR-SCB codes,

each pair of VNs can be connected at most once. There are ten

such pairs. Any group of four VNs forms a (4,8) absorbing set

iff all six of its VN pairs are connected. Thus, if

absorbing

sets do not exist, each such group of four VNs must have one

unconnected pair. This implies that at least two of the ten pos-

sible pairs must be unconnected. Thus, there are at most eight

connected VN pairs, which implies at most 16 edges connected

to satisfied check nodes, which means at least nine edges con-

nected to unsatisfied check nodes, and therefore,

.

Corollary 6: For an

SR-SCB code in which

ab-

sorbing sets do not exist, the

absorbing set is the smallest

possible, and there are no other

absorbing sets.

Proof: Because each of the five VNs must have three satis-

fied checks, 15 of the 25 edges must go to satisfied checks. Thus,

the number of edges that go to unsatisfied check nodes is at most

ten. From Corollary 5,

in the absence of

absorbing

sets. Since is odd, the smallest possible

absorbing set is

the

absorbing set. We now prove that the

absorbing

set does not contain the

absorbing set as a subgraph.

Suppose a

absorbing set has a

absorbing set as

a subgraph. We label the five VNs as

, and .

Without loss of generality, let

, and form a

absorbing set as in Fig. 1. If connects to a satisfied check

node in the

absorbing set, for example, check node that

connects and , and will have more unsatisfied check

nodes than satisfied check nodes. Then, has also to connect

to one of ’s unsatisfied check nodes ( or ) to make

satisfy the absorbing-set property. However,

, and

or

, and would then form a length-4 cycle, which

leads to a contradiction of Lemma 1.

Thus, cannot connect to the satisfied check nodes of

, and . Since has at least three satisfied check

nodes, it has to connect to at least three of the formerly unsatis-

fied check nodes of

, and . This configuration makes

the total number of unsatisfied check nodes seven or less and

certainly not nine. This property again leads to a contradiction.

Therefore,

absorbing sets cannot have

absorbing

sets as a subset.

The only remaining possible configuration of a

ab-

sorbing set is where one VN has four satisfied check nodes and

four VNs have three satisfied check nodes. Fig. 3 depicts this

configuration, which has a VN graph that does not contain the

VN graph of a

absorbing as a subgraph. Corollary 7 below

establishes the necessary and sufficient conditions for the exis-

tence of this absorbing set.

Corollary 7: For matrix in (15) below, a row-group label

assignment that satisfies the Bit Consistency conditions and sat-

isfies

is necessary and sufficient for the ex-

istence in an SR-SCM code of the

absorbing set shown in

Fig. 3.

Proof: With an analysis similar to that of

absorbing

sets, the bcs for Fig. 3 has dimension 4. We construct the fol-

lowing CCM by selecting the following linearly independent

Fig. 3. Depiction of a

absorbing set. Black circles are bit nodes in the

absorbing set, white squares are their satisfied checks, and black squares are

their unsatisfied checks.

cycles:

,

,

,

and

:

(15)

As in the proof of Corollary 2, we can show that a row-group

label assignment that satisfies the Bit Consistency conditions

and

is necessary and sufficient for the exis-

tence of a

absorbing set, where

(16)

Under the Bit Consistency conditions, there

are five possible nonisomorphic check labeling

patterns of

as fol-

lows:

,

,

,

,

and

, where different letters correspond

to distinct row-group labels.

The EAB codes have the set of row-group labels

drawn from the set

. In

particular, for the fourth pattern

,

there are eight solution sets

that always have

in (16). The other four patterns

have a nonzero determinant for large enough. Once the labels

of the check nodes are selected so that

in (16) (cf.,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2302

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

Fig. 3), the VN labels (pairs

through

) can be

selected in

ways as in the

case.

For SR-SCB codes with a proper choice of RSF,

for large enough. One such example is using an RSF

of

where

for the prime greater

than 89 except for the set

. Therefore,

we can conclude with the following two corollaries.

Corollary 8:

absorbing sets exist in EAB codes de-

scribed by the parity-check matrix

, and their number

scales as

.

Corollary 9: There are no

absorbing sets in the

SR-SCB codes described by the parity-check matrix

,

for prime large enough and with a proper choice of RSF .

C.

Absorbing Sets

This section considers the

absorbing sets, which are the

smallest remaining after the

and

absorbing sets. We

will investigate the

absorbing sets both for EAB codes

and for SR-SCB codes that preclude the

and

ab-

sorbing sets. The six subsections that follow examine, respec-

tively, the six candidate configurations of

absorbing sets

to be studied.

Section summary. We first prove in Section IV-C1 that in (6,8)

absorbing sets in

SR-SCB codes that preclude

ab-

sorbing sets the largest possible check-node degree is 2. Combi-

natorial and consistency arguments show (Sections IV-C3 and

IV-C4) that three of the remaining five configurations are not

present for sufficiently large in either the EAB code or in

SR-SCB codes that preclude the

and

absorbing sets.

The other two configurations have the cardinality

in

the EAB code. However, both of these configurations contain

a

absorbing set as a subset and thus cannot be present

in SR-SCB codes that preclude the

absorbing sets. These

two configurations are analyzed in Sections IV-C2 and IV-C5.

With this comprehensive analysis of

absorbing sets, we

can conclude that

SR-SCB codes can avoid all

,

, and

absorbing sets for large enough if the five

row groups are properly chosen.

1) Configuration 1—Check Nodes With Degree : This

case is precluded by the following lemma:

Lemma 2: If a

absorbing set has a check node that

connects to more than two VNs in the absorbing-set graph, it

must contain a

absorbing set as a subgraph.

Proof: Consider a check node that connects to more than

two VNs in such an absorbing set. It is either a satisfied check

connected to either four or six VNs or an unsatisfied check con-

nected to either three or five VNs.

If this check is satisfied, it cannot be connected to all 6

VNs because any additional satisfied check would complete a

length-4 cycle and violate the girth constraint. Suppose now

that the check in question is satisfied and connected to 4 (out

of 6) VNs. As with the degree-6 case discussed above, these

four VNs (forming a 4-clique) cannot have any other checks in

common because of the girth constraint.

The nodes in this 4-clique each have at least three satisfied

checks, by the absorbing-set constraint. For each of these four

VNs, two satisfied (degree-2) checks must necessarily be shared

with the remaining two VNs. By the girth constraint, these four

VNs then have exactly three satisfied and two unsatisfied checks

each. The two remaining variable must share an additional sat-

isfied check (so that all their checks are satisfied) to make the

total number of unsatisfied checks be equal to 8. Consider two

VNs from the 4-clique and the two remaining VNs outside of

the clique. Each of these four VNs pairwise shares a satisfied

check with the other three VNs. These checks are distinct and

the configuration induced by these four VNs is indeed a

absorbing set.

Now, we suppose that the check connected to more than two

VNs is unsatisfied. It cannot be connected to five VNs because

to have three satisfied checks, pairs of these five VNs would

need to share at least one additional check, violating the girth

constraint. Suppose that this check is connected to three VNs.

These three VNs (creating a 3-clique) must each share a dis-

tinct satisfied check with each of the remaining three VNs, by

the absorbing-set property. By the girth constraint, each VN in

the clique has an additional unsatisfied check not shared with

any other VN. The total number of unsatisfied checks incident

to the 3-clique is thus 4. Since the total number of unsatisfied

checks is 8, the remaining three VNs likewise share one unsat-

isfied check (thus creating another 3-clique) and each have an

additional unsatisfied check not shared with any other VN. Con-

sider two VNs from each of the two 3-cliques. In this group of

four VNs, every pair of VNs is connected via a distinct check,

forming a

absorbing set that is a subgraph of the

absorbing set.

Hence, all cases have been considered, and any

ab-

sorbing set with a check node having degree larger than two

must contain a

absorbing set as a subgraph.

Based on Lemma 2, attention is now restricted to cases where

all check nodes in the absorbing-set graph have degree at most

2.

In a candidate

absorbing set, VNs can have three, four,

or five satisfied checks. To maintain eight unsatisfied checks,

there can be at most two VNs with five satisfied checks. Suppose

first that there are two such VNs. Since there are a total of eight

unsatisfied checks, the other four VNs must each have three

satisfied and two unsatisfied checks. This necessarily implies

the configuration shown in Fig. 4 which we discuss next.

2) Configuration 2 (See Fig. 4): The configuration in Fig. 4

has two overlapping

absorbing sets. Thus, the existence

of this

absorbing set requires zero determinants for the

CCMs of these two

absorbing sets. As a result, SR-SCB

codes that preclude

absorbing sets also preclude this

absorbing-set configuration. This is formalized by the following

corollary.

Corollary 10: There are no

absorbing sets with the

structure of Fig. 4 in SR-SCB codes that preclude

ab-

sorbing sets.

We can also show the following result.

Corollary 11: The existence of a selection of integers for row group labels satisfying the Bit Consistency conditions associated with the absorbing set shown in Fig. 4 and satisfying

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CYCLE CONSISTENCY MATRIX APPROACH TO ABSORBING SETS

2303

Fig. 5. Configuration 3 of a

absorbing set. This is the first of two con-

figurations with exactly one VN that has five satisfied check nodes.

Fig. 4. Configuration 2 of a

absorbing set. In this configuration, two

VNs have five satisfied check nodes which forces the remaining four VNs each

to have exactly two satisfied check nodes. Note the two

absorbing sets

and

.

and

, where and

are CCMs of the two internal

absorbing sets consti-

tute a necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of the

absorbing set in Fig. 4.

The proof of Corollary 11 follows that of Corollary 2.

For EAB codes, we can show the following striking result.

Fig. 6. Configuration 4 of a

absorbing set. This is the second of the two

configurations with exactly one VN that has five satisfied check nodes.

Corollary 12: For EAB codes, there are exactly

absorbing sets of the type shown in Fig. 4 for

.

Proof: The

absorbing set in Fig. 4 includes two

absorbing sets, one spanning the four VNs

,

,

, and

and the other spanning

,

,

, and

.

Recall from Remark 1 in Section IV-A that any

ab-

sorbing set in an EAB code requires two check nodes connecting

two disjoint pairs of VNs to be both in row group 2. Another two

check nodes connecting two disjoint pairs of VNs need to be in

row groups 1 and 3. The third and final two check nodes con-

necting two disjoint pairs of VNs need to be in row groups 0

and 4.

Applying this remark simultaneously to the two

ab-

sorbing sets in Fig. 4 reveals that the only possibility that does

not violate the Bit Consistency condition is for , , and

in Fig. 4 to be in row group 2. Neglecting isomorphisms, with

, the required structure permits only two

distinct row group labelings for the remaining satisfied check

nodes. Both have

and

. However, one

labeling has

and

, while the other has

and

.

For each of these two isomorphisms, there are

ways to distinctly select , , and (Symmetry causes half

of the

choices for , , and to produce a labeling

that is a 180 rotation of the labeling resulting from a different

choice of , , and .) Thus, the total number of absorbing

sets of the type in Fig. 4 is exactly

.

Suppose now that there is exactly one VN in the absorbing

set having all five checks satisfied. The VNs in the absorbing

set must necessarily be arranged either as in Fig. 5 or Fig. 6.

3)

Configuration 3 (See Fig. 5): For this configuration,

we have the following result.

Lemma 3: In the Tanner graph corresponding to

for

the EAB codes and SR-SCB codes, there are no

absorbing

sets for large enough of the type shown in Fig. 5.

Proof: Without loss of generality, we may assign check-

node labels for the checks emanating from the VN

as

follows:

,

,

,

, and

, where

and are the five distinct check labels.

The bcs for Fig. 5 has dimension 6. We construct the CCM of

(17) by selecting the linearly independent cycles

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2304

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

,

,

, and

,

,

, as follows:

(17)

The rank of the matrix is at most 5 so in fact we may consider

the 5 5 submatrix formed by the first five rows (call it ). If

the matrix is full rank, then is full rank and has a zero-

dimensional nullspace. Hence

is necessary for the

existence of the absorbing sets of this type. This condition can

be expressed as

(18)

Also consider the bottom-left 4 4 submatrix (call it ).

Note that the Bit Consistency conditions ensure that every el-

ement of that is not explicitly zero in (17) must be nonzero.

Thus, if the matrix is full rank, then is full rank (rank-5)

because either of the top two rows provides a row linearly in-

dependent from the bottom four rows. Hence,

is

necessary for the existence of absorbing sets of the type shown

in Fig. 5. This condition can be expressed as

(19)

For the values of

, and in the available label

set

, both for the EAB and for the SR-SCB codes,

and such that the labels of check nodes sharing a VN are dis-

tinct (see Fig. 5), (18) and(19) evaluate to zero for only a finite

number of values of the parameter .

For

(the EAB code),

for

. We

can also find many SR-SCB codes where (18) and (19) eval-

uate to zero only for a finite number of values of the param-

eter . For example, with the SR-SCB code defined by the RSF

,

for

. Thus, for sufficiently

large, neither the EAB code nor well-designed SR-SCB codes

contain

absorbing sets of the type shown in Fig. 5.

labels

can be specified to satisfy Bit and Check Con-

sistency conditions and to satisfy

and

,

where and are as defined in the proof of Lemma 3.

Proof: We already established above that both

and

are necessary for the existence of

absorbing sets of the type shown in Fig. 5. We only need to

establish that these two conditions are also sufficient.

The rank of any matrix is lower bounded by the rank of any

of its submatrices. Recalling that every element of that is not

explicitly zero in (17) must be nonzero, is a full-rank 4 by 4

matrix. Thus, the rank of is no less than 4.

The first three rows of are always linearly independent.

(Recall that every element of that is not explicitly zero in

(17) must be nonzero.) Thus, if

the bottom row of

is a linear combination of the other 3 rows. Thus, the bottom

row of is a linear combination of the three rows of just

above it, and

.

Thus, if

and

are zero, is not full rank, and

there is a nonzero in the nullspace of the . If the selected

RSF precludes

absorbing sets, then the

absorbing

set in Fig. 5 is not extensible. Thus by Theorem 1

and

is a sufficient condition for the existence of the

absorbing set in Fig. 5.

4)

Configuration Candidate 4 (See Fig. 6): Note that

the configuration shown in Fig. 6 contains a subgraph that is the

absorbing set of Fig. 1. This implies the following:

Corollary 14: For SR-SCB codes that do not contain

absorbing sets, the configuration of Fig. 6 is not possible.

Even though EAB codes contain

absorbing sets, the fol-

lowing lemma states that EAB codes avoid the

absorbing

set in Fig. 6.

Lemma 4: In the EAB codes corresponding to

, there

are no

absorbing sets with the topology shown in Fig. 6

for large enough.

Proof: The bcs for Fig. 6 has dimension 6. Using linearly

independent cycles

,

,

,

,

,

, we construct the following CCM:

Incidentally, there do exist values of for certain RSFs for

which both

and

. For example, for

with the RSF

both conditions

hold. As we show in Corollary 13 below,

and

together are a sufficient condition for the exis-

tence of absorbing sets of the type shown in Fig. 5 if

absorbing sets have been excluded by the RSF. We also iden-

tified RSFs such as

where both determinants eval-

uate to zero (even before applying the

) for some choice

of check-node labels, and thus the associated codes have these

absorbing sets regardless of the choice of .

(20)

Let the top-left 3 3 submatrix of be . Note that is ex-

actly the CCM in (8) for the

absorbing set of Fig. 1. Corol-

lary 1 requires that

for the

absorbing

set of Fig. 6 to exist.

As shown in Corollary 3, EAB codes always contain

absorbing sets. Thus, there is an assignment of EAB row group

labels to

such that

.

When

, the second row of is a linear

Corollary 13: In the Tanner graph corresponding to

, combination of the first and third rows. Therefore, the rank of

if

absorbing sets have been excluded by the RSF,

ab-

only depends on the submatrix that contains all the rows

sorbing sets of the type shown in Fig. 5 exist if and only if row of except the second row.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CYCLE CONSISTENCY MATRIX APPROACH TO ABSORBING SETS

2305

Fig. 8. Candidate 6 configuration of a

absorbing set. This is the second

of two configurations with no VNs that have five satisfied check nodes.

Fig. 7. Configuration 5 of a

absorbing set. This is the first of two con-

figurations with no VNs that have five satisfied check nodes.

TABLE I

RSFS FOR SR-SCB CODES WITH

AND THE SMALLEST PRECLUDING

ALL

,

, AND

ABSORBING SETS

It suffices to consider the case when the labels

adopt one of the following two assignments:

or

. For

the first assignment

(21) D. Summary for

,

or

Absorbing Sets

and for the second assignment,

We have now considered all possible

,

, and

configurations. The following theorem is a consequence of the

results established above.

Theorem 2: In

EAB codes, the number of ,

(22) and

absorbing sets scales as

. However, for SR-SCB

codes with a properly selected RSF (such as the examples given

For both assignments and

,

for in Table I), the relevant determinants for the CCMs (or subma-

to taking values in the set

such that the Bit trices of CCMs) for all ,

or

absorbing sets are

Consistency constraints are satisfied. Thus, this

absorbing nonzero allowing the parameter to be selected so that these

set is not present in EAB codes for

.

determinants are all nonzero

, thus precluding all

,

5)

Configurations 5 and 6 (See Figs. 7 and 8): Finally,

and

absorbing sets.

we consider the case when no VN in the absorbing set has all five Table I presents some examples of RSFs that produce

satisfied check nodes. This implies one of the two configurations SR-SCB codes for which

,

and

absorbing

shown in Figs. 7 and 8.

sets do not exist. These examples provide the smallest that

Fig. 7 contains a

absorbing set. Thus, any SCM code precludes the absorbing sets. The precluded absorbing sets can

avoiding the

absorbing set will also avoid this (6,8) ab- still appear again for larger values of . However, in each case,

sorbing set. The EAB code, which does not avoid the

ab- there is a large enough that the absorbing sets are precluded

sorbing set of Fig. 1, has

absorbing sets of the type for all larger values of , as stated in the following corollary.

shown in Fig. 7 for large enough to guarantee that the needed

absorbing set is present.

Using arguments similar to those in Lemma 3, we can estab-

lish that for large enough there are no

absorbing sets

Corollary 15: When all of the relevant determinants are nonzero, there is some for which the associated absorbing sets are precluded for all larger values of .

of the type shown in Fig. 8 in either the EAB codes or in the As examples, with RSF

and

and with

SR-SCB codes. We omit detailed analysis of these cases for RSF

and

, all

,

and

ab-

brevity.

sorbing sets are precluded.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2306

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

Remark 2: For sufficiently small ’s, ,

and

absorbing sets cannot be eliminated simultaneously for the

SR-SCB codes. Here, are a few examples that remove most of

these absorbing sets for

: (1) for

with RSF=

, only the absorbing sets in Figs. 3 and 5 exist; (2)

for

with RSF=

, only the absorbing set in

Fig. 3 exists.

E. Absorbing-Set Spectrum in the Tanner Construction [4]

We now apply our analysis to the Tanner et al. construction

in [4], whose codes are in the family of SCB codes. The Tanner

et al. codes have the parity-check matrix

with

and

and

, where indicates the

multiplicative order of in

.

Lemma 5: In the Tanner graph corresponding to QC LDPC

codes with the parity-check matrix given by

in [4], no

or

absorbing sets exist with parameters selected in

[4, Table I].

Proof: For the codes in Table I of [4] with girth greater

than 6, neither

nor

absorbing sets exist since they

contain length-6 cycles. For the codes in [4, Table I] with girth

, we have analyzed each code using the CCM approach and

confirmed that in each case neither

nor

absorbing

sets exist. We note that the girth = 6 codes of [4, Table I] span

rates from 0.17 to 0.55. The full analysis is too long to include,

but we provide the following example.

Consider the girth

code with

as an example, with

. The resulting matrix

is a submatrix of the SR-SCB code with RSF

. Thus,

is achieved because the

RSF enforces and the submatrix of the SR-SCB code selects

the columns to enforce . We set up a system of equations

as before, and conclude that for

absorbing sets, the

only possible labeling for

is

. Five nonisomorphic solutions,

,

and

set

for

in (12).

Each of the solutions corresponds to the CCM equation:

(23)

Since to

and

, (23) is equivalent

(24)

If we expand the ’s with

, (24) is equivalent to

(25)

We denote the matrix in (25) as where the index

indexes the five realizations of corresponding to the five

possible choices of

values. The nullspace of

is . For any

absorbing set,

should be in

. Based on the code construction (cf., [4]), the column

groups for this code are the powers of 6 mod 31. Denote this set

by

. The four-tuple

must

be a selection of four distinct elements of . However, since

there is no vector in

that consists of four distinct ele-

ments of ,

absorbing sets do not exist and consequently

the

absorbing sets in Fig. 4, and Fig. 7 also do not exist

for this Tanner et al. code.

Similarly, for the CCMs constructed in (17) for configuration

3 in Fig. 5 and for configuration 6 in Fig. 8, the null spaces do not

include vectors that contain four distinct elements of , which

precludes the absorbing sets in Figs. 5 and 8.

Codes listed in [4, Table I] are mostly moderate-rate codes (the rate being around 0.5). The construction of codes with higher rates from this code family requires more columns to be selected from the SCB mother matrix. However, when more columns are selected (by choosing a higher order ), the Tanner et al. construction cannot guarantee the absence of certain absorbing sets.

Lemma 6: In the Tanner graph corresponding to a QC LDPC

codes with the parity-check matrix

in [4], selecting a

higher order to achieve higher rates can introduce ,

and

absorbing sets.

Proof: Continuing with the example above with

and

(which implies

), we increase the rate by re-

placing

(which implies

) with

(which im-

plies

.) This new choice of yields the column selection

set

. With this ,

absorbing sets exist because there are vectors in

that

consist of four distinct elements of . Similarly, (6,8) absorbing sets exist because corresponding solutions for Figs. 5 and 8 can be constructed from distinct elements of .

With the same row selection, the parity-check matrix of the

SR-SCB code has the parity-check matrix of the Tanner et al.

construction as a submatrix. According to the conclusions of

Theorem 2, we can modify Tanner et al. construction by using

an optimized row selection that precludes all the

,

and

absorbing sets for appropriate values of .

Lemma 7: In the Tanner graph corresponding to QC LDPC

codes (in [4]) described by

with higher rates and large

enough , all of

,

and

absorbing sets can

be eliminated by only modifying the mapping sequence of the

rows.

Proof: By replacing the row mapping sequence

by

and choosing

, the QC

LDPC with

becomes a new class of SCB LDPC codes

with

. Since

is a submatrix of the

mother matrix

, it follows that

,

and

absorbing sets can be structurally eliminated for large enough

using exactly the same analysis as in Section IV-A–IV-C.

Remark 3: We already showed that one can easily check the existence of certain absorbing sets in the Tanner et al. con-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CYCLE CONSISTENCY MATRIX APPROACH TO ABSORBING SETS

2307

struction [4] (see Lemmas 6 and 7). Other popular QC LDPC

codes, such as codes in [5] and [6] can also be viewed as being

constructed as a selection of certain rows and columns of the

SCB matrix. Codes in [5, Sec. III-B2/B3] use the SCB structure

with the parity-check matrix

, where

,

,

or

,

,

. Array codes [6] use the first

row groups of

. The approach developed for the SCB

construction can, therefore, be easily applied to codes in [5] and

[6].

TABLE II Sixty-Three CLASS LEADERS (EXCLUDING 0 AND 1) FOR RSF EQUIVALENCE CLASSES PRECLUDING (4,8), (5,9), and (6,8) ABSORBING SETS FOR

F. Equivalence Classes for SR Codes

This result enables a reduced search of structured matrices with good error-floor properties. For example, a row-map-

We now present three code equivalence conditions and use

them to fully characterize the

,

case.

Since the order of the elements in the RSF only permutes

the rows of the matrix

and does not change the code

properties, we can assume that the RSF vector

is ordered in ascending order.

Consider a difference matrix of the RSF, where

. If

or is the reflection of on

its antidiagonal, we say that and are equivalent difference

matrices. The following lemma establishes some absorbing-set

equivalence classes.

ping vector

is equivalent to

, and to

.

Here is an example for

. There are

RSFs, but there are only 2192 equivalence classes. These

equivalence classes can be represented by their class leaders

which start with 0 and 1, according to Corollary 16. Only 63

out of 2192 classes preclude (4,8), (5,9) and (6,8) absorbing

sets. Table II lists all the 63 class leaders, where the common 0

and 1 are omitted to save space. To generate all the equivalent

RSFs, we can couple the 0 and 1 to each three-element set

and form a five-element RSF vector. Then, by multiplying

and/or adding in

, where

, we can

Lemma 8: The following pairs of RSFs are equivalent in the reconstitute all the equivalent RSF vectors that preclude (4,8),

sense that they have the same absorbing sets:

(5,9), and (6,8) absorbing sets.

1)

Because code design is an offline process, complexity is not

2)

the primary consideration. However, after establishing the CCM

equations for the absorbing sets of interest, identifying all good

3)

if they have equivalent SR-SCB codes for

and

shown in Table II is

difference matrices.

completed in about five minutes using a simple MATLAB im-

plementation.

Proof: From the previous sections, the existence of any

particular absorbing set hinges on whether the determinant of

the associated CCM (or certain submatrices of the CCM) is zero.

Since the determinant is only a function of the differences be-

tween the elements of the RSF, if two RSFs

and

share any of the three equivalent condi-

tions,

leads to a zero determinant if and only

if

leads to a zero determinant.

V. THEORETICAL RESULTS FOR

This section provides an example with

(four row

groups) that shows how to design an SCB code with a speci-

fied circulant matrix that eliminates the dominant absorbing sets

by selecting rows and columns from the SCB mother matrix to

force the CCMs associated with the dominant absorbing sets to

have zero-dimensional nullspaces.

Remark 4: Since the null space of CCM also only depends on In addition to the EAB codes and SR-SCB codes introduced

the difference of the column-group indices, analogous equiva- in Section IV, removing a few column groups from an SR-SCB

lence conditions can be established column-wise.

code provides further improvement. Hence, shortened SR (SSR)

The following is a consequence of Lemma 8.

SCB codes form our third class of SCB codes. The parity-check

matrix for these codes is , with

,

Corollary 16: Any RSF is equivalent to an RSF

, where

is called the CSF. Note that for a

circulant

where

are positive integers.

matrix, EAB and SR-SCB codes have column groups ( bi-

Proof: With condition 1 in Lemma 8, a mapping vector nary columns), but SSR-SCB codes have fewer column groups

is equivalent to any mapping vector that differs by a constant in since

selects a subset of the possible column groups.

. Thus, we can subtract the smallest value in the mapping Section V-A identifies the

absorbing sets as dominant

vector and obtain a 0 in the mapping vector. Then, with condi- for EAB codes with

. Section V-B analyzes the three pos-

tion 2 in Lemma 8 and the multiplicative property of

, sible

absorbing-set configurations and shows how care-

we can multiply the mapping vector by some value in

fully selecting four row groups from the SCB mother matrix can

to make one of the nonzero elements equal to 1. Therefore, any eliminate two of the three possible configurations. Section V-C

mapping vector is equivalent to a mapping vector that contains provides an efficient provable algorithm to eliminate all

0 and 1.

absorbing sets by combining the row selection of Section V-B

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2308

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

with column selection in which some column groups of the SCB mother matrix are removed.

A. Identifying the Dominant Absorbing Sets

From the previous results in [16],

absorbing sets are

the smallest possible structure for EAB codes with

for

. Hardware simulations [3] also demonstrate that

absorbing sets are the dominant cause of the error floor for ex-

ample

EAB codes.

Based on these results, a key goal will be to design an

SCB code that avoids all

absorbing sets. The lemma

below establishes that the new code design approach does not

introduce other smaller absorbing sets that were avoided by the

codes discussed above.

Lemma 9: In the Tanner graph corresponding to

,

there is no absorbing set smaller than

for large enough

with a careful choice of the RSF .

Proof: The smallest possible absorbing sets for an SCB

code specified by

are

,

,

and

absorbing sets (cf., [16]). The ,

and

absorbing

sets for

are subgraphs of the

,

and

ab-

sorbing sets, respectively, for

. From the analysis of ab-

sorbing sets for

in the previous section (see also [10]), a

careful choice of the

RSF eliminates the ,

and

absorbing sets for large enough. Taking any four-el-

ement subset

of such an , for example, the RSF

where

, as a subset of

that can eliminate the

,

and

ab-

sorbing sets for

, avoids the

,

and

absorbing sets for

. Any RSF that avoids the

ab-

sorbing set also avoids the

absorbing set [16]. Thus, the

resulting

avoids

,

,

and

ab-

sorbing sets.

Remark 5: Since the SSR code is a shortened version of the SR code, obtained by removing certain VNs, no smaller absorbing set will be introduced in the SSR code.

In Section V-B, we show that SR codes always have absorbing sets, irrespective of the choice of . Avoidance of all such configurations using shortening is the subject of Section V-C.

Fig. 9. Depiction of the first

absorbing-set configuration.

Lemma 10: In the Tanner graph corresponding to the EAB

code and all SR codes with

, there are

absorbing

sets for any with the configuration shown in Fig. 9.

Proof: Using the technique of Section III-B, we construct

the CCM for this configuration. The bcs for Fig. 9 has dimension

5. Using the five linearly independent cycles:

,

,

,

,

, we construct the following CCM:

(26)

To avoid this absorbing set, we need to force the determinant

of the CCM to be nonzero. Note that

is computed as

where denotes the

entry in .

From the proof of Lemma 8 in [16], there are only two noniso-

morphic row-group labelings for the check nodes of Fig. 9. It is

sufficient to consider only

or

with

and taking distinct values in the range of RSF. The

first labeling yields

B.

Absorbing Sets in SR-SCB Codes

(27)

Three distinct configurations of

absorbing sets are pos-

sible for

SCB codes. This section shows which of these

configurations are possible in EAB and SR-SCB codes. The and

regardless of the specific values of

first configuration exists in the EAB code and in every pos- taken as mutually distinct integers

.

sible SR-SCB code. The second configuration exists in the EAB Thus, there exists a nonzero solution to

.

code but can be avoided by a proper choice of the RSF for the One solution to this equation is

SR-SCB code. The third configuration does not exist in either

the EAB code or the SR codes.

1) First

Configuration: Fig. 9 shows the first configu-

ration of a

absorbing set in an

SCB code. The fol-

lowing lemma establishes that the EAB code and all SR codes

have this configuration.

(28)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CYCLE CONSISTENCY MATRIX APPROACH TO ABSORBING SETS

2309

C. Eliminating

Absorbing Sets With Shortening

For a sufficiently large , well-designed SR codes avoid the

absorbing-set configurations in Figs. 10 and 11. However,

as shown in Lemma 10, SR codes cannot eliminate the

absorbing-set configuration in Fig. 9. We now consider SSR

codes that retain only certain column groups from the SCB

mother matrix (thus reducing the code rate). A well-chosen

column selection

allows the Tanner graph corresponding

Fig. 10. Depiction of the second candidate

absorbing set.

to

to avoid all

absorbing sets.

We begin with an SR code using well-selected RSF , for

instance

, that already avoids the

absorbing-set

configurations in Figs. 10 and 11 for large enough. We then

choose a CSF

to also avoid the

absorbing-set config-

urations in Fig. 9. Choosing a column selection

reduces to

choosing a submatrix of

by eliminating certain VNs.

This operation cannot introduce smaller absorbing sets.

One solution to

is (28). The rank of

in (27) is 4, and therefore this single solution forms a basis of

the null space. Multiplying by a constant , for

, also results in a solution. These

solutions cover all

of the feasible solutions described by the null space. For fixed

, we can choose from

and obtain

Fig. 11. Depiction of the third candidate

absorbing set.

fixed

. Thus, there are

ways to find to for a

. Since there are ways to assign check-node

For this absorbing set, the Check Consistency condition re- labels based on the set

for a fixed row mapping,

quires

,

,

,

,

,

, there are at most

possible vectors

that

,

,

, and

. These require- can form the configuration in Fig. 9. These vectors form the set

ments as well as the Bit Consistency inequalities are met since of vectors, which completely characterizes the instances of

are mutually distinct.

this absorbing-set configuration.

The solution in (28) satisfies the Bit, Check, and Cycle Con- If a CSF is applied, each VN group label is in a set where

sistency constraints. This is a sufficient condition for the exis-

and we can only choose

tence of

absorbing sets with the configuration of Fig. 9. such that

. There are

possible

Any four distinct values between 0 and

for

vectors and they form a set of vectors . If

identify a labeling of this first type that in turn identifies an ab-

, the new code does not have the

configuration in

sorbing set in the EAB code and every SR-SCB code.

Fig. 9. We can find such a CSF with the greedy column-cutting

Consider

, the procedure described in Algorithm 1 or the column-adding pro-

second labeling. In this case,

for

cedure described in Algorithm 2.

. Thus,

for large enough, and

there is no such

configuration with this labeling in the Algorithm 1 Greedy Column-Cutting Algorithm.

EAB code for large enough. The EAB code is one possible

SR code. Other careful choices of the RSF produce other SR 1: Initialization: begins with all columns.

codes that likewise do not have this

configuration.

2:

.

2) Two Additional Configurations: Fig. 10 shows the second

possible configuration of a

absorbing set in an

SCB

code. Similar arguments to those above establish that the EAB

code has this configuration but well-designed SR codes avoid

3:Collect all the vectors

configuration in Fig. 9 with

form a set

.

, that form the and they

it. One such example is the RSF

which avoids this 4: Proceed one column at a time removing columns that

configuration for

.

preclude vectors in until no vector in is possible.

Fig. 11 shows the third configuration of a

absorbing

set in an

SCB code. Similar arguments to those above

5:while

do

establish that neither the EAB nor well-designed SR codes have 6: Find the most frequent in , say .

this configuration for sufficiently large. In fact,

is

sufficient for the absence of this configuration in the EAB codes.

7: Replace

by

.

SR-SCB codes can avoid the configuration in Fig. 11 with a 8: Remove every

that involves from .

careful choice of the row mapping. One such example is the

EAB RSF itself. Another is to choose the RSF

, which

9:end while

avoids this configuration for

.

10: contains the column groups of the designed code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2310

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

Algorithm 2 Column-Adding Algorithm.

Fig. 12. Depiction of the

absorbing-set configuration.

Fig. 13. Depiction of the

and

absorbing-set configurations.

Remark 6: A similar technique could be applied to increase the girth [30] instead of eliminating the smallest absorbing sets. However, simply increasing the girth would not guarantee a better performance (see, e.g., [28]).

1: Initialization: Select an initial six columns for that do not form a vector in .

2:

.

3:Collect all the ordered vectors configuration in Fig. 9 with set .

, that form the , into the

4:Choose a distinct 6-element set ,

.

5:while for some ordering do

of the elements of ,

6:Choose another distinct 6-element set randomly such that .

7:end while

8: Proceed one column group at a time, adding columns to that do not introduce the absorbing set.

9:

10:while

do

11: Select a randomly from .

12: if every then

for every

13:

14: end if

15:

16:end while

17: contains the column groups of the designed code.

D. SSR Codes With the Tanner Construction

VI. DISCUSSION FOR

This section shows that for

, the RSF

of the Tanner

et al. construction [4] will always introduce

absorbing sets

for the case set forth in the following lemma. For an element

of

, let denote its multiplicative order in

.

Lemma 11: In the Tanner graph corresponding to the QC

LDPC code with the parity-check matrix

, where

,

,

,

,

ab-

sorbing sets as shown in Fig. 12 always exist.

Proof: The proof uses the same techniques as that of Corol-

lary 2. Details are omitted for brevity.

We briefly remark on the case where the column weight is 3.

First, we note that for the EAB codes with

, the

and

absorbing sets in Fig. 13 are the smallest ones, [16]. It is

easy to show that the same absorbing sets are also the smallest

possible for SR-SCB codes (of girth 6). The CCM expression

describing a

absorbing set now takes on a particularly

simple form:

Remark 7: Tanner et al. constructions with

which always has the solution

,

, and

.

and

sometimes can avoid all

absorbing sets by The number of

absorbing sets scales as

. This ex-

either increasing the girth or by making the intersection between pression precisely describes a length-6 cycle and thus estab-

the null space of and the VN space to be empty. However, lishes a one-to-one relationship between

absorbing sets

absorbing sets may still exist in some constructions with and length-6 cycles. It is therefore necessary to increase the girth

and

. For example, with

,

, for the elimination of

absorbing sets. The resulting short-

,

,

, the resulting code has

ened codes would have much lower rates and as such are not of

absorbing sets.

interest in this paper.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CYCLE CONSISTENCY MATRIX APPROACH TO ABSORBING SETS

2311

Similarly, we can apply the CCM approach to the

ab-

sorbing sets and easily prove their existence in any EAB and

SR-SCB codes. The CCM equation now becomes

(29)

and always has a nontrivial nullspace. Thus, this absorbing set

cannot be avoided in the SR-SCB codes. The number of

absorbing sets scales as

.

VII. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we experimentally demonstrate the perfor-

mance improvement achieved by the CCM design approach for

limited-precision decoders using both the sum–product algo-

rithm (SPA) [3] and the soft XOR algorithm (SXOR) [34]. The

limited-precision decoders in the simulations use 200 iterations

and a

quantization, 4 bits to the left of the radix point to

represent integer values, and 2 bits to the right of the radix point

to represent fractional values. We simulate SPA and SXOR for

a variety of different codes. We also identify the absorbing sets

responsible for each error in the error floor and report an error

profile for each simulation. As expected, when an SR-SCB code

or SSR-SCB code is designed to preclude certain absorbing sets,

they do not appear in the error profile obtained by simulation and

the error floor improves.

Fig. 14. Comparison of the

, rate-0.895 EAB, SR-SCB

LDPC codes and the Huang et al. construction [26] using SPA decoder.

TABLE III

SOFTWARE ERROR PROFILES FOR THREE

CODES:

THE EAB CODE, AN SR-SCB CODE, AND THE HUANG et al.

CONSTRUCTION. THE TOTAL NUMBER OF COLLECTED ERRORS

IS DENOTED N.E. THE NUMBER OF RUNS IS DENOTED N.R.

A. SCB Codes for

Consistent with the results presented at the end of

Section IV-A, Table III and Fig. 14 show the software,

limited-precision SPA performance of two

SCB

codes: the EAB code and an SR-SCB code. Both codes have

the following parameters: check-node degree = 47, and bit node

degree = 5. The EAB code uses

, and SR-SCB code

uses the RSF

. Another

QC code

using the Huang et al. construction [26] with the same code

parameters as our SCB codes is constructed and simulated with

the same decoder. The improved error-floor slope under lim-

ited-precision SPA decoding of the SR-SCB code as compared

to the EAB code and the Huang et al. construction is consistent

with the removal of all

absorbing sets.

We also simulated all three codes using a limited-precision

SXOR decoder in software. SXOR results are omitted in the in-

terest of space. Irrespective of the decoding algorithm (SPA or

SXOR), the SR-SCB code that provably eliminates all

ab-

sorbing sets performs the best among the three codes at every

SNR point measured. Both EAB and the Huang et al. code con-

tain

absorbing sets. The Huang et al. code offers visible

performance advantage over the EAB code under SXOR, in part

due to the suppression of the effect that the

absorbing sets

of this code have under SXOR decoding. Under SPA (and as

shown in Fig. 14), this performance advantage vanishes.

In addition to software simulations, SPA FPGA simulations

errors for the EAB code in the low BER region is again due

to

absorbing sets. The FPGA simulations collected more

errors overall so that

absorbing-set errors were observed

with both the EAB and SR-SCB codes.

While Table III and Fig. 14 showed that performance im-

provement can be obtained by precluding only (4,8) absorbing

sets, Table IV and Fig. 15 show hardware simulations demon-

strating the benefit of precluding all

,

and

ab-

sorbing sets. Here, we compare longer block-length EAB and

SR-SCB codes wither

and

. The SR-SCB code pre-

cludes all

,

and

absorbing sets using the RSF

with

which was identified in Table I of

Section IV-D as completely avoiding these three absorbing sets.

As expected, the error profile as shown in Table IV shows that

the SR-SCB code completely eliminates the

,

and

absorbing sets. Fig. 15 shows the corresponding BER im-

provement. The improved error-floor slope under limited-preci-

sion SPA decoding of the SR-SCB code is consistent with the

removal of the smallest absorbing sets.

for

EAB and SR-SCB codes were also performed,

see [10]. These results also demonstrate that the BER improve- B. SCB Codes for

ment is about one order of magnitude at 5.8 dB for SR-SCB Fig. 16 and Table V show the performance of

,

codes relative to EAB codes. This is the SNR point where

EAB code and SR-SCB codes both with check-node de-

SR-SCB codes reach BER of

. The majority of collected gree = 47 and bit node degree = 4. The EAB code has

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

Fig. 15. Performance comparison of using limited-precision SPA decoder.

EAB and SR-SCB codes

Fig. 16. Performance comparison of EAB, SR, SSR codes, a code from [4], and a code from the 802.11n standard with a decoder using 4.2 limited-precision SXOR decoding.

TABLE IV

ERROR PROFILES FOR THE EAB SCB

, CODE (TOP), AND THE

SR-SCB CODE (BOTTOM), BOTH WITH

N.E. IS THE NUMBER OF

COLLECTED ERRORS. N.R. IS THE NUMBER OF RUNS

ERROR PROFILES FOR

TABLE V

EAB

, SR-SCB

SSR-SCB

CODES

, AND

and the SR-SCB code uses RSF

. Consistent with the code provably eliminates

absorbing sets without intro-

theoretical analysis, the

absorbing sets dominate the error ducing smaller absorbing sets. The profiles in Table V confirm

floor of the EAB code. Precluding the (6,4) absorbing sets of this claim. Similar analysis can be applied to the codes in [5] as

Figs. 10 and 11 provides the SR performance improvement. Pre- well.

cluding the (6,4) absorbing set of Fig. 9 as well requires short- The

QC code from the 802.11n standard is also

ening which lowers the code rate somewhat. Such a code is dis- simulated as a reference. This code has larger block length and

cussed in the next paragraph.

lower rate than our SSR-SCB codes. The error floor is domi-

Fig. 16 also compares the performance of a high-rate QC code nated by the small absorbing sets such as

and

ab-

under the Tanner et al. construction [4] with a similar-rate SSR sorbing sets and the

trapping set which consists of a pair of

code that precludes all (6,4) absorbing sets. The QC code has degree-2 VNs. This code has a relatively early error floor com-

the following parameters:

,

,

, pared to the SSR code.

,

, and

, where indicates the mul- Finally, we plot the same SSR, Tanner et al. construction, and

tiplicative order of in

. Using the CCM-based analysis, 802.11n codes3 again in Fig. 17, now with a full precision de-

one can show that this code does not have

absorbing sets, coder. We notice that (as expected) the performance of full pre-

although it does have

absorbing sets (due to an inappro- cision-decoded codes improves for all codes considered. It is

priate row mapping). The SSR-SCB code is obtained by short- interesting to observe that the SSR code again eventually out-

ening the SR-SCB code with parameters

and

performs the 802.11n code, although the improvement is much

using Algorithm 1. This SSR-SCB code has CSF less than in the limited precision case, as the importance of ab-

sorbing sets is not as significant under full precision as it is with

. We thus obtain a code with a limited-precision decoder. Construction of a rate-1/2 LDPC

the same VN degree as the QC code, a similar block length

(

versus

for the QC code) and a sim-

ilar rate (0.8585 versus 0.8683 for the QC code). The SSR-SCB

3The 802.11n code was designed to primarily have good waterfall performance. This example is used here to further illustrate that such a code can have a high error floor if it is not optimized properly for a limited-precision decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CYCLE CONSISTENCY MATRIX APPROACH TO ABSORBING SETS

2313

Fig. 17. Performance comparison of the SSR code, a code from [4] and the code from the 802.11n standard as in Fig. 16 but with a full-precision floating-point SPA decoder.
code (not a central focus of this paper) with a low error floor was recently presented in [35].
VIII. CONCLUSION
We introduced a novel CCM description of dominant absorbing sets to guide code design and analysis of circulant-based LDPC codes. Our approach is a deterministic method that can provably eliminate certain absorbing sets in a large family of circulant-based codes, and can do so without changing code properties such as girth, rate and implementation complexity. This approach thus offers a class of codes with provably better performance than some known constructions. Theoretical findings were substantiated by experimental results showing consistent performance improvement over a range of decoding algorithms and implementation platforms. An interesting problem for future investigation would be to apply the CCM method to other graphical structures of interest, e.g., trapping sets.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Prof. Zhengya Zhang for helpful discussions.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation,” presented at the IEEE Global Commun. Conf., San Francisco, CA, Nov. 2006.
[2] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Lowering LDPC error floors by postprocessing,” presented at the IEEE Global Commun. Conf., New Orleans, LA, Nov. 2008.
[3] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance: Quantization and algorithm choices,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 3258–3268, Nov. 2009.
[4] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 15, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[5] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[6] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” presented at the 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sep. 2000.

[7] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.
[8] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Design of finite-length irregular protograph codes with low error floors over the binary-input AWGN channel using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 902–907, Apr. 2012.
[9] L. Dolecek, “On absorbing sets of structured sparse graph codes,” presented at the Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2010.
[10] L. Dolecek, J. Wang, and Z. Zhang, “Towards improved LDPC code designs using absorbing set spectrum properties,” presented at the IEEE 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sep. 2010.
[11] J. Wang, L. Dolecek, and R. D. Wesel, “Controlling LDPC absorbing sets via the null space of the cycle consistency matrix,” presented at the IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Kyoto, Japan, Jun. 2011.
[12] J. Wang, L. Dolecek, and R. D. Wesel, “LDPC absorbing sets, the null space of the cycle consistency matrix, and Tanner’s constructions,” presented at the Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2011.
[13] J. Wang, L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, and R. D. Wesel, “Absorbing set spectrum approach for practical code design,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Saint Petersburg, Russia, Jul. 2011.
[14] T. Richardson, “Error-floors of LDPC codes,” presented at the 41st Annual Allerton Conf., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003.
[15] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Estimation of bit and frame error rates of finite-length low-density parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 2234–2239, Dec. 2007.
[16] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. J. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 6261–6268, Jan. 2010.
[17] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470–3479, Dec. 2010.
[18] S. Kim, K. Ko, J. Heo, and J. Kim, “Two-staged informed dynamic scheduling for sequential belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 193–195, Mar. 2009.
[19] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” presented at the Proc. Wireless Commun., Honolulu, HI, Jun. 2005.
[20] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “Low-complexity high-speed decoder design for quasi-cyclic LDPC code,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 104–114, Jan. 2007.
[21] T. Tian, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[22] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715–718, Dec. 2004.
[23] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels: A finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2429–2458, Jul. 2007.
[24] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-shannon-limit quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.
[25] L. Zhang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, K. A. Ghaffar, and I. Blake, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: An algebraic construction, rank analysis, and codes on Latin squares,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3126–3139, Nov. 2010.
[26] Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Cyclic and quasi-cyclic LDPC codes on row and column constrained parity-check matrices and their trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 2648–2671, May 2012.
[27] D. V. Nguyen, B. Vasic, M. Marcellin, and S. K. Chilappagari, “Structured LDPC codes from permutation matrices free of small trapping sets,” presented at the IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Dublin, Ireland, Sep. 2010.
[28] D. V. Nguyen, S. K. Chilappagari, M. Marcellin, and B. Vasic, “On the construction of structured LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2280–2302, Apr. 2012.
[29] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. Huber, “When does one redundant parity-check equation matter?,” presented at the IEEE Global Commun. Conf., San Francisco, CA, Nov. 2006.
[30] O. Milenkovic, N. Kashyap, and D. Leyba, “Shortened array codes of large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3707–3722, Aug. 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 4, APRIL 2013

[31] R. Diestel, Graph Theory. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2006. [32] M. K. Dekhordi and A. H. Banihashemi, “An efficient algorithm for
finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012. [33] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007. [34] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003. [35] S. Khazraie, R. Asvadi, and A. H. Banihashemi, “A PEG construction of finite-Length LDPC codes with low error floor,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1288–1291, Aug. 2012.

Lara Dolecek (S’05–M’10) is an Assistant Professor with the Electrical Engineering Department at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) where she is the director of the Laboratory for Robust Information Systems. She holds a B.S. (with honors), M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, as well as an M.A. degree in Statistics, all from the University of California, Berkeley. She received the 2007 David J. Sakrison Memorial Prize for the most outstanding doctoral research in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences at UC Berkeley. Prior to joining UCLA, she was a postdoctoral researcher with the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. She is a 2011 Hellman Fellow at UCLA. In 2012 she received NSF CAREER award and Okawa Research Grant award. She is an Associate Editor for the IEEE COMMUNICATION LETTERS and the lead guest editor for JSAC special issue on emerging data storage. She is also Data Storage Symposium co-chair for 2013 IEEE ICNC and has served a member of the technical program committee for over a dozen international conferences. Her research interests span coding and information theory, graphical models, statistical algorithms, and computational methods, with applications to emerging systems for data storage, processing, and communication.

Jiadong Wang (S’10–M’12) received his B.S. degree in automation from Tsinghua University, Beijing, P.R.China in 2007, and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from University of California at Los Angeles, in 2008 and 2012, respectively. His research is in the area of communication theory with a focus on channel coding. He has been worked on a broad range of research topics including LDPC codes and turbo codes for a class of applications such as flash memory and broadcast channels. He is currently with Qualcomm Technologies Inc., San Diego, CA, where he conducts research on physical layer communications for CDMA technologies.

Richard D. Wesel (M’90–S’91–M’96–SM’96) is a Professor with the UCLA Electrical Engineering Department and is the Associate Dean for Academic and Student Affairs for the UCLA Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science. He joined UCLA in 1996 after receiving his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Stanford. His B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering are from MIT. His research is in the area of communication theory with particular interest in channel coding. He has received the National Science Foundation CAREER Award, an Okawa Foundation award for research in information and telecommunications, and the Excellence in Teaching Award from the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science. He has authored or co-authored over 130 conference and journal publications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

