2934

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Deeply Pipelined Digit-Serial LDPC Decoding
Philip A. Marshall, Vincent C. Gaudet, Senior Member, IEEE, and Duncan G. Elliott, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Highly parallel VLSI implementations of low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoders have a large number of interconnections, which can result in designs with low logic density. Bit-serial architectures have been developed that reduce the number of wires needed, however, they do not fully realize the potential for deeply pipelined serial data processing. Digitonline arithmetic allows operations to be performed in a serial, digit-by-digit manner, making it ideal for use in implementing a digit-serial LDPC decoder. Digit-online circuits for the primitive operations required for an offset min-sum LDPC decoder are simple, and allow deep pipelining at the digit level. A new hardware architecture for LDPC decoding is demonstrated, using redundant number systems for the internal representation of values.
We present post-layout decoder results for the (2048, 1723) 10GBASE-T LDPC code in a general-purpose 65 nm CMOS technology. The decoder requires a core area of 10.89 mm and operates at a clock frequency of 980 MHz. The decoder can simultaneously decode two 4-bit frames at 41.8 Gbit/s or one 10-bit frame at 20.9 Gbit/s.
Index Terms—Forward error control (FEC), iterative decoder architecture, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, message-passing decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) codes are a popular class of error-correcting codes proposed by Gallager [1]. They are popular due to their high performance and the simple, parallel structure of their decoders. This has led to many high-throughput ASIC designs in the literature.
The push to implement larger and larger codes with increasing computational precision has resulted in designs that require larger numbers of wires. It is reported in both [2] and [3] that as the parallelism of a bit-parallel message-passing decoder increases, the wiring overhead increases. Thus the goal of a high decoding throughput is at odds with the goal of a high logic density. In [4] it was reported that the size of a fully parallel decoder was determined by wiring congestion and not logic area. These results have prompted the design of structured codes that are suitable for partially parallel decoding [2], [3] [5]–[7]. Other approaches to limit the number
Manuscript received September 27, 2011; revised February 19, 2012; accepted May 30, 2012. Date of publication August 20, 2012; date of current version November 21, 2012.This paper was approved by Associate Editor Ming-Der Shieh.
P. A. Marshall and D. G. Elliott are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2V4, Canada (e-mail: marshall@ece.ualberta.ca; elliott@ece.ualberta.ca).
V. C. Gaudet is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada (e-mail: vcgaudet@ecemail.uwaterloo.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2012.2206461

of wires such as message broadcasting [8] and non-uniform quantization schemes [5], [9] are applicable to both partially and fully parallel decoders. Using serial communication on chip has also shown promise as a method to reduce the number of interconnect wires in LDPC decoders [10]–[12].
There has also been work in creating new decoding algorithms that have reduced routing congestion at the cost of coding gain. Stochastic decoding algorithms require fewer wires than bit-parallel min-sum or sum-product decoding but do not get as large of a coding gain [13], [14]. A 4-bit offset min-sum decoder will outperform a stochastic decoder by approximately 0.4 dB for the (2048, 1723) 10GBASE-T LDPC code [14]. Split-Row Threshold decoding is another alternate algorithm that improves routing at the cost of 0.2–0.3 dB of coding gain [15].
Existing decoders that use on-chip serial communications (referred to here as bit-serial decoders) must buffer entire values in parallel and perform parallel operations or reverse the order that the digits are processed (most-significant bit (MSB) first for minimum and least-significant bit (LSB) first for addition) at different nodes [10]–[12].
To be done with low latency, compare-select must be done MSB first since less significant bits are irrelevant if more the numbers differ in more significant positions. LSB-first serial addition can be done simply with a full adder and a flip-flop that delays each carry to be added in the next cycle. MSB-first addition cannot be done with low latency on two’s complement numbers because there could long carry chains. By expanding our numeric representation from bits to more generalized digits, we can use redundant notations to limit carry propagation and perform addition in a most-significant digit (MSD) to leastsignificant digit (LSD) fashion. This is the basis of digit-online arithmetic. Digit-online operations are simple to implement and can be deeply pipelined [16], [17]. A digit-online decoder does not require parallel storage of any messages during processing.
Section II provides an introduction to LDPC codes and gives an overview of belief propagation algorithms that are used to develop decoders. Section III provides an introduction to online arithmetic, and outlines the operations that are used to implement the serial data processing used in the proposed decoder. Section IV uses the principles of online arithmetic to develop a novel approach to belief propagation that allows serial processing of data using simple calculations. We provide a brief comparison to existing architectures in Section V, and conclude in Section VI.
II. LDPC CODES
A. Decoding Algorithm
LDPC codes can be decoded using a two-stage messagepassing algorithm. Each message passed is a log-likelihood ratio (LLR) representing a posteriori probability. Two types of

1549-8328/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MARSHALL et al.: DEEPLY PIPELINED DIGIT-SERIAL LDPC DECODING

2935

nodes are required: check nodes, and variable nodes. The vari- complexity to the system to resolve this conflict. Currently,

able nodes are initialized directly with LLRs from the channel. this involves deserializing messages and performing parallel

Then, each node passes out a set of messages corresponding to operations or reversing the order of bits. As a result, some

what it believes a bit should be. Messages propagate between hardware is only in use for only a small portion of the time.

variable and check nodes until all constraints are satisfied, or Adding two -bit two’s complement numbers MSB-first or

until a set number of iterations is reached.

finding their minimum LSB-first requires at least cycles [20].

The degree- variable node update equation is shown in (1). Thus performing MSB-first addition or LSB-first minimum

represents the th output of the variable node based on the on two’s complement operands requires no fewer cycles than

inputs from the check nodes (for

).

is the buffering the operands.

channel information.

In [10], bits arriving at the variable nodes were buffered

and then added in parallel. While this allowed for a higher

(1) throughput with their design, parallel adders are more complex than serial adders. If the bit order were consistent, the serial

adders could be pipelined to decrease the critical path. This

The sum-product belief propagation parity check node equa- would allow for increased operating frequencies while keeping

tion requires transcendental functions, so it is often approxi- the hardware efficiency.

mated by the simpler min-sum check node equation (2). rep- While such bit-serial systems reduce wiring complexity, they

resents the th output of the check node, and represents the suffer from relatively poor throughput because for -bit mes-

node degree. The minimum

is taken over all incoming sages, each set of nodes takes cycles to produce a result, during

edges with . If messages are represented in sign-magnitude which time the other set of nodes remains idle. Each iteration

notation, the output sign bit is the XOR of the input signs for then takes at least cycles to complete. It is, however, pos-

. The minimum value of the magnitude bits can be taken sible to process two codewords concurrently. While the variable

to give

.

nodes are processing the first codeword, the check nodes are

processing the second. This doubles the throughput [10]–[12].

(2) It is important to note that bit-serial systems allow the system precision to be increased without increasing interconnect

requirements. However, increasing the number of bits in a

Although the min-sum approximation makes parity check message increases the number of cycles required to transmit a nodes more simple to implement, it increases the error rate message, decreasing throughput and increasing latency.

relative to sum-product decoding. As a result, correction factors have been derived that allow for a much simpler implemen-

III. MSD-FIRST DIGIT-ONLINE ARITHMETIC

tation than sum-product decoding, while still approaching its To build a fast LDPC decoder that uses serial message

performance [18], [19]. Offset min-sum decoding subtracts a passing and serial data processing (which we will refer to as a

constant offset from the minimum magnitude in the check digit-online LDPC decoder), each output digit of any variable

node [19]. If the minimum magnitude is less than the offset, or check node should be calculated independently of other

zero is output to prevent flipping the sign. Equation (3) sum- output digits. Additionally, it is desirable that the output digits

marizes the operation of the offset min-sum check node.

can be generated after receiving as few input digits as possible

to minimize latency. These characteristics will allow for a

(3) deeply pipelined system with minimum storage requirements and latency. Previous bit-serial LDPC decoders have not fully

realized these pipeline goals and include operations that work

B. Bit-Serial LDPC Decoders

on full-precision operands in a parallel manner [10], [11]. Our discussion of digit-online arithmetic is motivated around

Recently, there has been an interest in digital systems that the operations we need to implement a min-sum LDPC block

transfer each message serially across single wires [10]–[12]. code decoder. Variable nodes require the addition of inputs. The

While this approach has reduced wiring complexity, it creates check nodes must determine the sign and magnitude of inputs,

new challenges to processing messages with low latency.

select the minimum of two values (compare-select), and mul-

If the messages are binary encoded and sent MSB-first, the tiply magnitudes by signs.

check node can evaluate the minimum function bit-by-bit as the messages are being received. However, serial addition is most A. Overview

efficiently done LSB-first. Each sum bit can be output as the An online algorithm is one that can process inputs piece-by-

messages come in, and any carry bits can be delayed and added piece without having the full set of inputs available. In contrast,

in to the next set of input bits.

an offline algorithm has all inputs available to work with at once.

Taken alone, both operations are easy to implement with Digit-online arithmetic allows operations to be performed in a

simple hardware while providing excellent performance. In a serial, digit-by-digit manner [16] making it ideal for use in im-

full system, continuous processing of messages is only possible plementing a serial processing architecture for LDPC codes. By

if the variable and check nodes process the bits in the same definition, a digit-online operation has a processing latency in

order. As a result, it becomes necessary to add additional digits that is small and fixed [16], [20].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2936

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Fig. 1. Pipeline diagram of two successive digit-online operations A and B with initial delays

and

. The pipeline stages are labeled

and . Input has digits. Output digits are shown in the cycle they are produced. No output digits are produced for cycles 0 to

; the output

digits to

are produced in cycles

to

.

Online arithmetic usually implies that the digits are processed simply negate all digits. Likewise, multiplication by can be

from MSD to LSD. This digit order is required to implement a realized by negating each digit of a number.

digit-online compare-select module [20].

Carry-save arithmetic also satisfies the requirements

Formally speaking, an operation is digit-online if after for MSD-first addition. However, the ease of negating

knowing the most significant digits we can produce the

signed-binary numbers makes them preferable to two’s com-

most significant digits of the result. The initial delay is some plement carry-save notation, which would have a larger initial

small number representing the number of digits of processing delay for absolute value and negation operations.

latency, where is less than the digits of precision of the In order to develop logic-level circuits, we must specify a

system [16], [20]. We will refer to or initial delay rather than method of encoding signed-binary digits into binary bits. The

latency to avoid confusion with the other meanings of latency. encoding specified in [22] will be used. For a signed-binary digit

In fully pipelined digit-online computations, each operation , each digit will be encoded as two bits: and . The coding

takes in a new set of input digits per clock cycle and outputs is summarized by (4).

a new set of output digits per clock cycle. Thus the latency (in

time) of an operation is very closely related to the initial delay

(4)

(in digits). For a single digit-online operation the total number of clock cycles required to produce a full result is . Subsequent operations can be overlapped to reduce the total system delay. The total number of clock cycles required for two sequential digit-online operations having initial delays and is only
. This concept is illustrated in Fig. 1. Operations that are performed with the minimum possible initial delay may have combinational paths from input to output. If pipelining is

We use the convention that represents a full-precision value, where is the th digit of (counting up from MSD to LSD). The positive and negative components of digit will be denoted and , respectively. For the outputs of operations
, we will use as the output digit, and as inputs where . Thus if a circuit takes (for example) an input , the
initial delay must be at least two.

added to split these paths, each register adds initial delay.

to the total B. Addition

Some operations, such as addition, cannot be performed in an Signed base-4 addition can be done in a two-stage process

MSD-to-LSD manner if the operands are represented in a non- with

by generating intermediate sum and carry digits in

redundant number system, such as two’s complement binary. limited ranges such that when any intermediate sum and inter-

Signed-digit representations were introduced in [21] as redun- mediate carry digit are added together they cannot generate an

dant number systems that allowed MSD-to-LSD addition of additional carry out. The addition of two signed-binary num-

numbers. We will use the set of signed-binary digits

, bers cannot be done with

because intermediate sum and

where represents the value . Many signed-binary numbers carry digits cannot be generated in a way that guarantees that

have multiple representations. For example,

, since the the second addition is carry-free [17], [21]. There are many im-

digit borrows from the position before it.

plementations of signed-binary adders with initial delays of two

The sign of a signed-binary number is the sign of the most digits or greater [21], [23], [24].

significant non-zero digit, since even if all other digits have the Fig. 2 shows the implementation of a

signed-binary

opposite sign their magnitude is not large enough to flip the adder using the desired digit encoding. Logic that breaks the

sign [17], [21]. Since the sign of a value is unknown until a carry chains between successive numbers is omitted for clarity.

non-zero digit is received, there is no upper bound on for sign This logic is not complex, it simply prevents a carry out from

detection. We will show in Section IV.B that it is possible to the MSD and ensures that the carries into the LSDs are zero.

design a digit-online LDPC decoder even though sign detection This addition circuit is more easily understood by considering

is not strictly speaking a digit-online operation.

each stage separately. Table I shows the truth table for each stage

The absolute value of a number may still be calculated in of the addition. Each stage reduces three half-digits down to one

a digit-online manner. If the first non-zero digit is negative, full digit. The additional flip-flop on the input ensures that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MARSHALL et al.: DEEPLY PIPELINED DIGIT-SERIAL LDPC DECODING

2937

Fig. 3. Circuits for adding (a) or subtracting (b) a conventional unsigned binary operand to/from a signed binary number.

Fig. 2. Circuit for digit-online addition of two signed-binary numbers with a

signed-binary result.

and

are

intermediate results.

TABLE I

TRUTH TABLES FOR THE (A) FIRST AND (B) SECOND ADDITION STAGE

IN THE TWO-STAGE DIGIT-ONLINE SIGNED-BINARY ADDER SHOWN

IN FIG. 2.

AND

ARE

INTERMEDIATE RESULTS

MSD of the input at the second stage arrives in the correct clock

Fig. 4. Circuit for digit-online addition of two signed-binary numbers and a

conventional binary value with a signed-binary result. Input

deter-

mines whether is subtracted or added and must remain constant for the entire

operation.

cycle.

By using each of the stages separately, we can introduce con- over the entire operation. This higher fan-in

circuit can

ventional unsigned operands into signed-binary operations. To be used to build variable nodes with a lower initial delay. Since

add an unsigned binary number in conventional notation to a the sign of sign-magnitude numbers are immediately known, if

signed-binary number, the circuit in Fig. 3(a) can be used. To the channel values are sent to the variable nodes in sign-mag-

subtract a conventional unsigned number from a signed-binary nitude notation, can take the magnitude of the channel value

number the circuit in Fig. 3(b) can be used [22].

and

can be set to a latched copy of the sign bit.

The building blocks of Fig. 3 can be arranged to yield the circuit of Fig. 4. This circuit can be used to add five signed-binary C. Compare-Select

half digits where the sign of all is fixed at design time, or where A finite-state machine is shown in Fig. 5 that compares two

the sign of is known at its first digit. Input

is true when signed-binary numbers and outputs the minimum. Since each

is to be subtracted rather than added, but must remain constant output digit generated has the same weight as the incoming

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2938

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Fig. 5.

Mealy machine with

for a signed-binary compare-select element. Inputs and are the input digits that arrive during cycle

, and output is the output digit generated during cycle . State

means is larger than up to the digits received. State

means is certainly

larger than regardless of remaining digits.

Fig. 6. System diagram of a digit-online LDPC decoder showing the path from one channel LLR to one output bit. Each pipeline stage stores one digit of a

message, so the digits of precision

.

digits,

. A similar circuit is presented in [17] that deter- To prevent overflow, numbers entering the variable node must

mines the minimum of two signed-base-4 numbers.

be limited to some maximum magnitude. Saturation should be

The state machine tracks the apparent difference between the done only after all additions, so additional guard bits are added

two operands and outputs digits from the number that appears to the LLRs. This allows LLRs of maximum magnitude to be

to be smallest. Due to the redundancy in signed-binary, an input added in the variable nodes without ill effect. An additional

that appears at the current position to be 1 larger than the other

digits are added to allow for the values in each

may still be minimum. For example,

is smaller than variable node to be added together. The LLRs leaving variable

even though the former has a larger first digit. How- nodes are allowed to exceed the maximum magnitude, but LLRs

ever, if the apparent difference grows to 2 then the ordering of are saturated before reaching the variable nodes again.

the operands cannot change. A number that begins with 11 must Saturation may take place either immediately after the output

be larger than a number that begins with no matter which of the variable nodes, or at any point within the check nodes.

digits follow.

Saturation in the check node gives a clear area advantage be-

D. Input and Output Conversion

cause it requires only two magnitudes to be saturated (minimum and second minimum), rather than saturating every LLR indi-

The channel inputs to the decoder will likely be in nonredundant binary format. The addition circuits can accommodate a non-redundant sign-magnitude input. The channel LLRs can be stored and distributed in sign-magnitude form. If the channel information is in two’s complement form, a conversion to sign-magnitude form can be performed upon input.
Conversion from signed-binary to two’s complement requires full-precision carry-propagate adders. This conversion is avoided by outputting only the final decoded bits off-chip.

vidually. While this decreases the amount of power used in processing, it will increase the switching power of the variable node to check node interconnects when LLR magnitudes are large (assuming that saturated values have fewer transitions).
Each node must receive an input that distinguishes the MSD of the LLR from other digits. We will call the vector version of this signal , and specify that for a corresponding value
if and only if is the MSD. This will allow carry chains to be broken in adders and state machines in the compare-select modules to be reset. This input will be globally synchronized in

IV. DIGIT-ONLINE LDPC DECODING

the sense that each node of a given type will receive its MSD at the same time.

In this section we will assemble an architectural design for a Assuming is the length of the full decoding pipeline, we

digit-online LDPC decoder. Fig. 6 shows the overall architec- can decode multiple frames at a time by allowing more than

ture of our system. Messages flow from variable nodes through one 1 in the vector. The precision of the LLRs may be varied

check nodes and back to variable nodes. If the variable nodes by changing the distance between 1 s. Each frame need not be

have a total initial delay and the check nodes have total ini- decoded with the same precision, so long as the precisions of all

tial delay , it is desirable that

. This allows each frames add up to the total pipeline length. While the input buffer

pipeline stage to hold one digit of an LLR message.

and output detector must be aware of these parameters, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MARSHALL et al.: DEEPLY PIPELINED DIGIT-SERIAL LDPC DECODING

2939

Fig. 7. Example

degree-4 signed-binary digit-online variable node. The

input represents channel information.

basic variable and check node circuits in no way depend on the precision or number of frames. The computation nodes work on a continuous stream of data, needing to know only where each value starts and ends. Existing bit-serial designs have an LLR length and number of frames is fixed at design time. It would not be as easy to implement variable word length in bit-serial designs because deserialization operations limit the maximum word length to half the pipeline length. The redundant notation used in digit-online decoding allows the entire pipeline to be used for one or more words.
In a decoder for an irregular code, differing node degrees may lead to different initial delays for the same type of node. Since each variable node must have the same processing delay and each check node must have the same processing delay, additional pipelining may be needed in some nodes.

A. Variable Node Design

Design of the digit-online variable node is relatively straightforward. The signed-binary adders presented earlier are used to implement (1). Each output is formed by the sum of the channel value and of all other inputs. For some node degrees, the number of adders can be reduced by reusing addition terms. Fig. 7 shows

Fig. 8. Architecture of a signed-binary digit-online offset min-sum parity

check node. The offset correction factor is represented by as in (3). The

sign/magnitude finite state machine is shown in Fig. 9. Each

signal is

false unless is the input with the smallest magnitude. If two or more inputs

are tied for the smallest magnitude, one is chosen arbitrarily. The selection

network is detailed in Fig. 10.

a degree-4 variable node that combines terms to reduce the total

number of adders.

Care must be taken to synchronize all values moving through

the node to make sure all the inputs to any adder arrive with a

constant initial delay so that they have the same weight when

added. Registers must be added to inputs that enter an unbal-

anced addition tree at later stages resulting in a higher hardware

cost for these paths. Inputs should be taken from the output of

the immediately previous stage when possible and, when syn-

chronization flip-flops are unavoidable, as few paths as possible

should contain synchronization flip-flops. As shown, the adder circuits have purely combinational paths
from input to output. Having cascaded adders may necessitate further pipelining to keep the clock period short.

Fig. 9. Sign/magnitude Mealy machine with

for signed-binary numbers.

The state means that the input is definitely positive, means the input is

definitely negative, and 0 represents an as-yet-unknown sign.

At the beginning of a new frame, the new incoming channel

values can be passed directly through the variable node into the satisfy the extrinsic principle of min-sum decoding, we use a

check node. Since all LLRs would be initialized to zero, doing selection network to calculate two minima: the first minimum,

additions is not necessary. This allows the addition tree to be and the second minimum. In the case where the magnitude of

used for the final sum (before hard decision) of the previous two inputs are equal to the first minimum, the first minimum

frame, resulting in more efficient hardware use.

and second minimum will be equal. The minimum and second

B. Check Node Design

minimum will undergo saturation, and one of these corrected magnitudes will be chosen for each output LLR depending on

The design of the check node is somewhat more involved. whether the corresponding LLR input was the first minimum.

Fig. 8 shows the check node architecture based on (3). Input The second minimum is used as the magnitude for the output

LLRs are split into signs and magnitudes using the state machine corresponding to the minimum input, while all other outputs are

in Fig. 9, and offset correction is applied to each magnitude. To given the first minimum magnitude.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2940

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Offset correction is implemented by subtracting the offset

from the magnitude unconditionally, then using a state machine

to replace negative values with zero. The correction factor is

stored in the decoding controller as a non-redundant binary

number and broadcast to all check nodes. Since a number

in conventional binary notation is being subtracted from a

signed-binary value, the adder is implemented as in Fig. 3(b)

for a

subtraction.

A selection network is used to find the two smallest values.

Optimal (in number of comparisons or depth) sorting networks

are well-known for up to 16 inputs, and heuristics are avail-

able to generate good sorting networks for larger numbers of

inputs [25]. A two-output selection network can be generated

from a sorting network by eliminating all comparators that do

not lead to either of the two smallest outputs. We will take

advantage of the fact that there is no inherent initial delay in

the compare-select operation to give us the most flexibility in

pipelining the system. Compare-select modules with

will be used, with the understanding that the check node can

be pipelined to decrease the clock period. This flexibility will

allow us to best balance the pipeline stages.

In order to track which input’s magnitude was the first min-

imum, the compare-select modules are modified to mark which

input had the lesser value, giving an output

which is

true if

. The input magnitude which was the smallest can

be determined by looking at the results of all the comparisons.

Each magnitude is marked with a signal

which is

true if and only if that magnitude is the smallest. If two or more

magnitudes are equal for smallest, any one can be chosen arbi-

trarily. Fig. 10 shows how

signals are generated for a

parity check node.

To ensure correct results, each

signal must change

only at certain times. Specifically, the signal may only change

when the minimum and second minimum are equal up to the

digits that have been received so far. This ensures that when the

multiplexor switches from selecting one magnitude to another

it does not produce invalid results. In the compare-select state

machine, there are no transitions directly between states where

and states where

. Therefore the only times the

output can change is when leaving the

state.

As long as the

signals from all comparators remain

synchronized to their corresponding minimum outputs, there

will only be

transitions at legal times.

This relationship between the

signals and the min-

imum magnitudes is the reason that offset correction must be

applied to each input magnitude. Although it would require less

hardware to apply offset correction at the output of the selec-

tion network (since only two magnitudes would need to be cor-

rected), such a configuration would result in changes to the min-

imum magnitudes that break the relationship to the

signals and result in invalid outputs from the multiplexor. Such

a design has been simulated and has been observed to generate

incorrect results. It would also be possible to do offset correction

between the multiplexor and the sign multiplication. However,

as we will explain, we wish to perform offset correction before

saturation.

The signs from the sign-magnitude splitters at input will be

XORed together to form the output signs. Each output magni-

Fig. 10. Example of a selection network (built using compare-select modules)

for

, with explanation of how

signals are generated. The

signal is true if

. Unused compare-select outputs are omitted.

tude will be multiplied by the corresponding output sign to form the final output LLR. The signs must be fully determined before the first non-zero digit is output to ensure a proper multiplication. Luckily, this is guaranteed to be the case, as illustrated in the next paragraph.
Consider determining in a degree-3 check node. The sign of need not be known at all because the output sign depends only on the sign of and . The compare-select finite state machine outputs digits of the number that appears smallest. If the number with the most leading zeros is the minimum, then the sign of the maximum is known first, and both signs are known by the time non-zero digits are to be output. If the number with the fewest leading zeros is the minimum value, the state machine will still output zeros until the first non-zero digit of the maximum, at which point both signs are known.
Generalizing to larger degrees, by the time the first non-zero digit of the minimum magnitude is reaching the output multiplexer, the signs of all numbers are known. Any output LLR that does not correspond to the minimum input will output the minimum value and all signs will be known by the first non-zero digit. For the output LLR that corresponds to the minimum input, the sign of the minimum does not need to be known. All other signs will be known by the time the first non-zero digit of the second minimum is received.
The XOR tree for signs is implemented by XORing all inputs together, and then XORing each input sign in again to obtain the correct sign for the output. Since the sorting network will need

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MARSHALL et al.: DEEPLY PIPELINED DIGIT-SERIAL LDPC DECODING

2941

to be pipelined, the XOR tree may be pipelined as well to limit in a digit-online system, all functional units are continuously in

the effect of having a large fan-in tree. The modulo 2 sum of use even for systems designed to decode only a single frame.

all input signs represents whether the check equation has been satisfied or not. The sum is zero when the equation is satisfied. A. Precision Scaling

To allow for early termination, each check node outputs whether it has been satisfied or not.
The ideal place to perform saturation in the check node is at the outputs of the sorting network. This method requires that only 2 values be saturated rather than . Another advantage of saturating in the check node is that only one comparison is necessary since all values are positive. Separately comparing for overflow and underflow is not necessary.
Numbers in signed-digit notation are difficult to saturate directly because in-range numbers can initially appear to be out-of-range [22]. Since we are not concerned with knowing whether our LLR is in range or out of range (only in clipping it), we can use a compare-select module. The LLR magnitude provides one input, and a state machine generating the maximum allowable magnitude provides the other. This ensures that all LLRs leaving the check node have magnitudes that are within the design range for the variable node inputs. The logic implementation of the saturation compare-select module can be simplified since one input is known to be positive and can be expressed in conventional notation. This method of saturation results in the minimum number of transitions within saturated values. If saturation is performed after offset correction, then the number of output transitions is minimized when check node values saturate.

We will now look at the effect of changing the message preci-

sion on decoder performance. Since it is often trivial to decrease

area while decreasing throughput (or increase throughput at the

cost of area), we will use the ratio of throughput/area for com-

paring different implementations.

To increase the word length in a bit-parallel system, the nodes

become necessarily larger. Adders and comparators must be

widened to accommodate the extra digits, and more wires are

required in the interleaver. To increase the message precision in

a digit-online decoder, only the number of pipeline stages needs

to increase to store the extra digits of precision. Addition and

comparison can be done with the same circuits regardless of pre-

cision, and the number of wires in the interleaver is fixed with

the code chosen.

The size and delay of a variable node is determined by the ad-

dition circuits. If we assume a bit-parallel implementation using

ripple-carry adders, the area and delay increase linearly with the

number of bits. For a tree-adder implementation, the area and

delay scale as

and

, respectively, with the

number of bits per message.

The delay and size of a comparison circuit determine the per-

formance of the check nodes. Since bit-parallel comparison is

implemented by subtraction, the scaling for bit-parallel check

nodes will be the same as bit-parallel variable nodes.

C. Hard Decisions and Early Termination

Finally, we consider the scaling of the interleaver. The number of wires is proportional to the number of message bits,

The hard decision upon output is trivial. As the final sum is calculated, a simple state machine stores the sign of the first non-zero digit. When all the signs are known, they form the bits of the decoded output and are sent off-chip.
Early termination is also easy to implement. Since each check node has an output indicating whether it has been satisfied or not, we can determine whether all check equations have been satisfied by ANDing the results from all the check nodes. If all check equations have been satisfied, the final output LLRs and the hard-decision outputs are calculated. If there are unsatisfied check equations, decoding continues as usual with the next iteration. Due to the initial delays of the final addition and the hard decisions, there is a cost of two extra iterations to terminate decoding early.

so we expect that interleaver area and delay would scale as

and

, respectively, in a bit-parallel system.

In a digit-online system, the number of clock cycles needed

to process each message is proportional to precision. A

more precise digit-online decoder is inherently more deeply

pipelined, so the clock cycle length could potentially be de-

creased by rebalancing pipeline stages. However, we make

the conservative assumption that the length of the clock cycle

remains constant. In this case, throughput is inversely propor-

tional to precision. For a -digit message, the precision in bits

is equal to

, where is the number of guard digits

required for the system. Since the area remains constant, the

throughput/area should scale as

.

From the scaling orders determined above, the digit-on-

line system has a throughput/area that scales as

.

V. ANALYSIS OF NEW ARCHITECTURE

A bit-parallel system with ripple-carry adders has a

throughput/area of order

. Using tree adders, bit-parallel

Compared to existing bit-serial implementations, the systems have a throughput/area that scales as

digit-online architecture has several advantages. First, the if the interleaver dominates, and

if it is not

digit-online architecture does not need to store messages in significant.

parallel at any point. Bit-serial systems require parallel storage Fig. 11 shows the throughput/area as a function of message

of messages in order to reverse the order of bits at each node, precision relative to a 4-bit implementation with the same

and in order to convert between two’s complement and sign- arithmetic scheme. All of the bit-parallel implementations scale

magnitude forms [12]. Second, determining the magnitude of similarly, but the digit-online implementation scales better

a signed-binary number is much simpler than determining the than any of them. For example, an increase from 4 bits to

magnitude of a two’s complement number. Current bit-serial 8 bits decreases throughput/area to half of the original value in

systems rely on frame interleaving to keep all functional units digit-online systems, and to one quarter or less in digit-parallel.

busy [10]–[12]. Since digits always flow in the same direction To go from 4 bits to 16 bits reduces throughput/area to one

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2942

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Fig. 11. Relative effect of increasing message precision on throughput/area for various LDPC block decoder implementations. For tree adder implementations, the worst case is that the interleaver dominates scaling while in the best case it can be neglected.

Fig. 12. FER (dashed lines) and BER (solid lines) performance of the (2048,1723) 10GBASE-T LDPC code from bit-accurate C-simulation using BPSK modulation.

quarter of the original value in digit-online, and to one sixteenth in digit-parallel.

TABLE II COMPARISON OF SUB-100 NM LDPC DECODER ASICS FOR
THE 10GBASE-T (2048,1723) LDPC CODE

B. Post-Layout Results

Using the digit-online architecture, a decoder for the (2048,

1723) 10GBASE-T LDPC code was implemented. The decoder

requires a core area of 10.89 mm in a TSMC general-purpose

65 nm process1. The post-layout clock frequency is 980 MHz

under nominal conditions and using the conservative wiring

model. The design was placed at an initial core density of 80%.

We were able to place and route our design at 90% initial den-

sity, but the achievable clock frequency dropped from 980 MHz

to 890 MHz.

The degree-32 check node was based on a selection network

with 61 comparisons in 8 levels. It was pipelined to give

.

Using the high fan-in addition circuit of Fig. 4, a two-stage

variable node was designed and pipelined to give

.

The 12 stages of the total system pipeline allows for 12-digit

signed-binary messages to be stored and processed. Three of the digits are required to prevent overflow, leaving 9 that can store useful data. As previously explained, LLRs are saturated to 9 digits once per iteration. Since signed-binary notation does not require a separate sign digit, this is equivalent to using 10-bit two’s complement messages.
Since 10-bits of precision is much higher than what is found in other published 10GBASE-T decoders [2], [3], [12], the 12 stages of the pipeline can also be used to store two 4-bit (3 signed-binary digit) frames and decode them in a frame-interleaved fashion. This requires changes to only the control logic, so it is possible for the same decoder to decode either one 10-bit frame or two 4-bit frames at once.
The error performance of the system has been verified with bit-accurate C-simulations. Fig. 12 shows the error performance of the decoding system at 4-bit and 10-bit precisions. The higher

precision provides only a slight 0.1 dB coding gain improvement but is included because of the low area cost (about 1%) of supporting this mode as well.
At low SNR, given 8 iterations per codeword and 12 clock cycles per iteration, a 980 MHz operating frequency corresponds to a 20.9 Gbit/s coded throughput at 10-bits. At 5.5 dB we are able to realize a 2.0 speedup from early termination, bringing the coded throughput to 41.9 Gbit/s. Using the decoder to decode two interleaved 4-bit frames doubles the worst-case throughput to 41.8 Gbit/s and brings the throughput at 5.5 dB to 82.8 Gbit/s.
A comparison of results is shown in Table II. Throughput is normalized to area to give the throughput/area ratio (TAR). To achieve a more fair comparison, we scale the 90 nm results of [3] and [12] to 65 nm using the approximate scaling factors of [26].

1Standard cells used were version 140b of the tcbn65gplus cells. Logic syn-

At a 4-bit precision, the digit-online architecture is an im-

thesis was performed in Synopsys Design Compiler D-2010.03-SP5.

provement over bit-serial [12] in terms of absolute throughput

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MARSHALL et al.: DEEPLY PIPELINED DIGIT-SERIAL LDPC DECODING

2943

while achieving a similar area-normalized throughput. It should

REFERENCES

be noted that the check nodes in [12] calculate only a single minimum and not the extrinsic minimums. This decreases their areas, but results in an SNR shift of about 0.5 dB compared to extrinsic minimum algorithms. Additionally, their results are pre-layout. A placed design would have a larger core area and possibly a lower clock frequency.
The bit-parallel decoder in [2] achieved a coded throughput of 47.7 Gbit/s through the use of early termination. They reported that routing congestion at high levels of parallelism limited their placement densities and timing. As a result they chose to implement a partially parallel design to limit congestion. They were able to achieve 80% placement density at their desired timing. The decoder in [3] required a lower 70% initial placement to meet their goals even though it is a much smaller design. Our design was fully parallel and yet we observed no routing congestion or timing difficulties at 80% placement density. This presents a strong argument that digit-online computations can mitigate routing issues in highly parallel decoder designs.
At 4-bit precision we achieve a higher throughput and throughput/area than [2] and [3]. Our BER performance is identical to [2]. The decoder in [3] performs slightly better due to the higher message precision of 5-bits. At a 10-bit precision we still achieve a higher throughput than [2] and [3], but at a lower throughput/area.
VI. CONCLUSION
Fully parallel LDPC block code decoders are known to be limited by wiring congestion. Using serial communications on-chip is one approach to mitigating this problem, but existing bit-serial message-passing LDPC block code decoders have several shortcomings. By using signed-binary redundant notation, we have expanded bit-serial communications to digit-serial communications. This allows us to use digit-online techniques to develop deeply pipelined LDPC decoders. Redundant notation removes the need that previous bit-serial decoders had to reverse the bit order at each node or de-serialize and perform parallel operations. Unlike existing bit-serial decoders, frame-interleaving is not necessary for efficient use of hardware.
Digit-online decoders do not require any special considerations for code design, do not require specialized decoding algorithms, and are suitable for fully parallel decoding. They achieve throughput comparable to state-of-the-art implementations and make efficient use of silicon area. Placement density of at least 80% is achievable without routing congestion, even for a fully parallel design.
Digit-online LDPC decoders have a lower relative cost to increasing word length than bit-parallel systems. They show promise to be used in implementations where high computing precision is needed. Digit-online decoders can dynamically switch between a higher-precision lower-throughput mode and a frame-interleaved lower-precision higher-throughput mode.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), CMC Microsystems, Synopsys and TSMC.

[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] Z. Zhang, V. Anatharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “An efficient 10GBASE-T ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[3] Y.-L. Ueng, C.-J. Yang, K.-C. Wang, and C.-J. Chen, “A multimode shuffled iterative decoder architecture for high-rate RS-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2790–2803, Oct. 2010.
[4] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[5] C. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Sha, L. Li, and J. Li, “Flexible LDPC decoder design for multigigabit-per-second applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 116–124, Jan. 2010.
[6] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.
[7] Y. Chen and K. K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004.
[8] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Multi-Gbit/sec low density parity check decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” in Proc. 2005 IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, vol. 5, pp. 5194–5197.
[9] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. K. Parhi, “On finite-precision implementation of low density parity check codes decoder,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, vol. 4, pp. 202–205.
[10] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A bit-serial approximate min-sum LDPC decoder and FPGA implementation,” in Proc. 2006 IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, pp. 149–152.
[11] T. Brandon, R. Hang, G. Block, V. C. Gaudet, B. Cockburn, S. Howard, C. Giasson, K. Boyle, P. Goud, S. S. Zeinoddin, A. Rapley, S. Bates, D. Elliott, and C. Schlegel, “A scalable LDPC decoder ASIC architecture with bit-serial message exchange,” Integration VLSI J., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 385–39, May 2008.
[12] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, pp. 1835–1845, Aug. 2008.
[13] S. S. Tehrani, A. Naderi, G.-A. Kamendje, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Majority-based tracking forecast memories for stochastic LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process, vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 4883–4896, Sep. 2010.
[14] A. Naderi, S. Mannor, M. Sawan, and W. J. Gross, “Delayed stochastic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., Aug. 2011.
[15] T. Mohsenin, D. N. Truong, and B. M. Baas, “A low-complexity message-passing algorithm for reduced routing congestion in LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1048–1061, May 2010.
[16] M. Ercegovac, “Online arithmetic: An overview,” in Proc. SPIE V.495: Real Time Signal Processing VII, 1984, pp. 86–93.
[17] M. J. Irwin and R. M. Owens, “Digit-pipelined arithmetic as illustrated by the paste-up system: A tutorial,” Computer, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 61–73, Apr. 1987.
[18] S. L. Howard, C. Schlegel, and V. C. Gaudet, “Degree-matched check node decoding for regular and irregular LDPCs,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 1054–1058, Oct. 2006.
[19] J. Chen and M. P. Fossorier, “Density evolution for BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes and their quantized versions,” in IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. 2002, Nov. 2002, vol. 2, pp. 1378–1382.
[20] R. M. Owens, “Techniques to reduce the inherent limitations of fully digit on-line arithmetic,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. C-32, no. 4, pp. 406–411, Apr. 1983.
[21] A. Avizienis, “Signed-digit number representations for fast parallel arithmetic,” IRE Trans. Electronic Computers, vol. EC-10, no. 3, pp. 389–400, Sep. 1961.
[22] M. D. Ercegovac and T. Lang, Digital Arithmetic. Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2004.
[23] M. A. Thornton, “Signed binary addition circuitry with inherent even parity outputs,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 811–816, Jul. 1997.
[24] Y. Harata, Y. Nakamura, H. Nagase, M. Takigawa, and N. Takagi, “A high-speed multiplier using a redundant binary adder tree,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. SC-22, no. 1, pp. 28–34, Feb. 1987.
[25] D. E. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, 2nd ed. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1998, vol. 3, ch. 5.3.4, pp. 225–229.
[26] G. Baccarani, M. R. Wordeman, and R. H. Dennard, “Generalized scaling theory and its application to a 1/4 micrometer MOSFET design,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-31, no. 4, pp. 452–462, Apr. 1984.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2944

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Philip A. Marshall received his B.Sc. in electrical engineering from the University of Alberta in 2005. He is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Alberta.
He has previously worked on high voltage and mixed signal CMOS designs to support microfluidic applications. His research interests include ASIC architectures and VLSI design for communications systems.
Vincent C. Gaudet (S’97–M’03–SM’10) received the B.Sc. in computer engineering from the University of Manitoba in 1995, the M.A.Sc. from the University of Toronto in 1997, and the Ph.D. from the University of Toronto in 2003. Since 2010 he has been an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada. From 2002 to 2010, he was with the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada, first as Assistant Professor, and later as Associate Professor. In 2002, he was a Research Associate at the Ecole Nationale Superiéure des Télécommunications de Bretagne (now Télécom-Bretagne) in Brest, France. In 2008–2009 he was on sabbatical leave at Northeastern University in Boston, MA, and at Tohoku University in Sendai, Japan. His research interests focus on information-processing microsystems, more specifically on energy-efficient circuits for graph-based decoding of error-control codes such as Turbo and Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes. He also has interests in biomedical circuits and systems. Prof. Gaudet is licensed as a Professional Engineer in the Province of Ontario. He currently serves as Associate Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, and as Technical Editor for the IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference. He is a Member-at-Large of the IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on Multiple-Valued Logic. He will serve as the Technical Program Chair for the 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Multiple-Valued Logic in Victoria, BC. He was the recipient of the 2009 Petro Canada Young Innovator Award. He has previously served on the NSERC Scholarships and Fellowships Committee 176 (2005–2007), and as Associate Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs (2008–2009).

Duncan G. Elliott (M’97) received his B.A.Sc. in engineering science and his masters and doctorate degrees in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Toronto.
He is a Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada. Previously, he has worked at Nortel in data communications, at MOSAID Technologies as a DRAM designer, and at IBM Microelectronics as a contractor in application-specific memory design. His research interests include information processing architectures, merged microfluidic-microelectronic systems, logic-enhanced memories and high-speed circuits. Professor Elliott was the 2001 winner of the Colton Medal in microelectronics for his work on Computational RAM, which has been commercialized. He is a member of the IEEE Solid-State Circuits, Circuits and Systems, Computer and Communications Societies and of the ACM.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

