7260

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Message-Passing Algorithms and Improved LP Decoding
Sanjeev Arora, Constantinos Daskalakis, and David Steurer

Abstract—Linear programming (LP) decoding for low-density parity-check codes (and related domains such as compressed sensing) has received increased attention over recent years because of its practical performance—coming close to that of iterative decoding algorithms—and its amenability to finite-blocklength analysis. Several works starting with the work of Feldman et al. showed how to analyze LP decoding using properties of expander graphs. This line of analysis works for only low error rates, about a couple of orders of magnitude lower than the empirically observed performance. It is possible to do better for the case of random noise, as shown by Daskalakis et al. and Koetter and Vontobel. Building on work of Koetter and Vontobel, we obtain a novel understanding of LP decoding, which allows us to establish a 0.05 fraction of correctable errors for rate-½ codes; this comes very close to the performance of iterative decoders and is significantly higher than the best previously noted correctable bit error rate for LP decoding. Our analysis exploits an explicit connection between LP decoding and message-passing algorithms and, unlike other techniques, directly works with the primal linear program. An interesting byproduct of our method is a notion of a “locally optimal” solution that we show to always be globally optimal (i.e., it is the nearest codeword). Such a solution can in fact be found in near-linear time by a “reweighted” version of the min-sum algorithm, obviating the need for LP. Our analysis implies, in particular, that this reweighted version of the min-sum decoder corrects up to a 0.05 fraction of errors.
Index Terms—Linear programming (LP) decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, message-passing algorithms, min-sum algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are linear codes over (or its extensions) whose constraint graph is sparse. They were introduced and analyzed by Gallager [1] in a paper that was forgotten for several decades and recalled again only in the 1990s. Sipser and Spielman [2] studied a subclass of these codes in which the constraint graph has good
Manuscript received August 23, 2010; revised November 01, 2011; accepted November 01, 2011. Date of publication July 13, 2012; date of current version November 14, 2012. S. Arora was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grants CCF-0832797, 0830673, and 0528414. C. Daskalakis was supported in part by NSF under Grants CCF-0953960 (CAREER) and CCF1101491, in part by a Sloan Research Fellowship, and in part by a Microsoft Research Faculty Fellowship. D. Steurer was supported by NSF Grants CCF0832797, 0830673, and 0528414. This paper was presented in part at the 41st ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, Bethesda, MD, 2009.
S. Arora is with the Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540 USA (e-mail: arora@cs.princeton.edu).
C. Daskalakis is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: costis@csail.mit.edu).
D. Steurer is with the Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850 USA (e-mail: dsteurer@gmail.com).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2208584

expansion properties. For these expander codes, they showed

that a very simple bit-flipping strategy, originally suggested by

Gallager, corrects efficiently an

fraction of (worst-case)

errors, though the actual constants were quite weak. (Myriad

extensions of expander codes have been studied but will not be

discussed here.)

Meanwhile, researchers in information theory rediscovered

Gallager’s ideas and began to view the decoding problem for

LDPC codes as an example of maximum a posteriori estimation

in factor graphs (a notion that also became popular in machine

learning). Various iterative message-passing algorithms—two

popular ones being belief propagation (BP) and the min-sum

algorithm—were found to empirically yield excellent decoding

performance. A survey of LDPC codes and decoding algorithms

appears in [3] and [4].

In a seminal paper, Richardson and Urbanke [4], aided

with some computer calculations, were able to establish

that a BP-like algorithm can decode with high probability

a

-regular LDPC code on a binary symmetric channel

with error rate up to 0.084. This is the best bound known for

any decoding algorithm, and is not far from the empirically

observed performance of BP, and the information theoretic

limit of roughly 0.11.

Our paper concerns the linear programming (LP) decoding

method. This method was introduced by Feldman et al. [5] in

a paper that only establishes a sublinear number of correctable

errors, but also notes that the empirical performance of LP de-

coding is similar to that of message-passing algorithms. A sub-

sequent paper of Feldman et al. [6] showed that the method cor-

rects -fraction of (worst case) errors for expander codes.

The proof consists of constructing a dual solution, inspired by

Sipser and Spielman’s analysis, and yields similar bounds: a tol-

erance of adversarial error rate up to 0.00017. Note that the ad-

vantage of LP decoding over message-passing decoders is that

in the case of decoding success, the linear program provides a

certificate that the output is indeed the nearest codeword.

Unfortunately, it has remained difficult to improve the anal-

ysis of LP decoding to establish bounds closer to the empirically

observed performance. Daskalakis et al. [7] were able to show a

tolerance to error rate up to 0.002—an order of magnitude better

than the bounds of Feldman et al. [6] but still more than 40 times

lower than the Richardson–Urbanke [4] bound of 0.084 for BP.

Their proof constructs a more intricate dual LP solution than

Feldman et al.’s, but it is still based on expansion arguments.

(Note: All the bounds in this paper are quoted for (regular) rate

½ codes and the binary symmetric channel.)

Intuitively, the main reason for the small bit error rates in the

aforementioned analyses of LP decoding was that these analyses

were close in spirit to the Sipser and Spielman expansion-based

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ARORA et al.: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS ANDIMPROVED LP DECODING

7261

approach. By contrast, the Richardson–Urbanke style analysis

of message-passing algorithms relies upon the high girth of the

graph defining the code (specifically, the fact that high-girth

graphs look locally like trees).

Nevertheless, it remained unclear how to bring girth-based

arguments into the context of LP decoding. In a recent paper,

Koetter and Vontobel [8] achieved this. Their key idea was

to use the min-sum algorithm rather than BP (which uses

highly nonlinear operations). They showed how to transform

the messages exchanged in the min-sum algorithm into an

intricate dual solution. (Their construction was inspired by the

Gauss–Seidel method to solve convex programs.) Though they

did not report any numbers in their paper, our calculations show

that their analysis of LP decoding allows

-regular codes

to tolerate random error rate 0.01 —a factor of 5 improvement

over Daskalakis et al. [7].

In this paper, we present an improvement of the error rate

by another factor of 5 to 0.05, coming very close to the perfor-

mance of BP. The key ingredient in our proof is a new approach

to analyzing LP decoding. Instead of trying to construct a dual

solution as in all the previous papers, we give a direct analysis

of the primal linear program. (This also answers an open ques-

tion of Feldman et al. regarding whether a primal-only analysis

is possible.) At its heart, the proof relies on the fact that the

LP relaxation is tight for trees. We use this to show that an LP

solution can be decomposed into a distribution over codewords

for every tree-like neighborhood of so that these distributions

are consistent in overlapping neighborhoods; the type of consis-

tency that we use is inspired by hierarchies of LP relaxations,

such as the Sherali–Adams hierarchy [9] (though all proofs are

self-contained and no prior knowledge is required besides basic

LP). We use our decomposition to define a criterion for certi-

fying the optimality of a codeword in the right circumstances

(Theorem 2), which is quite interesting on its own right. If the

certificate exists, it can be found by a simple message-passing

algorithm (Theorem 3), and if it exists, then LP decoding works

(Theorem 4). The first such certificate was described in [8]; ours

is more general and therefore occurs with high probability for

much larger error rates (Theorems 1 and 5). We note that prior

to [8], no other analyses led to message-passing algorithms that

certify the correctness of their answer.

As for the probability with which such a certificate exists,

our calculation consists of reducing the whole problem to the

study of a min-sum process on a finite tree (Definition 4), which

is even amenable to analytic calculation, as done for error rate

up to 0.0247 (see Section VII-A). This consists of tracing the

Laplace transform of the messages exchanged by the min-sum

process, as these messages move upward on the tree. We believe

that this idea of recursing the Laplace transform, rather than the

density functions, of the messages is interesting on its own right

and could be useful in other settings. In our setting, it is rather

effective in handling the min operators, which we cannot handle

analytically if we trace the density functions of the messages.

Combining our analytic bounds with a MATLAB calculation,

we can accommodate error rate up to 0.05 (see Section VII-B).

The method seems to break down beyond 0.05, suggesting that

getting to 0.084 would require new ideas. We note that our anal-

ysis does not require expansion, only high enough girth. (A

lower bound of

on the girth is sufficient to make the

probability of decoding error inverse polynomial in the block-

length .) Perhaps, the right idea to go beyond 0.05 is to marry

high-girth and expansion-based arguments, an avenue worth ex-

ploring.

An interesting byproduct of our technique is establishing that

a certain reweighted version of the min-sum decoder corrects

up to a 0.05-fraction of errors with high probability over the

binary symmetric channel for code-rate ½. To the best of our

knowledge, the bound of 0.05 is the best known for reweighted

min-sum decoders over BSC for codes of rate ½ (cf., [10]–[14]).

As compared to the 0.084 bound for BP, ours has the advantage

that with high probability the nearest codeword can be certified

to be correct.

We note that our method, being primal only, is relatively

clean—and in our opinion, easier to understand (apart maybe

from the probabilistic calculation) than previous analyses. We

also suspect that the idea of expressing primal solutions in terms

of local tree assignments may be of wider use in applications

that use LP decoding techniques and random graphs, such as

in compressed sensing. Candès and Tao [15] (independently of

Feldman et al. though somewhat later), as part of work on com-

pressed sensing, arrived at LP as a promising tool for a variety

of reconstruction problems in compressed sensing, which in-

clude decoding random linear codes over the reals (these are

not LDPC since the constraint graph is nonsparse). Recent work

such as [16] and [17] makes explicit the connection between

Sipser–Spielman type decoding of LDPC codes and compressed

sensing using sparse matrices.

Follow-Up Work: Our techniques have been extended to

codes defined by more general factor graphs [18] and channels

[19]. They also found use in compressed sensing [20].

Our Main Result: All result statements including the next

one assume that the message length is some arbitrarily large

constant; so, for instance, a girth of

or

is larger

than any fixed constant.

Theorem 1: Let

and let

be a codeword

of the LDPC code defined by a

-regular bipartite graph

with

girth. Suppose that

is obtained from

by flipping every bit independently with probability . Then,

with probability at least

for some constant

1) the codeword is the unique optimal solution to the LP

decoder of Feldman et al. [5] (see LP (1) in Section II);

and

2) a simple message-passing (dynamic programming) algo-

rithm running in time

can find and certify

that it is the nearest codeword to .

For LDPC codes defined by general

-regular graphs,

we have the same conclusion whenever

, and satisfy

the conditions

and

The running time is still inside the depending on

with the constant hidden .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7262

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Remark 1: If we are content with a decoding success prob-

ability of

, then

girth is sufficient

for the results in the previous theorem. The running time of the

message-passing algorithm is reduced to

.

II. PRELIMINARIES

LDPC Codes: Let be a simple bipartite graph with biparti-

tion

, left degree , and right degree . Let be the

number of left vertices, and be the number of right vertices.

We will assume that is the set

. For two

vertices and of , we let

be the distance of and

in . We denote by

the set of neighbors of . Similarly,

is the set of vertices at distance from . We denote by

(for “Ball”) the set of vertices at distance at most from

.

The parity-check code defined by is the set of all 0/1 as-

signments to the left vertices such that every right vertex has an

even number of neighbors with value 1

The elements of

are called codewords. Note that if we

allow general graphs, then any linear code can be realized as

parity check code

for some (generally irregular) graph .

In this paper, we will only deal with sparse (low-density) graphs,

i.e., the degrees and will be constants.

In the following, we refer to the vertices in and as

variable nodes and check nodes, respectively.

LP Decoding: In the nearest codeword problem for the code

, we are given a vector

and the goal is to find

a codeword

so as to minimize the Hamming distance

.

In [5] and [21], Feldman et al. introduced the following LP

relaxation for this problem:

(1) (2)

where

denotes the convex hull of a set of bit vectors,

and is the set of bit vectors satisfying constraint

We call

an LP solution if it satisfies (2). We say

is an optimal LP solution given if is an LP solution that

achieves the minimum distance (1) to . An optimal LP solution

can be computed in time polynomial in . In this paper, we are

interested to find conditions under which the solution of this LP

coincides with the nearest codeword to .

Before concluding this section, we note that

is an

affine linear function of

for any fixed

,

since

, for all

.

III. CERTIFYING THE NEAREST CODEWORD

to certify as the nearest codeword to . We present a certificate

based on local checks that is inspired by and generalizes the key

idea in the calculation of Koetter and Vontobel [8]. The moti-

vation for this generalization is that it allows certification/de-

coding in the presence of much higher noise. Our proof that this

certificate works is also quite different. It is designed to easily

carry over to prove that is also the unique fractional solution

to the LP.

To understand the certificate, imagine two different code-

words and . Whenever and differ in a certain bit, say

the one corresponding to

, then they must look very

different in the neighborhood of in the constraint graph. In-

deed, since

differ at , in order to satisfy the parity

constraints in

(i.e., those that are adjacent to ), code-

word must actually also differ from in some other variables

that are in

. Of course, then those other variables appear

in some other constraints in

, thus necessitating yet more

variables to be flipped in

, and so on for at least as long as

the neighborhood around looks locally like a tree. (Note that

the variable nodes in

have even distance to and the

check nodes have odd distance.) Since the girth of the graph is

large, this effect propagates quite a while, implying that and

differ along a large subtree rooted at in the graph.

Hence, if is not the closest codeword to , then one could

hope that this might show up locally in the neighborhood of

some bit : flipping this single bit in would trigger a cascade

of other bit flips, which might end up lowering the distance to .

If so, then would be locally suboptimal. Note that the induced

graph on

, is a tree (with degrees

and , respectively, at even and odd levels), and so one can

hope to find the best local perturbation from —in the sense we

will define in the following—efficiently via dynamic program-

ming, and thus efficiently test for local optimality of .

The aforementioned intuitive description raises the question:

if is globally suboptimal (i.e., not the nearest codeword to

), is it also locally suboptimal? The practical success of mes-

sage-passing algorithms gives us hope that the answer may often

be “yes.” Such algorithms are local in the following sense: after

iterations, the value computed for the variable

is a “guess” for given the information in the neighborhood

; in this sense, after rounds, message-passing algo-

rithms compute a “locally optimal” solution. Several notions of

“local optimality” were implicit in the algorithms of [10]–[14].

Our notion of local optimality generalizes the notions used in

all of these papers, and our interest centers around showing that

local optimality implies global optimality. (The reader confused

by the stream of ideas coming next may wish to focus on the next

two definitions and then study the simple proofs in Section IV

to understand the essence of our idea.)

Our notion of local optimality is given in Definition 2 and

requires the following definition generalizing Wiberg [10].

Definition 1: (Minimal Local Deviation): Let

. An assignment

is a valid devia-

tion of depth at

or, in short, a -local deviation at

, if

and satisfies all parity checks in

, i.e.,

Throughout this section and the next,

is the re-

ceived word and

is a codeword which we are trying

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ARORA et al.: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS ANDIMPROVED LP DECODING

7263

(Notice that need not be a codeword since we do not insist

that the check nodes beyond level from are satisfied.)

A -local deviation at is minimal if

for every

, and every check node in

has

at most two neighbors with value 1 in . Note that a minimal

-local deviation at can be seen as a subtree of

of

height rooted at , where every variable node has full degree

and every check node has degree 2. We will refer to such trees

as skinny trees.

An assignment

is a minimal -local deviation if

it is a minimal -local deviation at some . Note that given ,

there is a unique such

.

If

is a weight vector and is

a minimal -local deviation, then denotes the -weighted

deviation

Remark: Somewhat confusingly, a globally optimal code-

word does not necessarily have to be locally optimal (even with

respect to the weight vector

) because the definition of

local optimality ignores what happens beyond radius , and also

restricts attention to minimal deviations.

Note that if is locally optimal, then this is some intuitive ev-

idence that is the nearest codeword, since changing in just

one variable seems to cause the distance from to increase

in the immediate neighborhood of . Koetter and Vontobel [8]

make this intuition precise for

, in which case they show

that a locally optimal is also globally optimal, i.e., the nearest

codeword to . (In fact, all previous theoretical analyses of mes-

sage-passing algorithms have some notion of local optimality

but none of them were known to imply global optimality.) Our

proof works for general .

if

and

otherwise.

In particular, notice that

. (End of Definition 1.)

For two vectors

, we denote by

the co-

ordinatewise sum of and modulo 2. We extend this notation

to fractional vectors in the following way: if

and

, then

denotes the vector with co-

ordinate

. Note that, for a fixed vector

is affine linear in . Hence, for any distribution over vectors

and a fixed bit vector , we have

.

The next definition tries to capture whether or not local

changes to can increase the distance from . While our

previous discussion may suggest that it suffices to consider

the weight vector

,1 we will see later that the overall

analysis can be improved by allowing more general weight

vectors. In particular, our results on local-optimality implying

global-optimality (Theorems 2 and 4) remain unaffected by the

use of more general vectors, but different choices of allow

more flexibility resulting in better error rates in Theorem 5. It

is still mysterious to us what the optimum choice of is, and a

theory for calculating it is left as an open problem in this paper.

Intuitively, adjusting allows us to improve the likelihood that

local information in the neighborhood of variable predicts

correctly the value of variable . At the very least, it should be

clear that the vector

is more “natural”

than since it gives equal weight to every level of a skinny

tree (recall that the number of nodes in a skinny tree doubles

with (half) the distance from the root). Indeed, this vector is the

one we use to compute the 0.05 bound on error rate claimed in

Section I.

Definition 2: (Local Optimality): If

is a weight vector (with at least one positive coordi-

nate) and

, then a codeword

is

-locally optimal for

if for all minimal -local

deviations

Theorem 2: Let

and

be

any nonnegative weight vector with at least one positive coor-

dinate.

1) If is a

-locally optimal codeword for

,

then is also the unique nearest codeword for .

2) Moreover, given , and , a simple dynamic program-

ming algorithm running in time

can certify that is a

-locally optimal codeword for

, where is the number of bits required to represent a

coordinate of the weight vector .

Observe that since the local neighborhood at each node is

tree-like, the minimal -local deviation at that minimizes

, for a given pair of and , can be computed

by a simple dynamic programming algorithm in time near-linear

in the size of the neighborhood. Theorem 2(b) shows that it is

possible to interleave these computations for all possible ’s

achieving an overall running time of

(which is

near-linear since we are going to choose

or

later in the proof). The details of the dynamic

program are presented in Section IV. (The running times quoted

in this paragraph are hiding the dependence on the degrees

and and the description complexity of vector . For the pre-

cise running time, see the statement of Theorem 2.)

Theorem 2 implies that we can certify that is the nearest

codeword for by verifying the local optimality condition. It

raises two questions.

1) How can we find a locally optimal codeword if it exists?

2) What is the chance that the nearest codeword satisfies the

local optimality condition?

The first question has been studied in the context of mes-

sage-passing algorithms. For

, Wiberg [10] showed that

the well-known min-sum decoding algorithm can find locally

optimal codewords. Other specific weight functions were sug-

gested and analyzed in several works [11]–[14]. We show how

to make min-sum decoding work for arbitrary weight vectors

(which allows much more freedom in deriving analytic error

bounds). The proof of the following theorem and details of the

algorithm are presented in Section V.

1Whenever we refer to the weight vector

in this section, we abuse

Definition 1, by setting

(instead of 0).

Theorem 3: Let

and

be a

nonnegative weight vector with at least one positive coordinate.

Suppose that is a

-locally optimal codeword for

. Then, the -reweighted min-sum algorithm on input

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7264

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

computes in iterations. The running time of the algorithm

is

, where is the number of bits

required to represent a coordinate of the weight vector .

Since the focus of this paper is on LP decoding, we next ad-

dress whether LP decoding can find locally optimal solutions.

To this end, we extend Theorem 2 in order to show that a lo-

cally optimal solution is not only the nearest codeword to but

also the unique optimal LP solution given . For the case

,

this was also established by Koetter and Vontobel [8].

Theorem 4: Let

and

be

any nonnegative weight vector with at least one positive coor-

dinate. Suppose that is a

-locally optimal codeword for

. Then, is also the unique optimal LP solution

given .

The proof for

in [8] proceeded by constructing an

appropriate dual solution in an iterative manner. Our proof in

Section VI yields a more general result, and is completely dif-

ferent, since it only looks at the primal LP.

Now, we address the second question mentioned previously,

regarding the probability that the nearest codeword is locally

optimal. (Showing higher probabilities for this event was the

main motivation for introducing general weight vectors .) We

prove the following theorem in Section VII. The theorem asserts

the existence of certain weight vectors. Their explicit choices

are described in the proof. We just note here that each coordinate

of these vectors may only be a function of

, and , and in

particular does not depend on . We also note that we did not

address the question of numerically computing/approximating

these weight vectors. Their computation is irrelevant as far as

proving the success of the LP decoder goes, but is needed if one

chooses to instead use the -reweighted min-sum decoder of

Theorem 3, or wants to certify the optimality of the codeword

output by the decoder, using the algorithm of Theorem 2.

Theorem 5: Let be a

-regular bipartite graph and

. Let also

and

be a

codeword in

. Finally, suppose that is obtained from

by flipping every bit independently with probability .

1) If

, and satisfy the condition

(3)

then is

-locally optimal with probability at least

for some

. For

,

Condition (3) is satisfied whenever

.

2) If

and satisfy the conditions

and

for some constants and

.

For

, Condition (4) is satisfied whenever

.

3) There exists a weight vector such that if

and

, then is

-locally optimal with

probability at least

for some constants

and

.

Given Theorems 2–5, we can obtain the proof of Theorem

1 as follows. Suppose that

is a large enough

constant and take

. From Theorem

5, there exists a weight vector such that, with probability at

least

for some constant depending linearly on

the leading constant in front of

in the choice of (as well

as on , and ), the codeword is

-locally optimal.

From Theorem 4, it follows then that is the unique optimal

LP solution given . Also, from Theorem 3, it follows that

can be found by the -reweighted min-sum algorithm in

iterations, so time

overall, and by

Theorem 2 it can be certified that is the nearest codeword to

. (If the girth is

then the decoding still succeeds

with probability

.)

IV. LOCAL OPTIMALITY IMPLIES GLOBAL OPTIMALITY

Proof of Theorem 2: In this section,

is the

received word,

is a locally optimal codeword in

, and

is a codeword different from . We

wish to show

.

The following lemma is the key to our proof of Theorem 2,

and may be viewed as one of our key new contributions.

Lemma 1: Let

. Then, for every codeword

, there exists a distribution over minimal -local devia-

tions such that for every weight vector

where

is some scaling factor depending upon .

Before proving the lemma, let us first see how we can finish

the proof of Theorem 2 using such a distribution over minimal

local deviations. This proof (as well as the related proof of The-

orem 4) is at the heart of our paper.

Proof of Theorem 2: Let be a

-locally optimal

codeword for

. We want to show that for every code-

word

, the distance to increases, i.e.,

. The main idea is to observe that

is also a code-

word, and hence by Lemma 1, there exists a distribution over

minimal -local deviations such that

for the

codeword

. Now, it is easy to complete the proof using

local optimality of . Let

be the affine linear

function

.

Now

(4)

which implies

as desired.

then there exists a weight vector

such that To conclude the proof of the theorem, we argue that certifying

is

-locally optimal with probability at least

that a given is a

-locally optimal codeword for a given

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ARORA et al.: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS ANDIMPROVED LP DECODING

7265

can be carried out in

time with dynamic programming, where is the number of

bits required to represent each coordinate of the weight vector

. The algorithm proceeds in iterations, where each itera-

tion comprises two phases. In the first phase of iteration

, for every pair of adjacent variable and check nodes

, variable node sends a message

to check node , while in the second phase of

the iteration, a message

is sent in the opposite

direction of the edge. The messages are as follows.

1) Initialization: For all

neighborhood

and direct the edges away from the root

. Remove all variable nodes in this neighborhood with value 0

in . Remove now the vertices that are no longer reachable from

. This leaves a tree (rooted at ) in which the degree is a nonzero

even number at each check node and at each variable node.

In this remaining tree, pick a random subtree with full out

degree at variable nodes and out degree 1 at check nodes.

Suppose now that we choose such a tree for all with

, such that these trees are mutually independent. Independently

from the choices of the trees, we also choose uniformly at

random from the support of (that is, we pick with probability

), and define as

2) Variable-to-check node message: For all 3) Check-to-variable node message: For all

if otherwise.

We denote by the joint probability measure over the trees

, the variable node , and the assignment . Before

concluding the proof of Lemma 1, we make a few observations

about the random subtrees . First, the number of nodes at level

of any tree is always exactly

(the

root has out-degree ). Second, for any two variable nodes

with

, the aforementioned process treats them

symmetrically

(5)

4) Termination: After iteration

node

computes

is completed, every variable

Indeed, if

, then both of the probabilities are

0 (since the height of the trees is ). Otherwise, the nodes

are connected by a unique path of length

, say

. If there exists some variable

node

, in this path with

then both

of the probabilities are zero. Otherwise, let

be the number of neighbors of that are in the support of .

Then, both of the probabilities in (5) are equal to

It is easy to see that, for all

, the message computed

by the algorithm described previously equals the minimum

over all minimal -local deviations at . Hence,

comparing the computed ’s against

will certify cor-

rectly the local optimality of . The running time of the algo-

rithm is

, where is the number of

bits required to represent each coordinate of the weight vector

. Indeed, there are

messages computed in the course

of the algorithm (since there are

iterations and there are

messages computed in each iteration), each message

has size

, and takes time

to com-

pute.

which completes the proof of the claim in (5).

Armed with these observations, we can analyze our distribu-

tion over minimal local deviations : if

, then

with probability 1. Hence, we may assume

. Then

A. Proof of Lemma 1

Constructing Distributions Over Minimal Local Deviations

for Codewords: Let

be a codeword. We want to

construct a distribution over minimal local deviations such that

the mean of the distribution (viewed as a vector in ) is pro-

portional to .

For every variable node

with

, we define

a distribution over subtrees of of height rooted at :

The idea is that we grow minimally and randomly inside the Therefore, we have the desired conclusion

with

nonzeros of starting from the variable node . Consider the

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7266

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

V. FINDING LOCALLY OPTIMAL CODEWORDS

We briefly describe how to find a

-locally optimal

codeword for a given

if such a codeword exists. The

algorithm is a weighted version of the min-sum algorithm (see,

e.g., [10, Ch. 3]). It proceeds in iterations,

,

where each iteration comprises two phases. In the first phase of

iteration

, for every pair of adjacent variable and

check nodes

, variable node sends

a message

to check node , while in the second

phase of the iteration, a message

is sent in the

opposite direction of the edge. The messages are as follows.

1) Initialization: For all

can be decomposed as

, where

and have disjoint supports (i.e., for all

and

cannot be both 1).

Armed with this lemma, we can conclude the proof. Indeed,

assume that

. Then, (6) implies that there exists some

such that

where and are defined as in Lemma 3. But the same lemma implies that

2) Variable-to-check node message: For all

where to check that

and have disjoint support. It is easy

Combining the last three equations, we have that

3) Check-to-variable node message: For all

a contradiction to our assumption that is timal for at .

-locally op-

4) Termination: After iteration is completed, every variable

node

computes

We show the following lemma.

Lemma 2: If is a

-locally optimal codeword for

and

, then for all , the values computed

at termination by the aforementioned algorithm satisfy

Hence, the algorithm described previously computes a

-locally optimal codeword for a given

, if

such a codeword exists. The running time of the algorithm is

, where is the number

of bits required to represent each coordinate of the weight

vector . Indeed, there are

messages computed in

the course of the algorithm (since there are

iterations and

there are

messages computed in each iteration), each

message has bit length

, and takes time

to compute. To argue the latter, we

use a straightforward dynamic program to do the minimization

of Step (3) in

bit operations.

VI. LOCAL OPTIMALITY IMPLIES LP OPTIMALITY

Proof: Due to the symmetry of the code we can assume,

without loss of generality, that

. Hence, we

want to establish that, for all

. For

, let us

define

if

and

otherwise.

Proof of Theorem 4: Let

be a codeword in

and let

. The following lemma is completely

analogous to Lemma 1, and follows from the fact that LP solu-

tions look locally like distributions over codewords.

Lemma 4: Let

and

. Then, for

every nonzero LP solution

, there exists a distribution

over minimal -local deviations such that

It is clear from the definition of our algorithm that for every variable node and because

(6)

where

.

Using a distribution over minimal local deviations from

Lemma 4, we can prove Theorem 4 in almost the same way

Now, we use the following decomposition lemma due to Wiberg (see [10, Lemma 4.3]).

as Theorem 2 in the previous section. The only additional

ingredient is the following simple property of LP solutions.

Recall that for

and

, we denote by

Lemma 3: For

, let

the vector whose th coordinate is

. The next

satisfies all check nodes in

and

. Moreover, lemma is straightforward using the observation that the defining

let be the set of minimal -local deviations at . Then, any property of an LP solution (specifically, (2)) is that locally (for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ARORA et al.: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS ANDIMPROVED LP DECODING

7267

every check node) it can be viewed as a convex combination of

even-parity vectors.

Lemma 5: Let be a codeword and be an LP solution (i.e.,

it satisfies (2)). Then,

is also an LP solution.

Now, we can prove the main theorem.

Proof of Theorem 4: Let be a

-locally optimal

codeword for

. We want to show that for every LP

solution

, the distance to increases, i.e.,

. By Lemma 4, there exists a distribution over minimal

-local deviations such that

for the LP solution

. Let

be the affine linear function

. Now

in Lemma 1 (especially taking into account the probabilistic in-

terpretation of the functions ). As earlier, we first define for

every variable node with

, a distribution over height-

skinny trees rooted at : we start by choosing as the root.

From any chosen variable node, we branch to all its neighbors

in the next level. From any chosen check node , we go to a

random neighbor, chosen according to the transition probabili-

ties

. More precisely, if we reached from a variable node

, then we select the next variable node at random from

, with probability

.

We can now define the distribution over minimal local devia-

tions : for every variable node with

, we independently

choose a tree as described previously. Independently from the

choices of the trees, we also choose a variable node at random

according to the probabilities

. Finally, we output the

minimal -local deviation defined by

which implies

as desired.

A. Proof of Lemma 4

Constructing Distributions Over Minimal Local Deviations

for LP Solutions: Let

be a nonzero LP solution.

The proof of the current lemma is very similar to the proof of

Lemma 1 (the integral case). The following lemma is essentially

the only additional ingredient of the proof.

Lemma 6: For every nonzero LP solution and every

, we can find a function

such that

1) for every neighbor

if otherwise.

We make a few observations. First, the number of nodes at

level of is exactly

. Second, for any two

variable nodes that lie in the support of and have distance

to each other, the aforementioned process for constructing

a random skinny tree treats them symmetrically

(7)

The reason is that are connected by a single path of length

, say

. If

for some

variable node on this path, both sides of (7) are naught. Oth-

erwise, both sides of (7) are equal to

2) for any two neighbors

Proof: Since is an LP solution, it is a convex combination

of assignments in

. Hence, there are multipliers

with

such that

. Now, we can define

as

Armed with these observations, we can compute the mean of

our distribution over ( -weighted) minimal local deviations: for

every with

, we have

The second property (symmetry) follows from the fact

for

.

The first property (marginalization) can be verified directly.

Remark 2: The function has a natural probabilistic inter-

pretation. As in the proof, we can think of as the mean of a dis-

tribution over assignments

. For a variable node

with

, we sample an assignment from this distribution

conditioned on the event

. Now, we output a random vari-

able node

with

. The probability that

we output is exactly

. Note that the function is

not fully determined by , since we could realize as a mean of

two very different distributions.

The distribution over minimal -local deviations we con- Therefore, we have the desired conclusion

with

struct for the LP solution is very similar to the distribution used

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7268

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

VII. PROBABILISTIC ANALYSIS OF LOCAL OPTIMALITY ON TREES

For the purposes of this section, let us define a notion of opti-

mality of a codeword in the immediate neighborhood of a vari-

able node

, by appropriately restricting Definition 2 of

Section III.

Definition 3: (Single Neighborhood Optimality): A code-

word

is

-locally optimal for

if for all minimal -local deviations at

of a tree in a top-down fashion, i.e., its first coordinate corresponds to the variables closest to the root of the tree.
The following lemma makes the connection of the aforementioned random process to local optimality and the relation of and precise.

Lemma 7: Let

. Then

Now, for a fixed weight vector , variable node

, and

codeword

, we are interested in the probability

(8)

where

is the measure defined by flipping every bit of

independently with probability to obtain .

If

, the symmetry of the code and the channel

imply that Probability (8) does not depend on the choice of and

. Therefore, estimating this probability can be reduced to the

study of a concrete random process on a fixed regular tree (see

Definition 4).

Definition 4:

-Process on a

-Tree: Let be

a directed tree of height , rooted at a vertex . The root has

out-degree and the vertices in level have out-degree 0.

The vertices in any other even level have out-degree

.

The vertices in odd levels have out-degree

. The vertices

in even levels are called variable nodes and the vertices in odd

levels are called check nodes. For

, let us denote

by the set of vertices of at height (the leaves have height

0 and the root has height ).

A skinny subtree of is a vertex set

such that the

induced subgraph is a directed connected tree rooted at where

each variable node in has full out-degree and each check node

in has out-degree exactly 1. For a

-assignment to

the variable nodes of and

, we define

the -weighted value of a skinny subtree as

where

, for

.

Proof: The subgraph of in

is isomorphic to

the tree of Definition 4. Let then

be

one of the isomorphisms between the two graphs.

First, we observe that is

-locally optimal for if

and only if

where the minimum is over all minimal -local deviations

at . The reason is that

can be

expanded as

, as is easily checked.

We also note that the isomorphism gives rise to a bijection

between the minimal deviations in

and the skinny

subtrees of . We define

to be the skinny tree that con-

tains all variable nodes with

.

Now imagine coupling the random variables and in such

a way that

These ’s are i.i.d.

distributed with probability of

being , so the distribution is correct. Furthermore, we claim

that

. The reason

is that for all and

(In words, we sum the values of the variable nodes in weighted

according to their height.)

For

, we are interested in the probability

Let us define

where the minimum is over all skinny subtrees and the mea-

sure on is defined by choosing

with probability

, and

with probability .

Notation: Notice the subtle difference between and .

Both and represent weight vectors. However, , used in

Definition 4 and throughout this section, assigns weights to the

levels of a tree in a bottom-up fashion, i.e., its first coordinate

corresponds to the leaves of the tree. On the other hand, , used

throughout the previous sections, assigns weights to the levels

where is defined as in Definition 4. With this notation, Lemma 7 together with Theorem 4 (local optimality implies LP optimality) has the following consequence.

Lemma 8: Let

be a

graph,

be a codeword, and

vector with

. Suppose

-regular bipartite be a weight
is obtained from

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ARORA et al.: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS ANDIMPROVED LP DECODING

7269

by flipping every bit independently with probability . Then,

codeword is

-locally optimal with probability at least

And with at least the same probability, is also the unique op-

timal LP solution given .

By virtue of Lemma 8, to understand the probability of LP

decoding success, it is sufficient to estimate the probability

, for a given weight vector , bit error rate

, and degrees

. We give such estimates in the

following section.

We use the Laplace transform of

in order to bound the

probability

. Notice that in the following lemma

and the remaining of this section, variable is real-valued and

has nothing to do with indexing levels of the tree; for that pur-

pose, we will be using instead the variables and .

Lemma 9: For every

Proof: As noted earlier,

.

Hence, by Markov’s inequality

A. Bounding Processes on Trees by Evolving Laplace Transforms

We are going to study the probability of the existence of a

negative value skinny subgraph in the

-process in a re-

cursive fashion, starting from the leaves of the tree .

We define the following correlated random variables for

the vertices of : the variable is equal to the minimum

value of a skinny tree in the subtree below the (variable or

check) node

Here, ranges over all skinny subtrees of .

Let

denote the set of neighbors of that can be

reached by one of its outgoing edges. The variables satisfy

the following recurrence relations:

The variable is equal to the sum of the -values of its

children. Each child of the root has height

and hence

its -value has the same distribution as

. Using this and

independence, we have as desired

.

The following is our key lemma for estimating the proba-

bility

(or more precisely, the Laplace transform

of

). For the sake of brevity, let us denote

and

.

Lemma 10: For with

, we have

Proof: We derive the relation for

. The general

case follows by induction on .

Since is a sum of mutually independent variables

We use a relatively crude estimate to bound the Laplace trans-

Note that is just the minimum value of a skinny tree in the form of in terms of the Laplace transform of . By the def-

tree . Hence,

.

inition of

By symmetry, the distribution of a variable depends only

on the height of vertex . Also, for a fixed , the variables in

, we have with probability 1. Hence

are mutually independent, because for any two ver-

tices of the same height , the subtrees and are dis-

joint.

It follows that we can define random variables

in the following way, so that

has the same distribution as for

and has the

same distribution as for

which is the desired bound for

.

Armed with these general bounds on

and the

Laplace transform of , we can now derive several concrete

bounds on

.

Uniform Weights: In this paragraph, we will consider the case

. We apply Lemma 10 for

. For brevity, let us denote

and

. Note that

(using the

same argument as in the proof of Lemma 10). For reasons that

become apparent shortly, let us choose

so as to minimize

. We will assume

. Now, the bound of

Here, is a random variable that takes value 1 with proba- Lemma 10 simplifies to

bility

and value with probability . The notation

means that we take mutually independent

copies of the random variable (the copies are also indepen-

dent of in the last equation).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

(To obtain the last inequality, we used that

, which is

implied by our assumption that

, given that

and

that

.) By Lemma 9, we can conclude from

this bound that

For these choices of and , we have

Next, let us compute and as functions of The variable has the following distribution:

Hence

with probability with probability

We also have

, and . Thus

.

We proved the following bound on

for

.

Lemma 12: If and

and

satisfy the condition

, where

Putting together the calculations in this paragraph, we proved

the following general bound on

.

Lemma 11: If

and

satisfy the condition

then there exists a constant and

such that for all

then for

and

, we have

where .

Corollary 2: Let

For

-regular graphs, we have the following corollary. there exist constants and

Corollary 1: Let

, and

. Then, there

exists a constant

such that for all

and

, and such that for all

and . Then,

Nonuniform Weights: In this paragraph, we will show how

to improve the bounds by using different weights according to

the height. We will use very simple weights: variable nodes at

height 0 are weighted by a factor

, and all variable nodes

at higher heights are weighted by 1.

We apply Lemma 10 again for

. As in the previous

paragraph, the bound simplifies to

where

, and

.

The additional freedom of choosing the weight allows us to

minimize both and at the same time. To minimize , we

choose

. The value of is equal to

which is minimized for

B. Improved Bounds for

-Regular Trees

In this section, we show how to obtain the bound of 0.05 on

the tolerable error rate of

-regular codes. To achieve this,

we shall employ specially tailored nonuniform weights.

Let us first consider the weight vector

.

Note that this weight vector has the effect that every level con-

tributes equally to the -weighted value

of a skinny

subtree . For a fixed value of (say

), we can compute

the distribution of explicitly using the recursive definition of

the and variables, since we deal with finite probability dis-

tributions. Hence, for a fixed , we can also compute the value

Let

be the point where the Laplace transform of

achieves its minimum . We now show how to bound

in terms of for

, where

is a carefully chosen constant.

By Lemma 10, we have

Here, the right-hand side is nonnegative for

.

(Note that we do not have to worry whether

. By the def-

inition of the

-process,

is invariant under

(nonnegative) scaling of the weights.)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ARORA et al.: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS ANDIMPROVED LP DECODING

7271

where we chose such that

so as to min-

imize

. Using Lemma 9, we see that

de-

creases doubly exponentially in if

for

some . We verified that this condition is satisfied for

and

using the numerical analysis software MATLAB.

Hence, we establish the following theorem.

Theorem 6: Let exists a constant

, and such that for

. Then, there

We note that, as with all computer assisted proofs, it is pos-

sible that rounding errors or software and hardware bugs inval-

idate the numerical results.

We extend our approach to general

-regular trees in

the following lemma.

Lemma 13: Let

and

some

and some weight vector

. Suppose that for

Then, there exist constants

and

such that for all

where

.

VIII. CONCLUSION
One of our original intentions was to connect BP to LP (or some other form of convex programming) and this remains open. It is unclear where to start since BP relies on highly nonlinear operations.
It would also be interesting to investigate if stronger versions of LP decoding using either lift-and-project operators such as Sherali-Adams or using SDPs could have better provable performance for LDPCs, possibly approaching the information theoretic bound.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[3] A. Shokrollahi, “LDPC codes: An introduction,” in Coding, Cryptography and Combinatorics, K. Feng, H. Niederreiter, and C. Xing, Eds. Cambridge, MA: Birkhauser, 2004, pp. 85–110.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[5] J. Feldman, M. Wainwright, and D. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[6] J. Feldman, T. Malkin, R. A. Servedio, C. Stein, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding corrects a constant fraction of errors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 82–89, Jan. 2007.
[7] C. Daskalakis, A. Dimakis, R. Karp, and M. Wainwright, “Probabilistic analysis of linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3565–3578, Aug. 2008.

[8] R. Koetter and P. Vontobel, “On the block error probability of LP decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inaugural Workshop Center Inf. Theory Appl., 2006, pp. 6–10.
[9] H. D. Sherali and W. P. Adams, “A hierarchy of relaxation between the continuous and convex hull representations,” SIAM J. Discr. Math., vol. 3, pp. 411–430, May 1990.
[10] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linkoping University, Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[11] B. J. Frey and R. Koetter, “The attenuated max-product algorithm,” in Advanced Mean Field Methods, M. Opper and D. Saad, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001, pp. 213–227.
[12] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[13] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, 2002.
[14] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[15] E. Candes and T. Tao, “Near-optimal signal recovery from random projections: Universal encoding strategies?,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 5406–5425, Dec. 2006.
[16] V. Guruswami, J. R. Lee, and A. A. Razborov, “Almost Euclidean subspaces of via expander codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 47–68, 2010.
[17] P. Indyk, “Explicit constructions for compressed sensing of sparse signals,” in Proc. 19th Annu. ACM-SIAM Symp. Discr. Algorithms, 2008, pp. 30–33.
[18] P. Vontobel, “A factor-graph-based random walk, and its relevance for LP decoding analysis and Bethe entropy characterization,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, LA Jolla, CA, Jan.–Feb. 2010.
[19] N. Halabi and G. Even, “LP decoding of regular LDPC codes in memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 887–897, Feb. 2011.
[20] A. G. Dimakis, R. Smarandache, and P. O. Vontobel, “LDPC codes for compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 3093–3114, May 2012.
[21] J. Feldman and D. R. Karger, “Decoding turbo-like codes via linear programming,” in Proc. 43rd Annu. IEEE Symp. Found. Comput. Sci., 2002, pp. 251–260.
Sanjeev Arora is Charles C. Fitzmorris Professor of Computer Science at Princeton University and works on computational complexity and algorithms. He has been awarded the ACM Dissertation Award, the Packard Fellowship, the ACM EATCS Goedel Prize (twice), and the ACM Infosys Prize. http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~arora.
Constantinos Daskalakis is the X-Window Consortium associate professor of electrical engineering and computer science at MIT. He received the diploma degree in electrical and computer engineering from the National Technical University of Athens in 2004, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and computer sciences from the University of California, Berkeley, in 2008, while in 2008–2009 he was a postdoctoral researcher at Microsoft Research. Daskalakis has been honored with the 2007 Microsoft Graduate Research Fellowship, the 2008 ACM Doctoral Dissertation Award, the 2008 Game Theory and Computer Science Prize from the Game Theory Society, the 2010 Sloan Fellowship in Computer Science, the 2011 SIAM Outstanding Paper Prize, the 2011 Ruth and Joel Spira Award for Distinguished Teaching, and the 2012 Microsoft Research Faculty Fellowship.
David Steurer is an Assistant Professor of Computer Science at Cornell University. He received a Ph.D. in computer science from Princeton University in 2010. From 2010–2012, he was a postdoctoral research at Microsoft Research New England. He has been honored with the Best Paper Award at the Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) 2010 and the ACM Dissertation Honorable Mention Award 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

