Performance Improvement of LDPC Codes using Soft Input Decryption

Nandan. S
Dept. of Electronics and Communication,
Mar Baselios College of Engineering & Technology,
Kerala, India snandan.nair@gmail.com

Deepthi. P.P
Dept. of Electronics and Communication,
National Institute of Technology, Calicut,
Kerala, India

Abstract— A novel method to improve the performance of Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes using Soft Input Decryption is presented in this paper. A channel coding technique that provides performance near to Shannon’s limit is LDPC code. To achieve optimum decoding, Sum-product decoding is used for LDPC Codes. The Soft Input Decryption method is based on the combination of cryptography and channel coding. Cryptographic checksum called hash is used to improve the performance of Turbo coding. Hash value is appended to the transmitted information for data integrity verification. The least reliable soft output values of the channel decoder are modified until the data integrity verification is successful. Results show that a significant improvement in the performance of channel coding can be achieved using soft input decryption.
Keywords- Low Density Parity Check codes; Soft input decryption; Sum-product decoding; Hash verification.
I. INTRODUCTION
Error correction coding techniques are used to ensure reliable delivery of digital data over unreliable communication channels. The theory of error correcting codes has presented a large number of code constructions with corresponding decoding algorithms. However, for applications where very strong error correcting capabilities are required these constructions all result in far too complex decoder solutions. An error correction coding technique which gives performance near Shannon’s limit is LDPC Code [1-3]. Low Density Parity Check code is a linear block code with a message passing decoding algorithm. The sumproduct decoding [4] algorithm is used for the optimum decoding of LDPC Codes.
Soft Input Decryption [5-7] is a method to improve the performance of channel coding using cryptographic techniques. It is a novel method which uses soft output values of a channel decoder for the correction of input data of Soft Input Decryption (SID) blocks which have been modified during the transmission over a noisy channel. The method is nothing but a combination of cryptography and channel coding, in which the cryptographic checksum called hash is appended to message for data integrity verification and is used to improve the performance of channel coding. If the data is tampered on transmission, at the receiver side, verification of generated hash with extracted hash fails. But

if there is a small variation in data due to channel noise, data integrity verification should not fail. Rather, the data can be corrected to provide proper hash verification, provided the variation in data is within limits of channel noise error. Which all data values can be corrected for proper verification, is decided by soft decision values of data, which give indication about reliability in decoding. The algorithm, scenarios and the strategy of Soft Input Decryption are described.

II. LDPC CODES

Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are a class of

linear block codes. The name comes from the characteristic

of their parity-check matrix which contains only a few 1’s in

comparison to the amount of 0’s. Their main advantage is

that they provide a performance which is very close to the

capacity for a lot of different channels and linear time

complex algorithms for decoding. They were first introduced

by Gallager [1] in his PhD thesis in 1960.

For a matrix of size p x k, to be called low-density, the

two conditions

p and

n must be satisfied, where

is the number of 1’s per row and is the number of 1’s per column. Here p is the number of parity check equations and is equal to n-k. A LDPC code is called regular if is
constant for every column and = (n/p) is also constant

for every row. The feature of LDPC codes to perform near

the Shannon’s limit of a channel exists only for large block

lengths. The large block length results also in large parity-

check and generator matrices. The complexity of multiplying

a codeword with a matrix depends on the amount of 1’s in

the matrix. If we put the sparse matrix H in the form [ I]

via Gaussian elimination the generator matrix G can be

calculated as G = [I P].

III. SUM-PRODUCT DECODING ALGORITHM
The algorithm used to decode LDPC codes was discovered independently several times and as a matter of fact comes under different names. The most common ones are the belief propagation algorithm, the message passing algorithm and the sum-product algorithm. Belief propagation algorithm was proposed by J. Pearl. It is an algorithm expressed in probabilistic terms. It is based on the assumption that each variable node is a processor and each processor at any time interacts with the message board for

978-1-4673-2636-0/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

011

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:45:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the revision made by its neighbors and updates its own belief parameters, post new messages. This is propagated until a predefined equilibrium is reached. In the first step all variable-nodes send to the check-nodes connected to them a “message” containing the bit they believe to be the correct one for them. At this stage the only information a vnode has, is the corresponding received ith bit of v. In the second step every check node calculates a response to
every connected variable node. The response message contains the bit that believes to be the correct one for this
v-node assuming that the other v-nodes connected to
are correct. The beliefs propagated are probabilities and these probabilities are used to check the received bits for correctness.

A. Sum-Product Algorithm in Probability Domain

In SPA algorithm, decoding is repeated for a number of

iterations. The sum-product algorithm consists of three

phases: (i) Initialization: set the maximum number of

iterations, and initialize the probabilities based on both the

modulation technique in use and probabilistic characteristics

of noise on the channel. (ii) Message update: The messages

from variable to check nodes are computed based upon

observed value of the variable node and some of the

messages passed from the neighboring check nodes to that

variable nodes. (iii) Validation: If received code word

satisfies the validation condition, the decoding is completed

successfully, otherwise move on to the next iteration of

message update, on condition that the maximum number of

iterations has not yet been reached.

= message (extrinsic information) to be passed

from node to node regarding the probability that , 0,1

= message (extrinsic information) to be passed from

node to node

Assume binary phase shift keying modulation on

Gaussian channel. The received symbol is

where = +1 or -1 with equal probability, and is the

zero mean, Gaussian, with variance . The ensemble of

variable nodes connected to check node j is denoted by V(j),

while V(j)\i indicates the same ensemble without variable

node i. For check nodes, symbols C(i) and C(i)\j have

similar meanings. The decoding algorithm consists of

calculation of two probabilities. The first probability is the probability qij. It is the probability associated with ith code bit conditioned on the corresponding parity check equations which are being satisfied except the jth parity check. The

second set of probabilities indicates that the conditions of a

check node are satisfied when the value of a single bit is

given. It is denoted by rji. rji is the probability which is conditioned on all possible values of the coded bit C, when jth parity check is satisfied. L(qij) indicates LLR value of qij.
The algorithm is as follows.

Initialize:

01

1|

⁄

(1)

1

1|

⁄

(2)

0

∏ \ 1 2 ,1

(3)

11

0

(4)

Message update:

0

1

∏\

0

(5)

1

∏\

1

(6)

where the constants are chosen to ensure

0

1 1. Compute for all i

0

1

∏

0

(7)

1

∏

1

(8)

where the constants are chosen to ensure 0 11

Validation: For all I

1

1 0.5

= 0 else

If

0 or (iterations = maximum iterations) is

satisfied then stop the algorithm. Else continue from

message update.

IV. SOFT INPUT DECRYPTION
Recent research works reveals that cryptographic techniques can be used for the improvement of channel coding. One of the methods is Soft Input Decryption (SID). Soft Input Decryption works block oriented. The input for Soft Input Decryption contains data which are secured by cryptographic check values. The input message bits are first divided into blocks of a predefined size. Hash value is then generated for each block and is appended to the message. The block which has to be corrected by Soft Input Decryption after channel decoding is called SID block (Soft Input Decryption block). It may contain data and cryptographic check values, or just cryptographic check values, depending on the used scenario. Cryptographic check values provide data integrity, data origin authentication and non-repudiation.
A. CRC Hash Generation
CRC hash function is used in this work for generating the hash value and is appended with the message to form the Soft Input Decryption block. The cryptographic CRC hash function h(M) is defined as: M(x) xn mod g(x), g(x) is the irreducible polynomial of degree n over GF(2), where n is the hash value size in bits. M is the message to be hashed and M(x) is the message polynomial with degree ‘m–1’, where ‘m’ is the message size. xn is the multiplication factor. The operation of division modulo a polynomial over GF (2) is implemented through a simple LFSR with taps or connections determined by the division polynomial. The multiplication with xn simply means logical left shift of n

012 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:45:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

bits of the message. Hash function is generated using Modular division circuit.

Figure 3. CRC Hash generation circuit

This hash function can be implemented mainly using only flip-flops and XOR gates. As a result, it seems particularly attractive to be used in low-power applications. Figure 3 shows the schematic realization of cryptographic CRC hash by taking the division polynomial as g(x) = x5 + x4 + x2 + 1, g(x) defines the feedback connections of the LFSR. The message is fed as input starting from MSB to realize the pre-multiplication of the message polynomial with xn. When the whole message is given as input to the circuit, the contents of the flip-flops give the hash value corresponding to the input message.
B. Soft Input Decryption Algorithm
The algorithm of Soft Input Decryption is briefly explained as follows. If the verification of the cryptographic check value is successful, then SID is said to be completed successfully. i.e. the output is “true”. If the verification is negative, the soft output of the channel decoder is analyzed and the bits with the lowest | |-values are flipped. Then the decryptor performs the verification process again. If the verification is still negative, bits with another combination of the lowest | |-values are flipped. This iterative process will stop when the verification is successful or the needed resources are consumed. If the number of modified bits is too large due to a very noisy channel or if the length of SID block is large, then the resources may not be sufficient to find the correct content of a SID block. In such cases the attempts for correction fail. It may also happen that the attempts for the correction of a SID block succeed, but the content of a SID block is not equal to the original one: a collision happened. This case has a negligible probability if the length of the cryptographic check values is chosen under security aspects. CCER (Cryptographic Check Error Rate) is defined as:

SID

CCER =

SID

An incorrect SID block is a SID block which could not be successfully verified or a SID block, which has been falsely successfully verified, i.e. a collision happened. Vice versa, a correct SID block is a successfully verified SID block and no collision happened, i.e. it is identical to the sent SID block. The Soft Input Decryption gain [dB] means the

reduction of CCER by Soft Input Decryption depending on the signal to noise ratio. C. Strategy of Soft Input Decryption
The way how the bits of a SID block will be flipped defines the strategy of SID. Different schedules of bit correction are possible. A static strategy [5] of bit flipping is done in this work. Initially, after decoding, hash verification is done on each SID block. If the first verification is not successful, the bit with the lowest | |-value of the SID block is flipped, assuming that the wrong bits are probably those with the lowest | |-values. Verification is done again and if it is not successful, the bit with the second lowest | |value is changed. In the next attempt the bits with the lowest and second lowest | |-value are flipped, then the bit with the third lowest | |-value, etc. The process is limited by the number of bits with the lowest | |-values, which should be tested. This strategy follows a representation of an increasing binary counter, whereby the lowest bit corresponds to the bit with the lowest | |-values, etc.
V. RESULTS Experiments are conducted to verify the improvement in coding performance of Turbo codes. Simulations are done using Matlab with system specifications Intel(R) Core(TM)2 Duo processor with 1.97 GB RAM. The results are discussed in detail in this section. The modulation scheme used is BPSK and the channel model is AWGN. A. Performance improvement of LDPC Codes with Soft Input Decryption
Figure 4. BER plot of LDPC codes with and without SID
The Bit Error Rate (BER) performance of a LDPC coded system by applying soft input decryption is shown in figure 4. The number of iterations used at the sum-product decoder is 20. The block length considered here is 512. For a given block length, the coding gain of the system improves as the number of least reliable | |- values selected for flipping increases. The Cryptographic Check Error Rate (CCER) performance of the system is shown in figure 5. CCER is

013 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:45:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

nothing but the ratio of the number of incorrect SID blocks length decreases, the number of -values required also

to the total number of received SID blocks.

decreases at a given SNR.

Figure 5. CCER plot of LDPC Codes with and without SID
B. CCER performance for different block lengths using Soft Input Decruption The CCER comparison for different block lengths is
shown in figure 6. The number of | |-values taken for flipping is fixed at 32. As the block length decreases, the performance of the system increases, since the number of | |-values is fixed.
Figure 6. CCER performance for different block lengths using SID
C. Number of | |-values versus SNR for different block lengths Figure 7 shows the plot of number of | |-values versus
SNR for different block lengths for a CCER value of 0.05 (i.e., 95% correction of SID blocks). For a given block length, as SNR increases, the number of -values required for maintaining a CCER= 0.05, decreases. Also, as block

Figure 7. Number of | |-values versus SNR for different block lengths
VI. CONCLUSION
A novel method to improve the performance of a LDPC coded system is explained in this paper. Some cryptographic techniques can be used to increase the channel coding gain of a LDPC system. For increasing the coding gain, Soft Input Decryption can be done, which uses cryptographic hash values for data verification. CRC hash function is used for the generation of hash value. The SID algorithm uses a static flipping strategy of the least reliable | |-values of the sumproduct LDPC decoder. Results show that a considerable improvement in coding gain is obtained by applying Soft Input Decryption.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-8, pp. 21-28, January 1962.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices," IEEE Transactions on Information. Theory, vol. IT-45, no. 2, pp.399–431, March 1999.
[3] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, "Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes," IEE Electron Letters, vol.32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[4] Xiao-Yu Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D. M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient Implementations of the Sum -Product Algorithm for Decoding LDPC Codes”, Proc. 2001 IEEE GlobeCom Conference, Nov. 2001.
[5] NatasaZivic, “Strategies and Performances of Soft Input Decryption”, (IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, Vol. 1 No.1, May 2009.
[6] NatasaZivic, “Iterative method for improvement of coding and Decryption”, International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol 1, No 2, July 2009.
[7] N. Zivic, C. Ruland, ”Channel Coding as a Cryptography Enhancer”, Advances in Communications, Proceeding in the 11th WSEAS International conference on Communications (part of the 2007 CSCC multiconference), Agios Nikolaos, Crete Island, Greece, July 26-28, 2007.

014 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:45:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

