GC'12 Workshop: International Workshop on Emerging Technologies for LTE-Advanced and Beyond-4G

A New Fountain Decoder Escaping Almost All Absorbing Sets

Masoud Mir Rezaei Department of Electrical Engineering Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
Emails: sm.mirrezaie@aut.ac.ir

Shahram Yousefi Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada Email: s.yousefi@queensu.ca

Abstract—In contrast to the capacity approaching performance of iteratively decoded low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, many practical finite-length LDPC codes exhibit performance degradation, manifested in a so-called error floor, corresponding to a significant flattening in the error probability curves. Recent works have shown that the dominant trapping sets in the generator-based Tanner Graph (TG) of Fountain codes are the absorbing sets. In this paper, we demonstrate how these absorbing sets are damaging to the realized rate, delay, and decoding cost of Fountain codes. We further introduce the properties of these dominant trapping sets and propose a new encoder and decoder for Fountain codes. Our experimental results show that this new codec leads to improvements in realized rate, decoding cost and error performance.
Index Terms—Fountain codes, belief propagation decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
Fountain codes (also known as rateless erasure codes) are a class of erasure codes with the property that a potentially limitless sequence of encoding symbols can be generated from a given set of source symbols. The original source symbols can ideally be recovered from any subset of the encoding symbols of size equal to or only slightly larger than the number of source symbols. The term fountain or rateless refers to the fact that these codes do not exhibit a fixed code rate.
Luby Transform (LT) codes [8] were the first class of practical fountain codes. Even though they were originally designed for the Binary Erasure Channel (BEC) over which they are asymptotically and universally optimal, they have good performance over noisy channels such as the Binary Symmetric and Additive White Gaussian Channel (BSC/AWGN). One major issue with these generator-based (G-based) codes is that they exhibit error floors from relatively high error rates. This is similar to most Low-density Generator Matrix (LDGM) codes.
Estimating the performance of Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes in the error floor region and the design of LDPC codes with low error floors have attracted a great deal of interest in recent years. The performance of LDPC codes under Belief Propagation (BP) decoding in the error floor region is primarily related to Tanner Graph (TG) structure of the code. For BEC, the problematic substructures are stopping sets [2], [3]. In the case of BSC and AWGN channels, the
This work is supported by grant from NSERC Discovery Program, Queen’s University SARC, and Iran Telecommunication Research Center (ITRC).

error-prone patterns are mainly the trapping sets [4], nearcodewords [5], and pseudo-codewords. More recently, it was demonstrated that for some structured LDPC codes decoded by soft-decision BP, a subset of trapping sets, called absorbing sets (AS), dominate the error floor performance [6], [7].
Trapping sets were explored and categorized for LT codes leading to better decoder designs in [10]. In [1], G-based ASs were formally defined and categorized. Like stopping sets, ASs have a purely combinatorial definition in terms of the generator matrix of a given fountain/LT code. They can be viewed as a special subclass of near-codewords or trapping sets, in particular ones that are guaranteed to be stable under a bit-flipping decoder. With this, and in contrast to previous works, ASs constitute the dominant decoding failures of various message-passing algorithms and provide a new analytical foundation for studying error floors.
This study takes into account different code structures and the dynamic nature of fountain codes. It is shown that ASs are the major contributors to the error floor. When the decoder is caught in an AS, it cannot escape even with further iterations nor with subsequent decoding attempts. Thus, the decoding process continues, increasing the decoding cost and delay for naught. The decoding process for rateless codes consists of one or more decoding attempts. Our set of results provides concrete and effective techniques for avoiding or escaping ASs.
The idea in [12] is to devise a post-processing mechanism for weakening (strengthening) the messages incident to bits in the particular AS of interest. The automation of this postprocessing algorithm is crucially enabled by the isomorphic combinatorial structure of the dominant ASs for the LDPC code under study. Our solution is based on the following idea: if a decoder is able to realize that it is stuck in an AS, there exists opportunities to improve the system performance in terms of error rate, decoding complexity, as well as the average realized rate (ARR) of the code. For this to become the reality, once an AS is detected, we further need remedies to escape it.
Understanding of the AS formations in a TG, will also have benefits in terms of code and transmission protocol design. One can reverse-engineer codes which are pseudo-random and on-the-fly and yet avoid nasty AS substructures in their decoding TG. In this paper, we develop the former: we first propose an effective AS detection tool with low false alarms.

978-1-4673-4941-3/12/$31.00 ©2012 Crown

681

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:51:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

We then develop early termination methods based on the AS detector to obtain improvements in rate, latency, error rate, and decoding cost of LT codes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We begin in Section II with a brief overview of Fountain codes, and BP decoding leading to a review of G-based ASs. Section III introduces our new AS detection tool and a novel decoder for LT codes. We show our numerical results in section IV. Section V concludes the paper.
II. FOUNTAIN CODES: G-BASED ASS
Fountain codes are rateless LDGM codes [13]. Similar to LDPC codes, decoding for Fountain codes, or more generally LDGM codes, is performed using the BP algorithm on a sparse graph. They are a new class of codes with finite dimension and infinite block length. An appropriately designed Fountain code eliminates the need for a sender to guess the quality of the channel to a particular receiver, and enables the design of scalable transmission of data in a broadcast or multicast setting. This makes them the perfect choice for wireless applications where users experience a wide range of channel qualities and are hard to track. Fountain coding eliminates the need for real-time and accurate channel estimation for each user link and allows much smaller gaps to capacity via receive adaptivity rather than transmit adaptivity.
These codes use BP on a Tanner graph which represents the equation mG = x. Here m is the information vector of size k and x is the encoded vector of size n. When a BP decoder fails to decode a message m from a decoding TG, we are most likely stuck in an AS. This is particularly true for medium to high SNRs over an AWGN channel. This is while a Gaussian Elimination decoder (GED) would be perhaps capable of decoding. Yet, the cubic complexity of GED makes it a very unattractive choice even when applied to a subset of the decoding graph. This is where a large number of recent works on the Fountain decoder design fall; decoders are proposed combining BP and GED methods. Numerical results show that these methods do not provide substantial returns as many ASs happen at early stages of decoding leading to large GED problems.
Stopping sets can be used to precisely determine the probability of error on the BEC. Trapping sets appear to cause errors on the AWGN channel. For non-erasure channels, empirically, almost all trapping sets are near-codewords [5]. That is, almost all trapping sets are subsets of the graph such that the induced subgraph contains only a limited number of check nodes of odd degree, and is therefore nearly a codeword. A nearcodeword can be categorized by two numbers, the total number of variable nodes involved and the number of check nodes of odd degree in the induced graph. Simulations show that the majority of errors encountered in the error floor region during BP decoding of the G-based LT codes could be attributed to ASs. They appear to be useful for estimating the performance of iterative message-passing decoding.
The G-based TG has two types of variable nodes: message nodes (m) and encoded nodes (x). The value of the codeword

estimate x is the result of a hard decision on the soft information from the received sequence. Fountain codes, such as LT codes, are known to have a high error-floor. For LDPC codes, it has been found that small ASs contribute heavily to the error-floor.
For a given message block m = (m1, m2, . . . , mk), a Fountain code produces a potentially infinite stream x = (x1, x2, . . .) of encoded bits to be sent over the channel. Each encoded bit is generated independently by sampling from a fixed distribution on subsets of the message block and then performing addition modulo-2 on the information bits in the chosen subset.
The encoder continues to produce more encoded bits until the decoder acknowledges that it has recovered the message block. Thus, the number of encoded bits, n, in the final codeword is not known beforehand. We say then that the Fountain code used is generated on-the-fly or in an online fashion. This allows the message blocks encoded by a Fountain encoder to have different code rates.
A. The Fountain Codec
An LT Fountain code may be represented by a dynamic generator matrix G. The generator matrix has k rows, one for each information bit, and n columns, one for each encoded bit. However, as mentioned previously, the value of n is not fixed a priori. Each time an encoded bit is generated, a new column is added to the generator matrix.
A message bit mi belongs to the subset of the message block that was added modulo-2, to produce the encoded bit xj if and only if the element at the intersection of row i and column j of the generator matrix is non-zero. The codeword x at a given time can be given as x = mG.
The decoding process for Fountain codes consists of a series of decoding attempts (1, 2, . . .), which correspond to received sequences (y1, y2, . . .) of lengths (n1, n2, . . .), where n1 < n2 < . . . . We denote the received sequence at the final decoding attempt as y. Additionally, we denote the length of the final received sequence as n. A decoding attempt a aims to obtain a message estimate mˆ that satisfies a criterion for successful decoding given a received sequence ya. If decoding at attempt a fails to meet the criterion for success, then the decoder awaits the reception of the (na+1 − na) symbols necessary for a received sequence of length na+1, and then performs the next decoding attempt.
We assume the number of symbols that the receiver waits to receive between decoding attempts is a constant T . Hence, the number of symbols received at decoding the attempt a is na = n1 + (a − 1)T . Each decoding attempt uses the iterative BP algorithm, which approximates bitwise MAP decoding. The decoder has a finite number lmax of iterations in which to succeed for a given decoding attempt. If the maximum number of iterations is realized without success, the decoding attempt is marked as a failure and the decoder awaits the reception of more symbols to perform the next decoding attempt.
The BP decoding algorithm proceeds in iterations. For each iteration, messages in the form of pseudo log-likelihood ratios

682
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:51:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(LLRs) are passed from message nodes to check nodes and vice versa. On the first decoding attempt and first iteration, all message nodes send messages to all their neighboring check nodes with a value of 0. This is due to the fact that the message nodes have received no information at this point.
After running the BP algorithm for l iterations, the pseudo a posteriori LLR of each message bit mi can be calculated where the sum is over all the neighbors of mi . A message estimate mˆ = (mˆ 1, mˆ 2, ..., mˆ k) can be produced through a hard decision on the pseudo a posteriori LLRs.

B. The Absorbing Sets
There are two important points about absorbing sets. First, the set of unsatisfied check nodes and incorrect message nodes are fixed forever, however this does not apply to the other trapping sets. Second, these situations happen in small cardinality and the majority of trapping sets in high SNR are absorbing sets. We quickly revisit the definition of the absorbing sets [1].
The decoding graph of Fountain codes compared to LDPC codes is structurally different. Moreover, they are fixed-rate codes. Therefore, it is necessary to define and study absorbing sets in Fountain codes in a manner different than that realized for LDPC codes. LDPC codes have only one type of variable node, whereas Fountain codes have two types: message nodes and encoded nodes. It is important to make the distinction between the two types.
We define the check node degree as the number of connections it has to message nodes and encoded nodes. The studying of the absorbing sets has 3 possible uses: 1) decreasing the error rate, 2) decreasing complexity, and 3) improving the realized rate.
We will describe an absorbing set on a Fountain code with a triplet (α, β, z), where α is the number of message nodes in the absorbing set, β is the number of encoded nodes in the absorbing set, and z is the number of unsatisfied check nodes in the induced subgraph of the α and β variable nodes in the absorbing set.
Definition 1: [1] Let D be a decoding matrix of a Fountain code. An (α, β, z) absorbing set is a set of w = α + β rows of D and z is the number of unsatisfied check nodes. In addition all of message nodes can have one situation as follows :
1) They must only be connected to unsatisfied check nodes. 2) They must only be connected to satisfied (falsely satis-
fied) check nodes. 3) They must be connected to unsatisfied check nodes equal
or more than satisfied.
In this definition we use satisfied check nodes instead of even degree and unsatisfied check nodes instead of odd degree. Because the degree of check nodes is belong to number of connection to incorrect message and encoded nodes.
An example of tanner graph is shown in Fig. 1(a). The set of incorrect variable nodes in this absorbing set are four message nodes and 2 encoded nodes with black circles. Also the induced graph as a (4, 2, 3) absorbing set is depicted in Fig. 1(b).

(b)

Correct Message Node

Incorrect Message Node

Correct Encoded Node

Incorrect Encoded Node

(a)

Falsely Satisfied Check Node

Unsatisfied Check Node

Fig. 1. An example of a (4, 2, 3) absorbing set in G-based code.

Definition 2: [1] An (α, β, z) set is elementary absorbing set that the degree of check nodes are just one or two.
Definition 3: [1] An (α, β, z) set is an error − f ree absorbing set when α = 0 and so β = z.
When the error-free absorbing set happens, all of message nodes are correct, whereas all of check nodes are not satisfied and decoder will continue to decoding. In this case, by increasing the number of iterations, the decoder cannot satisfy the check nodes and should stop the decoding. For this reason detecting the aforementioned absorbing sets for releasing the decoder is very helpful.
III. NEW DECODER DESIGN
A common success criterion for the BP algorithm is to observe whether the message estimate satisfies the constraints imposed by the check nodes. This criterion is known as check-sum satisfaction ratio (CSR) test and uses the metric CSR = s(l)/na, where s(l) is the number of satisfied check nodes at iteration l and na is the total number of check nodes in the current decoding attempt. The test is satisfied when the CSR is greater than or equal to a user-defined threshold, ΓCSR, generally chosen to be 1 for complete check-sum satisfaction.
According to section II, if the difference in CSR between two consecutive iterations (denoted as ΔCSR) has a value of 0 for a number of consecutive iterations ΓAS, we can use this as an indicator that an absorbing set or in general a trapping set has occurred (like ΓP T S in [15]). The value of ΓAS is user-defined.
Absorbing sets generally appear in decoding attempts at iterations with a high value of CSR. Therefore after detecting the trapping set we set μAS as a criterion for finding the absorbing sets. For this reason if CSR is more than μAS, this trapping set is an absorbing set. The value of μAS is userdefined. Intuitively, there is a tradeoff in the selection of μAS. If we increase μAS, we have a higher possibility of accurately detecting an absorbing set but may miss some absorbing sets.

683
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:51:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

However, if we decrease μAS we may more often falsely detect an absorbing set and apply our post-processing method on it, which leads to false results.
After finding absorbing sets in the graph, we should find an approach to release the graph from the absorbing sets. For this reason, in this section we describe a post-processing method, based on the combinatorial structure of the absorbing set, which dramatically lowers the error floor.
We depict an example of absorbing sets in Fig. 2(a). Whereas in the decoder we practically have access only to satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes, we have to do postprocessing on them. Thus in our approach when the decoder detects the absorbing set, for one iteration it randomly adds one edge from each of unsatisfied check nodes to one message node. As shown in Fig. 2(b). After one iteration, the main tanner graph is applied and the decoder continues decoding until all check nodes are satisfied, the decoder falls in absorbing set again or it reaches the maximum iteration.
In most of the absorbing sets, the decoder can release from absorbing set after two iterations. For the rest of the absorbing sets, this happens after eight iterations on average. This is because of the random choice of message nodes. Based on our observation if the new edge added to an incorrect message node, the corresponding unsatisfied check node will not become satisfied and decoder continues to find the absorbing set again, after several iterations.
This post-processing method is very good for error-free absorbing sets. In this situation there is no incorrect message nodes and the unsatisfied check nodes only connect to correct message nodes, so the decoder can release from error-free absorbing sets after two iterations.

BER

three values are chosen for high SNR regime. The number of message bits, k, in a message block is 1000 and the LT code uses the degree distribution described in [9]:
Ω(v) = 0.007969v1 + 0.493570v2 + 0.166220v3 + 0.072646v4 + 0.082558v5 + 0.056058v8 (1) + 0.037229v9 + 0.055590v19 + 0.025023v65 + 0.003135v66.
The number of bits, T , for which the receiver wait for between decoding attempts is 50. The maximum allowable number of received symbols nmax is 1800. The maximum number of BP iterations, lmax, is 80 per decoding attempt. We use the incremental decoding (ID), introduced for Fountain codes in [16].

10-4

2

1

2

3 3 3

7 dB 7.25 dB 7.5 dB
4
4

1 10-5

2 1

4

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

Average Rate

Fig. 3. BER in terms of Average Realized Rate.

1.6 x 105

2

1.5 2
1.4

7 dB 7.25 dB 7.5 dB

Average Complexity

(a)
Correct Message Node
Correct Encoded Node
Falsely Satisfied Check Node
Main Edge

Incorrect Message Node
Incorrect Encoded Node Unsatisfied Check Node
Added Edge

1.3

2 1.2
3

1.1 1

1

1

(b)

1

0.9

33

4

44

Fig. 2. A (4, 2, 3) absorbing set in G-based code.
IV. RESULTS In the simulation, 10000 message blocks were encoded using an LT code and transmitted over a BIAWGN channel with three values of Es/No set to 7, 7.25 and 7.5 dB. These

00.8.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

Average Rate

Fig. 4. Average Complexity in terms of Average Realized Rate.

To show the performance of our approach we define four

684
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:51:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

decoders as follows:

Decoder 1: Implements the PTS test as in [15], i.e., ΓP T S = 1. Decoder 2: Implements the PTS test, with ΓP T S > 1. Decoder 3: Equipped with the PTS test and the ETS test in

[10].

Decoder 4: Equipped with ΓAS = 3 and μasd = 0.9918. We perform a simulation by focusing on the error-

performance, realized rate and decoding cost. The metric

Decoding Cost =

n atot
a=1 a

·

la

is

used,

where

atot

is

the

total number of decoding attempts performed in the complete

decoding process, na is the number of received symbols at attempt a, and la is the number of iterations performed at attempt a. It had been defined in [10]. For Decoders 2 and 3

we set ΓP T S = 3 and μET S = 0.95. Our simulation is under channels with various SNRs (7, 7.25 and 7.5 dB).

In Fig. 3 we depict BER versus Average realized rate for

three values of SNR and four decoders. Average decoding cost

versus Average realized rate for the decoders are shown in

Fig. 4.

In Decoder 3 we propose the error-free trapping set (ETS)

test based on [10]. The ETS test determines whether ΓET S consecutive attempts were terminated early according to the

PTS test and whether said attempts have CSR greater than

or equal to μET S. When the conditions of the ETS test are satisfied then both the decoding attempt and the entire

decoding process are terminated. This results in decoder 3

having the worst error performance, a good average realized

rate (Fig. 3) and a good average decoding cost (Fig. 4).

As shown in Fig. 3, Decoder 1 has the best error per-

formance but it shoes the lowest average rate, so it is not

considered a good decoder. This is because an over-hasty

termination criterion. The average complexity of Decoder 1

is not bad.

As shown in Fig. 4, Decoder 4 has the best average realized

rate and average complexity . We can also find from Fig. 3

that its error performance is in the second rank and in a very

good point.

According to what explained in the previous section, De-

coder 4 tries to escape the absorbing sets after detecting them

in the current attempt with the lowest number of iterations and

in over 96 percent of the cases in which it is successful. Thus

the average realized rate and average complexity for Decoder

4 is the best and the error performance is good as well.

We can observe that the difference between decoders is

more significant in high SNRs. For example, curves in 8 dB

for Decoder 4 have more difference than the other SNRs. So

as shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, Decoder 4 can escape from

absorbing sets more than the other decoders.

decoder can escape from the absorbing sets in the same de-
coding attempt (more than 96 percent success). This work will
further lead to better design and analysis of Fountain codes
(encoders in addition to decoders) linking their asymptotic
optimality to realistic finite-length performance via BP on a
TG. This is the subject of future contributions. Overall, these
improved Fountain codecs provide substantial potentials for
high-speed wireless systems in LTE Advanced and 4G+ in
unicast, multicast, and broadcast modes alike.
REFERENCES
[1] S. M. Mirrezaei, K. Faez, S. Yousefi, “Absorbing Sets of Fountain Codes over Noisy Channels,” inProc. 26th Biennial Symposium on Communications, Kingston, Canada, May. 2012.
[2] C. Di, D. Proietti, T. Richardson, E. Telatar, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” in IEEE Transactions on Infofromation Theory, vol. 48, no 6, pp. 15701579, Jun. 2002.
[3] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929953, Mar. 2005.
[4] T. Richardson, “Error-floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. of the 41st Annual Allerton Conference, Monticello, Ill., Oct. 2003, pp. 14261435.
[5] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and RamanujanMargulis low-density parity-check codes,” in Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 74, 2003.
[6] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. J. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of Absorbing Sets for Array-Based LDPC Codes,” inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Glasgow, UK, Jun. 2007, pp. 6261- 6268.
[7] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation,” in Proc. of IEEE Global communications Conference (GLOBECOM), San Francisco, CA, Nov. 2006.
[8] M. Luby, “LT codes,” in Proc. 43rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, Nov. 2002, pp. 271280.
[9] A. Shokrollahi, “Raptor codes,” in IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 25512567, June 2006.
[10] V. L. Orozco and S. Yousefi, “Trapping sets of fountain codes,” in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 14, no. 8, Aug. 2010.
[11] L.Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of Absorbing Sets and Fully Absorbing Sets of Array-Based LDPC Codes,” in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, Jan. 2010.
[12] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, M.J. Wainwright, “Lowering LDPC error floors by postprocessing,” in Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), New Orleans, LA, Nov. 2008.
[13] J. Garcia-Frias and W. Zhong, “Approaching shannon performance by iterative decoding of linear codes with low-density generator matrix,” in Communications Letters, IEEE, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 266- 268, june 2003.
[14] C.-W. Lin and L. Dolecek, “Asymptotic Distribution of Absorbing Sets and Fully Absorbing Sets for Regular Sparse Code Ensembles,”in AusCTW 2011, 2011.
[15] A. AbdulHussein, A. Oka, and L. Lampe, “Decoding with early termination for Raptor codes,” in IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 444 446, Jun. 2008.
[16] K. Hu, J. Castura, and Y. Mao, “Reduced-complexity decoding of Raptor codes over fading channels,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, Nov. 2006, pp. 1-5.

V. CONCLUSION
In this work, we propose an effective tool to detect the presence of absorbing sets in the decoding TG of Fountain codes. Via this, we develop a novel decoder for these rateless codes providing superior error rate, latency, ARR, and decoding complexity. In all the codes and settings tested, the

685
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:51:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

