IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

10087

An Analysis and Design of Rate-Dependent Nested Scheduling in Layered Decoding of LDPC Codes

Dongxu Chang , Ke Liu, Guanghui Wang , Guiying Yan , and Zhiming Ma

Abstract—In this study, we analyze the characteristics of scheduling sequences for layered belief propagation (LBP) that can result in efficient decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Specifically, we claim that scheduling sequences leading to high decoding efficiency should prioritize updating check nodes with lower error probabilities aggregated from neighboring variable nodes. We prove this conclusion separately on both the BEC and the BI-AWGN channels. Some observable characteristics in “good” scheduling sequences regarding row weights, rows connected to punctured columns, and column weights can serve as corollaries to this conclusion. By comprehensively considering these characteristics of good scheduling, we design a multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme of layered decoding for 5G New Radio (NR) LDPC codes. The proposed schemes can obtain scheduling sequences for various rates of ratecompatible LDPC codes using small hardware storage. What’s more, by respectively storing double-sequence, triple-sequence, or more sequences to obtain scheduling sequences at various code rates, a trade-off can be made between decoder storage and decoding performance. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed scheme achieves performance improvements compared to existing scheduling schemes at nearly all code rates.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check code, scheduling policy, decoding efficiency.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) code [1] has been widely used in communication fields, such as 5G New Radio (NR) [2], IEEE 802.11 (WiFi) [3]. It was demonstrated by D. MacKay and M. Neal in 1996 [4] that LDPC codes can approach the Shannon limit. The belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm [5] offers great advantages for LDPC codes due to its low complexity and good decoding performance.
The conventional BP algorithm employs a flooding scheduling strategy to conduct message-passing between variable nodes and check nodes. This strategy updates all variable-tocheck (V2C) messages or check-to-variable (C2V) messages
Received 24 November 2024; revised 6 February 2025, 24 March 2025, and 16 June 2025; accepted 28 June 2025. Date of publication 3 July 2025; date of current version 14 November 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2023YFA1009600. An earlier version of this paper was presented in part at the 2024 IEEE Global Communications Conference Workshop. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was K. Wan. (Corresponding author: Guanghui Wang.)
Dongxu Chang and Guanghui Wang are with the School of Mathematics, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250100, China (e-mail: dongxuchang@mail.sdu.edu.cn; ghwang@sdu.edu.cn).
Ke Liu is with Huawei Technologies Company Ltd., Beijing 100015, China (e-mail: liuke79@huawei.com).
Guiying Yan and Zhiming Ma are with the Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, CAS, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: yangy@amss.ac.cn; mazm@amt.ac.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2025.3585512

simultaneously in one iteration, achieving a high degree of parallelism. However, the flooding BP algorithm is known for its slow convergence speed. This is because the latest information available in the current iteration can only be utilized in the subsequent iteration. The delayed information may hinder the benefits of information transmission, thus affecting the algorithm’s convergence rate [6].
In 2004, D. Hocevar introduced the concept of layered belief propagation (LBP) decoding [6], which updates information in a sequential order. This decoding strategy can accelerate the decoding process as it ensures that the most recent information is disseminated. In comparison to the flooding scheduling strategy, LBP can reduce decoding complexity by nearly 50% while achieving the same performance.
Despite its benefits, LBP does not have a specific design for the order of decoding sequence. To further reduce decoding complexity, scheduling the order of decoding sequences is a key direction for improving LBP.
In [7], through heuristic analysis, updating the check nodes with fewer connected punctured variable nodes and larger degrees first is believed to enable broader dissemination of information. Based on this idea, the Least-punctured and highest-degree (LPHD) algorithm was designed. In [8], it was observed that low-degree check nodes could transmit more mutual information to their neighboring variable nodes after updating. Based on this idea, a scheduling algorithm was designed by updating the check nodes with smaller degrees first. In [9], by using two metrics – average entropy and gap to maximum a posterior [10], to assess the quality of a scheduling sequence, the scheduling problem is transformed into an optimization problem, and the successive-searching BP (SSBP) algorithm based on local search algorithm was proposed.
Despite the considerable amount of existing research on scheduling, much of it is based on heuristic approaches. Moreover, the fundamental question of scheduling – specifically, which message-passing order leads to higher message-passing efficiency and why – remains inadequately addressed in current studies, lacking comprehensive analysis.
In [11], a greedy approach to designing a single-sequence nested scheduling scheme by utilizing the raptor-like structure of 5G NR LDPC codes was proposed. For rate -compatible codes, by utilizing a nested structure, the decoder can easily obtain scheduling sequences for various rates, requiring only the storage of a single sequence to indicate the selection of the scheduling sequences. However, this single-sequence nested scheduling scheme also limits the flexibility in the selection

0090-6778 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10088

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

of scheduling sequences to a large extent. For example, in [11], for check nodes present in both low and high code rates, their order in the low code rate scheduling sequence needs to be consistent with the high code rate scenario. This inflexibility in scheduling sequence selection can result in a loss of performance. Therefore, a more flexible scheduling sequence selection scheme is needed to further improve message passing efficiency while still taking the hardware storage requirements into account.
In this study, firstly, we explore the question of what characteristics can lead to a “good” scheduling sequence. Specifically, we claim that a “good” scheduling sequence should prioritize updating check nodes with lower error probabilities aggregated from neighboring variable nodes. We prove this by tracking the average error probability for variable nodes with the updates of two adjacent check nodes in both the binary erasure channel (BEC) and the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BI-AWGN) channel. Specifically, in BI-AWGN channels, we adopt the Gaussian approximation [12] to simplify the analysis. Furthermore, starting from the characteristic of updating check nodes with lower error probabilities aggregated from neighboring variable nodes first, we illustrate that some observable changes in “good” scheduling sequences regarding row weights, rows connected to punctured columns, and column weights can serve as corollaries of this characteristic.
Based on these characteristics, we propose a multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme for 5G NR LDPC codes, which enables efficient scheduling at various code rates with a small amount of additional storage requirements for the decoder. In the multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme, the characteristics of highly efficient scheduling sequences are delineated by multiple scheduling indicator sequences. Specifically, the characteristics regarding the sum of error probabilities for variable nodes connected to check nodes, row weight characteristics, punctured variable nodes characteristics, and column weight characteristics are all taken into consideration in the multi-sequence nested scheme. During decoding, the decoder can utilize these scheduling indicator sequences to determine the scheduling sequences required for the current code rate. We allow the decoder to trade-off between the level of detail in characterizing favorable scheduling characteristics and the additional storage required for scheduling by the decoder. By choosing between the double-sequence nested scheduling scheme, triple-sequence nested scheduling scheme, and more sequences nested scheduling schemes proposed, one can opt to use more scheduling indicator sequences to capture the characteristics of highly efficient scheduling in greater detail and achieve better decoding performance, or use fewer scheduling indicator sequences to obtain lower additional storage requirements for the decoder. Simulation results show that the multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme outperforms the single-sequence nested scheduling scheme at almost all code rates. Moreover, the performance improves as more scheduling indicator sequences are used.
The main contributions and novelty of this study can be summarized as follows:

• On both the BEC and BI-AWGN channels, we demonstrate that an efficient decoding schedule should prioritize updating check nodes whose connected variable nodes exhibit a lower cumulative error probability.
• Some characteristics of efficient scheduling observed in previous studies [7], [8], [9], [11] are incorporated as corollaries of this study.
• Based on the characteristics of efficient scheduling, we design a multi-sequence nested scheduling algorithm, which achieves performance superior to state-of-the-art approaches.
• By considering the memory constraints of the decoder, the proposed multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme enables the derivation of scheduling sequences for ratecompatible LDPC codes across various code rates while requiring only a limited number of stored scheduling indicator sequences. Furthermore, it achieves efficient decoding performance across all code rates.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II provides an introduction to the BP algorithm and the definition of the scheduling sequences. Section III offers proof on the BEC regarding the characteristics of highly efficient scheduling sequences. Section IV extends the conclusions in Section III to the BI-AWGN channel. Section V provides an introduction to the rate-compatible codes and the single-sequence nested scheduling scheme proposed in [11]. Section VI presents the proposed multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme. The performance comparison of different scheduling schemes is provided in Section VII. We conclude in Section VIII.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. Belief Propagation for LDPC Codes

A brief review of the iterative BP decoding algorithm [5] is provided to facilitate the analysis of scheduling sequences.
The message-passing process of BP decoding consists of V2C message updates and C2V message updates. The message update rule of V2C is

m(i→ l) α = m0 +

m(hl→−1i),

(1)

h∈N (i)\α

and the message update rule of C2V is





m(αl→ ) i = 2 tanh−1 

tanh m(jl→−α1)/2  (2)

j∈N (α)\i

where m0 is the channel message in LLR form, l is the number
of iterations, N (v) represents the nodes connected directly to node v, mi(→ l) α means the message from variable node i to check node α in iteration l and m(αl→ ) i means the message from check node α to variable node i in iteration l. The initial message m(i→ 0)α and mα(0→) i is 0.

B. Layered Belief Propagation and Scheduling Sequences
In each decoding iteration, LBP [6] sequentially selects each check node in the graph and updates the information on all edges connected to the selected check node. Specifically, it performs V2C message updates along all edges connected to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG et al.: ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF RATE-DEPENDENT NESTED SCHEDULING IN LAYERED DECODING

10089

the selected check node, followed by C2V message updates. The order in which check nodes are selected for updating in LBP is referred to as the scheduling sequence, defined as follows:
Definition 1 (scheduling sequences) The scheduling sequence is a sequence composed of the indices of check nodes. It represents the order in which check nodes are selected for decoding in LBP, with the decoder selecting check nodes for decoding according to the order in which they appear in the scheduling sequences.
When the same message-passing order is used in each iteration, the scheduling sequence can consist of only the check node update order within one iteration.

Fig. 1. Different scheduling sequences lead to different decoding results. In (a), there are two check nodes and five variable nodes on the BEC. The information of variable nodes 3 and 4 is erased. In (b), decoding is performed in the order of updating check node A first, followed by check node B. After one iteration, the information of all variable nodes is recovered. In (c), decoding is performed in the order of updating check node B first, followed by check node A. After one iteration, the information of variable node 3 cannot be recovered.

III. SCHEDULING CHARACTERISTICS OVER THE BEC

On the BEC, under different scheduling sequences, the same number of message-passing iterations will result in different erasure probabilities of variable nodes after decoding. Therefore, for different check nodes, the order in the scheduling sequences where they can maximize their contribution to message updates should vary. We claim that one important characteristic that influences the optimal position of a check node in the scheduling sequence is the magnitude of the sum of erasure probabilities of variable nodes connected to the check nodes.
To simplify the analysis of decoding performance for different scheduling sequences, the subsequent analysis in this section will be conducted under the conditions of Assumption 1.
Assumption 1: For two check nodes that are adjacent in the scheduling sequence, consider the impact of their update order on the decoding performance. On the BEC, let a and b be two check nodes with adjacent order in the scheduling sequence. Denote the degree of a as da, the degree of b as db, and the number of common neighboring variable nodes between a and b as da,b. Let the erasure probabilities of variable nodes connected exclusively to a be denoted as εa1,· · · ,εada−da,b , the erasure probabilities of variable nodes connected exclusively to b be denoted as εb1,· · · ,εdbb−da,b , the erasure probabilities of variable nodes jointly connected to a and b be denoted as εa1,b,· · · ,εada,b,b . Assume the erasure probabilities of different variable nodes are independent.
Theorem 1: Under Assumption 1, if updating a first and then updating b, results in a lower average erasure probability of variable nodes compared to updating b first, and then updating a, it holds if and only if

da i=1

εai 1 − εia

<

db j=1

1

εbj −

εbj

.

(3)

In particular, when the erasure probabilities of variable nodes tend to 0 and of order o(1), (3) can be simplified to

da

db

εai < εjb,

(4)

i=1

j=1

which means that the sum of erasure probabilities of variable nodes adjacent to a is less than the sum of erasure probabilities of variable nodes adjacent to b.

Proof: Assume the decoding of check node a proceeds first.

Then, check node b can utilize the information just transmitted

by a if and only if a can recover the information of a variable

node that is jointly connected to both a and b and b can utilize

this information to recover the information of a variable node

that is exclusively connected to b. That is, there are no erased

variable nodes exclusively connected to a, only one erased

variable node jointly connected to a and b, and only one erased

variable node exclusively connected to b. Let Pai, Pbi, and Pai,b denote the probabilities that exactly
i variables are erased among the variable nodes exclusively

connected to a, exclusively connected to b, and commonly

connected to a and b, respectively. Then the probability Pa,b that check node b utilized the information transmitted by a is

given by

Pa,b = Pa0 · Pa1,b · Pb1,

where

da −da,b

Pa0 =

(1 − εai ),

i=1

and

db −da,b

Pb1 =

(1 − ε1b ) · · · (1 − εjb−1)εjb(1 − εbj+1)

j=1

·

·

·

(1

−

εb
db −da,b

).

While when we decoding b before a, the probability Pb,a that a can utilize the information transmitted by b is

Pb,a = Pb0 · Pa1,b · Pa1,
where Pb0 and Pa1 can be similarly given. Therefore, Pa,b > Pb,a is equivalent to Pa0 · Pb1 > Pb0 · Pa1.
By simplification, (3) can be obtained.

Remark 1: Theorem 1 can be understood heuristically. When the check node with a smaller sum of erasure probabilities from its neighboring variable nodes is updated first, it is more likely to recover the information of a neighboring erased variable node. Consequently, this recovered variable node can assist other check nodes in decoding, which leads to higher decoding efficiency. In Fig. 1, an example is provided. On the BEC, there are two check nodes, A and B, on the graph. A is connected to one erased variable node, while B is connected to two erased variable nodes. By first updating A, which is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10090

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

connected to fewer erased variable nodes, and then updating B, all variable nodes’ information can be recovered in one iteration. In contrast, updating B before updating A leads to the inability to recover the information of all variable nodes in a single iteration. Theorem 1 analyzes adjacent check nodes in the decoding order, providing a metric for exchanging the update order of adjacent check nodes in sequence to achieve better decoding efficiency. For check nodes that are not adjacent in sequence, the goal can be achieved by repeatedly exchanging the update order of multiple adjacent check nodes.
Theorem 1 provides a characteristic that a good scheduling sequence should possess. Some other characteristics of high-efficiency scheduling sequences that can be observed in simulations can be given as corollaries of Theorem 1.
Corollary 1 (Degrees of check nodes) Under Assumption 1, assume da < db. Then, by updating check node a first and then updating b, the expected average erasure probability of variable nodes is less than that of updating b before updating a.
Proof: Since da < db and the erasure probabilities of the variable nodes connected to a and b are independently and identically distributed, the expectation of the left-hand side of (3) is less than the expectation of the right-hand side of (3).
Remark 2: High-efficiency scheduling sequences often exhibit the tendency to update the check nodes in ascending order of their degrees, which is consistent with the conclusion in [8]. The high-efficiency scheduling sequences found in [9] and [11] also generally exhibit an arrangement where the row weights are in ascending order.
Corollary 2 (Puncture) Under Assumption 1, assume that the erasure probabilities of the unpunctured variable nodes are of order o (1). Let daP and dPb denote the number of variable nodes connected to check nodes a and b, respectively, that are both punctured and have not undergone message passing. If dPa < dbP , updating a first and then updating b, results in a lower average erasure probability of variable nodes compared to updating b first, and then updating a.
Proof: The erasure probability of a punctured variable node that has not undergone message passing is 1. Therefore, when dPa < dPb , (3) holds.
Remark 3: Corollary 2 can be intuitively explained as follows: Before updating the information of a check node connected to multiple punctured variable nodes, there needs to be a check node connected to only one punctured variable node to pass initial information to the punctured variable node. Otherwise, the check node connected to multiple punctured variable nodes cannot transmit valid information.
Corollary 3 (Degrees of variable nodes) Under Assumption 1, assume that the erasure probabilities of the check node information received by the variable nodes connected to a and b are independently and identically distributed, and their expectations pCE are of order o (1). Let damin denote the minimum degree of variable nodes connected to a, and dm b in denote the minimum degree of variable nodes connected to b. If dm a in > dbmin, then updating a first and then updating b, results in a lower average erasure probability of variable nodes compared to updating b first and then updating a.

Proof: For a variable node with degree d, the expected erasure probability pEV of the message it sends is
pVE = pCEH · (pCE )d−1,
where pECH is the expected erasure probability of the information sent by the channel. Therefore, the sum of erasure probabilities for variable nodes connected to a is of order Θ(pCEH · (pEC )dm a in−1), and the sum of erasure probabilities for variable nodes connected to b is of order Θ(pCEH ·(pEC )dm b in−1). Since dm a in > dbmin, (3) holds.
Remark 4: Corollary 3 can be intuitively explained as follows: variable nodes with smaller degrees receive fewer messages from check nodes, hence they often have higher erasure probabilities. Delaying the update order of check nodes connected to variable nodes with smaller degrees can transmit better information to error-prone variable nodes, thereby improving overall performance.
Based on the above conclusions obtained on the BEC, it seems that the key to obtaining efficient scheduling sequences may lie in fully utilizing the irregularity of LDPC codes. By adjusting the message-passing order, some nodes’ information in the graph can converge quickly, completing decoding, and driving the remaining nodes to complete decoding. Therefore, high decoding efficiency can be obtained.

IV. SCHEDULING CHARACTERISTICS OVER THE BI-AWGN CHANNEL

On the BI-AWGN channel, Gaussian approximation [12] is a commonly used technique for conveniently analyzing decoding performance, where the distributions of messages passed in the decoder are approximated by Gaussian distributions with the variances equal to twice the means. By approximating the information transmitted during decoding as Gaussian distributions, the process of performance analysis can be greatly simplified while maintaining a high degree of accuracy. We show the following lemma under the assumption of Gaussian approximation to simplify the analysis of different schedule schemes.
Lemma 1: On the BI-AWGN channel, assume that the messages passed during the decoding process of LDPC codes follow Gaussian distributions. Consider a variable node v with degree J, where J ≥ 1. Let pch be the error probability of the channel message of v, and p1, · · · , pJ be the error probabilities of the messages from the connected check nodes of v, where pch, p1, · · · , pJ tend to 0. Then, the error probability of v is of order Θ(pchp1 · · · pJ ).

Proof: We only need to prove the case for J = 1. When

J ≥ 2, the proof process remains consistent.

Assume the channel message received by v follows a

Gaussian distribution with a mean of mch and a variance of

2mch, and that the message received by v from its connected

check node follows a Gaussian distribution with a mean of

m1 and a variance of 2m1. Therefore, pch = Q

mch 2

,

p1 = Q

m1 2

, where Q is the Gaussian Q-function [13].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG et al.: ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF RATE-DEPENDENT NESTED SCHEDULING IN LAYERED DECODING

10091

In [14], it is demonstrated that Q(x)

=

Θ

e−

x2 2

for

sufficiently large x. Since pch and p1 tends to 0, we have

that pch = Θ

e−

mch 4

and p1 = Θ

e−

m1 4

.

After the variable node v receives the channel message and

the messages from its connected check node, the resulting

information of v follows a Gaussian distribution with a mean

of mch + m1 and a variance of 2mch + 2m1. Therefore, the

error probability of v is Q

mch +m1 2

, which is of order

Θ

e mch+m1 4

. From this, the conclusion can be established.

On the BI-AWGN channel, a result consistent with Theorem
1 can be obtained. The analysis on the BI-AWGN channel is
conducted under conditions similar to those in Assumption 1.
Assumption 2: On the BI-AWGN channel, assume that the
messages passed during the decoding process of LDPC codes
follow Gaussian distributions. Let a and b be two check nodes
with adjacent order in the scheduling sequence. Denote the degree of a as da, the degree of b as db, and the number of common neighboring variable nodes between a and b as da,b. Let the error probabilities of variable nodes connected exclusively to a be denoted as pa1,· · · ,pdaa−da,b , the error probabilities of variable nodes connected exclusively to b be denoted as pb1,· · · ,pdbb−da,b , the error probabilities of variable nodes jointly connected to a and b be denoted as pa1,b,· · · ,pdaa,b,b . Assume the error probabilities of different variable nodes are
independent, non-zero, and tend to be 0.
Theorem 2: Under Assumption 2, in the first iteration, if
updating a first and then updating b, results in a lower average
error probability of variable nodes compared to updating b
first, and then updating a, it holds if and only if

da −da,b

db −da,b

pia <

pbj ,

(5)

i=1

j=1

which means that the sum of error probabilities of variable nodes adjacent to a is less than the sum of error probabilities of variable nodes adjacent to b.

Proof: For variable nodes, the relationship between the error

probabilities of the received and transmitted messages can be

derived from Lemma 1. While for a check node with degree

dc, the relationship between the error probability pc of the sent message and the error probability pi of the received message

is [1]

1− pc =

dc −1 i=1

(1

−

2pi)

.

2

(6)

By tracking the changes in the error probabilities of messages sent by variable nodes and check nodes, we can compute the average error probability of variable nodes after updating a and b, and compare the resulting average error probabilities under different scheduling orders.
Assuming the scheduling order is to update check node a first, followed by updating check node b. The error probability of the message sent by check node a to a variable node v1a exclusively connected to check node a is given by

1−

da −da,b i=2

(1

−

2pia

)

2

da,b k=1

(1

−

2pak,b)

da −da,b

da,b

da −da,b

da,b



=

pai + pka,b + o 

pia +

pka,b .

i=2

k=1

i=2

k=1

The error probability of v1a after decoding a and b is

da −da,b

da,b



Θ 

pai + pka,b pa1  .

i=2

k=1

Denote Sa =

da −da,b i=1

pia,

Sb

=

da,b k=1

pak,b.

Denote

Pa

as

db −da,b j=1

pbj ,

and

Sa,b

=

da −da,b

Pa = Sa2 + Sa · Sa,b −

(pia)2.

i=1

Therefore, the sum of error probabilities of the variable nodes exclusively connected to a after decoding a and b is Θ(Pa).
Denote Pb as

Pb = Sb2 − (pjb)2 + Sa · Sb · Sa,b − Sb
j
· (pka,b)2 + Sb · Sa2,b,
k

Pa,b as

Pa,b

= (Sa + Sa,b)2 · Sa2,b − (pak,b)2
k

+ (Sa + Sa,b) 2 (pak,b)3 − 2Sa,b (pak,b)2 + SbSa,b

k

k

+ (pka,b)2 ·
k

(pak,b)2 − Sb − (pak,b)4.

k

k

Through similar analysis, we can obtain the sum of error probabilities of the variable nodes exclusively connected to b after decoding a and b is Θ(Pb), and the sum of error probabilities of the variable nodes connected to both a and b after decoding a and b is Θ(Pa,b).
Similarly, for the case that the scheduling order is to update check node b first, followed by updating check node a, the sum of error probabilities of the variable nodes can be calculated. By comparison, it can be derived that the sum of error probabilities of the variable nodes by updating a before b is smaller if and only if Sa,b · Sa < Sa,b · Sb. Since Sa,b > 0, (5) holds.
01

Theorem 2 is proved only for the first iteration. In subsequent iterations, correlation effects make performance analysis more challenging. However, simulations indicate that the conclusion of Theorem 2 remains valid under multiple iterations.
Similar corollaries to those on the BEC can also be obtained. Corollary 4 (Degrees of check nodes) Under Assumption 2, assume da < db. Then, updating check node a first and then updating b, the expected average error probability of variable nodes is less than the case of updating b before updating a.

Proof: Same as Corollary 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10092

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 2. The structure of 5G NR LDPC base graph.
Corollary 5 (Degrees of variable nodes) Under Assumption 2, assume that the error probabilities of the check node information received by the variable nodes connected to a and b are independently and identically distributed, and their expectations pCE tend to 0. Let damin denote the minimum degree of variable nodes connected to a, and dbmin denote the minimum degree of variable nodes connected to b. If dm a in > dbmin, then updating a first and then updating b, results in a lower average error probability of variable nodes compared to updating b first, and then updating a.
Proof: Same as Corollary 3.
Assumption 2 requires the error probability of variable nodes to approach zero. However, punctured variable nodes have an error probability of 0.5, which does not satisfy this requirement. Therefore, A corollary analogous to Corollary 2 for the BEC channel cannot be directly derived from Theorem 2. Nevertheless, extensive empirical evidence indicates that this conclusion still holds [7], [9], [11], [15].
V. RATE-COMPATIBLE CODES AND SINGLE-SEQUENCE NESTED SCHEDULING SCHEME
In this section, we first introduce the rate-compatible LDPC codes and their application in 5G NR LDPC. Building on this, we provide an overview of the single-sequence nested scheduling scheme presented in [11].
A. Rate-Compatible LDPC Codes
Rate-compatible codes [16] are essential for many communication systems, e.g. hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) systems. By designing a family of codes that allows coding across a range of rates, matching the code rate to channel conditions can be conveniently achieved. Starting with a highrate code, lower-rate codes can be obtained by extending the parity-check matrix of the high-rate code [17].
For 5G NR LDPC codes [2], as shown in Fig. 2, the Raptorlike extension [18] was adopted, where a different number of rows and columns in the base graph will be used at different code rates.
Therefore, under rate-matching, when the size of the underlying graph changes, the scheduling sequence used should also be adjusted to ensure good decoding performance across various code rates. However, storing the scheduling sequences corresponding to each code rate in the decoder would impose a great storage overhead on the decoder. As a result, a scheduling scheme that can simultaneously address the storage overhead of the decoder and maintain decoding performance is required.

B. Single-Sequence Nested Scheduling Scheme
For rate-compatible LDPC codes, at different code rates, the decoder needs to use different scheduling sequences. This operation can be achieved through scheduling indicator sequences.
Definition 2 (scheduling indicator sequences) The scheduling indicator sequence is a sequence composed of the indices of check nodes. The scheduling sequences used at various rates can be derived from the scheduling indicator sequence and the corresponding indication rules. Different scheduling indicator sequences may have varying indication rules for determining the scheduling sequence.
In [11], the single-sequence nested scheduling scheme is designed for 5G NR LDPC codes [2]. By using one scheduling indicator sequence, the scheduling sequence used at all code rates can be easily obtained in a nested manner. Specifically, when the number of operating layers nrow is determined under the applied code rate, the decoder selects check nodes with indices less than or equal to nrow from the scheduling indicator sequences in the order of their appearance to construct the scheduling sequence required.
The scheduling indicator sequence obtained in [11] was through a greedy nested approach. Starting from the scenario with the minimum number of rows in the base graph for the highest code rate in rate matching (specifically, the case of 4 rows in 5G NR LDPC [2]), the algorithm first examines all possible scheduling sequences for this scenario (which amounts to 4! in 5G NR LDPC) to derive a threshold-optimal scheduling sequence. When the number of check nodes on the base graph increases by one as the code rate decreases, the algorithm examines all possible positions for adding the new check node to the original m-length scheduling sequence, which had fewer check nodes. From these m+1 new scheduling sequences, it selects the one that is threshold-optimal to serve as the scheduling sequence for the current code rate.
Example 1: (single-sequence nested scheduling scheme [11]): For 5G NR LDPC codes base graph (BG) 1 with 46 check nodes in the base graph, let its single scheduling indicator sequence S be [ 43, 41, 27, 35, 38, 46, 31, 33, 23, 29, 39, 45, 42, 21, 28, 26, 32, 37, 40, 14, 34, 36, 25, 30, 44, 18, 24, 19, 22, 15, 7, 11, 17, 2, 5, 20, 8, 13, 16, 10, 6, 12, 9, 1, 3, 4], where the check nodes are labeled from 1 to 46 in a topto-bottom order according to their corresponding rows in the parity-check matrix. In rate matching, if the current decoding requires the first 10 rows of the parity-check matrix, the scheduling sequence is determined by sequentially selecting the parts of S with labels less than or equal to 10, which is [7, 2, 5, 8, 10, 6, 9, 1, 3, 4].
In the scheduling sequences obtained from the singlesequence nested scheduling scheme [11], it can be observed that the row weights are arranged roughly from smallest to largest. However, while the single-sequence nested scheduling scheme can effectively characterize the desirable scheduling properties of row weights, it has limited ability to depict other good scheduling characteristics, as a single scheduling indication sequence imposes severe limitations on the selection of scheduling sequences, which we show in the next example.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG et al.: ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF RATE-DEPENDENT NESTED SCHEDULING IN LAYERED DECODING

10093

Example 2: For the case in Example 1, when the number of check nodes on the base graph used in rate matching is 5, the scheduling sequence employed is [2, 5, 1, 3, 4]. It can be observed that this sequence is consistent with the portion of the scheduling sequence for the 10 check nodes where the check node labels are less than or equal to 5. This implies that when the number of check nodes increases, the decoding order of the previously established check nodes cannot be adjusted based on the newly added check nodes. Additional scheduling indication sequences are required to overcome this limitation.
VI. MULTI-SEQUENCE NESTED SCHEDULING SCHEME
In this section, we present the double-sequence, triplesequence, and more sequence nested schemes, aiming to achieve better performance with limited decoder storage requirements. By gradually increasing the number of scheduling indicator sequences that the decoder needs to store, the characteristics of effective scheduling can be better characterized.
A. Double-Sequence Nested Scheduling Scheme
In the double-sequence nested scheduling scheme, we aim to characterize efficient scheduling sequences in terms of row weight and punctured variable nodes. Since the characteristics of row weights have already been delineated in the singlesequence nested scheduling scheme, the double-sequence nested scheduling scheme builds upon this by using a new scheduling indicator sequence to characterize the puncturing characteristics.
As already mentioned in Remark 3, before updating the check nodes connected to multiple punctured variable nodes, there needs to be a check node connected to only one punctured variable node to propagate initial information to the punctured variable nodes; otherwise, decoding cannot proceed.
Therefore, for rate-compatible LDPC codes, at each code rate, there must be a check node connected to only one punctured variable node at the beginning of the scheduling sequence to pass initial information to the punctured variable. This requirement may conflict with certain characteristics, such as the row weight of the corresponding row. In the nested scheduling structure, scheduling sequences for low code rates with a higher number of check nodes need to incorporate check nodes from scheduling sequences for high code rates with fewer check nodes to be obtained. In this process, if a new check node is identified as the start of the scheduling sequence to propagate initial information to a punctured variable node, then the original check node responsible for propagating initial information to the punctured variable node no longer needs to fulfill this role. Therefore, this original check node can be placed further back in the scheduling sequence to achieve better performance, taking into account factors such as row weight. This process can be achieved through a new scheduling indicator sequence, which records the check nodes at each code rate that are responsible for passing initial information to the punctured variables. The complete double-sequence nested scheduling searching algorithm is provided in Algorithm 1, where for a sequence S = {s1, s2, · · · , sn} and an element

Algorithm 1 Double-Sequence Nested Scheduling

Input: Base Graph B, the maximum number of iterations T

Output: Scheduling indicator sequences S1 and S2 1 M ← number of rows in B, N ← number of columns in

B, K ← N − M , S1 ← ∅, S2 ← ∅. 2 m ← 4, Bm = B(1 : m, 1 : m + K). 3 Iterate through the m! different permutations of schedul-

ing sequences ranging from 1 to m, calculate the

corresponding thresholds under LBP on Bm, and select the sequence that yields the best thresholds as S1. 4 for i = 5, 6, · · · , M do

5 m ← m + 1, Bm = B(1 : m, 1 : m + K).

6 for j = 1, 2, · · · , m do

7

Compute the threshold T j under LBP on Bm using

the scheduling sequence S1m,j.

8 end for

9 Set S1 ← S1m,j0 = {s1, s2, · · · , sm}.

10 if j0 == 1 then

11

Stmp = S1/s2 = {s1, s3, · · · , sm}.

12

for k = 3, 4, · · · , m do

13

Compute the threshold Ttkmp under LBP on Bm

using the scheduling sequence Stsm2,pk.

14

end for

15

Find the optimal threshold among

Tt3mp, Tt4mp, . . ., Ttmmp as Ttkm0 p. If Ttkm0 p is better than T j0 , set S1 ← Stsm2,pk0 , and append (m − 1, s2)

to the end of S2.

16 end if

17 end for

s, we use Ss,t = {s1, · · · , st−1, s, st, · · · , sn} to denote the new sequence obtained by inserting s into the t-th position of sequence S. Considering the rate-compatible structure of the base matrix of 5G NR LDPC codes, Algorithm 1 starts from the case where the base matrix has 4 rows.
The double-sequence nested scheduling scheme will yield two scheduling indicator sequences, S1 and S2, where S1 = {s1, s2, · · · , sm} takes on a nested form and is primarily used to characterize row weight characteristics similar to the single-sequence nested scheduling scheme, and S2 = {(s1,1, s1,2), (s2,1, s2,2), · · · , (sp,1, sp,2)} takes on a grouped form, where its elements are grouped in pairs, representing the puncturing characteristics of scheduling. Building on the single-sequence nested scheduling scheme, Algorithm 1 delays the position of the second check node in the current scheduling sequence each time a new check node is introduced as the first check node in the scheduling sequence since this check node no longer needs to pass initial information to the punctured variable nodes. It then explores all possible delayed positions and selects the one that is threshold-optimal. If delaying the second check node results in a better threshold, the corresponding adjustment is made to the scheduling indicator sequence S1, while a new pair of check nodes is added to the scheduling indicator sequence S2 to document when the delay of the second check node occurs.
After obtaining the scheduling indicator sequences S1 and S2, assuming there are m layers at the current code rate,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10094

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

the scheduling sequence needs to be obtained through S1 and S2. First, select the check nodes with indices less than or equal to m from S1 according to their order of appearance in S1, and denote the resulting sequence as Φ1. Then, modify Φ1 according to S2 to consider the puncturing characteristics. Specifically, since S2 adopts a grouped form, it is first necessary to determine which grouped pairs in S2 need to be utilized at the current code rate. In S2 = {(s1,1, s1,2), (s2,1, s2,2), · · · , (sp,1, sp,2)}, the first element of each group is used to determine the scope of the current group’s effect, as shown in (7):
 s1,2, if m ≤ s1,1,  sfirst = si,2, if si−1,1 < m ≤ si,1, 1 < i ≤ p, (7) 0, else,
where p is the number of groups in S2, and sfirst denotes the check node that transmits initial information to the punctured variable node at the current code rate. If sfirst is not equal to 0, modify the position of the obtained sfirst in the sequence Φ1 to the first position to obtain the final scheduling sequence Φ used for decoding.
Example 3 (double-sequence Nested Scheduling Scheme) Let S1 = { 43, 41, 28, 38, 46, 26, 30, 32, 44, 40, 36, 24, 37, 34, 27, 29, 35, 31, 33, 23, 19, 39, 45, 42, 17, 22, 14, 25, 21, 18, 15, 11, 7, 5, 20, 8, 16, 13, 6, 12, 10, 9, 3, 4, 1, 2}. S2 = {(6, 2)}.
When m = 5, Φ1 = {5, 3, 4, 1, 2}, sfirst = 2, and Φ = {2, 5, 3, 4, 1}.
When m = 10, Φ1 = {7, 5, 8, 6, 10, 9, 3, 4, 1, 2}, sfirst = 0, and Φ = {7, 5, 8, 6, 10, 9, 3, 4, 1, 2}.
Note that unlike in [7] and [15], the rule of updating checks with fewer connected punctured variable nodes throughout the entire decoding process is not followed here. Instead, we only consider the punctured variables at the beginning of the decoding process. This is because, based on our previous analysis, the consideration of punctured variable nodes at the start of the decoding process has a significant impact, while in the later stages of decoding, experimental observations show that the impact of punctured variable nodes is relatively small.
B. Triple-Sequence Nested Scheduling Scheme
In the triple-sequence nested scheduling scheme, more characteristics of scheduling, including row weight, punctured variable nodes, and column weight, are delineated. Therefore, based on the double-sequence nested scheduling scheme, a new scheduling indicator sequence needs to be added to characterize the column weight characteristic of scheduling.
More precisely, as already mentioned in Corollary 3 and 5, the variable nodes on the information bits with the minimum column weight often have a higher error probability when the iteration number is small, exerting a decisive influence on the overall block error rate performance. Therefore, by delaying the update order of the check nodes connected to the variable nodes on the information bits with the minimum column weight, these check nodes can convey better information, thereby improving the performance of error-prone information bits and enhancing overall performance.

Fig. 3. The matrix B constructed based on the base matrix B, which is used to characterize row weight and puncturing characteristics in the triplesequence nested scheduling scheme.
To ensure that each scheduling indicator sequence can accurately characterize the characteristics it needs to depict, we first construct a new base matrix B based on the base matrix B used for decoding, to eliminate the influence of the minimum column weight characteristic on the row weight characteristic and puncturing characteristic. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 3, a new row and a new column are added to B to serve as the first row and the first column of the new base matrix B . The newly added column is only connected to the newly added row, while the newly added row is connected to both the newly added column and all information bits of B. During the decoding threshold calculation, the newly added column is treated as an information bit. Through the above construction, the newly added column in B serves as an information bit with the lowest column weight, and the newly added row serves as the row connected to the information bit with the lowest column weight, which needs to be placed in the last position in the scheduling sequence. Therefore, using the double-sequence scheduling scheme on B can characterize the row weight and puncturing characteristics of B while eliminating the influence of the minimum column weight characterize of B. Based on these, we use the third scheduling indicator sequence to denote the characteristics of minimal column weight. We identify the rows in B that are connected to the minimum column weight at each code rate and sort these rows at each code rate in ascending order based on the number of connections to the minimum column weight. Record these rows and their order using the third scheduling indicator sequence. The search algorithm of the triple-sequence nested scheduling scheme is shown in Algorithm 2. In line 7 of Algorithm 2, we first find all information bits with the minimum column weight, i.e., vi1 , vi2 , · · · , vit . Next, we identify all check nodes connected to any variable nodes in vi1 , vi2 , · · · , vit , devoted as cj1 , cj2 , · · · , cjd . Let w1, w2, · · · , wd denote the number of times that cj1 , cj2 , · · · , cjd , respectively, connect to variable nodes vi1 , vi2 , · · · , vit . Sort the check nodes cj1 , cj2 , · · · , cjd in ascending order based on w1, w2, · · · , wd, and denote the sorted sequence of cj1 , cj2 , · · · , cjd as Smin.
The triple-sequence nested scheduling scheme will yield three scheduling indicator sequences. The scheduling indicator sequences S1 and S2 are identical in form and function to the scheduling indicator sequences in the double-sequence nested scheduling scheme. The third scheduling indicator sequence S3 = { (0, s31,1, · · · ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG et al.: ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF RATE-DEPENDENT NESTED SCHEDULING IN LAYERED DECODING

10095

Algorithm 2 Triple-Sequence Nested Scheduling

Input: Base Graph B, the maximum number of iterations T

Output: Scheduling indicator sequences S1, S2, and S3 1 Construct the matrix B based on the based matrix B,

referring to Fig. 1.

2 Apply the double-sequence nested scheduling scheme on

B , yielding the scheduling indicator sequences S1 and S2. 3 Delete the check node indexed as 1 in S1, and decrement the indices of all remaining check nodes in S1 and S2 by 1.

4 M ← number of rows in B, N ← number of columns in

B, K ← N − M , S3 ← ∅, Smin ← ∅. 5 for i = 4, 5, · · · , M do

6 Bi ← B(1 : i, 1 : i + K). 7 Identity the columns vi1 , vi2 , · · · , vit on the informa-
tion bits with the minimum column weight in Bi. Find all check nodes connected to vi1 , vi2 , · · · , vit and sort them according to their number of connections

to vi1 , vi2 , · · · , vit in ascending order to obtain the sequence Smin. 8 if i == 4 then

9

Smin ← Smin.

10 else if Smin = Smin then

11

Append the sequence (0, i − 1, Smin) to the end of

S3.

12

Smin ← Smin.

13 end if

14 end for

15 Append the sequence (0, M, Smin) to the end of S3.

s31,q1 ), (0, s32,1, · · · , s23,q2 ), · · · , (0, spp,11, · · · , spp,qp ) is used to indicate the characteristic of the minimum column weight in the scheduling. It adopts a grouped form and uses 0 to indicate the beginning of each group.
When using the scheduling indicator sequences S1, S2, and S3 to obtain the scheduling sequence with m check nodes in the base matrix, the usage of S1 and S2 is consistent with the double-sequence nested scheduling scheme. This means that we need to first utilize the nested form of S1 to extract a sequence of length m , and then use S2 to modify the beginning of the sequence to incorporate consideration for the puncturing characteristics. Denote the obtained sequence as Φ2. Subsequently, use the scheduling indicator sequence S3 = (0, s13,1, · · · , s13,q1 ), (0, s23,1, · · · , s32,q2 ), · · · , (0, spp,11, · · · , spp,qp ) to modify the end part of the sequence Φ2 to consider the characteristic of the minimum column weight in the scheduling. Firstly, determine the group Slast in S3 that needs to take effect under the current value of m using the following equation.
Slast
= [s1,2, · · · , s1,q1 ], if m ≤ s1,1, [si,2, · · · , si,qi ], if si−1,1 < m ≤ si,1, 1 < i ≤ p.
Modify the sequence Φ2 to rearrange the positions of the elements in Slast according to the order in Slast to the last

position of Φ2 to obtain the final scheduling sequence Φ used for decoding.
Example 4 (Triple-sequence Nested Scheduling Scheme) Let S1 = {43, 41, 28, 38, 46, 26, 30, 32, 40, 36, 44, 24, 37, 34, 27, 29, 35, 31, 33, 23, 39, 45, 42, 14, 18, 25, 15, 11, 17, 21, 22, 19, 7, 5, 20, 8, 16, 13, 12, 6, 9, 10, 3, 4, 1, 2}, S2 = {(6, 2)}, S3 =.(0, 5, 1, 3, 4), (0, 7, 4, 1, 2, 3), (0, 21, 1, 2, 3), (0, 23, 21, 22, 11, 15, 7, 4, 2, 1, 3), (0, 25, 21, 22, 15, 7, 4, 2, 1, 3), (0, 27, 21, 22, 15, 1, 2, 3), (0, 38, 21, 22, 1, 2, 3), (0, 46, 22, 1, 2, 3)}.
When m = 5, Φ1 = {5, 3, 4, 1, 2}, Φ2 = {2, 5, 3, 4, 1}, Φ = {2, 5, 1, 3, 4}.
When m = 10, Φ1 = {7, 5, 8, 6, 9, 10, 3, 4, 1, 2}, Φ2 = {7, 5, 8, 6, 9, 10, 3, 4, 1, 2}, Φ = {7, 5, 8, 6, 9, 10, 4, 1, 2, 3}.
It can be observed that the relative order of check nodes with labels less than or equal to 5 is completely different when m = 5 compared to when m = 10. In fact, by using scheduling indicator sequences S2 and S3 to make different adjustments to the sequence obtained from scheduling indicator sequence S1 across various code rates, the multisequence nested scheduling scheme can greatly alleviate the inflexibility arising from the nested structure, resulting in more efficient decoding performance.
Note that S2 and S3 characterize different scheduling features and make adjustments to different parts of the sequence obtained from S1, in order to jointly achieve high decoding efficiency.
C. More Sequence Nested Scheduling Scheme
In the more sequence nested scheduling scheme, the characteristic of prioritizing the update of the check nodes with a smaller sum of error probabilities of connected variable nodes during scheduling is directly characterized. As the characteristics of scheduling about row weight, puncturing, and column weight can be obtained as corollaries for the characteristic of the sum of error probabilities of the connected variable nodes according to previous sections, the characterization of this characteristic is more complex, requiring more scheduling indicator sequences to accomplish.
To achieve this, in the nested structure, each time a scheduling sequence of a lower code rate is obtained from a scheduling sequence of a higher code rate in a greedy manner, we check whether the current scheduling sequence satisfies the required characteristic, and modify the parts of sequence that do not meet the characteristic to obtain a better threshold. For this purpose, we design a layered GA-DE algorithm to compute the sum of error probabilities from the connected variable nodes of each check node during the decoding process based on the Gaussian approximation density evolution (GA-DE) algorithm [12]. Gaussian approximation is an approximation algorithm of density evolution, which can be used to quickly estimate the message distribution in decoding. By using Gaussian approximation to calculate the mean of the messages at the variable nodes in layered decoding under a given scheduling sequence, the error probability for each variable node can be computed. Furthermore, the sum of error probabilities of the variable nodes connected to a given check node can be calculated. To verify whether a given

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10096

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

scheduling sequence satisfies the rule that check nodes with lower cumulative error probabilities from the connected variable nodes are updated first, we utilize the LGA-DE algorithm to assess the decoding process. Specifically, we examine the error probabilities corresponding to adjacent check nodes in the scheduling sequence as the decoding progresses.

Algorithm 3 Layered GA-DE: LGA-DE(B, Φ, Sch, t)

Input: (M , N ) base Graph B, scheduling sequence Φ =

{s1, s2, · · · , sM }, input SNR Sch, step t, 0 ≤ t ≤ M −2
Output: The sum of error probabilities, et+1 and et+2, of the
connected variable nodes for check nodes st+1 and st+2,
respectively, after decoding t check nodes along Φ 1 mjch ← 2Sch if j is not a punctured bit and mcjh ← 0
else, for j = 1, · · · , N . 2 mic,j ← 0, miv,j ← 0, for i = 1, · · · , M , j = 1, · · · , N . 3 for i = s1, s2, · · · , st do
4 for j = 1, · · · , N do

5

If B(i, j) = 0, mvi,j = 1 − φ i =i mci ,j + mjch .

6 end for

7 for j = 1, · · · , N do

8

If B(i, j) = 0, mic,j = φ−1 1 − j =j miv,j .

9 end for

10 end for 11 evj = Q mjch + i mci,j / 2 mjch + i mic,j , for

j = 1, · · · , N . 12 et+1 = j∈NB(st+1) evj , et+2 =

j∈NB (st+2) ejv .

Assume the codewords are transmitted over the BI-AWGN

channel, where y = x + µ, µ ∼ N (0, σ2). The parameter σ

is determined by the channel signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) Sch,

satisfying

the

relation

Sch

=

1 σ2

.

The

detail

of

the

designed

LGA-DE algorithm is shown in Algorithm 3, where



1

1 − √

φ(x) =

4πx

1,

tanh

u e−

(u−x)2 4x

du,

R

2

if x > 0, if x = 0,

Algorithm 4 More Sequence Nested Scheduling

Input: Base Graph B, the maximum number of iterations T,

input SNR Sch Output: Scheduling indicator sequences Sl, l = {1, · · · , L},
where L is the number of the scheduling indicator

sequences

1 M ← number of rows in B, N ← number of columns in

B, K ← N − M , L ← 1.

2 m ← 4, Bm = B(1 : m, 1 : m + K). 3 Iterate through the m! different permutations of schedul-

ing sequences ranging from 1 to m, calculate the

corresponding thresholds under LBP on Bm, and select the sequence that yields the best thresholds as SL. 4 for i = 5, 6, · · · , M do

5 m ← m + 1, Bm = B(1 : m, 1 : m + K).

6 for j = 1, 2, · · · , m do

7

Compute the threshold T j under LBP on Bm using

the scheduling sequence SLm,j.

8 end for

9 Find the optimal threshold among T 1, T 2, . . ., T m as

T j0 . Set Stmp ← SLm,j0 = {s1, · · · , sm}.

10 F ← 1, F ound ← 0.

11 while F == 1 do

12

F ← 0.

13

for k = 1, 2, · · · , m − 1 do

14

ek, ek+1 ← LGA-DE(Bm, SL, Sch, k − 1). If

ek > ek+1, exchange the order of sk and sk+1

in Stmp. Compute the threshold of the resulting

scheduling sequence, and if it is better than the

previous best threshold, let the new sequence be

Stmp = {s1, · · · , sm}, F ← 1, F ound ← 1.

15

end for

16 end while

17 if F ound == 1 then

18

L ← L + 1.

19 end if

20 SL ← Stmp. 21 end for

Q represents the Q-function, and NB(s) represents the variable nodes adjacent to check node s in B.
Based on LGA-DE, we design the more sequences nested scheduling scheme, which is shown in Algorithm 4. In the more sequence nested scheduling scheme, during each generation of a new scheduling sequence, we check if there are check nodes that do not satisfy the rule of updating the check nodes with a smaller sum of error probabilities of the connected variable nodes first. If such check nodes exist, we exchange their order in the scheduling sequence and check if a better threshold can be obtained. Exchange the original scheduling sequence with the scheduling sequence with a better threshold. Under this exchange, the nested structure of the scheduling sequence would be disrupted. Thereby more scheduling indicator sequences are required.
The scheduling indicator sequences Sl = {s1l , s2l , · · · , slnl }, l = 1, · · · , L, 4 ≤ n1 < n2 < · · · < nL = M , generated by more sequence nested scheduling scheme will respectively

function at different code rates according to the following equation:

Suse =

S1, Si,

if m ≤ n1, if ni−1 < m ≤ ni, 1 < i ≤ L,

where Suse is the scheduling indicator sequence required to be used under the current number m of rows in the base matrix and nl is the length of Sl. Then, select the check nodes with indices less than or equal to m from Suse according to their order of appearance in Suse to obtain the scheduling sequence Φ.
Example 5 (More Sequences Nested Scheduling Scheme) Let L = 5, S1 = 2, 5, 6, 3, 4, 1}, S2 = { 14, 18, 15, 11, 17, 7, 5, 8, 13, 16, 6, 12, 10, 9, 4, 1, 2, 3}, S3 = 26, 24, 27, 23, 14, 18, 15, 17, 25, 21, 5, 22, 19, 20, 8, 11, 13, 16, 7, 6, 12, 10, 9, 4, 1, 2, 3}, S4 = 28, 36, 26, 32, 30, 24, 34, 27, 5, 29, 35, 33, 31, 23, 14, 18, 25, 15, 17, 21, 22, 19, 20, 8, 11, 13, 16, 7, 6, 12, 10, 9, 4, 1, 2, 3}, S5 = 43, 41, 38, 28, 46, 36,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG et al.: ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF RATE-DEPENDENT NESTED SCHEDULING IN LAYERED DECODING

10097

26, 32, 40, 30, 44, 42, 24, 34, 5, 29, 37, 27, 35, 33, 23, 31, 39, 45, 14, 18, 15, 2, 1, 25, 17, 22, 19, 20, 8, 11, 13, 16, 7, 6, 12, 10, 9, 4, 1, 2, 3}.
When m = 5, Suse = S1, Φ = {2, 5, 3, 4, 1}. When m = 10, Suse = S2, Φ = {7, 5, 8, 6, 10, 9, 4, 1, 2, 3}.

D. Algorithm Complexity
By utilizing the multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme, hardware storage requirements can be significantly reduced, since a small number of scheduling indicator sequences can yield the required scheduling sequences for all code rates. In terms of complexity, we consider two aspects separately: the scheduling complexity during the decoding process and the design complexity of the scheduling indicator sequences, since these two aspects are required during and prior to the decoding process, respectively.
First, with regard to the scheduling complexity in the decoding process, assuming that the number of scheduling indicator sequences used in the multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme is ns and the maximum length of a scheduling indicator sequence is ls, the complexity of generating the scheduling sequence from the scheduling indicator sequences, considering their designed usage, will be bounded by ns × ls. For a given base graph, the values of ns and ls are independent of the lifting degree. Therefore, ns and ls can be regarded as constants unrelated to the code length. For moderate to large code lengths, the complexity of generating the scheduling sequence from the scheduling indicator sequences is negligible compared to the overall decoding complexity.
Second, with respect to the design complexity of the scheduling indicator sequences, the multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme exhibits a higher complexity compared to the single-sequence nested scheme, due to its more comprehensive characterization and consideration of efficient scheduling features. However, for a given code, the design of scheduling indicator sequences can be completed before decoding. Therefore, this complexity does not impact the decoding process.
VII. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we provide a comparison of simulation error correction performance under various scheduling algorithms. Using 5G NR LDPC BG1 as an example, we compare the simulation performance of single-sequence, double-sequence, triple-sequence, and more sequence nested scheduling schemes. We choose the reverse order scheduling as the baseline, in which check nodes are updated in descending order of their indices. For 5G NR LDPC codes, the reverse order scheduling generally follows the rule of updating in order of increasing row weight and has demonstrated good decoding performance in simulations. It is noteworthy that the LGA-DE algorithm in the more sequence nested scheduling scheme produces different results at different SNRs. In the experiment, the working point is chosen based on the SNR corresponding to 1% block error rate (BLER) under reverse order scheduling, in order to achieve optimal algorithm performance. However, since the more sequence nested scheduling

Fig. 4. Decoding threshold gain for various nested scheduling schemes compared to the reverse order scheduling at different code rates. The 5G NR LDPC codes constructed from BG1 are evaluated.
scheme evaluates the decoding thresholds of more scheduling sequences compared to the single-sequence nested scheduling scheme, its performance under various SNR selections should outperform that of the single-sequence nested scheduling scheme.
In Fig. 4, we compare the threshold gains of various nested scheduling schemes compared to the reverse order scheduling. The maximum number of iterations is set to 5 in order to evaluate the performance of the scheduling in high-throughput scenarios. For the single-sequence nested scheduling scheme, we adopted the method from [11] to redesign the scheduling indicator sequence under 5 iterations. The abscissa in Fig. 4 represents different code rates. The vertical axis represents the threshold gain of different scheduling sequences compared to the reverse order scheduling; a value greater than 0 indicates that the corresponding scheduling sequence achieves a better threshold than the reverse order scheduling. This gain value is related to the performance of reverse order scheduling and is therefore influenced by factors such as degree distribution and puncturing at different code rates, resulting in varying magnitudes across different coded rates. It can be observed that compared to reverse order scheduling, the single-sequence nested scheduling scheme can achieve threshold gain at high code rates. However, at medium to low code rates, due to the limitations in sequence selection introduced by the nested structure, its thresholds are inferior to reverse order scheduling. In contrast, the multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme considers more characteristics that a good schedule should possess and alleviates the restrictions on sequence selection in nested scheduling schemes. Therefore, it can achieve threshold gains compared to reverse order scheduling and single-sequence nested scheduling at almost all code rates. Moreover, in the multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme, the more scheduling indicator sequences used, the finer the characterization of good scheduling characteristics, leading to a better decoding threshold. This provides a trade-off between the storage of the decoder and its decoding performance.
In Fig. 5, we obtain the Es/N0 required to achieve the BLER under various scheduling schemes. We compare the Es/N0 required for each nested scheduling scheme with that of the reverse order scheduling, to determine the Es/N0 reduction compared to the reverse order scheduling. There-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10098

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 5. Error-correcting performance for various nested scheduling schemes compared to the inverse scheduling. The 5G NR LDPC codes constructed from BG1 are evaluated.

Fig. 6. The performance comparison of various scheduling schemes under 5G LDPC code BG1 with code rate 2/3. The maximum number of iterations is set to 3.

fore, the higher the ordinate value in Fig. 5, the better the performance of the corresponding nested scheduling scheme. The abscissa in Fig. 5 represents different code rates. We conduct experiments separately with 3 and 5 maximum iterations, with information bit lengths of 8448 and 2112, respectively. As observed, consistent with the threshold analysis, the multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme can overcome the performance loss brought by the single-sequence nested scheduling scheme at a low code rate, obtaining performance gains at almost every code rate. Moreover, incorporating more nested sequences can lead to improved decoding performance.
To provide a more direct observation of decoding performance under different scheduling schemes, Fig. 6 presents the performance of various scheduling schemes for the 5G

LDPC BG1 code at code rate of 2/3. The maximum number of iterations is set to 3 and the information length is set to 4224. In Fig. 6, layered decoding refers to decoding in ascending order of check node labels, while LPHD [7] prioritizes updating check nodes with fewer connections to punctured columns and higher degrees, LD [8] prioritizes the update of check nodes with smaller degrees, and BGSS 1-2-3 [15] prioritizes updating check nodes with fewer connections to punctured variable nodes, smaller degrees, and those with more frequently updated connected variables. It can be observed that, compared to unscheduled layered decoding, reverse order scheduling and nested scheduling can achieve improved decoding performance. Moreover, multi-sequence nested scheduling schemes achieve the optimal scheduling gain. Except for the nested scheduling scheme, the BGSS

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG et al.: ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF RATE-DEPENDENT NESTED SCHEDULING IN LAYERED DECODING

10099

Fig. 7. The performance comparison of various scheduling schemes under 5G LDPC code BG1 with code rate 2/3. The maximum number of iterations is set to 10.

1-2-3 algorithm demonstrates optimal performance. It can achieve performance similar to that of the double-sequence nested scheduling scheme, but is inferior to the triple-sequence and more sequence nested scheduling schemes. It is noteworthy that the nested scheduling scheme with more sequences obtains the optimal scheduling sequences at each code rate by searching from the perspective of the sum of the error probabilities of adjacent variable nodes.
Figure 7 further illustrates the performance of the code in Figure 6 under 10 iterations. As the number of iterations increases, the performance difference among different scheduling algorithms decreases. However, the multi-sequence nested scheduling schemes continue to achieve optimal performance.
However, in cases where a larger number of decoding iterations is required, such as 30 iterations, the impact of scheduling on decoding performance becomes less significant. Under such conditions, the decoding thresholds of the various scheduling strategies discussed in this paper converge, with differences reduced to within 0.01 dB.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we show that, by allowing check nodes that are less prone to errors to update earlier, they are more likely to correct current decoding errors, assisting other check nodes for decoding. Based on the characteristics of good schedules, we designed an efficient layered decoding algorithm for the 5G NR LDPC codes. Through the designed multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme, we can comprehensively consider the characteristics that good scheduling should satisfy, while using minimal additional storage for scheduling in the decoder. The simulation shows that the multi-sequence nested scheduling schemes achieve better performance compared to other existing scheduling algorithms across various code rates. Therefore, although the nested structure still introduces some inflexibility in the selection of scheduling sequences, by characterizing the features of efficient scheduling and making corresponding modifications to address this inflexibility, the multi-sequence nested scheduling scheme can achieve excellent decoding efficiency across various code rates while balancing hardware storage requirements. Whether adopting a different scheduling sequence in each iteration, instead of maintaining the same scheduling sequence across all iterations as in this study, can achieve further performance improvement remains an open question for future research.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] 5G NR; Multiplexing and Channel Coding (release 15), Standard 3GPP TS 38.212 v15. 2.0, 2018.
[3] IEEE Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems-local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Specific Requirements Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, Standard IEEE Std 802.11-2007. [Online]. Available: https://standards.ieee.org/ ieee/802.11/3605/
[4] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, 1997.
[5] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[6] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS), Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[7] B. Wang, Y. Zhu, and J. Kang, “Two effective scheduling schemes for layered belief propagation of 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1683–1686, Aug. 2020.
[8] J. Frenzel, S. Mueller-Weinfurtner, J. B. Huber, and R. R. Mueller, “Static layered schedules and core-only parity check for the 5G new radio LDPC codes,” in Proc. SCC 12th Int. ITG Conf. Syst., Commun. Coding, Feb. 2019, pp. 1–5.
[9] D. Chang, G. Wang, G. Yan, and D. Yin, “An optimization model for offline scheduling policy of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 1740–1744, Aug. 2024.
[10] D. Yin et al., “On the message passing efficiency of polar and lowdensity parity-check decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Dec. 2022, pp. 528–534.
[11] M. Jang, K. Kim, S. Myung, H. Jeong, K.-J. Kim, and S.-H. Kim, “A design of layered decoding for QC-LDPC codes based on reciprocal channel approximation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2022, pp. 554–559.
[12] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Mar. 2001.
[13] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[14] G. T. Freitas De Abreu, “Jensen-cotes upper and lower bounds on the Gaussian Q-function and related functions,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 3328–3338, Nov. 2009.
[15] K. Tian and H. Wang, “A novel base graph based static scheduling scheme for layered decoding of 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1450–1453, Jul. 2022.
[16] J. Hagenauer, “Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (RCPC codes) and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 389–400, Apr. 1988.
[17] T. V. Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “The design of ratecompatible protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2841–2850, Oct. 2012.
[18] M. Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, “On construction of rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2004, pp. 430–434.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

