10028

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

A Multi-High-Rate Structured Algebraic QC-LDPC Code for 3D TLC NAND Flash Memory

Linxin Yin , Xiongfei Zhai , Member, IEEE, Yi Fang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Guojun Han , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—As the number of stacked layers in 3D NAND flash memory increases, the channels experience more complex noise, leading to significant fluctuations in the error detection rate. Error-correcting codes with varying error correction capabilities (ECC) are required at different flash stages. To address this issue, we investigate multi-high-rate low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for 3D NAND flash memory in this paper. Firstly, we mathematically model the 3D triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash channel based on the obtained data from the test platform. Then we propose a multi-high-rate structured algebraic quasi-cyclic LDPC (MHR-SA-QC-LDPC) code. Specifically, the MHR-SAQC-LDPC code contains the fixed number of information bits and can be adjusted to various rates according to the characteristics of NAND flash channels. Both additive and multiplicative group construction methods are analyzed in the prime field. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed LDPC codes outperform existing benchmarks in 3D TLC NAND flash channels, improving both ECC performance and device lifetime.
Index Terms—3D TLC NAND flash memory, ECC, MHR-SAQC-LDPC code, prime field.
I. INTRODUCTION
N AND flash memory has been an important storage medium for decades. To satisfy the growing demands of data-intensive applications, the storage density of flash memory continues to increase, exacerbating reliability issues.
Different kinds of noise cause the dramatically increasing raw bit error ratio (RBER) [1]. To deal with this issue, the techniques of error-correcting codes are generally exploited during the data writing and reading in solid state drives (SSDs), leading to improved data reliability and longer service life [2]. Specifically, due to their outstanding error correction capabilities (ECC) as compared with the traditional BoseChanuduri-Hokkunhem (BCH) codes [3], the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have recently drawn lots of attention for improving data reliability in 3D NAND flash memory.
However, as the storage density increases, the existing LDPC codes face the new challenges, e.g., the unpredictable
Received 24 July 2024; revised 30 November 2024, 27 February 2025, and 28 April 2025; accepted 28 May 2025. Date of publication 9 June 2025; date of current version 14 November 2025. This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 62301166, 62322106, 62471151, and U2001203; in part by the Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou under Grant 2025A04J2904. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was K. Wan. (Corresponding authors: Xiongfei Zhai; Guojun Han.)
The authors are with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: 1112203003@mail2.gdut.edu.cn; zhaixiongfei@gdut.edu.cn; fangyi@gdut.edu.cn; gjhan@gdut.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2025.3577573

RBER caused by the superposition of various noises, especially in 3D TLC NAND flash memory. Generally, the RBER increases with the program/erase (P/E) cycles and data retention time (RT). In the literature, the considered LDPC codes for NAND flash memory mostly rely on a preset RBER threshold based on the code rate. When choosing a code rate, the trade-off between the ECC and the redundant space occupied by the check bits needs to be well addressed. In the 3D NAND flash memory, a high-rate code associated with the poor ECC results in the frequent read-retry operations. On the other hand, the code rate can be reduced at the cost of more check bits, requiring more storage capacity. In order to improve the storage efficiency, high-rate LDPC codes are generally preferred in the 3D NAND flash memory. However, as the P/E cycles and RT increase, the RBER worsens and the code rate needs to be reduced to guarantee the ECC.
To address the above issues, many works have been reported in the literature. For instance, the encoding designs of LDPC codes were investigated in [4], [5], [6], and [7], which were too complicated to be applied to the current 3D TLC NAND flash memory channels. Besides, low-latency decoding algorithms were studied in [8], [9], [10], and [11]. In [12], the authors proposed a lifetime-adaptive coding scheme to improve the latency performance and the lifetime of 3D NAND flash memory. The flash translation layer exploited the weak error correction codes in the early stage and the strong ones in the late stage to guarantee the storage reliability. The bit error ratios (BERs) of different pages in 3D TLC NAND flash memory on the same word-line (WL) were classified into different categories based on a clustering algorithm in [13]. Therefore, the various code rates could be flexibly selected to save the storage overhead. A rate-adaptive nonbinary LDPC code was proposed in [14] to improve the lifetime of SSDs, where the complexity linearly increased with the number of memory channels. An optimized accumulaterepeat-accumulate (OARA) scheme was proposed to construct high-rate protograph codes in [15]. However, the information bit length of this scheme would increase as the code length increased, which did not satisfy the requirement of the fixed information bit length in the 3D NAND flash memory. The authors in [4] constructed a rate-adaptive protograph (RAP) LDPC code with the multiple code rates to dynamically adjust to different P/E cycles. To mitigate unbalanced RBERs among different bit types within a memory cell, an optimal variablenode-to-bit-type mapping was proposed for the protograph.

0090-6778 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: MULTI-HIGH-RATE STRUCTURED ALGEBRAIC QC-LDPC CODE FOR 3D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

10029

However, the code-rate compatibility of this solution was suboptimal. The authors in [16] proposed a protograph-based quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code for the multi-level cell (MLC) NAND flash memory with a same code length under different code rates. Nevertheless, its information bit length was also varied.
The aforementioned works mainly focus on constructing LDPC codes with the fixed code length and the different information bit lengths. However, the code length in the 3D NAND flash memory varies from 1 KB to 16 KB [12]. Meanwhile, the above works all target at MLC flash memory channels. Thus, they may not be extended to the current mainstream TLC flash memory channels.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no reported construction method of rate-compatible algebraic QC-LDPC codes for 3D TLC NAND flash channels in the literature. To bridge this knowledge gap, this work proposes a multi-high-rate structured algebraic QC-LDPC (MHR-SA-QC-LDPC) code to address the issue of varying RBERs in 3D TLC NAND flash channels. In particular, the algebraic tools and the masking are considered to construct the parity-check matrix, guaranteeing the strong ECC and low complexity. To improve the effectiveness of the constructed code in 3D TLC NAND flash memory, a corresponding channel model is first investigated based on the flash memory test platform. Then, the varying RBERs due to P/E cycles and RT are analyzed, and the optimal read reference voltage (ORRV) is predicted to reduce RBERs. Multiple code rates can be selected to match the channel conditions, and the thresholds for switching the code rate can be determined based on the BER. When the BER exceeds the switching threshold, a lower code rate is applied to ensure the ECC.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
1. By utilizing the flash memory test platform, the realworld RBERs under different P/E cycles and RT conditions are obtained. Based on the collected data characteristics, a 3D TLC NAND flash memory channel model is proposed, where RBER variation patterns match those observed in real-world channels;
2. To address the issues of high error correction capability and varying RBER in NAND flash channels, MHR-SA-QCLDPC codes are constructed with extremely large code lengths and configurable code rates, which are particularly effective when the code rate exceeds 0.8;
3. Both the additive and multiplicative group construction methods are analyzed, with the latter proving superior;
4. The proposed code is verified through simulations in 3D NAND flash memory channels. Under the same P/E cycles and RT conditions, the proposed LDPC code demonstrates better ECC performance than 5G LDPC codes at similar code rates when using ORRV.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we provide an overview of 3D TLC NAND flash principles and channel modeling. Section III introduces the theory of constructing parity-check matrix for LDPC codes. Section IV proposes the construction scheme for MHR-SAQC-LDPC codes. Section V presents the simulation results

Fig. 1. Structure of a 3D NAND flash memory block.
Fig. 2. TVD of 3D TLC NAND flash memory.
and performance analysis. The conclusions are provided in Section VI.
II. 3D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY PRINCIPLES AND CHANNEL MODELING
This section presents an overview of the basic principles of 3D NAND flash memory and discusses factors affecting data reliability. A non-volatile memory test device is then used to analyze RBER variations in 3D TLC NAND flash memory chips under different P/E cycles and RT conditions. Based on the collected data, a mathematical model is developed to verify the constructed LDPC codes.
A. Basic Principles of 3D NAND Flash Memory The cells of 3D stacked NAND flash memory can be
arranged in the vertical direction as 3D stacking. Besides, the 3D architecture enables the larger storage capacity by increasing the number of stacked tiers without scaling down the cell sizes [17].
As shown in Fig. 1, a 3D stacked flash memory block consists of multiple storage layers. Each layer is constructed by multiple WLs with each containing several logical pages. Source select line (SSL) and drain selective line (DSL) are used to control data programming, reading, and erasing operations.
According to the number of bits stored in each memory cell, 3D stacked NAND flash memory can be categorized as the single-level cell (SLC) type, the MLC type, and the TLC type [18]. For the TLC type, each WL contains three logical pages: the most significant bit (MSB) page, the central significant bit (CSB) page, and the least significant bit (LSB) page. As shown in Fig. 2, the threshold voltage distribution (TVD) of 3D TLC NAND flash memories can be divided into eight parts corresponding to eight states, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10030

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 3. The number of error bits under different P/E cycles versus the RT.

Fig. 4. Shift of TVD under different RT when the number of P/E cycles is 7000.

The minimum erasable unit is a block, while the minimum readable and programmable unit is a page. From Fig. 2, the voltage distributions are encoded in Gray code, where we consider [LSB, CSB, M SB] ∈ {111, 101, 100, 110, 010, 000, 001, 011} in this work. When reading the stored data, the read reference voltages (RRVs), i.e., Vref1 . . . .Vref7, are harnessed to restore data. For LSB, if the detected voltage Vread is greater than Vref4, the stored data is 0, otherwise it is 1; For CSB, if Vref1 < Vread < Vref3 or Vref5 < Vread < Vref7, the stored data is 0, otherwise it is read as 1; For MSB, if Vref2 < Vread < Vref6, the stored data is 0, otherwise it is read as 1. The numbers of the RRVs required for LSB, CSB and MSB are 1, 4 and 2 respectively. When the TVD shifts due to some physical reasons, the BER of CSB will be higher than those of MSB and LSB.

B. The Reliability Affected by P/E Cycles and RT

Fig. 5. The Nanocycler test platform.

Generally, the reliability degrades as the number of P/E cycles and the RT increase. Fig. 3 shows the number of error bits of different P/E cycles versus RT. The randomly selected blocks of 8 flash memory chips are evaluated on the test platform. When a block is programed and then erased, its number of P/E cycles is increased by one. As we can see from Fig. 3, between months 8 and 13, the reliability degrades severely, where the number of error bits increases dramatically and then reaches a relatively stable platform. Moreover, the number of error bits increases with the P/E cycles.
By fixing the number of P/E cycles, Fig. 4 shows the leftshift of the TVD with different RT. The trend of the threshold voltage shifting is dominated by RT, and this effect becomes more severe as the RT increases. This is due to the fact that the charge leakage becomes worse as the RT increases. It is also found that the higher states show larger offset than the lower ones [19], since the retention errors follow two mechanisms: trap-assisted tunneling (TAT) and stress-induced leakage current (SILC) [20]. Cells in higher states store more charge with larger SILC, leading to faster charge leakage.

The seven state distributions depicted in Fig. 4 correspond to the P1-P7 states shown in Fig. 2. When the RRV is below 0 V, the stored codeword is determined to be in the P0 state. However, the testing platform is only capable of applying positive voltages to read data from the 3D NAND flash memory [21]. Therefore, we can only obtain the TVDs of the P1-P7 states.
C. The Experiment Platform
Before introducing the channel model, we present our experimental platform, the Nanocycler test platform, which is recently launched by NPlusT. A photo of the Nanocycler test platform is shown in Fig. 5.
The Nanocycler test platform can directly control the chip via personal computer (PC) through a network cable. The temperature test and the common operations (e.g., reading, writing, and erasing) are supported. Besides, the device is able to perform parallel testing of six flash memory chips. Note that the tested chips are all new charge-trap (CT) type

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: MULTI-HIGH-RATE STRUCTURED ALGEBRAIC QC-LDPC CODE FOR 3D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

TABLE I PARAMETERS OF TESTED CT TYPE 3D NAND FLASH MEMORY CHIPS

TABLE II EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN tbake AND tret

10031

3D TLC NAND flash memory chips without any peripheral control circuits, whose model is TH58TFT1T23BA8H. The parameters are shown in Table I.
In order to analyze the reliability under different noises, it is necessary to aging the chips before testing. First, blocks are randomly selected, programmed and erased until the required number of P/E cycles is reached. Then the random data is written to all pages in the block. Finally, the experiment of data retention persistent noise is carried out. The traditional approach of increasing RT is to place the chip for the specific time after being programmed, which takes an extremely long time. In order to accelerate the process, the chip can usually be heated to make the charge more active. Hence, high temperature aging can be equivalent to the long-time retention. We would like to note that baking 3D NAND flash chips to accelerate the retention process is a common and widely accepted approach, which is also supported by our test platform. Considering the operational conditions of chips, the baking temperature is set to be 70◦C. The baking time for the accelerated retention test is derived according to the method in [22]. Table II shows the equivalence between the baking time tbake and the RT tret at room temperature (25◦C).

Fig. 6. TVD under different P/E cycles and RT obtained from the Nanocycler test platform.

D. The NAND Flash Channel Modeling
The TVD under different P/E cycles and RT is obtained through the test platform, as depicted in Fig. 6, which shows the similar offset of the TVD just like Fig. 4. Based on the obtained results from the test platform, we exploit the approach in [23], [24], [25], and [26] to construct the 3D TLC flash memory channel model, where 8 Gaussian distributions and the complicated noise models caused by the P/E cycles, RT, read and write interference, and the cell to cell interference (CCI) are included. 1 Fig. 7 shows the RBER performance of the schemes with a fixed RRV [28] and an optimal RRV

Fig. 7. RBER performance under different RT.

1Our selected values of RT and P/E cycles may not cover all possibilities of all flash memories, since different types or production batches of 3D NAND flash chips suffer different degradation caused by the RT and P/E cycles. In fact, the main contribution of the channel model is to verify the considered LDPC codes. To obtain the accurate BER in the NAND flash memory testing, some golden data is stored both in the highly reliable area and the regular area of NAND flash memory [27]. After a specific number of P/E cycles or the specific RT, the NAND flash memory controller is required to perform the bit-by-bit comparison between the golden data from the highly reliable area and that from regular area. Note that the data stored in the reliable area is assumed to be correct. Based on the above comparison, the accurate BER can be obtained and the lower code rate will be applied if the BER exceeds the threshold. Besides, the golden data is restored in the regular area by exploiting the current coding scheme after the comparison.

through the test platform and the simulations based on our channel model. Note that the results of the optimal RRV scheme can be obtained through the simulations. It can be observed that the RBERs of the schemes with the fixed RRV are much worse than those of the optimal RRV scheme, which is mainly due to the TVD shift caused by the RT. Hence, in the industry, in order to guarantee reliability, the prediction and tracking technologies of optimal RRV are commonly considered. Although there exists a difference between the RBERs provided by the simulations and those from the platform with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10032

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

the fixed RRV, this can be attributed to the process variation of the chip and can be neglected. Hence, we can conclude that the proposed 3D TLC flash memory channel model works well as the real-world channels.
Based on the existing literature [29], [30], our proposed channel model of 3D NAND flash memory is not similar to the hard-decision Bit-Interleaved Coded Modulation (BICM) system under AWGN conditions. However, to the best of our knowledge, the BICM system is a method that integrates bit encoding, interleaving, and constellation mapping modulation, which is generally considered in wireless communication systems [31]. In TLC NAND flash memory, the 8 storage states are defined by the charge quantity in the memory cells, which leads to different voltage regions. When retrieving the stored data, the reference voltages need to be applied for reading or writing [32]. Due to the effects of PE cycles and RT, these 8 states vary during the service life of flash memory. However, in the 8-ASK scheme, the 8 states are predefined by the amplitudes of transmitted signals, which are unchanged. Furthermore, in this work we only consider the randomly generated errors caused by the channels. The erased error can be addressed by the RAID technology [33] and the locally repairable codes (LRC) [34], which are beyond the scope of this work.
III. THE ALGEBRAIC CONSTRUCTION AND ENCODING OF LDPC CODES
Based on the collected data from the test platform, the 3D NAND flash memory channel model constructed in Section II reveals the threshold voltage drift and the increasing RBER, which enables fast performance evaluation. To deal with the varying RBER, in this section we first introduce the theory of prime field for constructing the LDPC codes, including masking and dispersion. Then, the LDPC encoding is presented, which dynamically adjusts the code rates, achieving a tradeoff between the ECC performance and the storage efficiency.

A. Algebraic Construction Principle of Check Matrix
The field is an algebraic system defined with two binary operations: addition and multiplication. Four basic arithmetic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division are allowed in the field. The number of elements in a field is defined as the order of the field. In error control coding theory, finite fields, which have a finite order, are commonly exploited and denoted as F. A finite field containing q elements is denoted as Fq, where q is a power of a prime number. Let α be a primitive element of Fq. Consider the powers of α (i.e., α1, α2, α3, . . . , αq−2) as the non-zero elements of Fq. It is satisfied that αq−1 = α0 = 1, and the zero element is defined as α−∞ = 0. Every field must contain at least the additive identity “0” and the multiplicative identity “1”, thus, the simplest finite field is the binary field F2 = {0, 1}.
A prime field, denoted as GFq, consists of q elements, where q is a prime number. In the integer set Zq = {0, 1, 2, . . . , q − 1}, the addition and multiplication operations are defined as follows:

a ⊕ b = (a + b) mod (q) ,

(1)

Fig. 8. Flow chart for constructing the basis matrix Mbase.

a b = (a × b) mod (q) ,

(2)

where a, b ∈ Zq, a + b and a × b are defined within the prime field. It is evident that a prime field does not contain any proper subfields. For more finite domain properties, see [35].
The flow chart for constructing the basis matrix is shown in Fig. 8. Based on the properties of the prime domains, GFq can be divided into two arbitrary subsets, S1 = αi1 , αi2 , αi3 , . . . , αim , . . . , αiMb and S2 =
αj1 , αj2 , αj3 , . . . , αjn , . . . , αjNb , where im, jn ∈ Zq, 1 ≤ m ≤ Mb, 1 ≤ n ≤ Nb. The elements im and jn are randomly selected from the set Zq. Then the basis matrix Mbase ∈ ZMb×Nb can be obtained with Mbase(m, n) = ηm,n, where ηm,n = αim ⊕ αjn , or ηm,n = αim αjn . Note that Z denotes the integer space. Due to the characteristics of modern algebraic tools [36], we can conclude that the LDPC codes generated based on (2) show superiority as compared with those generated based on (1) since the additive group construction method is more likely to generate a 4-loop. To avoid the 4-loop, we can construct S1 and S2 as difference sets and impose the RC constraints for the additive group construction method, whereas the multiplicative group construction method does not require additional operations [37]. Although the elements in set S1 and set S2 are randomly selected, the performance of the ultimately constructed check matrices does not differ. The construction using the multiplicative group does not contain a 4-loop, while the construction using the additive group may lead to a 4-loop.

B. Theoretical Analysis of the Construction Methods
To compare the differences between the multiplicative group and the additive group construction methods, we perform a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: MULTI-HIGH-RATE STRUCTURED ALGEBRAIC QC-LDPC CODE FOR 3D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

10033

theoretical analysis from the perspective of loops [38]. For
the basis matrix constructed by the multiplicative group, we assume that the elements a = αim1 αin1 and b = αim2 αin2 correspond to the variable nodes (VNs) vi1 and vi2 , while the elements c = αjm1 αjn1 and d = αjm2 αjn2 correspond to the check nodes (CNs) cj1 and cj2 . We would like to emphasize that in the multiplicative group construction method, the conditions of existence of a 4-loop are a × c = b × d and a × d = b × c. We take a × c = b × d as an example. By
leveraging the definition of the multiplicative group, we have

a × c = (αim1 αin1 ) × (αjm1 αjn1 )

= (α ) im1 +in1 +jm1 +jn1 mod q,

(3)

b × d = (αim2 αin2 ) × (αjm2 αjn2 )

= (α ) im2 +in2 +jm2 +jn2 mod q.

(4)

Since the multiplicative group is cyclic and the products of different elements selected from S1 and S2 are unique, a×c = b × d is guaranteed, which avoids the existence of a 4-loop. This can also be verified by the computer-aided exhaustive method. In the additive group, the conditions of existing a 4loop are a + c = b + d and a + d = b + c. Similarly, for the first condition, we have

a + c = (αim1 ⊕ αin1 ) + (αjm1 ⊕ αjn1 )

= (αim1 + αin1 + αjm1 + αjn1 ) mod q,

(5)

b + d = (αim2 ⊕ αin2 ) + (αjm2 ⊕ αjn2 )

= (αim2 + αin2 + αjm2 + αjn2 ) mod q.

(6)

Since the symmetry conditions and the properties of the modulo q operation in the additive group are easy to be satisfied, it is easy to find two identical sums of different elements from S1 and S2. Moreover, once a + c = b + d is satisfied, due to the repetitiveness of the additive group, the second condition also holds. Hence, the 4-loop exists.

C. The Dispersion and Circular Permutation of Basis Matrix
For the prime field GFq, the cyclic permutation matrix (CPM) is defined as an L × L identity matrix with L = q − 1. In the dispersion operation, each element in the basis matrix needs to be replaced by the CPM or the right shift matrix based on the CPM. Specifically, if the element of the basis matrix is 0, it will be replaced by the original CPM; if the element is −1, it will be replaced by an L × L zero matrix; otherwise, it will be replaced by the right shift matrix of the CPM with the shift value being the element. After the above dispersion and circular permutation, we can obtain the check matrix HQC with dimension MQ × NQ, where MQ = MbL and NQ = NbL.

D. The Masking
In the construction of the check matrix for QC-LDPC codes, masking is a key technology to improve the code structure and the ECC. First, the density of HQC is defined as the ratio of non-zero elements, denoted by λ. Then the number of non-zero elements is λMQNQ. To make HQC more sparse and reduce the possibility of short cycles, more all-zero CPMs can be

Fig. 9. Structure of the matrix HQC .

considered when performing dispersion in a certain way, i.e., masking.
Assuming that β identity matrices are replaced by all-zero matrices, then βL edges are deleted in the Tanner graph, which can reduce the short cycles and increase the girth. The density of HQC after deleting βL edges is reduced to:

λMQNQ − βL = λ −

βL .

(7)

MQNQ

MQNQ

Masking can also be expressed as the Hadamard-like product. By defining a mask matrix Z ∈ ZMb×Nb with each
element being 1 or 0, the masked matrix Hmask based on Z and Mbase can be obtained by

Hmask(m, n) =

Mbase(m, −1,

n),

Z(m, n) Z(m, n)

= =

1 0

.

(8)

Therefore, some elements of Mbase are replaced by −1, which will be expanded as all-zero matrices after dispersion.

E. Encoding of the LDPC Codes
Generally, there are two encoding approaches: on the one hand, a generator matrix can be obtained for encoding based on the transformation of the check matrix; on the other hand, we can construct a check matrix with a special structure for direct encoding. Note that we only consider the binary LDPC codes in this work. By letting N and K be the code length and the information bit length, and assuming that the check matrix HQC is full-rank, the rank of HQC is M = N − K. In order to simplify the column permutation and Gauss-Jordan elimination of HQC , we choose the second approach.
In general, HQC can be divided by column into HQC = [Hds Hdp], where Hds is the constraint matrix and Hdp has some special structures. E.g., the single/double diagonal structures and the upper/lower triangle structures. By constructing HQC with a double diagonal structure, the dimensions of Hds and Hdp are MQ × K and MQ × MQ. The structure of HQC is shown in Fig. 9, where h denotes the elements of Hds and Hdp, each of which takes a value of either “0” or “1”. Compared to single diagonal and upper/lower triangle structures, double diagonal structures can provide the reduced complexity and the lower error floor. Hence, in this paper, we mainly focus on the double diagonal structure. According

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10034

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

to the double diagonal structure, the column weights of Hdp should be 2. However, the weight of its first column is 3, which the extra non-zero element appears in the X-th row. Generally, it is placed in the penultimate row of Hdp.

IV. THE CONSTRUCTION OF MHR-SA-QC-LDPC CODE
Due to the outstanding ECC performance with the increasing code length, the LDPC codes have become the mainstream encoding scheme of 3D NAND flash memory [39]. As the channels of 3D NAND flash memory deteriorating with the increasing RT and P/E cycles, the designed LDPC codes need to provide the higher code rate in the early service life and to switch to the lower code rate in the late service life. The minimum code rate is typically 0.8 in NAND flash memory, while there is no restriction on the maximum code rate [4]. The step sizes of code rates are determined by the structure of LDPC codes. To satisfy the requirements of multiple high code rates, the ECC, and the storage efficiency in NAND flash memories, in this section we first calculate the needed code rates to deal with the varying RBER. Then a specific method of constructing the check matrix is proposed.

Fig. 10. Mask matrix ZJ of multi-rate LDPC codes.

A. The Calculation of the Needed Code Rates

Before constructing the MHR-SA-QC-LDPC code, we need

to decide its multiple code rates needed by NAND flash

memories.

Let k and nj, j = 1, . . . , J denote the information bit length and the code lengths associated with J code rates. We assume

that the dimensions of Mbasej , j = 1, . . . , J vary from Mb1 × Nb1 to MbJ × NbJ to support multiple code rates, with the code rates satisfying R1 > . . . > RJ . The detailed steps are

presented as follows:

(1)

The

maximum

code

rate

is

defined

by

Rmax

=

R1

=

k n1

associated with the minimum number of rows in the check

matrix Mmin = 2L and n1 = k + 2L. The number of rows of

the check matrix associated with Rj is Mj = (j + 1)L.

(2)

According

to

the

previous

step,

we

have

n1

=

. 2L
1−Rmax

When Rj is considered, the number of columns of the check

matrix is Nj = n1 + L(j − 1).

(3) Then we have

Rj

=

Nj − Mj Nj

=

n1 − 2L . n1 + L (j − 1)

(9)

(4) Similarly, the minimum code rate Rmin is

Rmin

=

RJ

=

n1

n1 − 2L + L (J −

. 1)

(10)

(5) With the above derivation, the information bit length can be calculated as follows:

k

=

Nj

− Mj

=

2LRmax . 1 − Rmax

(11)

It can be seen that the information bit length of the varying code rates is fixed.
(6) Substituting (11) into (9), we have

Rj

=

2Rmax

+

(j

2Rmax + 1) ×

(1

−

. Rmax)

(12)

Therefore, the multiple compatible code rates can be obtained based on the maximum rate and the index of predefined rate levels. Considering the channel characteristics of 3D NAND flash memory, the RBER increases with the RT and the P/E cycles. This process is irreversible. Therefore, we only consider the switching from the higher code rate to the lower code rate.
B. Construction of the Check Matrix HQC
In order to be compatible with multiple rates, to reduce coding complexity, and to save the storage capacity, we consider a check matrix with the double diagonal structure for the MHR-SA-QC-LDPC code. First, the masking is considered, where the mask matrix is constructed by the Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) [40] and Approximate Cycle Extrinsic Message Degree (ACE) algorithms [41]. The PEG algorithm can work well for the long LDPC codes, while the ACE algorithm can eliminate the loops with poor connectivity. The designed mask matrix is shown in Fig. 10.
In Fig. 10, the black square represents the shift value, while the white one denotes “−1”. As we can observe, the largest mask matrix contains the smaller ones, where their dimensions are decided based on different code rates. Specifically, the masked matrix Z1 represents the maximum code rate, while ZJ is designed for the minimum code rate. Then the matrix Hmaskj after completing the masking operation can be denoted by the Hadamard-like product of Zj and Mbasej , where Mbasej is a sub-matrix of Mbase with the same dimension as Zj, j = 1, . . . , J . The matrix HmaskJ after the dispersion operation is HKJ . Next, we construct a doublediagonal matrix HCJ , which also consists of the submatrices HCj , j = 1, . . . , J associated with the different code rates, as shown in Fig. 11. The matrix HCj is a square matrix whose number of rows and columns is the row values of the matrix HmaskJ . In the double-diagonal matrix HCj , the black

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: MULTI-HIGH-RATE STRUCTURED ALGEBRAIC QC-LDPC CODE FOR 3D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

10035

Fig. 11. Double diagonal structure of HCJ .

Algorithm 1 Construction of Check Matrix for the MHR-SA-

QC-LDPC Codes

Input: k, L, Rmin;

Output: HQCJ ;

1:

Calculate

the maximum

code rate

Rmax

=

k 2L+k

,

n1

=

k + 2L;

2: According to Eq. (10), we obtain the number of supported

code rates J = f loor

(1−Rmin )n1 −2L Rmin L

+1

;

3: Calculate the maximum number of rows of the basis

matrix

rowmax

=

NJ −k L

=

J + 1,

where

NJ

=

n1 +

L(J − 1). The minimum number of rows is 2;

4: Calculate the maximum number of columns of the basis

matrix columnmax =

NJ L

= f loor

n1 +L(J −1) L

.

The

minimum

number

of

columns

columnmin

=

n1 L

;

5: Construct the basis matrix Mbasej with 2 ≤ Mbj ≤

rowmax and columnmin ≤ Nbj ≤ columnmax;

6: Construct HCJ with the double diagonal structure;

7: Generate ZJ based on the PEG-ACE algorithm;

8: Obtain HmaskJ based on ZJ and MbaseJ ;

9: Dispersion operation for HmaskJ and HCJ ;

10: Obtain HKJ and HPJ ;

11: HQCJ = [HKJ , HPJ ];

Fig. 12. Structure of the check matrix HQCJ .
squares represent that the shift value is “0”, while the white squares denote “−1”. The gray boxes contain the values that are different from the elements in Mbasej , which can be found by employing the computational search method to randomly select distinct elements from the integer set Zq. This ensures that the parity check matrix will not have 4-loop. The matrix HCJ after the dispersion operation is HPJ .
Finally, the check matrix HQCJ is constructed by combining HKJ and HPJ , as shown in Fig. 12. As we can observe, the check matrices associated with the higher code rates are a sub-matrix of HQCJ . Hence, we can only store the largest check matrix and select the corresponding sub-matrix for encoding/decoding according to the varying code rates, which can significantly reduce the complexity. With the above steps of construction, a full-rank check matrix without a 4-loop is obtained. The detailed steps are summarized in Algorithm 1.
In this paper, we consider the following parameters for the constructed LDPC code: the information bit length is 1 KB; q = 257; L = q − 1 = 256; the number of columns associated with the information bits is 32; the dimension of the basis matrix with the maximum code rate is 32 × 34 with

Rmax = 32/34 = 0.941. Since it is required that the code rate cannot be less than 0.8, the maximum number of columns is 40. The minimum number of rows in the base matrix is 2, since the design principle of LDPC codes stipulates that each VN should be connected to at least 2 CNs to form redundant check relationships. LDPC codes can possess ECC. In this paper, the value of J is 7. However, when j = 6, HCj does not satisfy the constraints of constructing the LDPC codes, where the weight of the first column is 2, leading to decoding failure. Hence, only 6 code rates are considered in this work.
According to Algorithm 1, the proposed MHR-SA-QCLDPC code can be easily extended to a 4 KB one, where the number of columns of the basis matrix associated with the information bits is 128. By assuming that the number of check rows is 2, the maximum code rate can be obtained as 128/(128 + 2) = 0.985. Similarly, the number of columns is 128/0.8 = 160 at the minimum code rate 0.8, with the number of rows being 160 − 128 = 32. Therefore, this 4 KB MHRSA-QC-LDPC code can provide 30 different code rates from 0.8 to 0.985.
According to [42], [43], since our proposed LDPC code structure is based on the algebraic methods, the obtained check matrix is devoid of short girth. Besides, the double diagonal structure is exploited to guarantee the full rank of the check matrix. Hence, the designed codes are well-suited for both hard and soft decision decoding. Consequently, in a BICM system, following bit interleaving and optimized symbol mapping, the proposed LDPC structure will also work efficiently, offering the additional advantage of low design complexity.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
The verification of our proposed MHR-SA-QC-LDPC codes is based on both MATLAB and test platform. Firstly, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10036

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025
TABLE III THE COMPARISON OF THE NUMBER OF LOOPS IN THE GENERATED 1KB MHR-SA-QC-LDPC CODES BASED ON THE
MULTIPLICATIVE GROUP AND ADDITIVE GROUP METHODS

proposed encoding scheme is exploited to generate a LDPC code, where the additive group and multiplicative group construction methods are both considered. Then, the performance analysis of these two methods is presented. Secondly, the MHR-SA-QC-LDPC codes are analyzed under different column weights (CWs) and the optimal CW distribution is selected. Finally, the MHR-SA-QC-LDPC codes are verified in 3D TLC NAND flash channels, as compared with the fifth generation (5G) LDPC codes [44], the traditional and wellestablished BCH codes designed for 3D NAND flash memory [45], the currently popular GC-LDPC codes [46], and an RCLDPC coding scheme based on the edge progressive expansion algorithm [47]. The code rates of the considered schemes all exceed 0.8, with an information bit length of 1KB. The SumProduct algorithm of layered schedule scheme [48] with the maximum iteration number of 15 is exploited.
Remark 1: The reason why we add the 5G LDPC code is that its check matrix can accommodate multiple code rates and is designed to be simple and mature. Additionally, the structure of the 5G LDPC codes bears similarity to that of the proposed LDPC codes, as both are full-rank matrices capable of supporting various code rates. The information bit length of 8448 with the lifting factor of 384 is selected. Although the considered information bit length is a little larger than 1KB, it should be noted that this configuration is the closest to the requirement for information bit length. Also, to ensure the error correction capability, we prefer the longer code length. Furthermore, to reduce the computational complexity and to ensure the fairness, the high-code-rate 5G LDPC codes are constructed by truncating the core matrix of BG1 rather than by the standard puncturing procedure, which is similar to the construction of the proposed LDPC codes. The sizes of truncated base matrices are 2 × 24, 4 × 26, and 5 × 27 for the (9216, 8448), (9984, 8448), and (10368, 8448) 5G LDPC codes with R = 0.917, R = 0.846, and R = 0.815.
A. Performance Analysis of the Additive Group and Multiplicative Group Construction Methods
In this subsection, we perform an analysis of the 1 KB MHR-SA-QC-LDPC codes constructed by the additive group and multiplicative group construction methods. We consider q = 257, L = 256, J = 6 with the code rates being selected from {0.8, 0.842, 0.865, 0.889, 0.914, 0.941}.

Fig. 13. BER and FER of 1KB MHR-SA-QC-LDPC codes in AWGN channels based on the additive group and multiplicative group methods.
The Sum-Product algorithm of layered schedule scheme [48] with the maximum iteration number of 15 is exploited. The additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels are considered and the simulation results are averaged over 500 channel realizations. Fig. 13 shows the BER and frame error ratio

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: MULTI-HIGH-RATE STRUCTURED ALGEBRAIC QC-LDPC CODE FOR 3D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY
TABLE IV DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS OF 1KB MHR-SA-QC-LDPC CODES AND 5G LDPC CODES

10037

TABLE V
THE COMPARISON OF THE DISTANCE PROPERTIES OF 1KB MHR-SA-QC-LDPC CODES BASED ON THE ADDITIVE GROUP AND MULTIPLICATIVE GROUP METHODS

(FER) of 1 KB MHR-SA-QC-LDPC codes in AWGN channels based on the additive group and multiplicative group methods. As we can observe, the codes generated by the multiplicative group method significantly outperform those constructed by the additive group method in terms of both BER and FER.
In Table III, we compare the numbers of loops in the generated 1 KB MHR-SA-QC-LDPC codes based on the multiplicative group and additive group construction methods. The variables g, Ng, Ng+2, Ng+4, Ng CN and Ng V N represent the minimum girth of the LDPC check matrix, the number of g, the number of g+2, the number of g+4, the average number of Ng for each CN and the average number of Ng for each VN, respectively. When the code rate varies from 0.8 to 0.914, the minimum girth of the multiplicative group is 6, while that of the additive group is 4. This 4-girth severely degrades the performance of LDPC codes generated by the additive group construction method. Moreover, the average numbers for each VN and each CN in the multiplicative group are smaller than those in the additive group, meaning that the proportion of the minimum girth in the multiplicative group is lower than that in the additive group in most cases. Specifically, when the code rate is 0.941, although Ng CN and Ng V N in the multiplicative group are larger, the minimum girth becomes the dominant factor to improve the performance.
Based on the protograph EXIT (P-EXIT) tool [49], Table IV shows the P-EXIT thresholds, the VN degree distributions V (x) and the CN distributions C(x) of the additive group, multiplicative group methods and 5G LDPC codes. Note that for the two proposed methods, their P-EXIT thresholds, VN degree distributions and CN degree distributions are the same.

The V (x) and C(x) of the two proposed methods are higher than those of the 5G LDPC code. The higher node degree distribution can improve the ECC of LDPC codes. Besides, the P-EXIT thresholds of 5G LDPC codes are generally higher under similar code rates. As the code rate increases, the P-EXIT values of the 5G LDPC codes rise sharply, particularly when the code rate reaches 0.917.
Besides, it is concluded in [50] that by defining µ1 and µ2 as the largest and the second largest eigenvalues of the parity-check matrix, the smaller the value of µ2/µ1 is, the better distance properties the QC-LDPC codes have. Thus, we compare the values of µ2/µ1 of the 1KB MHR-SA-QC-LDPC codes based on the additive group and multiplicative group methods in Table V. It can be observed that the multiplicative group leads to better distance properties with the considered code rates. Thus, we compare the values of µ2/µ1 of the 1KB MHR-SA-QC-LDPC codes based on the additive group and multiplicative group methods in Table V. It can be observed that the multiplicative group leads to the better distance properties with the considered code rates.
Inspired by [51], we further analyze the minimum Hamming distance of LDPC codes generated by the two considered construction methods, as shown in Table VI. RD and VD represent the minimum Hamming distances of row vectors and column vectors in the parity-check matrix respectively. It can be observed that the minimum Hamming distances of row vectors and column vectors of the multiplicative group are larger than those of the additive group. As it is known, when the code rate is high, it is challenging to guarantee a large minimum Hamming distance among the column vectors

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10038

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

TABLE VI
THE COMPARISON OF MINIMUM HAMMING DISTANCES OF 1KB MHRSA-QC-LDPC CODES BASED ON ADDITIVE AND MULTIPLICATIVE GROUP METHODS

with a small number of parity bits. However, the minimum Hamming distance of row vectors of the LDPC codes generated by the multiplicative construction method increases with the code rate. This large minimum Hamming distance of row vectors can significantly improve the performance of the layered scheduling decoding algorithm, which compensates performance degradation due to the small distance of column vectors.

B. The Impact of CWs
To further optimize the proposed code, the impact of CWs in the PEG-ACE algorithm needs to be discussed. To facilitate the design of the mask matrix, we assume the same CW for all VNs. Fig. 14 shows the BER and FER performance of MHRSA-QC-LDPC codes with different CWs and different code rates. It is shown that when R ≤ 0.865, the generated code with CW = 4 outperforms others. Besides, when R ≥ 0.889 and CW is smaller than the numbers of rows of their base matrices, the generated codes show worse performance. It is mainly due to the fact that an excessively large loop may lead to poor connectivity. According to the simulation results, we consider CW = 4, CW = 3, and CW = 2 for R ≤ 0.889, R = 0.914, and 0.941, respectively. Besides, we can also observe that the MHR-SA-LDPC code achieves the lower BER in the AWGN channels as compared to other benchmarks with the similar rates. The performance gaps may be due to the following reasons: First, 5G LDPC codes are intended to be compatible with a variety of code lengths and code rates. Nevertheless, the parity-check matrix of 5G LDPC codes is insufficiently sparse, which has a detrimental impact on their performance. Second, when the protograph of RCLDPC codes is expanded, the complex row and column (RC) constraints need to be incorporated. These constraints are not only complicated but also random in nature. Additionally, puncturing is necessary to ensure the sparsity of the paritycheck matrix, leading to the suboptimal performance. Third, regarding the GC-LDPC codes, the subcodes are employed with the short code length. Furthermore, the performance of parity check of the global matrix is limited when the code rate is high. Consequently, the performance of GC-LDPC codes is inferior to that of the proposed scheme.
Fig. 15 shows the comparison of the considered schemes with the code length of 1 KB, 2 KB and the code length being 1 KB and 2 KB under R =0.8. In Fig. 15, we can observe that the proposed LDPC coding scheme is superior to

Fig. 14. BER and FER under different CWs for 1 KB MHR-SA-QC-LDPC code.
the RC-LDPC codes and the GC-LDPC codes under R=0.8. Since the code rates of the 1 KB and 2 KB BCH codes are identical, the ratio of the parity bits to the information bits remains consistent. Considering the fact that the BCH codes are algebraic codes characterized by short code lengths, the performance is constrained by the channel capacity and the characteristics of random noise [52]. Furthermore, as the code length increases, the complexity of the algebraic decoder grows exponentially, which leads to the performance loss. Consequently, unlike the LDPC codes, the performance of BCH codes does not improve with the increasing code length under the high SNR.
C. The Performance of MHR-SA-QC-LDPC Code in NAND Flash Channels
In this subsection, we verify the performance of the MHRSA-QC-LDPC code with both fixed and optimal RRVs in the NAND flash channels, which is modeled in Section II. Note that the first-level quantization is considered to obtain the loglikelihood ratios (LLRs).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: MULTI-HIGH-RATE STRUCTURED ALGEBRAIC QC-LDPC CODE FOR 3D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

10039

Fig. 15. BER and FER for different 1 KB, 2 KB and R=0.8 LDPC codes. Fig. 16. BER and FER performance versus the RT with the fixed RRVs and the P/E cycles being 6500.

Fig. 16 shows the BER and FER performance versus the RT with the fixed RRVs and the P/E cycles of 6500. Note that the results are obtained by averaging the BERs and FERs of all pages. The 5G LDPC codes with R = 0.815, 0.846, and 0.917 are considered as the benchmarks with k = 8448. To facilitate the comparison, we mainly focus on discussing the proposed LDPC codes with the similar code rates, i.e., R = 0.8, 0.842, 0.914. It can be observed that, when the code rates are similar (e.g., R = 0.914 for our proposed code and R = 0.917 for 5G LDPC code), the MHR-SA-QC-LDPC codes achieve the same BER and FER performance with much longer RT, where the improvement is roughly 34.8%, 8.8%, and 52.8% for R = 0.914, 0.842, 0.8. Hence, we can conclude that the proposed LDPC codes can efficiently extend the service life of the 3D TLC NAND flash memory.
Besides, to describe the code rate switching process more clearly, we consider a switching threshold of 10−4 [53], [54] and the proposed MHR-SA-LDPC code switches from a high code rate to a lower one when BER > 10−4. In practice, the soft trigger rates [55] associated with the switching thresholds are preset by the manufacturers based on the the type and

TABLE VII CONDITION OF SWITCHING CODE RATE WITH RESPECT TO RT AND THE
PERCENTAGE OF INCREASED STORAGE WITH THE FIXED RRVS AND THE P/E CYCLES BEING 6500
the production process of 3D NAND flash. Table VII shows the condition of switching code rate with respect to RT and the percentage of increased storage with the fixed RRVs and the P/E cycles of 6500. As we can observe, to ensure the ECC, although more check bits are required when switching to a lower code rate, the required extra storage space is acceptable.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10040

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025
TABLE VIII CONDITION OF SWITCHING CODE RATE WITH THE OPTIMAL RRVS AND
THE P/E CYCLES BEING 6500

Fig. 17. BER and FER performance versus the RT with the optimal (OP) RRVs and the P/E cycles being 6500.

Fig. 17 shows the BER and FER performance versus the RT with the optimal RRVs and the P/E cycles of 6500. Similar to Fig. 16, it is shown that the improvement of service life is significant by exploiting our proposed LDPC codes, which is roughly 301.1%, 55.8%, and 196.3% for R = 0.914, 0.842, 0.8, as compared with the 5G LDPC codes. Besides, it can be observed that the improvement of service life by our proposed LDPC codes is about 54.5%, 21.7% and 79.5% for R =0.842, 0.865, 0.889, compared with the BCH code for R =0.841, the GC-LDPC code for R =0.858, and the RC-LDPC code for R =0.889, respectively. Accordingly, the corresponding condition of switching code rate with respect to RT is summarized in Table VIII. Combining Figs. 16 and 17, the exploitation of optimal RRV tracking scheme can significantly enhance the reliability of 3D TLC NAND flash memory.
Fig. 18 shows the BER and FER performance versus the P/E cycles with the fixed RRVs and the RT being 2 months. Compared with the 5G LDPC codes, the P/E cycles of the MHR-SA-QC-LDPC codes with code rates of 0.914, 0.842, and 0.8 can be increased by 47.5%, 8.4%, and 21.2%,

Fig. 18. BER and FER performance versus the P/E cycles with the fixed RRVs and the RT being 2 months.
respectively, which also means that the service life is extended. The corresponding condition of switching code rate with respect to P/E cycles is summarized in Table IX.
Fig. 19 shows the BER and FER performance versus the P/E cycles with the optimal RRVs and the RT being 2 months. The enhancement of service life is 16.3%, 9.6%, and 23.9% for R = 0.914, 0.842, 0.8, respectively, by comparing our LDPC codes with the 5G LDPC codes. Besides, it is shown

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: MULTI-HIGH-RATE STRUCTURED ALGEBRAIC QC-LDPC CODE FOR 3D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

10041

TABLE IX
CONDITION OF SWITCHING CODE RATE WITH RESPECT TO P/E CYCLE WITH THE FIXED RRVS AND THE RT BEING 2 MONTHS

TABLE X
CONDITION OF SWITCHING CODE RATE WITH RESPECT TO P/E CYCLE WITH THE OPTIMAL RRVS AND THE RT BEING 2 MONTHS

With the above simulation results, in 3D TLC NAND flash memory channels, our proposed LDPC codes significantly outperform the considered benchmarks in terms of the ECC and the improvement of service life. Besides, it can be also concluded that the designed code rate level can well address the issue of varying RBERs.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we first obtained the error characteristics of 3D TLC NAND flash memory caused by P/E cycles and RT based on the test data of the Nanocycler platform, and then proposed the corresponding channel model with 8 Gaussian distributions and the complicated noise models. To improve the reliability, a MHR-SA-QC-LDPC code and its encoding scheme were developed. In particular, the encoding scheme can adjust to various code rates according to the varying RBER of 3D TLC NAND flash memory, which can achieve the reduced extra storage for the check bits while maintaining the ECC. In addition, we compared the multiplicative group construction method with the additive group construction method in simulations, where the former significantly outperforms the latter. In 3D TLC NAND flash channels, with the increase of P/E cycles and RT, it is verified that our proposed MHR-SA-QCLDPC code can provide much better ECC and much longer service life as compared to the BCH code and other LDPC codes. Therefore, the proposed LDPC code and its encoding scheme can serve as promising candidates for ensuring data reliability for 3D TLC NAND flash memory.

REFERENCES

Fig. 19. BER and FER performance versus the P/E cycles with the optimal (OP) RRVs and the RT being 2 months.
that the improvement of service life by our proposed LDPC codes is about 7.1%, 3.7% and 7.3% for R =0.842, 0.865, 0.889, compared with the BCH code for R =0.841, the GCLDPC code for R =0.858, and the RC-LDPC code for R =0.889, respectively. In addition, the corresponding condition of switching code rate with respect to P/E cycles is concluded in Table X.

[1] R. Ma et al., “BlockHammer: Improving flash reliability by exploiting process variation aware proactive failure prediction,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 4563–4574, Dec. 2020.
[2] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Read and write voltage signal optimization for multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1613–1623, Apr. 2016.
[3] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[4] P. Chen, K. Cai, and S. Zheng, “Rate-adaptive protograph LDPC codes for multi-level-cell NAND flash memory,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1112–1115, Jun. 2018.
[5] A. Tasdighi and E. Boutillon, “Integer ring sieve for constructing compact QC-LDPC codes with girths 8, 10, and 12,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 35–46, Jan. 2022.
[6] B. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Construction of irregular protograph-based QC-LDPC codes with low error floor,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 3–18, Jan. 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10042

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

[7] Z. Yang, Y. Li, Y. L. Guan, and Y. Fang, “Source-constrained hierarchical modulation systems with protograph LDPC codes: A promising transceiver design for future 6G-enabled IoT,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1103–1117, Apr. 2025.
[8] Y. Li, G. Han, C. Liu, M. Zhang, and F. Wu, “Exploiting the singlesymbol LLR variation to accelerate LDPC decoding for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 5146–5150, Dec. 2023.
[9] X. Yu et al., “Interleaved LDPC decoding scheme improves 3-D TLC NAND flash memory system performance,” IEEE Trans. Comput.Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 4191–4204, Nov. 2023.
[10] B. Bao, Q. Li, W. Guan, Q. Wang, L. Liang, and X. Qiu, “Adaptive granularity progressive LDPC decoding for NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1312–1316, Apr. 2024.
[11] B. Zhang et al., “Monitor units assisted LDPC decoding algorithm based on page BER variation of 3D NAND flash memory,” Microelectron. Rel., vol. 147, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 115034.
[12] S. Wang et al., “Lifetime adaptive ECC in NAND flash page management,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), Lausanne, Switzerland, Mar. 2017, pp. 1253–1556.
[13] Q. Xiong et al., “Characterizing 3D floating gate NAND flash: Observations, analyses, and implications,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1–31, May 2018.
[14] S. Bates, “Using rate-adaptive LDPC codes to maximize the capacity of SSDs,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit (FMS), Aug. 2013, pp. 1–12.
[15] Y. Bu, Y. Fang, G. Han, S. Mumtaz, and M. Guizani, “Design of protograph-LDPC-based BICM-ID for multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash memory,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 1127–1131, Jul. 2019.
[16] L. Kong, Y. Liu, H. Liu, and S. Zhao, “Protograph QC-LDPC and rateadaptive polar codes design for MLC NAND flash memories,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 37131–37140, 2019.
[17] S. Venkatesan and M. Aoulaiche, “Overview of 3D NAND technologies and outlook invited paper,” in Proc. Non-Volatile Memory Technol. Symp. (NVMTS), Sendai, Japan, Oct. 2018, pp. 1–5.
[18] R. Micheloni, L. Crippa, and A. Marelli, Inside NAND Flash Memories. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010.
[19] T. Nakamura, Y. Deguchi, and K. Takeuchi, “Adaptive artificial neural network-coupled LDPC ECC as universal solution for 3-D and 2-D, charge-trap and floating-gate NAND flash memories,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 745–754, Mar. 2019.
[20] S. Gerardin et al., “Radiation effects in flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 1953–1969, Jun. 2013.
[21] L. Yin, Y. Li, X. Zhang, X. Zhai, and G. Han, “An efficient dynamic threshold voltage detection scheme for improving 3-D NAND flash reliability,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 529–543, Dec. 2024.
[22] K. Mizoguchi, T. Takahashi, S. Aritome, and K. Takeuchi, “Dataretention characteristics comparison of 2D and 3D TLC NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), Monterey, CA, USA, May 2017, pp. 1–4.
[23] H. Hu, G. Han, W. Wu, and C. Liu, “Channel parameter and read reference voltages estimation in 3-D NAND flash memory using unsupervised learning algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Comput.Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 305–318, Jan. 2024.
[24] Q. Xu, P. Gong, T. M. Chen, J. Michael, and S. Li, “Modelling and characterization of NAND flash memory channels,” Measurement, vol. 70, pp. 225–231, Jun. 2015.
[25] C. Wang, Z. Mei, J. Li, F. Shu, X. He, and L. Kong, “Channel modeling and quantization design for 3D NAND flash memory,” Entropy, vol. 25, no. 7, p. 965, Jun. 2023.
[26] G. Dong, Y. Pan, and T. Zhang, “Using lifetime-aware progressive programming to improve SLC NAND flash memory write endurance,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1270–1280, Jun. 2014.
[27] M. Zhang, F. Wu, Q. Yu, W. Liu, Y. Wang, and C. Xie, “Exploiting error characteristic to optimize read voltage for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 5490–5496, Dec. 2020.
[28] Y. Li, G. Han, S. Huang, C. Liu, M. Zhang, and F. Wu, “Exploiting metadata to estimate read reference voltage for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 9–17, Feb. 2023.

[29] H. Lin, Y. Guo, Y. Xi, Y. Kong, X. Zhan, and J. Chen, “Optimal read voltages of retention-after-cycling in triple-level-cell (TLC) 3D NAND flash memory and its high-precision modeling method,” in Proc. IEEE Silicon Nanoelectronics Workshop (SNW), Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2022, pp. 1–2.
[30] Y. Wang, D. Wei, M. Liu, H. Feng, and L. Qiao, “EBDN: Entropybased double nonuniform sensing algorithm for LDPC decoding in TLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1914–1918, Jun. 2024.
[31] J.-L. Liu and L. Lampe, “Improved BICM iterative decoding with harddecision feedback,” in Proc. IEEE Pacific Rim Conf. Commun., Comput. Signal Process. (PACRIM), Victoria, BC, Canada, Oct. 2005, pp. 73–76.
[32] Z. Du et al., “Adaptive pulse programming scheme for improving the Vth distribution and program performance in 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE J. Electron Devices Soc., vol. 9, pp. 102–107, 2021.
[33] Z. Shen, L. Han, C. Ma, Z. Jia, T. Li, and Z. Shao, “Leveraging the interplay of RAID and SSD for lifetime optimization of flash-based SSD RAID,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 40, no. 7, pp. 1395–1408, Jul. 2021.
[34] C. Rajput and M. Bhaintwal, “Cyclic LRC-LCD codes with hierarchical locality,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 711–715, Mar. 2021.
[35] R. Lidl, Introduction to Finite Fields and Their Applications. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1994.
[36] H. Li, B. Bai, X. Mu, J. Zhang, and H. Xu, “Algebra-assisted construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for 5G new radio,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 50229–50244, 2018.
[37] W. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[38] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “An algorithm for counting short cycles in bipartite graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 287–292, Jan. 2006.
[39] Q. Li et al., “LAEPS: LDPC LLR adaptive estimation based on pattern set distribution variation in 3D charge trap NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Integr. Circuits, Technol. Appl. (ICTA), Zhuhai, China, Nov. 2021, pp. 220–221.
[40] U.-F. Abdu-Aguye, M. A. Ambroze, and M. Tomlinson, “Improved minimum weight, girth, and ACE distributions in ensembles of short block length irregular LDPC codes constructed using PEG and cyclic PEG (CPEG) algorithms,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Brest, France, Sep. 2016, pp. 186–190.
[41] T. Tao, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[42] H. Jiang, L. Xie, and H. Chen, “An efficient equivalent channel model for LDPC coded BICM-ID system,” in Proc. IEEE 3rd Int. Conf. Commun. Softw. Netw., Xi’an, China, May 2011, pp. 11–15.
[43] D. Liang, S. X. Ng, and L. Hanzo, “Soft-decision star-QAM aided BICM-ID,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 169–172, Mar. 2011.
[44] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of low-density parity check codes for 5G new radio,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28–34, Mar. 2018.
[45] M. Zhang, F. Wu, C. Xie, Y. Zhou, and K. Zou, “A novel optimization algorithm for Chien search of BCH codes in NAND flash memory devices,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Netw., Archit. Storage (NAS), Boston, MA, USA, Aug. 2015, pp. 106–111.
[46] Y.-C. Liao, C. Lin, H.-C. Chang, and S. Lin, “A (21150, 19050) GCLDPC decoder for NAND flash applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 1219–1230, Mar. 2019.
[47] T. V. Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “The design of ratecompatible protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2841–2850, Oct. 2012.
[48] A. Farsiabi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error floor analysis of LDPC row layered decoders,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 5804–5826, Sep. 2021.
[49] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Washington, DC, USA, Nov. 2007, pp. 3250–3254.
[50] M.-H. Shin, J.-S. Kim, and H.-Y. Song, “Generalization of Tanner’s minimum distance bounds for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 240–242, Mar. 2005.
[51] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: Influence of proto- and tanner-graph structure on minimum Hamming distance upper bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 585–607, Feb. 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: MULTI-HIGH-RATE STRUCTURED ALGEBRAIC QC-LDPC CODE FOR 3D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

10043

[52] C. Ding, X. Du, and Z. Zhou, “The Bose and minimum distance of a class of BCH codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2351–2356, May 2015.
[53] Y. Wang, “Ultra high throughput LDPC schemes for SSD,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit (FMS), Santa Clara, CA, USA, Aug. 2016, pp. 1–15.
[54] S.-H. Kuo, “Ultra MMI: An LDPC decoder that doubles throughput at end-of-life,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit (FMS), Santa Clara, CA, USA, Aug. 2019, pp. 1–17.
[55] S.-K. Lu, Z.-L. Tsai, C.-L. Hsu, and C.-T. Sun, “Fault-aware ECC techniques for reliability enhancement of flash memory,” in Proc. Int. Symp. VLSI Design, Autom. Test (VLSI-DAT), Taiwan, Aug. 2020, pp. 1–2.
Linxin Yin received the B.S. degree in information engineering from Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2018, and the M.S. degree in information and communication engineering from Hainan University, Haikou, China, in 2022. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in information and communication engineering with Guangdong University of Technology. His research interests include hardware architecture, wireless mobile communication technology, the design of digital IC function modules, error-correcting codes, and data storage systems.
Xiongfei Zhai (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2009 and 2018, respectively. He was a Visiting Student with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. His research interests include over-the-air computation, massive MIMO communications, millimeter-wave communications, and the application of optimization algorithms in communications.

Yi Fang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from Xiamen University, China, in 2013. From May 2012 to July 2012, he was a Research Assistant in electronic and information engineering with The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. From September 2012 to September 2013, he was a Visiting Scholar in electronic and electrical engineering with University College London, U.K. From February 2014 to February 2015, he was a Research Fellow with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He is currently a Full Professor and the Vice Dean of the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, China. He was the Publicity Co-Chair of the International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing in 2018. His current research interests include information and coding theory, spread-spectrum modulation, and cooperative communications.
Guojun Han (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China, in 2011, and the M.E. degree from South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, in 2004. From March 2011 to August 2013, he was a Research Fellow with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. From October 2013 to April 2014, he was a Research Associate with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He is currently a Full Professor and the Dean of the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology. He has more than 15 years of experience in research and development of advanced channel coding and signal processing algorithms and techniques for various data storage and communication systems. His research interests include memory devices and data storage systems, wireless communications, coding, and information theory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

