10130

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Nested Root-Protograph LDPC-Coded Multilevel-Priority IR-HARQ Systems: A New Design for Multi-Stream Transmissions With
Non-Ergodic Block Fading

Zhaojie Yang , Xiaoxi Yu, Yaoyue Hu , Yi Fang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Yong Liang Guan , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—To enhance the adaptability and performance of multi-stream transmissions over non-ergodic block fading (BF) channels, this paper studies a multilevel-priority incrementalredundancy hybrid ARQ (MP-IR-HARQ) system with nested root-protograph-based low-density parity-check (NRP-LDPC) codes. Specifically, we analyze the performance of traditional RP-LDPC codes and reveal that they are unable to achieve full diversity in the IR-HARQ system over non-ergodic BF channels. To address this limitation, we propose a design methodology to construct a family of NRP-LDPC codes having the full-diversity property, throughput-limit-approaching property, outage-limitapproaching performance, and rate compatibility tailored for the IR-HARQ system. Additionally, we incorporate a multilevelpriority design composed of the adaptive modulation, adaptive detection, and successive decoding into the traditional IR-HARQ framework. The designed MP-IR-HARQ system can support the transmission of multiple data streams while providing unequal error protection (UEP) across them. The outage-boundary analyses, throughput analyses, and word-error-rate (WER) simulations demonstrate that the proposed NRP-LDPC-coded MP-IR-HARQ system can not only significantly outperform prior-art counterparts over non-ergodic BF channels, but also enable the multi-data-stream-based UEP transmission.
Index Terms—Multi-data-stream, incremental-redundancy hybrid ARQ, rate compatibility, block fading, root protograph.
Received 21 January 2025; revised 16 May 2025 and 27 June 2025; accepted 1 July 2025. Date of publication 14 July 2025; date of current version 14 November 2025. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore and Infocomm Media Development Authority under its Future Communications Research & Development Programme, Grant No. FCP-NTU-RG-2022-020, in part by the NSF of China under Grant 62322106, and in part by the NSF of China under Grant 62401278. An earlier version of this paper was presented in part at the IEEE Global Communications Conference, Cape Town, South Africa, December 2024 [1]. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was R. Asvadi. (Corresponding author: Yi Fang.)
Zhaojie Yang, Xiaoxi Yu, and Yong Liang Guan are with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: zhaojie.yang@ntu.edu.sg; xiaoxi.yu@ntu.edu.sg; eylguan@ntu.edu.sg).
Yaoyue Hu is with the School of Internet of Things, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210049, China (e-mail: huyaoyue@njupt.edu.cn).
Yi Fang is with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: fangyi@gdut.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2025.3588561

I. INTRODUCTION
T HE multi-data-stream-based (MDS) transmission technique has attracted significant attention from both academia and industry because it can meet diverse Quality-ofService (QoS) requirements in both satellite and multimedia scenarios [2]. To ensure the timely transmission for critical data and the efficient scheduling for non-critical data, MDS applications often require the retransmission strategies, e.g., automatic repeat request (ARQ) [3]. Among various ARQ strategies, the incremental-redundancy hybrid-ARQ (IR-HARQ) [4] is the most popular approach, which has been employed in the fifth-generation (5G) wireless communication standard as it simultaneously enhances the transmission reliability and the spectral efficiency. For many wireless applications, such as the orthogonal-frequency divisionmultiplexing (OFDM) systems, multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) systems, and cellular networks, their data transmissions typically suffer from the slowly-varying fadings [5]. The fading gain remains constant during each block within a codeword but takes different random variables over different blocks. Therefore, the channel models in a variety of wireless communication systems can be characterized by the blockfading (BF) channel [6].
Different from the fast fading (i.e., ergodic fading) channel, the BF channel belongs to the non-ergodic fading category, and thus does not have the information stability property, i.e., the Shannon capacity equals zero [7]. For this reason, the existing coding schemes designed for ergodic fast fading channels based on Shannon capacity cannot achieve good performance in the non-ergodic BF scenarios [8]. To design an excellent coding scheme tailored for the non-ergodic BF channel, the irreducible probability (also called outage probability [9]) is conceived to analyze the outage limit, which serves as an information-theoretical lower bound of the word error rate (WER) of a given coding scheme [10], [11]. Additionally, another key performance metric utilized in the non-ergodic BF scenarios is called diversity order, which indicates the slope of the WER curve for a given coding scheme [7]. In particular, for a given rate-(1/L) coding scheme, the maximum achievable diversity order (i.e., full diversity) is L.

0090-6778 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: NESTED ROOT-PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED MULTILEVEL-PRIORITY IR-HARQ SYSTEMS

10131

To approach outage limit and achieve full diversity over non-ergodic BF channels, the root-based low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes have been proposed as an effective coding scheme when an iterative decoding (e.g., beliefpropagation (BP) decoding) algorithm is employed [7]. Also, improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) technique [12], turbo decoding [10], and power allocation scheme [13] can be incorporated to further enhance the robustness of root-based LDPC codes against the non-ergodic BF. Unfortunately, due to their inherent irregular code structures, the root-based LDPC codes suffer from the non-linear encoding complexity, and thus are unsuitable for efficient hardware implementations. To address this weakness, a subclass of root-based LDPC codes, namely root-protograph-based LDPC (RP-LDPC) codes [14], has been designed. The RP-LDPC codes can not only preserve the advantages (e.g., linear encoding complexity) of protograph codes, but also possess both outage-limit-approaching and full diversity properties. Thanks to their intrinsic advantages, the RP-LDPC codes have been widely investigated in various communication environments, including the code construction in binary modulation scenarios [15] and the bitto-symbol mapping design in high-order modulation scenarios [10]. Moreover, researchers have explored the flexibility of RP-LDPC codes in the relay networks [16] and the IR-HARQ systems [17]. Particularly, the authors in [17] have designed rate-compatible RP-LDPC codes and a feedback encoding method, and the resultant RP-LDPC-coded IR-HARQ system with feedback encoding achieves high (but not full) diversity. Specifically, the maximum achievable diversity of the designed RP-LDPC codes [17] is 2 (even if these codewords experience more than two fading blocks, i.e., L > 2), but the RP-LDPCcoded IR-HARQ system can obtain a high diversity through the use of feedback encoding.
To the best of our knowledge, there is limited research on the robust RP-LDPC-code design for the IR-HARQ systems suffering from the non-ergodic BF. Importantly, as will be demonstrated later, the existing RP-LDPC codes (i) do not have the nested structure to realize rate compatibility and (ii) fail to achieve the full diversity, throughput-limitapproaching property, and outage-limit-approaching performance in the IR-HARQ systems over non-ergodic BF channels. Also, there has been no research effort investigating the IR-HARQ system with MDS transmission capability [18], [19] up till now, but it is a potential candidate to achieve high energy efficiency and UEP for applications with different QoS requirements. Inspired by above observations, we conduct an in-depth study on the multilevel-priority IR-HARQ (MP-IR-HARQ) system with nested RP-LDPC (NRP-LDPC) codes over non-ergodic BF channels. Such a design possesses three notable advantages: (a) rate compatibility for incremental-redundancy transmission; (b) full diversity for block fading; and (c) priority management for multiple data streams. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
1) We first discuss and explain why the existing RP-LDPC codes cannot guarantee full diversity in the IR-HARQ system over non-ergodic BF channels from the messagepassing perspective, and then present outage-boundary

analyses to validate our findings. Subsequently, we propose a NRP-LDPC code-design methodology, enabling full-diversity transmission over BF channels. 2) We further construct a family of NRP-LDPC codes, which can preserve the full-diversity property and possess the rate-compatible (RC) structure (i.e., the high code-rate root protograph can be nested within the low code-rate root protograph). Through the throughput analyses, we verify that the proposed NRP-LDPC codes can benefit from the throughput-limit-approaching property, i.e., the transmission rounds required for correct decoding decreases as the signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) increases. 3) We propose a multilevel-priority design that consists of the adaptive modulation, adaptive detection, and successive decoding to develop an enhanced IR-HARQ framework, called MP-IR-HARQ. The proposed MP-IRHARQ system not only supports the MDS transmission, but also enables the UEP capability. 4) We carry out the outage-boundary analyses, throughput analyses and WER simulations to validate the superiorities of the proposed NRP-LDPC-coded MP-IR-HARQ system with respect to the prior-art counterparts under various transmission conditions.
Compared to LDPC codes, Polar codes exhibit a relatively poor performance at long codeword lengths. Moreover, the codeword lengths of Polar codes are inherently limited to the power of 2. To support arbitrary codeword lengths, puncturing or shortening techniques must be applied, which usually leads to an obvious degradation in the performance. Additionally, the successive cancellation list (SCL) decoding of Polar codes lacks parallelism, and thus its computational complexity grows as O(NLN log2 N ), where NL and N denote the list size and codeword length, respectively. In contrast, LDPC codes support parallel decoding with linear complexity (i.e., O(N )), making them more efficient for long codeword lengths. Therefore, this work mainly focuses on the design of full-diversity structured LDPC codes.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sect. II introduces the preliminaries of the IR-HARQ transmission, non-ergodic BF channels, and traditional RP-LDPC codes. Sect. III reveals the limitations of traditional RP-LDPC codes, and then presents the design methodology of proposed NRP-LDPC codes and validates their superiority from the outage-boundary analyses. Sect. IV depicts the proposed NRP-LDPC-coded MP-IR-HARQ systems. Sect. V provides simulation results, while Sect. VI concludes this paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. IR-HARQ Transmission
Fig. 1 shows the P-LDPC-coded IR-HARQ system model with L transmission rounds. Referring to this system diagram, the information-bit sequence m is first encoded by a P-LDPC encoder into a coded-bit sequence b, which is then mapped to a modulated-symbol sequence x (also known as a data stream). Subsequently, the data stream is divided into L different blocks {x1, x2, . . . , xL} in a sequential order. Then, in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10132

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 1. The proposed P-LDPC-coded IR-HARQ system model and its transmission mechanism.

1-st transmission round, the transmitter sends only the 1-st block x1, which is a series of data consisting of all information bits and some parity bits. The receiver will collect the transmitted block passing through the non-ergodic BF channel, i.e., y1. After that, the detector executes a demapping procedure on the received block and outputs its corresponding extrinsic log-likelihood-ratios (LLRs), which are then treated as the a-priori LLRs for decoding. When the decoding is successful, the receiver feeds back an acknowledgement (ACK), indicating that the transmitter does not need to send the remaining blocks, i.e., the remaining parity bits. Once decoding fails, the receiver feeds back a negative ACK (NACK) requesting the transmitter to send the 2-nd block x2. Similarly, at the receiving side, the currently received block y2 will be processed by the detector, but its corresponding extrinsic LLRs will be merged with those of the previously received block to form a new LLR sequence, which is then used for further decoding in the next iteration. Note that the above process must continue until the decoding is successful or all L blocks are sent to the receiver.

B. Non-Ergodic BF Channels
We assume that a given data stream composed of N binary modulation symbols is transmitted over the non-ergodic BF channel, and influenced by L ≥ 2 independent fading gains. The fading gain is modeled as an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) Nakagami random variable, which remains constant within each block but varies across the L different blocks. Each block then contains B = N/L binary modulation symbols. The received signal yj corresponding to the j-th binary modulation symbol xj is expressed as

yj = αlxj + nj ,

(1)

where αl is the Nakagami fading gain1 for the l-th block with E(αl2) = 1, l = 1 + (j − 1)/B , E(·) denotes the expectation operator, and · denotes the floor operation. In addition, nj ∼ N (0, σn2 ) represents the AWGN with zero mean and variance σn2 = N0/2, where N0 is the noise power-spectral density.

1The Nakagami fading is a practical and generalized fading model that can describe fading statistics for various wireless communication environments. Even the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and Rayleigh fading are two special cases of Nakagami fading.

In particular, the probability density function (PDF) of αl is given by

2 f|αl|(x) = Γ(ml)

ml

ml
x2ml−1 exp

− ml x2

,

Ωl

Ωl

(2)

where ml ≥ 1/2 is the fading depth of the l-th block, Ωl = E(αl2) = 1 is the mean-square value of the corresponding fading gain, and Γ(·) is the Gamma function. At the receiving side, the received signal yj(j = 1, 2, . . . , N ) is processed using the BP decoding algorithm. For simplicity, the perfect channel state information (CSI) is assumed since it can be captured based on a well-designed channel estimator [20].
For the non-ergodic BF channel, its corresponding Shannon capacity equals zero. The performance of the communication system in such a transmission environment is typically evaluated by the outage limit, which is defined as

Pout(γ) = Pr(I(γ) < R).

(3)

Here, Pr(·) is the probability function and I(γ) is the instantaneous mutual information (MI) between the channel input and the channel output, given by

1L

I(γ) = L

IAWGN(γl),

(4)

l=1

where IAWGN(x) denotes the MI between the input and the output over an AWGN channel with a fixed SNR per transmitted modulation symbol x, given by



+∞

1 πe

IAWGN(x) = −



−∞

ψ(τ, x) log2[ψ(τ, x)]dτ − 2 log2

, x

ψ(τ, x) =

1

[e(−x(τ +1)2) + e(−x(τ −1))2)].

 

2 π/x

(5)

It is noteworthy that the outage limit defined in (3) is

the fundamental performance limit on the WER of a rate-R

coding realization with a sufficiently large codeword length

over the non-ergodic BF channel. Consequently, for a given

code with the outage-limit-approaching property, its WER is

largely insensitive to the codeword length [10].

C. RP-LDPC Codes
A protograph G = (V, C, E) [21] is a small Tanner graph consisting of three different sets, including the variable-node (VN) set V, the check-node (CN) set C, and the edge set E. Each edge ei,j ∈ E connects a VN vj ∈ V(j = 1, 2, . . . , Np) to a CN ci ∈ C(i = 1, 2, . . . , Mp). The protograph can also be represented by a base matrix B = (bi,j) of size Mp × Np, where bi,j denotes the number of edges connecting vj to ci. Unlike the traditional LDPC codes, protographs allow parallel edges. By performing the “copy-and-permute” (i.e., lifting) operation on a given protograph, these parallel edges can be eliminated, thus yielding a larger graph, called derived graph. The resultant derived graph can be used to generate a P-LDPC code. Particularly, the lifting operation in this paper is implemented by a modified progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [22].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: NESTED ROOT-PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED MULTILEVEL-PRIORITY IR-HARQ SYSTEMS

10133

Different from the P-LDPC codes, the RP-LDPC codes have a relatively rigid protograph structure, called root protograph. Moreover, the RP-LDPC code with a code rate of R = 1/L can be constructed only from a root protograph that includes L different rootcheck types. For example, the base matrix of a general rate-1/2 RP-LDPC code is shown as

vinfo,1 vpari,1 vinfo,2 vpari,2

B=

I Bi1

0 Bp1

Bi2 I

Bp2 0

c1 c2

(6)

where Np = 2Mp = 2LMR and MR ∈ N+ is the number of each rootcheck type. Additionally, I (resp. 0) is the identity

(resp. zero) matrix with a size of MR × MR. As seen in

(6), the VN set V is divided into four subsets, including

two information-node subsets (i.e., vinfo,1 and vinfo,2) and two

parity-node subsets (i.e., vpari,1 and vpari,2). The information

nodes (resp. parity nodes) are the VNs corresponding to the

information bits (resp. parity bits) in an RP-LDPC code. The

coded bits (i.e., VNs) are composed of the information bits

and parity bits (i.e., information nodes and parity nodes). In

particular, the VNs vj ∈ vinfo,l ∪ vpari,l are affected by the fading αl, where j = (l − 1)B + 1, (l − 1)B + 2, . . . , lB,

B = N/2, and l = 1, 2. The CN set C is divided into two

subsets c1 and c2, where cl is the type-l rootcheck subset. The

weight per row in a combined sub-matrix Bsl = [Bil Bpl]

must be at least 2 (i.e.,

lB j=(l−1)B+1

bi,j

≥

2).

Based

on

the base-matrix structure, a rate-1/2 RP-LDPC code with full

diversity (i.e., the diversity order is 2) can be generated. The

diversity order is defined as

dc

=

−

lim
γ¯→∞

ln Pw ln γ¯

,

(7)

where Pw is the WER at the decoder output and γ¯ = E((Es/N0)αl2) is the average received SNR of the l-th block. Actually, the achievable diversity order d of a coded system
is also limited by the Singleton bound

d = dc ≤ 1 + L(1 − R) ,

(8)

where 1+ L(1−R) is the maximum diversity order provided by a coding scheme. In the case of d = dc = L, we conclude that the code can achieve full diversity [14]. Besides, one can easily observe that the RP-LDPC codes have a symmetric property, and thus their performance is independent of the order of the L fading gains [14].

III. PROPOSED NRP-LDPC CODES
Based on the IR-HARQ system with L transmission rounds and the non-ergodic BF channel, the theoretically achievable maximum diversity order is L. To achieve the full diversity, it is necessary to consider a rate-1/L RP-LDPC codeword, which is divided into L blocks with an equal symbol length. However, we will first conduct a message-passing analysis and an outage-boundary analysis to verify that the existing RP-LDPC codes cannot hold the full-diversity property. To address this problem, we propose a design methodology, which is sensitive to the slowly-varying fadings (i.e., block fadings), to construct a new family of NRP-LDPC codes.

Fig. 2. A rate-1/2 RP-LDPC code [14] used in the IR-HARQ system with L = 2 transmission rounds: (a) the protograph representation; and (b) the message-passing analysis.

A. Problem Formulation
As the first work regarding the design of full-diversity nested LDPC codes for IR-HARQ system over a BF channel, we begin by focusing on a special case, where a rate-1/L codeword is divided into L blocks, and each of which corresponds to a transmission round, i.e., the 1-st block is composed of all information bits. This assumption is necessary for a rate1/L codeword to achieve full diversity dc = L. Additionally, we investigate the application of the rate-1/L codewords in a common IR-HARQ system with L (L < L) transmission rounds. In this case, the 1-st transmission round includes all information bits and a portion of parity bits.
As shown in Fig. 2(a), we consider a traditional rate1/2 RP-LDPC code [14] used in the IR-HARQ system with L = 2 transmission rounds (i.e., a codeword is divided into L = 2 blocks for L = 2 separate transmissions) as an example to simplify the exposition. Due to the IR-HARQ mechanism, the 1-st block composed of all information bits must be sent in the 1-st transmission round. In other words, the information bits associated with the information nodes vinfo,1 and vinfo,2 are first sent over a noisy channel characterized by a Nakagami fading gain α1. When α1 is a deep fading gain, the information bits have a very high probability of being received incorrectly. This necessitates the 2-nd transmission round, during which the parity bits associated with the parity nodes vpari,1 and vpari,2 are sent over the noisy channel with a different Nakagami fading gain α2. The currently received parity bits then will be combined with the previously received information bits for a joint decoding, helping recover the original information bits. Unfortunately, the traditional RP-LDPC-code structure cannot correct the error occurring in the received information bits. As depicted in Fig. 2(b), even though both vpari,1 and vpari,2 can be received correctly under an ideal channel condition, their error-correction capabilities are limited because both vinfo,1 and vinfo,2 are involved in the same parity-check equations c1 and c2, given by

c1 : b(vinfo,1) ⊕ b(vinfo,2) ⊕ b(vpari,2) = 0,

(9)

c2 : b(vinfo,1) ⊕ b(vinfo,2) ⊕ b(vpari,1) = 0,

where b(vinfo,l) ∈ {0, 1} and b(vpari,l) ∈ {0, 1} denote the binary bit representation of the information node vinfo,l and the parity node vpari,l, respectively, for l = 1, 2. According to c1, we can assume that the bit associated with vpari,2 is received correctly (i.e., b(vpari,2) is determined), but the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10134

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

bits associated with vinfo,1 and vinfo,2 are not due to a deep fading. In this case, the decoder obviously cannot infer the original values of b(vinfo,1) and b(vinfo,2). In other words, the error propagation between vinfo,1 and vinfo,2 cannot be eliminated. Also, a similar phenomenon can be observed from c2. From the above message-passing analysis, the correctly received block 2 is ineffective in correcting the errors in block 1, and then the traditional RP-LDPC codes fail to achieve full diversity in the IR-HARQ scenarios.

B. Modified Outage-Boundary Analysis

To further validate the aforementioned inference, we employ the Gaussian-approximation-aided density evolution [23] to develop a modified outage-boundary analysis methodology for the RP-LDPC codes in the IR-HARQ system. The modified outage-boundary analysis serves as an asymptotic-performance evaluation tool, and is of great usefulness to characterize the convergence behavior of the RP-LDPC-coded systems. From the perspective of a transmitted codeword, we assume that a coded-bit sequence b = {b1, b2, . . . , bN } is first mapped to a modulated-symbol sequence x = {x1, x2, . . . , xN } based on the binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation, and then transmitted and suffered from L = 2 different fading gains. Consequently, the LLR of the received signal yj corresponding to xj (j = 1, 2, . . . , N ) is expressed as

lch,j = ln

Pr(xj = +1 | yj, αl) Pr(xj = −1 | yj, αl)

2

= σn2 yj αl,

(10)

where lch,j ∼ N (2αl2/σn2 , 4αl2/σn2 ). In the following, we turn our attention to a protograph with Mp CNs and Np VNs, and define three different LLRs used in the t-th (t = 1, 2, . . . , T )
iteration during the density evolution process as
• lvt (i, j) (resp. lct(i, j)) is the extrinsic LLR passing from the VN vj (resp. CN ci) to the CN ci (resp. VN vj);
• latpp(j) denotes the a-posteriori LLR of the VN vj. To simplify the update of lct(i, j), we give the function φ(·) [24], which is continuous and monotonically decreasing on
[0, +∞), with φ(0) = 1 and φ(+∞) = 0, as



1

+∞

1 − √

φ(u) =

4πu −∞

1,

f tanh
2

e−

(f

−u)2 4u

df,

u>0

u=0

(11)

After the above preliminaries, the modified outage-boundary

analysis is described as follows.

1) Initializing the minimum received SNR γlmin, maximum received SNR γlmax, step size ε, and maximum iteration number T , where l = 1, 2.2

2) Setting the received SNRs for the 1-st block and the 2-nd block as γ1 ∈ [γlmin, γlmax] and γ2 = γ2min, respectively.
3) Assume that the average energy per transmitted sym-

bol Es is normalized to 1, we can obtain the mean

2In this work, the four different parameters γlmin, γlmax, ε, and T are set to 0.01, 8, 0.005, and 100, respectively.

of the channel LLR lch,j corresponding to vj(j = 1, 2, . . . , Np), as

µch(j) = 2αl2/σn2 = 4γl, γl = (Es/N0)αl2 = αl2/(2σn2 ).

(12)

Subsequently, we set lv0(i, j) = µch(j) and t = 0 to initialize the density evolution recursion. 4) If γ2 = γ2max and t = T , terminate the iteration process; else if γ2 < γ2max and t = T , set γ2 = γ2 + ε and go to Step 3; otherwise, the extrinsic LLR lct(i, j) for i = 1, 2, . . . , Mp and j = 1, 2, . . . , Np is calculated by

lct(i, j) = φ−1 1 −

1 − φ lvt (i, s) bi,s

s=j

× 1 − φ lvt (i, j) bi,j−1 .

(13)

5) After that, the extrinsic LLR lvt (i, j) for i = 1, 2, . . . , Mp and j = 1, 2, . . . , Np can be measured by

Mp

lvt (i, j) = µch(j) + bs,j lct−1(s, j)

s=i

+ (bi,j − 1) lct−1(i, j) .

(14)

6) The a-posteriori LLR latpp(j) for j = 1, 2, . . . , Np then can be formulated as

Mp
latpp(j) = µch(j) + bi,j lct(i, j) . (15)
i=1

Note that both lct(i, j) and lvt (i, j) are in the range [0, +∞), and then latpp(j) is in the range [µch, +∞). As the information nodes and parity nodes can be easily distinguished, the WER can be calculated based on all information nodes (i.e., jinfo) instead of all VNs, as

 PWER,info = 

Pe(j),

j∈jinfo

(16)

Pe(j) = Q latpp(j)/2 ,

where Pe(j) is the bit error rate (BER) of the j-th VN and Q(·) denotes the Q-function, as

Q(x) = √1

+∞
e−f 2 /2 df .

(17)

2π x

7) If PWER,info = 0, this implies that the decoder converges successfully. The current SNR-threshold pair (γ1th, γ2th) is determined, while the iterative process is terminated. Otherwise, set t = t + 1 and return to
Step 4.
8) Repeat Steps 2∼7 to obtain NA different SNR-threshold pairs, helping depict the SNR-outage boundary.

In Fig. 3, we perform the modified outage-boundary analysis on the existing RP [14], improved RP1 (IRP1) [14], and improved RP2 (IRP2) [14] codes in the IR-HARQ system over a non-ergodic BF channel. Also, one of our proposed NRP codes (see next subsection Sect. III-C) is used as a benchmark. The parameters used are L = 2 and R = 1/2. Obviously, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: NESTED ROOT-PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED MULTILEVEL-PRIORITY IR-HARQ SYSTEMS

10135

Fig. 3. SNR-outage boundaries of the existing RP [14], IRP1 [14], IRP2 [14] codes and the proposed NRP code in the IR-HARQ system with L = 2 transmission rounds. The code rate is R = 1/2.
three existing RP codes cannot achieve full diversity because their outage boundaries (i.e., dashed lines) cannot converge (i.e., reach 0) as γ2 approaches infinity, whereas the proposed NRP code can do. The outage-boundary analysis and messagepassing analysis are consistent well with each other.
Remark 1:
• The proposed modified outage-boundary analysis can be easily extended to the case of L > 2. Specifically, one can take L > 2 nested loops to simulate the scenario that an RP-LDPC code experiences L different fadings. The received SNR for the l-th block of the RP-LDPC code is then set as γl ∈ [γlmin, γlmax] (l = 1, 2, . . . , L). By executing the L nested loops to make the threshold calculation with all possible received SNR combinations, the corresponding L-dimensional SNR-outage boundary can be obtained.
• The framework of the modified outage-boundary analysis is the same as that of the traditional one [14], except for the algorithms used to track message evolution. To be specific, the traditional analysis tracks the evolution of MIs by the protograph extrinsic information transfer (PEXIT) algorithm. The modified analysis can track the evolution of the mean of LLRs and then calculate the theoretical WER, thereby being more intuitive and potentially enabling an accurate prediction on the RPLDPC-code convergence trajectory.
C. Proposed NRP Structure
1) New Rootcheck Connection: To address the error propagation problem of the traditional RP-LDPC codes in the IR-HARQ system with L transmission rounds, we propose new NRP-LDPC codes. From the perspective of protograph, the proposed NRP structure features K different primary rootchecks (i.e., type-i rootcheck, i = 1, 2, . . . , K). Moreover, each type-i rootcheck includes (L − 1) secondary rootchecks (i.e., type-ij rootcheck, j = 1, 2, . . . , L − 1). Consequently, the proposed NRP structure contains K × (L − 1) different secondary rootchecks, each secondary rootcheck connects an information node belonging to the 1-st transmission round by a single edge and any parity nodes belonging to the k-th (k = 2, 3, . . . , L) transmission round by a single edge or

parallel edges. For instance, we assume that there are K information nodes, then the 1-st information node will connect to L − 1 secondary rootchecks (i.e., the type-11, type-12, . . ., type-1(L − 1) rootchecks) via L − 1 edges. Then, the L − 1 secondary rootchecks respectively connect to any parity nodes belonging to the remaining L − 1 transmission rounds. To be specific, the type-1j secondary rootcheck connects to the parity nodes within the (j + 1)-th transmission round, where j = 1, 2, . . . , L − 1. Similarly, the 2-nd information node also connects to L − 1 secondary rootchecks (i.e., type-21, type-22, . . ., type-2(L − 1) rootchecks) via L − 1 edges, while the type-2j secondary rootcheck connects to the parity nodes within the (j + 1)-th transmission round. By repeating this rootcheck connection process for all K information nodes, one can easily construct the protograph corresponding to an NRP-LDPC code.
To make the proposed rootcheck connection clearer, Fig. 4 shows the protograph structures of the proposed NRP-LDPC codes with K = 2 (i.e., 2 information nodes) tailored for the IR-HARQ system with L = 2, 3, and 4 transmission rounds. In this figure, it is obvious that a single edge is used to connect the information nodes (i.e., vinfo,1 and vinfo,2) and the check nodes (i.e., c1j and c2j, j = 1, 2, 3). The edges connecting the parity nodes (i.e., vpari,1, vpari,2, . . . , vpari,6) and the check nodes can be a single edge or parallel edges.3 Fig. 5 depicts the specific base matrices constructed based on the condition that the degree of each check node is 6. Obviously, one can find a family of nested codes with the RC structure. Specifically, the rate-1/2 base matrix is included in the rate-1/3 base matrix, which is included in the rate-1/4 base matrix.
2) Node-Based Dynamic Alteration: Based on a given transmission round L, one can enlarge the parameter K to obtain a larger base matrix according to the aforementioned rootcheck connection process. Particularly, a larger base matrix is more likely to be optimized for better performance. In Fig. 6, a rate-1/4 base matrix with K = 3 designed for the IR-HARQ system with L = 4 transmission rounds is provided. Also, a rate-1/3 base matrix with K = 3 is nested within it. To validate the effectiveness of this design, Fig. 7 gives the SNRoutage boundaries of the proposed rate-1/3 NRP codes with K = 2 and 3. In particular, the information nodes of the two codes (i.e., the 1-st block) are assumed to experience a deep fading (i.e., γ1 = 0.0005). In this figure, one can find that both rate-1/3 NRP codes achieve full diversity because their outage boundaries can converge as γl(l = 2, 3) approaches infinity. However, the rate-1/3 NRP code with K = 3 can outperform the one with K = 2 since the former exhibits a smaller outage region. The outage region is defined as the area enclosed by the outage boundary and the two axes.
Based on the above code-design procedure, a family of NRP-LDPC codes with a wide range of code rates R ∈ {1/2, 1/3, . . . , 1/L} can be easily generated. Moreover, these NRP-LDPC codes have a general protograph (i.e., base matrix)
3By setting the edges connecting information nodes to be singular and the edges connecting parity nodes to be parallel, one can not only ensure that the derived graph corresponding to the parity-check matrix maintains the rootcheck connection, but also provide a large degree of freedom to optimize the performance of an NRP-LDPC code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10136

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 4. The protograph structures of the proposed NRP-LDPC codes with K = 2 for the IR-HARQ system: (a) a rate-1/2 NRP-LDPC code for L = 2 transmission rounds; (b) a rate-1/3 NRP-LDPC code for L = 3 transmission rounds; and (c) a rate-1/4 NRP-LDPC code for L = 4 transmission rounds.

Fig. 5. A family of NRP-LDPC codes with K = 2 and L = 2, 3, 4 based on the condition that the degree of each check node is 6.

Fig. 6. A family of NRP-LDPC codes with K = 3 and L = 3, 4.

Fig. 8. A general base matrix of the rate-1/L (L ≥ 2) NRP-LDPC code.

Fig. 7. SNR-outage boundaries of the proposed rate-1/3 NRP codes with K = 2 and 3 in the IR-HARQ system with L = 3 transmission rounds.
structure, as shown in Fig. 8. Obviously, when the parameters L and K are given, one can determine not only the size of the base matrix, but also the majority of its elements. The remaining variable bij (i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , (L − 1) × K} and j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K}) in the general base matrix can be determined using a computer-aided outage-boundary analysis (see Algorithm 1), in which the values of bij are assumed to

be no larger than 3 (bi,j ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}) so as to help optimize

an NRP-LDPC code with excellent convergence performance,

while reducing the computational overhead. Note also that

an optimal rate-1/L NRP code does not fully guarantee the

optimality of its nested rate-1/L (L < L) NRP code, but the

NRP structure can guarantee the full-diversity property and

facilitate the IR-HARQ applications.

Remark 2: The proposed NRP-LDPC codes can also be

generated by a row-column extension method, which enables

a wider range of code rates (i.e., a more flexible code rate K/P

with P ≥ 2K) but accordingly increases the calculation com-

plexity during the matrix search procedure. Specifically, given

the parameters L and K, the complexity of the code-design

procedure in Algorithm 1 is NvK×K , while that of the row-

column extension method is NvK×K + (L − 2)

K i=1

Nv2i−1,

where Nv denotes the number of possible values that a

variable in the basis matrix can take. Fig. 9 shows a specific

example. For a given rate-1/2 NRP code composed of the first

three rows and the first six columns, we can strictly follow

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: NESTED ROOT-PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED MULTILEVEL-PRIORITY IR-HARQ SYSTEMS
Algorithm 1 Proposed NRP-LDPC-Code Design

10137

Fig. 10. The proposed NRP-LDPC-coded MP-IR-HARQ system model.

Fig. 9. A family of NRP-LDPC codes designed by a row-column extension method. The code rates are R = K/P , where K = 3 and P = 6, 7, . . . , 12.
the proposed root-check connection relationship among the information nodes, parity nodes, and check nodes to construct a rate-K/P NRP code, where K = 3 and P = 7, 8, . . . , 12. We also perform a row transformation on the base matrix (this does not affect the protograph structure) to make the root-check connections clearer. Obviously, the base matrix in Fig. 9 has the same NRP structure property as that in Fig. 6, and thus can achieve full diversity in the IR-HARQ system over the non-ergodic BF channel (see Fig. 18).
IV. PROPOSED NRP-LDPC-CODED MP-IR-HARQ SYSTEMS
For the priority-aware scenarios (e.g., satellite communication and multimedia transmission), a transmission technique that supports multiple data streams, unequal error protection, and ARQ strategy holds great promise as it enables efficient resource allocation by matching protection levels to data importance. However, no research has touched up on this study yet. To fill this gap, we propose a multilevel-priority design

method to establish a general NRP-LDPC-coded IR-HARQ system, called NRP-LDPC-coded MP-IR-HARQ system. The proposed MP-IR-HARQ system is shown in Fig. 10, and its operation principle (i.e., transmission mechanism) is illustrated as follows.
1) Proposed Transmitter: At the transmitting side, we assume that there are m different information-bit sequences m1, m2, . . . , mm, and they are re-ranked sequentially according to their priorities. In other words, mi has higher priority than mi+1, where i = 1, 2, . . . , m − 1. These m informationbit sequences will be passed to the NRP-LDPC encoders, which then produce the corresponding coded-bit sequences b1, b2, . . . , bm. Subsequently, every coded-bit sequence is divided into L different blocks bj,1, bj,2, . . . , bj,L for j = 1, 2, . . . , m. In the 1-st transmission round, a feedback signal sequence F = {F1, F2, . . . , Fm} is first set and initialized to an all-zero vector (i.e., Fj = 0).4 Based on the m NACK signals, each of these m NRP-LDPC encoders outputs the 1-st block of its codeword (i.e., bj,1) to the adaptive modulator, which can continuously extract m bits from the m different blocks to generate an M -ary modulation symbol sequence x by an M -ary constellation (M = 2m). During the bit-tosymbol procedure, the coded bits with the highest priority, second highest priority, . . ., lowest priority are respectively assigned into the most significant bit (MSB), second MSB, . . ., least significant bit (LSB) positions in the constellation to achieve the UEP property.
Importantly, in the subsequent (i.e., the l-th for l > 1) transmission round, the updated F may no longer be an allzero vector since the receiver is possible to correctly decode some data streams in the previous transmission round. As such, based on the updated F with m ‘0s’ (i.e., NACK) and m−m ‘1s’ (i.e., ACK), only the m NRP-LDPC encoders with NACK will output the l-th block of their corresponding codeword bk,l to the adaptive modulator, where k is the indicator of the m codewords that have not been successfully decoded yet. Then, the adaptive modulator also continuously extracts m bits from the m different blocks to generate an M -ary modulation symbol sequence x by an M -ary constellation (M = 2m ). The proposed MP-IR-HARQ encoding principle is given in Algorithm 2. It is obvious that the adaptive modulator [25],
4Similar to the traditional IR-HARQ system, the feedback signal Fj ∈ {0, 1} denotes the NACK if Fj = 0 or the ACK if Fj = 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10138

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Algorithm 2 Proposed MP-IR-HARQ Encoding Principle

Algorithm 3 Proposed MP-IR-HARQ Decoding Principle

[26] adopts different constellations based on the numbers of input blocks to implement the bit-to-symbol procedure.
2) Proposed Receiver: At the receiving side, the received signal sequence y is processed by a multi-level concatenated structure, which is formulated by an adaptive detector and m NRP-LDPC decoders. The proposed MP-IR-HARQ decoding principle is given in Algorithm 3, while the specific soft information (i.e., LLRs) update is described as follows.
Step 1: In the 1-st transmission round, the initial feedback signal sequence F of size 1 × m in the receiver is also an all-zero vector, indicating that m data streams need to be processed. Thereby, the adaptive detector will make the detection according to a 2m-ary bit-to-symbol mapping relationship. After that, for the LLRs output from the adaptive detector, those LLRs corresponding to the data stream with the highest priority are sent to its corresponding NRP-LDPC decoder. The corresponding decoding is then performed.
Particularly, i) If the decoding fails, F remains unchanged (i.e., its all elements are still 0), while the receiver sends F to the transmitter, requesting to start a new transmission round. It should be noted that since F is still an all-zero vector in next transmission round, the LLR update process is the same as above, except that the decoding considers the incremental redundancy principle (i.e., the current LLRs will be merged with those obtained in the previous transmission rounds into a new LLR sequence for decoding).
ii) If the decoding is correct, the first element within F is updated to 1, while the remaining elements remain 0. Also, the 1-st NRP-LDPC decoder feeds the extrinsic LLRs of the decoded bits transmitted in the current transmission round back to the adaptive detector.5 Based on the channel output and feedback LLRs, the adaptive detector initiates a new detection, and then sends the LLRs corresponding to the second-highest-priority data stream to the 2-nd NRP-LDPC
5For simplicity, we assume that the 1-st, 2-nd, . . ., m-th NRP-LDPC decoders are used to process the highest-priority, second-highest-priority, . . ., lowest-priority data streams, respectively.

decoder for decoding. When the decoding fails, go to Step 2; Otherwise, go to Step 3.
Step 2: In this case, F is kept unchanged, and then sent to the transmitter, which will start a new transmission round. Importantly, based on the current F in the receiver, the adaptive detector executes the detection according to a 2m -ary bitto-symbol mapping relationship, and sends the LLRs of the data stream with the highest priority among the currently transmitted data streams to its corresponding NRP-LDPC decoder for decoding, where m = m − j=1 Fj. When the decoding fails, repeat Step 2; Otherwise, go to Step 3.
In particular, i) If the decoding is failed and the maximum number of transmission rounds (i.e., L) is reached, terminate the LLR update, return to Step 1, and start a new transmission; ii) If the decoding is correct and m = 1, terminate the LLR update and send an all-one vector F to the transmitter, indicating that all data streams are received correctly.
Step 3: If the k-th (k < m) data stream is decoded correctly, the k-th element within F is updated to 1. Meanwhile, the k-th NRP-LDPC decoder feeds the extrinsic LLRs of the decoded bits transmitted in the current transmission round back to the adaptive detector. Based on the channel output and feedback LLRs, the adaptive detector initiates a new detection, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: NESTED ROOT-PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED MULTILEVEL-PRIORITY IR-HARQ SYSTEMS

10139

then sends the LLRs of the (k + 1)-th data stream to the corresponding (k + 1)-th NRP-LDPC decoder for decoding. Subsequently, go to Step 4.
Step 4: i) For k + 1 < m, when the (k + 1)-th NRP-LDPC decoding is failed (resp. correct), set k = k + 1 and return to Step 2 (resp. Step 3). ii) For k + 1 = m, when the (k + 1)-th NRP-LDPC decoding is failed, return to Step 2; Otherwise, terminate the LLR update and send an all-one vector F to the transmitter, indicating that all data streams are received correctly).
Remark 3:
• Both proposed adaptive modulator and adaptive detector must employ the 2m -ary (1 ≤ m ≤ m) bit-to-symbol mapping and demapping, respectively, according to the number of zero elements (i.e., m ) within F. The proposed MP-IR-HARQ scheme aims to simultaneously transmit multiple data streams with different priorities to a single receiver (instead of assigning a separate data stream to each user), and thus does not require a complex controlplane protocol to manage the HARQ processes across multiple users.
• Based on the proposed successive decoding, the lowpriority data stream is processed only after that the high-priority data stream has been correctly decoded. Because the latter is given priority protection and is more reliable. In other words, if the high-priority data stream cannot be decoded correctly, there is a high probability that the low-priority one cannot be decoded correctly. This mechanism significantly reduces the computational overhead.
• The MP-IR-HARQ scheme is designed to support multiple data streams transmitted to a single device, rather than multiple devices. This design provides differentiated protection among different data streams, and thus efficiently utilizes both available bandwidth and receiver capabilities. Specifically, the MP-IR-HARQ scheme allows devices to receive more data streams over a good channel, while ensuring reliable reception of critical data for devices over a poor channel. Thereby, the MP-IRHARQ scheme is well suited for scenarios that demand differentiated QoS and high transmission rates.
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we present throughput analyses and WER simulations to demonstrate the superiority of the proposed NRP-LDPC codes over non-ergodic BF channels, and then validate the benefits of the proposed MP-IR-HARQ system. It is assumed that the information length is C = 1020 and the maximum number of BP iterations is TBP = 100, while cyclic redundancy check (CRC) is used for information bits. Unless otherwise stated, the BPSK modulation is used in the simulations.
A. Throughput Performance of the Proposed NRP-LDPC-Coded IR-HARQ Systems
As in many research works on the IR-HARQ system [27], [28], we first consider the throughput as one of performance

measures. For the IR-HARQ transmission, we assume that the probability of l successive errors is defined as fl Pr{NACKl} for 1 ≤ l ≤ L, while NACKl {ERR1 ∧ ERR2 ∧ · · · ∧ ERRl}. In particular, ERRl indicates that the l-th transmission round is failed. Thereby, given that the previous l − 1 transmission rounds are failed, the probability that the l-th transmission round is correct can be denoted as Pr{NACK(l−1) ∧ ERRl} = fl−1 − fl [28], where E is the complement of the event E. The throughput (i.e., bits per channel use (bpcu)) then can be computed as

ηLIR

=

C(1 − f1) + C(f1 − f2) + · · · + C(fL−1 − fL) B(1 − f1) + 2B(f1 − f2) + · · · + LB(fL−1)

=

RB(1 1+

− fL)

L−1 l=1

fl

,

(18)

where RB = C/B and B is the block length, i.e., the number of coded bits within a transmitted block.
Fig. 11 presents the throughput performance comparison among various protograph codes in the IR-HARQ system over a non-ergodic BF channel, where the rate-1/2 regular-(3, 6) code [10], accumulate-repeat-4-jagged-accumulate (AR4JA) code [10], IRP2 code [14], and proposed NRP code with K = 2 are considered. As seen in Fig. 11(a), it is obvious that in the case of L = 2, only the proposed NRP code can approach the theoretical maximum throughput as the SNR increases. Similarly, in Fig. 11(b), where the rate-1/3 regular-(4, 6) code, accumulate-repeat-jagged-accumulate (ARJA) code [29], and proposed NRP code with K = 2 are considered, one can find similar throughput performance trend among the three types of codes. Also, one can obtain the same conclusion from Fig. 11(c), where the rate-1/4 regular-(6, 8) code, ARJA code [29], and proposed NRP code with K = 2 are considered.
Remark 4: The upper bound (i.e., BPSK capacity) on the throughput performance is derived under the assumptions of Rayleigh fading, perfect CSI, and coherence time lasting for one transmitted modulation symbol. From the perspective of theoretical performance limit (an infinite-length codeword), the IR-HARQ system includes infinite transmission rounds, and each of which experiences an i.i.d fading. The average value of the accumulated MI then converges to its statistical expectation, and thus the throughput of the IR-HARQ system over a BF channel can be upper bounded by an ergodic capacity [30], [31]. Although there is a relatively large gap between the throughput performance of proposed NRP codes and the BPSK capacity in low SNR range (i.e., 0 ∼ 24 (dB)), this gap can be narrowed by optimizing HARQ mechanism. Specifically, the current work can be extended from the following two directions: (a) one can optimize the L individual block lengths B1, B2, · · · , BL used in L different transmission rounds, respectively, instead of using a uniform block length (i.e., B1 = B2 = · · · = BL = B); (b) one can adopt crosspacket HARQ [27], [28], [32], which allows the incorporation of new packets into each retransmission of a previous packet, thereby enabling the joint transmission of multiple packets. By performing error correction while simultaneously delivering new information, this approach effectively enhances the overall throughput. These specialized HARQ designs are beyond the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10140

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 12. WER curves of the existing regular-(3, 6) [10], AR4JA [10], IRP2 [14] codes and the proposed NRP codes in the IR-HARQ system with L = 2, 3, and 4 transmission rounds over a non-ergodic BF channel. Also, three different outage limits are given as the theoretical lower bounds.

Fig. 13. WER curves of the existing 5G NR codes [33] and the proposed NRP codes in the IR-HARQ system with L = 2, 3, and 4 transmission rounds over a non-ergodic BF channel.

Fig. 11. Throughput comparisons among various protograph codes in the IR-HARQ system over a non-ergodic BF channel: (a) rate-1/2 protograph codes with L = 2 transmission rounds; (b) rate-1/3 protograph codes with L = 3 transmission rounds; and (c) rate-1/4 protograph codes with L = 4 transmission rounds. All proposed NRP codes have K = 2.
scope of this paper, and thus interested readers are refer to [4] for more details.
B. WER Performance of the Proposed NRP-LDPC-Coded IR-HARQ Systems
Fig. 12 studies the WER performance of three different rate1/2 protograph codes, including the regular-(3, 6), AR4JA, and IRP2 codes [33]. Also, the proposed NRP codes with rates of 1/2, 1/3, and 1/4 are considered. Referring to this figure, the proposed rate-1/2 NRP code achieves a gain of about 6.0 dB over the other three existing rate-1/2 protograph codes at a WER of 3×10−4. Furthermore, it is obvious that the proposed rate-1/2 NRP code has the same WER slope as its corresponding outage limit (i.e., achieves full diversity), and

exhibits a gap of only about 3.0 dB from its corresponding outage limit. Considering that the SNR scale over the nonergodic BF channel is approximately ten times larger than that over the AWGN channel [7], [14], designing a code with a 3.0 dB gap to the outage limit is comparably challenging to designing a code with a 0.3 dB gap to the Shannon limit. More importantly, for the proposed NRP codes with rates 1/3 and 1/4, both of them not only can achieve full diversity, but also are closer to their corresponding outage limits than the rate-1/2 NRP code.
Fig. 13 compares the WER performance of two different types of nested protograph codes, including the existing 5G NR codes [33] and the proposed NRP codes. In particular, the information length is 1020, while the codeword lengths are 2244, 3264, and 4284 for code rates 1/2, 1/3, and 1/4, respectively. The decoder is implemented by a standard flooding decoding (i.e., without min-sum approximation). As observed from this figure, one can easily notice that the proposed NRP codes are superior to the 5G NR codes under all three different code-rate conditions. Furthermore, Table I analyzes the computational complexities of the above two nested protograph codes. The computational complexity of a protograph code is determined by its degree distribution, and can be expressed as O V¯ nv + C¯nc , where V¯ (resp. C¯) denotes the average degree of VNs (resp. CNs) and nv

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: NESTED ROOT-PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED MULTILEVEL-PRIORITY IR-HARQ SYSTEMS
TABLE I NUMBERS OF CALCULATIONS REQUIRED FOR BOTH VN AND CN
UPDATES OF THE EXISTING 5G NR CODES [33] AND THE PROPOSED NRP CODES WITHIN EACH DECODING ITERATION. IN PARTICULAR, THREE DIFFERENT CODE RATES ARE CONSIDERED

10141

Fig. 15. WER curves of the proposed rate-1/3 NRP codes with K = 2 and 3 in the IR-HARQ system with L = 2 and 3 over a non-ergodic BF channel.

Fig. 14. WER curves of the existing random root LDPC codes, including Code-5 [34], Code-F3 [35] and Code-F4 [35], as well as the proposed NRP codes in the IR-HARQ system with L = 2, 3, and 4 transmission rounds over a non-ergodic BF channel.

(resp. nc) denotes the information-bit (resp. check-bit) length. Referring to this table, it is evident that the proposed NRP codes exhibit lower decoding complexities than the 5G NR codes. In other words, the proposed NRP codes benefit from a lower energy consumption.
Fig. 14 further compares the WER performance of the existing random root LDPC codes, including Code-5 [34], Code-F3 [35] and Code-F4 [35], as well as the proposed NRP codes. Referring to this figure, in the case of L = 2, the performance of the rate-1/2 Code-5 is significantly worse than that of the rate-1/2 NRP code in the high-SNR region. When L = 3, the Code-F3 exhibits almost the same performance as the rate-1/3 NRP code, but the former has a code rate of 0.3248 (i.e., a reduced transmission rate). Additionally, for L = 4, the rate-0.2468 Code-F4 performs worse than the rate-1/4 NRP code in terms of both error performance in the high-SNR region and transmission rate.
Fig. 15 presents the WER performance of the proposed rate1/3 NRP codes with K = 2 and 3. Obviously, both codes have the full-diversity property, but the rate-1/3 NRP code with K = 3 exhibits a better WER performance than that with K = 2. Therefore, these error performance phenomenons are consistent with the outage-boundary analyses in Fig. 7. In addition to the case of L = 3 transmission rounds (i.e., L = 3 fading blocks), we perform the WER simulation on the rate-1/3 NRP code with K = 3 in the IR-HARQ system with L = 2. One can notice that the proposed code can also achieve full diversity (i.e., d = dc = L = 2). This implies that the proposed rate-1/L NRP code possesses the full-diversity property in both i) IR-HARQ system with L transmission rounds (i.e., only information bits are included in the 1-st transmission round) and ii) IR-HARQ system with

Fig. 16. WER curves of the proposed rate-1/4 NRP codes with K = 2 and 3 in the IR-HARQ system with L = 2, 3 and 4 over a non-ergodic BF channel.
Fig. 17. WER curves of the proposed rate-1/4 NRP code with K = 3 in the IR-HARQ system over a non-ergodic BF channel, while the GRPL4 code with and without feedback encoding [17] is considered as the benchmark.
L transmission rounds (i.e., all information bits and partial parity bits are included in the 1-st transmission round), where 2 ≤ L < L is a positive integer.
Fig. 16 also depicts the WER performance of the proposed rate-1/4 NRP codes with K = 2 and 3. Similarly, one can observe that the performance of the proposed code with K = 3 is better than that with K = 2 in the case of L = 4. Besides, the proposed code with K = 3 can exhibit the full-diversity property for L = 4, 3, and 2.
To further validate the superiority of the proposed NRPLDPC code-design methodology, Fig. 17 depicts the WER

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10142

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 18. WER curves of a family of NRP codes with rational code rates R = K/P for K = 3 and P = 6, 7, . . . , 12 in the IR-HARQ system with L = 2, 3 and 4 over a non-ergodic BF channel.

performance of the proposed rate-1/4 NRP code with K = 3, while the GRPL4 code with and without feedback encoding [17] is considered as the benchmark. It is obvious that the GRPL4 code with L = 4, 5, 6 cannot achieve full diversity in the proposed system, whereas the proposed NRP code can do so. Additionally, Fig. 18 depicts the WER performance of a family of NRP codes having a wide range of rational code rates R = K/P (see Fig. 9), where K = 3 and P = 6, 7, . . . , 12. Referring to this figure, the proposed rate-K/P NRP code can also achieve full diversity in the case of 2 ≤ L ≤ P/K , where L is a positive integer and · is a floor operation.
C. WER Performance of the Proposed NRP-LDPC-Coded MP-IR-HARQ Systems
The MP-IR-HARQ scheme is designed for supporting the transmission of multiple data streams to a single user (rather than a multi-user scenario), and thus we focus on the linklevel analysis for evaluating the physical-layer transmission performance, with particular emphasis on the performance of NRP-LDPC codes in the MP-IR-HARQ context. Fig. 19 shows the WER performance comparison between the proposed MP-IR-HARQ system and the traditional IR-HARQ system [17]. In particular, the Gray-labeled 4-ary phase shift keying (PSK), 8-ary PSK, and 16-ary quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) are considered, and then 2, 3, or 4 coded bits can be transmitted in every time slot. As observed from Fig. 19(a), where rate-1/2 NRP code and L = 2 are assumed, the proposed MP-IR-HARQ system can provide UEP for 4 different data streams, and exhibit better WER performance than the traditional IR-HARQ system. Specifically, in the proposed MP-IR-HARQ system, the high-priority data streams 1 and 2 significantly outperform the low-priority data streams 3 and 4 due to the UEP property. Additionally, as the SNR increases, the low-priority data streams 3 and 4 of the proposed MP-IR-HARQ system can achieve the same WER performance as the traditional IR-HARQ system due to the successive decoding property. Referring to Fig. 19(b), where rate-1/3 NRP code and L = 3 are assumed, a similar WER performance trend can be observed. From above discussion, the proposed NRP-LDPC-coded MP-IR-HARQ system stands out as a promising technique for UEP-based multi-stream

Fig. 19. WER curves of the proposed MP-IR-HARQ system with four transmitted data streams, while the traditional IR-HARQ system [17] is used as the benchmark. Also, the Gray-labeled constellation is considered: (a) a rate-1/2 NRP code and L = 2; and (b) a rate-1/3 NRP code and L = 3.
transmissions. Note that the aim of the MP-IR-HARQ design is to simultaneously process multiple independent information sources, while assigning different reliabilities to them based on their priorities. Although merging multiple information sources into a single one can produce a long codeword, it fails to effectively achieve the UEP, thereby compromising the reliabilities of high-priority information sources. Furthermore, a long codeword inevitably results in a high computational overhead in a single codec (i.e., significantly increases the complexity of both encoding and decoding), which is undesirable for the hardware-friendly implementation.
Note also that: As the first work regarding the design of MP-IR-HARQ scheme which combines the multiplepriority transmission and IR-HARQ strategy, we focus on the equal-codeword-length assumption in this paper. Actually, the MP-IR-HARQ scheme adopts adaptive modulation and detection, and then can adaptively employ different constellations to implement the bit-to-symbol mapping by coordinating the bit lengths of different data streams at each transmission round. Thereby, the MP-IR-HARQ scheme is capable of supporting the multi-stream transmissions with different codeword lengths after proper modification. In the future, we will further explore this issue and develop an improved MP-IR-HARQ scheme tailored for the unequal-codeword-length configuration.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper carefully investigates the full-diversity protograph code design for the IR-HARQ system over non-ergodic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: NESTED ROOT-PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED MULTILEVEL-PRIORITY IR-HARQ SYSTEMS

10143

BF channels. First, we have carried out the modified outageboundary analysis of the traditional RP-LDPC codes in the IR-HARQ system over a non-ergodic BF channel and revealed that they fail to achieve full diversity from the messagepassing perspective. Subsequently, we have proposed the NRP-LDPC code-design methodology composed of a new rootcheck connection and a node-based dynamic alteration. The new rootcheck connection allows the NRP-LDPC codes to possess both the nested structure supporting rate compatibility and the full-diversity property over non-ergodic BF channels, while the node-based dynamic alteration can enlarge (resp. reduce) the size of the base matrix to optimize NRP-LDPC codes with good performance (resp. to facilitate hardware implementation). Additionally, we have put forward a multilevel-priority design, which is composed of the adaptive modulation, adaptive detection, and successive decoding, into the traditional IR-HARQ framework. The resultant MP-IRHARQ system enables the transmission of multiple data streams while providing UEP. The outage-boundary analyses, throughput analyses and WER simulations have demonstrated that the proposed NRP-LDPC-coded MP-IR-HARQ system is significantly superior to the state-of-the-art counterparts over non-ergodic BF channels, while supporting the MDS-based UEP transmission. As the first work regarding the design of full-diversity nested LDPC codes and multilevel-priority IR-HARQ system, we just focus on the assumption of perfect ACK/NACK feedback. In the future, we will extend this work to a more general and practical IR-HARQ scenario with imperfect feedback conditions.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Yang, X. Yu, Y. Fang, and Y. L. Guan, “Rate-compatible rootprotograph-based LDPC codes for IR-HARQ systems,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2024, pp. 1–6.
[2] H. Sun, C. Dong, S. X. Ng, and L. Hanzo, “Five decades of hierarchical modulation and its benefits in relay-aided networking,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 2891–2921, 2015.
[3] K. I. Pedersen, S. R. Khosravirad, G. Berardinelli, and F. Frederiksen, “Rethink hybrid automatic repeat reQuest design for 5G: Five configurable enhancements,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 154–160, Dec. 2017.
[4] A. Ahmed, A. Al-Dweik, Y. Iraqi, H. Mukhtar, M. Naeem, and E. Hossain, “Hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) in wireless communications systems and standards: A contemporary survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 2711–2752, 4th Quart., 2021.
[5] M. Chiani, A. Conti, M. Mazzotti, E. Paolini, and A. Zanella, “Outage capacity for MIMO-OFDM systems in block fading channels,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. Forty 5th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput. (ASILOMAR), Nov. 2011, pp. 779–783.
[6] P. C. F. Eggers, M. Angjelichinoski, and P. Popovski, “Wireless channel modeling perspectives for ultra-reliable communications,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2229–2243, Apr. 2019.
[7] J. J. Boutros, A. Guille´n i Fabregas, E. Biglieri, and G. Ze´mor, “Lowdensity parity-check codes for nonergodic block-fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 4286–4300, Sep. 2010.
[8] Y. Fang, P. Chen, G. Cai, F. C. M. Lau, S. C. Liew, and G. Han, “Outagelimit-approaching channel coding for future wireless communications: Root-protograph low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 85–93, Jun. 2019.
[9] J. Kim, C. Kim, H. Park, and J.-S. No, “Design of protograph LDPC codes using resolvable block designs for block fading channel,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 1970–1974, Sep. 2022.
[10] Y. Fang, G. Zhang, G. Cai, F. C. M. Lau, P. Chen, and G. Han, “Root-protograph-based BICM-ID: A reliable and efficient transmission solution for block-fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 5921–5939, Sep. 2019.

[11] H. Khodaiemehr, D. Panario, and M.-R. Sadeghi, “Design and practical decoding of full-diversity construction a lattices for block-fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 138–163, Jan. 2021.
[12] A. G. D. Uchoa, C. Healy, R. C. de Lamare, and R. D. Souza, “Design of LDPC codes based on progressive edge growth techniques for block fading channels,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 1221–1223, Nov. 2011.
[13] G. Lechner, K. D. Nguyen, A. Guillen i Fabregas, and L. K. Rasmussen, “Optimal power control for LDPC codes in block-fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 1759–1765, Jul. 2011.
[14] Y. Fang, G. Bi, and Y. L. Guan, “Design and analysis of root-protograph LDPC codes for non-ergodic block-fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 738–749, Feb. 2015.
[15] C. Kim, J.-S. No, G. Kim, H.-Y. Song, and J. Ahn, “New design of high-rate generalized root protograph LDPC codes for nonergodic block interference,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 214–217, Feb. 2019.
[16] Y. Fang, S. C. Liew, and T. Wang, “Design of distributed protograph LDPC codes for multi-relay coded-cooperative networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 7235–7251, Nov. 2017.
[17] C. Kim, S.-H. Kim, and J.-S. No, “New GRP LDPC codes for HARQ-IR over the block fading channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 11, pp. 6642–6656, Nov. 2020.
[18] Q. Li, J. Zhang, L. Bai, and J. Choi, “Performance analysis and system design for hierarchical modulated BICM-ID,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 3056–3069, Jun. 2014.
[19] Z. Yang, Y. Fang, G. Han, and K. M. S. Huq, “Spatially coupled protograph LDPC-coded hierarchical modulated BICM-ID systems: A promising transmission technique for 6G-enabled Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 5149–5163, Apr. 2021.
[20] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[21] Z. Yang, Y. L. Guan, Y. Fang, and L. Lv, “Capacity, convergence, and complexity improvements for LDPC-coded MIMO-VLC systems with generalized spatial modulation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 72, no. 7, pp. 4226–4242, Jul. 2024.
[22] Z. Yang, Y. Li, Y. L. Guan, and Y. Fang, “Source-constrained hierarchical modulation systems with protograph LDPC codes: A promising transceiver design for future 6G-enabled IoT,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1103–1117, Apr. 2025.
[23] M. Noor-A-Rahim, G. Lechner, and K. D. Nguyen, “Density evolution analysis of spatially coupled LDPC codes over BIAWGN channel,” in Proc. Austral. Commun. Theory Workshop (AusCTW), Jan. 2016, pp. 13–17.
[24] S.-Y. Chung, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[25] M. Hossain, P. Vitthaladevuni, M.-S. Alouini, V. Bhargava, and A. Goldsmith, “Adaptive hierarchical modulation for simultaneous voice and multiclass data transmission over fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1181–1194, Jul. 2006.
[26] H. Mukhtar and M. El-Tarhuni, “An adaptive hierarchical QAM scheme for enhanced bandwidth and power utilization,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2275–2284, Aug. 2012.
[27] J. Feng, Z. Shi, G. Yang, N. I. Miridakis, S. Ma, and T. A. Tsiftsis, “Outage performance of cross-packet HARQ,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 1423–1427, Jul. 2022.
[28] M. Jabi, A. Benyouss, M. Le Treust, E´ . Pierre-Doray, and L. Szczecinski, “Adaptive cross-packet HARQ,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 2022–2035, May 2017.
[29] D. Divsalar, C. Jones, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Protograph based LDPC codes with minimum distance linearly growing with block size,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), vol. 3, Nov./Dec. 2005, pp. 1–5.
[30] M. Jabi, A. E. Hamss, L. Szczecinski, and P. Piantanida, “Multipacket hybrid ARQ: Closing gap to the ergodic capacity,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 12, pp. 5191–5205, Dec. 2015.
[31] M. Jabi, E´ . Pierre-Doray, L. Szczecinski, and M. Benjillali, “How to boost the throughput of HARQ with off-the-shelf codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 2319–2331, Jun. 2017.
[32] H. Yaoyue, Y. Xiaoxi, P. Zhiwen, G. Y. Liang, and Y. Xiaohu, “Polarcoded cross-packet HARQ based on polarizing matrix extension,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 1954–1958, Aug. 2023.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10144

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

[33] 5G NR: Multiplexing Channel Coding, 3GPP, document ETSI TS 138 212, V.15.2.0(2018-07): Sophia Antipolis, France, ETSI, Jul. 2018.
[34] D. Duyck, J. J. Boutros, and M. Moeneclaey, “Full diversity random LDPC codes,” in Proc. 18th IEEE Symp. Commun. Veh. Technol. Benelux (SCVT), Nov. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[35] C. T. Healy and R. C. de Lamare, “Design of LDPC codes based on multipath EMD strategies for progressive edge growth,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 8, pp. 3208–3219, Aug. 2016.
Zhaojie Yang received the B.Sc. degree in electronic engineering from Lingnan Normal University, China, in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from Guangdong University of Technology, China, in 2021. From November 2020 to October 2021, he was a Visiting Student with the Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. He is currently a Research Fellow with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interests include channel coding, coded modulation, sparse code multiple access, and visible light communications.

Yi Fang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from Xiamen University, China, in 2013. From May 2012 to July 2012, he was a Research Assistant in electronic and information engineering with The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. From September 2012 to September 2013, he was a Visiting Scholar in electronic and electrical engineering with University College London, U.K. From February 2014 to February 2015, he was a Research Fellow at the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. From June 2024 to July 2024, he was a Visiting Professor at the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Toronto, Canada. He is currently a Full Professor and the Vice Dean of the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, China. His current research interests include information and coding theory, digital modulation, and cooperative communication. He served as the Symposium/Workshop Co-Chair for the IEEE ISIT 2026, IEEE/CIC ICCC 2021–2024, and ISTC 2018. He served or is serving as an Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE ACCESS, and IET Quantum Communication.

Xiaoxi Yu received the B.Eng. degree in electrical and electronics engineering and the M.S. degree in wireless communications and signal processing from the University of Bristol in September 2016 and February 2018, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 2024. Her research interests include information and coding theory, LDPC/protograph codes, and HARQ schemes.

Yaoyue Hu received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in 2013 and 2016, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2023. From 2016 to 2017, she was a Software Engineer at ZTE Corporation, Nanjing. She is currently a Lecturer with the School of Internet of Things, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing. Her research interests include information theory and wireless communications.

Yong Liang Guan (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. degree (Hons.) from the National University of Singapore, Singapore, and the Ph.D. degree from Imperial College London, London, U.K. He is currently a Professor of communication engineering with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, where he leads the Continental-NTU Corporate Laboratory and the successful deployment of the campus-wide NTU-NXP V2X test bed. He is an Associate Vice President of NTU. His current research interests include coding and signal processing for communication systems and data storage systems. He is a Distinguished Lecturer of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society. He is an Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

