2025 XIX International Symposium on Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems (Redundancy) | 979-8-3315-4992-3/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/Redundancy68069.2025.11301108

Decoding of generalized LDPC Codes Using the BCJR Algorithm

Alexey A. Bandyukov Department of Electronic Engineering
Higher School of Economics Moscow, Russia
aabandyukov@miem.hse.ru

Andrey A. Metlyakov Department of Electronic Engineering
Higher School of Economics Moscow, Russia
aametlyakov@miem.hse.ru

Fedor I. Ivanov Department of Electronic Engineering
Higher School of Economics Moscow, Russia fivanov@hse.ru

Abstract—Generalized low-density parity-check (GLDPC) codes have emerged as a promising class of error-correcting codes that extend the capabilities of traditional LDPC codes by incorporating more powerful component codes. This paper investigates an approach to construct long GLDPC codes using short component codes. In this scheme, the BCJR algorithm is used as a component decoder and integrated into the belief propagation algorithm. Simulation results demonstrate that constructions incorporating quasi-cyclic LDPC codes yield the best performance. Compared to the conventional decoding approach for LDPC codes, the proposed generalized constructions demonstrated better bit and frame error rate performance. This approach is promising for communication systems that require low latency. A comparison is also provided with LDPC codes constructed using the Progressive Edge-Growth (PEG) algorithm.
Index Terms—GLDPC codes, LDPC codes, BCJR decoding, BCH codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
T He growing demand for high-reliability data transmission in modern communication systems, especially under constraints of low latency and limited computational resources, has revived interest in powerful error-correcting codes with efficient soft-decision decoding algorithms. Traditional harddecision decoding methods, while computationally inexpensive, often fall short in scenarios involving additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels. Soft-decision decoding algorithms, such as the BCJR algorithm [1], offer significantly improved performance by utilizing probabilistic information from the channel.
Generalized low-density parity-check (GLDPC) codes, introduced as a natural extension of Gallager’s LDPC codes [2], incorporate more sophisticated constituent codes in place of simple parity checks. These constructions, originally explored over four decades ago [3], were initially overshadowed by the rapid development of long LDPC codes tailored to emerging communication standards. However, the increasing importance of short block codes in latency-sensitive applications has renewed the relevance of GLDPC constructions.
GLDPC codes can be effectively represented using Tanner graphs, where each check node is associated with a small block code instead of a single parity check. When combined with iterative soft-input soft-output (SISO) decoding, such as the BCJR algorithm, these codes demonstrate strong error-correcting capabilities, particularly in short blocklength

regimes. Furthermore, the flexibility in selecting the structure of component codes allows for practical trade-offs between complexity and performance.
GLDPC codes based on Gallager‘s LDPC codes and short component codes decoded by the BCJR algorithm were previously considered in [4]. In this paper, we extend this approach by exploring a construction method for GLDPC codes using quasi-cyclic LDPC base matrices. The resulting constructions are evaluated through simulations in AWGN channels and compared with conventional LDPC codes built using the Progressive Edge-Growth (PEG) algorithm [5]. The proposed scheme exhibits superior performance in terms of bit and frame error rates, making it well suited for modern communication systems with strict constraints.
II. BACKGROUND
A. LDPC Codes
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes are a class of linear block codes defined by sparse parity-check matrices. Initially proposed by Gallager in the 1960s, LDPC codes were largely forgotten until their rediscovery in the 1990s, when advances in iterative decoding algorithms made them practical for modern communication systems. The key idea behind LDPC codes is that the sparse structure of the parity-check matrix enables efficient belief propagation (BP) decoding, which approximates maximum-likelihood performance with relatively low complexity.
An LDPC code of length N and dimension K is defined by an M × N parity-check matrix H, where M = N − K and each row and column contain only a small number of ones. This sparsity allows the decoding to be represented as a message passing on a bipartite graph (Tanner graph), where variable nodes correspond to codeword bits and check nodes correspond to parity constraints. During decoding, messages are iteratively exchanged between the variable and check nodes, progressively improving the reliability estimates for each bit.
LDPC codes have been adopted in numerous communication standards, including Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11), DVB-S2, and 5G NR, due to their excellent error-correction performance and scalability across different code lengths and rates. The design of the parity-check matrix, whether structured (e.g., quasi-cyclic) or random, significantly impacts the performance and hardware efficiency of the decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:09:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. The matrix H(32,28), which forms the basis of the example of generalized LDPC code.

Fig. 1. The parity-check graph corresponding to H(32,28).

B. Quasi-cyclic LDPC constructions
The chosen method for constructing quasi-cyclic LDPC codes can be divided into several stages.
1) Firstly, we need to determine some characteristics in advance: m1 – the number of units in the column of the desired LDPC code, n1 – the number of units in the row of the desired LDPC code, p – the dimension of the square unit matrix p × p in which permutations (cyclic shifts) are performed.
2) In the next step, we need to define the random values to produce a shift of specific matrices. Then we need to create a matrix Hrpv (random parameter values) of size m1 × n1 filled with random values from 0 to p − 1.
3) In the last step, we create the final matrix by placing the unit matrices with the corresponding shifts instead of the values of Hrpv. This allows us to obtain a quasi-cyclic LDPC code matrix with dimensions pm1 × pn1.
The described method is shown in Figure 1 with the following values: m1 = 2, n1 = 6 and p = 6.

Fig. 3. The parity-check graph corresponding to H(32,28).
in randomly assigning the positions of the check equation’s ones to the columns of the code-component. At the same time, the zeros in the original parity checks are replaced with all-zero columns whose height matches the number of rows in the code-component’s parity-check matrix. Figure 4 illustrates the transformation from a single parity check to the resulting layer. The remaining three parity checks are transformed into generalized layers in a similar manner. As a result, we obtain the parity-check matrix of the generalized LDPC code (HGLDPC), shown in Figure 5. The algorithmic description is given below (Algorithm 1).

C. GLDPC constructions
Generalized Low-Density Parity-Check (GLDPC) codes are a modification of conventional LDPC codes, in which standard parity-check constraints are replaced by blocks based on embedded component codes [6]. This modification enhances the error-correcting capability without significantly increasing the density of the parity-check matrix.
At the core of a generalized LDPC code lies a high-rate LDPC code. As an example, consider a ”LDPC-like” short code of length 32 with 28 information symbols. Its paritycheck matrix H is shown in Figure 2, and the corresponding parity-check graph is presented in Figure 3. The component code must be selected so that its length matches the number of ones in a row of the parity-check matrix of the “parent” LDPC code. In the current example, we use the extended Hamming code with 16 code bits and 11 information bits. The core principle of transforming the parity checks of the original code into layers of a generalized LDPC code lies

Fig. 4. Transformation from a single parity check to a generalized paritycheck layer.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:09:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of the parity-check graph (Figure 6) retains the same number of variable and check nodes as in the original LDPC code (Figure 3), despite the increased complexity of the local checks at the check node side. Unlike standard implementations of the belief propagation algorithm, such as the sum-product algorithm, the messages passed from check nodes to symbol nodes in the generalized belief propagation algorithm are not computed directly using analytical expressions. Instead, they are derived from the output of the decoder associated with the component code corresponding to each check node. This requires that each row of the submatrix in the generalized LDPC code be preassigned to a specific component code, and that the appropriate decoder be applied accordingly.

Fig. 6. Parity-check graph of the generalized LDPC code (32,12). GC – generalized check.

Fig. 5. Transformation from a single parity check to a generalized paritycheck layer.

Algorithm 1 Construction of the parity-check matrix of a
GLDPC code Require: HLDPC – parity-check matrix of the base LDPC code
(dimensions: mLDPC × nLDPC); Hcomp – parity-check matrix of the component code (dimensions: mcomp × ncomp) Ensure: HGLDPC – parity-check matrix of the resulting GLDPC code (dimensions: mLDPC · mcomp × nLDPC)

/*Initialize output matrix with zeros*/

H ← 0 GLDPC

mLDPC ·mcomp ×nLDPC

for i = 0 to mLDPC − 1 do /* Find indices of ones in row i */ J ← {j | HLDPC[i, j] = 1} K ← randomly select |J| columns from Hcomp for each j ∈ J with corresponding k ∈ K do HGLDPC[i · mcomp : (i + 1) · mcomp, j] ← Hcomp[:, k] end for
end for return HGLDPC

D. GLDPC decoding
Decoding of generalized LDPC codes is performed using a modified belief propagation algorithm, commonly referred to as generalized belief propagation. Importantly, the structure

III. OUR CONTRIBUTION
A. GLDPC decoder
Based on the procedure (Algorithm 2) of a preconstruction of a structure linking standard checks, generalized checks, and the corresponding component codes — as well as the core framework of the belief propagation algorithm and the component code decoder (e.g., the BCJR algorithm), a variant of a decoder for generalized LDPC codes can be described. In this approach, generalized checks are interpreted as independent decoding subproblems using the specified component code.
The proposed algorithm (Algorithm 3) retains the overall belief propagation loop characteristic of LDPC decoders but introduces a modification in the check node update step: instead of analytically recalculating messages for each check, the decoder of the corresponding code layer is invoked.
Algorithm 2 Formation of an auxiliary structure linking standard checks, generalized checks and the component code. Require: mLDPC ×nLDPC – the dimensions of the parity-check
matrix of the base LDPC code; Hcomp – parity-check matrix of the component code (dimensions: mcomp×ncomp); HGLDPC – parity-check matrix of GLDPC code (dimensions: mLDPC · mcomp × nLDPC) Ensure: D - Dictionary with mLDPC keys, where each value is a dictionary containing:
• the corresponding layer of the generalized LDPC paritycheck matrix HGLDPC
• an array of indices in codeword involved in the component code decoding, ordered.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:09:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

/* Initialize row_layer_match as empty dictionary */ D ← {}
for i = 0 to mLDPC − 1 do /* Extract i-th layer from HGLDPC */ layer ← HGLDPC[i · mcomp : (i + 1) · mcomp, :]
/* Build and sort index pairs (k, j) such that layer[:, j] = Hcomp[:, k] */ mapped pairs ← [ ] for each j = 0 to nLDPC − 1 do
for each k = 0 to ncomp − 1 do if layer[:, j] = Hcomp[:, k] then mapped pairs.append((k, j)) break end if
end for end for
/* Sort pairs by k and extract sorted j indices */ mapped pairs ← sorted(mapped pairs) sorted layer indexes ← [j for (k, j) ∈ mapped pairs]
/* Store layer and sorted indexes in the dictionary */ D[i] ← {“layer” : layer, “sorted layer indexes” : sorted layer indexes} end for return D
Algorithm 3 Decoding of Generalized LDPC Code with Component Decoder Require: L – vector of LLRs received from the channel,
length n; σ2 – channel noise variance; M axIter – maximum number of iterations; D – auxiliary structure Ensure: xˆ – variant of codeword
/* Initialize Hq (messages from variable nodes to check nodes) and Hγ (messages from check nodes to variable nodes) based on the LDPC parity-check matrix HLDPC. */ for each i, j where HLDPC[i, j] = 1 do
Hq[i, j] ← HLDPC[i, j] · L[j] Hγ [i, j] ← HLDPC[i, j] end for
for iter = 1 to M axIter do
/*Update messages from check nodes*/ for each row i in HLDPC do
layer indexes ← D[i][sorted layer indexes] llrin ← Hq[i, layer indexes] llrout ← component decoder(llrin, σ2) Hγ[i, layer indexes] ← llrout − llrin end for

/* Update messages from variable nodes */ for each i, j where HLDPC[i, j] = 1 do
/* Find all other check nodes i′ containing variable j */ indexes ← {i′ | HLDPC[i′, j] = 1, i′ ̸= i} Hq[i, j] ← L[j] + i′∈indexes Hγ [i′, j] end for
/* Attempt decoding */ for each variable j do
Lout[j] ← L[j] + i Hγ [i, j] end for
xˆ[j] ← 1 if outL[j] < 0 0 otherwise
if xˆ · HGTLDPC mod 2 = 0 then return xˆ
end if end for
/* If syndrome check does not pass during all iterations, result is the last decoded variant */ return xˆ
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The testing was carried out using BPSK modulation over an AWGN channel. Two generalized LDPC codes with length n = 420 and number of information bits k = 196 (code rate ≈ 0.47) were simulated using the developed decoder. In one case, the base LDPC code was a classical (420, 364) LDPC code constructed using the Gallager algorithm, with a row weight of 15 and a column weight of 2. In the other case, a quasi-cyclic [7] LDPC code with the same parameters was used, constructed based on permutation matrices. The component code used was the BCH(15,11) code, decoded using the BCJR algorithm. To evaluate the performance of the proposed decoding approach, the results were compared with decoding using the Sum-Product Algorithm [8], both for the same generalized LDPC codes and for a standard LDPC code (420, 193) constructed using the PEG algorithm.
For all subsequent graphs, EsN0 is the ratio of energy per symbol to the spectral density of noise, expressed in decibels. The simulation is performed using √BPSK modulation, while the transmitted bits are mapped to ± Es signals, and additive white Gaussian noise is superimposed on them with a variance corresponding to the set value of EsN0. According to Figure 7, it can be seen that with an increase in the number of iterations, the corrective properties noticeably improve, which is absolutely logical. An increase in the efficiency of the GLDPC code decoder compared to the Sum-Product in terms of its performance at initial signal-to-noise values is observed only when the number of iterations of the decoder is 4 or higher (the difference is 0 – 1.2 dB). However, at high signalto-noise values, the efficiency of Sum-Product decreases, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:09:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 7. GLDPC(420, 196) based on Gallager‘s LDPC.

Fig. 9. GLDPC(420, 196) based on Gallager‘s and quasi-cyclic LDPCs.

Fig. 8. GLDPC(420, 196) based on quasi-cyclic LDPC.

it begins to correspond to 1-2 iterations of the GLDPC code decoder.
Let us move on to the code based on the quasi-cyclic LDPC code. Similarly to the previous case, with an increase in the number of iterations, this approach has better decoding performance, as can be seen in Figure 8. However, it should be noted that as the number of iterations increases, the performance gain becomes less significant in dB. For example, the difference between 10 and 20 iterations becomes minimal. Improvements over Sum-Product have been stable since 4 iterations. Let us compare these two approaches in Figure 9.
The codes under consideration are identical in terms of input parameters, which makes their comparison reasonable. Based on Figure 9, the following conclusion can be drawn: with one decoding iteration, both variants show similar results in terms of FER. However, with an increase in the number of iterations, the design based on the quasi-cyclic GLDPC code demonstrates a stable advantage and better corrective ability.
The final comparison in Figure 10 is made between the decoding of generalized matrices (blue and orange), the

Fig. 10. Different approaches comparison.
slightly slower LDPC(420, 193) code constructed by the PEG algorithm (green) using Sum-Product, and the decoding of the GLDPC code based on the quasi-cyclic LDPC (red). The maximum number of iterations is 20 for both decoders. The graph shows that decoding a generalized LDPC using a generalized decoder is significantly more efficient than decoding the same matrix using a Sum Product (difference 1.2 - 1.8 dB). The GLDPC, built on the basis of the Gallager‘s LDPC, is decoded much worse. However, in comparison with LDPC-PEG, the conclusions are ambiguous. On the one hand, at low values of signal/noise, the GLDPC is decoded better, but then the graphs overlap and the situation changes, while the difference does not exceed 0.4 dB. At around 0.8 dB, the steepness of the PEG decreases and the graph begins to go more flat, while the GLDPC retains its steepness. We cannot say for sure, but we assume that at higher signal-to-noise values, GLDPC will show better performance than LDPC built by the PEG algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:09:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. CONCLUSIONS The simulation showed that using component decoders inside the generalized graph checks makes it possible to achieve lower FER values with a fixed code length and speed. A particularly noticeable advantage is observed when using a larger number of iterations, as well as when constructing a generalized code based on quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. Despite this, a comparison with the LDPC code generated by the PEG algorithm yielded results that do not allow us to declare the unconditional advantage of the basic LDPC design. In general, the obtained results demonstrate the promise of GLDPC codes and the expediency of their use in systems with strict requirements for transmission reliability.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This work is an output of a research project implemented as part of the Basic Research Program at the National Research University Higher School of Economics (HSE University).
REFERENCES
[1] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, 1974.
[2] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[3] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, 1981.
[4] J. Boutros, O. Pothier, and G. Zemor, “Generalized low density (tanner) codes,” in 1999 IEEE International Conference on Communications (Cat. No. 99CH36311), vol. 1, 1999.
[5] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, 2005.
[6] S. Elsanadily, “Generalized low-density parity-check codes: Construction and decoding algorithms,” in Coding Theory. Rijeka: IntechOpen, 2019, ch. 1.
[7] M. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, 2004.
[8] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sumproduct algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, 2001.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:09:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

