2025 XIX International Symposium on Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems (Redundancy) | 979-8-3315-4992-3/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/Redundancy68069.2025.11301552

Construction of LDPC Codes for Single Bursts Correction by Masking

Alina Veresova HSE University St. Petersburg, Russia amveresova@gmail.com

Andrei Ovchinnikov HSE University
St. Petersburg, Russia a.ovchinnikov@hse.ru

Abstract—This paper addresses the problem of constructing codes for correcting single error bursts. The construction is based on a block-circulant design of low-density parity-check codes. For such a design, the maximal correctable burst length is limited by the block size, which forces consideration of codes whose parity-check matrix contains only a small number of large blocks. However, this significantly restricts the attainable sets of code lengths and code rates, and, aside from a few special cases, such codes may be turned out to be rather far from the Reiger bound on the maximum correctable burst length. To overcome these limitations we introduce a masking procedure and propose a method for constructing a masking matrix based on evaluating the burst correcting capability of a code. Experiments estimating the correcting capability of the proposed codes in comparison with both the original block-circulant construction and with random codes defined by dense parity-check matrices were performed. The proposed methodology provides quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes whose correcting capability substantially exceeds that of block-circulant codes without zero subblocks and, for certain parameter choices, approaches the Reiger bound. The resulting codes also provide greater flexibility in varying the number and size of blocks, enabling more versatile adjustment of code lengths and code rates. Finally, the burst correcting capability of the proposed construction is comparable to that of codes defined by dense parity-check matrices, while its quasi-cyclic structure enables more computationally efficient encoding and decoding procedures.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, quasi-cyclic codes, error bursts, Reiger bound
I. INTRODUCTION
Classical coding theory primarily addresses the correction of independent errors, which corresponds to the channel model without memory. Usually the code ability to correct errors is described in terms of error-correcting capability, i.e. the number of errors which may be corrected in any combination by code (using an appropriate decoder), in other cases – in terms of decoding error probability, which is commonly evaluated through extensive computer simulations [1], [2].
The state of real communication channels, affecting the noise level and the amount of corrupted transmitted data, is usually changing slowly, which leads to non-independent distortions in neighboring transmitted symbols, which is usually called as memory in the channel. Error vectors in this case are usually described as error bursts, and error-correcting capability of the code is connected to the maximal length of corrected error burst [3]. This effect is negative from

the point of view of error decoding probability provided by codes and decoders initially constructed for the memoryless channels, and to overcome it, in most communication systems the interleaving procedure is used, transforming the channel with memory to some memoryless channel, which is in some sense equivalent to the initial one. However, this procedure leads not only to increasing the latencies on transmitting and receiving sides, but also to degradation of potential capabilities of communication system [4]. Thus, decoding error patterns specific to given channel, including error bursts, is an important task.
In coding theory, the task of correcting the bursts of errors obtains much less attention than correcting independent errors. Essentially, it is limited by construction of burst-correction cyclic codes or usage of product or iterated schemes [3], [5]. In [6] the low-density parity-check (LDPC) construction is considered for the special case of error model when the errors are only in the beginning of the word. The paper [7] considers cylic codes, in [8], [9] the special subclasses of phased bursts with fixed location within the codeword are considered, as well as bursts of erasures. In [10] the transmission by LDPC codes via Gilbert-Elliott channel model is considered, when the number and lengths of bursts are random, and the modification of standard belief propagation decoding algorithm is proposed for the case when the channel parameters (Markov state transition probabilities) are known. In [11] the task of detecting the burst position in considered for the special channel combining Gilbert-Elliott model and channel with additive white Gaussian noise.
In the papers [12], [13] the burst-correction capabilities of LDPC codes are analyzed, including block-circulant constructions. Decoding algorithms for burst-correcting Gilbert codes and its extensions are proposed in [14]. However, in general case the task of constructing the codes for the channel with memory, particularly to correct single error bursts, remains poorly investigated.
In this paper the approach to construction the ensemble of the codes with relatively high correctable burst length is considered, using block-circulant construction of LDPC codes and masking procedure.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the notions of single error bursts correction and describes the masking procedure. In Section III it is shown that masking

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:15:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

may overcome the limitations of burst-correction capabilities of block-circulant constructions when correcting single bursts. Section IV presents a practical method for building quasicyclic codes and simulation results are given comparing the proposed constructions with other codes. Section V concludes the paper.

II. CODES FOR SINGLE ERROR BURSTS CORRECTION

Linear (n, k) code with rate R = k/n is defined by its (k × n) generator matrix G or (rH × n) parity-check matrix H, where rH ≥ n − k = r and GHT = 0. In this paper we consider the code definition by its parity-check matrix. When correcting independent errors, the capability of the code to correct any combination of given number of errors or less is connected to the parameter d0 – minimal distance of the code. Minimal distance may be determined by the parity-check matrix H – this is the number, for which any d0−1 columns of H are linearly independent, but there are d0 linearly dependent columns. The procedure of determining the minimal distance of the code is NP-hard [15].
We will call the single error burst of length b the vector of length n, for which the first and the last non-zero elements are on b positions from each other, in other words, all nonzero elements of error vector are gathered within b consecutive positions. Then the correcting capability of the code when correcting single error bursts may be naturally defined as maximal length bmax of the burst which may be corrected by the code (regardless its position and error pattern within the burst). This means that all error bursts of lengths not exceeding bmax should be in different cosets. The Reiger bound is known [3], according to which bmax ≤ ⌊r/2⌋. The value of burst length correspondent to Reiger bound with equality we will denote as bR.
In [13] the procedure of determining the bmax by the paritycheck matrix of the code is considered, basing on the fact that if code corrects any burst of length bmax or less, two such bursts cannot be in one coset and hence having the same syndrome. The existing of such bursts can be examined by considering different submatrices of H formed by bmax columns and calculating the rank of their concatenation from 2bmax columns. The complexity of this procedure is polynomial [13], though rather resource-intensive for the codes of large lengths.
Let us consider the binary parity-check (rH × n)-matrix, consisting of blocks:

H1,1 H1,2 . . . H1,ρ

H

=

H2,1

 

...

H2,2 ...

... ...

H2,ρ ...

  

.

(1)

Hγ,1 Hγ,2 . . . Hγ,ρ

Obviously, here γ < ρ. Note that the number of parity-check symbols of the code
defined by (1) equals to r = n − k = rank H ≤ rH. Such block constructions of parity-check matrices are used to determine the low-density parity-check codes [1], [16]. Any sparse submatrices may be used as blocks Hi,j, but most

often the degrees of (m × m) cyclic permutation matrix Cxi,j , xi,j ∈ 0, . . ., m − 1 are used. In this case n = ρm, rH = γm, and r ≤ rH − γ + 1. Code defined by H using Cxi,j is quasicyclic, and though matrices Cxi,j are only the special case of circulant matrices with unity weight of row (column), we will call such construction of H as block-circulant construction (BCC). Usage of BCC possess advantages for development of computationally efficient software and hardware implementations of encoding and decoding procedures [17]. In place of Hi,j the general circulant matrices, permutation matrices and so on may be used, but important case is usage of all-zero blocks Hi,j, then the resulting parity-check matrix H may be presented as

H = HM ⊗ HB,

(2)

where HB is a block matrix of the form (1) without zero subblocks, HM – masking (γ × ρ) binary matrix, in which zero elements corresponds to all-zero blocks in H, and ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product. Masking by zero subblocks is commonly used to improve the properties of the paritycheck matrix for iterative decoders, such as belief-propagation decoding and its variants [1].
Usage of BCC (without zero blocks) and some subclasses of BCC such as Gilbert codes for single bursts correction were considered, for example, in [13], [14]. It is known that for BCC the condition bmax < m is holds, since the sum of all columns within the block gives all-ones vector, and it is easy to indicate two bursts of length m consisting of all-ones at positions correspondent to blocks, they will have equal (all-ones) syndrome and hence these bursts are in the same coset. This leads to observation that to improve the burst correcting capability of the code, that is, the maximal length of correctable burst, the block-circulant matrix with low number of blocks should be considered, i.e. with small values of γ and ρ, for example, γ = 2 or γ = 3. Note that the code with parity-check matrix

II I

H = I C C2

(3)

(special case of Gilbert codes), where I is (m × m) unity matrix, has r = rH − 1 = 2m − 1, burst correcting capability bmax = m − 1 and lies on Reiger bound [12]. However, burst correcting capability of Gilbert construction with γ = 2 linearly decreases with growth of ρ. At the same time, for γ = 3 and any ρ > γ it is possible to select the cyclic permutation blocks in such a way that bmax = m − 1 (to simplify the search for such constructions the value of m is usually selected prime), but these codes less effective from the point of view of redundancy utilization and Reiger bound. Moreover, BCCs with low number of blocks may provide only codes with limited values of rates, and increasing the number of blocks leads to significant degradation of redundancy usage in terms of Reiger bound.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:15:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

15

10

5

0

0

20

40

60

80

100

Fig. 1. Burst correction capabilities of BCC with masking for m = 11.

III. USAGE OF MASKING FOR INCREASING THE BURST CORRECTION CAPABILITY

Consider the possibility of overcoming the upper bound bmax ≤ m−1 for BCC codes. Recall that this bound is caused by the formation of all-ones columns when all columns within the block column of H are added together. When a mask of zero blocks is applied to a block column, the structure of the single sum is disrupted, and if a different mask is chosen for each block column, the sum of columns within different blocks does not repeat, and the maximum length of the correctable burst is determined by more complex linear combinations of the columns in the parity-check matrix.
Thus, consider BCC with γ = 3, ρ = 4. Choose the mask

1 1 0 1

HM = 1 1 1 0 ,

(4)

1011

in which there are no identical columns, and generate the elements of the ensemble (1) with cyclic permutation matrices Cxi,j as blocks with random uniform selection of values xi,j in the interval [0, . . . , m − 1], with further masking according to (2). For the resulting codes, we will determine the values of bmax using the procedure described in [13]. For m = 11, the results for a sample of 100 codes are shown in Fig.1.
Without using a mask for the initial codes, bmax ≤ 10, while r = rH − 2 = γm − 2 = 31, and the Reiger bound bR = 15. For codes obtained using masking, in 75 out of 100 cases, we have bmax > 10, and in 6 cases, the maximum value for this considered sample was bmax = 15. For these codes, rH = r = 33, and the Reiger bound is bR = 16. Thus, masking allows obtaining the codes that have both a higher burst error-correction capability and are closer to the Reiger bound.
Now consider the mask

1 1 0 1

HM = 0 1 1 0 .

(5)

0011

This mask satisfies the same properties as the one given in (4) – it uses such zero-masking that will not give the same columns. For the same sample of 100 initial codes, the codes obtained by masking have bmax > 10 in 42 out of 100 cases, and bmax = 15 in 2 cases. Thus, there is a slight decrease in the probability of receiving codes with improved error-correction capability, but the maximum burst error-correction capability of 15 is still achieved.
Let us compare the obtained results with (44, 11)-codes, defined by random (33 × 44) parity-check matrices with probability of non-zero elements 0.5 and rank 33 – these are codes with the same parameters as obtained earlier by masking. Such codes we will call random in what follows, although it should be noted that BCC can also be considered as random codes from a probabilistic ensemble. A sample of 100 “dense” random codes has bmax > 10 in 97 cases, and in 3 cases bmax = 15. Thus, these codes are better than BCC before masking and have the same correcting capability as codes with masking, however, a smaller probability of obtaining the maximum correcting capability. In addition, they do not possess a quasi-cyclic structure, which can complicate the procedures of encoding and decoding.
Table I summarizes the results obtained for the considered constructions, as well as similar results for block sizes m = 19 and m = 29. In the table, BCCM means codes with masking according to (4), and bmax is the maximum correctable burst length found from the sample. In general, it can be observed that the construction with the considered masking matrix for these code parameters allows construction of quasi-cyclic codes whose burst error-correcting capability is close to the Reiger bound and comparable to random codes.
TABLE I BURST CORRECTING CAPABILITIES OF BCCM WITH γ = 3, ρ = 4,
AND “DENSE” RANDOM CODES
Codes m n k bmax bR
BCCM 11 44 11 15 16 Random – 44 11 15 16 BCCM 19 76 19 26 28 Random – 76 19 26 28 BCCM 29 116 29 42 43 Random – 116 29 41 43
Experiments show that additional limitations on values xi,j in the construction (1) to avoid short cycles in Tanner graph, or the use of general permutation blocks instead of cyclic permutation, do not improve the characteristics of the resulting codes, but can make them worse or decrease the probability of finding codes with the best parameters.
In the next section, we will consider the methodology for constructing masks for the more general case of BCC codes.
IV. CONSTRUCTION OF A MASKING MATRIX FOR BCC CODES
In the previous section, we showed in a particular example that the application of masking to a block-circulant

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:15:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

construction allows overcoming the restriction in the size of the block of a circulant for maximal correctable burst length and allows to obtain codes with a burst correcting capability close to the Reiger bound. However, as we have seen, the choice of masking transformation affects the probability of obtaining codes with good error-correction capability, and the idea of constructing masks (4) and (5) based on avoiding identical columns is applicable only to a very small set of parameters, especially since it seems that the column weights of the masking matrices should not be too small.
In the case of low-density codes for correcting independent errors, masking matrices are typically chosen to improve the structure of the corresponding Tanner graphs, increase the graph’s girth, and reduce the number of trapping sets [1], [18]. Let’s consider the properties that a masking matrix should have when constructing codes for correcting error bursts.
Consider some base matrix (1) without zero blocks:

HB = [h1, h2, . . . , hρ],

(6)

where each element hj in (6) is block column:

H1,j 

hj

=

H2,j

 

...

  

,

(7)

Hγ,j

where Hi,j – (m×m)-blocks, which are permutation matrices (for block-permutation construction) or cyclic permutation matrices (for BCC).
Recall that the sum of the columns of the (m × m) blocks in HB, i.e. the columns in any block column hi, gives an all-ones column, since the blocks are permutation matrices. This means that the sum of the m columns in any two block columns hi and hj gives the same (all-ones) syndrome, and thus there will be bursts of length m that lie in the same coset. To overcome this limitation, some blocks of the check matrix can be made zero, in which case the sum of the columns of a block gives a column in which ones correspond to nonzero blocks and zeros correspond to zero blocks. In order to ensure that two different hi and hj do not produce the same syndrome, the zeros added through masking must form different combinations, which means that each column of the masking matrix HM must be unique.
Now, let’s apply masking in accordance with (2) using some (γ × ρ)-matrices

HM = [h(1M), h(2M), . . . , hρ(M)],

where h(jM) is the j-th column of HM , and the matrix H = [h1, h2, . . . , hρ] is obtained. Note that now the blocks Hi,j in
(7) can be zero blocks. Suppose that by masking the upper
bound of block size m for the length of the corrected burst is
overcome, and consider the next possible upper bound.
Let (hi, hi+1) and (hj, hj+1) be two pairs of adjacent blocks in H, then they correspond to the columns (hi(M), h(i+M1)) and (hj(M), h(jM +1)) in the masking matrix, and all these columns are distinct. However, it is obvious that if

hi(M) ⊕ hi(+M1) = h(jM) ⊕ h(jM +1),

(8)

the sum of all columns in (hi, hi+1) and (hj, hj+1) will again
give two identical syndromes, and there will be bursts of length
2m in one coset. This will give a bound of bmax ≤ 2m − 1.
Continuing the similar consideration for the three blocks
(hi, hi+1, hi+2) and (hj, hj+1, hj+2) and the corresponding columns of the masking matrix (h(iM), h(i+M1), hi(+M2)) and (h(jM), h(jM +1), h(jM +2)), we conclude that in order for two bursts of length 3m not to end up in the same coset, it is necessary that no linear combination of the columns (h(iM), h(i+M1), h(i+M2)) gave a result that coincided with any linear combination of the columns (h(jM), hj(M +1), hj(M +2)), in other words, the condition

rank([h(iM), h(i+M1), hi(+M2), h(jM), hj(M +1), hj(M +2)]) = 6 (9)

should holds. Of course, this assumes that γ ≥ 6. If the rank in (9) is less than 6, then we obtain the bound bmax ≤ 3m− 1.
Generalizing the above reasoning, we obtain that for codes obtained from BCC using masking, the length of the corrected burst is bmax ≥ κm − 1 if 2κ ≤ γ, and for any i ∈ [1, . . . , ρ − 2b+1], j ∈ [i+b, . . . , ρ−b+1], b ∈ [1, . . . , κ] for the masking matrix should holds:

rank([h(iM), . . . , h(i+Mb)−1, h(jM), . . . , hj(M +b)−1]) = 2b, rank([h(iM), . . . , hi(+Mb)−1, hj(M), . . . , hj(M +b)−1]) < 2b,

b < κ,
b = κ. (10)

For b = 1, we get a check for the uniqueness of the columns

of the matrix HM , for b = 2 we get a check (8), for b = 3

we get a check (9), and so on.

However, it is easy to see that the procedure considered

and the rule derived in (10) is nothing more than the result of

applying the algorithm for determining the burst correcting capability b(mMax) of a code with a parity-check matrix HM that gives bm(Max) = κ − 1. This allows us to formulate the

following heuristic for constructing quasi-cyclic BCC codes

for correcting single error bursts for given γ, ρ, and m:

1: Search for a masking matrix HM with as large burst correcting capability bm(Max) as possible, preferably close to the Reiger bound, in this case bm(Max) = ⌊γ/2⌋.
2: Search for basic matrices HB giving as large burst correcting capability bmax as possible for the code given
by (2).

Let us consider the application of this technique by exam-
ples.
First, consider the Gilbert code given by (3) and lying on the Reiger bound. Let m = 55, this will give a (165, 56)-code with the burst correcting capability bmax = 54, while for such
(M )
parameters the Reiger bound is bR = 54. Let’s try to build a code with approximately similar pa-
rameters using the proposed technique. Let γ = 10, ρ = 15, m = 11. The Reiger bound for the masking matrix will be γ/2 = 5. A computer search allows us to find the matrix HM for which bm(Max) = 5 quite quickly. We will generate basic matrices HB for m = 11, after applying masking this will give (165, 55)-codes, the Reiger bound for these parameters is bR = 55. Using the Matlab development environment, a search for about 4 minutes among 1000 random HB for the already

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:15:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

constructed HM allowed to find 5 codes with bmax = 52. This results in slightly worse codes than Gilbert codes, but still with comparable burst error correction capability.
A search among “dense” random (165, 55)-codes only found codes with bmax = 51, and it took about 12 minutes to generate and verify 1000 such codes. Of course, it is possible that a longer search would have found codes with higher bmax.
The simulation results are summarized in Table II. Now consider the BCC with γ = 3, ρ = 4, m = 44. With a Reiger bound of 65, these codes can only correct bursts up to 43. Applying the proposed search method for γ = 12, ρ = 16, m = 11 allowed us to find codes with bmax = 63. Among random codes with similar parameters, we found codes with bmax = 62, but the simulation time for random codes was significantly longer. These results, as well as codes with the same γ and ρ but longer lengths, are also shown in Table II.

TABLE II BURST CORRECTING CAPABILITIES OF BCC, BCCM
AND RANDOM CODES

Codes

γ ρm n

k

b(mMax) bR(M ) bmax bR

Gilbert 2 3 55 165 56 –

–

54 54

BCCM 10 15 11 165 55 5

5

52 55

Random – – – 165 55 –

–

51 55

BCC

3 4 44 176 45 –

–

43 65

BCCM 12 16 11 176 44 6

6

63 66

Random – – – 176 44 –

–

62 66

BCC

3 4 76 304 78 –

–

75 113

BCCM 12 16 19 304 76 6

6 110 114

Random – – – 304 76 –

– 109 114

BCC

3 9 44 396 266 –

–

43 65

BCCM 12 36 11 396 264 4

6

54 66

Random – – – 396 264 –

–

60 66

Finally, Table II shows the results for codes with higher rate. As can be seen from all the results, with the increase in the number of blocks in the BCC, the burst correcting capability of these codes significantly decreases relative to the Reiger bound, and for values of γ > 3, these codes will become even worse, as they will have increasing redundancy and decreasing rate but the same limitation of bmax ≤ m − 1. By using masking, it is possible to construct codes that are comparable in their burst error correcting capability to random codes, and lie close to the Reiger bound.
The choice of values (γ, ρ) in the approach with masking can be much wider than for the examples considered in (4), (5), giving a larger set of achievable code lengths and rates. At the same time, the values of (γ, ρ) can be small enough to make the search in step 1 of the proposed methodology fast enough, and experiments show that step 2 is faster than for “dense” random codes.
V. CONCLUSION
This article discusses the construction of quasi-cyclic codes for correcting single error bursts. The article considers a method for finding codes from probabilistic ensemble based on masking the basic matrix of block-circulant codes with zero blocks. The article proposes a method for constructing

a masking matrix based on maximizing its burst correcting
capability. Experiments have been conducted to compare the obtained
codes with both conventional block-circulant constructions and
random codes defined by dense parity-check matrices. The
obtained codes significantly improve the burst error-correcting
capability of block-circulant construction, bringing it closer to
the Reiger bound and making it comparable to random codes,
while reducing the search time as compared to random codes
and providing a quasi-cyclic structure that enhances the com-
putational efficiency of encoding and decoding procedures. The article was prepared within the framework of the Basic
Research Program at HSE University, Internet of Things and
Cyber-Physical Systems Laboratory, St. Petersburg School of
Computer Science, Physics and Technology.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Lin and W. Ryan, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. Cambridge: Cambridge university press, 2009.
[2] T. K. Moon, Error correction coding: mathematical methods and algorithms. Wiley-Interscience, 2005.
[3] S. Lin and D. Costello, Error Control Coding. Pearson, 2004. [4] J. Wolfowitz, “Memory increases capacity,” Information and Control,
vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 423–428, 1967. [5] N. Xie, T. Zhang, and E. F. Haratsch, “Improving Burst Error Tolerance
of LDPC-Centric Coding Systems in Read Channel,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 933–941, Mar. 2010. [6] M. Yang, Z. Pan, and I. B. Djordjevic, “FPGA-based burst-error performance analysis and optimization of regular and irregular SD-LDPC codes for 50G-PON and beyond,” Optics Express, vol. 31, no. 6, p. 10936, Mar. 2023. [7] S. Vafi, “Cyclic Low Density Parity Check Codes With the Optimum Burst Error Correcting Capability,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 192 065– 192 072, 2020. [8] L. Song, Q. Huang, and Z. Wang, “Construction of Multiple-BurstCorrection Codes in Transform Domain and Its Relation to LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 40– 54, Jan. 2020. [9] X. Xiao, B. Vasic, S. Lin, J. Li, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes With Parity-Check Matrices of Column Weight Two or More for Correcting Phased Bursts of Erasures,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 2812–2823, May 2021. [10] A. Eckford, F. Kschischang, and S. Pasupathy, “Analysis of low-density parity-check codes for the gilbert-elliott channel,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3872–3889, 2005. [11] L. Li, J. Lv, Y. Li, X. Dai, and X. Wang, “Burst error identification method for ldpc coded systems,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 1489–1493, 2024. [12] E. Krouk and A. Ovchinnikov, “Exact Burst-Correction Capability of Gilbert Codes,” Information and Control Systems, no. 1, pp. 80–87, Jan. 2016. [13] A. M. Veresova, M. N. Isaeva, and A. A. Ovchinnikov, “Estimation of independent errors and bursts correction capability of linear codes,” in 2024 Conference of Young Researchers in Electrical and Electronic Engineering (ElCon), 2024, pp. 23–27. [14] A. M. Veresova and A. A. Ovchinnikov, “Burst detection and correction for gilbert codes and its qc-ldpc extensions,” in 2024 IEEE International Multi-Conference on Engineering, Computer and Information Sciences (SIBIRCON), 2024, pp. 47–51. [15] E. Berlekamp, R. McEliece, and H. van Tilborg, “On the inherent intractability of certain coding problems (corresp.),” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 384–386, 1978. [16] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-8, Jan 1962. [17] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006. [18] A. Price and J. Hall, “A survey on trapping sets and stopping sets,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.05996

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:15:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

