2025 XIX International Symposium on Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems (Redundancy) | 979-8-3315-4992-3/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/Redundancy68069.2025.11301418

On the Correcting Capability of Hard-Decision Error-and-Erasure Iterative Decoding of LDPC
Codes for Data Storage

Vladimir Kuzmin, Ilia Chevtaev, Maya Chernaya Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia
{vlvlkuzmin, iachevtaev, machernaia}@edu.hse.ru;

Alexey Frolov, Pavel Rybin Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology,
Moscow, Russia {al.frolov, p.rybin}@skoltech.ru

Abstract—Modern storage systems such as NAND flash solidstate drives are increasingly exposed to channels where both errors and erasures coexist. Classical Reed–Solomon (RS) codes provide strong error-and-erasure protection but suffer from high decoding complexity and latency, limiting their applicability in high-throughput storage architectures. Low-Density ParityCheck (LDPC) codes, with iterative message-passing decoders, offer near-capacity performance at low complexity and are therefore the preferred solution in practice. While the decoding behavior of LDPC codes has been well studied for pure error or pure erasure channels, the mixed error-and-erasure case has received less attention, despite its direct relevance to storage. In this work, we analyze the potential correction capability of iterative error-and-erasure decoding for LDPC codes under harddecision channels. Using density evolution, we derive recursion equations for the joint evolution of error and erasure probabilities and establish bounds on the region of correctable error–erasure patterns. The presented results provide theoretical correction bounds that complement existing studies on error-only and erasure-only channels, and offer guidelines for LDPC code and decoder design in storage systems where errors and erasures naturally coexist.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, iterative decoding, error-anderasure channels, hard-decision decoding, density evolution, correction capability bounds, data storage systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern high-density storage systems, such as NAND flash SSDs, face growing reliability challenges due to various impairments. Two dominant failure mechanisms can be distinguished: random errors, arising from cell wear, retention loss, or inter-cell interference, and erasures, caused by unreadable memory cells, synchronization losses, or uncorrectable channel distortions. Consequently, practical storage channels often exhibit ternary outputs: correctly received symbols, erroneous hard decisions, and erasures. While error-control coding for pure-error [1] and pure-erasure [2] channels has been extensively studied, scenarios where errors and erasures coexist have received comparatively little attention.
Classical storage systems relied heavily on Reed–Solomon (RS) codes, exploiting their maximum distance separable
The research was carried at Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology and supported by the Russian Science Foundation (project no. 23-11-00340), https://rscf.ru/en/project/23-11-00340/

(MDS) property to correct combined errors and erasures efficiently [3]. However, algebraic RS decoding has quadratic complexity and exhibits high decoding latency, making it increasingly impractical for modern large-block storage and high-throughput systems. Furthermore, the rigid block structure of RS codes limits their scalability to the very long block lengths demanded in current devices.
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [4] have become the coding method of choice in advanced storage systems. LDPC codes achieve high performance using iterative decoding with low complexity [5]. In practice, SSD controllers typically adopt a two-phase decoding strategy: a fast harddecision LDPC decode is performed first, and if decoding fails, the controller initiates soft-decision LDPC decoding using multiple threshold reads. This design balances reliability and latency: hard-decision decoding ensures high throughput in most cases, while soft-decision decoding is invoked only rarely, when the bit error rate (BER) becomes too high [6].
In practice, a channel containing both errors and erasures poses special challenges. Preliminary analyses of LDPC iterative decoding in hybrid error/erasure environments [7] suggest that introducing erasures can either help or harm decoding, depending on their distribution relative to the code’s Tanner graph structure. For example, assigning unreliable symbols as erasures rather than hard decisions may reduce the impact of trapping sets, thereby improving decoding convergence, but excessive erasures may instead stall decoding.
This paper investigates the iterative error-and-erasure correction algorithm for LDPC codes under hard-decision channels. Unlike soft-decision decoding, which relies on detailed reliability metrics, we assume only ternary hard outputs, reflecting the operational constraints of storage devices aiming to minimize read latency and controller complexity.
By systematically addressing the joint error-and-erasure setting in hard-decision LDPC decoding, this work closes an existing gap between theory and practice. It offers insights for code and decoder design in modern storage systems, where reliability demands, density scaling, and latency constraints

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

A. LDPC Code

Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [4] are linear
block codes defined by a sparse parity-check matrix H ∈ {0, 1}m×n, where n is the codeword length and m = n − k
is the number of parity constraints. A valid codeword x ∈ {0, 1}n satisfies the condition

HxT = 0 over F2.

(1)

The sparsity of H enables low-complexity, iterative message-

passing decoding, which can be efficiently implemented in

parallel hardware architectures.

LDPC codes are classified as either regular or irregular ac-

cording to the uniformity of node degrees in H. In a (dv, dc)-

regular LDPC code, each column of H contains exactly dv

ones and each row contains dc ones, leading to the design

code

rate

R

≥

1−

dv dc

.

In

contrast,

irregular

LDPC

codes

allow variable node and check node degrees to vary according

to degree distributions defined from the edge perspective as

λ(x) = λixi−1,

ρ(x) = ρj xj−1,

(2)

i

j

where λi and ρj denote the fraction of edges connected to

variable nodes of degree i and check nodes of degree j,

respectively. Thus, in this case the design code rate is defined

as follows:

R ≥ 1 − ρj / λi .

j

i

j

i

Properly optimized irregular degree distributions can significantly improve decoding thresholds and approach channel capacity [5].
The matrix H can be represented graphically by a bipartite Tanner graph [8], consisting of variable nodes (VNs) corresponding to code bits and check nodes (CNs) corresponding to parity constraints (see Fig. 1). An edge connects VN vi to CN cj if and only if Hj,i = 1. Iterative message-passing decoding operates on this graph by exchanging messages along the edges between VNs and CNs. The sparse nature of the Tanner graph allows for efficient parallel updates, which is particularly advantageous in storage systems requiring low latency.

Fig. 1. An example Tanner graph for a parity-check matrix of size (3x5) [9]
The iterative process can be visualized as an unfolded Tanner graph (see Fig. 2), where each decoding iteration corresponds to one layer of message exchange. This unfolding perspective is central to analytical tools such as density evolution and extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) analysis, which

track the propagation of error and erasure probabilities through iterations. In the context of this work, such representations are instrumental in quantifying the potential correction capability and convergence behavior of the error-and-erasure iterative decoding algorithm described in the following sections.
Fig. 2. Example Tanner graph unfolding
B. Channel Model We consider a discrete memoryless channel with input
alphabet X = {0, 1} and output alphabet Y = {0, 1, ?}, where the symbol “?” denotes an erasure. A transmitted bit x ∈ X is received as:
 0, with probability 1 − τ − ε,  y = 1, with probability τ, ?, with probability ε, where τ is the symbol error probability and ε is the erasure probability. We assume independent impairments across symbols. This model captures practical storage channels, where retention errors, cell-to-cell interference, and read noise manifest as errors, while unreadable cells or threshold ambiguities are represented as erasures.
C. Iterative Error-and-Erasure Decoding Consider a channel with errors and erasures as described
above. For convenience, we introduce the following substitution:
1 −→ −1, 0 −→ +1, ? −→ 0.
This mapping allows us to replace the XOR operation (addition modulo 2) with ordinary multiplication, simplifying message computations in the iterative process.
The Error-and-Erasure (EaE) decoding algorithm operates iteratively on the Tanner graph (see Alg. 1). Its operation can be summarized as follows:
• Each VN is initialized with the value received from the channel and transmits this value to all connected CNs.
• Each CN generates outgoing messages for all neighboring VNs based on the values received from the remaining connected variables as the product of these values.
• Each VN collects messages from its neighboring CNs, sums them together with its initial channel value, and computes new outgoing messages according to the sign of this sum. These updated messages are then sent back to the corresponding CNs.
• After completing the predefined number of iterations, each VN makes a final decision based on the sign of the sum of its initial value and all messages received from its neighboring CNs in the last iteration.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 Iterative Error-and-Erasure Decoding Algorithm

1: Input: Received vector y ∈ {−1, 0, +1}n, Tanner graph

(V, C, E)

2: Initialization:

3: for all variable nodes v ∈ V do

4: for all c ∈ N (v) do

5:

mv(0→) c ← yv

6: end for

7: end for

8: for ℓ = 0, 1, . . . , Lmax − 1 do 9: Check-node update:

10: for all check nodes c ∈ C do

11:

for all v ∈ N (c) do

12:

mc(ℓ→) v ← u∈N (c)\v mu(ℓ→) c

13:

end for

14: end for

15: Variable-node update:

16: for all variable nodes v ∈ V do

17:

for all c ∈ N (v) do

18:

s ← yv + d∈N (v)\c m(dℓ→) v

19:

m(vℓ→+c1) ← sign(s)

20:

end for

21: end for

22: end for

23: Final decision:

24: for all variable nodes v ∈ V do

25:

xˆv ← sign yv +

c∈N

(v)

m(Lmax
c→v

)

26: end for

27: Output: Estimated codeword xˆ

III. DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS
To analyze the asymptotic performance of LDPC codes under iterative Error-and-Erasure decoding, we employ the method of density evolution (DE) [5]. In this framework, the Tanner graph is assumed to be cycle-free in the limit as block length n → ∞, and the probability distributions of messages exchanged between nodes can be tracked across iterations.
Without loss of generality, we assume that the all-zero codeword is transmitted. Let the degree distributions for variable and check nodes be denoted by λ(x) and ρ(x), respectively. Consider the variable node at iteration ℓ + 1 (the top node in Fig. 2), which depends on messages generated by check nodes and variable nodes at iteration ℓ. Let εc(ℓ→) v and τc(→ ℓ)v represent the probabilities that a message sent from a check node to a variable node at iteration ℓ is an erasure or an error, respectively. Similarly, let ε(vℓ→) c and τv(→ ℓ) c denote the probabilities of erasure and error messages from a variable node to a check node at iteration ℓ.
A check node sends an erasure message if at least one of the incoming messages (excluding the considered edge) is an erasure. Therefore,
εc(ℓ→) v = 1 − ρ(1 − εv(ℓ→) c).

If no erasure messages are present among the remaining inputs, the check node sends an erroneous message if the number of erroneous inputs is odd. This yields

τc(→ ℓ) v

=

ρ(1

− εv(ℓ→) c)

− ρ(1 − ε(vℓ→) c 2

− 2τv(→ ℓ) c) .

To compute the outgoing message probabilities at a variable node, we aggregate the incoming messages from adjacent check nodes. Taking into account the channel error and erasure probabilities and the decision rule of the decoder, the probability of sending an erasure message is given by

dv

ε(vℓ→+c1) =

λl

l=1

k1,k2,k3: j∈{−1,0,+1}:

k1+k2+k3=l−1 j−k2+k3=0

l−1 k1, k2, k3

× (ε(cℓ→) v)k1 (τc(→ ℓ) v)k2 (1 − εc(ℓ→) v − τc(→ ℓ) v)k3

× (τ δj,−1 + εδj,0 + (1 − τ − ε)δj,+1) ,

where τ and ε denote the channel error and erasure probabilities, respectively, and δi,j is the Kronecker delta:

1, i = j, δi,j = 0, i ̸= j.

Similarly, the probability of sending an erroneous message from a variable node is

dv

τv(→ ℓ+c1) =

λl

l=1

k1,k2,k3: j∈{−1,0,+1}:

k1+k2+k3=l−1 j−k2+k3<0

l−1 k1, k2, k3

× (εc(ℓ→) v)k1 (τc(→ ℓ) v)k2 (1 − εc(ℓ→) v − τc(→ ℓ) v)k3

× (τ δj,−1 + εδj,0 + (1 − τ − ε)δj,+1) .

The difference between the two expressions lies in the decision condition (see third sum limits of the both equations): an erasure is produced when the sum of messages and the channel symbol equals zero, while an error occurs when this sum is negative.
By iterating these recursions, we can characterize the evolution of erasure and error probabilities across decoding iterations under different channel conditions. The DE analysis provides insight into how erasures can either mitigate or exacerbate the effects of errors, and enables evaluation of the potential correcting capability of the considered Error-andErasure decoding scheme.

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the iterative error-and-erasure decoding algorithm for both regular and irregular LDPC codes. The theoretical predictions obtained via density evolution (DE) are compared with Monte Carlo decoding simulations. For all experiments, the decoding process is limited to 10 iterations, and a bit error rate (BER) threshold of 10−7 is used to determine convergence. Performance is analyzed under varying channel error and erasure probabilities in order to illustrate the correcting capability of the decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10−2

pτ

10−3

10−4 0 5 · 10−2 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 pε

DE (optimized poly) Shannon bound

Experiment (optimized poly) Ideal DE bound

Fig. 4. Comparison of DE predictions and experimental decoding performance for the optimized irregular LDPC code. The Shannon bound and the ideal DE bound are shown for reference.

We begin by considering the well-known regular (3, 6) LDPC code. The corresponding results are shown in Fig. 3, which presents the dependence of the decoding error probability pτ on the erasure probability pε. The figure includes both the DE predictions and the experimentally measured decoding performance, as well as the Shannon bound and the ideal DE bound. The latter represents the best decoding performance achievable by any LDPC ensemble at a given pε, assuming degree distributions are optimized pointwise.
From Fig. 3, several observations follow. First, a slight increase in the erasure probability initially decreases the error probability, illustrating that, in the mixed error–erasure setting, a moderate number of erasures can reduce harmful error propagation. Second, the DE predictions match the experimental results throughout the entire range of pε, confirming the accuracy of the analytical DE model in the considered decoding regime. Finally, both experimental and theoretical curves follow the ideal DE bound with good agreement.
Next, we consider an irregular LDPC code, whose degree distribution was optimized to improve performance under the mixed error–erasure channel. To construct such a degree distribution, we used the differential evolution method [10], restricting the maximum variable node degree to 10. The optimization criterion was chosen as
2pτ (pε = 0) + pε(pτ = 0),
which reflects the combined decoding performance in pureerror and pure-erasure regimes. The resulting optimized variable node degree distribution is

λ(x) = 0.52024 x2+0.21105 x3+0.10236 x6+0.16635 x8.

10−2

pτ

10−3

10−4 0 5 · 10−2 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 pε

DE (3,6) Shannon bound

Experiment (3,6) Ideal DE bound

Fig. 3. Comparison between density evolution (DE) and experimental decoding performance for the (3, 6) LDPC code. The Shannon bound and the ideal DE bound represent theoretical performance limits for each pε.

Fig. 4 shows the decoding performance for this optimized irregular LDPC code. As in the regular case, the DE predictions match the experimental results. Moreover, the irregular code performs closer to the ideal DE bound across the entire range of pε, demonstrating a clear performance improvement over the regular (3, 6) code.
A direct comparison between the regular (3, 6) code and the optimized irregular LDPC code is presented in Fig. 5. The irregular code consistently outperforms the regular one for all considered values of pε, confirming the advantage of optimizing the degree distribution for the mixed error–erasure channel. For the same erasure probability, the irregular code achieves a smaller decoding error probability, indicating greater robustness to errors.
Finally, Fig. 6 illustrates how the bit error rate (BER) of the regular (3, 6) LDPC code depends on the channel error probability pτ for several fixed values of the erasure probability pε. The figure shows that, for moderate levels of erasure, the BER decreases for the same pτ , confirming the behavior predicted by DE: erasures can break harmful correlations and thus improve decoding performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BER

100

10−1

10−2

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

pτ

·10−2

pε = 10−1 pε = 1.8×10−5 pε = 5.6×10−3

pε = 10−6 pε = 3.2×10−4

Fig. 6. Experimental bit error rate (BER) as a function of the channel error probability pτ for several fixed values of pε using the (3, 6) LDPC code.

V. CONCLUSION
This paper investigated the correcting capability of iterative error-and-erasure decoding for LDPC codes under a mixed error–erasure channel, a model of practical relevance for modern data storage systems. Using density evolution, we derived explicit recursion equations governing the evolution of error and erasure probabilities, enabling an analytical characterization of the decoder’s asymptotic behavior. The analysis revealed how erasures can either impede or facilitate convergence, depending on their interaction with erroneous messages, and showed that moderate erasure levels may improve decoding performance by suppressing harmful error propagation.
The theoretical predictions were validated through Monte Carlo simulations for both regular and irregular LDPC codes. For the regular (3, 6) ensemble, the density evolution results closely matched experimental data across a wide range of channel parameters. We further demonstrated that an optimized irregular degree distribution, obtained via differential evolution, provides improved robustness to mixed errors and erasures and performs closer to the ideal density evolution bound than the regular code. Experimental comparisons confirmed the superiority of the optimized irregular ensemble at all considered operating points.
Overall, the results illustrate the potential of densityevolution-guided design for enhancing the correction capability of LDPC codes in scenarios where errors and erasures coexist. Future work may include analyzing more sophisticated update rules, extending the framework to spatially coupled and other LDPC code constructions.

10−2

pτ

10−3

10−4 0 5 · 10−2 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 pε

Experiment (optimized poly)

Experiment (3,6)

Fig. 5. Experimental comparison between the regular (3, 6) LDPC code and the irregular LDPC code with an optimized degree distribution. The optimized code provides consistently better performance.

REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, Feb 2001.
[2] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, Feb 2001.
[3] S. B. Wicker and V. K. Bhargava, Reed-Solomon Codes and Their Applications. IEEE Press, 1994.
[4] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. MIT Press, 1963. [5] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of
capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, Feb 2001. [6] K. Zhao et al., “Ldpc-in-ssd: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. USENIX FAST, Feb 2013. [7] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 3, May 1998. [8] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, 1981. [9] S. J. Johnson, “Introducing low-density parity-check codes,” ACoRN Spring School, School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Newcastle, Australia, May 2010, version 1.11.3. [10] U. K. Chakraborty, Ed., Advances in Differential Evolution, ser. Studies in Computational Intelligence. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Jul. 2008, vol. 143.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:17:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

