IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

4167

SC–GC-LDPC for NAND Flash Memory: Construction and Decoding
Jinhong Mo , Xiongfei Zhai , Member, IEEE, Min Yu , Yi Fang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Guojun Han , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—With the continuous improvement of data memory density, as the common solution for error correction of NAND flash, the low-density-parity-check (LDPC) code faces more challenges, such as the increasing code length requirements, the worse raw bit error rates (RBERs), and the frequently varied channels. In this article, a new (37536, 33672) spatially coupled and globally coupled LDPC (SC–GC-LDPC) code is constructed to address the above challenge, which outperforms the traditional globally coupled LDPC (GC-LDPC) code with the gaps of 0.065 and 0.08 dB by exploiting the layered sum–product algorithm (SPA) and the layered normalized min–sum (NMS) algorithm, respectively. In the flash channel, the SC–GC-LDPC code also shows superior error correction performance than the conventional GC-LDPC codes with 25% improvement. Due to its special structure of the check matrix, an improved two-level decoding algorithm (ITLA) and an improved two-phase decoding algorithm (ITPA) are proposed in this article. Specifically, the algorithms exploit the adjacent subcodes to correct the faulty ones, which reduces the number of check-node-updating (CNU). For the case of single subcode errors, the simulation results show that the number of CNU is reduced by ranging from 6.64% to 31.14% by applying our proposed algorithms, leading to significant improvement of throughput. Compared with the conventional algorithms, the ITLA and ITPA only show slight performance loss. Moreover, ITPA also provides high flexibility of decoding in the NAND flash memory, which can achieve the balance between the error-correction performance and the throughput.
Index Terms—Globally coupled low-density-parity-check (GCLDPC), NAND flash memory, program/erase (P/E) cycles, two-level decoding, two-phase decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
S INCE the 21st century, an explosive growth of data has been shown due to the rapid development of information technology. The advancement of storage technology, ranging
Received 3 December 2024; revised 17 March 2025; accepted 18 April 2025. Date of publication 23 April 2025; date of current version 22 October 2025. The work of Xiongfei Zhai was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62301166, and in part by the Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou under Grant 2025A04J2904. The work of Guojun Han was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62471151 and Grant U2001203. The work of Yi Fang was supported in part by the NSF of China under Grant 62322106. Part of this work has been submitted to ICCC 2024 [2] [DOI: 10.1109/ICCC62479.2024.10681799]. This article was recommended by Associate Editor G. Di Natale. (Corresponding authors: Xiongfei Zhai; Guojun Han.)
The authors are with the Department of School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: 1393044175@qq.com; zhaixiongfei@gdut.edu.cn; 844535734@qq.com; fangyi@gdut.edu.cn; gjhan@gdut.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2025.3563802

from optical discs to mechanical hard drives and solid-state drives, has significantly enhanced capacity and performance. However, the pace of improvement lags behind the rapid growth of data. It is indicated that the global data volume is expected to increase from 163 to 175 ZB by 2025, while the corresponding storage capacity will only reach 22 ZB at that time [1]. Thus, a significant challenge in terms of storage capability is now an urgent topic. The current classification of storage media is based on the different physical materials, namely, the optical storage media, the magnetic storage media, and the semiconductor storage media. Among them, flash memory media is extensively utilized in the smart phones and the computer storage systems due to its high-density storage, low power consumption, and nonvolatility. Notably, 3-D flash memory has superseded 2-D flash memory in storage systems as the predominant storage media [3].
Over the past decade, in tandem with the rapid advancements in NAND flash technology, the storage capacity of a single NAND flash unit has progressively increased from single-level cell (SLC) to multilevel cell (MLC), trinarylevel cell (TLC), and even quad-level cell (QLC). In order to further enhance the density of flash storage, the NAND flash manufacturing process has transitioned entirely from 2D planar technology to 3-D vertical stacking technology. The increase in storage capacity and density also renders flash memory units more susceptible to various types of noise, thereby introducing a significant challenge to the reliability of NAND flash memory [4].
Error correction code (ECC) technology serves as an effective approach to enhance the reliability of stored data. The Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) code [5] was the first one to be employed in the solid-state disk (SSD) master, which is a hard-decision decoding technique for the channel error correction in SLC and MLC flash memories [6]. The error correction capability of BCH code, however, is limited and falls short in addressing the excessively high raw bit error rates (RBERs). Recently, the low-density-parity-check (LDPC) code is extensively employed for ensuring data reliability, owing to its inherent advantages of facilitating soft decision and exhibiting robust error correction capabilities [7]. The LDPC code employs a distinctive and iterative decoding algorithm, which initially acquires Log Likelihood Ratio (LLR) information per bit and subsequently iteratively updates to rectify bit errors [8]. However, the decoding throughput is directly proportional to the iterative convergence speed, as this process requires a certain amount of time. The implementation of decoders for NAND flash also face the significant challenges due to

1937-4151 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4168

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

the required large code lengths and high code rates. While the un-folding fully parallel architecture [9] and the frameinterleaved pipeline architecture [10] aim to boost the speed, they incur the high hardware costs. In [11], this issue has been addressed by proposing a hardware-optimized architecture for the large circulant permutation matrix (CPM) LDPC codes, which jointly optimizes the decoding performance, the scheduling, the complexity, and the throughput. Concurrently, Liu et al. [12] analyzed the error floor phenomenon via an unified penalty gradient descent bit flipping decoing algorithm, demonstrating the scalable hardware integration. These works underscore the critical role of algorithm-and-architecture codesign in satisfying flash memory’s stringent demands.
In the industry, there is a common consideration of exploiting the gradual transition toward 2-kB LDPC as the key ECC technique for the NAND flash memory. However, when the NAND flash memory comes to be TLC and QLC, its error correction capability fails to meet the stringent requirements of enterprise-class SSDs in terms of data reliability. Consequently, 4-kB LDPC has emerged as the predominant choice. Moreover, the flash memory channel’s RBER degrades as its service life increases, and the significant variations of RBER exist across different pages. Consequently, this imposes higher demands on the dynamic error correction capability of ECC [13]. In 2016, Li et al. [14] proposed globally coupled LDPC (GC-LDPC) codes, employing full-valued matrices for constructing the global matrix of GC-LDPC and the base matrix of local matrices, while utilizing finite fields to construct the shift value matrix. Due to its flexible decoding methods, the GC-LDPC code was soon applied to the flash memory. In 2019, Liao et al. [15] constructed a new (21150, 19050) GC-LDPC code for NAND flash applications. In 2023, Bao et al. [16] proposed an improved adaptive granularity progressive LDPC decoding (IAGPD) by taking advantage of the (21150, 19050) GC-LDPC code, which can significantly reduce flash read latency. However, the aforementioned works primarily focus on 2-kB GC-LDPC codes in the flash channel, which fails to meet the requirement of code length in the rapid development of NAND flash. For encoding, the structure of the check matrix leads to high encoding complexity. Furthermore, the features of flash channels and the unique structure of check matrix are not considered in the above works, which may be exploited to significantly improve the decoding algorithm. To the best of our knowledge, there is still no works reported in the literature to properly address the above issues.
To address the above issues and achieve dynamic error correction as well, we propose a spatially coupled GC-LDPC (SC–GC-LDPC) code. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows.
1) By exploiting the spatially coupled (SC) structure for the construction of the global matrix, a (37536, 33672) SC–GC-LDPC code is proposed. As compared with the previously GC-LDPC codes, it is shown that the SC–GC-LDPC code exhibits superior error correction features.
2) Based on the features of flash channels and the unique structure of SC–GC-LDPC code, we propose an improved two-level decoding algorithm (ITLA) and

an improved two-phase decoding algorithm (ITPA). Specifically, in these two algorithms, the adjacent local codes will be exploited to assist in correcting the error which cannot be fixed within a local code. 3) The performance of proposed decoding algorithms is evaluated in additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels, which can significantly reduce the average number of check-node-updating (CNU) as compared to the existing algorithms without performance loss. 4) Experimental results under NAND flash channels demonstrate that the ITPA can effectively adapt to dynamic changes of flash channels. Compared with the existing algorithms, the proposed algorithms can further improve the error-correction ability and decoding speed. In Section II, we briefly elaborate the flash channel model and review the related knowledge of GC-LDPC codes. In Section III, a 4-kB GC-LDPC code and (37536, 33672) SC–GC-LDPC code are proposed. And then the two-level decoding algorithm (TLA) and the two-phase decoding algorithm (TPA) are improved. In Section IV, we conduct performance tests in AWGN channels and NAND flash channels. Section V draws the conclusion.

II. BACKGROUND
In our research, the flash channel model plays a crucial role as it serves as the foundation for constructing LDPC codes and conducting the encoding/decoding algorithm investigations. Different from the well-characterized AWGN channels, the errors in NAND flash memory exhibit asymmetric characteristics, and its RBER is time-varying. The flash channel model is indispensable for validating the considered codes. Thus, a brief introduction of the threshold voltage model is presented, followed by the review of GC-LDPC codes.

A. NAND Flash Channel Model

The voltage distribution of the TLC NAND flash channels is illustrated in Fig. 1, where P0 represents the erased state and the remaining seven states represent the programming states. The threshold voltage distribution in the erased and programming states exhibit a Gaussian-like pattern [17]. Hence, we introduce an approximate model for characterizing the threshold voltage distribution as

p(x) =

√1

e−

(x−μ)2 2σ 2

(1)

σ 2π

where μ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the erased state or the programming state. The first bit stored in the TLC flash memory cell is called the most significant bit (MSB), the second bit is called the central significant bit (CSB), and the third bit is called the least significant bit (LSB) [18].
However, the noise characteristics of flash memory are impacted by various factors, such as the random telegraph noise (RTN), the cell-to-cell interference noise (CCI), and the data retention noise (RN) [4]. In practice, RN plays a decisive role in the channel characteristics of flash memory, which is the main factor to be considered in this article.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MO et al.: SC–GC-LDPC FOR NAND FLASH MEMORY: CONSTRUCTION AND DECODING

4169

Fig. 1. Voltage distribution.

RTN: RTN induces stochastic fluctuations in the threshold voltage of the storage unit. The probability density function of this effect can be effectively modeled as a symmetric exponential distribution

pr (x)

=

1 2

Ar

N

aIT

e−Ar

N aIT

|x|

(2)

where Ar is a constant, N is the number of program/erase (P/E) cycles, and aIT are the exponent for interface state traps.
CCI: In NAND flash memory, due to the parasitic capacitive coupling effect, the threshold voltage drifts of the adjacent floating gates affect each other, resulting in the voltage interference between cells. The threshold voltage shift is estimated as

F=

Vt γ k

(3)

k

where Vt represents the threshold voltage shift of one interfering cell which is programmed, γ is coupling ratio, and k is the number of the victim cells. It should be noted that the γ includes the vertical coupling ratio γy and the diagonal coupling ratio γxy [4].
RN: The reduction of the threshold voltage in the process
of data retention is mainly due to interface state trap recovery
and electron detrapping. We can approximately model the
threshold voltage reduction as a Gaussian distribution

pt(x) = N μd, σd2 .

(4)

Both the mean μd and standard deviation σd are proportional to the sum of the interface state traps and oxide traps, as well as to the data retention time. In addition, the significance of threshold voltage reduction during data retention also tends to be related to the magnitude of the initial threshold voltage. In other words, the higher the initial threshold voltage is, the faster the threshold voltage decreases. Therefore, we assume that the generated holding noise is about the scale (x − x0), where x is the initial threshold voltage, and x0 is the threshold voltage of the erased state. The mean μd and the standard deviation σd can be expressed as
μd = K1(x − x0) AtNaIT + BtNaOT log(1 + td) (5) σd = K2(x − x0) AtNaIT + BtNaOT log(1 + td) (6)

where K1, K2, At, and Bt are constants, aOT is the exponent for oxide traps, and td are the retention time.
On the basis of the earlier discussions, the channel model can be simply expressed as the convolution of p(x), pr(x), F, and pt(x)

P(x) = p(x) ⊗ pr(x) ⊗ F ⊗ pt(x).

(7)

Fig. 2. Tanner graph of GC-LDPC.

B. GC-LDPC Codes

Recently, LDPC codes have emerged as a popular choice

for NAND flash systems, where the GC-LDPC code is one

of the recent innovations in the code design. Compared with

traditional LDPC codes, the local matrix of GC-LDPC codes

is composed of several independent local codes, which means

that the local matrix of GC-LDPC codes is sparse enough.

On the other hand, in the iterative decoding of GC-LDPC

codes, the correct soft information can be quickly passed

to all positions of the whole codeword through the global

coupling. Based on the sparse check matrix structure and the

globally coupling structure, the GC-LDPC codes not only have

the low encoding complexity converges faster in the iterative

decoding algorithm. The definition, structure, characteristics,

and unique decoding algorithm of the GC-LDPC code are

briefly elucidated in this section.

The GC-LDPC code is composed of multiple shorter LDPC

codes, which usually have a quasi-cyclic (QC) structure [19]

that ensures highly parallelizable encoding and decoding

procedures with low complexity [20], [21], [22], [23]. The

check matrix can be succinctly described by four parameters,

namely, the dimensions of the local matrix with m rows and n

columns, the number s of rows in the global matrix, and the

number t of local matrices. Simply, the structure of matrix is

given by HGC = ⎢⎢⎢⎡⎢⎢⎣H1l00o...cal

⎤

0

... 0

Hl2ocal ... 0

... ...
...

0
... Htlocal

⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥.

(8)

Hglobal

The local matrices are identical and positioned along the main diagonal. Hence, these t local matrices are completely independent of each other. At the bottom of the matrix is the global check part Hglobal, which connects all the local codes and provides them with a large number of information passing paths. These connections can be clearly presented by the Tanner graph, as shown in Fig. 2.
The upper part is characterized by multiple local codes, which are interconnected through a set of check nodes located at the bottom. This set of check nodes is provided by the global matrix. Compared with the matrix form, this tanner graph provides a more intuitive representation of the unique

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4170

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

structure of GC-LDPC codes. As we can observe, by ignoring

the global matrix component, the t local matrices are entirely

independent, thereby enabling parallel decoding of the local

codes. In the process of iterative decoding, these t short

codewords not only satisfy the parity check constraint of

Hlocal but also adhere to the constraint imposed by Hglobal.

The local parity-check constraints guarantee that the data

within each subcodeword block adheres to the fundamental

error-correcting code rules, enabling the independent detection

and the correction of localized errors. The global coupling

constraints establish the interblock parity relationships, which

involve the variable nodes from multiple subcodeword blocks,

leading to the cross-blocks parity-check equations. Those

errors that cannot be rectified within a single local code can be

corrected by exploiting the validation information from other

local codes.

The crucial factor in the design of a GC-LDPC code lies in

the meticulous construction of its local and global matrices.

When the GC-LDPC code was first proposed, the shift value

matrix is constructed based on the finite field, where the full

element matrix is exploited and it leads to good performance.

The finite fields, also known as the Galois fields, are denoted

by GF(q), where q is a prime number. Let α be the primitive of GF(q), then α0, α1, α2, . . . , αq−2 represent all elements on GF(q) and satisfy α0 = αq−1 = 1. From such a finite field,

we can construct a shift value matrix as follows:

⎡ α0 − 1

α1 − 1 . . .

αq−3 − 1

αq−2

−

⎤ 1

SGF = ⎣⎢⎢⎢αq−2... − 1

α0 − 1 ...

... ...

α2 − 1 ...

αq−3 ...

−

1⎥⎥⎥⎦.

(9)

α1 − 1 α2 − 1 . . . αq−2 − 1 α0 − 1

There is a notable property in SGF: any 2 × 2 submatrix is nonsingular. Thus, this shift value matrix in GC-LDPC codes ensures the absence of four cycles, no matter what kind of base matrix is employed [24].

III. PROPOSED SC–GC-LDPC CODE
In this section, an example of 2-kB GC-LDPC code is first presented, followed by a similarly constructed 4-kB one. Then, the proposed SC–GC-LDPC code is introduced in detail. It should be noted that for NAND flash memory applications, the codeword lengths must align with the industry-standard sizes, typically 2 or 4-kB, with the emerging trends favoring even the larger codeword length to accommodate the increasing storage densities. Simultaneously, NAND flash ECC necessitates ultrahigh code rates (≥0.9) to minimize redundancy overhead, maximizing storage density. By combining the above constraints and the properties of finite fields, GF(139), GF(151), GF(173), and GF(197) emerge as the optimal candidates. Furthermore, the corresponding encoding/decoding algorithms are provided and discussed.

A. Construction
Example-1 (GC-LDPC-2-kB): Considering the finite field GF(151), a matrix S1 of size 150 × 150 can be obtained as shown in (9). Since q − 1 can be factored into 151 − 1 = 3 × 50, we can construct a GC-LDPC code with three local

Fig. 3. Constructed GC-LDPC-2-kB code based on GF(151) (2 kB).
Fig. 4. Constructed GC-LDPC-4-kB code based on GF(197) (4 kB).
codes, where the first four rows and the first 47 columns of S1 form the identical local matrix. Rows 5 and 6 of matrix S1 are used to construct the global part Bglobal. The resulting matrix is shown in Fig. 3. Then, each column of the matrix is randomly masked, that is, one of the nonzero elements is randomly forced to be zero. Finally, it is extended with a lifting factor 150. It is worth noting that the zero elements in the matrix need to be extended to the all-zero matrices. This results in a (21150, 19050) GC-LDPC code with a code rate of 0.9007.
Example-2 (GC-LDPC-4-kB): Since the leading SSD controller manufactures (e.g., Samsung and Kioxia) have widely adopted the 4-kB LDPC codes, the 4-kB-GC-LDPC code is considered the benchmark scheme. Similar to Example-1, a GC-LDPC code can be constructed with four local codes by considering the finite field GF(197). The resulting shift matrix is shown in Fig. 4. By randomly masking and extending the matrix with the lifting factor, we obtain a (36848, 33320) GCLDPC code with a code rate of 0.9043.
The aforementioned (21150, 19050) GC-LDPC-2-kB code is a flash memory-specific code proposed by Liao et al. [15]. Then, a GC-LDPC-4-kB code is constructed using a similar method in this work. For deteriorating channels, the reliability and lifetime of flash memory can be enhanced by adjusting the TPA of GC-LDPC, rendering these code words highly suitable for deployment in flash memory channels. At the early stage of service life, the local code with high bit rate is parallelly decoded to achieve low complexity and high throughput. With the increase of service time and the deterioration of flash channel, the global check matrix is introduced to provide more check information for soft decision decoding. In this way, the decoder can fully adapt to the changes of flash channel and achieve similar performance as that at the early stage of service life.
However, there still exists some challenges that need to be properly addressed. First, the GC-LDPC-2-kB code fails to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MO et al.: SC–GC-LDPC FOR NAND FLASH MEMORY: CONSTRUCTION AND DECODING

4171

Fig. 5. Constructed TB-GC-LDPC code based on GF(173) (4 kB).

meet the requirement of code length in the rapid development of NAND flash, and the error correction performance of the GC-LDPC-4-kB code needs to be further tested. Second, the structure of the check matrix does not provide encoding advantages and the globally coupled structure disrupts the sparsity, which leads to high encoding complexity. Third, there exist optimization opportunities in the conventional two-level and TPAs, which will be elaborated upon in detail in the next section. We now introduce the SC structure as the global matrix of GC-LDPC codes and construct GC-LDPC code.
Example-3 [Tail-Biting GC-LDPC (TB-GC-LDPC) (4 kB)]: Similar to Example-1, by exploiting the SC structure for the construction of the global matrix, a GC-LDPC code can be constructed with four local codes by considering the finite field GF(173). The resulting shift matrix is shown in Fig. 5. By randomly masking and extending the matrix with the lifting factor, we obtain a (36676, 33216) TB-GC-LDPC code with a code rate of 0.9056. Research show that the constructed TBGC-LDPC codes perform well over the AWGN and the binary erasure channel (BEC) [25].
In the following, we propose the (37536, 33672) SC–GCLDPC code to address the above issues. For construction, the finite geometries and the quasi cyclic structured method are employed to guarantee the sparsity and avoid the short cycles. The shift matrix is constructed based on the nonbinary finite field GF(139). Let α = 3, then the following 138 × 138 shift matrix can be obtained:

⎡

⎤

0 2 8 . . . 102 30 92

S = ⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢98...2

0 ...
26

2 ...
80

... ...
...

126 ...
92

102 ...
0

32...0⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥.

(10)

2 8 26 . . . 30 92 0

This matrix is used for CPM extension which is simply referred to as “extending the matrix with the lifting factor” in the previous text. It is essential to understand CPM expansion, where the elements in a base matrix are replaced with either the CPMs or the zero matrices. Let Hbase be an m × n integer matrix with the entries being 0 or 1, where 0 and 1 will be replaced by a Z × Z zero matrix and a Z × Z CPM I(s) that is obtained by cyclically right shifting the identity matrix by

s positions. For Z = 3, s = 1, the CPM is

⎡

⎤

010

I(1) = ⎣0 0 1⎦.

(11)

100

Therefore, a matrix is required to contain all the shift values

of the base matrix, which is termed the shift value matrix.

For example, consider the following cyclic shift value matrix

Sexample:

⎡

⎤

0 −1 2

Sexample = ⎣ 1 2 − 1⎦.

(12)

−1 0 2

Based on the CPM expansion, 0 and −1 are replaced with the

identity matrix and the zero matrix, while 1 and 2 are replaced

by I(s) with s = 1 and s = 2

⎡

⎤

100000001

Hexample

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢

0 0 0 0 1 0 0

1 0 1 0 0 0 0

0 1 0 1 0 0 0

0 0 0 1 0 1 0

0 0 0 0 1 0 1

0 0 1 0 0 0 0

1 0 0 0 0 0 1

0 1 0 0 0 0 0

0 0 0 0 0 1 0

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥.

(13)

000001010

As we can see, the element in row i and column i of S is 0 and should be extended to an identity matrix. However, to reduce column weight, it will be extended to an all-zero matrix. The scatter diagram of the base matrix of the local matrix is shown in Fig. 7. The red dots represent the positions of 1’s in the base matrix, where the extension by lifting factor is required. Here, we are dealing with a full matrix of size 5 × 61. One element of each column in the full element matrix is set to 0 for ensuring a diagonal structure of 0’s. Thus, the column weight is reduced by 1. Then, a 5 × 5 identity matrix is spliced on the right side to obtain the base matrix in Fig. 7. This base matrix is extended by taking the first 5 rows and the first 61 columns of the shift matrix S, and the diagonal part behind the base matrix is extended by the all-0 shift value. Therefore, we can get the sparse check matrix Hlocal of the local code.
By referring to the construction methods for LDPC codes with convolutional structure [26], [27], [28], we find that they have excellent performance. The SC-LDPC codes are interconnected in the spatial dimension through chain-like or convolutional coupling, exhibiting a sparse banded structure in their parity-check matrices. As an improved variant of conventional SC-LDPC codes, tail-biting SC-LDPC codes [29], [30], [31] modify the SC-LDPC architecture by circularly coupling the initial and terminal blocks of the chain. Constructing the global matrix using the tail-biting SC structure enables the global matrix to achieve improved sparsity.
And the construction of global check matrix plays a decisive role in the performance of GC-LDPC codes, so this work proposes to exploited the tail-biting SC-LDPC base matrix. For a 2 × 61 base matrix

B=

1 1

1 1

... ...

1 1

1 1

1 1

... ...

1 1

1 1

(14)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4172

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 6. Check matrix H of the proposed SC–GC-LDPC code (before lifting).

if the column weight is fixed as a constant, the edge spreading technique can be exploit to obtain the following two matrices:

B0 =

0 1

0 1

... ...

0 1

0 0

1 0

... ...

1 0

1 0

(15)

B1 =

1 0

1 0

... ...

1 0

1 1

0 1

... ...

0 1

0 1

.

(16)

Suppose that we start the SC-LDPC code with convolutional base matrix at time τ = 0 and terminate it after L time instants. The resulting finite-length base matrix is then given by

⎡

⎤

B0

B[0,L−1] = ⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢B1

B0 B1

... ...

B0 B1

B0⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥

(17)

B1

where L denotes the coupling length. By letting L = 4 and terminating with tail-biting, the structure of base matrix is

shown in the following:

⎡

⎤

B0

B1

Bt[b0,3] = ⎢⎣⎢B1

B0 B1

B0

⎥⎦⎥.

(18)

B1 B0

Obviously, the dimension of the base matrix Bt[b0,3] is 8 × 244, and the first 61 columns of rows 6 to 9 of the shift matrix S are utilized to extend B0 and B1 to obtain a sparse check matrix (the part G in Fig. 6). By exploiting the same construction method, the dimension of the initial base matrix B is set to 2 × 5, and finally 8 × 20 tail-biting base matrix is obtained. Specifically, rows 6 to 9 and columns 62 to 66 of the shift matrix S are exploited to expand B0 and B1 to obtain G in Fig. 6.
Based on the above construction of local matrix and global matrix, a (37536, 33672) SC–GC-LDPC code is proposed, and its base matrix structure can be roughly described in Fig. 6(a), consisting of four local codes. In order to separate the check bits, the diagonal matrix is deployed at the right side of the local matrices. This does not affect the check structure of the entire LDPC code. Then we can divide the whole parity-check

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MO et al.: SC–GC-LDPC FOR NAND FLASH MEMORY: CONSTRUCTION AND DECODING

4173

matrix into six parts, as shown in Fig. 6(b). The global base matrix consists of three parts: an 8 × 244 tail-biting base matrix G, an 8 × 20 tail-biting base matrix G , and an 8 × 8 identity matrix I. The identity matrix is extended by all 0 shift values.
In summary, the global matrix of the proposed code draws inspiration from the tail-biting SC-LDPC structure. Our primary innovations lie in two aspects: 1) global matrix construction based on the tail-biting SC-LDPC structure and 2) improving the sparsity through the strategically introduced diagonal structures. The above improvements substantially reduce the encoding complexity while maintaining the decoding performance. More critically, the local codes eliminate the short cycles and optimize the degree distributions, significantly enhancing their robustness for the random errors. The global matrix interconnects multiple local codes, dispersing the burst errors across the localized blocks for joint correction via the global parity constraints.

B. Encoding

In this section, the encoding algorithms of SC–GC-LDPC code are described in detail. We would like to emphasize that the proposed SC–GC-LDPC code can achieve low complexity in encoding. In order to show the process of encoding more clearly, the check matrix H after the expansion of the base matrix can be represented as follows:

H=

LL GG

O I

=

LI GG

O I

.

(19)

Note that the dimensions of matrices are neglected which can

be found in Fig. 6.

Suppose that the encoded code word is divided into three

parts C = [ST PT1 PT2 ]. According to the definition of LDPC,

we have

⎡⎤

H × CT =

LI GG

O I

S × ⎣P1⎦ = 0.
P2

(20)

Obviously, for the check bits, the following equations are obtained:

P1 = LS

(21)

P2 = GS + G P1.

(22)

For traditional GC-LDPC codes, the Gaussian elimination method must be employed for encoding, which involves row and column transformations and extensive arithmetic operations. This encoding process fundamentally exploits the parity-check constraints of the rows to derive the corresponding parity bits. Considering an (N−K)×N parity check matrix, the encoding complexity can be O(N2).
As demonstrated in (21) and (22), the SC–GC-LDPC code does not require the row/column transformations for encoding. Instead, the parity bits are calculated via the matrix multiplication. Critically, these matrices are sufficiently sparse with abundant zero elements, drastically reducing the number of multiplicative and additive operations. For an (N − K) × N check matrix, the encoding complexity of the SC–GC-LDPC codes is significantly reduced to O(N) as compared with the

Fig. 7. Scatter plot of the base matrix.
traditional GC-LDPC codes. It is also easy to design ratecompatible codes with longer code length [32], [33].
C. Decoding Algorithms
For the GC-LDPC codes, due to the special structure of their check matrices, the decoding process can be very flexible. Two decoding algorithms are mainly considered in the literature: 1) the TLA and 2) the TPA.
1) TLA: The decoding process is divided into two levels. The maximum numbers of iterations of level-1 and level2 need to be preset for decoding, denoted by TL and TG, respectively. After LLR, the local decoding (level1) starts, where only the local check nodes and variable nodes are updated. If the decoding is completed at level1, the decoding result is directly output. Otherwise, when the maximum number of iterations TL is reached, the complete decoding (level-2) starts, where all check nodes and variable nodes need to be updated until decoding is successful or the maximum number of iterations TG is reached.
2) TPA: The whole decoding process is divided into two phases. The maximum numbers of iterations of the local phase, the global phase, and the entire decoding phase are chosen for decoding, denoted by TL, TG, and Imax, respectively. The process in the local phase is similar to that in level-1 of the TLA. When the maximum number of iteration TL is reached, the global phase starts where the global check nodes and variable nodes are updated. If the decoding can be completed successfully, the code word is directly output. Otherwise, when the maximum number of iterations TG is reached, the number of executions of the entire algorithm is increased by 1 and then the local phase restarts. When the number of executions exceeds Imax, if the decoding cannot be completed successfully, the decoding is directly terminated (decoding fails).
Both algorithms consist of the local and global operations, prioritizing the local error before addressing the complex global errors. However, for the TLA, the decoding process is divided into two hierarchical levels, where the operation is in a strictly sequential manner (i.e., from level-1 to level-2). For the TPA, the decoding process is divided into two phases, which allows the cyclic execution between the phases until the termination criteria are met.
The flash memory operates page-by-page for both reading and writing, with each page serving as the smallest unit of data access. Note that the channel characteristics vary from page to page. The iteration numbers of the above two decoding algorithms can be optimized according to the channel characteristics of different pages if it is allowed to decode the data from different pages separately. First, the maximum

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4174

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 8. Block diagram of ITLA.

iteration numbers are dynamically allocated for the sub-blocks based on the qualities of initial LLR. For the reliable subblocks, the local maximum iteration number can be reduced (e.g., from 7 to 4) if the median of absolute values of LLR exceeds a threshold. For the unreliable sub-blocks, the local maximum iteration numbers need to be increased (e.g., to 10) if the dispersion of LLR indicate the high uncertainty. Second, the global iteration depth can be adjusted based on the residuals in the local decoding. For the mild residuals (e.g., less than 5% parity check is unsatisfied), only one global iteration is enough. For the severe residuals (e.g., more than 20% of parity check is unsatisfied), more global iterations (e.g., 5) are needed. It can be seen that the GC-LDPC codes show strong adaptability to the flash memory channel, whose RBER is varying. However, the fixed maximum iteration number is considered in our work.
Due to the high data throughput requirement of flash memory, the decoding speed needs to be significantly improved while maintaining a certain level of error correction performance. Thanks to the special structure of the proposed (37536, 33672) SC–GC-LDPC, it is possible to further improve the error correction ability and throughput of decoding algorithms, where the following three points need to be specified.
1) The local code word is considered to be successfully decoded and output if it passes the parity check of local matrix during level-1 (or local phase). Except the first round of level-1 (or local phase), the local code does not undergo further decoding but only participates in level-2 (or global phase) for LLR information transfer.
2) If there is a failure in decoding a single local code, level2 (or global phase) utilizes only a portion of the global check matrix which is related to the neighboring local codes to rectify the error. For instance, when a failure in

the first round of level-1 (or local phase) happens, the subsequent level-2 (or global phase) involves iterating over rows 1 to 4 of the global matrix as depicted in Fig. 6. Consequently, only the second and fourth local codes are employed for error correction. 3) If the global phase decoding fails the counter is reset and the LLR of the global matrix decoding is passed to the local phase. Then the next round of decoding is started. By refining the termination of local decoding, the global correction for the local failures, and the reset mechanism, we derive the ITLA and ITPA. Fig. 8 illustrates the ITLA workflow. First, the LLR is initialized and then level-1 decoding proceeds. If the decoding fails, the process proceeds to level-2 decoding, which bifurcates into the distinct branches based on the channel conditions. Fig. 9 delineates the ITPA workflow, which employs a more intricate control mechanism compared to ITLA. Specifically, ITPA enables the cyclic execution between the decoding phases until the predefined termination criteria are satisfied, enhancing the robustness to the dynamic channels. The TLA and the ITLA can provide flexibility in determining the length of the check bits when considering the error correction performance and throughput. The TPA and the ITPA can configure the number of iterations of the local phase and the global phase, which leads to a high flexibility of controlling the decoding flow. In some delay-sensitive applications, it is required that the decoding needs to be terminated as soon as the parity check of all local codes pass. In general, TPA and ITPA provide better performance of bit error ratio (BER) and iterative convergence, while TLA and ITLA have a simpler control mechanism. Therefore, it is necessary to choose the corresponding decoding algorithm according to the actual application scenario.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MO et al.: SC–GC-LDPC FOR NAND FLASH MEMORY: CONSTRUCTION AND DECODING

4175

Fig. 9. Block diagram of ITPA.

IV. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
In this section, the error correction performance of proposed (37536, 33672) SC–GC-LDPC code in AWGN channels and NAND flash memory channels is evaluated via the Monte Carlo method.
The discussed GC-LDPC-2-kB and GC-LDPC-4-kB codes in Section III are considered as the benchmarks. Both the sum–product algorithm (SPA) and the normalized min–sum (NMS) algorithm are exploited. To speed up the convergence of decoding and achieve high efficiency of hardware resource utilization, layered decoding [34], [35] is also considered in the experiments. Besides, the maximum number of iterations is set to 20 and the normalization factor of NMS is 0.7 among the simulations, which is applied to both AWGN channels and NAND flash memory channels. The ITLA/TLA and ITPA/TPA are tested on the basis of NMS. For TLA and ITLA, we choose (TL, TG) = (20, 10) and (TL, TG1, TG2) = (20, 10, 10). For TPA, we choose (TL, TG, Imax) = (3, 2, 7), hence we can get TL × Imax = 21 and TG × Imax = 14. Considering the number of CNU, this is close to the maximum number of iterations 20 for NMS. For the proposed ITPA, it is chosen that (TL, TG1, TG2, Imax) = (3, 2, 2, 7).
In our work, random data write is performed to a block within the NAND flash chip and subsequently the numbers of memory cells falling into different threshold voltage ranges can be obtained by exploiting the NanoCycler test platform as shown in Fig. 10, which enables us to acquire the threshold voltage distribution of the actual NAND flash chip. According to the test results, we consider the following default parameter setups. For erase and programming operations, we set the means of the eight threshold voltages to -1.20, 0.40, 1.20, 2.05, 2.88, 3.72, 4.59, and 5.60V, respectively. The corresponding voltage standard deviations are 0.35, 0.06, 0.06, 0.06, 0.06, 0.06, 0.08, and 0.13V, respectively. For the noise factors, ARTN = 1.81 × 10−4, aIT = 0.62, γy = 0.04, γxy = 0.003,

Fig. 10. NanoCycler test platform.
At = 5.3 × 10−5, Bt = 2.9 × 10−4, aOT = 0.3, K1 = 1, and K2 = 0.3.
In flash memory, the process of soft decoding typically involves step-by-step soft decision. The higher the decision level is, the more accurate the LLR provided by the channel should be. However, this comes at the cost of increasing read delay [13]. During the early and middle stages of flash life, a high soft decision level is unnecessary due to low RBER. To simplify the channel model and reveal more insights, level 1 soft decision analysis is employed [36].
A. Performance in AWGN Channels Fig. 11 shows BER performance of the considered codes
under different decoding algorithms. As we can see, the GCLDPC-4-kB code shows a lower waterfall region as compared with the GC-LDPC-2-kB mainly due to the longer code length. When SPA is applied, it can be observed that the proposed SC–GC-LDPC code exhibit superior performance compared to traditional GC-LDPC-4-kB code, achieving a gain of roughly 0.065 dB with identical code length and code rate. When NMS is considered, the gap between the SC–GC-LDPC code and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4176

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 11. Performance versus SNR in AWGN channels (R = 0.9).
TABLE I PARAMETERS OF LOCAL CODES

Fig. 12. Performance of subcodes versus SNR.

GC-LDPC-4-kB code is even larger, which is roughly 0.08 dB. Furthermore, one can also observe that SPA outperforms NMS when they are exploited in the same code, since the latter is simplified from the former. Besides, it can be seen that the TB-GC-LDPC code shows similar performance as compared with the GC-LDPC-4-kB code when applying SPA, but the former shows the superiority when exploiting NMS. Hence, we can conclude that the tail-biting structure does improve the performance. By combining the SC structure and the diagonal structure, the proposed LDPC code outperforms the TB-GCLDPC code by applying both SPA and NMS.
In the following, we analyze the local codes. The code lengths and code rates of the local codes are summarized in Table I and Fig. 12 shows their performance versus signal-tonoise ratio (SNR). It is shown that the SC–GC-LDPC subcode outperforms the TB-GC-LDPC subcode, which is mainly due to the diagonal structure. Although the traditional GC-LDPC subcodes show better performance, this is at the cost of the lower code rate and efficiency.
In the previous section, we propose to utilize only a portion of the global check matrix which is related to the neighboring local codes to rectify the error in the SC–GC-LDPC code. To explore the feasibility of this approach, we show the proportion of single error local code versus RBER within different iteration numbers in Fig. 13. Since the proposed LDPC code consists of 4 local codes, the number of error local codes can

Fig. 13. Proportion of single error local code versus RBER.
be 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4. It can be observed that the proportion of single error local code in the above cases is high within the considered RBER region. Besides, although the proportion is low at the beginning of decoding when the RBER increases, the proportion increases first and then decreases after some iterations. This means that our approach can transform the cases of multiple error local codes to those of single error local code, and the latter can be efficiently addressed. Furthermore, since the proportion of single error local code is high in the whole service life of flash memory, our approach can reduce the decoding complexity tremendously.
Under different SNR setups, we conduct a statistical analysis of the cases with only single sub-block error to compare the performance of two decoding strategies based on the partial global matrix information (the adjacent sub-blocks) and the complete global matrix information, respectively. For the fairness of the error correction ability and the computational load, we limit the maximum number of iterations for the latter strategy to half of that for former, namely, only half of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MO et al.: SC–GC-LDPC FOR NAND FLASH MEMORY: CONSTRUCTION AND DECODING

4177

Fig. 14. Performance versus SNR of the considered decoding algorithms.

Fig. 15. Number of CNU versus SNR of the considered decoding algorithms.

TABLE II SINGLE LOCAL CODE ERROR TEST

decoding. For TLA, the erroneous/correct soft information is delivered/obtained to/from other local codewords. However,

for ITLA, the erroneous/correct information is only deliv-

ered/obtained to/from the neighbor local codewords due to

the utilization of partial global matrix. These two algorithms

almost show the same error correction ability, because ITLA’s

reduced propagation of erroneous soft information counterbal-

ances its diminished reception of correct soft information.

The above analysis can be extended to TPA/ITPA. The

ITPA propagates much fewer erroneous information and

receive more correct soft information, resulting in an obvious

performance gain compared to TPA. In Fig. 15, we can

observe that all the improved algorithms (ITLA and ITPA),

drastically reduce the number of check node updates (CNUs),

due to the exploitation of sparser subsets of global matrix.

global matrix information is utilized. The experiment results are presented in Table II, where RBE denotes the number of raw bit errors, BE1 is the remained number of bit errors after the partial global matrix decoding, BE2 represents the remained number of bit errors after the complete global matrix decoding, CNU1 expresses the number of CNU after the

As the SNR increases, the gaps become narrow due to the fact that most errors are corrected in local decoding. In addition, the cyclic iteration between the local and global decoding in TPA/ITPA enables the quick soft information propagation, explaining why TLA/ITLA exhibits the substantial performance degradation relative to TPA/ITPA.

partial global matrix decoding, CNU2 denotes the number of CNU after the complete global matrix decoding, and B. Performance in NAND Flash Channels

DECLINE is the reduced percentage by comparing CNU1 The proposed SC–GC-LDPC code can be directly aligned

with CNU2. Evidently, the utilization of adjacent subblocks to the NAND flash pages of 4-kB, and multiple codewords

for rectifying erroneous subblocks can lead to a reduction in can be combined for the larger flash pages efficiently. Fig. 16

CNU ranging from 6.64% to 31.14%, while maintaining the illustrates the BER performance of the considered LDPC codes

similar performance of the remained bit error.

in different pages of flash memory when the NMS algorithm is

Fig. 14 shows the BER performance versus SNR of the applied. The RBER performance is different from page to page

considered algorithms applying to our proposed SC–GC- in NAND flash memory due to their channel characteristics. As

LDPC code. From Fig. 14, we can observe that TLA and ITLA we can see, the proposed SC–GC-LDPC code outperforms the

show the comparable error correction performance. This is GC-LDPC-2-kB and GC-LDPC-4-kB codes with the gaps of

mainly due to the fact that during level-2 decoding, both TLA RBER=0.0016/0.0015 in the MSB, RBER=0.0018/0.0017 in

and ITLA propagate the soft information via the global parity- the CSB, and RBER=0.0016/0.0015 in the LSB, respectively,

check matrix. On the one hand, local codewords with errors which provides roughly 25% performance enhancement. Thus,

receive the correct soft information from error-free local code- the SC–GC-LDPC code can achieves excellent performance

words. Conversely, error-free local codewords are exposed to in all pages, which further strengthens its promising potential

erroneous soft information from faulty local codewords. This in ECC of NAND flash memory.

bidirectional exchange results in the simultaneous diffusion In the following, the (37536, 33672) SC–GC-LDPC code is

of correct and the erroneous soft information during level-2 further analyzed in detail. In order to show the performance of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4178

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 16. BER performance versus RBER in NAND flash channels (R=0.9).

Fig. 17. ADI and average number of CNU of SC–GC-LDPC in NAND flash channels.

the SC–GC-LDPC code on different pages in a wider region of RBER, we consider different P/E cycles for three pages. Fig. 17 presents the average numbers of CNU and the average numbers of decoding iterations (ADIs) of the SC–GC-LDPC code (denoted by GCcode) and its four local codes (denoted by Subcode) for successfully decoding in different pages by exploiting layered NMS algorithm. In order to compare the average number of CNU, it is necessary to obtain the ADIs, and then the average number of CNU can be calculated by multiplying ADI by the number of check nodes. One can see that in the region of low RBER, the algorithm employing full check matrix decoding leads to much larger number of CNU than that only utilizing local check matrices. However, when the ADI for the local code is roughly 3, both the GCcode and the Subcode exhibit similar CNUs (the intersection of two blue curves in MSB page). As RBER becomes further worse, employing full check matrix shows its superiority. In other words, we can only exploit the four local codes for error correction in the early stage of service life of flash memory. However, as the number of P/E cycles increases, more information of the check matrix is needed, and finally the complete check matrix is required to participate in decoding. Therefore, the TPA/ITPA can be

exploited due to its ability for achieving the tradeoff between the error correction capability and throughput.
It can be seen from Fig. 17 that it is necessary to introduce complete check matrix if the Subcode cannot be terminated in three iterations. With the default setups, the decoded BER performance and the average number of CNU by applying the TPA and ITPA to our proposed SC–GC-LDPC code are shown in Fig. 18. Note that the TLA/ITLA shows large performance gap as compared with the TPA/ITPA in Fig. 14. Hence, we do not consider the TLA/ITLA in Fig. 18. As we can see, although these two algorithms show similar decoded BER, the ITPA can achieve significantly smaller number of CNU than the TPA. Besides, the SC–GC-LDPC code enables the high parallelism by decoding up to four local codes simultaneously. By exploiting the SPA and NMS decoding algorithms, the SC–GC-LDPC code also shows superiority, which indicates the fewer iterations and the low latency, collectively ensuring significant throughput improvements. Since the RBER of flash memories is low in the early stage of service life, it is verified that the proposed ITPA can provide a tradeoff between the error correction ability and throughput. Therefore, the proposed SC–GC-LDPC code associated with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MO et al.: SC–GC-LDPC FOR NAND FLASH MEMORY: CONSTRUCTION AND DECODING

4179

Fig. 18. Decoded BER and average number of CNU versus RBER of the TPA and ITPA.

the corresponding decoding algorithms can serve as promising candidates for NAND flash memories.
V. CONCLUSION
Compared with conventional LDPC codes, the GC-LDPC codes can significantly improve the flexibility of decoding and adapt to dynamically changing flash channels. Motivated by this advantage, this article proposed a (37536, 33672) SC–GCLDPC code by exploiting the SC structure for the construction of the global matrix, and proposed the ITLA and the ITPA according to the unique structure of this code. We conducted decoding experiments in AWGN channels and flash memory channels to verify the constructed code. It is shown that the SC–GC-LDPC code can achieve excellent performance under the layered decoding algorithms. In AWGN channels, compared with the proposed 4-kB GC-LDPC code in this article, the SC–GC-LDPC code can achieve 0.065 and 0.08 dB performance gain by exploiting SPA and NMS, respectively. In flash channels, the SC–GC-LDPC code also shows better error correction performance than the conventional GC-LDPC codes with 25% improvement. Moreover, the proposed ITLA and ITPA achieve much smaller number of CNU than the conventional TLA and TPA with a slight performance degradation. Besides, the proposed optimized algorithms can deal with the varying flash channels well and provide a tradeoff between the error correction ability and throughput, especially in the early stage of service life. Based on these results, it is verified that the (37536, 33672) SC–GC-LDPC code and the corresponding decoding algorithms are attractive options for NAND flash memories by providing the stronger ability to deal with channel deterioration in NAND flash memories.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Siddiqa, A. Karim, and A. Gani, “Big data storage technologies: A survey,” Front. Inf. Technol. Electron. Eng., vol. 18, pp. 1040–1070, Sep. 2017.

[2] J. Mo, X. Zhai, M. Yu, Y. Fang, and G. Han, “Construction of spatially coupled GC-LDPC code for NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE/CIC Int. Conf. Commun. China (ICCC), Aug. 2024, pp. 944–949.
[3] H. Kim, S. Ahn, Y. Shin, K. Lee, and E. Jung, “Evolution of NAND flash memory: From 2D to 3D as a storage market leader,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), May 2017, pp. 1–4.
[4] G. Dong, Y. Pan, and T. Zhang, “Using lifetime-aware progressive programming to improve SLC NAND flash memory write endurance,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1270–1280, Jun. 2014.
[5] R. C. Bose, and D. K. Ray-Chaudhuri, “On a class of error correcting binary group codes,” Inf. Control, vol. 3, pp. 68–79, Mar. 1960.
[6] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, X. Zhang, N. Zheng, and T. Zhang, “LDPCin-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. 11th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), Feb. 2013, pp. 244–256.
[7] L. Song, S. Yu, and Q. Huang, “Low-density parity-check codes: Highway to channel capacity,” China Commun., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 235–256, Feb. 2023.
[8] Y. Li, G. Han, C. Liu, M. Zhang, and F. Wu, “Exploiting the singlesymbol LLR variation to accelerate LDPC decoding for 3-D nand flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 5146–5150, Dec. 2023.
[9] R. Ghanaatian et al., “A 588-gb/s LDPC decoder based on finitealphabet message passing,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 329–340, Feb. 2018.
[10] M. Li, V. Derudder, K. Bertrand, C. Desset, and A. Bourdoux, “Highspeed LDPC decoders towards 1 Tb/s,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 2224–2233, May 2021.
[11] L. Liu, M. Yuan, Y. Liao, and H. Chang, “A 38.64-Gb/s large-CPM 2-KB LDPC decoder implementation for nand flash memories,” IEEE Open J. Circuits Syst., vol. 3, pp. 180–191, 2022.
[12] L. Liu, Y. Liao, and H. Chang, “UP-GDBF: A 19.3 Gbps error floor free 4KB LDPC decoder for NAND flash applications,” IEEE Open J. Circuits Syst., vol. 3, pp. 228–236, 2022.
[13] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3-D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020.
[14] J. Li, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, W. E. Ryan, and D. J. Costello, “Globally coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. (ITA) Workshop, Feb. 2016, pp. 1–10.
[15] Y. Liao, C. Lin, H. Chang, and S. Lin, “A (21150, 19050) GC-LDPC decoder for NAND flash applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 1219–1230, Mar. 2019.
[16] B. Bao, Q. Li, W. Guan, Q. Wang, L. Liang, and X. Qiu, “Adaptive granularity progressive LDPC decoding for NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1312–1316, Apr. 2024.
[17] Q. Li, L. Shi, Y. Cui, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting asymmetric errors for LDPC decoding optimization on 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 475–488, Apr. 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4180

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

[18] Y. Luo, S. Ghose, Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, and O. Mutlu, “HeatWatch: Improving 3D NAND flash memory device reliability by exploiting selfrecovery and temperature awareness,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. High Perform. Comput. Archit. (HPCA), Mar. 2018, pp. 504–517.
[19] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[20] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[21] Y. Chen and K. K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004.
[22] Y. Fang, G. Han, G. Cai, F. C. M. Lau, P. Chen, and Y. L. Guan, “Design guidelines of low-density parity-check codes for magnetic recording systems,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1574–1606, 2nd Quart., 2018.
[23] Y. Fang, P. Chen, G. Cai, F. C. M. Lau, S. C. Liew, and G. Han, “Outagelimit-approaching channel coding for future wireless communications: Root-protograph low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 85–93, Jun. 2019.
[24] Q. Diao, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A matrix-theoretic approach for analyzing quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 4030–4048, Jun. 2012.
[25] J. Zhang, B. Bai, S. Li, M. Zhu, and H. Li, “Tail-biting globally-coupled LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 8206–8219, Dec. 2019.
[26] D. J. Costello, L. Dolecek, T. E. Fuja, J. Kliewer, D. G. M. Mitchell, and R. Smarandache, “Spatially coupled sparse codes on graphs: Theory and practice,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 168–176, Jul. 2014.
[27] O. Laouar, I. Amamra, and N. Derouiche, “Performance evaluation of bit-flipping based algorithms for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. 19th Int. Multi-Conf. Syst., Signals Devices (SSD), Nov. 2022, pp. 15–20.
[28] M. H. Tadayon, A. Tasdighi, M. Battaglioni, M. Baldi, and F. Chiaraluce, “Efficient search of compact QC-LDPC and SC-LDPC convolutional codes with large girth,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1156–1159, Jun. 2018.
[29] D. G. M. Mitchell, P. M. Olmos, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled generalized LDPC codes: Asymptotic analysis and finite length scaling,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 3708–3723, Jun. 2021.
[30] L. M. Zhang, D. Truhachev, and F. R. Kschischang, “Spatially coupled split-component codes with iterative algebraic decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 205–224, Jan. 2018.
[31] S. Wang, Z. Wu, and Q. Wu, “Design of protograph-based quasi-cyclic spatially coupled ldpc codes,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. Workshops (WCNCW), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[32] J. Zhang, B. Bai, X. Mu, H. Xu, Z. Liu, and H. Li, “Construction and decoding of rate-compatible globally coupled LDPC codes,” Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput., 2018, to be published.
[33] S. H. Lim, J. B. Lee, G. M. Kim, and W. H. Ahn, “A stepwise ratecompatible LDPC and parity management in NAND flash memory-based storage devices,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 162491–162506, 2020.
[34] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[35] C. Lv, X. He, P. Kang, K. Cai, J. Xing, and X. Tang, “Mutual information-maximizing quantized layered Min-Sum decoding of QCLDPC codes,” in Proc. GLOBECOM IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Dec. 2022, pp. 3490–3495.
[36] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Error characterization, mitigation, and recovery in flash-memory-based solidstate drives,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1666–1704, Sep. 2017.
Jinhong Mo received the B.E. degree in information engineering from Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2022, where he is currently pursuing the master’s degree with the Department of Communication Engineering.
His primary research interests include channel coding and NAND flash.

Xiongfei Zhai (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2009 and 2018, respectively.
He was a visiting student with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. His research interests include over-the-air computation, massive MIMO communications, millimeter-wave communications, and application of optimization algorithm in communications.
Min Yu received the B.E. degree in electronic information engineering from Gannan Normal University, Guangzhou, China, in 2023. She is currently pursuing the master’s degree with the Department of Communication Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou.
Her primary research interests include channel coding and NAND flash.
Yi Fang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from Xiamen University, Xiamen, China, in 2013.
From May 2012 to July 2012, he was a Research Assistant in Electronic and Information Engineering with Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. From September 2012 to September 2013, he was a Visiting Scholar in Electronic and Electrical Engineering with University College London, London, U.K. From February 2014 to February 2015, he was a Research Fellow with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He is currently a Full Professor and the Vice Dean of the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. His current research interests include information and coding theory, spread-spectrum modulation, and cooperative communications. Prof. Fang served as the Publicity Co-Chair for the International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing 2018.
Guojun Han (Senior Member, IEEE) received the M.E. degree from the South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2004, and the Ph.D. degree from Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, in 2011.
From March 2011 to August 2013, he was a Research Fellow with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. From October 2013 to April 2014, he was a Research Associate with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong. He is currently a Full Professor and an Executive Dean of the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou. He has more than 14 years’ experience on research and development of advanced channel coding and signal processing algorithms and techniques for various data storage and communication systems. His research interests are in the areas of wireless communications, signal processing, and coding and information theory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:12:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

