2025 IEEE 6th International Women in Technology Conference (WINTECHCON) | 979-8-3315-5293-0/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/Wintechcon66724.2025.11430116

2025 IEEE 6th International Women in Technology Conference (WINTECHCON)

A Performance-Aware Framework For LDPC Code Enhancement Using Shortening Techniques
Bhawna Kamra, Ankit Srivastav, Vamshidhar Kamuganti, Sarvesha Anegundi Ganapathi Samsung Semiconductor India Research
{bhawna.kamra, ankit.sriv, vamshidar.k, sarvesha.ag}@samsung.com

Abstract—In Release 15, 3GPP introduced the New-Radio (5G) wireless technology to support a wide range of use-cases across industries into three main service types: enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), ultra reliable low latency communication (uRLLC) and massive-machine type communication (mMTC). However, numerous emerging use-cases exhibit requirements that lie in between the defined boundaries of the aforementioned service types. These use-cases do not demand the complete capabilities offered by full-fledged 5G networks. To address such use-cases, in Release 17, 3GPP introduced the reduced capability NR devices (RedCap) as a tailored solution. The standardized low-density parity check (LDPC) scheme lacks the necessary optimizations for low-complexity hardware requirements for the RedCap Devices. In this paper, a customized LDPC code design framework is proposed to meet the low-complexity requirements of NR RedCap devices, while maintaining acceptable BER levels. Specifically, a shortening technique is implemented to reduce the check node (CN) degree, thereby inherently minimizing both decoder complexity and memory requirements. Shortening method must be meticulously selected to avoid significant performance loss, while maintaining the desired properties like girth and sparsity. Simulation results demonstrate that the achieved BER performance remains within the permissible range recommended by the standard for NR RedCap devices with Check node degree reduction.

CN for a predefined number of iterations until the convergence is reached.
There are emerging use-cases such as wearables, video surveillance and industrial wireless sensors with service requirements that fall between the predefined categories specified by the standard, indicating a need for flexible intermediate service classification. In order to effectively handle such usecases, In Release 17, 3GPP introduced RedCap devices to support use-cases requiring lower cost, extended battery life, reduced complexity, and relaxed reliability requirements than the standard NR devices. LDPC base graph introduced in [3] focuses majorly on eMBB use-case and is not optimized for other services [4]. Given the hardware constraints of the RedCap devices [5]- [6], in the state of the art, we propose an enhanced LDPC code design specifically tailored to these use cases aiming to reduce the hardware complexity and storage requirement further. The remainder of this paper is structured

I. INTRODUCTION

The 5th generation wireless technology classifies a diverse set of use-cases into three main categories, addressing the full spectrum of performance demands. The eMBB services aims to deliver significantly higher data rates and improved user experience, while uRLLC services are designed to support extremely low latency and exceptionally high reliability. mMTC services aims to target Internet of Thing (IoT) applications. Each of these service categories has distinct requirements in terms of throughput, reliability and latency. Considering all these aspects, Quasi-cyclic low density parity check (QCLDPC) codes are adopted for NR data channels [1]. A regular QC-LDPC (k,n) code is constructed by parity check matrix H = [hij](n−k)×n, where k is the number of message bits and n is the number of code-word bits. The LDPC parity check matrix is represented in graphical form by Tanner [2]. LDPC Tanner graphs are bipartite graphs, in which one set of nodes, the check nodes (CN), represents the parity check equations, and the other set of nodes, the variable nodes (VN), represents the bits in the codeword. The LDPC decoding process is performed on the Tanner graph by exchanging information bits (Log-Likelihood ratios) back and forth between VN and

Fig. 1. RedCap requirements contextualized with eMBB, uRLLC and mMTC
as follows. The principle contributions of this work are outlined in section II. Section III presents an overview of the NR LDPC codes. In order to efficiently support various block length and code-rates, shortening and puncturing methods can be used, which has already been studied for the binary [7]- [8] as well as non-binary LDPC codes [9]. Section IV presents the base graph shortening techniques. An overview of the Iterative offset min-sum (IOMS) scheme is presented in section V. The proposed LDPC code enhancement is discussed in section VI. Section VII covers the simulation results along with the design parameters. The discussion is concluded by outlining the key takeaways along with potential directions for future work.
II. MAIN CONTRIBUTIONS
This paper’s contributions are summarized as follows: • We propose a systematic shortening strategy for LDPC
codes tailored to NR RedCap use-cases, aimed at preserving the structural properties of the code while reducing

979-8-3315-5293-0/25/$31.00 © 2025 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:15:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the check-node degree, which directly contributes to lower hardware complexity and memory footprint. • Our method evaluates the influence of each variable node on decoding reliability and prioritize shortening positions that cause minimal degradation in bit error rate (BER) performance. • The interplay between shortening and check node degree reduction offers a promising direction for optimizing LDPC codes.

III. QC-LDPC CODES

QC-LDPC codes, which are structured LDPC codes play a significant role in 5G NR communication. They are defined by a base graph matrix B of size L × K with integer entries bi,j >= −1 , where i = {1, 2, 3..L} and j = {1, 2, 3..K}, as represented below:

 

b1,1

b1,2

...

b1,K

 

  

b2,1

b2,2

...

b2,K

  

B= 

...







bL,1

bL,2

...

bL,K

 

The parity-check matrix H of QC-LDPC codes is obtained by its base graph matrix B and Lifting factor Zc [3]. To construct the parity-check matrix H, elements bi,j >= 0 of the matrix B are replaced by circulant permutation of size Zc × Zc obtained by right-shifting the identity-matrix by bi,j positions and 0’s are replaced by zero matrix of the same size. It follows that QC-LDPC code is characterized by M ×N parity-check matrix H, with M = Zc × L rows and N = Zc × K columns. Fig.1 shows the general structure of the base graph matrix of NR LDPC codes. As represented in Fig.2, base graph matrix is

length (40≤ K≤ 2560) and lower to medium code rates (1/5≤ R≤ 2/3).
IV. BASE GRAPH SHORTENING OF LDPC CODES
Shortening is a well-established design strategy for LDPC codes and has been widely adopted in practical communication standards such as DVB-S2 and IEEE 802.11 (Wi-Fi). Given that the shortening strategies for NR BG2 have been thoroughly addressed by the standard, and the rate-matching parameters of NR BG1 closely align with the requirements of NR RedCap use-cases, we will focus our study on NR BG1. As illustrated in Fig.2, the first 22 columns of the BG1 are designated as systematic bit columns (Kb). Using sub-column shortening as mentioned before, we set the information or systematic columns to Kb − k′, where k′ is the number of sub-columns selected to be shortened. The bits selected to be shortened usually can be set with all 0’s or all 1’s before encoding, while the reliabilities of the corresponding bits is set to infinity for decoders. The impact of shortening on the regular QC-LDPC codes has been discussed in [7]. However, for irregular QC-LDPC codes, CN degree distribution plays a major role to determine the decoding performance as well as hardware complexity.
One of the most important aspect of the LDPC decoders is the check-node unit operations [10]. Its main task is to find the first two minimum values among incoming variableto-check node messages and return from check-to-variable node messages. Higher CN degree (dc) improves the error correction capabilities but results in increased computational complexity and higher hardware demands during decoding. Considering the hardware constraints of the RedCap devices, in this paper, we aim to reduce CN degree to minimize decoding complexity and resource requirements.

Fig. 2. The structure of base graph matrix BG1 of 5G NR standard
divided into five sub-matrices, namely A,B,C,D and I. • Submatrix A represents systematic bits. • Submatrix B represents parity bits with a dual diagonal structure to simplify encoding and decoding process . • Submatrix C represents the zero matrix. • Submatrix D represents single parity check (SPC) rows to efficiently support incremental redundancy harq (IRHARQ). • Submatrix I represents identity matrix. In the 5G standard, two rate-compatible base graph matri-
ces, namely BG1 and BG2 are introduced for efficient channel coding. BG1 is intended for medium to larger block length (500≤ K≤ 8448) and medium to higher code rates (1/3≤ R≤ 8/9), while BG2 is designed for smaller to medium block

V. ITERATIVE OFFSET MIN-SUM DECODING

As a background to the implementation proposed in later sections, let’s consider a codeword c is modulated by Binaryphase shift keying (BPSK) scheme is transmitted over additivewhite gaussian noise channel (AWGN). The received vector can be described by y = (y1, y2...yn) with y = x+z, where x is the transmitted codeword and z = (z1, z2..zn) is an independent gaussian random variable with zero mean and variance σ2 = N0/2. To keep it simple, following notations will be used throughout the paper.
• lch,n : apriori information of the decoder pertaining to variable-node n
• γ˜ : aposteriori information (APP) provided by the decoder, pertaining to variable node n
• qm,n: Information exchanged from VN n to CN m • rm,n : Information exchanged from CN m to VN n
In the initialization phase of the LDPC decoder, the received vector is assigned to the variable nodes. Further, the apriori information lch,n is computed for each variable-node n and the variable-to-check messages are updated respectively.

qm,n = lch,n =

log P r(xn = 0|yn) P r(xn = 1|yn)

∀m

(1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:15:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The decoder terminates its operation when either the code-

In each iteration of the LDPC Iterative decoding, CN and VN word is found or the maximum number of iterations are

processing is as follows:

reached.

A. CN processing
Each CN processes dc incoming variable-to-check node messages. Post CN updation, extrinsic messages are computed in the form of hyperbolic tangent (tanh) function. Since, tanh is an odd function, it can be further simplified as follows:

rm,n =

sgn(qm′,n). min |qm′,n| (2)

n′∈(V (m)\n)

n′∈(V (m)\n)

Equation 3 can be expressed in another way as:

min2, if |qm′,n| = min1 rm,n = A.
min1 otherwise

,where V(m) is the set of VN connected to CN m.





A=

sgn(qm′,n)

(3)

n′∈(V (m)\n)

and min1 and min2 represent the first and second minimum values among all the magnitudes of incoming variable-tocheck node messages. The disadvantage of min-sum algorithm is the high magnitude of VN messages than shannon-limit approaching sum-product algorithm (SPA) algorithm. Hence, a well designed offset value will be subtracted from obtained min1 and min2 values to keep the BER in limits.
Hence, the equation can be further modified to

min1′ = max((min1 − δ), 0)

(4)

min2′ = max((min2 − δ), 0)

(5)

0 < δ < 1 is the offset factor, which is fine tuned through simulations. In order to identify the optimum value, we performed the simulation with step size of 0.05 in the range of 0 < δ < 1 and observed that 0.25 gives a significant good performance.

B. VN Processing: Variable-to-check node messages are updated as follows:

qm,n = lch,n +

rm′,n

(6)

m′ ∈(C (n)\m)

Note that the incoming message rm,n is omitted to calculate the extrinsic update of qm,n due to duplicate data. Finally, the aposteriori information is updated as follows:

γ˜ = lch,n +

rm,n

(7)

m∈C (n)

After each iteration, the decoder computes the hard decision vector xˆn (i.e. estimated codeword) and the corresponding syndrome s = H.xˆn, where

xˆn = (1 − sgn(γ˜)) 2

(8)

VI. THE PROPOSED LDPC CODES ENHANCEMENT
As highlighted earlier, a critical aspect of LDPC codes is the performance of the CN operations. The degree of CN typically ranges from 3 to 19 for BG1. As the CN degree increases, the associated implementation complexity and memory requirement also rises. The storage space during iterative decoding is allocated based on the maximum CN degree and the number of non-zero elements in the chosen Base graph. As described in section IV, the elimination of certain columns will be performed as part of the base graph shortening strategy. A careful selection of the shortening plays a significant role in reducing the CN degree and consequently, decoder complexity can be reduced significantly.
Algorithm 1 Column Elimination via Monte Carlo Simulation Require: H, Threshold for elimination criteria (T ) Ensure: BER performance should be less than threshold
For i =1:N
• Generate random codeword • Perform LDPC encoding and decoding using H • Record the BER performance for a selected Zc. - Record the performance contribution of each column by replacing the column values with 0 for all j =1 to N. - Identify column j such that C[j] < T ( i.e. low significance). - Perform the same operation by eliminating 2 and 3 columns and record the performance and dc.

The highlighted columns in Fig.3 indicate the columns to be shortened. Simulations are carried out according to the algorithm described previously and the best four proposals in terms of BER performance and CN degree reduction are illustrated above. Proposals - I & II consider to shorten the last 3 or 2 systematic columns, while proposals - III & IV consider to shorten one column from RV0 and remaining ones from RV1. With these approaches, the check-node degree

TABLE I Kb AND TBS RELATIONSHIP FOR PROPOSED SHORTENING

Kb

19

20

21

TBS Size T BS ≤ 7296 7296 ≤ TBS ≤ 7680 T BS ≤ 7680

reduction is achieved by 2 &1 and respective Kb and Transport block size (TBS) is highlighted in Table-I. Based on the requirement and performance constraints, one can make the optimum choice among the mentioned proposals.
VII. SIMULATION RESULTS
Finally, to verify the bit-error rate performance of the proposed approaches, we performed Monte-Carlo simulations for various NR BG1 LDPC codes with different lifting sizes (Zc).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:15:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

which is acceptable due to the relaxed reliability requirement for the RedCap devices. This further ensures that these approaches are optimal and ensures decoder complexity as well as storage reduction as specified in Table-II. Additionally, careful planning of shortening bits reduces the impact of girth and hence, improves the decoder efficiency with early termination, which directly decreases both decoding latency and power consumption. The proposed approaches have been verified for various lifting sizes and code-rates. For illustration purpose, we have shown simulations for R = 0.4 and Zc = 192 in Fig. 4.
TABLE II SUMMARY OF THE SIMULATION RESULTS

P arameter Shortened column number
dc Total non-zero values Row processing storage saving Storage req. reduction

I 20,21,22
17 307 2.84% 10.52%

II 21,22
18 310 1.89% 5.26%

III 13,21
18 310 1.89% 5.26%

IV 13,17,22
17 307 2.84% 10.52%

NR-std none 19 316 base base

Fig. 3. Proposed shortening approaches for NR RedCap devices
The apriori information (lch) and exchanged information is represented by 3-bit fixed-point numbers, while the aposteriori information (γ˜ ) is represented by 6-bit fixed-point numbers. The maximum number of soft decoding iterations are set to 18 and the offset used for IOMS scheme is 0.25.

100 R=0.4,Proposal-III,|dc|=18

R=0.4,NR standard,|dc|=19

R=0.4,Proposal-IV,|dc|=17

R=0.4,Proposal-II,|dc|=18

10-1

R=0.4,Proposal-1,|dc|=17

=0.25

10-2

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

SNR(dB)

Fig. 4. BLER performance of various shortening techniques for BG1
We observed that BER performance with the proposed approaches is slightly inferior to that of the NR standard,

VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
This paper presents an enhanced LDPC code design for
NR RedCap devices, specifically targeting their unique relia-
bility and complexity requirements. To reduce the check node
degree, selective column shortening is employed. Although
proposed approaches provides valuable insights, numerous
research directions remain to be explored. The storage requirement directly depends upon the choice of lifting size(Zc). The careful design of Zc specifically for NR RedCap devices can reduce the storage requirements even further. AI/ML
approaches can be explored for optimal column selection.
REFERENCES
[1] Gallager, Robert, Low-density parity-check codes. IRE Transactions on information theory, 21–28, 1962.
[2] Tanner, R., A recursive approach to low complexity codes. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 533-547, 1981.
[3] ETSI, TS. 138 212-V17.4.0, 5G NR. Multiplexing and channel coding (3GPP TS 38.212 version 17.4.0 Release 17) , ETSI, 2023-01
[4] Li, Liguang and Xu, Jun and Xu, Jin and Hu, Liujun, LDPC design for 5G NR URLLC & mMTC. 2020 International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing (IWCMC), 1071-1076, 2020.
[5] RP-220966, Support of reduced capability NR devices. 3GPP TSG RAN Meeting #95e, Electronic Meeting, 17th -23rd March 2022.
[6] Moloudi, Saeedeh and Mozaffari, Mohammad and Veedu, Sandeep Narayanan Kadan and Kittichokechai, Kittipong and Wang, Y.-P. Eric and Bergman, Johan and Ho¨glund, Andreas, Coverage Evaluation for 5G Reduced Capability New Radio (NR-RedCap). IEEE Access, 45055-45067, 2021.
[7] Richardson, Tom and Kudekar, Shrinivas, Design of Low-Density Parity Check Codes for 5G New Radio. IEEE Communications Magazine, 2834, 2018.
[8] Wei, Yuejun and Yang, Yuhang and Jiang, Ming and Chen, Wen and Wei, Lili, Joint Shortening and Puncturing Optimization for Structured LDPC Codes. IEEE Communications Letters, 2060-2063, 2012.
[9] Liu, Xiaojian and Wu, Xiaofu and Zhao, Chunming, Shortening for irregular QC-LDPC codes. IEEE Communications Letters, 612-614, 2009.
[10] Nguyen-Van-Thanh, Loc and Do-Duy, Tan, Efficient Genetic Algorithm-based LDPC Code Design for IoT Applications. 2023 International Conference on System Science and Engineering (ICSSE), 598-603, 2023.

BER

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:15:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

