1416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

RS Plus LDPC Codes for Perpendicular Magnetic Recording
Wu Chang and J. R. Cruz, Fellow, IEEE
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019 USA
In this paper, we investigate RS plus LDPC concatenated architectures for perpendicular magnetic recording channels. Using simulations, we find the optimal code rate and iterative scheme for the concatenated codes, compare their performance in both random noise and media defects, and show that those whose inner LDPC codes have lower column weights exhibit better performance. In addition, we estimate the performance of the concatenated codes with inner LDPC codes of column weight two, at very high signal-to-noise ratios, and find their error floors.
Index Terms—Concatenated codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, perpendicular magnetic recording, Reed–Solomon codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

I T is well known that low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes significantly outperform the traditional

Reed–Solomon (RS) codes on magnetic recording channels

(MRCs). However, there are two difficulties with the replace-

ment of the RS codes. First, we have not only random noise,

but also media defects that cause burst errors. While RS codes

are guaranteed to correct a fixed maximum number of symbol

errors of both types, LDPC codes are usually designed to

correct random errors. They cannot guaranty the correction of

a given number of errors and, hence, are considered unreliable

for media defects. Second, the sector error rate (SER) required

for MRCs is around

, and LDPC codes may exhibit error

floors at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs); their coding gains

over RS codes may vanish with increasing SNR before the

target SER is achieved. Recently, the use of outer RS codes

concatenated with inner LDPC codes has been suggested to get

better performance and better reliability [1], [2].

In this paper, we investigate RS plus LDPC architectures for

perpendicular MRCs (PMRCs) with different code concatena-

tion parameters and iterative decoding schemes. Related work

can be found in [2], [3], where the optimal error correction ca-

pability of outer RS codes is evaluated with fixed inner LDPC

codes on channels with fixed PR targets. Fixing the inner LDPC

code and changing the outer RS codes simplifies the investiga-

tion of the problem, but prevents the actual encoding with the

outer RS code. For a sector with a certain number of user in-

formation bits, the encoding with outer RS codes with different

values of will lead to distinct lengths for the RS codewords and,

hence, change the length of the inner LDPC code. We are aware

that longer LDPC codes exhibit stronger error correction capa-

bility, and that the performance of the inner LDPC code could be

obviously different when the of outer RS codes is varying in the

range of interest. Therefore, we design inner LDPC codes with

different lengths to match the outer RS code with different .

Furthermore, we broaden our investigation by considering inner

LDPC codes with various column weights and code rates. At a

fixed user density, the code rate determines the tradeoff between

Manuscript received October 27, 2009; revised January 31, 2010; accepted February 06, 2010. Current version published May 19, 2010. Corresponding author: J. R. Cruz (e-mail: jcruz@ou.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2010.2043062

Fig. 1. System diagram for an RS plus LDPC coded PMRC.

the error correction capability and the channel density penalty. In addition, to achieve better performance on the read channel, we equalize the PMRCs to generalized PR targets which are optimized at different SNRs.
In this paper, we are not looking for the optimal of the outer RS code, although we employ outer RS codes with different error correction capabilities. Instead, we would like to find the optimal iterative scheme and code rates for various code concatenations as well as identify the respective contributions of the outer RS and inner LDPC codes to the overall performance. It is also of interest to estimate the performance of the concatenated codes at high SNRs. In this work, we attempt to do that for the concatenated codes whose inner codes exhibit error floors, using the microscopic method proposed in [4].

II. CHANNEL MODEL

In our PMRC model, we approximate the isolated

transition response by a hyperbolic tangent function

, and implement the position

jitter noise using a first order approximation. This model is the

same as the one in [5], where one can find a diagram of the

channel model and the SNR definition. In this paper, we use a

mix of 50% jitter noise power and 50% electronics noise power

in our channel. Note that we are purposely using a channel with

a low percentage of jitter noise power to mimic a channel with a

high percentage of jitter noise power but with a data-dependent

noise predictive detector [6]. We define the user density as

, with

being the user bit interval,

the channel bit interval and the code rate. In this paper, we

only consider channels with a moderate user density of 1.049.

We show in Fig. 1 the system diagram of the coded PMRC,

where the soft-output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) is utilized for

channel detection, and the normalized Min-Sum (MS) algorithm

implements the LDPC decoder. The outer RS code is decoded

by hard decision decoding.

0018-9464/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:31:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG AND CRUZ: RS PLUS LDPC CODES FOR PERPENDICULAR MAGNETIC RECORDING

1417

TABLE I RS PLUS LDPC CODES

Fig. 2. Performance of RS(t = 16) + LDPC(R = 0:88; W = 2) code at SNR = 8 dB, under different iterative schemes.

III. CONCATENATED CODE DESIGN

We design (442, 410), (450, 410), and (458, 410) shortened

RS codes over

as outer codes, which we denote by

,

and

, respectively. For

each outer RS code, we design inner LDPC codes with dif-

ferent rates ( 0.84, 0.86, 0.88, and 0.9) using the progressive

edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [7]. For each inner code rate, we

construct two LDPC codes, with parity-check matrices of con-

stant column weight two

and three

, re-

spectively. We list the concatenated codes designed in Table I,

where the information word lengths of the inner LDPC codes

match the lengths of the outer RS codes.

IV. OPTIMAL ITERATIVE SCHEME AND CODE RATE
We use turbo equalization to improve decoding performance, and simulate the concatenated codes at appropriate SNRs under

Fig. 3. Performance of RS(t = 16) + LDPC codes with different code rates
and column weights.

various iterative schemes, where each iterative scheme consists

of a particular combination of the maximum number of inner and this is also the case, although we are not presenting those

outer iterations. In Fig. 2, we show the iterative scheme test for the simulation results. In other words, the optimal code rates of the

code at

dB. concatenated codes solely depend on the inner code rate: given

We observe that additional outer iterations always improve per- a pair of and , the concatenated codes with inner code rate

formance, while more than six inner iterations only give a mar- of 0.88 always provide the best performance.

ginal improvement. All other concatenated codes in this work, for different , , and , have similar graphs as in Fig. 2. There-

V. PERFORMANCE OF RS PLUS LDPC CODES

fore, given that the decoding complexity of the system needs to With the optimal iterative scheme (T6MS6), we simulate con-

be kept at a reasonable level, we chose the iterative scheme with at catenated codes with inner code rate of 0.88 on PMRCs with

most six outer (turbo) iterations and six inner iterations, denoted both random noise and media defects. The media defects here

by T6MS6, as the one for all concatenated codes.

consist of 50 bits of half erasure and their locations are assumed

At a fixed user density, lowering the code rate may enhance to be known and available to the decoder. For comparison pur-

the error correction capability of the codes, but increases the poses, we design two (4655, 4096) LDPC codes of rate 0.88,

channel density penalty. To find the optimal tradeoff, we vary which have constant column weights of two and three, respec-

the inner code rates for each outer RS code and measure their tively. We simulate the two LDPC-only coded PMRCs with the

decoding performance under the selected iterative scheme same iterative scheme (T6MS6) and use them as base lines.

(T6MS6). We show in Fig. 3 the performance curves for We can see in Figs. 4 and 5 that the concatenated codes pro-

codes with different rates and column vide remarkable gains over the RS-only

code in both

weights for the inner LDPC codes. We can see that, for each noise environments, and that the LDPC code with lower column

column weight, the inner LDPC code with a rate around 0.88 weight exhibits better performance. Due to the severe channel

exhibits the best performance, and further increasing the inner density penalty, stronger outer RS codes lead to worse perfor-

code rate severely degrades their error correction capability. mance in the simulation range considered. However, the advan-

For the concatenated codes with

and

, tage of the concatenated codes is also obvious. On the one hand,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:31:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1418

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

floors at high SNR. To do a complete evaluation, the perfor-

mance of the LDPC-only code and concatenated codes should

be compared at higher SNRs, where very low SERs are ex-

pected. Unfortunately, at present, we cannot estimate the per-

formance of the LDPC-only

code at high SNRs, es-

pecially under this complicated iterative scheme. For the con-

catenated codes, the multinomial model is widely used to esti-

mate the SER at the output of RS decoder [8], but we find that

the multinomial model cannot give an accurate estimation for

the RS plus LDPC codes. Recently, Kuznetsov et al. proposed a

microscopic approach [4] to estimate the SER of RS-plus codes

more accurately, based on the distributions of both error event

weight and the number of error events in a sector.

Fig. 4. Performance of RS + LDPC(R = 0:88) codes in random noise for
different RS and LDPC codes.
Fig. 5. Performance of RS + LDPC(R = 0:88) codes with media defects
for different RS and LDPC codes.

A. Microscopic Method

In this subsection, we briefly review the basic concept of the

microscopic method. Let denote the probability of an error

event that contains RS symbol errors. We can estimate by

simulation, which we denote as , with

. Then

we use a Markov chain of order to model the probability

mass function (PMF) and then generate , and optimize the

model parameters by minimizing the Kullback–Leibler distance

between the PMF and the weight distribution produced by the

model. Using the Markov chain model, it is easy to compute the

conditional word failure rate

, which is the probability

of the occurrence of more than RS symbol errors in a sector,

given that there are observed error events.

We then model the distribution of the number of error events

in a sector by tail fitting. At first, one can get a PMF

of

the number of error event by simulation, where

for greater than some value , due to limited simulation time.

For an LDPC code, we use an exponential function

with

to re-construct the missing tail of .

The tail-fitting finds the values of and which minimize the

quantity

(1)

the LDPC-only code with column weight of two exhibits a high

error floor, and so do the inner LDPC codes with column weight

of two. Since the concatenated codes always have sharp curves

in our simulations, it is clear that the outer RS codes are low-

ering the error floors caused by the inner LDPC codes. Similarly,

the concatenated codes have shaper curves than the LDPC-only

codes with column weight of three, and it is possible for the

concatenated codes to have better performance than LDPC-only

codes at high SNR. On the other hand, the concatenated codes

achieve larger coding gain over the RS-only

code in

the presence of media defects than in random noise, while the

coding gains of the LDPC-only code over the RS-only

code become smaller in the presence of media defects. In other

words, the concatenated codes are the most robust codes and ex-

hibit smaller performance degradation in the presence of media

defects than the LDPC-only and RS-only codes.

VI. SER ESTIMATION OF RS PLUS LDPC CODES
From Figs. 4 and 5, we note that the best performance is obtained for the LDPC-only code with column weight three. But as mentioned in the introduction, LDPC codes may have error

where

. Then , the distribution of the number

of error events, is made by combining and together,

where

for

and

for

.

Finally, the SER of RS plus LDPC codes is computed by

(2)

B. SER Estimation

To accurately estimate the SER of RS plus LDPC codes by the

microscopic method, it is necessary to obtain enough number of

error events by simulation to find the distributions and .

Unfortunately, we cannot get enough error events for

codes; at this time, we are only able to estimate

the SER for

codes by the microscopic

method. We have shown in Section V that

codes provide remarkable coding gains over the RS-only code.

It is interesting to verify if these gains vanish at high SNR.

By simulating the

codes in a wide SNR

region, we obtain enough number (no less than 400,000) of error

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:31:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG AND CRUZ: RS PLUS LDPC CODES FOR PERPENDICULAR MAGNETIC RECORDING

1419

Q k t R : ; W t ; ; R : ; W Fig. 6. PMFs ( ) for RS( = 16) + LDPC( = 0 88 = 2) code at Fig. 7. SER estimation for RS( = 16 20 24) + LDPC( = 0 88 =

Q k : different SNRs and ~( ) by exponential tail-fitting at SNR = 9 5 dB.

2) codes.

events to draw PMFs and . However, we find that

may not have a simple exponential tail. For example, we show in

Fig. 6 the distributions for the

code at different SNRs. At 7.6 dB,

has two corners

which separate the distribution curve into a sharp left region, a

flat middle region and a sharp tail region, where the fluctuation

in the sharp tail region is caused by the big estimation variation

at large . At higher SNRs, we lose track of the sharp tail region

and we are also gradually missing the flat middle region. At

very high SNRs (higher than 9 dB), we are only able to detect

the head region of , which exhibits a zigzag pattern just as

mentioned in [4].

Since

does not have a simple exponential tail, the tail-

fitting using (1) may not lead to an accurate estimation of the

SER. However, we note that

is a nondecreasing se-

quence with going to infinity. If we do the exponential tail

fitting only for the head region and ignore the flat middle region

of at high SNR, we get an estimator, which gives a lower

bound on the decoding performance. Since the existence of the

flat middle region is assumed but cannot be proved in this work,

the lower bound generated by this estimator is only a reasonable

conjecture.

We show in Fig. 7 the SER estimates for

codes. The estimator provides accurate results

at low SNRs and is expected to give a lower bound at high SNRs.

We expect these concatenated codes to have flat error floors,

because their inner

codes also have flat error

floors. In addition, the concatenated codes with larger exhibit

a lower error floor, which explains the contribution of the outer

RS codes. We also observe that the performance lower bounds

are above the SER of

; if the target working SER of the

system is

, then

codes may not be good choices.

VII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we investigate RS plus LDPC architec-

tures for PMRCs in great detail, and find the best iterative

scheme and code rate. We compare the waterfall region per-

formance for various RS plus LDPC codes in both random

noise and with media defects, and estimate the error floor

for the

codes. The interesting

question of estimating the performance of LDPC-only and

codes at high SNR and compare them

with our simulation results remains open.

REFERENCES
[1] W. Tan, “Design of inner LDPC codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 217–222, Jan. 2008.
[2] E. M. Kurtas, A. V. Kuznetsov, and I. Djurdjevic, “System perspectives for the application of structured LDPC codes to data storage devices,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 200–207, Feb. 2006.
[3] S. Jeon, X. Hu, and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Evaluation of the concatenation of LDPC and RS codes in magnetic recording channel using field programmable gate array,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., New Orleans, LA, 2008, pp. 1–5.
[4] A. V. Kuznetsov and R. Venkataramani, “Macroscopic and microscopic approaches in sector failure rate estimation,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 187–192, Jan. 2008.
[5] W. Chang and J. R. Cruz, “Nonbinary LDPC codes for 4-kB sectors,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 3781–3784, Nov. 2008.
[6] E. M. Kurtas, J. Park, X. Yang, W. Radich, and A. Kavcic, “Detection methods for data-dependent noise in storage channels,” in Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording Systems, B. Vasic and E. M. Kurtas, Eds. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 2005, pp. 33-1–33-17.
[7] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[8] P. Chaichanavong and G. Burd, “On the concatenation of soft inner code with Reed–Solomon code for perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 744–749, Feb. 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:31:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

