1610
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 58, NO. 6, JUNE 2010
Gradient Descent Bit Flipping Algorithms for Decoding LDPC Codes
Tadashi Wadayama, Keisuke Nakamura, Masayuki Yagita,
Yuuki Funahashi, Shogo Usami, and Ichi Takumi
Abstract—A novel class of bit-flipping (BF) algorithm for
decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is presented.
The proposed algorithms, which are referred to as gradient
descent bit flipping (GDBF) algorithms, can be regarded as
simplified gradient descent algorithms. The proposed algorithms
exhibit better decoding performance than known BF algorithms,
such as the weighted BF algorithm or the modified weighted BF
algorithm for several LDPC codes.
Index Terms—LDPC code, bit-flipping algorithm, gradient
descent algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
B
IT-FLIPPING (BF) algorithms for decoding low-density
parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] have been investigated
extensively and numerous variants of BF algorithms, such as
the weighted BF (WBF) algorithm [4], the modified weighted
BF (MWBF) algorithm [8], and other variants [2], [3], [5],
have been proposed.
Although the bit error rate (BER) performance of the BF
algorithm is inferior to that of the sum-product algorithm or
the min-sum algorithm, in general, the BF algorithm enables
the design of a much simpler decoder, which is easier to
implement. Thus, bridging the performance gap between BF
decoding and belief propagation (BP) decoding is an important
technical challenge.
In the present letter, a novel class of BF algorithm for
decoding LDPC codes is proposed. The proposed algorithms,
which are referred to as gradient descent bit flipping (GDBF)
algorithms, can be regarded as bit-flipping gradient descent
algorithms. The proposed algorithms are naturally derived
from a simple gradient descent formulation. The behavior of
the proposed algorithms can be explained from the viewpoint
of the optimization of a non-linear objective function.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Notation
Let 𝐻be a binary 𝑚× 𝑛parity check matrix, where 𝑛>
𝑚≥1. The binary linear code 𝐶is defined by 𝐶
△= {𝒄∈𝐹𝑛
2 :
𝐻𝒄= 0}, where 𝐹2 denotes the binary Galois field. In the
present letter, a vector is assumed to be a column vector. By
Paper approved by F. Fekri, the Editor for LDPC Codes and Applications
of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received January 22, 2009;
revised September 15, 2009.
T. Wadayama, K. Nakamura, M. Yagita, and I. Takumi are with the
Nagoya Institute of Technology, Nagoya, 466-8555, Japan (e-mail: wa-
dayama@nitech.ac.jp).
Y. Funahashi and S. Usami are with Meijo University.
A part of this letter was presented at the International Symposium on
Information Theory and its Applications, Auckland, Dec. 2008, and was
posted to ArXiv (indicator:0711.0261v1).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2010.06.090046
convention, we introduce the bipolar codes ˜𝐶corresponding
to 𝐶as follows: ˜𝐶
△= {(1−2𝑐1, 1−2𝑐2, . . . , 1−2𝑐𝑛) : 𝒄∈𝐶}.
Namely, ˜𝐶, which is a subset of {+1, −1}𝑛, is obtained from
𝐶using binary (0, 1) to bipolar (+1, −1) conversion.
In the present letter, we assume the binary-input AWGN
channel, which is defined as 𝒚= 𝒄+ 𝒛(𝒄∈˜𝐶). The vector
𝒛= (𝑧1, . . . , 𝑧𝑛) is a white Gaussian noise vector, where
𝑧𝑗(𝑗∈[1, 𝑛]) is an i.i.d. Gaussian random variable with zero
mean and variance 𝜎2. The notation [𝑎, 𝑏] denotes the set of
consecutive integers from 𝑎to 𝑏.
Let 𝑁(𝑖) and 𝑀(𝑗)(𝑖∈[1, 𝑚], 𝑗∈[1, 𝑛]) be 𝑁(𝑖)
△=
{𝑗∈[1, 𝑛] : ℎ𝑖𝑗= 1} and 𝑀(𝑗)
△= {𝑖∈[1, 𝑚] : ℎ𝑖𝑗=
1}, where ℎ𝑖𝑗is the 𝑖𝑗-element of the parity check matrix
𝐻. Using this notation, we can write the parity condition
as:
∏
𝑗∈𝑁(𝑖) 𝑥𝑗= 1(∀𝑖∈[1, 𝑚]) which is equivalent to
(𝑥1, . . . , 𝑥𝑛) ∈
˜𝐶. The value ∏
𝑗∈𝑁(𝑖) 𝑥𝑗∈{+1, −1} is
referred to as the 𝑖-th bipolar syndrome of 𝒙.
B. Brief review of known BF algorithms
A number of variants of BF algorithms have been devel-
oped. The BF algorithms can be classified as either single
bit flipping (single BF) algorithms or multiple bits flipping
(multi BF) algorithms. In the decoding process of the single
BF algorithm, only one bit is flipped according to its bit
flipping rule. On the other hand, the multi BF algorithm
allows multiple bit flipping during each iteration of a decoding
process. In general, although the multi BF algorithm exhibits
faster convergence than the single BF algorithm, the multi BF
algorithm suffers from the oscillation behavior of a decoder
state, which is not easy to control.
In a decoding process of a BF algorithm, bit flip positions
are determined based on the values of an inversion function.
The inversion functions of WBF [4] are defined by
Δ(𝑊𝐵𝐹)
𝑘
(𝒙)
△=
∑
𝑖∈𝑀(𝑘)
𝛽𝑖
∏
𝑗∈𝑁(𝑖)
𝑥𝑗,
(1)
where 𝒙= (𝑥1, . . . , 𝑥𝑛) ∈{+1, −1}. The values 𝛽𝑖(𝑖∈
[1, 𝑚]) are the reliabilities of bipolar syndromes defined by
𝛽𝑖
△= min𝑗∈𝑁(𝑖) ∣𝑦𝑗∣. In this case, the inversion function
Δ(𝑊𝐵𝐹)
𝑘
(𝒙) provides a measure of the invalidness of symbol
assignment on 𝑥𝑘, which is given by the sum of the weighted
bipolar syndromes. Although the inversion function of the
MWBF algorithm [8] has a similar form to the inversion
function of the WBF algorithm, the inversion function of the
MWBF algorithm contains a term corresponding to a received
symbol. The inversion function of the MWBF algorithm is
0090-6778/10$25.00 c⃝2010 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:39:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
WADAYAMA et al.: GRADIENT DESCENT BIT FLIPPING ALGORITHMS FOR DECODING LDPC CODES
1611
given by
Δ(𝑀𝑊𝐵𝐹)
𝑘
(𝒙)
△= 𝛼∣𝑦𝑘∣+
∑
𝑖∈𝑀(𝑘)
𝛽𝑖
∏
𝑗∈𝑁(𝑖)
𝑥𝑗,
(2)
where the parameter 𝛼is a positive real number.
The framework of the single BF algorithm is summarized
as follows:
Single BF algorithm
Step 1 For 𝑗∈[1, 𝑛], let 𝑥𝑗:= sign(𝑦𝑗), where sign(𝑥)
△=
+1 if 𝑥≥0. Otherwise sign(𝑥)
△= −1. Let 𝒙
△=
(𝑥1, 𝑥2, . . . , 𝑥𝑛).
Step 2 If the parity equation ∏
𝑗∈𝑁(𝑖) 𝑥𝑗= +1 holds for all
𝑖∈[1, 𝑚], output 𝒙, and then exit.
Step 3 Find
the
flip
position
given
by
ℓ
:=
arg min𝑘∈[1,𝑛] Δ𝑘(𝒙) and then flip the symbol:
𝑥ℓ:= −𝑥ℓ. The function Δ𝑘(𝒙) is referred to as an
inversion function.
Step 4 If the number of iterations is less than the maximum
number of iterations 𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥, then return to Step 2;
otherwise output 𝒙and exit.
In a decoding process of the single BF algorithm, hard
decision decoding for a given 𝒚is first performed, and 𝒙
is initialized to the hard decision result. The minimum of the
inversion function Δ𝑘(𝒙) for 𝑘∈[1, 𝑛] is then found1. An
inversion function Δ𝑘(𝒙) can be considered to be a measure
of the invalidness of bit assignment on 𝑥𝑘. The bit 𝑥ℓ, where
ℓgives the smallest value of the inversion function, is then
flipped.
III. GRADIENT DESCENT FORMULATION
A. Objective function
It seems natural to consider the dynamics of a BF algorithm
as a minimization process of a hidden objective function. This
observation leads to a gradient descent formulation of BF
algorithms.
The maximum likelihood (ML) decoding problem for the
binary AWGN channel is equivalent to the problem of finding
a (bipolar) codeword in ˜𝐶, which gives the largest correlation
to a given received word 𝒚. Namely, the MLD rule can be
written as ˆ𝒙= arg max𝒙∈˜
𝐶
∑𝑛
𝑗=1 𝑥𝑖𝑦𝑖.
Based on this correlation decoding rule, we define the
following objective function2:
𝑓(𝒙)
△=
𝑛
∑
𝑖=1
𝑥𝑗𝑦𝑗+
𝑚
∑
𝑖=1
∏
𝑗∈𝑁(𝑖)
𝑥𝑗.
(3)
The first term of the objective function corresponds to the
correlation between a bipolar codeword and the received word,
which should be maximized. The second term is the sum of
the bipolar syndromes of 𝒙. The second term has a maximum
value ∑𝑚
𝑖=1
∏
𝑗∈𝑁(𝑖) 𝑥𝑗= 𝑚if and only if 𝒙∈˜𝐶. Thus, this
1When Δ𝑘(𝒙) is an integer-valued function, a tie-break rule is required in
order to resolve a tie.
2This objective function has been inspired by the correlation MLD rule.
There are several possible objective functions for mimicking the correlation
MLD rule. In the present letter, we investigate one of the simplest objective
functions in such a class.
term can be considered to be a penalty term, which forces 𝒙
to be a valid codeword.
Note that this objective function is a non-linear function and
has many local maxima. These local maxima become a major
source of sub-optimality of the GDBF algorithm presented
later herein.
B. Gradient descent BF algorithm
For the numerical optimization problem of a differentiable
function, such as (3), the gradient descent method is a natural
choice for the first attempt. Namely, we consider the following
maximization problem:
maximize 𝑓(𝒙)
for the decoding of ˜𝐶and apply the gradient ascent method
to find a local maximum.
The partial derivative of 𝑓(𝒙) with respect to the variable
𝑥𝑘(𝑘∈[1, 𝑛]) can be immediately derived from the definition
of 𝑓(𝒙):
∂
∂𝑥𝑘
𝑓(𝒙) = 𝑦𝑘+
∑
𝑖∈𝑀(𝑘)
∏
𝑗∈𝑁(𝑖)∖𝑘
𝑥𝑗.
(4)
Let us consider the product of 𝑥𝑘and the partial derivative
of 𝑥𝑘in 𝒙, namely,
𝑥𝑘
∂
∂𝑥𝑘
𝑓(𝒙) = 𝑥𝑘𝑦𝑘+
∑
𝑖∈𝑀(𝑘)
∏
𝑗∈𝑁(𝑖)
𝑥𝑗.
(5)
For a small real number 𝑠, we have the first-order approxima-
tion: 𝑓(𝑥1, . . . , 𝑥𝑘+ 𝑠, . . . , 𝑥𝑛) ≃𝑓(𝒙) + 𝑠
∂
∂𝑥𝑘𝑓(𝒙). When
∂
∂𝑥𝑘𝑓(𝒙) > 0, we need to choose 𝑠> 0 in order to obtain
𝑓(𝑥1, . . . , 𝑥𝑘+ 𝑠, . . . , 𝑥𝑛) > 𝑓(𝒙). On the other hand, if
∂
∂𝑥𝑘𝑓(𝒙) < 0 holds, we should choose 𝑠< 0 in order to
obtain the above inequality. Therefore, flipping the 𝑘th symbol
(𝑥𝑘:= −𝑥𝑘) is highly likely to increase the objective function
value if (i) 𝑥𝑘
∂
∂𝑥𝑘𝑓(𝒙) < 0 holds and (ii) flipping induces a
relatively small change in a search point3.
One reasonable way to find a flipping position is to choose
the position at which the absolute value of the partial derivative
is largest. This flipping rule is closely related to the steepest
descent algorithm based on ℓ1-norm also known as the coor-
dinate descent algorithm4. According to this observation, we
use the following rule to choose the flipping position.
Definition 1 (Inversion function of the GDBF algorithm):
The single BF algorithm based on the inversion function
Δ(𝐺𝐷)
𝑘
(𝒙)
△= 𝑥𝑘𝑦𝑘+
∑
𝑖∈𝑀(𝑘)
∏
𝑗∈𝑁(𝑖)
𝑥𝑗
(6)
is referred to as the gradient descent BF (GDBF) algorithm5.
Thus, the decoding process of the GDBF algorithm can
be seen as the minimization process of −𝑓(𝒙) (it can be
3The possibility exists that the objective function value decreases because
the step size is fixed.
4Note that an algorithm based on coordinate descent approximation of the
min-sum and LP decoder was proposed by Vontobel and Koetter [7].
5Strictly speaking, the algorithm should be referred to as the gradient ascent
BF algorithm. However, based on the equivalent minimization problem, we
adopt the name gradient descent BF (GDBF) algorithm.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:39:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1612
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 58, NO. 6, JUNE 2010
Local maximum
(A) Single flipping
 Oscillation
 behavior 
(B) Multiple flipping
 (fixed)
(C) Multiple flipping
 (dynamic)
(A) converging but slow, (B) not converging but fast, (C)
converging and fast
Fig. 1.
Convergence behavior of a search point in GDBF decoding process.
considered as the energy of the system) based on the bit-
flipping gradient descent method.
The combination of the objective function ˜𝑓(𝒙) defined by
˜𝑓(𝒙)
△= 𝛼
𝑛
∑
𝑖=1
𝑥𝑗∣𝑦𝑗∣+
𝑚
∑
𝑖=1
𝛽𝑖
∏
𝑗∈𝑁(𝑖)
𝑥𝑗
(7)
and the argument on gradient descent presented above gives
the inversion functions of conventional algorithms such as the
WBF algorithm (1) and the MWBF algorithm (2).
C. Multi GDBF algorithm
A decoding process of the GDBF algorithm can be regarded
as a maximization process of the objective function (3) in a
gradient ascent manner. Thus, we can use the objective func-
tion value to observe the convergence behavior. For example,
it is possible to monitor the value of the objective function for
each iteration. In the first several iterations, the value increases
as the number of iterations increases. However, the value
eventually ceases to increase when the search point arrives
at the nearest point in {+1, −1}𝑛to the local maximum of
the objective function. We can easily detect such convergence
to a local maximum by observing the value of the objective
function.
Both the BF algorithms reviewed in the previous section
and the GDBF algorithm flip only one bit for each iteration.
In terms of the numerical optimization, in these algorithms,
a search point moves toward a local maximum with a very
small step (i.e., 1 bit flip) in order to avoid oscillation around
the local maximum (See Fig.1(A)). However, the small step
size leads to slower convergence to a local maximum.
The multi bit flipping algorithm is expected to converge
faster than the single bit flipping algorithm because of its
larger step size. If the search point is close to a local
maximum, a fixed large step is not suitable for finding a
(nearby) local maximum point and leads to oscillation in a
multi-bit flipping BF algorithm (Fig.1(B)). It is necessary to
adjust the step size dynamically from a large step size to a
small step size in an optimization process (Fig.1(C)).
The objective function provides a guideline for adjusting
the step size (i.e., number of flipping bits). The multi GDBF
algorithm is a GDBF algorithm that incorporates the multi-bit
flipping concept. In the following, we assume the inversion
function Δ(𝐺𝐷)
𝑘
(𝒙) defined by (6) (the inversion function for
the GDBF algorithm). The flow of the multi GDBF algorithm
is approximately the same as that of the previously presented
GDBF algorithm. When it is necessary to clearly distinguish
between two decoding algorithms, the GDBF algorithm pre-
sented in the previous sub-subsection is referred to as the
single GDBF algorithm.
In order to define the multi GDBF algorithm, we need
to introduce the parameters 𝜃and 𝜇. The parameter 𝜃is a
negative real number, which is called the inversion threshold.
The binary (0 or 1) variable 𝜇, which is called the mode flag,
is set to 0 at the beginning of the decoding process. Step 3
of the BF algorithm should be replaced with the following
multi-bit flipping procedure:
Step 3 Evaluate the value of the objective function, and let
𝑓1 := 𝑓(𝒙). If 𝜇= 0, then execute Sub-step 3-1
(multi-bit mode), else execute Sub-step 3-2 (single-
bit mode).
3-1
Flip all bits satisfying Δ(𝐺𝐷)
𝑘
< 𝜃
(𝑘∈
[1, 𝑛]). Reevaluate the value of the objective
function, and let 𝑓2 := 𝑓(𝒙). If 𝑓1 > 𝑓2
holds, then let 𝜇= 1.
3-2
Flip a single bit at the 𝑗th position where
𝑗
△= arg min𝑘∈[1,𝑛] Δ(𝐺𝐷)
𝑘
.
IV. BEHAVIOR OF THE GDBF ALGORITHMS
In this section, the behavior and decoding performance of
(single and multi) GDBF algorithms obtained from computer
simulations are presented. The objective function (3) was used
in these experiments.
Figure 2 presents objective function values 𝑓(𝒙) (3) as a
function of the number of iterations in the single and multi
GDBF processes. Throughout the present letter, a regular
LDPC code with 𝑛= 1008 and 𝑚= 504 (called PE-
GReg504x1008 in [6]) is assumed. The column weight of the
code is 3. In both (single and multi) cases, we tested the same
noise, and both algorithms output the correct codeword (i.e.,
the decoding was successful).
In the case of the single GDBF-algorithm, the value of
the objective function gradually increases as the number
of iterations grows increases in the first 50–60 iterations.
Eventually, the value of the objective function is no longer
incremented, and a flat section of the curve that corresponds
to a local maximum appears. The curve corresponding to the
multi GDBF algorithm exhibits much faster convergence as
compared to the single GDBF algorithm. The multi GDBF
algorithm requires only 15 iterations for the search point to
closely approach the local maximum point.
Figure 3 presents the bit error curves of single and multi
GDBF algorithms (𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥= 100, 𝜃= −0.6). As references,
the curves for the WBF algorithm (𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥= 100), the MWBF
algorithms (𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥= 100, 𝛼= 0.2), and the normalized min-
sum algorithm (𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥= 5, scale factor 0.8) are included as
well. The parameter 𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥denotes the maximum number of
iterations for each algorithm.
The GDBF algorithms perform much better than the WBF
and MWBF algorithms. For example, at BER = 10−6, the
multi GDBF algorithm has approximately 1.6 dB gain over
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:39:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
WADAYAMA et al.: GRADIENT DESCENT BIT FLIPPING ALGORITHMS FOR DECODING LDPC CODES
1613
 1250
 1300
 1350
 1400
 1450
 1500
 1550
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
Value of Objective Function
Number of Iterations
multi GDBF
single GDBF
SNR=4 dB
Fig. 2.
Objective function values in GDBF processes as a function of the
number of iterations (single GDBF v.s. multi GDBF) : regular LDPC code
(PEGReg504x1008[6]).
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
Bit Error Rate
SNR [dB]
WBF, Lmax=100
MWBF, Lmax=100
single GDBF, Lmax=100
multi GDBF, Lmax=100
Normalized min-sum, Lmax=5
Fig. 3.
Bit error rate of GDBF algorithms and other BF algorithms: regular
LDPC code (PEGReg504x1008[6]).
the MWBF algorithm. Compared with the single GDBF al-
gorithm, the error curve of the multi GDBF algorithm has a
steeper slope. According to these results, the single GDBF
algorithm appears to have no advantage, in either complexity
or performance, over the multi GDBF algorithm.
Unfortunately, there is still a large performance gap between
the error curves of the normalized min-sum algorithm and the
GDBF algorithms. The GDBF algorithm fails to decode when
a search point is attracted to an undesirable local maximum of
the objective function. This large performance gap suggests the
existence of some local maxima relatively close to a bipolar
codeword, which degrades the BER performance.
V. ESCAPE FROM A LOCAL MAXIMUM
A. GDBF algorithm with the escape process
A decoding failure occurs when a search point is captured
by a local maximum, which is not a transmitted codeword.
Since the weight of the final position of a search point is so
small, a small perturbation of a captured search point appears
Transmitted
codeword
Trapped
search point
Multi-bit
mode
Single-bit
mode
Downward
move
Fig. 4.
Idea of escape process. A trapped search point can move to another
hill by multi-bit flipping based on 𝜃2.
to be helpful for the search point to escape from an undesirable
local maximum. Such a perturbation process can be expected
to improve the BER performance of BF algorithms.
One of the simplest ways to add a perturbation to a trapped
search point is to forcibly switch the flip mode from the
single-bit mode to the multi-bit mode with an appropriate
threshold when the search point arrives at a non-codeword
local maximum. This additional process is referred to as the
escape process. In general, the escape process reduces the
object function value, i.e., the search point moves downward
in the energy landscape. After the escape process, the search
point again begins to climb a hill, which may be different from
that of the trapped search point.
Here, we modify the multi GDBF algorithm by incorporat-
ing two thresholds: 𝜃1 and 𝜃2. The threshold 𝜃1 is the threshold
constant used in the multi-bit mode at the beginning of the
decoding process. After several iterations, the multi-bit mode
is changed to the single-bit mode, and the search point may
then eventually arrive at the non-codeword local maximum.
In such a case, the decoder changes to the multi-bit mode
(i.e., 𝜇= 0) with threshold 𝜃2. Thus, the threshold 𝜃2 can be
regarded as the threshold for downward movement. Although
𝜃2 can be a constant value, in terms of the BER performance,
it is advantageous to choose randomly6. In other words, 𝜃2
can be a random variable. After the downward move (only
one iteration), the decoder changes the threshold back to 𝜃1.
The above process continues until the parity check condition
holds or the number of iterations becomes 𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥. Figure 4
illustrates the concept of the escape process.
B. Simulation results
Figure 5 shows the BER curve for such a decoding algo-
rithm (labeled ’Multi GDBF with escape’). In this simulation,
we used the parameters 𝜃1 = −0.7 and 𝜃2 = 1.7 + 𝛼, where
𝛼is a Gaussian random number with mean zero and variance
6This conclusion is based on experimental observations.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:39:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1614
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 58, NO. 6, JUNE 2010
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
Bit Error Rate
SNR [dB]
 multi GDBF with escape, Lmax=300
multi GDBF,  Lmax=100
Normalized min-sum, Lmax=5
Normalized min-sum, Lmax=100
WBF, Lmax=100
Fig. 5.
Bit error rate of the GDBF algorithm with the escape process: regular
LDPC code (PEGReg504x1008[6]).
0.01. Unfortunately, we have no quantitative theory predicting
the effect of the escape process. The parameters 𝜃1 and 𝜃2
were chosen based on the results of preliminary experiments,
i.e., these parameters were obtained by an ad hoc optimization
at SNR = 4 dB.
The BER curve of the multi GDBF with escape (with
𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥= 300) is much steeper than that of the naive multi
GDBF algorithm. At a BER of 10−5, the multi GDBF with
escape gives approximately 1.5 dB gain over the naive multi
GDBF algorithm. The average number of iterations of the
multi GDBF with escape is approximately 25.6 at SNR = 4 dB.
This result implies that the perturbation can actually reduce
the number of trapped search points in order to converge to
the desirable local maximum corresponding to the transmitted
codeword. Optimization of the flipping schedule to narrow
the performance gap between the min-sum algorithm and the
GDBF algorithm remains an open problem.
VI. CONCLUSION
The present letter proposed a class of BF algorithms based
on the gradient descent algorithm. The proposed algorithms
show better decoding performance than known BF algorithms,
such as the weighted BF algorithm and the modified weighted
BF algorithm, for several LDPC codes.
The GDBF algorithms can be regarded as a maximization
process of the object function using the bit-flipping gradient
descent method (i.e., bit-flipping dynamics, which minimizes
the energy −𝑓(𝒙)). The dynamics of the decoder is naturally
derived by differentiating the energy function, and the gradient
descent formulation introduces an energy landscape of the
state-space of the BF-decoder. This formulation provides a
new understanding of the convergence behaviors of BF algo-
rithms.
Acknowledgement
The author would like to express his thanks to the anony-
mous reviewers of ISITA 2008 and IEEE Transactions on
Communications for their comments, which helped to improve
the quality of the manuscript. The present study was supported
in part by the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports, and Cul-
ture of Japan through a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research
on Priority Areas No. 180790091 and by a research grant from
the Storage Research Consortium.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes," in Research Mono-
graph Series. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] F. Guo and H. Henzo, “Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping
decoding for low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Electron. Lett., vol.
40, no. 21, pp. 1356-1358, 2004.
[3] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Shi, and Y. Chen, “An improvement on the
modified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,"
IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814-816, 2005.
[4] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes
based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results," IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, pp. 2711–2736, vol. 47, Nov. 2001.
[5] C. H.Lee, and W.Wolf, “Implmentation-efficient reliability ratio based
weighted bit-flipping decoding for LDPC codes," IEEE Electron. Lett.,
vol. 41, no. 13, pp. 755-757, 2005.
[6] D. J. C. MacKay, “Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes." [Online].
Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
[7] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Towards low-complexity linear program-
ming decoding," in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics,
Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006.
[8] J. Zhang, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping
decoding of low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Commun. Lett., pp.
165-167, vol. 8, Mar. 2004.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:39:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
