A Flexible LDPC Decoder Architecture Supporting Two Decoding Algorithms

Shuangqu Huang, Dan Bao, Bo Xiang, Yun Chen and Xiaoyang Zeng
State Key Laboratory of ASIC and System Fudan University No. 825, Zhangheng Road, Shanghai, China
Email: {072052014, 081021040, bxiang, chenyun, xyzeng}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract—In this paper a programmable and area-efficient decoder architecture supporting two main stream decoding algorithms for any Block-LDPC codes is presented. The novel decoder can be configured to decode in either TPMP or TDMP decoding mode according to different Block-LDPC codes. To verify our proposed architecture, a flexible LDPC decoder which supports IEEE 802.16e is implemented using a 0.13um CMOS process with a total area of 6.3 mm2 and maximum clock frequency of 260 MHz. The estimated comsumption is 270 mW when operates at 125 MHz and 1.2V supply.
I. INTRODUCTION
Since the Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes have near-capacity decoding performance and very high decoding throughput, they have been employed as FEC coding scheme in many transmission standards for wireless communication such as IEEE 802.11n, IEEE 802.16e and DVB-S2. LDPC codes can be decoded by Gallager’s iterative Two-Phase Message Passing (TPMP) algorithm [1] which involves checknode update and variable-node update as two phase schedule. The check nodes are processed first and then the variable nodes next, resulting in a limited decoding throughput but most flexible operation schedule. Turbo-Decoding Message Passing (TDMP) algorithm was proposed in [2] to allow updating both check nodes and variable nodes concurrently in each block row, resulting in an increase of throughput by 2x as number of required iterations decrease by 50% when compared to TPMP algorithm.
Almost all of the research on LDPC decoder design so far has focused on one particular transmission standard, in which specific optimization are made to improve the decoder performance using only one of TPMP algorithm, TDMP algorithm and their modifications. For example, decoder in [3] takes advantage of inherent parallelism in the TDMP algorithm and achieve high throughput. However, the structure of implemented decoder is mostly code dependent and can not support a class of unstructured Block-LDPC codes such as High-Structured LDPC codes (HS-LDPC). In order to design an architecture that is code independent, decoders in [4][5] have the moderate throughput requirements and enable a flexible LDPC decoder implementation. However, these architectures are not area efficient and the throughputs are less

than architectures optimized for specific codes. In this paper, we present a flexible architecture targeting code independent LDPC decoder implementation, which can be configured to decode in either TPMP or TDMP decoding mode according to different Block-LDPC codes in order to take advantages from two decoding algorithms. For improving area and power efficiency, we present a Reconfigurable Serial Processing Array (RSPA) which has scalable datapath and can be dynamically reconfigured to support multi-standard.
II. LDPC CODES AND DECODING ALGORITHM
Low-Density Parity-Check codes are a class of linear block code defined by a M × N parity check matrix as shown in Fig. 1(a), where M represents the number of LDPC check bits and N represents the number of LDPC codeword bits. The parity check matrix can be represented by a bipartite graph called Tanner graph as shown in Fig. 1(b). There are two types of nodes in the Tanner graph, called check nodes and variable nodes. Each of the check nodes cm (m = 1,…,M) is connected to variable node vn (n = 1,…,N), where elements of each row in the parity check matrix are one.

c0 c
1
c2 c
3
v vv v v vv v 0123456 7
(a) M×N seed matrix

c0 c1 c2 c3
v0 v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6 v7 (b) Tanner graph

IΠ0 IΠ1 IΠ2

IΠ3

C0

IΠ4

IΠ5 IΠ6

IΠ7 C1

IΠ8

IΠ9 IΠ10

IΠ11

C2

IΠ12 IΠ13

IΠ14

IΠ15 C 3

V VV V V V V V

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

(c) zM × zN Parity Check Matrix

(d) Superimposed sub-matrix

Fig. 1. Parity check matrix and its representation

This work was supported by the funding of the State Key Lab of ASIC & System under grant No. 20080202.

978-1-4244-5309-2/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

3929

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A. Block-LDPC Codes
Block-LDPC codes were proposed recently in most of modern wireless communication systems including but not limited to IEEE 802.11n, IEEE 802.16e, DVB-S2, DMBT and CMMB. As shown in Fig. 1(c), the parity check matrix of structured Block-LDPC codes (C = z×M, V = z×N) is constructed from a M × N seed matrix from Fig. 1(a) by replacing each 1 in the seed matrix with a z×z cyclic-shifted identity I∏ of an offset value s, and each 0 in the seed matrix with a z×z zero matrix, where z is an expansion factor. The structured Block-LDPC codes include QC-LDPC, AA-LDPC and so on. Correspondingly, there are another kind of BlockLDPC codes called unstructured Block-LDPC codes such as IRA-LDPC and HS-LDPC which extensively exist in DVB-S2, CMMB and other communication standards. Different from structured Block-LDPC codes, some of cyclic-shifted matrices in unstructured Block-LDPC codes are replaced by superimposed cyclic-shifted identity matrices as shown in Fig. 1(d). As a result, the unstructured Block-LDPC codes have higher code rates and more excellent performance than structured Block-LDPC codes. Unfortunately, this irregular structure leads to data-collision when unstructured Block-LDPC codes are decoded by TDMP algorithm. Furthermore, this feature affects the choice of decoding algorithm and the architecture of LDPC decoder.
B. Decoding Algorithm
The most typical LDPC decoding algorithm, known as Gallager’s TPMP algorithm, passes messages along the edges of the Tanner graph in multiple rounds of updates between the two classes of nodes in Fig. 1(b). The rearranged schedule TPMP based on Normalized Min-Sum (NMS) algorithm can be briefly described as follows: In the i-th iteration, the checknode update operation can be expressed in (1) and (2), while variable-node update operation in (3). The two operations are repeated iteratively until the decoding criterion is satisfied.

Liv−c1 = Svic−1 − Rciv−1

(1)

Rciv = NMSn∈N (c),n∉v (Lin−c1 )

(2)

messages Λcv are immediately used to the variable-node update operation, whose results γ vc are then provided for updating the next block row. The TDMP based on NMS
algorithm can be described as follows: In the i-th block row
update operation of j-th iteration, messages update operations
can be expressed in (4), (5) and (6) sequentially.

ρvc

=

γ

i( vc

j −1)

−

Λ

(i−1) cv

j

(4)

Λicjv = NMSn∈N (c),n∉v (ρnc )

(5)

γ

ij vc

=

ρvc

+ Λicjv

(6)

Since extrinsic messages and posterior messages are updated in each block row concurrently, TDMP algorithm has an increase of throughput by 2x as number of required iterations decrease by 50% when compared to TPMP algorithm. Unfortunately, TDMP algorithm suffers from datacollision for their layered decoding flow when decoding superimposed cyclic-shifted identity matrix from unstructured Block-LDPC. For example, two value of γ vc will be generated simultaneously when decoding a superimposed submatrix as depicted in Fig. 1(d), resulting in a data-collision in updating the following block row whose sub-matirx has the same column number with previous superimposed sub-matrix.
C. Flexible schedule of decoding Algorithm
As expressed above, the flow of message update
operations between TPMP algorithm and TDMP algorithm are
different from each other. In order to efficiently decode any
Block-LDPC codes, in other words, to support variable block-
length and multi-rate, we adopt a rearranged schedule of
TPMP algorithm and expressed in Fig. 2(a). The breakup of parity-check matrix partitions C into M disjoint subsets: C = C1 ∪ C2 ∪ ... ∪ CM , where Cm (m= 1,2,…,M) denotes the set of check nodes in m-th block row, and V into N disjoint subsets: V = V1 ∪ V2 ∪ ... ∪ VN , where Vn (n = 1,2,…,N) denotes the set of variable nodes in n-th block column. The i-
th iteration of rearranged schedule TPMP first computes the

∑ Svic =

Rmi v + Iv

m∈M (v)

(3)

V → C1

V → C2

C → V1 C → V2

Where M(v) is the set of the neighboring check nodes for variable node v, N(c) is the set of the neighboring variable nodes for check node c. Iv, Rcv, Lvc and Svc denote the value of the prior log-likelihood ratio (LLR), extrinsic messages, prior messages and posterior messages, respectively. The NMS denotes the Normalized Min-Sum algorithm for check-node update operation.
In recent years, TDMP, also known as layered belief propagation algorithm, has been proposed for decoding LDPC codes. Unlike the TPMP, after the check-node update operation of TDMP is finished in one block row, the extrinsic

V → CM

C → VN

(a) The i-th iteration for rearranged schedule TPMP algorithm

V → C1

C1 → V

V → C2

C 2

→V

V → CM CM → V

(b) The i-th iteration for TDMP algorithm Fig. 2. Message passing schedule during one iteration

3930

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RCS

RCS FA A MSA

DRA

Address Memory

Permutation Memory

...Z
1
Fig. 3. The proposed LDPC decoder architecture
messages from V to Cm block row by block row serially and then accumulates the messages from C to Vn block column by block column serially as shown in Fig. 2(a). Similarly, the i-th iteration in TDMP first computes the messages from V to C1 and from C1 to V, and then computes the messages from V to C2 and from C2 to V, and so forth, as shown in Fig. 2(b).
III. VLSI ARCHITECTURE To balance the tradeoff between design complexity and decoding throughput, the best strategy is to have a partially parallel architecture design by grouping a certain number of variable and check nodes into a cluster for parallel processing. Fig. 3 shows the block diagram of proposed LDPC decoder architecture based on the block partially parallel, which is composed of four parts: 1) Central Controller with Permutation and Address Memory, 2) single port memory banks including Bit Node Sum Memroy (BNSM), Check Node Sum Memroy (CNSM) and Temporary Data Memory (TDM), 3) Parity Check, Input and Output Buffer, 4) Reconfigurable Serial Processing Array (RSPA).

Fig. 4. The Reconfigurable Serial Processing Array
throughput has been implemented as follows: 1) NMS algorithm and 1st and 2nd minimum search scheme are adopted in (2) and (5), resulting in a reduction of the decoding hardware complexity and memory capacity size. 2) By rearranging the schedule of TPMP algorithm and updating messages of each block row or block column serially, only one BNSM is needed and all memory banks can be single-port instead of dual-port. 3) Hardware utilization is increased by time-division multiplexing in RSPA when decoding in different update operations. 4) Since the parallelism factor z of RSPA varies from code to code, the datapath has to be scalable and reconfigurable. This is achieved by employing distributed arithmetic units in RSPA and memory banks as shown in Fig. 3, resulting in a reduction of overall power consumption by deactivating the arithmetic units and memory banks that are not being used.
B. Reconfigurable Serial Processing Array
As presented above, there are four basic arithmetic units are needed in block row or block column update operations: 1) Data Recovery Array (DRA), which recovers the extrinsic messages from the compressed messages (minimum, 2ndminimum, index, sign) stored in Check Node Sum Memory. 2) Reconfigurable Cyclic Shifter (RCS), which is realized with reconfigurable logarithmic barrel shifters and can be bypassed (blank blocks in Fig. 5 according to different decoding operations. 3) Finite Addition Array (FAA), which achieves

BNSM

CNSM

A. Flexible and Efficient Implementation
As depicted in Fig. 3, The Central Controller, which generates the control signals of all other blocks, fetches the offset value of each sub-matrix at different code-rates from the Permutation Memory and transfers this value to RSPA. The Parity Check and Output buffer achieves parity check, hard decision and data output operations. The RSPA is the central processing unit who is responsible for updating messages based on (1) to (6), which will be detailed depicted in the next section. In each iteration, the updated Rcv or Λcv from different decoding mode are stored in Check Node Sum Memory, while the updated Svc or γ vc are stored in Variable Node Sum Memory. The prior log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages from TPMP mode or the value of ρvc from TDMP mode are temporarily stored in Temporary Data Memory.

TDM

CNSM

DRA

RCS

(a) The block row update operation mode

FAA MSA

BNSM

DRA RCS
FAA

CNSM

As low cost design is critical for wireless receivers, in order to support variable block-length and multi-rate, an area efficient serial architecture with an aim to achieve maximum

(b) The column update operation mode Fig. 5. The block row and block column update operation modes

3931

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I.

COMPARISION OF LDPC DECODERS

Algorithm Block Szie Code Rate Sub-Matrix Size Parity Check Matrix Memory Size (bits) Area (mm2) Frequcency (MHz) Peak Power (mW) @ Fre.(MHz) Throughput (Mbps) @ Fre. (MHz), Iter. Technology (nm, V)

Proposed

[6]

[7]

TPMP,TDMP

TDMP

TPMP

576:96:2304

1/2, 2/3A, 2/3B, 3/4A, 3/4B, 5/6

24:4:96

Block-LDPC QC-LDPC

QC-LDPC

82,944

-

89,856

6.3

8.29

6.25

260

83.3

150

270 @ 125

52 @ 83.3

264 @ 150

205 @ 260,15 130, 1.2

60 @ 83.3,8 130, 1.2

105 @ 150,20 90, 1.0

Fig. 6. Performance of fixed point simulation at rate-1/2 2304-bits code
the signed binary addition operations with overflow control. 4) Minimum Scan Array (MSA), which searches out the minimum, 2nd-minimum, position of minimum and sign of all updated extrinsic message in each block row operations and completes normalized operations simultaneously.
In order to increase the hardware utilization, a RSPA has been proposed, which can be dynamically configured into TPMP or TDMP decoding mode according to different BlockLDPC codes. As presented in Fig. 4, a RSPA is composed of two RCS, a DRA, a FAA, a MSA and three 2-to-1 MUXs. The MUXs could switch RSPA into different operation mode by time-division multiplexing. For example, when the proposed decoder is decoding in TPMP mode, the block row update operation and block column update operation of RSPA are shown in Fig. 5(a) and Fig. 5(b), respectively.
IV. VLSI RESULTS
A flexible LDPC decoder which supports IEEE 802.16e has been synthesized on a SMIC 130nm 1.2V 8-metal layer CMOS technology. Fig. 6 shows the fixed-point simulation results in both TPMP and TDMP decoding modes for a rate1/2 2304-bit code. The iteration number of our proposed decoder can be set according to the channel condition. Fig. 7 shows the VLSI layout view of the LDPC decoder.

The VLSI implementation results show that the proposed decoder occupies an area of 6.3 mm2 and achieves a maximum decoding throughput of 205 Mbps at an operating frequency of 260 MHz with maximum 15 iterations in TDMP decoding mode. The post-layout estimated power consumption is 270 mW when decoding at 125 MHz and 1.2V supply voltage. Table 1 compares this decoder with the stateof-the-art LDPC decoder of [6] and [7].
V. CONCLUSION
A flexible decoder architecture which is code independent and can be configured into different decoding mode has been presented, as a result the proposed decoder can gain benefits from both TPMP and TDMP decoding algorithms. This novel architecture features high area and power efficiency and has a scalable datapath, which is particularly suitable for multistandard LDPC decoder scheme.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] M. Mansour, “A Turbo-Decoding Message-Passing Algorithm for Sparse Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Trans. On Signal Processing, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 4376-4392, Nov. 2006.
[3] Y. Sun and J. R. Cavallaro, “A low-power 1-Gbps reconfigurable LDPC decoder design for multiple 4G wireless standards,” in IEEE International SOC Conference, Sep. 2008, pp. 367-370.
[4] S. M. E. Hosseini, K. S. Chan and W. L. Goh, “A reconfigurable FPGA implementation of an LDPC decoder for unstructured codes,” in 2nd International Conference on Signals, Circuit and Systems, Nov. 2008, pp. 1-6.
[5] R. Priewasser, M. Huemer and B. Bougard, “Trade-off of decoding algorithm and architectures for multi-standard LDPC decoder,” in 2008 Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, Oct. 2008, pp. 88-93.
[6] X.-Y. Shih, C.-Z. Zhan, C.-H. Lin, and A.-Y. Wu, “An 8.29mm2 52mW Multi-mode LDPC Decoder Design for Mobile WiMAX System in 0.13 um CMOS Process,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 672-683, Mar. 2008.
[7] C.-H. Liu, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-S. Hsu, S.-J. Jou, “An LDPC Decoder Chip Based on Self-Routing Network for IEEE 802.16e Applications,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuit, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 684-694, Mar. 2008.

Fig. 7. VLSI layout view of the proposed LDPC decoder

3932

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

