1836

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

Error Floor Estimation of Long LDPC Codes on Magnetic Recording Channels
Xinde Hu1, Zongwang Li2, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar3, and Richard Barndt1
STMicroelectronics, San Diego, CA 92122 USA LSI Corporation, San Jose, CA 95035 USA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
The presence of error floor in low density parity check (LDPC) codes is of great concern for potential applications of LDPC codes to data storage channels, which require the code to maintain the near capacity error correcting performance down to frame error rates
of 10 12. In order to investigate the error floor of LDPC codes under magnetic recording channels used in data storage systems, we
extended the trapping set based estimation method to predict the error floor under magnetic recording channels. The goal is to accurately estimate the error rates in the error floor region for certain types of LDPC codes under the partial response channel. First, we use field-programmable gate array (FPGA) hardware simulation to find the trapping sets that cause the decoding failure in the error floor region. For each trapping set, we extract the parameters that are key to the decoding failure caused by this trapping set. Then we use a much simpler in situ simulation with these parameters to obtain the conditional decoding failure rate. By considering all the trapping sets, we obtain the overall frame error rate in the error floor region. The estimation results under the magnetic recording channel are within 0.3 dB of the direct simulation results.
Index Terms—Error floor, importance sampling, low density parity check (LDPC), magnetic recording, trapping set.

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE near Shannon-limit error correcting performance of low density parity check (LDPC) codes [1] has led to

interests in applying them in data storage systems. However,

there are open issues about the LDPC codes. LDPC codes ex-

hibit “waterfall” performance curves as the error rates drop very

fast after certain signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) threshold. After the

“waterfall” region, the slope of the curve often decreases dra-

matically, generally referred to as the error floor (the bottom of

the “waterfall”). MacKay and Postol [2] discovered in simula-

tion a “weakness” in the Margulis construction of a regular (3,6)

Gallager code that gives rise to a relatively high error floor. For

data storage applications, the error correcting codes are required

to maintain the near-capacity performance even at bit error rates

as low as

. Thus, the error floor behavior of LDPC

codes is a big concern.

Much research effort has been devoted to estimating the error

floor of LDPC codes for different channels. For channels with

additive white Gaussian noise, certain subsets of the Tanner

graph, called trapping sets, are believed to be the primary reason

for error floor [3]. In [3], Richardson uses the concept of trap-

ping sets (definition based on the dominant error patterns) to

estimate the error floor. The semi-analytical method can also be

extended to partial response channel [4], [5]. In [4], Hu et al.

use trapping-set based method to estimate the error floor of the

ideal partial response channel.

For a realistic magnetic recording channel with data-depen-

dent noise occurring in data storage systems, the behavior of

error floor remains an open issue. In this effort, we extend the

trapping set based method to estimate the error floor of LDPC

Manuscript received October 30, 2009; revised December 09, 2009; accepted December 25, 2009. Current version published May 19, 2010. Corresponding author: X. Hu (e-mail: xhu@stec-inc.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2010.2040026

coded magnetic recording channel with a combination of analytical tools and field-programmable gate-array (FPGA) simulation. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the recording channel model and the concept of trapping sets. The searching process for trapping sets is also presented in Section II. The error floor estimation method based on trapping sets is introduced in Section III. Section IV contains the results of the estimation and the conclusion.
II. TRAPPING SETS OF LDPC CODED MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNEL
A. Trapping Sets
The error floor of LDPC codes was initially pointed out by MacKay et al. [2]. The source of the error floor was identified as “near codeword.” In more recent work, Richardson [3] introduced a similar concept of trapping sets to analyze the error floor behavior. For a given channel, the trapping set can be defined as follows.
Definition [Trapping Sets]: A trapping set of a code, given a representation and a decoding algorithm, is a set of variable nodes which is a fixed point of the decoder when in error.
The concept of trapping sets can be used to any decoding algorithm. Under maximum likelihood (ML) decoding, only legal codewords are the fixed points in the ML decoder, thus the trapping sets are precisely all the legal codewords. For iterative decoding algorithm for LDPC codes under additive White Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels or partial response (PR) channels, the trapping sets can be more complicated. During the iterative decoding process, we define the hard decision on each variable node after each iteration as its status. For a particular codeword sent, the status after iteration is determined by the sign of log-likelihood ratios (LLRs). For the variable nodes in the same trapping set, when all are in error, the iteration process will not be able to alter the status on any of these variable nodes.
For channels with additive white Gaussian noise, during the “waterfall” region (SNR is less than the starting point of error

0018-9464/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF LONG LDPC CODES ON MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

1837

(1)

Here is the transition response from the recording system,

which usually modeled by an error function. Here

de-

notes the th derivative of and the jitter noise is assumed

to be Gaussianly distributed [7].

Fig. 1. Magnetic recording channel model.

C. Finding the Trapping Sets

floor), a decoding failure can be caused by a variety of factors, such as converging to a wrong codeword, decoding oscillation, as well as the trapping sets. But as the error floor starts, the decoding failures are almost exclusively created by the trapping sets [3]. For Margulis’s regular (3,6) LDPC code, 20 classes of trapping sets were identified and these dominant error patterns account for more than 99% of error events that occur. Most of these trapping sets involve fewer than 12 variable nodes out of a length-2640 codeword [3].
For long LDPC codes, direct simulation results shows that in the error floor region, the dominant error patterns of the iterative decoding can be characterized by several particular structures in the bipartite graph. In general, the structure can be identified as a subset of the variable nodes having very small number of odd-degree neighbors (connecting check nodes). When every bit in this subset is in error, all the even-degree neighbors will be propagating positive information on the status of this subset in the future iterations, since the parity check equation is obviously satisfied. Clearly, this part of the belief propagation is misleading since it confirms the wrong status. Although the odd-degree neighbors will give negative feedback, the likelihood ratio is typically not strong enough to overturn the decision.
B. LDPC Coded Magnetic Recording Channel

For the ideal PR channel with AWGN, the trapping sets can be found through direct simulation. Through the iterative decoding process, we define the error symptom as the subset of variables whose status are erroneous after a large number of (e.g., 60) iterations
(2)
The trapping sets are defined as the fixed points in the iterative decoder. When the simulation process reaches a fixed point, the error symptom contains exactly the variable nodes that comprise a trapping set. Therefore, the symptoms of error event during the error floor region (high SNR) can directly lead to trapping sets. Based on this fact, we use the FPGA hardware to simulate the decoding process at high SNR level (for codes with high error floors, this is practical; for others, one can use certain biased LLR simulation to find trapping sets [8]). The symptom of an error event is recorded as the variable nodes in a trapping set.
III. DECODING FAILURE CAUSED BY TRAPPING SETS
To determine the decoding failure rate in the error floor region, we estimate the error rate caused by each trapping set individually. The overall decoding failure rate is estimated by the sum of error rate induced by each trapping set

Partial response (PR) channels are widely used in data

(3)

storage systems to increase the recording density. A channel

detector (typically Viterbi detector) is needed to calculate the soft-information of each variable node for the iterative decoding. The LDPC code decoding process is based on the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) obtained from the soft output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) detector. In addition, we also consider the data-dependent noise for a realistic partial response channel model. Compared to the ideal PR channel, a realistic channel will include not only additive white Gaussian noise, but data-pattern noise (jitter), which is also Gaussianly distributed. In addition, an interleaver is used between detector and decoder. The overall system structure is shown in Fig. 1.
The jitter noise is caused by the zig-zag boundaries between the storage bit cells on the recording media. As a result, the readback signal exhibits a pulse response shift ( in time domain). Since the jitter noise occurs only when there is a transition between bit cells [7], it is dependent on the data-pattern. To capture the effect of the jitter noise in discrete time, an Taylor’s series

In this case, is defined by the event of decoding failure and error occurring on every variable node in the trapping set .
Simulation using all-zero codeword cannot fully represent codewords generated from random user bits in magnetic recording channel. To begin our discussion, we use all-zero codewords in the PR channel (the notation and calculation process follows the process in [4] for all-zero codewords) as a more complete discussion will be presented later this section. The following variables are defined.
• : The length of Gaussian noise sequence for one codeword. Note that for PR channel, is slightly larger than the codeword length.
• : noise variable at the bit of the codeword. Note that for the all-zero codeword, the channel output is precisely at the bit.
• : noise variable sequence, from 1 to .

expansion of the pulse response is used to model the readback •

: noise variable sequence, from 1 to , excluding the

signal, as shown in (1) [6]

variables in vector .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1838

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

Now, the only variables in the system are the independent Gaussian noise variables. Ideally, the decoding failure rate caused by a particular trapping set can be calculated by
(4)

The amount of Monte Carlo simulation required for (4) is

still impractical. However, within the noise sequence, only a

small subset of noise variables affects the input to the decoder

on the nodes within . For variable node ( bit in the

codeword, node in the trapping set being examined) under

the PR channel (assuming EPR4 channel), the noise variables

which determine the input to the variable node in LDPC decoder

are , , , and since EPR4 is a length-4 target.

These noise variables are independent Gaussian variables with

variance of . For a trapping set

, the

vector of noise variables which determines the input for

the trapping set in LDPC decoder can be expressed as follows

(for a size trapping set)

(5)

The noise vector is a key factor in determining the decoding failure rate due to . We can rewrite (4) as follows [4]:

(6)
Above derivation assumes that the noise variables are independent and thus can be isolated from the noise sequence [4].
Starting from this step, we look to simplify the later part of the equation. The goal is to find a variable to approximate the impact of the noise vector . We can rewrite as

(7)

Now, define parameter

, which is a Gaussian

variable with variance

. Since determines the Eu-

clidean distance difference, we use to approximate the impact

of on decoding failure due to , i.e.,

Thus, in order to estimate

, we use an in situ simu-

lation conditioned on the parameter . At different levels of ,

Monte Carlo simulations of the overall system are used to cal-

culate

. The rest of the

equation can be obtained analytically. Compared to (6), this es-

timation method varies only one key parameter instead of

Gaussian variables. In addition, for certain value, the amount

of simulation required to calculate the

is only a small

fraction of the direct Monte Carlo simulations [4].

For every trapping set found, we use this method to estimate

the corresponding decoding failure rate at different SNRs. The

final FER estimate is obtained as follows:

(11)

Now, we know the process of estimating the SFR caused

by trapping sets if all-zero pattern is used (no data-dependent

noise). When we consider the general case, we need to include

the data-pattern factor and the data-pattern dependent noise

factor. In addition to the ones defined so far, the following

variables are used in this section.

• : the encoded binary data sequence (of length ).

• : the data sequence corresponding to the elements of the

vector .

•

: the data sequence excluding the data bits in the

vector , defined in (5).

We can write the probability of a frame error due to the trapping

set as

(12) Here the noise sequence is dependent upon the encoded data sequence.
Similar to (6), this equation can be written as

(8)

(13)

Thus, we can rewrite (6) as

Again, we examine the dimensional noise vector (for a trapping set size ) in the Euclidean space. The goal is to find a vari-

able representing the projection of noise vector to the vector

connecting and , and the term

can be di-

(9)

Note that here we use discrete summation over to approx-

imate the integration. Since is Gaussian variable with zero

mean and variance of

, we can write

rectly calculated. At certain SNR, the noise variances on different dimensions
are different due to the presence of jitter noise, as shown at the bottom of Fig. 2. Therefore, we can not directly use the projection of the noise vector using the orthonormal basis defined in

(5). However, we can normalize all dimensions using an asym-

metric mapping (linear transformation) on the Euclidean space,

as shown on the top of Fig. 2. Assuming the noise variance

when transition occurs is and without transition, we apply

(10) linear scaling of

on axis without transition. This way, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF LONG LDPC CODES ON MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

1839

Fig. 3. Estimation result for recording channel model. The estimation of FER in the error floor region is within 0.3 dB of the simulation results.

• Set the value of .

• Generate the readback signal with the data pattern known.

• The noise vector on is replaced by the value of .

• Simulate the detector and decoder to see whether the trap-

Fig. 2. Noise vector and the linear transformation of the Euclidean space.

ping set causes the decoder to fail or not.

noise variances across all dimensions will be the same. Then we can use the direct projection variable to the direction connecting and . Note that here the ideal channel output is also scaled accordingly. Shown in Fig. 2, the parameter , representing the projection vector length, is a Gaussian variable. With the new orthonormal basis with the first element being
(based on the data pattern in this example). The noise vector can be written as

• If true, given the data pattern on , calculate

.

• Repeat with different data patterns.

• Change the value of , and repeat the simulation.

For one trapping set, when is small, although the term

is large, the frame error rate is low. When is

large, the term

is negligible. Thus, the simulation

can be done only for values of in the middle range. An-

other finding from this simulation is that the new elements in

the realistic channel have significant impact on the frame error

rate caused by trapping sets. Two trapping sets having identical

graph structure can have very different frame error rates (differ-

ence of

). The reason is that a random interleaver can

Define parameter

, put the variable nodes in one trapping set closely in the channel,

which is a Gaussian variable. Depending on the data pattern, thus a small error event can trigger a decoding failure. Also, for

the parameter can be different. Following the procedure one trapping set, under the same SNR settings, different data

similar to the ones shown in (9) and (10), we can write the final patterns can lead to different failure rates. The ones with more

estimation equation as

transitions have significantly higher frame error rates. Consid-

ering all trapping sets found, we compared the estimation results

with the direct simulation result, as shown in Fig. 3. The esti-

mation result is within 0.3 dB of the simulation result.

In conclusion, we proposed a method using a combination of (14) analytical tools and FPGA simulation to estimate the error floor

of LDPC codes under magnetic recording channel. The method

Here the term

can be calculated directly if is is based on the concept of trapping sets. The estimation result is

known. Other part can be obtained using the simulation process. also within 0.3 dB of the direct simulation result.

IV. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION
Following the system model shown in Fig. 1, we search for trapping sets first. The trapping set for this system model is found through intensive FPGA hardware simulation. Compared with the AWGN channel, the trapping set not only dependent on the graphic structure of the LDPC code, but also certain error events that has direct impact on a trapping set. The key reason is the presence of data-dependent noise and the interleaver, which can link the variable nodes within a trapping set into one short error event. The result is far fewer trapping sets contributed to the frame errors in the error floor region for the recording channel.
For each trapping set found, we follow the method outlined by (14) to calculate the frame error rate caused by this trapping set at different SNR. The simulation process can be summarized in the following steps.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambirdge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and M. Pastol, Electron, Notes in Theoretical Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 1–8, 2003.
[3] T. Richardson, in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf., Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[4] X. Hu, Z. Li, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, and R. Barndt, in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Dec. 2007, pp. 259–264.
[5] S. Yang, Y. Han, K. Gunnam, Z. Li, M. Ivkovic, W. Tan, H. Zhong, L. Sun, H. Song, and Y. Lee, in Magnet. Record. Conf. Dig., 2009, pp. 71–72.
[6] J. Moon and J. Park, in Proc. IEEE ICC, May 2005, vol. 3, pp. 2057–2062.
[7] X. Hu and B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 727–732, Feb. 2007.
[8] C. Cole, S. Wilson, E. Hall, and T. Giallorenzi, “A general method for finding low error rates of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, submitted for publication.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

