IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

1813

Signal Processing for Near 10 Tbit/in2 Density in Two-Dimensional Magnetic Recording (TDMR)
E. Hwang, R. Negi, and B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar
Data Storage Systems Center, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) is a new magnetic recording paradigm that aims to record one bit of information in one or a few grains, with the goal of achieving a recording density of nearly 10 Tbit/in2. In addition to the usual noise, a TDMR channel

experiences the problem that some bits are never recorded because of the randomness of grain size and location. Thus, it is believed that

a key component of a TDMR channel is two-dimensional (2-D) signal processing along with a strong error correction code. In this study,

the TDMR channel is investigated based on a random Voronoi grain model and a signal processing architecture is proposed. Here, a 2-D

linear minimum mean squared error (LMMSE) equalizer and a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code are employed and the effects of

Tgrains in unwritten bits are modeled by a Gaussian mixture model.
user bit densities near 10 Tbit/in2 for media with a 20

In

numer2icgarlasiinmduelnatsiiotyn.s,

the

proposed

architecture

shows

the

feasibility

of

Index Terms—Channel simulation, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, two-dimensional magnetic recording.

I. INTRODUCTION

T OWARDS the goal of achieving user bit densities of 10 Tbit/in using magnetic recording, a new recording para-

digm called two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) has

recently been proposed [1]. TDMR tries to achieve this user bit

density by encoding the user data with very powerful (and as

a consequence, relatively low-rate) error correcting codes and

recording a channel (i.e., encoded) bit in one or a few magnetic

grains (on average) of the conventional media. Also, TDMR is

envisioned to use aggressive two-dimensional (2-D) signal pro-

cessing and powerful decoding techniques to overcome errors

caused by noise and the fact that some channel bits may not

have been recorded at all, causing write errors. Therefore, ini-

tial TDMR research is aimed at investigating whether TDMR

can achieve the target density under such impairments.

Recently, the TDMR channel has been investigated based on

a Voronoi grain model [2], [3], where grains are assumed to be

magnetized according to the channel bits containing the cen-

troids (centers of mass) of the grain, and readback is assumed

to be acquired by successive scans of the recorded medium [1].

Based on the channel model, the write errors are discussed in

[1], [4], and position errors in 2-D readback are investigated

experimentally using a contact drag tester [4]. In addition, to

retrieve data from the TDMR channel, several 2-D signal pro-

cessing and error control schemes have been proposed, such

as the 2-D zero-forcing equalization (ZFE) [5] and linear pro-

gramming based LDPC decoding [6]. Through numerical eval-

uations, the theoretical capacity of the TDMR channel has been

approximated by fitting it to simple channel models, such as

the binary symmetric channel (BSC) and the binary erasure

and error channel (BEEC). The information capacity calculated

from a BSC model is about 4.2 Tbit/in for a grain density of

20

[1].

Manuscript received October 30, 2009; revised December 20, 2009; accepted January 17, 2010. Current version published May 19, 2010. Corresponding author: E. Hwang (e-mail: euiseokh@cmu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2010.2041531

In this study, the feasibility of TDMR is investigated with an

advanced channel model that includes write errors, 2-D inter-

ference, additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and random

position jitter. In the channel model, the Voronoi grain model is

further extended with additional random offsets and variations

in grains per channel bit density. Based on the channel model,

signal processing schemes are proposed that can nearly achieve

the target user bit density. A 2-D linear minimum mean square

error (LMMSE) equalizer is employed for equalization and a

soft input low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoder [7] is used

for error correction. Here, the residual error in the equalizer

output is approximated by a Gaussian mixture noise model,

which is used to extract soft information needed for LDPC

decoding.

In order to evaluate the TDMR channel numerically, the

channel impairments are modeled by several parameters such

as the average number of grains per channel bit and LDPC

code rate. Using the channel model, error rates, including the

write error rate, the raw bit error rate (BER) of the channel, and

BERs after equalization and error correction are estimated. In

simulations, 1.3 grains per channel bit density along with an

LDPC code of rate 41/64 leads to a BER of

after

error correction. The corresponding user bit density is 0.493

bits/grain, which is equivalent to 9.86 Tbit/in assuming a grain

density of 20

[1].

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II con-

tains a brief introduction of the TDMR channel model. This

is followed, in Section III, by a discussion of the 2-D signal

processing schemes for TDMR. Numerical evaluations are then

presented in Section IV and Section V concludes the paper.

II. TDMR CHANNEL MODEL
A TDMR channel is different from other magnetic recording channels in two major aspects: write errors and spatially varying 2-D interference. The channel model introduced in this study includes these features as well as other conventional magnetic recording channel impairments such as AWGN and position jitter. In this study, the channel model is divided into three parts: first, modeling of the grains of the media, then the recording of the grains, and finally, the reading from the grains.

0018-9464/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:35:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

does not provide any information about the unwritten bits. In

the channel model, a simple write model is employed, where a

grain modeled by a Voronoi cell is magnetized by the channel

bit containing the centroid of the grain cell [1]. Here, the

write error occurs if no grain centroid falls on the bit cell.

For example, the input data shown in Fig. 1(b) is recorded on

the grains in Fig. 1(a) with the simple write model. Resulting

recorded Voronoi cells are shown in Fig. 1(c). White cells

Fig. 1. Illustrative example of TDMR writing and reading. Voronoi cells (a) input data bit array (b) recorded Voronoi cells (c) multiple scans concatenated in parallel (d) and equivalent discrete channel output sampled at the center of the bit cell (e).

represent one direction of magnetization (e.g., up), while gray cells represent the other direction of magnetization (e.g., down). As can be seen, some of the channel bits are not recorded to any grain. For example, the 8th bit of the 2nd track contains no

grain centroid, and is not written to any grain, causing a write

error. The bit is originally gray; however, the grains near the

The grains in the recording media can be modeled by randomly distributed Voronoi cells [3], [5]. The Voronoi cells are generated from a set of randomly distributed points (corresponding to nuclei) in a plane and a corresponding set of regions, where each region represents a set of all points in the media closer to the selected nucleus than to other nuclei. Each region represents one Voronoi cell which indicates one magnetic grain, and the number of regions in the area determines the average size of grains. For easy manipulation of the variance of the Voronoi cells, a predefined lattice can be used for the boundaries of the ideal grain cells. Random Voronoi

bit are recorded to white. The readback of TDMR can be obtained from successive
scans of the media using a single read head, i.e., from raster scan of the recorded block of grains. Typically, the TDMR bit cell size is comparable to the resolution of the read sensor, which adds a considerable amount of 2-D interference to the TDMR readback signal. In addition, this interference varies spatially due to the randomness of the grains in the media. This 2-D readback process can be modeled by a convolution of the recorded magnetization of the Voronoi cells and the 2-D read sensitivity function given below [3]

cells with certain areal variance can be obtained by shifting

the center of the ideal cells with controlled random offsets

(1)

[5]. One undesired effect of the lattice based approach is that

the centroids of the Voronoi cell can be correlated to those of the channel bit cell. Specifically, for the case of one grain per channel bit, centroids of the Voronoi cells are densely distributed near the centers of the bit cells, even though the nuclei of the Voronoi cells are uniformly distributed all over the bit cells. Consequently, grains can be unrealistically well aligned with the bit cells. The reduced misalignment may result in an underestimation of the channel impairments, compared to the case of uniformly distributed random misalignments. In this study, to mitigate this correlation while maintaining the simple Voronoi cell generation scheme, additional random offsets are applied to a group of nuclei, denoted by a sub-block. Centroids of the Voronoi cells of different groups are densely distributed at different parts of the bit cells. Thus, the centroids of the Voronoi cells in an entire page are uniformly distributed all over the bit cells. An example of random Voronoi cells is shown in Fig. 1(a), where the mean area of the grain is equal

where is the half pulsewidth and is the length of the square

bit cell. Here and denote locations along down-track and

cross-track directions, respectively, normalized by . An ex-

ample of 2-D readback scan of previously recorded grains is

shown in Fig. 1(d). In this figure, is set to , while AWGN

and position jitter are ignored. The scanning resolution is 10

10 times finer than that of the bit cell. Due to the 2-D nature of

the TDMR channel, interference is present in both down-track

and cross-track directions. Equivalent discrete channel outputs

can be obtained by sampling the scans at the center of a bit cell,

as shown in Fig. 1(e). Both inter-symbol interference (ISI) and

inter-track interference (ITI) exist in the readback samples and

the interference varies spatially depending on the grain geom-

etry near the bit cells.

Based on the channel model shown in Fig. 1, the TDMR

channel output,

, can be expressed as

to that of the bit cell (one grain per channel bit) and the bit

aspect ratio (BAR) of the bit cell is set to 1. The vertical and

(2)

horizontal axes are the bit indexes along the down-track and

the cross-track directions, respectively. Dots denote cell nuclei and the regions divided by solid lines are Voronoi cells. The cross marks are the centroids of the Voronoi cells, which are different from the nuclei of the cells.

where

denotes the input data array,

. This

array is assumed to consist of independent and identically dis-

tributed random variables, having equal probabilities. de-

In order to reduce the recorded size of the channel bit, notes a set of neighboring bits of bit and

TDMR employs a shingled writing technique [8], where the denotes a spatially varying pixel spread function (PSF), which

grains are magnetized sequentially, i.e., in a TV raster fashion. includes the effect of imperfect sampling with random position

Here, some of the data bits are recorded erroneously because jitter denoted by and for down-track and cross-track direc-

the grains recorded by the previous data bits can be rewritten tions, respectively. Here

denotes additive noise. Position

by the following bits. These write errors can be handled only jitter and additive noise are modeled by Gaussian random vari-

by error correction decoding since the readback signal itself ables with mean zero and variance and , respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:35:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HWANG et al.: SIGNAL PROCESSING FOR NEAR 10 TBIT/IN DENSITY IN TDMR

1815

III. SIGNAL PROCESSING FOR TDMR
In this section, based on the channel model, a signal processing architecture for TDMR is proposed, which employs 2-D LMMSE equalization, Gaussian mixture noise modeling, and soft input LDPC coding.

A. 2D Equalization for TDMR

A TDMR channel experiences spatially varying 2-D interfer-

ence, which strongly depends on the placement of grains relative

to bit cells. This interference is captured by the spatially varying

PSF in the channel model, as shown in (2). Previously, a 2-D

zero-forcing equalizer (ZFE) has been proposed to mitigate the

interference in a TDMR channel [5]. Let

be a spatially

invariant channel response, obtained from the perfectly aligned

ideal grain model. Then an effective magnetization

can

be introduced (note that the underbars represent the “effective”

variables) such that

Fig. 2. Conditional probability density functions of equalized output, z. f^ (z)’s are empirical probability density functions and f^ (z) and f^ (z) are ones fitted to Gaussian and Gaussian mixture noise model, respectively.

(3)

where and

represents a 2-D discrete convolution of for bit . ZFE is an inverse of

(4)

In this study, an LMMSE equalizer is derived to take into account the random offsets between the bit cells and the grains near the bit cells. The LMMSE equalizer is given as [9]

(5)

so that the mean squared error between channel input,

,

and equalized output,

, is minimized. Here,

denotes the expectation.

B. Gaussian Mixture Noise Model for LDPC Decoding The residual error after LMMSE equalization is given as

(6)

where

is the LMMSE equalizer output.

This error integrates the effects of the random placement of

grains and channel inputs near the bit , as well as additive

noise. The mean of the equalizer output,

, can be zero for

unwritten bit since is independent from . On the other

hand,

for written bits since the effects of the other

channel inputs through the random placement of grains and ad-

ditive noise cancel out by averaging all of the effects. In order to

take into account this difference between the written and the un-

written bits, the residual error is approximated by the Gaussian

mixture (GM) model with the following distribution

and

, for the unwritten and written bits,

respectively.

Based on the GM model for the residual error, the condi-

tional probability density functions of the equalizer output

given channel input

, denoted by , can also

be described by a GM model. Fig. 2 shows an example of con-

ditional probability density functions of equalized output

from the TDMR channel simulation. The grains per channel bit

density is set to 1.1 and additive noise and position jitter are ne-

glected. Empirical conditional probabilities of given

and

are plotted with dotted crosses and dotted circles,

respectively. Both curves have additional contributions from

the opposite of their inputs, which are caused by unwritten bits

as described in the second term of (7). Two solid lines, denoted

by

and , show the conditional probability density

functions modeled by GM residual error, as shown in (7). Here,

the write error rate, , is 0.112 and the variances of GM model

are

and

, respectively. For comparison,

estimated density functions using a single Gaussian model are

plotted together as dashed lines, denoted by and . The

estimated density functions based on the Gaussian mixture

model are close to the empirical density functions in the range

, while the density functions using the Gaussian model

deviate from the empirical ones when

.

Based on the conditional probability density functions ap-

proximated by the GM model, the log likelihood ratio (LLR)

can be obtained for the equalized data , as below

(8)

This LLR can be used as the soft input for LDPC decoding.

IV. NUMERICAL EVALUATION

(7) The TDMR channel is evaluated numerically using the grain model and channel parameters described in Section II. A page
where denotes the probability of write error and and size is set to 256 256 bit cells and a sub-block for perturbing are probability density functions of normal distributions, Voronoi nuclei is set to 32 32 bit cells. Each bit cell is divided
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:35:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1816

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

Fig. 3. Write error rate and threshold detector BERs before and after equalization as a function of grains per channel bit density ().

channel bits in a finite area. Consequently, the overall user bit

per grain is the highest at

, where BER is 10 at

, which corresponds to 9.86 Tbit/in for media with

20

[1] grain density.

Finally, the effects of additive noise and position jitter in the

TDMR channel are investigated. For the case of additive noise

of zero mean and

with

, the raw BER

and equalized BER change from 0.243 and 0.0725 to 0.243 and

0.0872, respectively. As a result, the user bits per grain that

yields a corrected BER of

shifts from 0.499 to 0.46.

Similarly, random position jitter of zero mean and

is

introduced in both down-track and cross-track directions during

readback sampling. The resulting BER plot with respect to the

user bits per grain is also shifted, yielding a BER of

near

0.45 user bits per grain. Although additive noise of

and position jitter of

reduce the BER performance of

the TDMR channel, the overall user bit density can be as large

as 0.45 user bits per grain, which corresponds to 9 Tbit/in for

media with 20

[1] grain density.

V. CONCLUSION

In this study, a TDMR channel model based on random

Voronoi grains is investigated. Read channel signal processing

with LMMSE equalization, Gaussian mixture modeling and

LDPC decoding yields

10 at 0.45 user bits per

grain density, based on the channel parameters suggested for

TDMR. This result shows the potential of TDMR to achieve

user bit densities about 10 Tbit/in . Further investigations that

include other channel impairments (e.g., read/write head limi-

tations and 2-D ISI) are necessary to achieve a more accurate

assessment of TDMR.

Fig. 4. BER as a function of user bits per grain density ().

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by a Grant from Information Storage Industry Consortium (INSIC) EHDR program.

into 10 10 sub-cells to represent random Voronoi grains nu-

merically. The of the read sensitivity function in (1) is set

to and the equalizer size is set to 5 5 bit cells. In the sim-

ulation, the average number of grains per bit cell, denoted by ,

is changed from 1.0 to 1.5 in increments of 0.1, and the code

rate of the LDPC code [7], , is changed from 27/64 to 45/64 in

increments of 1/128.

First, the effects of varying are observed in terms of write

error rate and threshold detector BERs before and after LMMSE

equalization, as shown in Fig. 3. The write error rate ranges from

0.160

to 0.0252

, while the raw BER of the

channel output ranges from 0.259

to 0.236

.

After equalization, the BERs are reduced to 0.117

and

0.0525

, which shows that the LMMSE equalizer can

somewhat reduce the effect of 2-D interference in the TDMR

channel.

Next, the soft input LDPC decoding is applied to the LLR

computed from the equalizer output. The BERs after LDPC de-

coding are shown in Fig. 4 as a function of user bits per grain ,

defined by

. Increasing from 1.0 to 1.5 reduces equal-

ized BERs from 0.117 to 0.0525, while reducing the number of

REFERENCES
[1] R. Wood, M. Williams, A. Kavcic, and J. Miles, “The feasibility of magnetic recording at 10 terabits per square inch on conventional media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 917–923, Feb. 2009.
[2] R. Wood, “The feasibility of magnetic recording at 1 terabit per square inch,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 36–42, Jan. 2000.
[3] M. Mallary, A. Torabi, and M. Benaki, “One terabit per square inch perpendicular recording conceptual design,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1719–1724, Jul. 2002.
[4] K. S. Chan, J. J. Miles, E. Hwang, W. Lin, R. Negi, B. V. K. V. Kumar, and J. G. Zhu, “TDMR platform simulations and experiments,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 3837–3843, Oct. 2009.
[5] B. Vasic, A. R. Krishnan, R. Radhakrishnan, A. Kavcic, W. Ryan, and F. Erden, “Two-dimensional magnetic recording: Read channel modeling and detection,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 3830–3836, Oct. 2009.
[6] A. R. Krishnan, R. Radhakrishnan, and B. Vasic, “LDPC decoding strategies for two-dimensional magnetic recording,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom 2009, to be published.
[7] R. M. Neal, Software for LDPC Codes [Online]. Available: http:// www.cs.toronto.edu/~radford/ftp/LDPC-2006-02-08/index.html
[8] S. Greaves, Y. Kanai, and H. Muraoka, “Shingled recording for 2–3 Tbit/in ,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 3823–3829, Oct. 2009.
[9] B. Vasic and E. M. Kurtas, Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording Systems. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:35:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

