2010 International Conference on Electrical and Control Engineering
A Resource-Efficient Decoder Architecture for LDPC Codes

Qinzhi Hong
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNlist)
Department of Microelectronics and Nanoelectronics, Tsinghua University Beijing 100084, China
hqz03@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Jun Wang, Weilong Lei
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNlist)
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University Beijing 100084, China

Abstract—A novel architecture for the LDPC decoder with Chinese DTTB standard is presented in this paper. Two kinds of schemes to do the minimizing operations in the horizontal process of min-sum algorithm are compared, and then a foldable horizontal process unit is developed to support the splittingmatrix architecture, which is a reuse architecture based on check matrix splitting to increase the resource efficiency of the decoder. Theoretical analyses and implementation results are both provided to demonstrate that the decoder using this architecture has higher resource utilization efficiency than classical decoder. In addition, the new architecture can also be applied to other LDPC decoder, especially to LDPC codes with long code words.
Keywords-component; QC-LDPC; decoder; resource efficiency
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, discovered by Gallager R G. in 1962 [1] and rediscovered by MacKay D.J.C in 1990s [2], can deliver capacity approaching performance with belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm [3]. Due to their superior error correction capacity, LDPC codes are now widely used widely in wireless and satellite communications, such as DVB-S2 [4] and Chinese digital television terrestrial broadcasting (DTTB) standard [5] [6].
To find an efficient and low cost implementation of an LDPC decoder has drawn much research attention in recent years [7] [8]. With regular structure, QC-LDPC codes take reduced-complexity decoding comparable to randomly constructed LDPC codes, while keeping good error correcting performance. For its easy implementation, QC-LDPC codes are used in many broadband broadcasting systems, like 802.16e, 802.11n and Chinese DTTB standard.
The decoding algorithm has been developed for many years. Belief propagation (BP) algorithm is widely used as an efficient decoding algorithm of LDPC codes [9]. Besides that, a lot of algorithms have been proposed to reduce the decoding complexity. The most famous simplification of BP algorithm is min-sum algorithm [10]. The min-sum algorithm leads to a much simple hardware structure, with an a little loss in the performance.

In recent years, the researches in hardware architecture of LDPC decoders focus on the degree of parallelism [11] [12]. The fully parallel decoder can provide a high throughput performance with the high hardware complexity, while the serial decoder offers a lowest resource cost but unacceptable low throughput performance. On the other hand, the semiparallel architecture has shown its advantage in keeping balance between the throughput performance and hardware complexity. Besides that, the semi-parallel architecture is suitable extremely for QC-LDPC codes. The architecture proposed in this paper is based on the semi-parallel architecture and some improvement is done to make the architecture has higher resource utilization efficiency than the classical semiparallel architecture.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the QC-LDPC codes, decoding algorithms and classical semiparallel decoding architecture are reviewed. In section III, two kinds of schemes to do the minimizing operations in HPUs are compared. The Foldable HPUs is referred too. A new decoding architecture is described in detailed. Section IV shown the implementation results for LDPC codes according to Chinese DTTB standard to verify the advantages of the proposed methods before conclusions are drawn in Section V.
II. REVIEWS OF QC-LDPC CODES
A. QC-LDPC codes
LDPC codes are linear block codes, which can be defined
by the parity check matrix H ( M × N ). If x is a valid codeword and then H × xT = 0 . A LDPC code is called as (N,
K) LDPC code, in which the N is the length of the code words and the K is the length of message words. The code rate is computed by R=K/N=1-M/N. the weight of a column is defined as the number of 1 in the column, and the weight of a row is the number of 1 in the row.
As a kind of special LDPC code, quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code is structured more regularly. A QC-LDPC code with the
index p is made up of many p × p square blocks, including
all-zero matrix and circulant permutation matrix. A circulant permutation matrix with the parameter s is generated by

This work was supported in part by the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University and 863 Program of China under Grant 2007AA01Z2B6.

978-0-7695-4031-3/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE

244

DOI 10.1109/iCECE.2010.66

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:44:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

shifting an identify matrix to the right by s times. These characters of the matrix are suitable for hardware implementation of decoder.

B. Decoding algorithm
As discussed above, there are many kinds of decoding algorithms. For balance between error correcting performance and computational complexity, normalized min-sum decoding algorithms is proposed.

Suppose an LDPC code is applied to an AWGN channel with noise of zero-mean and variance of σ 2 . Assuming signal is BPSK modulated with unit energy. The yn is the soft input information from the channel and then the Dn is the decoding result of the algorithm. The decoding operators of min-sum decoding algorithm contain steps as follows:

Initialization:

Pn

=

−2 yn σ2

Qmn = Pn

(1)

Iteration:

Horizontal update:

∏ Rmn = (

sgn(Qmn )) min(abs( Qmn ))

(2)

n '∈N (m)\n

n '∈N (m)\n

Vertical update:

∑ Qmn = Pn +

Rm ' n

(3)

m'∈M (n)\m

Tentative decoding:

∑ Qn = Pn +

Rm ' n

m '∈M (n)

(4)

if Qn > 1，t hen Dn = 1；else Dn = 0

C. Decoding architecture
The decoder consists of processing units and a number of memory units. The processing units include vertical processing units (VPUs) to calculate equation (3) ， and horizontal processing units (HPUs) to calculate equation (2). Some of memory units are used to store temporary messages of iterations between VPU and HPU.
After setting up the generic structure, the most important design consideration is how many arithmetic units are allocated to HPUs and VPUs. For QC-LDPC decoders, the semi-parallel decoding architecture allocates an HPU (VPU) for every p rows (columns). Semi-parallel decoding architecture reuses an HPU (VPU) for p rows (columns) by p clocks operation. The degree of parallelism of semi-parallel decoding is p. For the QC matrix; each row is the one place cyclic right shift of the row above it in a circulant. Therefore, the decoder could be easily implemented using semi-parallel decoding architecture.

III. DECODING ARCHITECTURE
Although a lot of work have been done and the semiparallel QC-LDPC decoders achieve an appropriate balance

between decoding performance and resources cost [13] [14], many challenging issues have to be solved. For example, VPUs and HPUs can not work simultaneously because the data to be processed by both of them are not independent. On the other hand, the resource cost and time delay will raise with input numbers’ grow in HPUs and VPUs, and become insufferable when input numbers are huge. To solve the problems, some approaches will be presented in the following sections.

A. The comparison modules
HPUs perform computations with the rows of the matrix H, as equation (2) shown. The minimizing operations occupy most of the HPUs hardware resources, even of the decoder’. To describe the minimizing operations, the input of a t-inputs HPU is rewritten as T={in1，in2,…,int}. Each input will be relative to an output, which is calculated by finding minimum of input sets except itself. There are two typical schemes for the minimizing operations [15], the direct scheme and the index scheme.

1) The direct scheme

in1

Reg

C

out2

C

Reg

in2

Reg

min12

C

out1

in3

Reg

C

out4

C

Reg

min34

in4

Reg

C

out3

Figure 1. MIN4 of HPU, in the direct scheme

The direct scheme, gets results by computing directly minimum from input sets. A 4-inputs HPU, using direct scheme, is presented in Fig. 1. From the Fig. 1, it can be observed that there are l = log2 t layers, which are constituted
by 2-input comparing components. The 2-input comparing component outputs the smaller of its two inputs. The 8-inputs HPU can be structured based on 4-inputs HPU. Equation (5) show how many 2-input comparing components used in an l layers HPU.

qt = ql = l × 2l − 2 = log2 t × t − 2

(5)

The direct scheme can be pipelined to increase the

decoding throughput. If each layer is pipelined, the numbers of

registers can be derived, which is defined as follow:

rt = qt = log2 t × t − 2

(6)

2) The index scheme

In the index scheme, the results are obtained indirectly by

calculating the minimum, its index and sub-minimum of input

sets. The output, with the same index of the minimum input,

values sub-minimum, while other outputs value minimum.

An 8-inputs HPU using the index scheme is presented in Fig. 2. It can be divided into three parts with different

245 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:44:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

functions. The input part is constituted by a bank of 2-input comparing selectors, which exports the smaller and the bigger of its two inputs. The middle part consists of some basic unit called Minboth, which can merge two sets of minimum and sub-minimum to calculate their minimum and sub-minimum. There are l = log2 t −1 layers in the middle part and the numbers of Minboth reduce by half layer-by-layer.

in1

m12

C

in2

s12

m1

C

m12

s1

S

m2

C

s12

S s2

in3

m34

C

in4

s34

in5

m56

C

in6

s56

in7

m78

C

in8

s78

Min
Minboth 1234
Sec 1234
Min 5678
Minboth
Sec 5678

Minboth

out1

out2

index

out3

Minboth

M out4 min U
X out5
out6 sec
out7

out8

Figure 2. MIN8, in the index scheme

The third part calculate the outputs from the minimum, its index and the sub-minimum as follow

outi

=

⎧min

⎨ ⎩

sec

if i ≠ index if i = index

(7)

Assume the resource cost of a comparing selector is A, the

selector’s is B and the output selector’s is C.

From Fig. 2, the cost can be calculated as follow:

qt′

=

A×

t 2

+

(t

−

2)

+

B

× (t

−

2)

+

C

×t

(8)

= ( A +1+ B + C)× t − 2× (B +1) 2

The values of the parameter A, B, C are determined by

technology of implementation, such as FPGA and ASIC. To

get a approximation, set A=1.5, B=0.5, C=0.75, then

qt′ = 3× t − 3

(9)

As the direct scheme, registers are inserted into the index

scheme among all layers. From the Fig. 2, the registers cost can

be calculated as follow:

rt ' = t + Mt × 2 = 2× t − 2

(10)

3) Comparison between the two schemes

By comparison between equation (5) and equation (9), it

can be observed that both logic resource cost using the direct

scheme and using the index scheme increase with input

numbers’ increase. Logic resource cost using the index scheme

increase linearly with input numbers while logic resource cost

using the direct scheme increase ultra linearly. When using 7-

Selector

input HPU, two kinds of logic resource cost are almost equal in value. If the input numbers increasing, logic resource cost using the direct scheme will be greater than the one using the index scheme. From the comparison between equation (6) and equation (10), the conclusion of registers is similar as logic resource cost.
According to the analysis above, some suggestions in implementation are proposed as follow. With a comparatively large input number, it is more area-efficient to employ the index scheme than the direct scheme. On the other hand, how to using small input number HPU to substitute for large input number HPU become a direction of optimization.
B. The foldable HPU As mentioned above, the logic resource cost and registers
of HPU increase with its input number’s increase, which is directly related to the weight of the row. When the weight of the row is large, the hardware resource of HPU will cost too much and sometime it is insufferable.
Based on the index scheme, a foldable HPU is proposed to resolve the problem above.
In the classical HPU, the messages of a row are sent into HPU at the same time and calculated in parallel, which results that the weight of a row decides directly the HPU’s input number. So if the messages of a row are divided several parts to send into HPU in several times, the HPU will not need so much complexity to calculate one time. In the following detailed description, it can be observed that the foldable HPU is easy to implement by the index scheme.
Figure 3. The foldable HPU
As shown in Fig. 3, the foldable HPU include a minimizing operations module, which can be constituted by the index scheme’s first two parts mentioned above, some signs selector, a Minboth module and a Decompression output module.
The messages of a row in the matrix H are divided averagely into k parts, and then each part is sent into HPUs to calculate serially. First, the first part messages are sent to the minimizing operations module to calculate, and then the result is stored into memory RRAMT as the format {min, sub-min, index}.for the second time, the second part messages are sent to the minimizing operations module to calculate, and the result is shown as the format {min, sub-min, index}, while another {min, sub-min, index} is read from RRAMT. The two {min, sub-min, index} are sent into the Minboth module, which can merge two {min, sub-min, index} into a {min, sub-min, index} as the current result, which is stored into RRAMT again. Following the operation above, after k time calculation the

246 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:44:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

result of a full row is obtained as the format {min, sub-min, and index}.then the result is sent into the decompression output module to transform the normal format and then export to memory RRAM.
Comparing the classical HPUs, the foldable HPUs divide the row of the matrix H into several parts, and then use several clock cycles to accomplish horizontal process. As discussed above, the complexity of HPUs reduces with the input numbers’ decrease. To be more specific, if the row is divided into k parts, the complexity of the minimizing operations module will reduce to 1/k when the HPU mentioned above is based on the index scheme. If comparing the HPU based on the direct scheme, the complexity of HPU using folding method will reduce more. On the other hand, the foldable HPU need to increase a Minboth module and a memory RRAMT. The structure of Minboth module is not complex, comparing the minimizing operations module. The memory RRAMT is used to store the middle results in calculation, which decide the middle results should be not too large. Based on the index scheme, the middle results’ is only three value as {min, submin, index} so the RRAMT sides is small comparing other RAMs in the decoder, while using the direct scheme will make the RRAMT sides unacceptable.
C. The splitting-matrix architecture
Because HPUs treat with the rows of the matrix H while VPUs deal with the columns, HPUs have to wait for all columns’ computation accomplished by VPUs, and VPUs have to confront the same problem. So HPUs and VPUs just work in a half time and wait in another half time, which causes the hardware resource utilization efficiency reduction. Based on the foldable HPU and the study on the matrix H, a new decoding architecture is proposed to resolve the problem mentioned above.
The new decoding architecture, called the splitting-matrix architecture, makes HPUs and VPUs work simultaneously in many clock cycles (a clock cycle need p clocks for QC-LDPC codes), while the decoding algorithm keeps unchanged.
The matrix H is split into k new matrixes by columns. Some regulations are observed when splitting the matrix H. First, the new matrixes have the same row number and the same columns number. Second, make sure the new matrixes have the same weights of the columns. Third, it is better to make the new matrixes have the same weights of the rows.
After the splitting process, the columns’ numbers of the splitting-matrixes become 1/k of the matrix H while the weights of the columns keep unchanged. The rows’ numbers of the splitting-matrixes remain the same as the matrix H but the weights of the rows become 1/k.
The new VPUs are distributed to do the v-process of the splitting-matrixes serially. Because the columns’ numbers of the splitting-matrixes is 1/k of the matrix H, the VPUs parallelism become 1/k of the old VPUs, which means the hardware resource cost of VPUs reduce to 1/k. On the other hand, the rows’ weights of the splitting-matrixes are 1/k of the matrix H, so the hardware resource cost reduces to 1/k or less.

Figure 4. Time sequence comparison
Based on the splitting-matrixes, the new timing process is arranged as follow. As shown in Fig. 4. In the first clock cycle, the VPUs do v-process for the first splitting-matrix and get the middle results. In the second clock cycle, the VPUs do vprocess for the second splitting-matrix, while the HPUs do hprocess for the first splitting-matrix using the middle results from the first clock cycle. As the operation mentioned above, the third splitting-matrix’s v-process and the second splittingmatrix’s h-process run at the same time, and so on for other splitting-matrixes’ operation. In the last clock cycle, the HPUs complete the last splitting-matrix’s h-process and decompress the data {min, sub-min, index}. From the timing process exposited above, it can be observed that VPUs and HPUs work simultaneously in many clock cycles. In fact, only in the first clock cycle and the last clock, VPUs and HPUs can not operate simultaneously.

TABLE I.

Classical

VPU logic
1

New

1

COMPARISON BTEWEEN TWO ARCHITECTURES

VPUs number
nv
nv k

HPU logic

HPUs number

Clock cycles

1

nh

2× p

1 k

nh (k +1) × p

The chief difference between the classical architecture and the new architecture is listed in Table I. A parameter E is defined to measure the hardware resource utilization efficiency as equation (11):

E=

1

(11)

(VPUs log ic + HPUs log ic) × clocks

Equation (11) is not an accurate equation, but it shows the comparison between the two architectures. Some of data in Table I is approximate, for example the frequency. By substituting the data of the Table I in the equation (11), some results are obtained, as follow:

Ec

=

2 × (nv

1 + nh ) ×

p

(12)

En

=

(k

k +1) × (nv

+

nh ) ×

p

(13)

247 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:44:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

e = En = 2 × k

(14)

Ec (k +1)

From the Fig. 4, it can be observed that if k is larger, VPUs

and HPUs will work simultaneously in a higher proportion of

clock cycles, which means higher hardware resource utilization

efficiency. On the other hand, because VPUs and HPUs’

hardware resource cost are both in inverse relation to k, taking

a high k is cost-efficient in theory. As shown in the equation

(14), e grows with the k, which means the new architecture can

show its advantages more when k is larger. But in fact, the k

value depends on many factors, such as the weight of rows, and

if k is too big, a complex routing is required between VPUs（

HPUs） and RAM, which will cause extra hardware resource

cost. Therefore, a suitable k value has to be chosen by practice

in implementation of decoder.

IV. IMPLEMENTATION
The approaches proposed above are used in the design of the LDPC decoder in Chinese DTTB standard. 0.8-rate LDPC code is chosen because it has the higher weights of the rows and costs more hardware resource than other two rate codes.
0.8-rate LDPC code in DTMB is a QC-LDPC, with the check matrix H of 11 rows, 59 columns. The sub-matrix is a circulant permutation matrix with the size 127*127. The weights of rows are 26 and 27 while the weights of columns are 3、4 and 11.
The splitting parameter k is 2, which means the matrix H is split into two splitting matrixes. In the splitting-matrix architecture, HPU13 and HPU14 are used to substitute for HPU26 and HPU27, and the parallelism of VPU reduce to 30 from 59. It needs 3 127-clocks to finish an iterative operation.

TABLE II.

IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

Logic Resource Registers Cost Memory Cost
Throughput Max Iterations

Classical
28301 15425 700160 54MHz
30

Proposed
17854 8344 750464 66.7MHz 30

-36.9% -45.9% +7.2% +23.5%

Finally the decoder is implemented with the performance parameter shown in Table II, comparing the classical decoder [16]. The proposed decoder reduce logic resource and registers cost massively with a little increase in memory cost, which can be avoided when k is beyond 2 because of QRAM’s reduce in that situation. Since the maximum operating frequency depends on the delay of combinational logic device, such as HPUs and VPUs, employing the splitting-matrix architecture can reduce the delay of HPUs, which will make it easy to increase the maximum operating frequency. Therefore, the proposed architecture is easier to get a high throughput, which can be shown in Table II.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, two kinds of scheme to do the minimizing operation of HPUs are compared in hardware resource cost,

and one of them is chosen to constitute the foldable HPUs, which cost less hardware resource than the classical HPUs. In the foundation above, finally the splitting-matrix architecture, in the decoder of which the HPUs and the VPUs can work simultaneously in part of clock cycles, is proposed. Some equations are derived and the implementation results are shown to verify our proposed design approaches can significantly improve the hardware resource utilization efficiency. Furthermore, the proposed architecture is not only used in QCLDPC codes but also other LDPC codes, especially the LDPC codes with long code length.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity check codes,” IRE Trans Inform Theory, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457-458, Mar. 1997.
[3] Robert J. McEliece, David J. C. MacKay, and Jung-Fu Cheng, “Turbo Decoding as an Instance of Pearl's "Belief Propagation" Algorithm,” IEEE Journal on selected areas in communications, vol.16, Feb. 1998
[4] A. Morello and V. Mignone, “Dvb-s2: The second generation standard for satellite broad-band services,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 94, no.1, pp. 210–227, January 2006.
[5] Framing structure, Channel coding and modulation for digital television terrestrial broadcasting system, R. P. China Standard Number: GB20600- 2006 Std.
[6] J. Song, Z.Yang, L.Yang, et al, “Technical Review on Chinese digital terrestrial television broadcasting standard and measurements on some working modes,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 53, pp. 1–7, Mar. 2007.
[7] Z. Wang, Y. Chen, and K. Parhi, “Area-efficient quasi-cyclic LDPC code decoder architecture,” in proc. of ICASSP 2004, vol. 5, pp. 49-52, May 2004.
[8] B. Honary, A. Moinian, and B. Ammar, “Construction of well-structured quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEE Proc. Commun., vol. 152, no. 6, pp.1081–1085, Dec 2005.
[9] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding”, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[10] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic ′ , and H. Imai, “ Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673– 680, May 1999.
[11] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, “Parallel decoding architecture for low density parity check codes,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. On Circuits and Syst., vol. 4, pp. 742–745, 2001.
[12] M. Karkooti and J. R. Cavallaro, “Semi-parallel reconfigurable architectures for real-time LDPC decoding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Technology: Coding and Computing. (ITCC’04), Las Vegas, NV, USA, Apr.5–7, 2004.
[13] Y. Chen and K. K. Parhi, “Overlapped massage passing for quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuit Sys. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, June 2004.
[14] N. Jiang, K. Peng, J. Song, C. Pan, and Z. Yang, “High-Throughput QCLDPC Decoders,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 251259, June 2009
[15] M. Cocco, J. Dielissen, M. Heijiligers, A. Hekstra, and J. Huisken, “A scalable architecture for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. 2004 Design, Automationand Test in European Conf. and Exhibition, vol.3, pp. 88–93, 16-20 2004.
[16] D. Niu, K. Peng, J. Song, C. Pan, and Z. Yang, “Multi-Rate LDPC Decoder Implementation for China Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting Standard,” IEEE Proc. ICCCAS, vol. 1, pp. 24-28, 2007.

248 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:44:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

