2626

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

Error Correction Capability of Column-Weight-Three LDPC Codes Under the Gallager A Algorithm—Part II
Shashi Kiran Chilappagari, Member, IEEE, Dung Viet Nguyen, Student Member, IEEE, Bane Vasic, Senior Member, IEEE, and Michael W. Marcellin, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The relation between the girth and the error correction capability of column-weight-three LDPC codes under the Gallager A algorithm is investigated. It is shown that a column-weight-
 three LDPC code with Tanner graph of girth g 10 can correct all 0 error patterns with up to (g=2 1) errors in at most g=2 iterations
of the Gallager A algorithm. For codes with Tanner graphs of girth
 g 8, it is shown that girth alone cannot guarantee correction of 0 all error patterns with up to (g=2 1) errors under the Gallager 0 A algorithm. Sufficient conditions to correct (g=2 1) errors are
then established by studying trapping sets.
Index Terms—Error floor, Gallager A algorithm, girth, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
I TERATIVE message passing algorithms for decoding lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] operate by passing messages along the edges of a graphical representation of the code known as the Tanner graph [2]. These algorithms are optimal when the underlying graph is a tree (see [3] and [4] for general theory of LDPC codes), but in the presence of cycles, the decoding becomes sub-optimal and there exist low-weight patterns known as near codewords [5] or trapping sets [6] uncorrectable by the decoder. It is now well established that the trapping sets lead to error floor in the high signal-to-noise (SNR) region (see [7] for a list of references). While it is generally known that high girth codes have better performance in the error floor region, the exact relation between the girth and the slope of the frame error rate (FER) curve in the error floor region is unknown. In this paper, we consider the error correction capability of column-weight-three LDPC codes under the Gallager A decoding algorithm as a function of the girth of the underlying Tanner graph of the code.
Manuscript received July 22, 2008; revised May 08, 2009. Current version published May 19, 2010. This work was supported in part by the NSF under Grant CCF-0634969, IHCS-0725405, ITR-0325979, and in part by the INSICEHDR program. The work of S. K. Chilappagari was performed when he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), Porto, Portugal, May 5–9, 2008.
S. K. Chilappagari is with Marvell Semiconductor, Inc., Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA (e-mail: shashickiran@gmail.com).
D. V. Nguyen, B. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: nguyendv@ece.arizona.edu; vasic@ece.arizona.edu; marcellin@ece.arizona.edu).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2046203

Gallager [1] showed that the minimum distance of ensembles

of

-regular LDPC codes with

, grows lin-

early with the code length. While this implies that there exist

codes in these ensembles capable of correcting a linear number

of errors in the code length under maximum-likelihood (ML)

decoding, it does not necessarily imply the same for sub-op-

timal decoding algorithms. Zyablov and Pinsker [8] initiated the

study of guaranteed error correction capability of LDPC codes.

They showed that almost all the codes in the regular code en-

sembles with

are capable of correcting a linear number

of errors in the code length under the parallel bit flipping algo-

rithm. Sipser and Spielman [9] established similar results using

expander graph based arguments. Burshtein and Miller [10] ap-

plied expansion arguments to irregular code ensembles to show

that message passing algorithms are also capable of correcting

a linear number of errors in the code length when the degree

of each variable node is at least six. Recently, Burshtein [11]

showed that regular code ensembles with

are also ca-

pable of correcting a linear number of errors in code length

under a variant of the parallel bit flipping algorithm. Expansion

arguments have also been successfully applied in the case of

linear programming (LP) decoding [12]. The LP decoding al-

gorithm first proposed by Feldman et al. [12] is another sub-op-

timal decoding algorithm which has higher complexity com-

pared to the message passing algorithms, but is attractive from

an analysis standpoint. Feldman et al. [13] established that the

LP decoding algorithm can correct a linear number of errors in

the code length when the underlying Tanner graph is a good

expander. The arguments in [13] are applicable to codes with

. The results of [13] were refined in [14], in which the

authors also initiated the probabilistic analysis of LP decoding.

Another approach to the study of error correction capability

of LDPC codes is based on the girth of the underlying Tanner

graph. Tanner in [2] studied codes based on bipartite graphs

and derived lower bounds on the minimum distance of graph

based codes as a function of the left degree and girth of the

Tanner graph. For

, the minimum distance was shown

to increase exponentially with the girth, which implies that for

ML decoding, the error correction capability increases exponen-

tially with the girth. The minimum pseudo-codeword weight

on the binary symmetric channel (BSC) for LP decoding was

also shown to increase exponentially with the girth for

,

thereby guaranteeing that the error correction capability grows

exponentially with the girth of the Tanner graph. In [15], it was

shown that the size of variable node sets that have the expan-

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF COLUMN-WEIGHT-THREE LDPC CODES UNDER THE GALLAGER A ALGORITHM—PART II 2627

sion required by the expansion based arguments also increases

exponentially with girth for

, leading to the result that

the error correction capability under the bit flipping algorithms

grows exponentially with the girth. It is worth noting here that

the minimum stopping set [16] size also grows exponentially

with the girth for

[17].

One observes that the above discussion does not address the

error correction capability of LDPC codes with

(hence-

forth referred to as column-weight-three LDPC codes) under the

Gallager A algorithm as well as the bit flipping algorithms. This

is due to the fact that the Tanner graphs of column-weight-three

LDPC codes cannot achieve the expansion required by the ex-

pansion based arguments. Also, girth based arguments have not

been investigated in sufficient detail for this case.

Burshtein [11] was the first to observe that it cannot be proved

that almost all the codes in the ensemble of column-weight-three

LDPC codes can correct a linear number of errors as a non-

negligible fraction of codes have parallel edges in their Tanner

graphs and such codes cannot correct a single worst case error.

A stronger statement was proved in [18], where it was shown

that at sufficiently large code length, no code in the ensemble of

column-weight-three codes can correct a linear number of errors

in the code length. The result was extended to the bit flipping

algorithms also. The result was established by showing that a

necessary condition for a column-weight-three code to correct

all error patterns with up to

errors under the Gallager A

algorithm is to avoid cycles of length up to in its Tanner graph.

Since the girth of the Tanner graph grows only logarithmically

with the code length, it follows that correction of a linear number

of errors is not possible.

The results derived in this paper are a continuation of the

results presented in [18] and complete the investigation of error

correction capability of column-weight-three codes under the

Gallager A algorithm. We show that a column-weight-three

LDPC code with Tanner graph of girth

can correct

all error patterns with up to

errors in at most

iterations of the Gallager A algorithm. For codes with Tanner

graphs of girth

or

, we show that avoiding code-

words of weight

is sufficient to guarantee correction

of all error patterns with up to

errors under the

Gallager A algorithm. For codes with Tanner graph of girth

, we show that there exist certain trapping sets which

should be avoided to guarantee correction of all error patterns

with up to three errors (these results first appeared in [19]).

From the results presented in this paper, it follows that the error

correction capability of column-weight-three codes under the

Gallager A algorithm grows linearly with the girth of the Tanner

graph and consequently logarithmically with the code length.

Apart from the obvious theoretical significance of this problem,

guaranteed error correction capability of column-weight-three

codes is interesting from a practical point of view. Applications

that demand high speed decoders (with transmission rates in

the range of 40–80 Gbps) need to employ low-complexity

decoding algorithms such as the Gallager A algorithm and in

this respect column-weight-three codes are superior to higher

column weight codes.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we

establish the notation and provide some background material.

A detailed analysis of the Gallager A algorithm is presented in

Section III. In Section IV, we consider the case of codes with

Tanner graphs of girth

. We investigate codes with Tanner

graphs of girth

in Section V and conclude in Section VI

with a few remarks.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. Notation

The Tanner graph of an LDPC code of length consists

of two sets of nodes: the set of variable nodes with

and the set of check nodes . The check nodes (variable nodes)

connected to a variable node (check node) are referred to as its

neighbors. The degree of a node is the number of its neighbors.

A

regular LDPC code has a Tanner graph in which the

degree of each variable node (column weight) is and the de-

gree of each check node (row weight) is . Note that in the lit-

erature, the column weight and the row weight are also referred

to as left degree and right degree respectively. An edge is an

unordered pair

of a variable node and a check node

and is said to be incident on and . A directed edge is an or-

dered pair

or

corresponding to the edge

.

With a moderate abuse of notation, we denote directed edges by

simple letters (without arrows) but specify the direction. Hence,

denotes an undirected edge while

or

denotes

a directed edge. The girth is the length of the shortest cycle

in . For a given node , the neighborhood of depth , denoted

by , is the induced subgraph consisting of all nodes reached

and edges traversed by paths of length at most starting from

(including ). The directed neighborhood of depth of a di-

rected edge

denoted by , is defined as the induced

subgraph containing all edges and nodes on all paths

starting from such that

(see [3] for definitions and no-

tation). In a Tanner graph with girth , we note that is a tree

when

. Also, if

and

, then

for

. Let denote the number of

iterations for which the incoming messages to the nodes are sta-

tistically independent, as defined by Gallager in [1]. In a Tanner

graph of girth , the number of independent iterations satisfies

the relation

.

We consider binary LDPC codes and binary message passing

decoding algorithms. The original value of a variable node is

its value in the transmitted codeword. We say a variable node is

good if its received value is equal to its original value and bad

otherwise. A message is said to be correct if it is equal to the

original value of the corresponding variable node and incorrect

otherwise. In this paper, denotes a good variable node, de-

notes a bad variable node and denotes a check node. When

the channel and the decoder satisfy certain symmetry conditions

(see [3] for details), we can assume, without loss of generality,

that the all zero codeword is transmitted. We make this assump-

tion throughout the paper. Hence, a bad variable node has re-

ceived value 1 and an incorrect message has a value of 1. A

configuration of bad variable nodes is a subgraph in which the

location of bad variable nodes relative to each other is specified.

A valid configuration is a configuration of at most

bad variable nodes free of cycles of length less than . The set of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2628

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

bad variable nodes in is denoted by

and

is In this paper, we assume Decision rule B for codes with Tanner

denoted by

. The number of bad variable nodes at depth graphs of girth

and Decision rule A for codes with

in is denoted by .

Tanner graphs of girth

. A detailed discussion of this is

B. Binary Message Passing Algorithms

provided in Section V.

Gallager in [1] proposed two simple binary message passing C. Trapping Sets and Inducing Sets

algorithms for decoding over the BSC; Gallager A and Gallager

B. See [20] for a detailed description of the Gallager B algo-

rithm. For column-weight-three codes, which are the focus of

this paper, these two algorithms are the same. Every round of

message passing (iteration) starts with sending messages from

variable nodes to check nodes (first half of the iteration) and

ends by sending messages from check nodes to variable nodes

(second half of the iteration). Let

, an -tuple

be the input to the decoder. Let

denote the message

passed by a variable node to its neighboring check node in

the th iteration and

denote the message passed by a

check node to its neighboring variable node . Additionally, let

denote the set of all messages from

denote

the set of messages from to all its neighbors except to and

denote the set of all messages to . Let

denote the number of incoming messages to which are equal to

. Further, if all the messages in the set

are equal to

, we say

. The

terms

and

are defined similarly. The Gallager A algorithm can then be de-

fined as follows:

We now provide a brief overview of the characterization of

failures of the Gallager A algorithm. We adopt the definitions

of the terms eventually correct variable nodes, trapping sets and

failure sets from [6] and the definition of inducing set from [18].

We also adopt the definition of critical number of a trapping set

from [21]. The support of a vector

, denoted

by

is defined as the set of all variable nodes for which

. Since the transmitted codeword is assumed to be the

all-zero-codeword, the support of the input to the decoder is

simply the set of variable nodes flipped by the channel (or, in

other words, the set of variable nodes initially in error).

Let denote the input to the Gallager A decoder. A variable

node is said to be eventually correct if there exists a positive

integer such that for all with

. For

an input , the failure set is defined as the set of variable

nodes that are not eventually correct. The decoding on the input

is successful if and only if

. If

, then we say

that is a trapping set and

is an inducing set. The

size of an inducing set is its cardinality. Since the failure sets

of two different input vectors can be the same trapping set, we

denote a trapping set simply by . A trapping set is said to be

an

trapping set if it has variable nodes and odd-degree

if if otherwise

check nodes in the sub-graph induced by . Note that in order

to show that a given set of variable nodes is a trapping set, we

should exhibit a vector for which

.

Definition 1 ([21]): (Critical number for Gallager A algo-

rithm) Let be a trapping set for the Gallager A algorithm and

let

. Let

. The critical

number

of trapping set for the Gallager A algorithm is

At the end of each iteration, an estimate of each variable node the minimum number of variable nodes that have to be initially is made based on the incoming messages and possibly the re- in error for the decoder to end up in the trapping set , i.e.,

ceived value. The decoded word at the end of the th iteration

is denoted as . The decoder is run until a valid codeword

is found or a maximum number of iterations is reached, whichever is earlier. The output of the decoder is either a codeword or . We say that the Gallager A algorithm is successful on a configuration of bad variable nodes in iterations if the de-

From the above discussion, it follows that it is necessary to avoid all trapping sets with critical number to guarantee correction of all error patterns with up to errors.

coded word at the end of the th iteration is equal to the trans-

mitted codeword. Otherwise, we say that the Gallager A algorithm is not successful on the configuration.
Different rules to estimate a variable node after each iteration are possible and it is likely that changing the rule after certain number of iterations may be beneficial. However, the analysis of various scenarios is beyond the scope of this paper. For columnweight-three codes, only two rules are possible.

III. FIRST ITERATIONS

In this section, we outline a method to find, for different

values of , all the possible configurations of at most

bad variable nodes in the neighborhood of a variable node such

that the variable node sends an incorrect message in the

th

iteration. We begin with the following lemma.

• Decision rule A: if all incoming messages to a variable Lemma 1: The messages passed by a variable node and

node from its neighboring check nodes are equal, set the a check node in the Gallager A algorithm operating on

variable node to that value; else set it to received value. a column-weight-three LDPC code can be described in the

• Decision rule B: set the value of a variable node to the following manner.

majority of the incoming messages; majority always exists i) If is a bad variable node, then we have

since the column weight is three.

and:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF COLUMN-WEIGHT-THREE LDPC CODES UNDER THE GALLAGER A ALGORITHM—PART II 2629

Fig. 1. Illustration of neighborhood up to depth 1 of a good variable node.

•

if

, i.e., sends

incorrect messages to all its neighbors if it receives two

or more incorrect messages from its neighboring check

nodes in the previous iteration;

•

and

if

and

, i.e., sends one correct mes-

sage and two incorrect messages if it receives one in-

correct message from its neighboring check nodes in

the previous iteration; the correct message is sent along

the edge on which the incorrect message is received;

•

if

, i.e., sends all

correct messages if it receives all correct messages

from its neighboring check nodes in the previous

iteration.

ii) If is a good variable node, then we have

and:

•

if

, i.e., sends

all correct messages if it receives two or more correct

messages from its neighboring check nodes in the pre-

vious iteration;

•

and

if

and

, i.e., sends one incorrect

message and two correct messages if it receives two

incorrect messages from its neighboring check nodes

in the previous iteration; the incorrect message is

sent along the edge on which the correct message is

received;

•

, if

, i.e., sends

all incorrect messages if it receives all incorrect mes-

sages from its neighboring check nodes in the previous

iteration.

iii) For a check node , we have:

•

, if

is odd, i.e.,

sends incorrect messages along the edges on which it

received correct messages and correct messages along

the edges on which it received incorrect messages, if

the total number of incoming incorrect messages from

its neighboring variable nodes is odd;

•

, if

is even, i.e.,

sends incorrect messages along the edges on which

it received incorrect messages and correct messages

along the edges on which it received correct messages,

if the total number of incoming incorrect messages

from its neighboring variable nodes is even.

iv) A variable node is estimated incorrectly at the end of an

iteration if it receives at least two incorrect messages.

Proof: Follows from the description of the Gallager A

algorithm.

Let be a variable node which sends an incorrect message

along the edge

in the

th iteration for some .

Let the other two neighboring check nodes of be denoted by

and . Additionally let

and

denote

the directed edges from and , respectively, to (see Fig. 1

for an illustration when is a good variable node). From Lemma

1, we see that only the following three cases are possible.

1) is a good variable node and and contain an odd

number of variable nodes which send an incorrect message

in the th iteration to and .

2) is a bad variable node and and contain an odd

number of variable nodes which send an incorrect message

in the th iteration to and .

3) is a bad variable node and one of and contains

an odd number of variable nodes while the other contains

an even number of variable nodes which send an incorrect

message in the th iteration to and .

Now, consider a variable node which sends an incorrect

message along the edge

in the

th iteration. The

message along depends only on the variable nodes and check

nodes in . Since is a tree, all the variable nodes and

check nodes in are guaranteed to be distinct. This fact cou-

pled with the above observations provides a recursive method to

determine all the possible configurations of at most

bad

variable nodes in .

For a variable node to send an incorrect message along

in the

th iteration, must contain variable node/nodes

which sends/send an incorrect message in the th iteration. Let

be the generic label used to denote a variable node that sends

an incorrect message along edge (note that

or

) in the th iteration. The total number of bad vari-

able nodes in is the sum (over all possible ) of all bad

variable nodes in

. It is easy to see that if we derive a

configuration of bad variable nodes in from the configura-

tion of bad variable nodes in

by applying observations

(1)–(3), the number of bad variable nodes increases by at least

one. Hence, all the configurations of at most

bad vari-

able nodes in can be constructed from the configurations

of at most bad variable nodes in

by applying obser-

vations (1)–(3). We illustrate this with two examples.

Example 1: Let us begin by considering the case

in

which we require configurations of at most three bad variable

nodes in for a variable node to send an incorrect message

along

in the second iteration. The only variable nodes

that send incorrect messages in the first iteration are the bad vari-

able nodes. It can be seen that there are only three configurations

of at most three bad variable nodes which are described below.

1) is a bad variable node and contains another bad vari-

able node.

2) is a bad variable node and and each contain one

bad variable node.

3) is a good variable node and and each contain

one bad variable node.

The three cases are illustrated in Fig. 2(a). It can be seen that

if and each contain one bad variable node, sends

an incorrect message irrespective of whether it is good or bad.

Hence, to avoid drawing too many figures, we illustrate cases (2)

and (3) in one figure in which the variable node is represented

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2630

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

Lemma 2: Let be a variable node that sends an incorrect

message along the edge

in the

th iteration and

assume that is a tree.

i) If is a bad variable node, then

. If

, i.e.,

for

,

N Fig. 2. (a) All configurations of at most three bad variable nodes in in
which v sends an incorrect message to c in the second iteration. (b) Configurations illustrated using neutral variable node.

then

. If

.

ii) If is a good variable node, then

, then . If

, then

. If

,

then

. If

,

then

.

Proof: The proof is by induction on . It is easy to verify

the bounds for

. Let the bounds be true for some

,

and let be a bad variable node sending an incorrect message

on

in the

th iteration. Further, assume that

is a tree. Then, has at least one check node which

sends an incorrect message along the edge

in the

th iteration. This implies that has at least one variable

node sending an incorrect message in the

th iteration

along the edge

. Since a path of length 2 exists

between and

.

If is a bad variable node, then

and conse-

quently

. If is a good variable node, then

and consequently

.

If

for

, then is a good variable node

such that

which implies that

by

the induction hypothesis. Hence,

.

If

then either (a) is a bad variable node with

N Fig. 3. (a) All configurations of at most four bad variable nodes in in which N v sends an incorrect message to c in the second iteration. (b) All configurations
of at most five bad variable nodes in in which v sends an incorrect message to c in the third iteration.

for

which implies that

by the induction hypothesis. Hence,

, or (b) is a good variable node with

which implies that

by the

induction hypothesis. Hence,

.

by the gray circle and refer to the variable node as a neutral By the principle of mathematical induction, the bounds are

variable node. This is illustrated in Fig. 2(b).

true for all when is a bad variable node. The proofs are

Example 2: For

, we require configurations of at most similar for the case when is a good variable node.

five bad variable nodes in for a variable node to send an

incorrect message along

in the third iteration. We

IV. MAIN THEOREM

first determine all the configurations of at most four bad vari- In this section, we prove that a column-weight-three code

able nodes in for a variable node to send an incorrect with Tanner graph of girth

can correct all error patterns

message along

in the second iteration. The con- with up to

errors in at most iterations of the Gal-

figurations are shown in Fig. 3(a). Then, applying observations lager A algorithm. The proof proceeds by finding, for a partic-

(1)–(3), we derive all possible configurations for . Fig. 3(b) ular choice of , all configurations of

or less bad vari-

illustrates the configurations for

from which all the pos- able nodes on which the Gallager A algorithm is not successful

sible configurations can be derived in the following way. For in iterations and then prove that the Gallager A algorithm

each configuration illustrated in Fig. 3(b) that contains neutral is successful on these configurations in subsequent iterations.

variable nodes, convert some of the neutral variable nodes to bad When is even, we use

(or

)

variable nodes such that the total number of bad variable nodes and when is odd, we use

(or

).

does not exceed five. Carrying this out in all the possible ways We deal with these cases separately.

generates all the possible configurations. Proceeding along similar lines, we can obtain all possible A.

Is Even

configurations with at most seven bad variable nodes such that Let be a variable node which receives two incorrect mes-

sends an incorrect message along edge in the fourth iteration sages along the edges

and

at

under the assumption that is a tree. Fig. 4 illustrates the con- the end of the

th iteration ( can be either good or

figurations for

from which all the possible configurations bad). This implies that and each has a variable node,

can be derived.

and respectively, that sends an incorrect message in the

We now prove bounds on

in the following lemma.

th iteration to check nodes and , respectively. Let

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF COLUMN-WEIGHT-THREE LDPC CODES UNDER THE GALLAGER A ALGORITHM—PART II 2631

N Fig. 4. All configurations of at most seven bad variable nodes in in which v sends an incorrect message to c in the fourth iteration.

and

[see Fig. 5(a) for an illustration]. All possible configurations of

bad variable nodes in and can be determined using

the method outlined in Section III. Since there exists a path

of length 3 between and , we have

. Also,

for

. Therefore,

for

. This implies that

and can have a common node only at depth . The total

number of bad variable nodes in

, in

any configuration is, therefore, lower bounded by

or equivalently

. Hence, we have

Fig. 5. Configurations of at most seven bad variable nodes, free of cycles of
length less than 16, on which the Gallager A algorithm is not successful in four
(1) iterations.

We are interested only in the valid configurations, i.e., at most

bad variable nodes, free from cycles of length less

than . We divide the discussion into three parts: 1) we find all

the possible valid configurations for the case when

; 2)

the constraint

, we see that there are only

three possible configurations which are shown in Fig. 5.

we then proceed iteratively for

; 3) we consider the case Remark: Since, all the configurations contain seven bad vari-

separately as the arguments for

do not hold for able nodes excluding the variable node , we note that for a

this case.

valid configuration, has to be a good variable node. Hence,

1)

: Let

be defined as above there do not arise cases where a bad variable node receives two

with . Since and are variable nodes that send incor- incorrect message at the end of fourth iteration.

rect messages along and , respectively, in the fourth iter- 2)

: Let be a valid configuration in which there

ation, the configuration of bad variable nodes in and

exists a variable node which receives two incorrect messages

must resemble one of the configurations illustrated in Fig. 4. In along the edges

and

at the end of

order to find all valid configurations on which the Gallager A the

th iteration. This implies that and each has

algorithm is not successful at the end of 4 iterations, we con- a variable node, and , respectively, that sends an incorrect

sider each possibility in Fig. 4 for and . From (1) and message in the

th iteration. We have the following lemma.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2632

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

Lemma 3: and are bad variable nodes.

Proof: The proof is by contradiction. We know that the

lower bound on the total number of bad variable nodes in any

configuration is given by (1) and that . We have two cases.

a) and are both good variable nodes: We first note that

in any valid configuration,

. Otherwise,

we have the following two possibilities.

i)

. In this case, from Lemma 2, we see

that

, since

.

ii)

. In this case,

, since

.

Both cases are a contradiction as we have at most

bad variable nodes. Hence,

.

Now,

, and, hence, we have

, which is a

contradiction.

b) is a bad variable node and is a good variable node.

The opposite case is identical.

First, we claim that in any valid configuration,

. Since is a bad variable node,

. Assume

that

. Then

. Again,

implies that

(as ), which is a contradiction. Hence,

.

Now,

and

imply that

which is a contradiction.

Hence, and are both bad variable nodes.

We now have the following theorem.

Fig. 6. (a) Construction of C from C . (b) Construction of C from C .
Fig. 7. Configurations of at most 2` + 1 bad variable nodes free of cycles of length less than 4` + 4 on which the Gallager A algorithm is not successful in (` + 1) iterations.

Theorem 1: If is a valid configuration on which the Gal-

lager A algorithm is not successful in

iterations, then

there exists a valid configuration on which the Gallager A

algorithm is not successful in iterations.

Proof: In the configuration

and are bad variable

nodes which send incorrect messages to check nodes and ,

respectively, in the

th iteration. This implies that and

each has a check node, and , respectively, that sends

an incorrect message in the th iteration to and , respec-

tively. Now consider a configuration constructed from

by removing the nodes

and the edges connecting

them to their neighbors and introducing the edges

and

(see Fig. 6(a)). If has at most

bad variable

nodes and no cycles of length less than , then has at most

bad variable nodes and no cycles of length less than

. In , variable node receives two incorrect messages

at the end of iterations, and, hence, is a valid configura-

tion on which the Gallager A algorithm is not successful in

iterations.

Theorem 1 gives a method to construct valid configurations

of bad variable nodes for girth from valid configurations for

girth . Also, if and are two distinct valid configura-

tions, then the configurations and constructed from

and , respectively, are distinct. Hence, the number of valid

configurations for girth is greater than or equal to the number

of valid configurations for girth

. Note that the converse

of Theorem 1 is not true in general. However, for

, we

will show in Theorem 2 that any configuration for girth can be

extended to a configuration for girth .

Theorem 2: For even and

, there are only three

valid configurations on which the Gallager A algorithm is not

successful in

iterations.

Proof: For

, we have

and there are only

three valid configurations as given in Fig. 5. So, for

and even, there can be at most three valid configurations.

Each valid configuration for

, can be extended to a con-

figuration for

by the addition of two bad variable

nodes and in the following way. Remove the edges

and

. Add bad variable nodes

and

and check nodes and . Introduce the edges

and

(see Fig. 6(b) for an illustration). It can be seen that is a

valid configuration for girth

. In general, the configura-

tions constructed using the above method from the valid config-

urations for

are valid configurations for

. Fig. 7

illustrates the three configurations for all .

Remark: In all valid configurations with

, no bad

variable node receives two incorrect messages at the end of the

th iteration.

Theorem 3: The Gallager A algorithm is successful on all

valid configurations in iterations.

Proof: We prove the theorem for one configuration for

only. The proof is similar for other configurations. At the end

of fourth iteration, let receive two incorrect messages [see

Fig. 5(a)]. It can be seen that there cannot exist another variable

node (either good or bad) which receives two incorrect messages

without violating the

constraint. Also, receives all

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF COLUMN-WEIGHT-THREE LDPC CODES UNDER THE GALLAGER A ALGORITHM—PART II 2633

Fig. 8. Configurations of at most five bad variable nodes free of cycles of length less than 12 on which the Gallager A algorithm is not successful in three iterations.

correct messages and message each from iteration, we have
otherwise In the sixth iteration, we have
otherwise In the seventh iteration, we have

receive one incorrect , respectively. In the fifth

prove that any code with Tanner graph with

, can correct

all error patterns of weight less than six. Let be a variable node

which sends an incorrect message in the third iteration along

edge

given that there are at most 5 bad variable nodes

and is a tree. Fig. 4 illustrates different configurations of bad

variable nodes in .

Fig. 8 shows all possible configurations of five or less bad

variable nodes on which the Gallager A algorithm is not suc-

cessful at the end of three iterations. However, the Gallager A

algorithm is successful on all the configurations in six iterations.

The proofs for configurations in Fig. 8(a)–(h) are similar to the

proof for configuration in Fig. 5(a) and are omitted. Since, con-

figuration (i) has only four bad variable nodes, a complete proof

for convergence requires considering all possible locations of

the fifth bad variable node, but other than that the structure of

the proof is identical to that of the proof for the configuration

in Fig. 5(a). It is worth noting that in this case, there exist con-

figurations in which a bad variable node receives two incorrect

messages at the end of the third iteration. However, the Gallager

A algorithm is successful on all the configurations eventually.

otherwise

B. Is Odd In this case, we have

and we need to prove

Finally in the eighth iteration, we have

that the code is capable of correcting all error patterns of weight or less. The methodology of the proof is similar

to the proof in the case when is even. In this case, we have

otherwise

for

. This implies that

and can have a common node at depth

. There-

At the end of eighth iteration, no variable node receives two incorrect messages, and, hence, the decoder is successful.

fore, in any configuration,

is lower bounded

by

. The

valid configurations in this case are the ones which satisfy

3)

: In this case,

and the incoming messages

. We again deal with

and

at the end of the second iteration are independent. We need to separately.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2634

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

Fig. 9. (a) Configuration of at most six bad variable nodes free of cycles of
length less than 14 on which the Gallager A algorithm is not successful in four iterations. (b) Configuration of at most 2` bad variable nodes free of cycles of length less than 4` + 2 on which the Gallager A algorithm is not successful in ` + 1 iterations.

Fig. 10. Configurations of at most four variable nodes free of cycles of length less than ten on which the Gallager A algorithm is not successful in three iterations.

1)

:

girth

can correct

errors in iterations. In

Lemma 4: For

, there is only one configuration of six

bad variable nodes on which the Gallager A algorithm is not

successful in four iterations.

Proof: Using arguments outlined above and the configu-

rations in Fig. 3(b) along with the constraint that

, we

conclude that there is only one configuration which is not suc-

cessful in four iterations, which is shown in Fig. 9(a).

[18], it was shown that the Gallager A algorithm for a column-

weight-three code with

cannot correct all error patterns

with up to errors. Hence, the bounds established in this

paper are tight for codes with Tanner graphs of girth

and cannot be improved. In this section, we discuss the case of

codes with Tanner graphs of girth

and the conditions on

the Tanner graph to correct all error patterns with up to 1, 2, and

3 errors.

Lemma 5: If with

is a valid configuration on which

the Gallager A algorithm is not successful in

iterations,

then and are bad variable nodes.

Proof: Similar to the proof of Lemma 3.

Before we proceed, we give an important remark about the

decision rule. As mentioned in Section II-B, we adopt Decision

rule A for codes with Tanner graphs of girth

. This is

due to the fact that when the number of errors is small (as is

the case), adopting Decision rule A leads to faster convergence

Theorem 4: If is a valid configuration on which the Gal- to a codeword than adopting Decision rule B. In Decision rule

lager A algorithm is not successful in iterations, then there B, any variable node which receives two incorrect messages is

exists a valid configuration on which the Gallager A is not decoded wrongly. For Tanner graphs of girth

, due to

successful in iterations.

the dense connectedness, it is possible that many good variable

Proof: Similar to the proof of Theorem 1.

nodes receive two incorrect messages thereby leading to non-

Theorem 5: For , there is only one valid configuration

on which the Gallager A algorithm is not successful in

iterations.

Proof: For

, we have

and there is only one

configuration. For

, the number of valid configurations

cannot be more than one. The valid configuration for

,

can be extended to a configuration for

(in the same

manner as in Theorem 2). In general, the valid configuration for

girth can be extended to a valid configuration for girth .

Fig. 9(b) shows for all

.

convergence. In Decision rule A, a good variable node is de-

coded wrongly only if it receives three incorrect messages and

if the number of errors is small, it is less likely for this scenario

to arise. While bad variable nodes need only one incorrect mes-

sage to be decoded wrongly, when the number of errors is small,

such variable nodes receive all correct messages as the iterations

progress. It is worth noting that the results established for codes

with Tanner graphs of girth

hold for Decision rule A

also. But we adopted Decision rule B, as the proof in this case

is more elegant. In practice, however, it is beneficial to adopt

Decision rule A due to the following reasons. The bit error rate

Theorem 6: The Gallager A algorithm is successful on the (BER) performance when the number of errors introduced by

configuration in iterations.

the channel is small is better for Decision rule A compared to

Proof: Similar to the proof of Theorem 3.

Decision rule B. Moreover, the Tanner graphs associated with

2)

: In this case,

and there are three configura-

tions on which the Gallager A algorithm is not successful at the

end of the third iteration. Fig. 10 shows the three configurations.

It can be shown that the Gallager A algorithm is successful on

these configurations in five iterations.

small to moderate length codes of high rates have low girth and

adopting Decision rule A would lead to faster convergence.

For a column-weight-three code with Tanner graph of girth

, it cannot be proved that the Gallager A algorithm can

correct all error patterns with up to

errors. This is due

to the fact that such Tanner graphs can contain codewords of

V. CASE OF GIRTH

weight less than or equal to

and in such cases even

the maximum likelihood decoder is not guaranteed to correct

In Section IV, we established that the Gallager A algorithm

errors. Specifically, a code with Tanner graph of girth

for a column-weight-three LDPC code with Tanner graph of four can contain a codeword of weight two, a code with Tanner

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF COLUMN-WEIGHT-THREE LDPC CODES UNDER THE GALLAGER A ALGORITHM—PART II 2635

= 4 Fig. 11. (a) Codeword of weight two in a Tanner graph of girth g

.

= 6 (b) Codeword of weight four in a Tanner graph of girth g . (c) Codeword

= 8 of weight six in a Tanner graph of girth g .

graph of girth six can contain a codeword of weight four and a

code with Tanner graph of girth eight can contain a codeword

of weight six [see Fig. 11(a)–(c) for illustration1]. Hence, it is

necessary to avoid all codewords of weight less than or equal to

to guarantee correction of

errors.

For codes with Tanner graphs of girth four, it is easy to show

that the Gallager A algorithm can correct a single error in one

iteration if there are no codewords of weight two. For codes with

Tanner graphs of girth six, we have the following theorem.

Theorem 7: A column-weight-three LDPC code with Tanner

graph of girth

can correct all error patterns with up to

two errors in at most two iterations of the Gallager A algorithm

if does not contain any codewords of weight four.

= 8 Fig. 12. Trapping sets with induced subgraphs of girth g

and critical

number three. (a) A (5,3) trapping set. (b) An (8,0) trapping set.

assume that no variable node in

, has two or more

neighbors in . In the first iteration, we have

if otherwise and if otherwise
All variable nodes in receive three incorrect messages and are decoded incorrectly at the end of the first iteration. In the second iteration

if

A. Case of

otherwise

and

Codes with Tanner graphs of girth

require a separate

discussion. In this case, avoiding codewords up to weight six

if otherwise

alone cannot guarantee correction of all error patterns with up

to three errors under the Gallager A algorithm.

We first exhibit two trapping sets with induced subgraphs of

girth

, which have critical number three under certain

conditions. We then show that avoiding these trapping sets in

a Tanner graph of girth

is sufficient to guarantee the

correction of three errors under the Gallager A algorithm.

Lemma 6: The Tanner graph of a column-weight-three code

with girth

can contain trapping sets with critical number

three. Specifically, there exist (5,3) and (8,0) trapping sets with

critical number three.

Proof: We prove the lemma for the case of the (5,3) trap-

ping set shown in Fig. 12(a). The proof for the (8,0) trapping set

shown in Fig. 12(b) is similar and is omitted.

Consider the (5, 3) trapping set shown in Fig. 13. Let

be the set of variable nodes which are initially in

error. Let

and

. Also,

and all variable nodes in are decoded incorrectly. Continuing

in this fashion,

and

.

That is, the messages being passed in the Tanner graph repeat

after every two iterations. Hence, three variable nodes in error

initially can lead to a decoder failure, and, therefore, this (5, 3)

trapping set has critical number equal to three.

Theorem 8: If the Tanner graph of a column-weight-three

LDPC code has girth eight and does not contain a subgraph

isomorphic to a (5,3) trapping set of Fig. 12(a) or a subgraph

isomorphic to an (8,0) trapping set of Fig. 12(b), then the code

can correct all error patterns with up to three errors in at most

three iterations of the Gallager A algorithm.

Proof: Let

be the set of three variable

nodes initially in error and be the set of the check nodes

connected to the variable nodes in . In a column-weight-three

code free of cycles up to length six, the variable nodes in

can induce only one of the four subgraphs given in Fig. 14. In

1We note here that in Figs. 11, 12, and 15,  just indicates a variable node each case,

if

and is 0 otherwise. The

with no value (good or bad) attached.

proof proceeds by examining these subgraphs one at a time and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2636

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

Fig. 13. Illustration of message passing for a (5,3) trapping set: (a) variable node to check node messages in the first iteration, (b) check node to variable node messages in the first iteration, (c) variable node to check node messages in the second iteration, and (d) check node to variable node messages in the second iteration. Arrow-heads indicate the messages with value 1.

Lemma 7: There can be at most one variable node in .

Proof: Suppose

. Specifically, assume

. The proof is similar for

. First

note that for any

cannot be connected to as it

would introduce a six-cycle. Next, let

and

. Then, any

cannot have both check

nodes in either or as this would introduce a four cycle.

Hence, any

has one check node neighbor in and one

check node neighbor in . Assume without loss of generality

that

is connected to and . Then, cannot be

connected to and as this would introduce a six-cycle. Also,

cannot be connected to and as this would introduce a

(5, 3) trapping set. Hence,

.

Now, let

be connected to

check . In the second iteration

and an additional

= 8 Fig. 14. All the possible subgraphs that can be induced by three variable nodes
in a column-weight-three code with Tanner graph of girth g .
proving the correction of the three errors in each case. Below we provide the complete proof for the case depicted in Fig. 14(b) and relegate the proofs for other cases to Appendix A.
Subgraph 2: The variable nodes in induce the subgraph shown in Fig. 14(b). At the end of the first iteration

if if if otherwise and if if if otherwise
We have the following lemma.

if

if

(2)

otherwise

For no

as this would introduce a four-

cycle or a six-cycle in the graph. For any

only if

. This implies that must have two

check node neighbors in

. Let be the set of such

variable nodes. We have the following lemma:

Lemma 8: There cannot exist any variable node

that receives two or more incorrect messages at the end of the

second iteration.

Proof: Suppose there exists a variable node that receives

two incorrect messages in the second iteration. Then, it would

be connected to two check nodes in the set

. This is

not possible as it would introduce a four-cycle or a six-cycle or

a (5, 3) trapping set (e.g., if is connected to and , then

would form a (5, 3) trapping set).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF COLUMN-WEIGHT-THREE LDPC CODES UNDER THE GALLAGER A ALGORITHM—PART II 2637

Fig. 15. Codeword of weight eight with critical number four.

Fig. 16. Illustration of a cycle of length 12.

Thus, in the third iteration

logarithmically with the code length. This is in contrast to the

if if otherwise and if if otherwise

results obtained so far for higher column weight codes for which correction of a linear number of errors in code length was established. Considering error correction capability as a function of girth also provides interesting results. The minimum distance in this scenario increases exponentially with girth while the guaranteed error correction capability grows only linearly with the girth. It is worth also noting that for LP decoding on the BSC, the error correction capability for column-weight-three codes

At the end of the third iteration, Also, we have the following lemma.

for all

. grows exponentially with the girth. The results derived in this paper do not apply to the parallel
bit flipping algorithm. It can be easily shown that when is

Lemma 9: There exists no

such that

. even, variable nodes in error can lead to oscillations in the

Proof: Suppose there exists such that

. bit flipping algorithm. Fig. 16 shows a set of six variable nodes

Then, is connected to three check nodes in the set that form a cycle of length 12. If the bad variable nodes are lo-

. This implies that

. However, cated as shown in Fig. 16, it can be seen that the variable nodes

from Lemma 8 it is evident that no such exists.
Hence, if a decision is made after the third iteration, a valid codeword is found and the decoder is successful.

in error at the end of a decoding round in the parallel bit flipping algorithm oscillate, thereby resulting in a decoding failure. This observation leads to the conclusion that the Gallager A algorithm can correct (approximately) twice the number of errors

Remark: It is interesting to note that there is another (8,0) trapping set which is shown in Fig. 15. But the critical number of this (8,0) trapping set is four.

compared to the parallel bit flipping algorithm. We conclude with a few open problems and suggestions for
future work that are of considerable interest: • Is there a decoding algorithm, perhaps one that employs

VI. DISCUSSION

more bits in the message alphabet, under which columnweight-three LDPC codes can correct a linear number of

Gallager in [1] showed that the girth of the Tanner graph of

errors in the code length?

any code in the ensemble of

regular codes is bounded • Can it be proved that column-weight-three LDPC codes

by

can correct a linear number of errors in the code length

under the LP decoder?

• It would be interesting to see if the method outlined in this

paper can be applied to higher column weight codes to

Additionally, an explicit construction of codes whose Tanner graphs satisfy

identify trapping sets as well as derive tighter bounds on the guaranteed error correction capability. • Algorithms that utilize soft information from the channel

and/or employ more bits in the message alphabet have the

potential to correct more errors. Future work includes the

extension of the results derived in this paper to quantized

was proposed. Codes with Tanner graphs of girth growing logarithmically with the code length were also proposed by Margulis

belief propagation algorithms over the BSC as well as the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.

[22] and further investigated by Rosenthal and Vontobel [23].

The results presented in this paper, combined with the results

APPENDIX A

of [18], establish that the guaranteed error correction capability

PROOF OF THEOREM 8

of column-weight-three LDPC codes under the Gallager A al- Subgraph 1: The variable nodes in induce the subgraph gorithm grows logarithmically with the code length. This is an shown in Fig. 14(a). At the end of the first iteration interesting result due to the fact that while the minimum dis-

tance of codes in this ensemble increases linearly with the code

if

length, the guaranteed error correction capability increases only

otherwise

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2638

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 6, JUNE 2010

There cannot exist a variable node

which is connected

to two or more check nodes in the set without introducing

either a six-cycle or a subgraph isomorphic to (5,3) trapping

set. At the end of first iteration,

for all

. Furthermore, there exists no

for which

. Hence, if a decision is made after the first iteration, a valid

codeword is found and the decoder is successful.

Subgraph 3: The variable nodes in induce the subgraph

shown in Fig. 14(c). At the end of the first iteration

if if otherwise

For no lemma:

only if

. For any . We have the following

Then, (i) there exists at most one variable node

such

that

, and (ii) there exist at most three variable

nodes

which receive two incorrect messages

at the end of the first iteration. Furthermore, no two variable

nodes in

share a check node in

.

Let the third check nodes connected to

be

and , respectively, and let

. In the second

iteration

if if otherwise and if if otherwise

Lemma 10: Let be the set of all variable nodes in

that receive two incorrect messages at the end of the first iter-

ation. Then, (i) has at most four variable nodes and, (ii) no

two variable nodes in can share a check node in

.

Proof: There exists no variable node which is connected

to two check nodes from the set

as it would

introduce a four-cycle or a six-cycle. However, a variable node

can be connected to one check node from

and to

one check node from

. Note that a variable node con-

nected to does not receive an incorrect message at the end of

the first iteration. It is easy to see that there can be at most four

variable nodes which receive two incorrect messages without

introducing a four cycle or a six cycle. Also, these four variable

nodes cannot share check nodes outside the set without in-

troducing a four cycle or a six cycle.

Let these four variable nodes be labeled

and

their third check node neighbors be

, respectively.

Let

. Hence, in the second iteration

It can be shown that there cannot exist a variable node which is

connected to one check node from and to one check node

from

. It can also be shown that there cannot be a

variable node which is connected to all three check nodes in

the set as this would introduce a graph isomorphic to the

(8,0) trapping set. However, there can be at most two variable

nodes which receive two incorrect messages from the check

nodes in , say and . Let the third check nodes con-

nected to them be and , respectively. Let

and

. At the end of the second iteration, variable

nodes

and receive one incorrect message each. Vari-

ables in the set receive two incorrect messages each. There-

fore, in the third iteration, we have

if if otherwise and if

if

if

if otherwise and if if

At the end of the third iteration,

for all

.

Furthermore, for no

. So, if a decision is

made after the third iteration, a valid codeword is reached and

the decoder is successful.

otherwise

REFERENCES

At the end of the second iteration,

for all

.

Moreover, for no

. So, if a decision is

made after the second iteration, a valid codeword is reached and

the decoder is successful.

Subgraph 4: The variable nodes in induce the subgraph

shown in Fig. 14(d). At the end of the first iteration

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, May 1981.
[3] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[4] T. J. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-

if otherwise

If there exists no variable node

such that

, a valid codeword is reached after the first iteration. Suppose

this is not the case. Then, we have the following lemma.

Lemma 11: Let be the set of variable nodes which receive two or more incorrect messages at the end of the first iteration.

approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001. [5] D. J. C. MacKay and M. J. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan–Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. MFCSIT, 2003, vol. 74 [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/abstracts/margulis.html, Elsevier, Galway, ser. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science [6] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, 2003, pp. 1426–1435 [Online]. Available: http://www.hpl.hp.com/personal/Pascal_Vontobel/pseudocodewords/papers

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF COLUMN-WEIGHT-THREE LDPC CODES UNDER THE GALLAGER A ALGORITHM—PART II 2639

[7] M. Ivkovic, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.
[8] V. V. Zyablov and M. S. Pinsker, “Estimation of the error-correction complexity for Gallager low-density codes,” Probl. Inf. Transmission, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 18–28, 1976.
[9] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[10] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Expander graph arguments for message-passing algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 782–790, Mar. 2001.
[11] D. Burshtein, “On the error correction of regular LDPC codes using the flipping algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 517–530, Feb. 2008.
[12] J. Feldman, M. Wainwright, and D. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[13] J. Feldman, T. Malkin, R. A. Servedio, C. Stein, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding corrects a constant fraction of errors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 82–89, Jan. 2007.
[14] C. Daskalakis, A. G. Dimakis, R. M. Karp, and M. J. Wainwright, “Probabilistic analysis of linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3565–3578, Aug. 2008.
[15] S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, B. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin, “On trapping sets and guaranteed error correction capability of LDPC codes and GLDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1600–1611, Apr. 2010.
[16] C. Di, D. Proietti, T. Richardson, E. Telatar, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, 2002.
[17] A. Orlitsky, R. Urbanke, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping sets and the girth of Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, 2002, p. 2.
[18] S. K. Chilappagari and B. Vasic, “Error correction capability of column-weight-three LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 2055–2061, May 2009.
[19] S. K. Chilappagari, A. R. Krishnan, and B. Vasic, “LDPC codes which can correct three errors under iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, May 2008, pp. 406–410.
[20] A. Shokrollahi, “An introduction to low-density parity-check codes,” in Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science: Advanced Lectures. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2002, pp. 175–197.
[21] S. K. Chilappagari, M. Chertkov, M. G. Stepanov, and B. Vasic, “Instanton-based techniques for the analysis and reduction of error floors of LDPC codes,” presented at the IEEE JSAC on Capacity Approaching Codes, 2009 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0903.1624
[22] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982.
[23] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, 2000, pp. 248–257.
Shashi Kiran Chilappagari (S’05–M’09) received the B.Tech. and M.Tech. degrees in electrical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India, in 2004, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Arizona, Tucson, in 2008.
He was a Research Engineer in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Arizona from January 2009 to December 2009. He is currently with Marvell Semiconductor, Inc., Santa Clara, CA. His research interests include error control coding and information theory with focus on the analysis of failures of various suboptimal decoding algorithms for LDPC codes.

Dung Viet Nguyen (S’07) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Arizona, Tucson, in 2007, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests include digital communications and information theory.
Bane Vasic (S’92–M’93–SM’02) received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Nis, Nis, Yugoslavia (now Serbia), in 1989, 1991, and 1994, respectively.
From 1996 to 1997, he was a Visiting Scientist at the Rochester Institute of Technology and Kodak Research, Rochester, NY, where he was involved in research in optical storage channels. From 1998 to 2000, he was with Lucent Technologies, Bell Laboratories (Bell-Labs). He was involved in research in iterative decoding and low-density parity-check codes, as well as development of codes and detectors implemented in Bell-Labs chips. Presently, he is a Professor in the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Arizona, Tucson. His research interests include coding theory, information theory, communication theory, and digital communications and recording.
Dr. Vasic is a Member of the Editorial Board for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS. He served as Technical Program Chair of the IEEE Communication Theory Workshop in 2003 and as Co-organizer of the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science (DIMACS) Workshops on Optical/Magnetic Recording and Optical Transmission, and Theoretical Advances in Information Recording in 2004. He was Co-organizer of the Los Alamos Workshop on Applications of Statistical Physics to Coding Theory in 2004, the Communication Theory Symposium within the IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC 2006), and IEEE Communication Theory Workshop (CTW 2007).
Michael W. Marcellin (S’81–M’87–SM’93–F’02) was born in Bishop, CA, on July 1, 1959. He graduated summa cum laude with the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from San Diego State University, San Diego, CA, in 1983, where he was named the most outstanding student in the College of Engineering. He received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Texas A&M University, College Station, in 1985 and 1987, respectively.
Since 1988, he has been with the University of Arizona, Tucson, where he holds the title of Regents’ Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering, and of Optical Sciences. His research interests include digital communication and data storage systems, data compression, and signal processing. He has authored or coauthored more than two hundred publications in these areas. He is a major contributor to JPEG2000, the emerging second-generation standard for image compression. Throughout the standardization process, he chaired the JPEG2000 Verification Model Ad Hoc Group, which was responsible for the software implementation and documentation of the JPEG2000 algorithm. He is coauthor of the book JPEG2000: Image Compression Fundamentals, Standards and Practice (Kluwer, 2002). This book is intended to serve as a graduate level textbook on image compression fundamentals, as well as the definitive reference on JPEG2000. He served as a consultant to Digital Cinema Initiatives (DCI), a consortium of Hollywood studios, on the development of the JPEG2000 profiles for digital cinema.
Prof. Marcellin is a member of Tau Beta Pi, Eta Kappa Nu, and Phi Kappa Phi. He is a 1992 recipient of the National Science Foundation Young Investigator Award and a corecipient of the 1993 IEEE Signal Processing Society Senior (Best Paper) Award. He has received teaching awards from NTU (1990, 2001), IEEE/Eta Kappa Nu student sections (1997), and the University of Arizona College of Engineering (2000). In 2003, he was named the San Diego State University Distinguished Engineering Alumnus. He is the recipient of the 2006 University of Arizona Technology Innovation Award. From 2001 to 2006, he was the Litton Industries John M. Leonis Professor of Engineering. He is currently the International Foundation for Telemetering Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Arizona.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:37:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

