IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

85

Highly Reliable and Low Power SSD Using Asymmetric Coding and Stripe Bitline-Pattern
Elimination Programming
Shuhei Tanakamaru, Student Member, IEEE, Chinglin Hung, Student Member, IEEE, and Ken Takeuchi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Highly reliable and low power solid-state drive (SSD) is proposed. Through the analysis based on measured error rate in the SSDs with NAND flash memories, the memory cell error shows the asymmetric characteristic in multilevel cell (MLC) NAND flash memories. The proposed asymmetric coding increases the number of “1” s or “0” s of the programming data to reduce the data retention error. The numbers of the memory cells in the higher states are reduced. The memory cell error is reduced by 90% with the asymmetric coding. On the other hand, the inter bit-line capacitance significantly increases with the scaling of memory cells. The bit-line charging current becomes unacceptably large. To decrease the write power consumption, the stripe pattern elimination algorithm (SPEA) is proposed. The SPEA eliminates the column-stripe pattern which consumes the maximum power to charge all of the inter bit-line capacitance in a NAND chip. Theoretical analyses are given for both the asymmetric coding and the SPEA. The asymmetric coding and the SPEA can be used together with the other highly reliable or low power techniques such as intelligent interleaving and adaptive code selection scheme and realizes the high reliability and low power consumption.
Index Terms—ECC, error correcting code, low-power coding, NAND controller, NAND flash memory, reliability, solid-state drive, SSD.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE feature size of the NAND flash memories used in solid-state drives, SSDs has reached 2Xnm [3]–[6], where “2Xnm” denotes that the design rule of the NAND flash memory is in the range of 20 to 30 nm. As the NAND flash memories are scaled down, the reliability is degraded and the power consumption increases due to the larger bit-line capacitance [1]. This paper presents the SSD with the NAND flash memory controller which decreases memory cell errors and reduces the power consumption [7]. Fig. 1 shows the photograph of the proposed SSD whose measurement results were obtained. Figs. 2 and 3 show the measured memory cell bit error rate (BER) during the data retention and the program disturbance of 4X, 3X and 2Xnm NAND flash memories, respectively. The data retention error significantly increases as the data retention time in-
Manuscript received April 29, 2011; revised July 14, 2011; accepted September 13, 2011. Date of publication November 09, 2011; date of current version December 23, 2011. This paper was approved by Guest Editor Satoshi Shigematsu. This work was supported by CREST/JST.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Graduate School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Faculty of Engineering Tokyo 113-8656, Japan (e-mail: tanakamaru@lsi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2011.2170637

Fig. 1. Photograph of the proposed SSD.
creases. The program disturbance error increases exponentially as the write/erase cycles increase. In general, both the data retention and the program disturbance errors increase with the device scaling because of the enhanced cell-to-cell interference, random telegraph noise and reduced electrons [8]–[11]. In the sub-40-nm NAND flash memory design, dummy cells are added next to the select transistors to avoid the GIDL-induced program disturbance [12]. Therefore, the program disturbance problem is alleviated and the data retention error rate is much larger than the program disturbance error rate as shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 4 shows the dependence of the ratio of the data retention error to the program disturbance error on the write/erase cycles.
Fig. 5 shows the hardware architecture of the SSD [1]. An SSD is composed of the NAND flash memories, DRAM and the NAND controller. Because no mechanical component is used, the SSD is small, robust and low power compared with the conventional HDD. Multiple e.g., 8 or 16 NAND flash memories operate in parallel with the interleaving to enhance the write performance. The NAND controller connects with the host device through the host interface such as USB3.0, SATA3, SAS, PCI express. The flash memory management functions such as the bad block management, logical-physical address translation, wear-leveling, interleaving and error correction are implemented in the flash translation layer (FTL). The proposed asymmetric coding and the SPEA are also implemented in FTL.
As a highly reliable technology, in conventional SSDs, 20–40 bit correction per 1 KByte codeword Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) error correcting code (ECC) is used to correct errors [13]. As a stronger ECC such as low density parity check (LDPC) is developed [14], the capability of ECC reaches close to the Shannon limit of a few percent error correction. On the other hand, the reliability of the SSD continues to become worse as the scaling of memory cells. Thus, the

0018-9200/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

86

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

Fig. 4. The ratio of the data retention error to the program disturbance error. Fig. 2. Measured data retention error of 4X and 3Xnm NAND flash memories.

Fig. 5. Hardware architecture of the solid-state drive (SSD).

the memory cell reliability without the access time penalty.

The stripe pattern elimination algorithm (SPEA) eliminates

the worst case program data pattern and decreases the power

consumption during the program without the circuit area or the

access time overhead.

This paper is organized as follows. The error characteristics

of the memory cells are analyzed in Section II. The asymmetric

coding that reduces the SSD error is proposed in Section III. The

detailed theoretical analysis of the asymmetric coding is also de-

scribed. In Section IV, the SPEA that decreases the power con-

Fig. 3. Measured program disturbance error of 4X, 3X and 2Xnm NAND flash memories.

sumption is proposed. The program current is evaluated based on the future bit-line capacitance projection. The combination of various signal processing technologies such as the asymmetric

coding, the SPEA and the ECC are discussed in Section V. Con-

additional high-reliability scheme which can be combined with clusions are given in Section VI.

ECC is required. In the device scaling, the memory array size of NAND
flash memories increases to keep cell efficiency high in order to achieve high capacity NAND flash memory, whereas the bit-line capacitance is not scaled sufficiently in proportion to shrinks of cell and bit-line pitch, due to the increase of bit-line to bit-line parasitic capacitance. Furthermore, as many as 130 thousand (16 Kbyte) bit-lines operate simultaneously to maintain program throughput. As a result, the total bit-line

II. SSD ERROR ANALYSIS
The multipage cell architecture is used in the MLC NAND flash memories [15]. Two pages, an upper page and a lower page are assigned to one physical memory cell. The programming scheme is illustrated in Fig. 6. First, the lower page is programmed and the memory cells are divided into two states. Then, the memories are divided into four states when the upper page is programmed.

capacitance to drive in a chip exceeds 200 nF. When 16 or Fig. 7 shows the measured reliability failures. The key ob-

more NAND chips in SSDs operate in parallel to realize a servation is that the measured memory error is not random but

350 MByte/sec write, a huge current, about 2 A, flows in SSDs asymmetric, strongly depending on the data pattern. For both the

and low power techniques are required.

data retention and the program disturbance errors, the number

To overcome reliability and power crisis in SSDs, this paper of “

”-errors and “

”-errors are not equal. As for

proposes two key techniques. The asymmetric coding improves the data retention error, only “

”-errors occur in the lower

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: HIGHLY RELIABLE AND LOW POWER SSD USING ASYMMETRIC CODING

87

Fig. 6. Program operation of the multipage cell architecture.

Fig. 8. Architecture of the proposed SSD controller with the proposed stripe pattern elimination algorithm (SPEA) and the asymmetric coding.

“

”-errors occur in the lower pages and “

”-errors

are the dominant error in the upper pages.

The origin of the data retention error is the electron ejection

from the floating gate due to the stress-induced leakage current

(SILC) or the electron de-trap from the tunnel oxide. SILC is

caused by the trap created in the tunnel oxide. During the data

retention, the memory cell moves to , the thermally

equilibrium , where no electron exists in the floating gate.

is around 0 V. Most errors correspond to the decrease

of “

” or “

” due to the higher electric field

across the tunnel oxide as shown in Fig. 7(a). Moreover, if the

memory cell is higher, the program voltage is also higher.

The enhanced voltage stress to memory cells increases the trap

density in the tunnel oxide. As a result, SILC increases and the

data retention errors also increase.

The program disturbance error is caused by the electron in-

jection due to the programming voltage

, pass voltage

disturbances and the GIDL-induced hot electron in-

jection. Thus, the program disturbance error corresponds to the

increase of “

” or “

” as shown in Fig. 7(b).

III. ASYMMETRIC CODING

A. Concept of the Asymmetric Coding

Fig. 8 shows the architecture of the proposed NAND flash

memory controller. The original data from the host is input to the

proposed SPEA encoder. The SPEA modifies the program data

to “modified data 1” to decrease the power consumption. Then,

the proposed asymmetric coding encoder generates “modified

data 2” from “modified data 1”. Finally, the BCH ECC encoder

outputs the data to the NAND flash memory with an additional

code bit. Fig. 9 shows the worst case data pattern for the data

retention error, the randomizing coding and the proposed asym-

metric coding. Considering that the data retention error is over

100 times more than the program disturbance error when the

write/erase cycle exceeds 5000 as shown in Fig. 4, the proposed

asymmetric coding improves the data retention by increasing

“1”- and “0”-data of the lower and upper pages, respectively.

Fig. 7. Measured asymmetric error characteristics during (a) the data retention

The worst case data pattern is that all of the memory cells are

and (b) the program disturbance.

programmed in the highest level. When the memory cell

is high, the memory cell reliability degrades due to two ef-

fects, the large program voltage stress during the write/erase en-

pages and “

”-errors are the dominant error in the upper durance and the higher electric field across the tunneling oxide.

pages. On the other hand in the program disturbance error, only To reduce these effects, the randomizing coding may be used.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

88

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

Fig. 9.

distributions of the worst case, the randomizing coding and the asymmetric coding.
TABLE I PROBABILITIES OF “1” S AND “0” S OF THE LOWER AND UPPER PAGES FOR THE WORST CASE,
THE RANDOMIZING CODING AND THE ASYMMETRIC CODING

In the randomizing coding, the probability of “10” and “00”

is about 25% of the total data if the output data is completely

random. Compared with the worst case data pattern, both pro-

gram voltage stress and the electric field across the tunneling

oxide are decreased because the population of the lower

states increases.

In the proposed SSD, the asymmetric coding encoder modi-

fies the data programmed to NAND so that at least 60% of the

lower and upper pages are “1” s and “0” s, respectively as shown

in Table I. As a result, “10” and “00” occupy 16% and 24% of

the total data. The probability of the highest state, “10” is

decreased by 84% and 36% compared with the worst case and

randomizing coding, respectively. As a result, the data retention

error decreases.

Fig. 10(a) shows the algorithm of the asymmetric coding. The

proposed asymmetric coding increases the number of “1” s in

the following way. If “0” s data is major, all data are inverted.

In the example of Fig. 10, the user data length of the data unit

where the asymmetric coding is applied is 4 bit. If “Data unit1”

in Fig. 10(a) contains more than or equal to 2 bit of “0” s, “Data

unit1” is flipped to increase the number of “1” s and the flag

is set to “1”. On the other hand, if “Data unit2” contains less

than 2 bit of “0” s, the data is not modified and the flag is set to

“0”. The code length of the asymmetric coding is 5 bit. The cell

area overhead of the NAND flash memory for the flag depends

on the code length of the data unit. The asymmetric coding is

executed without randomizing to enhance the efficiency. When

the input data is already asymmetric, the randomizing decreases the effect of the asymmetric coding.
The circuit schematic of the proposed asymmetric coding en-

Fig. 10. (a) Algorithm of the proposed asymmetric coding. (b) Schematic circuit diagram of the asymmetric coding encoder.

coder is shown in Fig. 10(b). The number of “1” s in the data unit

is calculated as the sum of the input data with the 16 bit adder circuit. The comparator judges if the sum is larger than 8. If

B. Theoretical Analysis

the comparator detects that the result of the summation is larger The effect of the proposed asymmetric coding is analyzed

than 8, the comparator outputs “0” and the input data is output with Table II. Table II shows , the number of “1”-data in a

through MUX with “0” flag. If the comparator detects that the user data, the number of the data patterns, the number of “1” s

result of the adder is equal or smaller than 8, the comparator in- after the asymmetric coding, and the additional flag. First, the

verts the input data and outputs the inverted data with the “1” even bit user data

is assumed as shown in Table II(a). As-

flag. The asymmetric coding decoder is very simple because the suming the input data is random and the data length is suffi-

decoding only flips the data depending on the flag. Due to the ciently larger than the code length, all of the possible data pat-

simple logic, the latency, circuit area and power consumption terns exist equally. The probability of “1” s is calculated as

related with the asymmetric coding are negligibly small com- follows. The number of all data patterns is

.

pared with the ECC encoder and decoder.

The probability of “1” s

is calculated by dividing the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: HIGHLY RELIABLE AND LOW POWER SSD USING ASYMMETRIC CODING

89

TABLE II NUMBER OF “1” S IN THE ORIGINAL DATA, NUMBER OF POSSIBLE PATTERNS, NUMBER OF “1” S AFTER THE ASYMMETRIC CODING AND THE FLAG. (A) INPUT
DATA CONTAIN EVEN BITS. (B) INPUT DATA CONTAIN ODD BITS

Fig. 11. Probability of “1” s and the NAND cell area overhead dependence on code length of the asymmetric coding.

number of “1” s in all of the data patterns with flag bits by .

The NAND cell area overhead for the flag bit is Similar to the discussion above, the probability of “1” s

(1) Fig. 12. (a) Measured data retention error dependence on the program voltage

.

stress of the worst case, the randomize and the asymmetric coding. (b) Measurement conditions.

when the user data length is odd

is calculated as

follows:

voltage stress to the memory cells as shown in Fig. 12(b). The

asymmetric coding pattern consists of 60% and 40% “1” s in

the lower page and the upper page, respectively to emulate the

(2) asymmetric coding to the random data pattern. The data reten-

tion patterns which are written just before the data retention

The NAND cell area overhead for the flag bit is are the same. The data patterns used in Fig. 12 are also used

. The probability of “1” s and the NAND throughout Figs. 13 and 14. In the randomizing and the asym-

cell area overhead with the asymmetric coding dependence on metric coding, the population of the high states, “10” and

the user data length are shown in Fig. 11. The smaller code “00”, is lower and the program voltage stress to memory cells is

length realizes a higher probability of “1” s with a drawback reduced. As a result, the data retention error decreases by 83%

of a larger cell area overhead due to the flag. If the user data for both randomizing and asymmetric coding.

length is 16 bit, the NAND cell area overhead is 6.3%. The Fig. 13(a) shows the measured errors as a function of the data

number of “1” s of the lower page and that of “0” s of the upper pattern during the data retention. In this case, 10K write and

page becomes 60% of the total data.

erase cycles are executed with the same program voltage stress

C. Measurement Results

condition while the different write/erase pattern is used in the measurements of Fig. 12. The data retention pattern is the ran-

Fig. 12(a) shows the measured data retention error as a func- domizing and the asymmetric coding pattern to observe the ef-

tion of the data retention time. 10 K write and erase cycles fect of the data retention pattern. The worst case pattern is not

are executed in the cases of the worst code, the randomizing shown in Fig. 13. As the proposed asymmetric data pattern de-

and the asymmetric coding to discern the effect of the program creases the population of the high states and decreases the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

90

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

Fig. 15. Acceptable raw bit error rate comparison of the proposed scheme with 24 bit correction BCH ECC and the asymmetric coding and 61 bit correction BCH ECC.

Fig. 13. (a) Measured data retention error dependence on the data pattern during the data retention. (b) Measurement conditions.

controller, either the proposed or conventional scheme can be chosen on the viewpoint of the circuit area, the power consumption and the reliability. The performance of the BCH ECC does not change with the asymmetric coding data.
Monte-Carlo simulation results and the asymmetric coding results for the real files are shown in Fig. 16. The user data length is 16 bit and 4 KByte page size is assumed. Fig. 16(a) is the Monte-Carlo simulation result of the asymmetric coding with 5000 times iteration. Fig. 16(b) is the actual result of the picture file in the JPEG format. The file size is 692 KByte. Fig. 16(c) is the actual result of the music file in MP3 format. The file size is 6.04 MByte. For both simulated results and real-life files, 60% of “1” s are realized with the asymmetric coding as predicted in (1).

D. Discussion

The usefulness of the asymmetric coding on 3-bit per cell and

4-bit per cell NAND flash memories is discussed below. Three

pages and four pages are applied to one word-line in 3-bit and

Fig. 14. Overall measured data retention error of the worst case, the randomize and the asymmetric coding.

4-bit per cell, respectively. For example in 3-bit per cell NAND

flash memory, the data is stored in 8

states as shown in

Fig. 17 [17]. The erased state is the lowest and is defined

as “E”. The second lowest

state is defined as “D1”. The

electric field across the tunneling oxide, the data retention im- highest state is defined as “D7”. The data assignments of

proves by 40% compared with the randomizing coding.

the first page from “E” to “D7” is “11110000,” the second is

Due to the two effects above, the total data retention error de- “11000011,” and the third is “10011001”. The first page would

creases by 90% and 40% compared with the worst and random- show a clear asymmetry of the error pattern because the data

ized case as shown in Fig. 14. The bit error rate after ECC with transition occurs at only one reference voltage level,

. On

the conventional BCH ECC scheme and the proposed asym- the other hand in the third page, the error asymmetry would

metric coding with ECC are shown in Fig. 15. The proposed decrease due to the 4 reference levels,

,

,

and

scheme is assumed to be applied with BCH ECC which cor-

. In such a case, the asymmetric coding can be applied to

rects 24 bit random errors in 1 KByte codeword. Considering the pages that have larger error asymmetry such as the first page

the same overhead of the proposed scheme with the asymmetric and the randomizing coding can be applied to the pages that

coding and the ECC, the conventional BCH ECC scheme can have smaller error asymmetry such as the third page.

correct 61 bit random errors in 1 KByte codeword. The pro-

posed scheme applied to the worst case where all of the memory

IV. STRIPE PATTERN ELIMINATION ALGORITHM

cells are in the highest state achieves the highest reliability because the data retention error is reduced by 90% with the pro- A. Concept of Stripe Pattern Algorithm

posed asymmetric coding. Although the conventional scheme In the digital VLSI circuits, the power consumption is in-

with 61 bit ECC shows a higher reliability than the proposed creasing to charge or discharge the load capacitance of the signal

scheme with the random data pattern, the circuit area and the lines. The low power circuit techniques have been proposed to

power consumption are doubled [16]. When designing the SSD reduce the frequency of the signal transition [18] or to reduce the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: HIGHLY RELIABLE AND LOW POWER SSD USING ASYMMETRIC CODING

91

Fig. 18. Bit-line capacitance trend as a function of the feature size of the NAND flash memory.

power consumption associated with the parasitic capacitance of

the bit-lines (BLs). The height of the bit-lines does not scale

down to keep the low resistance of bit-lines as the design rule

decreases. On the other hand, the width and the space of the

bit-lines are decreased to the minimum feature size. The length

of the bit-lines is assumed 5 mm which corresponds to the width

of memory cell planes. Fig. 18 shows the calculated bit-line ca-

pacitance trend [20]. The bit-line capacitance significantly in-

creases to a few picoFarads because the inter bit-line capaci-

tance increases with the scaling of bit-lines. The low power tech-

nique for the bit-line charging is required because the program

peak current of the NAND flash memory chip is dominated by

the charging current of the bit-lines.

Fig. 19(a) shows the concept of the proposed program current

reduction. Fig. 19(b) shows the proposed SPEA. The column-

stripe pattern maximizes the program current. In case of the

column-stripe pattern, bit-lines are alternately biased to and

. All of the inter bit-line capacitance is charged and a large

current flows. On the other hand, when every bit-line is biased

Fig. 16. (a) Monte-Carlo simulation result of the asymmetric coding with 5000 times iteration. (b) Measured asymmetric coding result for the picture file in JPEG format. (c) Measured asymmetric coding result for the music file in MP3 format.

to

with all “1” data pattern, inter bit-line capacitance di-

minishes and the program current decreases.

The SPEA encoder modifies the original data from the host

to avoid the worst case column-stripe pattern and save the

power consumption. In the design of the power supply system

of SSD, the worst case of the power consumption must be

considered because the worst case large peak current may

cause a catastrophic voltage drop and leads to the malfunction

of SSD. The SPEA calculates the number of “1” s in even

and odd columns separately. Then, the SPEA calculates the

difference of the number of “1” s. If the difference is larger than

a threshold value, , the data programmed to the NAND

Fig. 17. Data assign of the 3-bit per cell [17].

flash memory is modified so that the odd column data are arranged first and the even column data are arranged next and

flag1 is added as shown in Fig. 19(b). Flag1 shows whether the

inter-bus capacitance [19]. To reduce the power consumption SPEA is applied or not. Then, the odd or the even column data

of the NAND flash memory, the critical issue is to reduce the which has larger number of “1” s is flipped and flag2 is added

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

92

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

Fig. 19. (a) Concept of the SPEA. (b) Algorithm of the SPEA.

to increase the number of “0” s and emphasize the effect of B. Theoretical Analysis

the subsequent asymmetric coding as discussed in Section V. Flag2 is an optional extra bit and is not always necessary. The SPEA can be applied with the larger codeword than the asymmetric coding because the SPEA is used to eliminate the worst case of the power consumption. On the other hand in the asymmetric coding, as the codeword becomes large, the probability of “1” s decreases and becomes identical to the randomizing coding. The codeword of the SPEA can be as large as 512 Byte and the overhead of the SPEA flag is negligibly small. Furthermore, the influence of the flag bit on the power consumption is also negligibly small due to the large codeword. The power consumption and the delay caused by the SPEA can also be disregarded due to the following reasons. First, the

The program current of the NAND flash memory is analyt-

ically estimated below. Because the bit-line capacitance is in-

creasing as shown in Fig. 18, the main portion of the program

current is the charging current of the bit-lines. The bit-line ca-

pacitance is composed of the inter bit-line capacitance

and the others

. In case that the memory cell connected

to the bit-line

is unselected (program inhibited),

is biased to [21]. Whether

is charged or not is

determined by the program data of the memory cells connected

to

and

. is the probability of a bit-line being

precharged. corresponds to the probability of “1” s. When

is precharged to , the adjacent bit-lines may be at one

of the following three states.

SPEA is a very simple algorithm and the power consumption 1) Both adjacent bit-lines,

and

are

and the delay are small. Especially, the delay is negligibly

precharged to

.

only charges

be-

small compared with the long program time of the NAND flash

cause

is eliminated. The program energy is

memory. Second, the SPEA and the program operations are not

. The probability of this state is .

executed at the same time. Because the SPEA is designed to 2) Both adjacent bit-lines,

and

are not

reduce the peak current, the function of SPEA does not affect

precharged.

charges

and two

be-

the peak current of the NAND programming.

cause

and

are biased to . The program

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: HIGHLY RELIABLE AND LOW POWER SSD USING ASYMMETRIC CODING

93

Fig. 20. Program peak current dependence on the probability of “1” s.

Fig. 21. Program peak current comparison of the column-stripe pattern, the random pattern and all “1” pattern.

energy is

and the proba-

bility of this state is

.

3) One of the adjacent bit-lines is precharged to .

charges

and one

. The program energy is

and the probability of this

state is

.

Based on the discussion above, the average energy to charge

a bit-line

is expressed as follows:

(3)
Assuming that charging the bit-lines is the dominant component of the program current, the program peak current is described as follows:
(4)

Here

is the page size of the NAND flash memory and

is the charging time of the bit-lines. The calculated

program current is shown in Fig. 20. The 25 nm NAND flash

memory, 8 KByte page size and 1 charging time is assumed.

Fig. 22. (a) Measured program current waveforms of the column-stripe pattern, all “1” and random pattern. (b) Comparison of the program peak current of the column-stripe pattern, all “1” and random pattern in 4X and 3Xnm NAND flash memories.

and

occupy 40% and 20% of the total bit-line

capacitance, respectively. As for the data pattern, the random capacitance increases. For example, in 25 nm NAND flash

data is assumed. When the data is all “0”, all of the bit-lines are memory, the program peak current is assumed to be 80 mA

biased to so that the program current does not flow to the and 134 mA with the random and column stripe pattern, re-

bit-lines.

spectively. Especially the program peak current of the worst

When the column-stripe pattern is input to the NAND chip, case, column-stripe pattern is unacceptably large as 200 to 300

the average energy to charge a bit-line

is shown as fol- mA as the feature size becomes smaller than 15 nm. When 16

lows:

NAND flash memories operate at the same time, a large current

of 4.8 A will flow. The program peak current is reduced by

(5) 60% if the proposed SPEA changes the column-stripe pattern to all “1” pattern.

When the column-stripe pattern is applied to the bit-limes,

every bit-line charges

and half of the bit-lines

C. Measurement Results

charges

. The calculated program peak current of Fig. 22 shows the measured power consumption. The

the column-stripe pattern and the random pattern which con- program peak current is compared among the column-stripe

tains “1” s for 50% and the all “1” pattern is shown in Fig. 21. pattern, all “1” and the random pattern. Fig. 22(a) shows the

The program peak current significantly increases with the measured program waveforms in 3Xnm NAND flash memory.

scaling of the NAND flash memory because the inter bit-line The program current is reduced by 20% with the randomizing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

94

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

Fig. 24. Encoding and decoding order of the proposed SSD controller.

Fig. 25. (a) The asymmetric coding of the column-stripe pattern without the Fig. 23. Measured program peak current of the random data pattern with SPEA. SPEA. (b) The asymmetric coding of the column-stripe pattern with the SPEA.

coding. With the SPEA, the program current of 4Xnm and any of smaller than the half of the code length can be used.

3Xnm NAND decreases by 35% and 43%, respectively as To care the semi-worst case pattern, should be smaller than

shown in Fig. 22(b). The reduction of the program peak current the half of the code length. Whatever are chosen, the parity

with the SPEA is smaller than 60% which was predicted in the bit is always 1 bit.

previous theoretical discussion because of the current of the peripheral circuits such as charge pump circuits. The SPEA is

V. ENCODING AND DECODING ORDER

more effective in the scaled NAND flash memory because the Fig. 24 shows the encoding and decoding order of the pro-

bit-line capacitance and the power consumption increase as the posed NAND controller. The encoding and decoding order must

memory cell size decreases.

be carefully considered to maximize the benefit of the asym-

Fig. 23 shows the measured dependence of program peak cur- metric coding, the SPEA and finally the ECC. In the encoder, the

rent and SPEA enable rate on

with 3Xnm NAND flash data from the host is transferred to the SPEA encoder first, then

memory. The result of the program peak current is the average the asymmetric coding encoder and the ECC encoder. In the de-

of the program peak current in 12 pages. The SPEA applied in coder, the data read from the NAND flash memory is transferred

Fig. 23 used only Flag1. The SPEA code length is 257 bit in to the ECC decoder first, then the asymmetric coding decoder

Fig. 23(a) and 129 bit in Fig. 23(b). SPEA is applied to the and the SPEA decoder. There are two requirements for the en-

random data pattern which contains 50% of “1” s. When the coding and decoding order.

page size of the NAND flash memory is 8 KByte, 256 and First, the SPEA encoding should be applied before the asym-

512 SPEA codewords exist in the page when the SPEA code metric coding encoding. With the SPEA encoding the column-

length is 257 bit and 129 bit, respectively. The number or the stripe pattern, in which the asymmetric coding is least effective,

probability of the codewords where SPEA are applied becomes is eliminated. The numbers of “1” s and “0” s are equal in the

small as increases. The program peak current changes only column-stripe pattern. The asymmetric coding can only increase

below

compared with the original data without SPEA. No “1” s from 50% to 53% as the number of “1” s increases from 8

dependence on the code length is also observed. This result im- to 9 in case of the 17 bit code length as shown in Fig. 25(a). On

plies that the SPEA does not affect the program peak current the other hand, when the SPEA is applied first, the probability

of the random data pattern. To care the worst case data pattern, of “1” s increases to 100% as shown in Fig. 25(b). Therefore,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: HIGHLY RELIABLE AND LOW POWER SSD USING ASYMMETRIC CODING

95

Fig. 26. Negligibly small degradation of the probability of “1” s with consideration of the parity bits of the BCH ECC.
TABLE III SUMMARY OF THE KEY FEATURES

are proposed. Both theoretical calculation and measurements are executed to evaluate the usefulness of the asymmetric coding and the SPEA. The asymmetric coding increases the probability of “1” s to 60% of the total data and reduces the memory cell errors by 90%. As a result, the reliability of the SSD improves by 10 times. The asymmetric coding realizes the highest reliability by combining with the advanced ECC such as LDPC with the systematic encoding. The SPEA eliminates the column-stripe pattern and decreases the program current associated with the inter bit-line capacitance. The total program current decreases by 43%. The SPEA is more suitable for the scaled NAND flash memory because the inter bit-line capacitance increases as the space between the bit-lines decrease. The SPEA can be combined with other low power memory technologies such as intelligent interleaving that diversify the peak current [1] and the adaptive code selection scheme [2] that adaptively assign the programmed states to decrease the power consumption.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors sincerely appreciate Dr. K. Johguchi for his support. The authors would also like to thank A. Esumi, M. Ito, and Dr. K. Li of SIGLEAD Inc. for their support.

REFERENCES

the SPEA encoding is applied before the asymmetric coding to enhance the effect of the asymmetric coding.
The second requirement for the encoding and decoding order is that ECC decoding needs to be applied first. When an error occurs in the flag for the asymmetric coding or SPEA, errors also occur in other bits of the codeword, resulting in higher bit error rate. Therefore, the error in the flag should be corrected before the asymmetric coding/SPEA decoding. Even though the error after ECC in the flag bits causes the multiple errors, the efficiency of the ECC does not degrade because zero error is required after ECC. Both the error in the flag bit and the error in the other bits are regarded as the decoding failure. In this order, the asymmetric coding is not applied to the parity bits of the ECC but the degradation is very small. Fig. 26 shows the dependence of the probability of “1” s on ECC correctable bits per 1 KByte. The asymmetric coding increases the probability of “1” s in the user data to 60%. The probability of “1” s decreases to 59% when the ECC correctable number is up to 60 bit because the probability of “1” s in the parity bits of the ECC is 50%. The degradation of the effect of the asymmetric coding is only 1% and negligibly small.
VI. CONCLUSION
The key feature of the proposed SSD is summarized in Table III. The read/write speed is 150 MByte/sec. Besides the on-board 16 NAND flash memory chips, another NAND flash memory is implemented in the daughter board for the reliability or power measurement. The asymmetric coding and the SPEA

[1] K. Takeuchi, “Novel co-design of NAND flash memory and NAND flash controller circuits for sub-30 nm low-power high-speed solidstate drives (SSD),” in 2008 IEEE Symp. VLSI Circuits Dig. Tech. Papers, Jun. 2008, pp. 124–125.
[2] C. Lee et al., “A 32 Gb MLC NAND-flash memory with -endurance-enhancing schemes in 32 nm CMOS,” in 2010 IEEE Int. SolidState Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2010, pp. 446–447.
[3] K. Prall and K. Parat, “25 nm 64 Gb MLC NAND technology and scaling challenges,” in 2010 IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting Tech. Dig., Dec. 2010, pp. 102–105.
[4] K. Fukuda et al., “A 151 mm 64 Gb MLC NAND flash memory in 24 nm CMOS technology,” in 2011 IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig., Feb. 2011, pp. 198–199.
[5] T.-Y. Kim et al., “A 32 Gb MLC NAND flash memory with margin-expanding schemes in 26 nm CMOS,” in 2011 IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig., Feb. 2011, pp. 212–213.
[6] K.-T. Park et al., “A 7 MB/s 64 Gb 3-bit/cell DDR NAND flash memory in 20 nm-node technology,” in 2011 IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig., Feb. 2011, pp. 204–205.
[7] S. Tanakamaru, C. Hung, A. Esumi, M. Ito, K. Li, and K. Takeuchi, “95%-lower-BER 43%-lower-power intelligent solid-state drive (SSD) with asymmetric coding and stripe pattern elimination algorithm,” in 2011 IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig., Feb. 2011, pp. 204–205.
[8] J. D. Lee, S. H. Hur, and J. D. Choi, “Effects of floating-gate interference on NAND flash memory cell operation,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 23, pp. 264–266, May 2002.
[9] M. Ichige et al., “A novel self-aligned shallow trench isolation cell for 90 nm 4 Gbit NAND flash EEPROMs,” in 2003 IEEE Symp. VLSI Technology Dig. Tech. Papers, Jun. 2003, pp. 89–90.
[10] H. Kurata et al., “The impact of random telegraph signals on the scaling of multilevel flash memories,” in 2006 IEEE Symp. VLSI Circuits Dig. Tech. Papers, Jun. 2006, pp. 112–113.
[11] K. Inoh, “Scaling challenge in NAND Flash,” presented at the IEEE Symp. VLSI Technology, Short Course, Kyoto, Japan, 2007.
[12] K. Kanda et al., “A 120 mm 16 Gb 4-MLC NAND flash memory with 43 nm CMOS technology,” in 2008 IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2008, pp. 430–431.
[13] M. Abraham, “NAND flash trends for SSD/enterprise,” Flash Memory Summit, 2010 [Online]. Available: http://www.flashmemorysummit. com/
[14] Y. Y. Tai, “Error control coding for MLC flash memories,” Flash Memory Summit, 2010 [Online]. Available: http://www.flashmemorysummit.com/

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

96

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 47, NO. 1, JANUARY 2012

[15] K. Takeuchi et al., “A multipage cell architecture for high-speed programming multilevel NAND flash memories,” in 1997 IEEE Symp. VLSI Circuits Dig. Tech. Papers, Jun. 1997, pp. 67–68.
[16] S. Tanakamaru, M. Fukuda, K. Higuchi, A. Esumi, M. Ito, K. Li, and K. Takeuchi, “Post-manufacturing, 17-times acceptable raw bit error rate enhancement, dynamic codeword transition ECC scheme for highly reliable solid-state drives, SSDs,” Solid-State Electron., vol. 58, pp. 2–10, Apr. 2011.
[17] S. H. Chang et al., “A 48 nm 32 Gb 8-level NAND flash memory with 5.5 MB/s program throughput,” in 2009 IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig., Feb. 2009, pp. 240–241.
[18] S. Komatsu, M. Ikeda, and K. Asada, “Low power chip interface based on bus data encoding with adaptive code-book method,” in Proc. 9th Great Lakes Symp. VLSI, Mar. 1999, pp. 368–371.
[19] S. Komatsu, M. Ikeda, and K. Asada, “Bus data encoding with coupling-driven adaptive code-book method for low power data transmission,” in Proc. 2001 Eur. Solid-State Circuits Conf., Sep. 2001, pp. 297–300.
[20] T. Sakurai and K. Tamaru, “Simple formulas for two- and three- dimensional capacitances,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-30, no. 2, pp. 183–185, Feb. 1983.
[21] K. D. Suh et al., “A 3.3 V 32 Mb NAND flash memory with incremental step pulse programming scheme,” in 1995 IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 1995, pp. 128–129.
Shuhei Tanakamaru (S’09) received the B.E. and M.E. degrees in engineering in 2009 and 2011 from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree.
He has been engaged in a research on low-power DRAM, SRAM and highly reliable solid-state drive (SSD).
Mr Tanakamaru received the 2009 IEEE EDS Japan Chapter Student Award.

Chinglin Hung (S’10) was born in Taipei, Taiwan, in 1985. He received the B.S. degree from National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2007, and will receive the M.S. degree from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2011.
He has been engaged in research on the reliability and scaling trend of NAND flash memory.
Ken Takeuchi (M’01) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in applied physics and the Ph.D. degree in electric engineering from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 1991, 1993, and 2006, respectively. In 2003, he also received the M.B.A. degree from Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
He is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Graduate School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Japan. He is now working on the VLSI circuit design and device, especially on the emerging non-volatile memories, 3D-integrated SSDs, low-power 3D-LSI circuits and ultra-low-voltage SRAMs for Green-IT. Since he joined Toshiba in 1993, he had been leading Toshiba’s NAND flash memory circuit design for 14 years. He designed six world’s highest density NAND flash memory products such as 0.7 m 16 Mbit, 0.4 m 64 Mbit, 0.25 m 256 Mbit, 0.16 m 1 Gbit, 0.13 m 2 Gbit, and 56 nm 8 Gbit NAND flash memories. He holds 204 patents worldwide including 107 U.S. patents. Especially, with his invention, “multipage cell architecture”, presented at the Symposium on VLSI Circuits in 1997, he successfully commercialized world’s first multi-level cell NAND flash memory in 2001. Dr. Takeuchi has authored numerous technical papers, one of which won the Takuo Sugano Award for Outstanding Paper at ISSCC 2007. He has served on the program committee member of International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC) and Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference (A-SSCC). He served as a tutorial speaker at ISSCC 2008, a SSD forum organizer at ISSCC 2009, a 3D-LSI forum organizer at ISSCC 2010, Ultra-Low Voltage LSI forum organizer at ISSCC 2011 and Robust VLSI System forum organizer at ISSCC 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

