824

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 59, NO. 4, AUGUST 2012

On the Use of Euclidean Geometry Codes for Efficient Multibit Error Correction on Memory Systems
Pedro Reviriego, Member, IEEE, Mark F. Flanagan, Senior Member, IEEE, Shih-Fu Liu, and Juan A. Maestro, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Soft errors caused by radiation particles are becoming an increasingly important issue for memory reliability. Traditionally, Single Error Correction Double Error Detection (SEC-DED) codes have been used to correct soft errors. Such codes can correct one error per memory word, but as errors become more frequent they may be insufficient. More complex error correction codes (ECCs) could be used, but they typically require complex decoders which impact memory area and speed. In this paper, the use of Euclidean geometry (EG) codes for memory applications is studied. The results show that these codes, which provide powerful error correction capabilities, can be implemented efficiently in terms of area and latency.
Index Terms—Error correction codes (ECCs), Euclidean geometry codes, memories, soft errors.
I. INTRODUCTION
S OFT errors caused by radiation particles are a major threat to memory reliability [1]. For many years, Error Correction Codes (ECCs) have been used to correct soft errors in memories [2]. The most commonly used ECCs in memories are Single Error Correction Double Error Detection (SEC-DED) codes, which can correct one error per memory word [3]. The advantage of SEC-DED codes is that they are simple to implement and have little impact on memory area and latency. However, recent studies suggest that as the number of soft errors increases, single error correction will not be enough for some applications in the near future [4]. Another important issue is that as technology scales, it is more likely for a particle hit to produce multiple soft errors in nearby memory cells, a phenomenon known as Multiple Cell Upset (MCU) [5]. Traditionally, MCUs have been mitigated through the use of interleaving, which physically separates the cells that belong to the same word so that they are not affected by the errors in an MCU [6]. However, interleaving requires a more complex routing to access the bits that belong to the same word as they are physically apart. This results in an overhead in terms of area and latency which grows with the interleaving distance [6]. As technology scales, the required interleaving distance grows in terms of the number of cells, having a
Manuscript received September 06, 2011; revised December 07, 2011; accepted January 11, 2012. Date of publication February 16, 2012; date of current version August 14, 2012. This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation under Grant AYA2009-13300-C03-01.
P. Reviriego, S. Liu, and J. A. Maestro are with Universidad Antonio de Nebrija, E-28040 Madrid, Spain (e-mail: previrie@nebrija.es; sliu@nebrija.es; jmaestro@nebrija.es).
M. F. Flanagan is with the School of Electrical, Electronic and Communications Engineering, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland (e-mail: mark.flanagan@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNS.2012.2185061

larger impact on the area and latency. The use of more advanced ECCs would reduce the requirements for interleaving, making them an attractive option for implementation.
The increased number of soft errors, together with the larger proportion of MCUs, has drawn the attention of the research community to efficient implementations of more advanced error correction codes. For example, in [7] the use of Single Error Correction, Double Error Detection, Double Adjacent Error Correction (SEC-DED-DAEC) codes was proposed. These codes can correct double errors that affect adjacent bits and can be sufficient when MCUs affect only two bits. Double Error Correction Codes (DEC) codes can also be used in that case. The implementation of DEC codes has recently been considered in [8]. In [9] the use of a Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) code combined with a Hamming code is proposed to provide multibit error correction capability for Flash memories. When MCUs affect more than two bits, more powerful codes are needed. In the context of Nanoscale memories, where reliability is an even bigger issue, Euclidean Geometry (EG) codes that can correct a larger number of errors have been studied [10], [11].
In this paper, the use of Euclidean Geometry (EG) codes to protect memories is studied. These codes, which may be viewed as Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes, have been previously studied in the context of Nanoscale memories [11]. In our case, the focus is to present efficient implementations for these codes and compare them with SEC-DED codes in terms of area and latency.
The paper is organized as follows. EG codes are presented in Section II, with a focus on existing decoder implementations. In Section III an optimized decoder is proposed which exploits the properties of EG codes, and complexity estimates for the decoder implementation are calculated. In Section IV the decoder complexity is compared to that of SEC-DED code decoders. Finally, conclusions are presented in Section V.
II. EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY CODES
Euclidean geometry (EG) codes are based on the mathematical properties of Euclidean geometries. A detailed analysis of these codes is outside the scope of this paper; however, a brief introduction is provided in the rest of this section, which then focuses on Majority Logic Decoders (MLD) which can be used for some of the EG codes.
Let s be a positive integer. An m-dimensional Euclidean geometry over the Galois Field GF , denoted by EG(m, ), is formed by the m-tuples over GF , by defining vector addition and scalar multiplication to operate entry-wise [12]. Each m-tuple is called a point in EG(m, ), with the all-zero m-tuple

0018-9499/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:17:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

REVIRIEGO et al.: ON THE USE OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY CODES

825

Fig. 1. Serial one-step majority logic decoder for the (15,7) EG code.

TABLE I PARAMETERS OF THE EG CODES CONSIDERED

One possibility to reduce the decoder latency is to use a parallel implementation of the decoder as proposed in [11]. In this

implementation, the combinational logic which implements the

correction is replicated n times so that all bits are corrected in

one cycle. The latency of this decoder can be comparable to tra-

ditional codes like SEC-DED or DEC. The remainder of this

paper therefore focuses on parallel decoders, as otherwise the

latency of the memory protected with EG-codes would be much

being called the origin and denoted by o. A line in EG(m, ) larger than that of a memory which uses SEC-DED or DEC. The

may be defined as the set of points

, issue with the parallel decoder is that it results in a large de-

where a is a point in EG(m, ), and c is a nonorigin point in coding complexity, for example for the

code,

EG(m, ). EG codes are derived from these Euclidean geome-

check equations are required. However, this cost

tries by identifying the nonorigin points of the geometry with can be reduced based on the properties of EG codes, as shown

the code bits, and the lines not passing through the origin with in the next section.

the parity check equations. A bit is involved in a parity check equation if (and only if) the corresponding point lies on the cor-

III. OPTIMIZED EG DECODER IMPLEMENTATION

responding line.

The parallel decoder can be simplified by showing that many

Among the EG codes, those with

(i.e., derived from of the MLD check equations in the decoder are repeated, and

EG(2, )) are one-step Majority Logic Decodable (MLD) [12]. therefore need only be calculated once. As an example, for the

These codes have a block size

and the number of decoder shown in Fig. 1, the third check (c , c , c , c ) in cycle

MLD equations used for decoding of any bit is

. The two is equal to the second check in cycle one. In fact, these

parameters of the one-step majority logic decodable EG codes checks will match in general for cycles and i respectively,

which are most relevant for memory applications are shown in for any i. This demonstrates the principle that the complexity of

Table I. The remaining EG codes have larger block sizes [12] the parallel decoder can be reduced (in this case, from the ini-

and their study is left for future work, although similar results tial

check equations used in [11]). In fact, it will

are expected to those presented here.

be shown that a parallel decoder needs only to implement n dif-

The interest of one step majority logic decodable codes is that ferent check equations compared to the n batches of q equations

the implementation of the decoder is simple. As an example, used in [11]. This reduces the number of equations by a factor

the decoder for the

code is shown in Fig. 1,

which increases with the block size of the code. For the

where n is the block length and k is the number of data bits. De- example considered, this means that only 15 equations would

coding starts by loading the word into the shift register. Then, be required.

the majority-logic check equations are computed and if there is The number of different check equations can be derived by

a majority of ones among them, bit is corrected and the bits analyzing the properties of the EG codes. For an EG code with

are cyclic-shifted. This operation is repeated for n cycles (15 in

(i.e., derived from EG(2, )), the set of

lines

the example) so that at the end, the register contains the cor- passing through a particular point corresponds to a set of parity

rected bits in the same order in which they were loaded into the checks orthogonal on the corresponding code bit [12]. These are

shift register. The issue with this decoder implementation for a therefore the majority logic check equations for that bit. These

memory application is that it requires n cycles; this increases codes have block length

. Each choice of an ordered

the decoding time and therefore limits the memory speed. As pair (a,b), where a is a nonorigin point, and b is any point not on

the memory word size grows, n would increase, making the de- the line containing o and a, defines a line not passing through the

coding time even larger.

origin. There are

such ordered pairs. In

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:17:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

826
TABLE II REQUIRED NUMBER OF TWO-INPUT GATES TO IMPLEMENT THE SERIAL
DECODER

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 59, NO. 4, AUGUST 2012
TABLE III REQUIRED NUMBER OF TWO-INPUT GATES TO IMPLEMENT THE PARALLEL
DECODER

this count, each line is included

times; hence the

number of lines not passing through o (i.e., the number of parity

checks) is

. This gives the number of different check

equations which need to be implemented in a parallel decoder.

TABLE IV

From a system perspective, it is important to consider how LOGIC DEPTH IN TERMS OF NUMBER OF TWO-INPUT GATES IN THE PARALLEL

soft errors in the decoder affect reliability. Even though equa-

DECODER

tions are shared, a soft error in an equation would not cause a

miscorrection, as a majority of ones is needed to trigger a correc-

tion. This means that more than half the check equations must

be affected by soft errors in order to cause a failure. Therefore,

the logic sharing does not significantly degrade the reliability of

the decoder.

The main blocks required for ECC implementation are the

encoder and the decoder. The encoder is used in write operations

while the decoder is used in read operations. The decoder is

typically more complex than the encoder and therefore is the

block which limits the memory performance in terms of latency

and cost. Therefore, in the following the analysis focuses on the

decoder implementation. To enable comparison with SEC-DED

codes, the number of gates will be used as an estimate of cost

and the logic depth as an estimate of latency.

From Fig. 1, the decoder requires a) a majority logic circuit;

b) the parity check equations; and c) the correction gate. For the

majority logic circuit, the approach based on the use of sorting

networks [11] is used to compute the gate estimates. The number

of gates in the parity check equations depends on the number

of bits which participate in each equation

which in

turn depends on the block size

(see [12] for more

details). Finally, the correction gate is a two-input XOR gate.

be used. The logic depth of the check equations depends on the

number of bits involved in each equation and the same applies

to the majority logic voter. The values for each of the block

sizes considered are summarized in Table IV. The length of the

logic path is the same for both implementations of the parallel

decoder, as the optimization only removes redundant equations.

In an actual circuit implementation, the optimized decoder will

be slightly slower as the check equation outputs are connected to

multiple majority logic circuits so that the load would be larger.

This larger load would have a small impact on the delay, which

could be easily mitigated using larger gates at the outputs of the

check equations. Therefore, this effect is not considered in the

rest of the analysis.

To illustrate the latency of the decoding, the complete de-

coding path for the

EG code is shown in Fig. 2.

It may be observed that the decoding path is simple and compa-

rable with that of traditional codes like SEC-DED.

The complexity of a serial majority logic decoder, for different block sizes, is given in Table II. These results differ from those

IV. COMPARISON WITH SEC-DED CODES

in [11] by one gate. This can be explained as the correction gate The implementation of SEC-DED codes has been studied

may not have been included in the previous estimates.

for many years [2]. A number of options are available when

For the parallel decoder, the estimates of replicating n times choosing a SEC-DED code for a given block size. A summary

the serial decoder can be directly computed and are shown in of different SEC-DED codes and their implementation cost is

Table III. Again, there are minor differences with those reported presented in [7]. In this paper, the ones presented in [13] are

in [11]. When the properties of the EG codes are used, the cost considered. In any case, the differences between the different

is reduced as now we need only implement n check equations codes are small.

instead of n times the number of check equations in a serial For SEC-DED codes, the decoder is typically implemented

decoder (see Table I). This greatly reduces the required number by re-computing the parity equations and checking the results

of gates, especially for large block sizes as seen in the results of with the parity bits. Then n-k inverters are used to generate

Table III. This is because the number of equations is reduced by the complements of the check results and using those and the

a factor

which grows with the block size, as discussed in original check results, n AND gates, each with n-k inputs, are

Section II. Therefore, the proposed optimization for the parallel used to locate the error and produce the inputs to n XOR cor-

decoder can make practical in terms of area the use of EG codes, rection gates [2]. The number of XOR gates required to imple-

which can correct more errors while keeping the decoding time ment the parity equations is given in [7], [14]. An AND gate

small.

with n-k inputs requires n-k-1 two-input AND gates, so the re-

To estimate the decoding time, the logic depth of the decoder quired number of two-input gates can be easily computed. The

in terms of the number of two-input gates of the longest path will n-k inverters mentioned previously are not included in the cost

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:17:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

REVIRIEGO et al.: ON THE USE OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY CODES

827
TABLE VII COMPARISON OF EG VS SEC-DED

TABLE VIII SYNTHESIS RESULTS

Fig. 2. Decoding path for the (15,7) EG code.

for a large memory, the area cost of those of gates should be

small in both cases compared to the area of the memory. This

TABLE V REQUIRED NUMBER OF TWO-INPUT GATES TO IMPLEMENT THE SEC-DED
DECODER

means that in terms of cost and performance, it is possible to implement the EG-code in a memory application. The EG code requires 26 parity bits compared with the 7 parity bits required

by the SEC-DED code, but the EG code can correct up to four

errors in a word, which is a significant improvement over the

single error correction per word capability of the SEC-DED

code.

The combinational logic of the decoders for the (39,32)

SEC-DED code and the (63,37) EG-LDPC code has been

TABLE VI LOGIC DEPTH FOR SEC-DED DECODER

implemented in HDL and synthesized for the TSMC35 library [15]. The results are shown in Table VIII. It can be observed that the area is larger for the EG-LDPC code, as expected. For

the SEC-DED code, the results are similar to those calculated

analytically. For the EG-LDPC, there is an increase of 25%.

However the delay is lower for the EG-LDPC than for the

SEC-DED code. This can be explained as the logic depth is

only an estimation of the delay which depends also on the type

of gate and on the fan-out. The results confirm that EG-LPDC

calculation as they are simpler than a two input logic gate and in any case their contribution to cost and delay is small. The results for different block sizes are summarized in Table V.
The logic depth of the SEC-DED decoder can also be easily calculated using the values given for the check equations in [7]. The results are shown in Table VI.
A comparison of the SEC-DED code implementation with the proposed EG code implementation is provided by Table VII.

codes can be efficiently implemented. In summary, these results show that EG codes can be im-
plemented with a reasonable number of gates and with a moderate latency overhead over that of SEC-DED codes. This makes them a good option for memory applications which require multiple bit correction capabilities. The main limitation is the limited number of block sizes (n) for which EG codes exist. This restricts the choice of memory word sizes.

It may be observed that the logic depths of EG and SEC-DED codes are not very different. This is an interesting result as it

V. CONCLUSION

means that EG codes can be used without degrading signifi- In this paper, the use of advanced error correction codes,

cantly the speed of the memory. Regarding the gate count, the namely Euclidean Geometry (EG) codes, has been studied for

use of large block sizes in EG codes results in a large number of memory applications. Using the properties of those codes, an

gates compared with SEC-DED.

optimized decoder is proposed that reduces substantially the de-

From the results, the most interesting EG code seems to coder complexity. The proposed decoder has been compared

be the (63,37) code, which can be compared with the (39,32) with decoders for SEC-DED codes. Our results show that for

SEC-DED code. The EG code incurs a latency overhead of some block sizes, EG codes provide a promising option to pro-

approximately 25% compared to the SEC-DED code, and tect memories when advanced error correction capabilities are

requires approximately six times the number of gates. However required.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:17:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

828

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 59, NO. 4, AUGUST 2012

Future work will focus on the study of parallel decoder implementations for other codes that are one-step Majority Logic Decodable (MLD). In particular the study of Difference Set (DS) codes seems an interesting option.
REFERENCES
[1] R. C. Baumann, “Radiation-induced soft errors in advanced semiconductor technologies,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Reliab., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 301–316, Mar. 2005.
[2] C. L. Chen and M. Y. Hsiao, “Error-correcting codes for semiconductor memory applications: A state-of-the-art review,” IBM J. Res. Develop., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 124–134, 1984.
[3] M. Blaum, R. Goodman, and R. McEliece, “The reliability of single error protected computer memories,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 114–119, Jan. 1988.
[4] M. A. Bajura et al., “Models and algorithmic limits for an ECC-based approach to hardening sub-100-nm SRAMs,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 935–945, 2007.
[5] E. Ibe, H. Taniguchi, Y. Yahagi, K. Shimbo, and T. Toba, “Impact of scaling on neutron-induced soft error in SRAMs from a 250 nm to a 22 nm design rule,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1527–1538, Jul. 2010.

[6] S. Baeg, S. Wen, and R. Wong, “SRAM interleaving distance selection with a soft error failure model,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 2111–2118, Aug. 2009.
[7] A. Dutta and N. A. Touba, “Multiple bit upset tolerant memory using a selective cycle avoidance based SEC-DED-DAEC code,” in Proc. 25th IEEE VLSI Test Symp., 2007, pp. 349–354.
[8] R. Naseer and J. Draper, “DEC ECC design to improve memory reliability in sub-100 nm technologies,” in Proc. IEEE ICECS, 2008, pp. 586–589.
[9] P. Ankolekar, S. Rosner, R. Isaac, and J. Bredow, “Multi-bit error correction methods for latency-contrained flash memory systems,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Reliab., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 33–39, 2010.
[10] S. Ghosh and P. D. Lincoln, “Low-Density Parity Check Codes for Error Correction in Nanoscale Memory,” SRI Comp. Sci. Lab., Tech. Rep. CSL-0703, 2007.
[11] H. Naeimi and A. DeHon, “Fault secure encoder and decoder for nanomemory applications,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 473–486, 2009.
[12] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[13] M. Y. Hsiao, “A class of optimal minimum odd-weight column SEC-DED codes,” IBM J. Res. Develop., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 395–401, 1970.
[14] M. Richter, K. Oberlaender, and M. Goessel, “New linear SEC-DED codes with reduced triple bit error miscorrection probability,” in Proc. IOLTS’08. 14th IEEE Int. On-Line Testing Symp., Jul. 2008, pp. 37–42.
[15] Mentor Graphics Web Site [Online]. Available: http://www.mentor. com/company/higher_ed/ic-asic, Jul. 2011

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:17:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

