2012 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference: PHY and Fundamentals

ML performance bounds of Turbo and LDPC codes
Kuan-Chi Chen, Meng-Lin Wu, Hsiao-Hsien Chen, and Da-shan Shiu Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering Department of Electrical Engineering National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
Email: {r95942027, r95942050, r96942024}@ntu.edu.tw dsshiu@cc.ee.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract— To date there is no practical means to evaluate the true word error probability (WEP) of a given turbo or LDPC code because typical decoders cannot achieve the performance of ML decoding. In this paper, we propose a viable methodology to establish tight bounds on the ML-decoding WEP for these codes through empirical simulation. Our framework centers on the efficient use of multiple-output decoding induced by receiver-generated side information, or gift. At low WEP regime, perturbed decoding can give tight bounds. In high WEP regime, due to the prohibitive complexity of perturbed decoding, we instead pursue other type of gifts. The effectiveness of various types of gifts is investigated in detail. We observe that the complexity of gift-assisted decoding is dominated by the effort to identify partial gifts that can then be further extended. Using bit values as gifts and an algorithm that maximizes the efficiency of identifying valid partial gifts, the ML bounds of turbo and LDPC codes are evaluated. At low WEP regime, our approach successfully yields the ML performance for these codes. Their WEP are shown to be very far from the sphere packing bound. At higher WEP regime, our results indicate that best-performing message-passing decoders underperform an ML decoder by at least 0.2 dB.
I. INTRODUCTION
Turbo and low density parity check (LDPC) codes have enjoyed high popularity of late due to their exceptional performance. With a block size of thousands of bits or more, these codes are known to achieve a performance near that predicted by the sphere packing bound (SPB) in the intermediate word error probability (WEP) regime [1]. To date, the maximum-a posterior (MAP) and the sum-product algorithms (SPA) are generally utilized high performing decoding algorithms for turbo and LDPC codes, respectively. In [2], the error performance of the ensemble of typical LDPC codes transmitted over the binary erasure channel (BEC) is analyzed, and a probabilistic upper bound on this error exponent is derived. Additional enhancement techniques can further improve the performance of these decoding algorithms.
One intuitive approach is to make several decoding passes wherein each pass is done with a different assumption on the transmitted information. Decoding success is declared if some pass produces an outcome that meets a certain criterion. For instance, in [3][4][5], multiple independent decoding passes for an SCCC code are executed. Each decoding fixes the a priori value for one information bit. Similarly, in [6][7], multiple independent decoding passes for an LDPC code are performed. In each decoding pass, one assigns an a priori

value to a given check node. An algorithm specifies how one selects the node for such value assignment.
In this paper, we refer to such guesses on the transmitted information as gifts. So far, there is not a systematic understanding on how gifts contribute to the decoding success. From [8], a gift that contains more correct gift bits should in general yield a higher likelihood codeword. And the consistent gift outperform most of other random value-assigned gift, and can help us build up a complete gift gradually.
The identifiability of good gifts can only manifest if the size of the gift is above a certain threshold. Thus, we propose an algorithm that tries to produce consistent gifts with as low complexity as possible. Such an algorithm exploits the posterior probability produced by the decoder, lower the threshold to 10 and 24 for Turbo code and LDPC code, thus reduce the complexity by 6 orders of magnitude. With this method, giftassisted multiple-output decoding indeed becomes practicable in the high WEP regime. We note that this technique does not assume any prior knowledge of the underlying code, making it universally applicable.
Because ML-approaching decoding algorithms for near Shannon limit codes on AWGN channel are unavailable, so far studies on the WEP for turbo and LDPC codes under ML decoding generally concern either impractically long codes [9][10]or the property of an ensemble of codes [11][12][13]. For codes with small block sizes, the aforementioned improved decoders were also employed to give upper and lower bounds. Nevertheless, so far these approaches are not applicable in terms of finding out the exact ML performance of turbo or LDPC code with practically preferred block sizes of 1000 to 8000 bits. We apply the gift-assisted decoding concept above to some selective turbo and LDPC codes to explore their ML performances. Our results show that best-performing messagepassing decoders underperform an ML decoder by at least 0.2 dB.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we introduce a number of background concepts. In Section III, we review the simulation technique based on the concept of multiple-output decoding to bound the ML WEP. In Section IV, we demonstrate that better perturbation noises and higher likelihood decoder output are not aligned, thus evolutionary algorithms cannot be applied to search for a good perturbation noise. In Section V, the concept of multiple-output decoding induced by gifts are introduced. We explain the feasibility of gradually building up gift as well as the greedy procedure to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
978-1-4673-0437-5/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE 152

produce a minimal gift that exceeds the trigger threshold. In Section VI, we present the simulated ML bounds of turbo and LDPC codes, as well as the detailed parameters used in the simulation. Concluding remarks can be found in Section VII.

Received signal

Decoder

decoded codeword 1 decoded codeword n

II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Turbo and LDPC codes
By “turbo codes” we refer specifically to parallel concatenated convolutional codes (PCCC) in this paper. Lowdensity parity-check codes were invented in early 1960s by R. Gallager [14] and later reintroduced when a parallel, high performance iterative decoder is discovered by Mackay and Neal [15]. In general, a long irregular LDPC code can outperform a regular one [16].
Although many other forms of decoders exist, we only consider the MAP decoder [17] for turbo codes and SPA decoder for LDPC codes due to their excellent performance. Because of wealth of results in the literature and large block size for exceptional performance, we use the rate one-third (7692, 2560) PCCC code defined by 3GPP and the rate one-third (16200, 5400) LDPC code defined in the DVB-S2 specification [18]. The term the turbo code and the LDPC code refers to the above codes.
B. Notations
We consider a BPSK-modulated coded transmission over an AWGN channel. The information bit sequence is d0 = (d1, d2, . . . , dK ), where dk ∈ {0, 1}. These bits are encoded to produce the transmitted codeword c0 = (c1, c2, . . . , cN ), where cn ∈ {1, −1}. The received signal y = (y1, y2, . . . , yN ) is disturbed by real-valued additive white Gaussian noise of variance N0/2:

side info 1 side info n
Fig. 1. Multiple-output decoding using receiver-generated side information.
for the ML performance using a practical decoder and a simple bounding technique [19]. The WEP of the decoder itself serves as an upper bound. On the other hand, the probability that the decoder decodes into a codeword with a higher likelihood than the transmitted codeword can be used as the lower bound. This lower bound is valid even though an actual ML decoder may decode into another codeword with an even higher likelihood.
B. Multiple-output decoding The concept of multiple-output decoding is for the decoder
to produce more than one codeword as its outputs. This technique is useful in niche applications such as in a concatenated coding scheme [19]. Some decoders can be naturally adapted to produce multiple outputs; e.g. list Viterbi decoder [20].
The simulation bounding technique above can be improved by employing the technique of multiple-output decoding. In this paper, we use receiver-generated side information as a means to achieve the multiple-output effect. This concept is illustrated in Fig. 1. The receiver prepares many distinct instances of side information by itself. Each instance of side information is processed by the decoder individually. If the receiver is lucky, certain side information may induce high likelihood decoded codewords.

yn = cn + wn, n = 1, 2, . . . , N,

(1)

where wn are i.i.d. N (0, N0/2). Given y, the likelihood of a potential transmitted information sequence d, whose corresponding coded symbol sequence is c(d), is

L(d) = N √ 1 exp(− (yn − cn(d′))2 ).

n=1 πN0

N0

(2)

Over an AWGN channel, the path metric of a codeword has a monotonic relationship with its likelihood. The normalized path metric for a decoded codeword c1 is the ratio between the path metric of c1 to that of the transmitted codeword c0. When a codeword different from the transmitted codeword turns out to have a likelihood no less than that of c0, it is referred to as a superior codeword.

III. BOUNDING ML PERFORMANCE THROUGH
SIMULATION
A. Bounding ML WEP through simulation
So far, efficient ML decoding algorithms are not known for turbo and LDPC codes and one cannot find out the WEP under ML decoding of this code through empirical simulation. Nevertheless, one can still obtain a lower and an upper bound

IV. BOUNDING ML PERFORMANCE USING PERTURBATION
NOISES
A. Perturbed decoding
One simple form of receiver-generated side information is perturbation noise. The receiver can generate this type of side information at random independent of the received signal. Specifically, a decoder maps the received signal y into some codeword d. If we perturb the input signal by an additive signal ν and pass the perturbed signal y + ν through the decoder, the decoder can produce an output codeword dν whose corresponding likelihood is L(dν). Thus, by feeding the decoder with randomly perturbed copies of the received signal y, one can produce a pool of distinct decoded codewords. Among the codewords, the one with the highest likelihood is selected as the decoder output. The use of perturbation noise to induce multiple decoder output and the selection of the highest likelihood output as the overall decoded result is referred to as perturbed decoding algorithm (PA). A prior attempt to enhance PA by combining it with the genetic algorithm produces some limited benefits [21].
In the case of PA, the highest-likelihood decoded codeword eventually converges to the ML decoder output dML, provided that the following is satisfied.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
153

10−2 10−3

1

10000 perturbed decoding on LDPC code

50000 perturbed decoding on LDPC code

200000 perturbed decoding on LDPC code

Lower bound of ML decoding using PA on LDPC code

0.9

10000 perturbed decoding on turbo code

50000 perturbed decoding on turbo code

200000 perturbed decoding on turbo code

Lower bound of ML decoding using PA on turbo code

0.8

Word error probability normalized path metric

10−4

0.7

0.6
10−5
0.5

10−6 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 1.1 1.2 Eb/N0(dB)
Fig. 2. Complexity of perturbed decoding for the turbo and LDPC codes. The signal-to-perturbed noise ratio is empirically optimized at 15 dB for the turbo code and 20 dB for the LDPC code. All three decoding complexity budgets produce the same lower bound.

0.4

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

size of gift

Fig. 3. Average normalized path metric as a function of gift size for a typical error (thin lines) and a difficult error (thick lines) for the turbo code of block size 2560. Gifts are generated at random. Solid/dash/dot curve: gift contains 0/1/2 error bits.

1) A set of perturbation signals, V, exists such that for any perturbation signal ν ∈ V, this decoder maps y + ν into dM L .
2) According to the procedure employed for the generation of the perturbation signal ν, the probability of producing a noise signal ν that belongs to V is nonzero.
From our observation, straightforward perturbed decoding can indeed be used to produce very good bounds on the ML performance at the low WEP regime. Unfortunately, due to the large block size typically used by turbo and LDPC codes, when the target WEP increases, PA requires too much computation to be practical. In Fig. 2, the performance of PA for the turbo and LDPC codes as a function of the number of perturbations is shown. We observe that increasing the number of perturbed decoding from 50000 to 200000 produces very minor improvements in both the upper and the lower bounds and the same phenomenon is observed for the LDPC code.
V. FEASIBILITY OF GIFTS IN FACILITATING ML
PERFORMANCE BOUNDING
In this section, we consider the receiver-generated side information to induce multiple decoder outputs. From [8], the side information is called gift, and if an ML decoder performs exactly 0.2 dB better than that of a practical decoder when both are not assisted with gifts, then the said decoder can match the performance of the ML decoder if it is given gifts with size equals to 3.5% block size at random positions. For code block sizes of 2560 and 5400, the estimated required numbers of randomly and correctly chosen gift bits are 87 and 189, respectively. However, randomly generate a matched gift with size 87 need about 1026 times, which is too complicated.
A. Feasibility of evolutionary algorithms
In order for an evolutionary algorithm to function properly, a scoring method is needed and shall satisfy the following requirements:

1) For two gifts of the same size, the one with fewer errors tends to be associated with a higher score.
2) If we desire the average gift size to grow from round to round, then for two gifts containing the same number of errors, the one with a larger size tends to be associated with a higher score.
In Fig. 3, the average normalized path metric as a function of gift size for a “typical” error and a “difficult” error is shown. A difficult error is one which, after 50000 perturbed decoding attempts, a superior codeword is still not found. In this figure, the positions of the gift bits are randomly chosen. All gifts are matched to the transmitted codeword.
We can see that, once the gift size exceeds a certain threshold, the average path metric would start to rise monotonically. We refer to this threshold as the trigger threshold as it triggers the approximately linear growth of the normalized path metric. The two requirements above are met for both the turbo code and the LDPC code once the trigger threshold is crossed. Furthermore, notice the vast difference in average path metrics between gifts that contain 0, 1, or 2 false values once the trigger threshold is crossed. This property can be effectively exploited to detect whether a gift contains false values.
The observations above suggest that one can indeed build a sufficient-size matched gift from an insufficient-sized one. Consider the following conceptual procedure. Start with a matched gift whose size barely exceeds the trigger threshold. Pick a new gift bit and append that to the gift. If the resulting normalized path metric does not drop significantly, it is likely that we have guessed the right gift value. Thus this new gift bit can be admitted. Otherwise, one might conclude that the latest few new appended bits might be incorrect and hence remove them. This procedure can be iterated until either a superior codeword is found or after a predefined generation is reached and we note that the conceptual procedure above coincides with the general framework of the ant colony optimization (ACO) [22][23][24].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
154

Two interesting observations are made from Fig. 3. The

1

first is that the required gift size estimated using the random

0.9

gift channel theory falls between the required sizes for a 0.8
typical and a difficult error. The other observation is that,

Cumulative distribution function

although a “difficult” error is identified from a perturbed

0.7

decoding perspective, it is also more difficult form a gift0.6
assisted decoding perspective because it has a far larger trigger

threshold. In this case, the threshold size on turbo code is about

0.5

30. Even for size 30, it still need 109 times decoding to find

0.4

out a correct one.

0.3

B. Concentration of useful gift bits

Unfortunately, for a difficult error, reach the trigger thresh-

old is still a formidable task. Next, we try to extract useful

information from the received signal and apply it to the

formation of gifts. From [8], not all gift positions have the

same impact; informing a decoder that it had made the

right hard decisions over these positions produces a much

more muted impact on the WEP performance. A number of

innovative ways of producing a matched gift that meets the

trigger threshold. One approach follows the greedy heuristic.

In this approach, one aims at maximizing the expected positive

benefit at each step. We define the conditional benefit of a

correctly chosen gift bit from a subcategory k to be the inverse

of the required number of bits, Nk, from this subcategory. At a

given step of gift selection, assuming that all past selections are

made correctly, there are ik remaining bits for this subcategory and jk remaining bits for the complementary subcategory. Then the subcategory k∗ that maximizes the expected positive

benefit is:

k∗ = arg max ik 1 . ik + jk Nk

(3)

After k∗ is identified, one randomly selects a gift bit from the set of positions where a bit belonging to subcategory k∗ can occur. After the gift selection, the expected number of bits per subcategory is updated assuming that the selection matches with the desired codeword. This procedure is iterated until a gift of the needed size is built.
Intuitively, this procedure should reduce the required gift size to achieve the trigger threshold as well as enhance the probability in guessing such a gift. The remaining question is that, when such a gift is produced, can one reliably identifies it from the other gifts? In Fig. 4, the CDF of normalized path metric for gifts that are generated using the above greedy procedure are shown. The CDF given matched gifts is contrasted with the that over all generated gifts. The underlying error is the “difficult” turbo code error in the previous subsection. One can see from this figure that, even with a very small gift size of 10, the normalized path metric CDF given matched gift is already appreciably different from that for the unconditional one. For this particular error, the identifiability of a matched gift is quite good. And it means we need only 1024 times to get a correct gift, the complexity is reduced about 6 orders from the previous random select method.
To summarize, the findings presented in this section suggests that one can employ a greedy procedure to identify a number of small-sized matched gifts that exceed the trigger

0.2

0.1

0

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

normalized path metric

Fig. 4. CDF for normalized path metric. Gifts are generated using a greedy procedure. The gift size is 10 for thick curves and 20 for thin curves. Solid lines: CDF given matched gifts. Dash lines: unconditional CDF.

threshold. For each of these gifts, one can grow longer gifts iteratively until gifts that induce superior codewords are found. The overall complexity is largely determined by the complexity of the first step.
VI. GIFT-ASSISTED DECODING ALGORITHM
In Section V-A and V-B, we mentioned a selection method to maximize the probability for a receiver to produce a matched gift and a method to distinguish whether such a gift includes more correct bits or not. The procedure can greatly reduce the complexity in producing a superior codeword. Thus, here we proposed the ideas of gift-assisted decoding algorithm (GDA) and the simulation results based on our analysis.
In this paper, our primary goal is to establish the ML performance of turbo and LDPC codes. Therefore, the first concern of proposed algorithm is a higher diversity for the candidate solution population. This is to safeguard against the potential pitfall of always decoding into the codeword preferred by the rapidly converging greedy algorithm. In other words, the step of initial gift selection will dominate main complexity in whole procedure.A gift is a sequence of assumed coded symbol values here. The detailed parameters and decoding algorithm are summarized below.
The following algorithm, referred to as Method A and B in the main algorithm, is used to select a bit position that meets the general idea of Section V-B.
Method A. Define the set S to contain the bit positions whose posterior probability falls within Pgift = [P1, P2]. In this method, a bit position is randomly drawn from the set S.
Method B: (+b, −c) grow-up procedure. Randomly append b new gift bits drawn using Method A and remove c bit from the original gift bits. Do the above step for root chromosome Ng times. Keep the chromosomes whose fitness scores are the highest d as the new root chromosomes.
The gift-assisted decoding algorithm is specified as follows.
1) A gift is a sequence of gift bit values for the source bits or coded symbols. A gift bit value can take on one of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
155

three values: 0, 1, and NA. A decoder translates these three values into the corresponding prior probability values of 1 − ǫ, ǫ, and 0.5 for a small positive ǫ. The use of ǫ is to allow the computation of path metric even for a self-conflicting gift. 2) In the initialization step, we create Nini initial gifts. Each gift is created by randomly drawing M distinct positions. Define the set S to contain the bit positions whose posterior probability falls within Pgift. In this method, a bit position is randomly drawn from the set S. Each bit of the M positions is randomly given a value from {0, 1}. The rest of the bits are assigned NA. 3) Among the Nini gifts, put the ones with the highest Nroot path metric scores into the initial pool. We consider those initial gifts as root gifts. Each root and its offspring belong to one family. 4) For each individual root gift, do the (+b, −c) grow-up procedure and repeat Na times. 5) Keep the gift whose path metric score is the highest in each family as the new root gift and abandon the remaining gifts. 6) Repeat step 4 ∼ 5 Nb times. 7) The output codeword is the one whose corresponding gift induces the highest path metric score during the whole process.
The parameter of GDA described above can be assigned arbitrarily according to how much complexity the system can tolerate.
Because we randomly assign gift bit value, the probability to get correct bit is 0.5. Considering reasonable complexity and CDF in Figure 4, we set the trigger threshold as 20 gift bits, which also implies that there is at least 1 all-correct gift among 106 picking times. For the initial population, the number of gifts may be more that 106.
In order to reach trigger threshold for some difficult cases, we add additional steps in the initialization procedure. First, we keep gifts which have the highest Ntemp path metric scores alive. Subsequently, we randomly append 4 additional bits to the existed gifts Ng times and it supposes to find 4-correct bits twice. Then, among the new and original gifts, we choose the one corresponding to the highest path metric score. Among Ntemp best gifts in every family, we put Nroot of them in the initial pool. This modification can help us to find all-correct gift whose size is 24 and reduce lots of complexity compared to random selection. However, this step is not necessarily existed.
Once we decide initial gifts, GDA enters the grow-up procedure. Here we append b additional bits and remove c bit from the initial gifts individually Ng times. This step can help decoder to remove incorrect gift bits and keep correct bits. In the following generations, we consider the gifts which have the highest d path metric scores as the roots and expand again. Because there is only Nroot gifts in the initial pool, the complexity become relatively small. Thus, we ignore the complexity impact in the procedure and try the best to find superior codeword.

10−1 MAP iterative decoding algorithm Gift−assisted decoding algorithm Lower bound of ML decoding using GDA Lower bound of ML decoding using MAP
10−2

word error probability

10−3

10−4

10−5

0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

1

1.1 1.2

Eb/N0(dB)

Fig. 5. Comparison of bounds on the turbo code WEP using various methods. The block size of turbo code is 2560. The performance is better than [21] and complexity cost is tolerable.

A. ML WEP bounds: the turbo and the LDPC code

We applied GDA in the turbo code and the LDPC code.

After mathematics calculation, using greedy procedure, all

selected gift bits are located in category whose corresponding

posterior probability is from 0.25 to 075. To make it simple,

we randomly assign gift bit values in the above category for

every gift. The detailed parameters are summarized below.

Type of codes

Turbo code LDPC code

Selected gift bit posterior probability, Pgift [0.25, 0.75] [0.25, 0.75]

Initial-generation gift, M

20

20

Gift pool, Nini Initial pool, Nroot Potential pool, Ntemp

107 103 5 ∗ 104

2.5 ∗ 106 103
5 ∗ 104

MAP or SPA decoding iterations

18

100

Appending gift bits, b

3

3

Removable gift bit, c

1

1

Producing leaf gifts, Ng Root gifts, d

32

32

2

2

Repeating grow-up procedure, Na

2

2

Replacing initial gifts and

1

1

performing grow-up procedure, Nb

Appending gift bits in initialization step, e

4

4

The comparison of upper and lower bounds on the ML WEP for the turbo code given information block sizes of 2560 bits per block is shown in Figure 5. In the figure, the WEP of the MAP decoder, the WEP of GDA, and the lower bound on ML WEP derived using GDA are shown. As can be seen, at a WEP of 10−4 and below, the upper and the lower bound collapse against each other. Hence GDA actually achieves the error performance of ML decoding. When WEP equals 10−4, the ML upper bound is 0.2 dB better than that of the MAP decoder. Also, at a WEP of 6 ∗ 10−3, the upper bound achieved by GDA is 0.2 dB superior to the SPA.

The comparison of upper and lower bounds on the ML WEP for the LDPC code given information block sizes of 5400 bits

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
156

10−1

Sum−product decoding algorithm

Gift−assisted decoding algorithm

Lower bound of ML decoding using GDA

10−2

Lower bound of ML decoding using SPA

word error probability

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

Eb/N0(dB)

Fig. 6. Comparison of bounds on the LDPC code WEP using various methods. The block size of LDPC code is 5400.

per block is shown in Figure 6. In the regime where WEP is at or below 10−5, the upper and the lower bounds meet each other. Thus we indeed establish the ML WEP for the LDPC code. Also, at a WEP of 10−4, the upper bound achieved by GDA is 0.15 dB superior to the SPA.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
Typical decoders for turbo and LDPC codes operate based on the belief-propagation principle. Although these decoding algorithms work remarkably well, they cannot achieve the performance of ML decoding. The concept of ”gift bits” were proposed to improve decoding performance.
In this paper, we formed an estimate of the number of gift bits required if one is able to select those critical bit positions. This estimate is later shown to be reasonably accurate.
The complexity of gift-related techniques depend both on the block size and on the error probability region of interest. We consider Turbo and LDPC codes with practically preferred block sizes of 2000-5000 bits. At a WEP lower than 10−5, gift techniques can easily produce a performance as well as that of ML decoding. However, for a WEP higher than 10−4, without appropriate mechanisms to select the gift bit positions and the gift bit values, the complexity of gift-related techniques quickly become prohibitive.
In the low WEP regime, the upper and the lower bounds match each other. This produces the exact ML performance. The upper bound can be obtained using a simple perturbed decoding technique. Our results confirm that, even at a WEP of 10−5, neither the MAP nor the SPA decoder can achieve the ML WEP. An ML-achieving decoder outperforms these suboptimal decoders by roughly 0.2 dB.
At a WEP higher than 10−4, the complexity of using perturbed decoding for the upper bound becomes prohibitive. We provide an explanation of the reason why evolutionary technique cannot be expected to iteratively search for good perturbation noises. Thus, one must turn to other forms of side information for the ML bounds.

REFERENCES
[1] C. E. Shannon, “Probability of Error for Optimal Codes in a Gaussian Channel,” in Bell. Syst. Tech. J., vol. 38, pp. 611–656, May 1959.
[2] I. Goldenberg and D. Burshtein, “Upper Bound on Error Exponent of Regular LDPC Codes Transmitted over the BEC,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 55, pp. 2674 –2681, june 2009.
[3] E. Papagiannis, M. A. Ambroze, and M. Tomlinson, “Received Vector Codeword Modification (RVCM),” Jul. 2003.
[4] E. Papagiannis, M. A. Ambroze, and M. Tomlinson, “Analysis of Non Convergence Blocks at Low and Moderate SNR in SCC Turbo Schemes,” in SPSC 2003 8th International worksop on Signal Processing for Space Communications, (Catania, Italy), pp. 121–128, Sep. 2003.
[5] E. Papagiannis, M. A. Ambroze, and M. Tomlinson, “Approaching the ML Performance with Iterative Decoding,” in International Zurich Seminar on Communications, (Zurich, Switzerland), pp. 220–223, Feb. 2004.
[6] N. Varnica and M. Fossorier, “Belief Propagation with Information Correction : Imporved near Maximum-Likelihood Decoding of LowDensity Parity-Check Codes,,” in Proc. of IEEE Intl. Symp. Inform. Theory(ISIT), (Chichago, USA), p. 343, July 2004.
[7] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “Improved Decoding Algorithms for LowDensity Parity-Check Codes,” in Proc. 3rd Intl. Symp. on Turbo Codes, (Brest, France,), pp. 117–120, 2003.
[8] H. Chen and D. Shiu (2010) Capacity of Random Gift Channel and its Applications, Unpublished Master’s thesis, National Taiwan University.
[9] S. young Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the Design of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon Limit,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 5, pp. 58–60, 2001.
[10] D. J. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[11] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, M. R. J., and F. Pollara, “Transfer Function Bounds on the Performance of Turbo Codes,” in TDA Progress Report 42-122, April-June 1995, (Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California), pp. 44–45.
[12] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Unveiling Turbo-Codes: Some Results on Parallel Concatenated Coding Schemes,” in IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 409–428.
[13] D. Burshtein, “Bounds on the Performance of Belief Propagation Decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 21–28, Jan 2002.
[14] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan 1962.
[15] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good Codes based on Very Sparse Matrices,” in Cryptography and Coding, 5th IMA Conference, vol. ed. Colin Boyd, Lecture Notes in Computer Science number 1025, pp. 100– 111, 1995.
[16] L. M., M. M., S. A., and D. Spielman, “Analysis of Low Density Codes and Improved Designs Using Irregular Graphs,” in Proc. 30th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, pp. 249–258, 1998.
[17] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative Decoding of Binary Block and Convolutional Codes,” in IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, March 1996.
[18] European Telecommunications Standards Institute, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing structure, channel coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services News Gathering and other broadband satellite applications. 2006.
[19] K. Shih and D. Shiu, “Perturbed Decoding Algorithm for Concatenated Error Correcting and Detecting Codes System,” in 17th IEEE Intl. Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC’06), Sept. 2006.
[20] N. Seshadri and C.-E. W. Sundberg, “List Viterbi Decoding Algorithms with Applications,” in IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 42, no. 2/3/4, Feb./Mar./Apr. 1994.
[21] T. Hsueh and D. Shiu, “Theory and Performance of ML Decoding for Turbo Codes Using Genetic Algorithm,” in 18th IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, June 2007.
[22] T. Stutzle and H. Hoos, “Max-min Ant System,” in Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 889–914, 2000.
[23] M. Dorigo, M. Birattari, and T. Stutzle, “Ant Colony Optimization,” in IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine, vol. 1, issue. 4, Nov. 2006.
[24] M. Dorigo, G. D. Caro, and L. Gambardella, “Ant Algorithms for Discrete Optimization,” in Artificial Life, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 137–172, 1999.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
157

