FPGA based hardware architectures for high performance computing applications

Bogdan Belean, Sergiu Pogacian, Adrian Bot
National Institute for Research and Development of Isotopic and Molecular Technologies, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 65-103, Donath str., 400293
bogdan.belean@itim-cj.ro

Abstract— The paper describes the FPGA technology together with its possibility to exploit spatial and temporal parallelism in order to develop high performance computing applications. The development of hardware architecture using FPGA technology represents a reliable solution in case of various applications where fast processing it’s mandatory. Two applications are presented where the FPGA technology is used. Thus, on one hand, automatic microarray image processing is performed using FPGA based hardware architecture, while on the other hand, an FPGA based LDPC decoder implementation is proposed in order to improve the decoder throughput compared to state of the art approaches.
High performance computing, FPGA technology, Low Density Parity Check Codes, image processing, itterative algorithms

programmed for implementing any logic function of its inputs. This is the reason why these blocks are called Configurable Logic Blocks. Their structure include Look-up-tables, multiplexers and D flip-flops which allows user to implement registers, RAM memories and logic functions using VHDL language. Also, FPGA structure includes interconnect layers having different lengths and components called input/output blocks (IOBs). IOBs provide the interface between the package pins and internal signal lines. An overall image of the FPGA structure can be seen in Fig. 1.

I. INTRODUCTION
FPGA technology uses pre-built logic blocks and programmable routing resources for configuration and for implementing custom hardware functionality. Their main benefits are the low cost, the short time to market and the ease of reconfiguration. They were introduced by Xilinx as a new concept which combines the user control and time to market of PLDs with the densities and cost benefits of gate arrays. This leads to the user possibility to design, program and make changes to the designed application specific hardware architecture at any time. The FPGA also adds design flexibility and adaptability with optimal device utilization while conserving both board space and system power, which is often not the case with DSP chips. When a design demands the use of a DSP, or time-to-market is critical, or design adaptability is crucial, then the FPGA may offer the best solution. Due to the enormous speed up possible over conventional digital signal processor, parallel computation of multiple data streams and due to optimal utilization of board space and system power field programmable gate arrays are increasingly being applied to DSP applications. Indeed, FPGA technology offers the possibility to exploit spatial and temporal parallelism in order to speed up computation.
An FPGA is a regular structure of logic cells or modules and interconnect networks which are under the designer’s complete control. In other words, FPGA can be defined as an integrated circuit which consists on a two dimensions network of cells or logic blocks. Usually each logic block can be

Figure 1. FPGA architecture
As previously mentioned, the main advantage of the FPGA technology is to possibility to exploit temporal and spatial parallelism. An example of the spatial parallelism used for computing f(x) = Ax2+Bx+C is presented in Fig. 2, where Fig.2.a represents an FPGA based approach which uses 3 x Tclk cycles for computing f(x), while a general purpose processor approach needs 5 x Tclk cycles for the same computation, Fig.2.b.
Figure 2. a) Example of general purpose processor computation of f(x), b) Example of spatial parallelism using FPGA technology for f(x) computation

This work was supported by Romanian UEFISCDI through Human Resources Post Doctoral PD grant.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In case of temporal parallelism, pipeline approaches are used for implementation. The algorithms to be implemented using FPGA technology are divided in independent subsequent task. Thus multiple tasks can be performed at the same time. Further on, the benefits of using FPGA technology for implementing processing algorithms are presented in case of two applications: automatic microarray image processing and low density parity check code decoder implementation.
II. HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING APPLICATIONS
A. Microarray image processing
User intervention in microarray image processing brings up the need of a work station with a costly processing platform which will slow down the process of microarray analyses in case of large number of subjects is involved. In order to overcome the previous mentioned disadvantages, the following approaches are taken into account: image processing algorithms will be robust and independent of operator last time adjustments; microarray images are processed using FPGA technology in order to speed up computation.
Further on, the flow of microarray image processing techniques is presented, together with the parallel computation strategies which can be applied on. After image enhancement using logarithm transformation, vertical and horizontal projections are computed in order to estimate spot location and dimension. Once the spot location is established, center detection using shock filters is applied [1]. Spot centers together with the edge detection algorithms are used for pValue estimation and spot intensity extraction.
Image processing operations like median filters and gradient calculation are based on the convolution, which is included in a class of algorithms called spatial filters. Convolution is used for implementing image operators which have as output pixel value a linear combination between pixels of the original image. Conceptually, each pixel in the output image is produced by sliding an NxM window over the input image and computing an operation according to the input pixels under the window and the chosen window operator. The hardware approach for convolution is presented as follows: the entire input image is stored into a frame buffer; each time the window is moved, MxN pixels values are required to calculate the resulted pixel value. Memory bandwidth constraints make obtaining all these pixels each clock cycle impossible, so local caching is performed [2]. In this way, N-1 rows are cached using a shift register which leads to the block diagram presented in Fig. 3. In this case, instead of sliding a window across the image, the implementation feeds the image through the window.
The levels of parallelization for the previously described image processing algorithms are discussed next. In case of image enhancement, we consider M, N the image dimensions and p the number of logarithm computation units. Due to the independent computation of logarithm for each pixel, the maximum level of parallelization for image enhancement is (MxN)/p. For spot position estimation, the level of parallelization is M+N. Autocorrelation and shock filters are applied on image profiles. Due to the recursive description of

the algorithms they cannot be easily parallelized. Nevertheless, they are not applied over the full image. As a consequence, the parallelization is not mandatory. Once the spot locations are estimated, k being the number of spots filters like Sobel or Canny for image segmentation can be parallelized, and the maximum parallelization level is k. In order to estimate the computational time, the highest level of parallelization was taken into account. We consider the number of logarithm units p = 100 for an M x N = 6100x2160 pixels Agilent image. The number of microarray spots k is 22575. In Table I parallelization levels are listed together with the computation time for the microarray image processing algorithms.
Figure 3. Hsrdware architecture for image convolution
Total computational time for logarithm transformation, profile computation and microarray image segmentation is around 13,437 ms, encouraging for future implementations.
In the next plot, on X axis, are represented different microarray images with different sizes (size defined by the number of microarray spots included) and on Y axis computational time using a personal computer and the proposed application specific architecture implemented on Virtex5 FPGA. It is to be mentioned that the results presented in Fig. 4 correspond to the presented image processing techniques and hardware implementation without any levels of parallelization included.
Figure 4. Computational time on PC (Dual Core, 1800 MHz, 2GB RAM) and Virtex5 (Microblaze 125Mhz, 256 MB RAM)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I.

TABLE TYPE STYLES

Image processing algorithms

Level of parallel.

Input data

1. Log. Transformation (MxN)/p ≈100 MB

2. Image profiles

M+N

≈100 MB

3. Autocorrelation

2

M+N

4. Shock filters

2

M+N

5. Canny filter

k

≈100 MB

Processing time
12000 us 82,6 us
1354,5 us

B. Error correction codes (LDPC)
Low density parity check (LDPC) codes are a class of linear block codes for error correction in communication channels. Introduced by Galager in 1962 [3], LDPC codes offer remarkable performances falling only 0.04 dB short of the Shannon theoretical limit, while the complexity of their iterative decoding process grows only linearly with block length. Despite their advantages, LDPC codes were forgotten for the next decades, due to insufficient computational power available for the decoding process. In the last decade, making use of the increased computational power offered by graphic processing units, FPGA/ASIC technologies and digital signal processors, LDPC codes are considered a significant breakthrough in the world of digital communications.
An N dimension LDPC code represent a linear block code whose codewords of length N satisfy a set of M linear paritycheck constraints and its code rate is R=1-M/N. LDPC codes are defned by the sparse parity-check matrix H(M,N) composed by 1 and 0 values, each of its line specifying one of the paritycheck constraints. Thus, each codeword c satisfies the relation c*Ht=0 (Ht = H transposed). The LDPC decoding process is characterized by iteratively passing probabilistic messages between two types of nodes, M check-nodes (CN) and N variable nodes (VN) according to Tanner graph [4],[5].

CN = −2 tanh−1(∏ -VNprevious (i) + CNprevious (i) )

i

2

VN = LLR(i) + ∑ CN

Figure 6. Message passing
The main disadvantage of LDPC codes is the increased computational time needed for the iterative decoding process. The state of the art solutions used to overcome the last mentioned disadvantage involve decoding algorithms parallelization using application specific hardware architectures. Existing approaches used to increase the decoder throughput can be summarized as follows:
1) GPU (Graphic Processing Units) [6] [7] exploits data parallelism using multithread capabilities and parallel memory access producing performances for LDPC decoder implementations comparable with ASIC dedicated decoders.
2) ASIC/FPGA technology is used to develop application specific hardware architectures and processing elements in order to parallelize LDPC decoding process [8].
3) The LDPC decoding process is parallelized using Application Specific Instruction Processors [9] [10] or RISC processors [11]. This approach involves using Single Instruction Multiple Data microprocessor architectures in order to realize parallel update for check nodes CN and variable nodes VN.

H matrix LUT

Figure 5. Message passing
Each type of nodes collects incoming messages from its complementary nodes and produces an outgoing message. The message qij is sent from VN to CN and represents the probability for the yi bit from the codeword to be 0 or 1. The CN sends the rij message back to the VN, indicating the probability for the yi codeword bit to be 0 or 1, considering the parity check constrains. Thus, the LDPC decoding determines the correct codeword based on the resulted yi bits, after performing iterative updates for VN and CN nodes. The decoding algorithm is presented in Fig.6.

Figure 7. LDPC decoder schematic
A schematic of application specific hardware architecture for the LDPC decoder is described at the level of principle in Fig. 7. The H matrix values are stored in look-up-tables and each line i specifies the variable nodes prev (R1) register values which are sequentially delivered to the appropriate CN update function and its accumulator Sum1i. Moreover each column j, of the H parity matrix specifies the check nodes (R2) register values as inputs for the Sum2j adder. As depicted in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 7, the total delay path for updating the var nodes (R3) register values in case of 1 decoding iteration is T = u+v clock cycles, where u and v represents the number of 1 values within the H lines and the number of clock cycles necessary for Sum2j addition, respectively (T = 10 in case of WiMAX standard).

Considering the WiMAX standard (M = 576 codeword length and the number of iterations for the decoding process Niterations = 10) a decoder throughput estimation can be done as shown by equation (3) where the frequency of the FPGA based decoder is estimated to be 350 MHz.

Throughput = M ⋅ fclk

(3)

Niterations ⋅ T

Thus, a decoder throughput up to 2 Gbps is expected.

The improvements to the LDPC decoders, compared to existing approaches, introduced by the proposed design are presented in the following section. The decoder throughput depends on the level of parallelism used for nodes updates. The most efficient implementations regarding the decoder throughput are obtained using FPGA/ASIC and ASIP approaches. In case of the ASIP approach, [9] [10], [11] the level of parallelism depends on the number of microprocessor cores p and registers size n. The microprocessor registers are used to perform parallel updates for pxk nodes, where a node value representation is on n/k bits. In case of our proposed FPGA based approach, the level of parallelism for nodes update is given exclusively by the available FPGA resources.

III. CONCLUSIONS
The present paper presents two high performance computing applications which make use of FPGA technology. Thus, hardware implementations for microarray image processing algorithms which take advantage of the FPGA technology features lead to an automated system for fast microarray image processing. Due to the reduced computational time and cost, a large number of microarray analyses can be performed, compared with the existing

computational tools. In case of LDPC decoder implementation, the use of FPGA technology can lead to an improvement regarding the decoder throughput, considering the level of parallelism depending exclusively on the FPGA resources.
The experimental results based on algorithms parallelization proved that FPGA technology is an efficient solution for developing high performance computing applications.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Belean, M. Borda, M, B. Le Gal, R. Terebes, “FPGA based system for automatic cDNA microarray image processing,” Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics, Vol. 36(5), July 2012, pp. 419-429.
[2] C. Johnston, “Implementing image processing algorithms on FPGA,” Institute of Information Sciences and Technology, Palmerston, New Zeeland, 2004.
[3] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IRE Transmision Information Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, January 1962
[4] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor Graphs and the Sum-Product Algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498-519, February 2001
[5] Bernhard M.J. Leiner, “LDPC Codes – a brief Tutorial,” Aprilie 2005.
[6] Falcao, G., Silva, V., and Sousa, L., “How GPUs can outperform ASICs for fast LDPC decoding,” IEEE International Conference on Supercomputing, pages 390–399, 2009
[7] Houston M, Stanford University, “General Purpose Computation on Graphics Processors,” 2008
[8] J.-n. Su, K. Liu and H. Min, “Hardware Efficient Decoding of LDPC Codes Using Partial-min Algorithms,” IEEE Trans. on Consumer Electronics, Vol. 52, No. 4, pp. 1463-1468, November 2006
[9] Steffen Kunze, Emil Matus and Gerhard P. Fettweis, ASIP Decoder Architecture for Convolutional and LDPC Codes, IEEE Int. Symposium on Circuits and Systems, ISCAS 2009.
[10] Matthias Alles, Timo Vogt, Norbert Wehn, FlexiChaP: A Reconfigurable ASIP for Convolutional, Turbo, and LDPC Code Decoding, International Symposium on Turbo Codes, 2008
[11] Xiaojun Zhang, Yinghong Tian, et al. , An Multi-Rate LDPC Decoder Based on ASIP for DMB-TH, IEEE 8th International Conference on ASIC, pp. 995-998, 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

