FPGA Prototyping and Performance Evaluation of Multi-standard Turbo/LDPC Encoding and Decoding
Purushotham Murugappa, Jean-Noel Bazin, Amer Baghdadi, Michel Je´ze´quel Institut Mines-Telecom; Telecom Bretagne; Lab-STICC CNRS UMR 6285 Electronics Department, Technopoˆle Brest Iroise 29238 Brest France Email: {firstname.surname}@telecom-bretagne.eu

Abstract—Hardware prototyping has been the key to system validation, once the hardware simulation matches the software model results and before the final silicon tape-out. On the other hand, flexible multi-standard implementations are being widely investigated these last years for the challenging channel decoding application. The latest contributions explore ASIP (ApplicationSpecific Instruction-set Processor) concept and target to achieve efficient resource sharing between advanced Turbo and LDPC iterative decoders.
In this paper we present an FPGA-based prototype of a multistandard Turbo/LDPC Encoding and Decoding. The functional prototype implements a full communication system including encoder, channel model, ASIP-based decoder and performance counters. All components are flexible and are dynamically configurable through a dedicated GUI (Graphical User Interface). The prototype supports all communication modes defined in LTE, WiFi, WiMAX, and DVB-RCS wireless communication standards.
I. INTRODUCTION Flexible implementations are being widely investigated these last years in many application domains. Digital communication domain is very representative of this trend where many flexible designs have been recently proposed for the challenging channel decoding application. For this application, there is a large variety of coding options specified in existing and future digital communication standards, besides the increasing throughput requirement (Table I). In fact, current and emerging digital communication standards target different sectors, namely, LTE and WiMAX covering metropolitan area for voice and data applications with limited video, the DVB series targeting video broadcasting for metropolitan area and Wi-Fi covering the very limited area range to support high bandwidth for gaming, networking, video and data applications. In this context, Application-Specific Instruction-set Processor (ASIP) concept has been proposed as it allows the designer to freely tune the flexibility/performance trade-off as required by the considered application requirements. The latest contributions propose ASIP designs supporting both Turbo and LDPC iterative decoding [1][2]. However, the validation of such advanced and highly flexible designs is not always discussed. Typically, this is done by hardware simulations which consume significant time particularity for low error rates. This further becomes unfeasible when considering all supported communication modes. One of the ways around this issue is to have partial prototypes or evaluations that only validate the functionality for one frame
978-1-4673-2789-3/12/$31.00 c 2012 IEEE

or a subset of corner case scenarios [3][4]. However this still leaves enough ambiguity on the full design validation, while in some cases the corner case scenarios can still be huge. This mandates to have a full system prototype that can realize any scenario with ease. To the best of our knowledge such system prototypes and in particular which integrates ASIP based designs are not proposed in the literature. In this paper we propose the first such prototype of a multistandard ASIP based Turbo/LDPC Decoding. Implemented on an FPGA platform this prototype realizes a full communication system including encoder, channel model and the ASIP-based decoder. All components are flexible and are dynamically configurable through a dedicated GUI (Graphical User Interface). The prototype supports all communication modes defined in LTE, WiFi, WiMAX, and DVB-RCS wireless communication standards.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First a brief overview of the communication system is provided. Then, sections III and IV present the channel encoder and decoder respectively. For the purpose of illustration, the ASIP based architecture of UDEC [1] supporting LDPC and Turbo decoding is considered in this paper. Section V groups the presentation of the remaining blocks of the system prototype. Finally, the implementation results and the evaluation of the features of the system prototype are discussed in section VI.

Standard IEEE-802.11 IEEE802.16
(WiMax) DVB-RCS 3GPP-LTE

Codes CC
LDPC CC
DBTC LDPC DBTC SBTC

Rates 1/2 - 3/4 1/2 - 5/6 1/2 - 7/8 1/2 - 3/4 1/2 - 5/6 1/3 - 6/7
1/3

States 64 64 8 8 8

info. bits .. 4095 .. 1620 .. 864 .. 4800 .. 1920 .. 1728 .. 6144

Channel Throughput ..300 Mbps ..300 Mbps ..75 Mbps ..75 Mbps ≥75 Mbps ..2 Mbps ..150 Mbps

TABLE I SELECTION OF STANDARDS AND CHANNEL CODES

II. COMMUNICATION SYSTEM MODEL Fig. 1 shows a typical communication system model. The first block models an information source that could be an audio, video, data, etc. This block ideally should exhibit an equi-probable information bit stream or else, source coding is used to remove the redundancy at the input source. The information bits from the source are passed through a channel encoder, which adds redundancy bits to help the receiver

143

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Source

Encoder

Channel

Decoder

Sink

Fig. 1. Communication system model

Fig. 2. Global platform architecture overview

to correct the information loss in case the received bits are in errors. The encoded bits are then modulated on to analog waveform and sent over a channel. The transmitted bits are received at the receiver with errors introduced by the channel. For simplicity of representation, the whole chain of modulation, transmission, error introduction by noise, receiver reception and demodulation is represented here as a channel block. In most communication analysis the behaviour of the channel is modelled to be an Additive White Gaussian Noise. The channel decoder in turn decodes the incoming data stream and, if possible, corrects the errors introduced by the channel and provides the decoded information to the intended receiving application which is modelled here as a sink.
The following sections elaborate the implementation of each of the above mentioned blocks in the proposed hardware prototype which is depicted in Fig. 2.

These configurable connections realize adequate XOR gating based on the communication mode. Two instances of this convolutional encoder read the data to be encoded from a dualport RAM: one in natural sequence and the other in interleaved sequence.

III. FLEXIBLE CHANNEL ENCODER As there is little commonality between the encoding process of turbo and LDPC codes, we proposed and implemented two separate (yet flexible) encoders.

A. Flexible Turbo Encoder The considered system model supports both single binary
turbo code (SBTC) which is used for LTE and Duo-Binary Turbo Code (DBTC) used for WiMAX and DVB-RCS. We propose a simple flexible architecture to provide both encodings. The basic component of a flexible turbo encoder is a recursive convolutional encoder as shown in the Fig. 3. Flexibility is obtained by making the connections ConfigXorBack, ConfigIn, ConfigOutA and ConfigOutB configurable.

Fig. 3. Flexible Turbo encoder

144
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

data_out_valid

data_out

B. Flexible LDPC Encoder Compared to turbo codes, LDPC codes have much higher
encoding complexity. However, this complexity is alleviated for the block-structured LDPC codes which are defined in the recent standards of WiFi and WiMAX. For these codes, the parity check matrix is partitioned into an array of block matrices where each block matrix is either a zero matrix or a right cyclic shift of an identity matrix.
Efficient encoding method based on the parity check matrix H of WiFi LDPC codes has been proposed in [5]. This method enables to calculate the parity bits p of the codeword from the m systematic bits through simple equations. In fact, for these codes, the codeword cb is divided in groups of Z bits, where Z is the size of the sub-matrix as defined in the standard for each different H matrix and code rate.

cb = [m, p] = [mo, m1, ..., mkb−1, p0, p1, ..., pmb−1] (1)
With the particular structure of the parity check matrix H, the first block of Z parity bits can be computed through the following expression:

mb−1 kb−1

p0 =

hi,j mj

(2)

i=0 j=0

where hi,j is a block matrix and hi,jmj is a cyclic shift of mj. By defining λi coefficients as follows:

kb −1

λi =

hi,jmj for i = 0, ..., mb − 1

(3)

j=0

the second block of Z parity bits can be given by the expression:

p1 = λ0 + h0,kb p0

(4)

And similarly, the subsequent blocks of parity bits pi+1 can be obtained recursively using pi and λi [5].
Based on this method, we proposed a parallel and efficient architecture which supports all LDPC code parameters (H matrix type, frame size, code rate) specified in WiFi and WiMAX standards. The proposed architecture (Fig. 4) is composed of 4 mains units: (1) a memory to store the definition of parity check matrices, (2) a low complexity pipelined unit for the generation of λi coefficients, (3) a parallel unit for the generation of parity bits, and (4) a controller unit (Finite State Machine) to manage and schedule the encoding process. An original architecture is proposed for the λi generator unit which makes use of few counters and cascaded registers instead of using a conventional complex Barrel Shifter.

IV. FLEXIBLE TURBO/LDPC DECODER The channel decoder is the main unit, for which this complete system prototyping has been developed. Its original architecture is based on a multi-ASIP architecture model. We consider in this work an enhanced version of the flexible highthroughput architecture presented in [1]. The enhancements can be summarized by the following main points:

Params. (Mode, Z, Rate)

Controller Unit (FSM + memory address generator)

RAM
Parity Check Matrices 8
H
data_in 1

Shift
data_in
Shift

λ0

XOR

DQ

Z

en

XOR

DQ en

λmb-1 Z

λi Generator

λ0 Z λZ
mb-1
Z

∑
Z p0

pi

1

Z

pi Generator

Delay

Fig. 4. Flexible LDPC encoder

• In the LDPC mode, the enhanced architecture allows each ASIP to process 2 check nodes per clock cycle (instead of processing 3 check nodes in 2 cycles), and thus increases the overall throughput by 25%.
• In the Turbo mode, a low complexity network-on-chip (NoC) based on Butterfly topology [6] is used (instead of the de-Bruijn based NoC). This NoC enables a flexible exchange of extrinsic information between the ASIPs processing the received data in natural and interleaved domains.
• The two ring buses that are used to connect the top and the bottom most ASIPs in the Turbo mode (for exchange state metric values between sub-frame boundaries) are reconfigured into a ring bus in LDPC mode to carry extrinsic information messages.
Fig. 5 gives an overview of the flexible channel decoder architecture with 4 ASIPs. Besides ASIPs, the decoder architecture integrates several memory banks, configuration and communication networks to handle the extrinsic data exchanges.
Each ASIP is connected to 4 types of memories as given in the Table II. In double binary Turbo mode, the channel logLikelihood Ratios (LLRs) are quantized on 6 bit and are read by the ASIP from the input channel memory. The generated extrinsic information bits (8 bit quantization) are stored in the extrinsic memory of the other component decoder via the Butterfly NoC. The intermediate state metric values (8 states each of 11 bits) generated during the backward recursion are stored in the cross metric memory. The maximum window size is 64 symbols and the boundary state metric values are exchanged via the α−β network. For processing single binary turbo coded frames (as in LTE standard), radix-4 technique is used to optimize resource sharing by converting the processed data to double binary symbols.
In LDPC mode, memories are efficiently shared with the Turbo mode. Thus, the 7 bit channel LLR values are stored in the input channel memory and the 5 bit extrinsic information (or check node to variable node messages) are grouped in 2 and stored in the extrinsic memory. The cross metric memories are used as FIFOs to store the intermediate variable to check node messages along with control signals.

145
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In all modes, appropriate program is needed to be loaded in to the program memory while its corresponding configurable parameters are loaded into the configuration memory. For detailed explanation on the ASIP architecture and instruction set [1] is to be referred.

Memory

# Depth Width (bits)

Input channel

12 256

12

Extrinsic

12 256

12

CrossMetric/FIFO 2

32

88

Configuration

1

64

24

Program

1

32

17

TABLE II MEMORY BANKS OF THE ASIP

Type Dual port Dual port Dual port Single port Single port

V. OTHER BLOCKS OF THE SYSTEM PROTOTYPE While the previous two sections have focused on the channel encoder and decoder, this section groups the presentation of the remaining blocks of the system prototype.
A. Pseudo Random Generator In order to emulate an equi-probable source data, a pseudo
random data generator is implemented in hardware using a simple linear feedback shift register (LFSR) of 32 bits. This length avoids correlation between data during long simulation runs.
B. Flexible Channel Model The communication channel considered in this prototype is
an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN). The hardware implementation which emulates this channel model is as proposed in [7]. The quantization of the transmitted soft-bits is different for Turbo (6 bits) and LDPC (7 bits) codes. The noise level is represented on 17 bits. The quantization depends on the communication mode. It is automatically selected after the configuration process.
C. Global Input Interface In order to distribute the incoming channel LLR to the
ASIP’s input memories, a Global Input Interface has been proposed and designed. This flexible block considers the system parameters in terms of communication mode (LDPC, Turbo), frame size, and the interleaving rules. In Turbo mode, ASIP 0 and 1 process the frame in natural order, while ASIP 2 and 3 process it in interleaved order. In order to fill the input memories of ASIPs 2 and 3, interleaving addresses are required. Instead of using look-up tables to store interleaving addresses for all supported standards and frame sizes, an interleaver module based on recursive computation is used to generate the addresses on the fly during memory filling process. This interleaver needs 2 seed and 8 step values for each different frame. Furthermore, the ASIPs use the same interleaver module to transmit the extrinsic information. For LDPC mode, all the input memories are filled sequentially by the following order ASIP0, ASIP1, ASIP3 and finally ASIP2. As the ring bus connects the ASIPs in this order.

D. Error Counter In order to evaluate error rate performance, an error counter
is added to the FPGA system prototype. This error counter stores the transmitted frame and compares it to the decoded one. To be able to perform long simulations, the error counter is dimensioned to 64 bits. In Turbo mode, the number of errors in the interleaved frame is also calculated for debugging and performance exploration purposes.
E. Configuration Module The configuration module is used to initialize the platform
at the beginning of a simulation. It analyses the configuration data (transmitted through the USB interface) and fills the ASIP’s configuration memories accordingly. In addition, this module initializes the corresponding registers that configure the whole platform. For example, communication mode, frame size, and interleaving seeds used in the global input interface are set through this module. During the configuration, the platform goes to the ”reset” state. When the whole platform is configured, the encoding/decoding processes start.
F. Global System Controller The Global System Controller module implements the Finite
State Machine (FSM) that drives the different modules of the system prototype and sequences the different simulation steps. First, the controller waits for the end of the configuration, initiated by the GUI. Depending on the configuration, the controller then starts the Turbo or LDPC encoders and then the corresponding decoding. After the end of the decoding and the error counting, the controller starts again an encoding with the same parameters. This controller acts as slave for the GUI.
G. Graphical User Interface A GUI has been developed in order to configure the
platform, launch the simulation, and get the error rate results. The proposed GUI consists of two windows: one for the configuration and one for results display on the fly during the simulation. The configuration allows setting the following parameters:
• Communication mode (Turbo: 3GPP-LTE/DVBRCS/WiMAX or LDPC WiFi/WiMAX),
• Turbo mode parameters: frame size, window size, code rate, number of iterations, extrinsic scaling factor,
• LDPC mode parameters: frame size, sub-matrix size, code rate, number of iterations,
• Quantization used in the channel model • Display of different performance curves (BER/FER, nat-
ural, interleaved, uncoded) • SNR range and step values that determine the number of
SNR points to be had to plot the error rate curves. Once all the parameters are validated by the user, the interface generates corresponding configuration text files. Then it sends these configuration files to the FPGA platform through the USB interface. Furthermore, the GUI reads continuously the values of the error counter from the FPGA. When the number of errors

146
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

To Global System Controller

From Channel

Configuration Module

α − β network

Input Memory (24x256)
Program memory (16x64)
Config Memory (24x48)

Turbo LDPC

ASIP 0

Extrinsic Memory (24x256)
Cross metric memory (88x32)

Butterfly NOC

Extrinsic Memory (24x256)

ASIP 2

Cross metric memory (88x32)

Input Memory (24x256)
Program memory (16x64) Config Memory (24x48)

Input Memory (24x256)

Extrinsic Memory (24x256)

Extrinsic Memory (24x256)

Input Memory (24x256)

Program memory (16x64)
Config Memory (24x48)
40

ASIP 1

Cross metric memory (88x32)

Component decoder 1

ASIP 3
Cross metric memory (88x32)

Program memory (16x64)
Config Memory (24x48)

LDPC

Turbo

40

40

Component decoder 2

Fig. 5. UDec decoder system architecture

reaches a parameterized threshold, the SNR is incremented by the SNR step defined by the user. When the SNR reaches the limit defined by the user, the simulation is stopped. All the results, in addition to the BER/FER curves plotting, are saved to an output text file with all simulation parameters. This allows external tools to exploit the results.
H. USB Interface The connection between the FPGA platform (from Dini-
Group [8]) and the host computer (running the GUI) is realized through a USB interface. An interface controller module (for the FPGA platform side) and a software driver (for the host computer side) are provided by DiniGroup for this purpose.
VI. RESULTS A. Synthesis Results
The FPGA synthesis for Xilinx Virtex-5 (xc5vlx3301ff1760) device yielded the results as shown in Table III. The total design occupies 31497 slices which represent around 60% of the of logic slices available on the target device.

Component LDPC/Turbo decoder (2x2 ASIPs)
LDPC Encoder Turbo Encoder
Channel Error Counter Global system controller Total (design+Glue Logic)

Slices 21164 6096
343 2622 884
34 31497

RAM blocks 82 1 1 7 4 0 95

DSP48E 0 0 0 56 0 0 0

TABLE III FPGA SYNTHESIS ON XILINX VIRTEX-5 LX330

B. Reconfiguration The reconfiguration time is the minimum number of clock
cycles needed to write a new program memory contents to the ASIPs along with writing the configuration memory contents. It should be emphasized that when we are changing between

LDPC to another configuration of LDPC (or Turbo to another configuration of Turbo), only few values need to be updated in the configuration memory while the program memory content remains the same. Table IV gives an estimate of the number of clock cycles needed to reconfigure the proposed prototype. As we can see that total reconfiguration can be achieved with at most 167 clock cycles.

From mode Turbo Turbo LDPC LDPC

To mode Turbo LDPC LDPC Turbo

clock cycles needed 5+15*4
51+(5+24)*4 (5+24)*4
40*2+(15*4)

TABLE IV RECONFIGURATION TIME

C. Scalability and throughput

Number of
ASIPs 8 4 2

Throughput in M bps for

FPGA implementation @

80MHz

Turbo @7 LDPC @10 iter

iter

(Crate = 5/6)

22.8

68.5

11.4

36.5

5.7

17.7

Max. frame size in bits (over all
code rates) Turbo LDPC

6144 3072 1536

2048 2048 768

TABLE V SCALABILITY AND THROUGHPUT ACHIEVED

The architecture presented here has four ASIPs operating in 2x2 mode for turbo decoding and 4 ASIPs connected to a unidirectional ring network for LDPC decoding. The ASIPs can also be configured to 1x1 mode for lower throughput and/or shorter frames. The number of available memory blocks depends on the number of ASIPs in the system. The frame sizes supported in different modes are as shown in the Table V. It has to be noted that for the system with 4 or 2 ASIPs in LDPC mode, the extrinsic memory depth for each ASIP must

147
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

be large enough to store the entire check node to variable node messages processed by it. The throughputs achieved are low when compared to the requirements specified by the target standards (Table I). This is due to the limited clock frequencies achievable on FPGA. Furthermore, the primary objective of this prototype is to verify to the feasibility, functionality and reconfigurable features of the proposed design. In fact, when targeting ASIC implementation, using 90nm CMOS technology allows 500MHz clock frequency and thus fulfils the throughput requirements of Table I with 4x4 mode.
The throughput estimate for LDPC mode is given by (5). The best throughput achieved for the presented configuration is 36.5 M bps for WiMAX with code rate Crate = 5/6, submatrix size Z = 84, number of rows in the check matrix Mb = 4 . The number of iterations considered is Niter = 10. The architecture has NA = 4 ASIPs each processing CNA = 2 check nodes per clock cycle. The clock speed considered is Fclk=80M Hz which is the maximum frequency achieved for the FPGA implementation.

T hroughputLDP C

=

(

Z ∗ Crate ∗ Fclk

(

NA

Z ∗C NA

)

+

1)

∗

(

Mb ∗Niter 3

)

(5)

Similarly, equation (6) gives the throughput calculation for

turbo mode. An average Ninstr = 4 instructions are needed to give a symbol which is composed of Bitssym = 2 bits. Considering Niter = 7 iterations, the maximum throughput achieved is 11.4 M bps.

T hroughputT urbo

=

Bitssym ∗ Fclk ∗ (NA/2) Ninstr ∗ Niter

(6)

D. Performance results

Using the proposed complete system prototype we are able to evaluate the error rate performance on hardware for any communication mode of the supported standards. Due to space limitation, we only show the results of the following configurations: SBTC (LTE) with 2880 bits frame size and 1/3 code rate, DBTC (WiMAX) with 1728 bits frame size and 1/3 code rate, and LDPC (WiMAX) with Z=48 and 1/2 code rate. The BER curves obtained after FPGA evaluation along with corresponding reference curves software model are as shown in the Fig. 6. The hardware measured BER (Bit Error Rate) shows acceptable performance degradation when compared to floating-point C simulations.

VII. CONCLUSION In this paper, we have presented the first FPGA-based prototype of a full communication system targeting the support of multi-standard Turbo/LDPC Encoding and Decoding. The proposed functional prototype demonstrates the effectiveness of ASIP concept in the implementation of flexible multistandard platforms for wireless communications. The prototype supports all communication modes defined in LTE, WiFi, WiMAX, and DVB-RCS standards. To enable reasonable throughputs on FPGA most of the system components (including emitter, channel model, decoder, and system controller) have been implemented in hardware. A GUI enables the

100 10-1 10-2

SBTC (LTE) HW measure, 7 iter, shuffled SBTC (LTE) C simu, 6 iter, serial DBTC (WiMAX) HW measure, 7 iter, shuffled DBTC (WiMAX) C simu, 6 iter, serial LDPC (WiMAX) HW measure, 20 iter LDPC (WiMAX) C simu, 20 iter

BER

10-3

10-4

10-5

0

0,5

1

1,5

2

2,5

3

SNR (dB)

Fig. 6. Measured and simulated BER curves for: (1) SBTC with 2880 bits frame size and 1/3 code rate, (2) DBTC with 1728 bits frame size and 1/3 code rate, and (3) LDPC with Z=48 and 1/2 code rate

dynamic reconfiguration and monitoring of the communication system through a user friendly GUI. Besides its wide flexibility, the proposed FPGA prototype achieves a throughput of 11.4 Mbps in Turbo modes and 36.5 Mbps in LDPC modes when operating at a clock frequency of 80 MHz.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This work was supported in part by the UDEC and TEROPP projects from the French National Research Agency (ANR).

REFERENCES

[1] P. Murugappa, A.-K. R., A. Baghdadi, and M. Je´ze´quel, “A Flexible High

Throughput Multi-ASIP Architecture for LDPC and Turbo Decoding,”

in Proc. of the ACM/IEEE Design, Automation and Test in Europe

Conference & Exhibition (DATE), 2011.

[2] M. Alles, T. Vogt, and N. Wehn, “FlexiChaP: A reconfigurable ASIP

for convolutional, turbo, and LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. of the 5th

International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, 2008, pp.

84–89.

[3] O. Muller, A. Baghdadi, and M. Jezequel, “From application to ASIP-

based FPGA prototype: a case study on turbo decoding,” in Proc. of the

19th IEEE/IFIP International Symposium on Rapid System Prototyping

(RSP), 2008, pp. 128–134.

[4] M. Karkooti and J. Cavallaro, “Semi-parallel reconfigurable architectures

for real-time LDPC decoding,” in Proc. of the International Conference

on Information Technology: Coding and Computing, vol. 1, 2004, pp.

579–585.

[5] J. Perez and V. Fernandez, “Low-cost encoding of IEEE 802.11n,”

Electronics Letters, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 307–308, 2008.

[6] H. Moussa, O. Muller, A. Baghdadi, and M. Jezequel, “Butterfly

and Benes-Based on-Chip Communication Networks for Multiprocessor

Turbo Decoding,” in Proc. of the ACM/IEEE Design, Automation & Test

in Europe Conf. & Exhibition (DATE), 2007.

[7] E. Boutillon, Y. Tang, C. Marchand, and P. Bomel, “Hardware Discrete

Channel Emulator,” in Proc. of the International Conference on High

Performance Computing and Simulation, 2010, pp. 452–458.

[8] The

Dini

Group,

Inc.,

“DN9000K10PCI:

Xil-

inx

Virtex-5

Based

ASIC

Prototyping

Engine,”

http://www.dinigroup.com/new/DN9000k10PCI.php.

148
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

