ISITA2012, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, October 28-31, 2012

Multi-bit flip type gradient descent bit flipping decoding using no thresholds
Ryoji Haga1, Shogo Usami2 Postgraduate Course in science and Technology
Meijo University Shiogamaguchi, Tempaku, Nagoya, 468-8502, Japan 1123430032@ccalumni.meijo-u.ac.jp 2susami@meijo-u.ac.jp

Abstract—Gradient Descent Bit Flipping (GDBF) decoding has one of the best decoding performances of the bit flip type decoding algorithms for low density parity check code. Multi-bit type GDBF decoding, however, achieves good error performance only with suitable thresholds.
In this paper, we propose multi-bit type GDBF decoding without using thresholds. The proposed method estimates the number of bits to flip from the received soft sequence using the characteristic of the probability density distribution of the additive white Gaussian noise channel. The error performance of the proposed method is almost equal to that of the conventional method despite not using thresholds.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low density parity check (LDPC) [1] code was introduced in 1962, and can achieve performance close to the Shannon bound when combined with the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [2]. However, the SPA has very high computational complexity. In comparison, the popular normalized min-sum algorithm (NMSA) [3] has lower complexity, with comparable performance to SPA. Still, its complexity is too high to be efficiently realized in hardware implementation. Conversely, bit flipping (BF) [1] decoding has low computational complexity. The basic idea of BF is to repeatedly flip unreliable bits until the decoding sequence is the same as the codeword. Although the (BER) of the BF algorithm is inferior to that of the SPA, in general, the former enables the design of a much simpler decoder, which is easier to implement. To reduce the decoding performance gap with the SPA, weighted bitflipping (WBF) [4], modified WBF(MWBF) [5], improved MWBF (IMWBF) [6], and many other algorithms have been proposed. In particular, gradient descent bit flipping (GDBF) [7] has one of the best decoding performances of all the BF decoding algorithms. To achieve multi-bit GDBF decoding with good error performance, however, proper threshold values must be selected for each parity check matrix and the signaltonoiseratio (SNR). Threshold values realizing a minimum BER must be calculated experimentally through computational simulation. Thus, in this paper, multi-bit flipping GDBF decoding without threshold values is proposed. In this decoding algorithm, the number of flipped bits is estimated from the soft received values using the characteristic of the AWGN channel. Moreover, through computational simulation we show that the BER of the proposed decoding algorithm is almost the same as that of conventional decoding. bits is estimated from

a receiving value, and the method of carrying out multi-bit flipping without using threshold value is proposed.

II. GDBF DECODING

A. Multi-bit GDBF decoding

GDBF decoding performs bit flipping to maximize the objective function in Eq. (1).

n

m

f (x) = xjyj +

xj ,

(1)

j=1

i=1 j∈N (i)

where N (i) is the set of column indices such that the i-th row is 1 in the m × n check matrix, M (j) is the set of row indices such that the j-th column is 1 in the m × n check matrix, y is the soft receiving vector, and x is the hard decision vector from the soft receiving vector. The first term of Eq. (1) correlates with the receiving vector y and the hard decision vector x based on the bitwise maximum likelihood decoding rule in the AWGN channel. The second term is the sum of the syndrome, which reaches a maximum when x is the codeword. Maximizing the objective function in Eq. (1) using the gradient descent inverse function of the k-th bit is carried out as follows:

Ek = xkyk +

xj .

(2)

i∈M (k) j∈N (i)

The steps in the GDBF decoding algorithm are given below. Initialization : Set the maximum number of iterations lmax and let the iteration index l = 1. Then, set μ = 0 (multibit flip mode) and the threshold value θ = θ1. Step1 : Hard decision for the given y is carried out, and x is initialized to the hard decision vector as follows:

xk =

+1, if yk ≥ 0 −1, if yk < 0

, k ∈ [1, k].

(3)

Step2 : follows:

Syndrome s = (s1, s2, ..., sm) is calculated as

si =

xj, i ∈ [1, m].

(4)

j∈N (i)

If all the si are +1, x is assumed to be the codeword and the
algorithm terminates. Otherwise, go to step 3. Step3 : Objective function f (l) is evaluated as Eq. (1). Let

Copyright 2012 IEICE

6

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:16:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

μ = 1 (single bit flip mode) if the objective function value f (l) of the l-th iteration is less than that for the previous objective function value f (l−1). Depending on the flipping mode μ, substep 4-1 is executed if μ = 0 and 4-2 if μ = 1. Step4 − 1(multi − bitflipping) : Flip all bits satisfying Ek < θ(k ∈ [1, n]). If θ = θ2, set θ = θ1. Step4 − 2(single − bitflipping) : Flip a single bit, the j-th bit satisfying j = arg mink∈[1,n] Ek. If the same bit is flipped in the (l−1)-th and l-th iterations, set θ = θ2 and μ = 0 to escape from a local maximum of the objective function. Step5 : If l > lmax, the algorithm terminates with x as the assumed codeword. Otherwise, let l = l + 1 and return to step 2.
According to GDBF decoding as shown in Fig. 1, first most of the errors are roughly corrected in multi-bit flipping mode and the algorithm iterates as long as the objective function value continues to grow. Then, once the objective function value starts decreasing compared with that in the previous iteration, fine correction is performed by flipping only one bit in each iteration in single-bit flipping mode.
B. Escaping from a local maximum
In GDBF decoding, the objective function may be caught in a local maximum by flipping the same bit in single-bit flipping mode until the number of iterations reaches lmax as shown in Fig. 2. In this case, the decoding process does not succeed in obtaining the codeword. To escape from a local maximum where the same bit is repeatedly flipped, we employ multibit flipping mode (μ = 0) with a large threshold value θ2. This ensures that the objective function moves far from the local maximum by decreasing its value greatly. In the next iteration, multi-bit flipping mode continues, but with threshold θ = θ1, i .e., ordinary multi-bit flipping mode is reinstated as shown in Fig. 3. Note that the objective function may fall into the same local maximum of the same x(l) after several iterations x(l+t).
C. Difficulty in threshold value setup
Naturally, BER performance in multi-bit flip type GDBF varies with different thresholds θ1 and θ2. Moreover, thresholds giving the best BER performance differ for each parity check matrix. Unfortunately, there are no methods for finding optimal thresholds systematically. Therefore, we use computational simulation to search for near-optimal thresholds experimentally for each parity check matrix and the SNR. This is the problem with conventional GDBF decoding in the application of various codes.
III. MULTI-BIT FLIP TYPE GDBF DECODING WITHOUT
THRESHOLDS
A. Basic idea
In general, binary-bipolar conversion is executed before transmission over the AWGN channel, i.e., {0, 1}n → {+1, −1}n. Then, Gaussian noise with mean 0 and variance σ2 is added to each transmitted symbol in the AWGN channel. In step 1 of the GDBF algorithm, the hard decision is executed,

that is, xj = +1 if yj ≥ 0 and xj = −1 if yj < 0. If the j-th transmitted symbol is ‘+1.0’ and the j-th received symbol yj < 0, or the transmitted symbol is ‘-1.0’ and yj ≥ 0, then failure judgment occurs. In other words, failure judgment occurs when the absolute value of AWGN noise is greater than 1.0 and the sign of the noise is opposite to that of the transmitted symbol. According to the characteristic of the probability density distribution of the AWGN channel, the probability that the absolute value of AWGN noise is greater than 1.0 and the sign of the noise is the same as that of the transmitted symbol is equal to the probability of failure judgment. Thus, we can estimate the number of failure judgments (number of flipped bits) by counting symbols |yj| > 2.0, j ∈ [1, n], when the SNR is higher than some value. Here, we present our novel multibit flip type GDBF decoding without using any thresholds. Instead, the number of bits to flip in each iteration is decided from the estimated number of failure judgments.

B. Algorithmic steps
The steps in the proposed decoding algorithm are given below. Initialization : Set the maximum number of iterations lmax and let the iteration index l = 1. Then, set μ = 0 (multibit flip mode). Let Bmax = |{j|(|yj| > 2.0), j ∈ [1, n]}|. Step1 :) Execute hard decision for the received y as

xj =

+1, if yj ≥ 0 −1, if yj < 0

, j ∈ [1, n]

(5)

and set B0 = Bmax. Step2 : Calculate syndrome s = (s1, s2, · · · , sm) as

si =

xj, i ∈ [1, m].

(6)

j∈N (i)

If all the si are +1, x is assumed to be the codeword and the algorithm terminates. Otherwise, goto step 3. Step3 : Calculate Ek(k ∈ [1, n]) using Eq. (2). If μ = 0 perform sub-step 3-1, else if μ = 1 perform sub-step 3-2. Step3 − 1 : Let

Bl = max{ Bl−1/2 , 1}.

(7)

According to inverse function Ek, bit flips are executed on the smallest Bl bits. In single-bit flip mode (i.e., Bl = 1), if the same bit as in the previous iteration is expected to be flipped, set μ = 1. Step3 − 2 : According to inverse function Ek, bit flips are executed on the smallest Bmax bits. Then, set μ = 0. Step4 : If l > lmax, the algorithm terminates with x as the assumed codeword. Otherwise, set l = l + 1 and return to step 2.
Figs. 4 and 5 show the behavior of the objective function,
respectively, in normal operation of the proposed decoding,
and when falling into a local maximum and escaping from it
using the proposed decoding.

7
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:16:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. Behavior of objective function in the GDBF decoding process

Fig. 3. Behavior of the objective function escaping from a local maximum in the GDBF decoding process

Fig. 2. Behavior of the objective function in a local maximum in the GDBF decoding process
Fig. 4. Behavior of the objective function in the proposed decoding process

C. Simulation results
In this subsection, we evaluate the proposed decoding algorithm using computational simulation. Fig. 6 shows the decoding BER of the proposed decoding, Normalized minsum algorithm decoding, WBF decoding and conventional multi-bit flip type GDBF decoding using (1008,504) regular LDPC code [8]. In the simulation, channel denotes an AWGN channel, the maximum number of iterations for normalized minsum algorithm decoding was sets to 5 and 100, and scal factor was set to 0.8. the maximum number of iterations for bit flipping decoding was set to 300, and the threshold values for conventional multi-bit flip type GDBF decoding were set to θ1 = −0.7, and, θ2 = 1.7, which approximate the optimal valies from the previous experiment with SNR= 4.0dB. According to Fig. 6, the BER performance of the proposed algorithm is almost the same as that of conventional multi-bit flip type GDBF decoding.
Fig. 7 shows the decoding BER for the same decoding methods using (504,252) regular LDPC code[7]. Similarly, the threshold values for conventional multi-bit flip type GDBF decoding were set to θ1 = −0.65, and θ2 = 1.82, which are almost the optimal valies with SNR=4.0dB. Fig. 7 also shows that the BER performance of the proposed decoding algorithm is almost the same as that of conventional method. However, the BER performance of the proposed decoding algorithm is inferior with SNR ≥ 1.5dB to that of Normalized min-sum

decoding with iteration number of 100 at 10−5. Moreover, the average decoding times per iteration of the
(1008,504) regular LDPC code and (504,252) regular LDPC code for each decoding method are shown in Table 1. The computational simulation was used to CPU:Intel i7-3930K @ 3.20GHz, Memory:16.0GB. According to Table 1, the proposed and conventional methods have almost the same computation times. In the proposed method, the computation cost for sorting the inverse function is greater rhan in the conventional method. Conversely, in the proposed method evaluation of the objective function is omitted. Therefore, the proposed method has almost the same computational cost as the conventional method.
D. Escaping from the Same Local Maximum
Through the computational simulation we found that after escaping from a local maximum the first time, a pattern is formed and the same local maximum is reached repeatedly.

TABLE I AVERAGE DECODING TIME PER ITERATION [μs]

Normalized min-sum multi-bit GDBF
proposed algorithm

(1008,504)regular LDPC
692.1 43.2 42.3

(504,252)regurlar LDPC
346.7 22.3 22.2

8
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:16:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 5. Behavior of the objective function escaping from a local maximum in the proposed decoding process

Fig. 7. Bit error rate for (504,252) regular LDPC code

Fig. 6. Bit error rate for (1008,504) regular LDPC code

Fig. 8. Movement of the pbjective function value when the same fall into a local maximum

Fig. 8 shows the movement of the objective function value when falling into the same local maximum. From the figure, it can be seen that a local maximum is reached in the eighth iteration. Although the objective function value is decreased to escape from the local maximum, the objective function falls into the local maximum again with the same value. Eventually the maximum number of iterations is reached, and decoding fails. To avoid this pattern, we need to change the objective function value when falling into a local muximum. So, we propose a new method for avoiding falling into the same local maximum by increasing number of flipping bit with each fall into a local maximum(i.e., Bmax = Bmax + 1, with each fall into a local maximum).
Fig. 9 shows the movement of the objective function value when escaping from the same local maximum as shown in Fig. 8 using the proposed method. In the proposed method, when the same local maximum is reached a second time, the objective function does not to take the same value as the first time. This ensures that decoding is successful in iteration 17 without falling back into the same local maximum.
Fig. 10 shows the decoding BER of the proposed decoding algorithm. In this simulation, other than the algorithm for the proposed method, the conditions are the same as those shown in Fig 6. Fig. 10 shows that for all SNR values, the proposed method yields improved BERs. In parfticular, If the SNR is higher than 3dB, the effect of the proposed method is higher

improvement.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a multi-bit type GDBF decoding algorithm without any thresholds. The proposed method estimates the number of bits to flip from the received soft sequence using the characteristic of the probability density distribution of the AWGN channel. Both the error performance and computation cost of the proposed method are almost equal to those of the conventional method despite not using any thresholds. In addition, by incorporating the algorithm escape from local muximum of the same, showed a further improvement error performance. As future work, we intend investigating the optimal number of bits to flip both in each iteration and escaping from a local maximum.
REFERENCES
[1] R.G.Gallager, in Research Monograph series. Cambridge, MIT Press, 196. [2] D.J.C.MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse
matirices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.45, pp.399–431, 1999. [3] J.Chen and M.P.C Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-
based decoding algorithm of LDPC codes,” IEEE commun. Lett., vol.6, pp.208–210, 2002. [4] Y.Kou, S.Lin and M.P.C Fossorier, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Based on Finite Geometries: A Rediscovery and New Results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.47, pp.2711–2736, 2001. [5] J.Zhang, and M.P.C.Fossorier, “A Modified Weighted Bit-Flipping Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,”IEEE Commun. Lett., vol.8, pp.165–167, 2004.

9
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:16:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 9. Movement of the objective function value when the same escape local maximum of the proposed method
Fig. 10. Bit error rate of the GDBF algorithm with the escap from the same local maximum [6] M.Jiang, C.Zhao, Z.Shi, and Y.Chen, “An improvement on the modified
weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes.”, IEEE Commun. Lett., vol.9, pp.814–816, 2005. [7] T.Wadayama, et al., “Gradient Descent Bit Flipping Algorithms for Decoding LDPC Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform., vol.58, No.6, pp.16101614, 2010. [8] D.J.C.MacKay, “Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes,” available: http://www.inference.phy.cam. ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html.
10
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:16:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

