2009 12th Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design / Architectures, Methods and Tools

Flexible Architectures for LDPC Decoders based on Network On Chip Paradigm

Fabrizio Vacca∗, Guido Masera∗ ∗CERCOM–Dipatimento di Elettronica
Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy, I–10129
Email: {fabrizio.vacca,guido.masera}@polito.it

Hazem Moussa†, Amer Baghdadi†, Michel Jezequel† †TELECOM Bretagne–Electronics Department
Technopole Brest-Iroise, 29238 Brest Cedex 3, France
{hazem.moussa,amer.baghdadi,michel.jezequel}@telecom-bretagne.eu

Abstract— This paper explores the possibility of building a flexible Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) decoder using a Network On Chip communication infrastructure. Even if this idea is not completely new, previously published works suffered from an excessive area occupation and their practical impact has been very limited. In the following we analyze two possible NOCs specifically designed for the LDPC case. From synthesis results it can be observed how the proposed networks outperform previous implementations in terms of active area with no significant bandwidth loss. Finally to prove the effectiveness of the proposed approach a complete, partially parallel LDPC decoder design is presented and characterized in terms of throughput and area occupation.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section II a brief introduction to LDPC codes and their decoding algorithm is provided, then in Section III we introduce a novel NOCs taxonomy based upon their structure and their physical domain. In Section IV we present some possible architectural solutions for NOC–based LDPC decoders. From this discussion we derive two potential network structures that are detailed in Section V. Synthesis results are then discussed and compared using proper assessment metrics in Section VI. Finally in Section VII conclusions will be drawn.

I. MOTIVATIONS AND BACKGROUND

II. LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM

During the past decades every advancement in wireless communications has increased the computational complexity on the implementation side. This trend has raised significantly the pressure on efficient hardware implementations able to support the always increasing computational demand. More recently the diffusion of a plethora of continuously–evolving wireless standards has stressed the need for flexible hardware platforms. Flexibility can be seen not only as a viable way to reduce development costs, but also as a strategy to extend product’s life. Almost at the same time of wireless bloom we have observed the Network On Chip (NOC) approach [1] gaining an increasing popularity in the VLSI community. Thanks to their high performance and intrinsic scalability NOCs are now considered a tangible alternative to shared bus topology, especially in modern Systems On Chip (SOCs), in Multiprocessor SOCs (MPSOCs) and generally when a high flexibility degree is required.
Nevertheless the exploitation of NOCs to design flexible channel decoders is still a topic that needs to be investigated as witnessed by the relative lack of scientific publications in the field. The aim of this work is to try to assess if NOC paradigm can be of help to design an high performance yet flexible Low Density Parity Check decoder. More specifically two different approaches will be presented: the first one is based on the exploration of on–line dynamic routing using a binary de Bruijn network to design an high performance interconnection structure; the second one is focused on the design of a so– called Zero–Overhead NOC (ZONOC) exploring the potential of off–line static routing.

A Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) code [2] is a linear block code characterized by a very sparse parity check matrix H. It is common to describe an LDPC code by a bipartite graph, called Tanner graph [3], containing two sets of nodes: the first set of N nodes represents the N bits of a codeword (Variable Nodes VN), the second set of M nodes implements the parity-check constraints (Check Nodes CN). The graph presents an edge between the i-th VN and the j-th CN if and only if the i-th bit is involved in the j-th parity-check equation, i.e. H(i, j) = 1. We define E as the set containing all the Tanner graph edges: the cardinality of E is therefore the total number of non–zero elements of the associated parity check matrix H.
The most common decoding algorithm for LDPC is the Message Passing Algorithm [3] that implements an iterative exchange of node–generated messages along the edges of the graph. In Message Passing decoders, messages are exchanged along the edges of the Tanner graph, and computations are performed inside the nodes. To avoid multiplications and divisions the decoder works in the logarithmic domain [3]. This algorithm is described in the following equations, where k represents the current iteration, Qji is the message generated by the VNj and directed to the CNi, Rij is the message computed by CNi and sent to the VNj. C[j] is the whole set of incoming messages for VNj and R[i] is the whole set of the incoming messages for CNi. VNs sum up all the messages Rij coming from CNs, combining them with the Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) λj associated to the received bit, as shown in (1).

978-0-7695-3782-5/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE

582

DOI 10.1109/DSD.2009.235

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PE

PE

IP IP
IP

IP R

IP R

R

R IP

R IP

IP
IP IP

R PE
R

R

PE

R

R PE
R
PE

R PE
R R
PE
PE

(a) InterIP NOC

(b) IntraIP NOC

Fig. 1. Example of InterIP and IntraIP NOCs: in both figures R boxes represent routers but in (a) they are used to interconnect heterogeneous IPs while in (b) they interconnects homogeneous PEs.

Given the simplicity of this formulation it has been widely

Q[jki] = λj +

Rα[kj−1] = λj +

Rl[kj −1] − Ri[kj−1]

employed in the literature. For the same reason we will use the minsum approximation through all of this work.

α∈C [j ]/i

l∈C [j ]

= Sj[k−1] − Ri[kj−1] with Sj = λj +

Rlj (1)

III. NOC TAXONOMY

l∈C [j ]

Given the large interest and impact of NOCs, the literature

On the other hand, CNs perform the following operation:

on this subject is very rich [1], [6], [7]. Such a vast research area should not be taken as a monolithic topic: for this reason

Ri[kj] = ψ−1

ψ(Qβ[ki−1]) · δij =

β∈R[j]/j

= ψ−1[Pi − ψ(Qj[ki−1])] · δij with Pi =

ψ(Qt[ki −1])

t∈R[j]

in the last years some works have been focused on NOCs classification depending upon some common features [8], [9]. Lately in [10] the idea of Application Specific NOC (ASNOC) (2)has been proposed and deeply explored. The main reason of ASNOC is to improve network efficiency, either in terms

where δij is the product of the signs of the input messages:

of bandwidth or in terms of complexity. Similarly to ASIC, ASNOCs are NOCs specifically built around a given appli-

δij = (−1)|R[i]| · sgn(Qji)

(3)

j

and |R[i]| is the cardinality (i.e. the number of edges) of the

CNi. In (2), ψ(x) is a non–linear, non–limited function defined

as:

ψ(x) = − ln

tanh

x 2

=

ln

(1 (1

+ −

e−|x|) e−|x|)

(4)

cation, hence providing the maximum possible performance yet retaining scalability and flexibility properties of NOCs. Some of these approaches have been also applied to the design of an advanced and flexible wireless receiver [11]; however [12] is the first NOC–based LDPC decoder presented in the literature. Even if this work represents a significant depart from traditional decoder’s design, the obtained results were very discouraging: the authors present a huge area occupation and

In the original formulation of the decoding algorithm, each

VN computes eq. (1) generating multiple output messages,

Qji; each message is delivered to the correspondent CN. Conversely each CN computes eq. (2) and generates Rij

which have to be delivered to the connected VNs. This

decoding scheduling is known as Two Phases Message Passing

algorithm (TPMP) [3]. Since ψ is an irrational non–linear

function several approximations have been proposed to directly

evaluate eq. 2 (see [4]). Another possibility is to use the so–

called minsum approximation [5]: in this case eq. 2 will simply

become:

Ri[kj ]

=

δij

·

min
β∈R[j]/j

Qβ[ki−1]

(5)

remarkable power consumption while the claimed performance are not so impressive. Moreover the presented architecture can only support moderate–sized LDPC codes (N = 1024), limiting the overall system’s flexibility.
On the contrary our main concern is to devise a proper decoder architecture able to support an unlimited variety of LDPC codes. We believe that the strategy to achieve such flexibility is twofold: on one hand the decoding is carried out using smart and programmable processing elements (such as ASIPs), on the other hand the interconnection fabric shall offer the capability of being quickly re-arranged, providing dynamic connectivity between processing cores [13]. These considerations have pushed us towards the need of a new

583 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOCs classification, depending upon their spatial domain. Hence, we will call InterIP NOC any network devoted to
interconnect different IPs, at a chip scale. It is important to stress how the greatest part of the existing NOC–based solutions falls in this class [9]. An important feature of InterIP NOC is their physical extent, which can be even a significant portion of the whole chip’s area. In Figure 1(a) a very simple example of InterIP NOC is depicted. As stated before, InterIP NOCs must deal also with routing, adapting it dynamically to the network congestion level.
Contrasting this, we will define IntraIP NOC any network whose domain area is restricted to be internal to a single IP. Even inside a single IP it is possible to re–use the same interconnection paradigm that holds for the InterIP class. However, the router block can be largely simplified considering that these networks typically connect homogeneous Processing Elements (PEs) rather than IPs. Moreover, the network topology tends to be quite regular leading to simpler routing algorithms compared to the InterIP case. An example of a possible IntraIP NOC is sketched in Figure 1(b). Compared with Figure 1(a) it is important to observe how in this case the whole network is intended to be contained into a single IP.
As a concluding remark it can be curious to observe how the proposed classification tends to mimic what has been done in the past regarding computer networks [14]. With a similarity, in fact, InterIP NOC can be viewed as a Wide Area Network (WAN) analogy while IntraIP is more similar to the Local Area Network (LAN) case.

IV. FLEXIBLE ARCHITECTURE FOR NOC-BASED LDPC

DECODER

Our aim is to design an LDPC decoder so flexible to support any generic (N, M ) code. To that end, we need to distribute the N + M node operations over P PEs. In the following we will consider P = 16 but the same design methodology holds for any value of P .
Besides, we assume that:

• Each PE is able to be used both as Check as well as

Variable node. Let P Ei be a given Processing Element of

the decoder: this means that through the whole decoding

process P Ei will serve ni variable nodes and mi check nodes respectively. If the total workload could be evenly

split over the PEs’ set, ni = n/P and mi = m/P .

• The decoder is built on the so–called Two Phases Mes-

sage Passing algorithm (TPMP) [3]: the scheduling of

the whole network is then carried out in two consequent

phases, i.e. the Variable Nodes and the Check Nodes

respectively.

• For the sake of simplicity we assume that the two phases

can not be overlapped at any time. Calling the duration of

these Node TCpN .

two phases TVp N Phase duration)

awnidllTbCpeNd,etfihneepdroacsesTsipng=timTVpeN(i.+e.

• The time required by the net for message delivery (i.e.

Network Phase duration) is named TVneNt and TCnNet, or T net = TVneNt + TCnNet.

TABLE I NUMBER OF MESSAGES THAT NEEDS TO BE EXCHANGED DURING EVERY
HALF–ITERATION BETWEEN VNS AND CNS FOR A 16 PES NETWORK.

Code
802.16e (2304, 1152)
802.11n (1944, 972)
DVB-S2 (64000, 32000)

|E |
7296 6966 226795

Ordered
6765 (93%) 6436 (92%) 212655 (94%)

|C| Random
6822 (94%) 6521 (94%) 212946 (94%)

GP
2974 (41%) 3204 (46%) 98521 (43%)

• Each P Ei is connected to its own local memory. Depending on the target sending period [15], this local storage can be a simple dual port memory or it can be implemented using some collision avoidance techniques (see [16] and [17] for further details on this). During the Node Phase these memories are used to store messages exchanged between nodes belonging to the same PE, as well as those heading to different PE. During the subsequent Network Phase outgoing messages are delivered through the interconnection network. Each decoding iteration will be composed of two Node Phases and two Network Phases, in analogy with well–known flooding scheduling [18].
• The network topology is not supposed to be fixed: in this work two different topologies will be explored, a torus mesh and a binary de Bruijn.
In order to build this Application Specific IntraIP NOC we need to address three distinct topics, i.e. how the jobs are distributed over the PEs, what kind of architecture is used for each PE and the router architecture itself. The first two tasks can be conceived with no or little knowledge of the third one, provided that a proper network interface is used. We will concentrate more on topics one and three, while for topic two we will opt for a well known flexible solution similar to [17].
A. Node partitioning technique
Given the fact that each PE is able to implement both the VN and the CN functionalities, node partitioning can be re– formulated as a graph partitioning problem [19]. The graph T(V, E) is the current LDPC code’s Tanner graph with V = VN ∪ CN , where VN = {V Ni|i ∈ [0, N − 1]} and CN = {CNj|j ∈ [0, M − 1]}; as far as E it is defined as in Section II.
Graph partitioning techniques solve the problem of dividing T in P partitions equalizing their size as much as possible trying to minimize the cutset cardinality. We define the cutset C as a subset of E that contains all those edges connecting two nodes located in different partitions, i.e.
C = {eij ∈ E|V Ni ∈ Pm, CNj ∈ Pn, m = n}
It is worth noting that each element of C represents a message that has to be transmitted across IntraIP NOC. Hence minimizing C’s cardinality (|C|) corresponds to minimize the overall

584 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

number of network flits exchanged over the network. In Table I we show a comparison in terms of exchanged messages for three different partitioning techniques on three different LDPC codes. Given every code |E| is the total number of Tanner graph edges, i.e. the number of messages that nodes have to exchange every half–iteration. Three different allocation strategies are considered to map VNs and CNs over the 16 PEs of the network, namely Ordered, Random and a Graph Partitioning based one (GP). Ordered means that nodes are sequentially assigned to every PEs: P EiV N = i mod 16 i ∈ [0, N − 1] and P EjCN = j mod 16 j ∈ [0, M − 1]. Conversely Random indicates that VNs and CNs have been randomly assigned to PEs, under the constraint of uniform workload among nodes. These values are actually the expected value of this random mapping process over 1000 realizations. Lastly, GP are the values obtained applying [20] to the Tanner graph. It is clear how this approach leads to an average saving of almost 50% with respect to other cases.

(100)
4

0

2

1

(101)
5

(110)
6

3

Router

TS

Control dynm. arbitr.&

incr

FSM

routing unit

TS

incr

7 (a)

NI Control

(b)

FSM

add TS field

B. PE architecture
As stated before, the proposed architecture uses a parallel architecture for the processing element. Since in this work we focus on the interconnection structure, we will not provide any detailed description of computation nodes. It is important also to consider how the network/PE interface enables to use almost any kind of PE: outgoing messages ought to be inserted in a FIFO called TX FIFO, while received packets are stored directly in the proper memory location.
Depending upon the PE internal structure (serial, partially parallel or totally parallel) the Node Phase T p will require a different number of clock cycles. For this work we use a parallel PE able to process up to eight messages per clock cycle. This means that we are able to process up to two degree– 4 VN and one degree–8 CN in a single clock cycle. In order to reduce the overall area occupation we decided to use the minsum approximation (see eq. 5), while VN is implemented using two independent adder trees.
Finally, during the Network Phase each PE ought to dispatch the messages pushing them into the TX FIFO. For this work we adopt a sending period [15] of 1.
C. Router architecture
Given the communication-intensive nature of our target application we are interested in experimenting the two possible routing techniques, namely:
• On–line dynamic routing, and • Off–line static routing.
In the first case each router will have to route on-the-fly packets depending upon their destination and on the network conditions. This means that dedicated logic has to be integrated inside each node to cope with this issue. Moreover each packet shall bring both an header section with routing–related information as well as the payload itself. Particular care should be posed on the routing strategy in order to keep the node complexity as limited as possible while still achieving good throughput figures.

PE

prio_msg1 prio_msg0 TS_msg1 TS_msg0
valid dst_msg0 dst_msg1

cmp
inf eq

cmp
inf eq

Priority arbitration 3 mux + 1 reg + 1 inv

(c)
01

cmp

cmp

transcoder

parallel shortest path computation output port selection
Fig. 2. Binary de Bruijn network: (a) network topology for 8 nodes, (b) simplified router and network interface architectures, (c) dynamic arbitration and routing unit

On the other hand off–line routing means that for any given code it is possible to pre–compute all the routing information for each packet travelling across the network. All these informations can then be stored in a Control Memory inside each node that will be sequentially addressed during the Network Phase. In this case the routing strategy can be quite sophisticated since it can be done off–line and can take as much time as needed to be completed. Moreover the network packet will only convey the payload information since it does not need to keep any routing–related information. For the aforementioned reason we call this approach Zero–Overhead NOC.

585 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. TWO POSSIBLE INTRAIP NOCS
This section describes the two experimented IntraIP NOC: the binary de Bruijn NOC with on-line dynamic routing and the Zero-Overhead NOC with off-line static routing.

North I/O port

PE

A. Binary de Bruijn NOC
The choice of the de Bruijn network as the interconnection structure for a flexible multiprocessor LDPC decoder is, above all, based on its appropriateness to support the communication patterns generated by the decoder. As stated previously, flexibility implies supporting various LDPC codes and parameters, and thus various parity-check matrices and induced communication profiles. The structure of the de Bruijn network allows any N-to-N communication profile to be routed efficiently thanks to a reduced latency (maximum latency of log2N without deflection).
1) Binary de Bruijn graph topology: The topology of the binary de Bruijn network is based on the directed de Bruijn graph [21]. It is about a graph made up of N = km nodes where each node is identified by a vector of size m in the base k. Connections between the nodes of the graph are done according to the following rule: a node v = vmvm−1 . . . v1 has an outgoing link to the node u = umum−1 . . . u1 if and only if vi = ui+1, with i ∈ [1, m − 1].
The binary system having been considered in this work. Thus, the nodes of the graph are connected by unidirectional edges according to the rule: a node vmvm−1 . . . v1 has its two output edges connected to the nodes vm−1vm−2 . . . v10 and vm−1vm−2 . . . v11. Figure 2(a) gives a schematic view of the binary de Bruijn topology for 8 nodes.
Moreover, the path diversity offered by the binary de Bruijn network enables to support any permutation and to manage the conflicting packets by deflecting them in a proper way until they reach the destination processor, rather than to store them in queues. In addition, being a direct network, the number of routers is also lowered, in comparison with the multistage networks.
Finally, this topology was proposed as an interconnection structure being appropriate for VLSI implementation [22]. NASA even developed a de Bruijn network for 8192 computing elements being used for a Viterbi decoder within the Galileo space mission to Jupiter [23]. The work of the authors in [24] can be also noted. They propose a generalized version of the de Bruijn graph for the design of a reliable NoC.
2) Routing algorithm and node structure: In order to minimize the overall latency, we opted to use the shortest path routing algorithm [26]. However, conflicts inside the routers can occur when the shortest path router output of the two incoming packets is the same. So in order to avoid packet buffering, the packet which cannot reach the intended output will be deflected to the other router output.
In its initial version, the function computing the shortest path is sequential, which leads to a propagation time of the packets in the router whom can take from one cycle to log2(N ) cycles, N being the number of routers in the network. In order to bring the number of cycles back to one in [26] the algorithm

West I/O port

East I/O port

Control Memory
South I/O port
Fig. 3. Routing node architecture for the ZONOC case. Registers are depicted as black boxes while Control Memory is the block holding the off–line generated control and routing informations.
has been modified by unrolling the “for” loop and another method has been proposed to compute the shortest path output.
The arbitration starts with fixed priority comparison then by round-robin, in case of equality of the priorities. A third arbitration scheme based on the age of the packets has been added [26], when the priorities are identical but before proceeding to the round-robin policy. Within this third type of arbitration, oldest packets are more important to route than youngest.
The architecture of the de Bruijn routers is very simple as can be observed from Figure 2(b). From the point of view of topology, four input/output ports are required, two for the previous/next routers and two for the associated processor, via its network interface. Then, there is an arbiter to perform the selection between the packets coming from the network and those from the processor. As for the logic implied by the routing algorithm it consists mainly of a simple packet arbitration unit and a parallel shortest path computation unit for the selection of the corresponding output port. In Figure 2(c) the internal architecture of this unit is depicted.
Thanks to the packet arbitration at the input of the router, to the age-based arbitration, and to the deflection routing, the phenomenon of deadlocks is avoided in the proposed binary de Bruijn network.
3) Network interfaces: The simple network interface [26] manages the packet flow in the two directions: from processor to the network, and vice versa.
In the processor-to-network direction, the interface is in charge of the packet building and its transmission to the network. Routing information and the write address of destination memory being already available inside the packet coming from the processor, the interface has only to add the Time Stamp field to the packet, which is initialized to 0. Two queues are

586 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE II SYNTHESIS RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OTHER NETWORK TOPOLOGIES FOR LDPC DECODING: 2D-MESH [12] AND MDN [25].

Network
Technology (nm) Frequency (M Hz) Network area (mm2) Network area 130 nm(mm2) Aggregate bandwidth (Gbps)

2D-Mesh [12]
160 500 25 16 400

MDN [25]
180 200 7.92 4.13 19.2

Binary de Bruijn
90 338 0.65 1.35 400

ZONOC
130 300 0.75 0.75 144

used to buffer the packets which cannot immediately enter in the network.
With regard to the other direction, the packets coming from the network are also stored in two queues and a round-robin arbitration is performed if incoming packets are intended to the same destination memory
B. Zero–Overhead NOC
As previously addressed, traditional InterIP NOC dedicates an important portion of the overall available bandwidth to control purpose [10], i.e. routing algorithm, congestion control, etc. Contrariwise to what explored in the previous approach here we present a network architecture where all the routing is pre–computed off–line and stored in distributed control memories. The relevant contribution of this approach is the idea of separate control logic from data logic. As the former is concerned we observed that it is possible to achieve remarkable performance in terms of throughput by the means of this approach having totally removed any non–data information from the packets.
1) 4x4 torus mesh: As a case study we consider a 4x4 torus mesh: this kind of network is a well known and well exploited one [27], especially in general purpose InterIP NOC due to its regular structure, fairly easy layout and high local bandwidth. In the LDPC case we are not going to exploit the “locality” of the network traffic at all since the traffic pattern looks uniformly distributed over the nodes.
The reason behind this choice is twofold: on one hand we were seeking a fairly regular topology well suited for automatic VLSI layout; on the other hand we like to compare this solution not only with the de Bruijn case but also with the whole decoder presented in [12].
2) Router architecture: This approach can not be generally exploited in InterIP NOC since the traffic pattern is generally not known at the design time. Conversely, in our case we used a proprietary tool to simulate the network evolution at a cycle-accurate resolution: hence, at any given time it is possible to completely determine the allocation and the switching of each node [27]. As far as the routing strategy is concerned we employ the so–called O1Turn as described in [28]. The routing logic of each PE is then replaced by a routing memory where we store the pre–computed node information. It is important to stress how this approach retains the same flexibility of a general purpose network since if a

different LDPC code is meant to be decoded, all is needed is to re–load the routing memory of each node. Conversely, this approach enable us to exploit all the available bandwidth without any penalty associated to control signals; additionally it enables the possibility to optimize FIFOs depths around the application since their sizes depend only on routing decisions pre–computed at the design time. In Figure 3 the router architecture is sketched.
VI. RESULTS
To prove the effectiveness of the two presented approaches both networks have been described in VHDL and synthesized on ASIC standard cell technology. For the ZONOC we also developed a dedicated Python tool able to map any LDPC code (specified through the ALIST format [32]) on a generic NxN Torus ASNOC. The tool schedules the message transmission on the network measuring the overall latency, the obtained throughput and FIFOs length. The tool output is then used to produce a VHDL description of the whole network together with the routing memory content of each node. As a case study we considered the biggest LDPC code from IEEE 802.16e, mapping it on a 4x4 torus IntraIP NOC. All messages exchanged between nodes are represented on 6 bits and we suppose that each interconnection link that connects two nodes is composed by the same number of lines.
As far as the NOC is concerned we had that TZnOetNOC = 465 clock cycles using a sending period of one. The generated NOC is able to run at 300 MHz and exhibits an area occupation of 0.75 mm2 on the 130 nm technology node. Of these, 0.44 mm2 are needed by the NOC distributed control memories, 0.23 mm2 are required by FIFOs and the remaining area is occupied by 13 kgates required for control purposes (i.e. crossbar switch, overall control logic, etc . . . ).
For the de Bruijn case we take a similar case study with a network composed by 16 PEs. In this case we had the opportunity to perform the design flow on the 90 nm technology node: the resulting architecture presents a maximum clock frequency of 338 MHz with an overall area occupation of 0.65 mm2.
Then in order to assess the validity of our two solutions we tried to compare them with already published works. Table II presents the results of these comparisons: we identify each network by its topology and we report target technology, the maximum clock frequency in M Hz, the area in mm2 and the estimated aggregate bandwidth in Gbps. It is quite difficult

587 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE III COMPARISONS WITH STATE–OF–ART DECODERS IMPLEMENTATIONS.

CN method Precision Technology Frequency Logic kgates Memory kbits Area mm2 Iterations Net throughput Normalized throughput

NTAR

bit cycle

[12]
ψ 8 bit 160 nm 500 MHz N/A N/A 110 N/A N/A 1200 Mbps
0.2

[29]
3–min 6 bit 65 nm 400 MHz 520 500 1.337 20 48 Mbps 960 Mbps
2.7

[30]
minsum 8 bit
130 nm 83 MHz
420 106 8.29 8 60 Mbps 480 Mbps
11.6

[31]
minsum 6 bit 90 nm
109 MHz 380 100 6.25 20
63 Mbps 1260 Mbps
25.6

ZONOC
minsum 6 bit
130 nm 300 MHz
125 775 3.7 10 56 Mbps 560 Mbps
2.7

to compare frequency and aggregate bandwidth since they are strongly related to the target technology node. One possible thing to do, however, is to re–scale the area occupation to 130 nm (according to [33]) and then compare the four solutions: the resulting data are also shown in Table II. From this first comparison it is possible to devise two important things. The former is that ZONOC results the smaller solution mainly due to FIFO’s optimizations carried out with our off–line routing strategy. A significant benefit of ZONOC is that the network delivers only payload information (i.e. 6 bits per message) instead of 48 as in [12]. The latter important consideration is that de Bruijn network presents the best efficiency ratio between aggregate bandwidth and occupied area.
Regarding scalability, the recursive structure of the 2D-mesh and the de Bruijn networks makes them highly scalable. On the other hand, the MDN network [25] lacks scalability because the network structure is randomly built by a complex algorithm based on a constructive heuristic. This network lacks flexibility because all permutation patterns must be simulated prior to their use in order to determine buffer size at design-time.
Given this encouraging results we designed a complete LDPC decoder using the smallest obtained network topology, i.e. the ZONOC one. In this case we also need to design the PE in order to being able to build up the complete array. As for the PE we obtained an area occupation of 7 equivalent kgates for the logic part, 16 kbits of SRAM to store messages, partitioned on eight independent 2 kbit banks plus 32 kbits to store all the read and write addresses needed during the two phases. Given these numbers it means that it is possible to map on each PE up to 128 degree–8 CN, and 256 degree–4 VN. In the WiMax case the most loaded node implements 75 CN and 153 VN, for a total of 462 messages. In that case we found that T p = 154 clock cycles per iteration.
The whole decoder hence requires 125 equivalent kgates, 2.21 mm2 for the distributed PE memories and 0.67 mm2 for the NOC memories. Finally to assess the validity of this approach it would be interesting to compare synthesis results to recent LDPC decoder implementations: Table III tries to give a sketch of such comparisons. In order to compare our architecture to similar approaches, we select works that

implement IEEE 802.16e LDPC decoder. We also report [12] since, to the best of our knowledge, represents the only existing NOC–based LDPC decoder example.
The first thing that can be noted from this table is how the technology used through all these works is again quite dispersed (as in the case of Table II). This makes the comparison process quite difficult. To overcome this we introduce a complexity assessment metric named Normalized Throughput to Area Ratio (NTAR). NTAR descends directly from [17] with a main significant difference:

N T AR

=

320 · A

f2 · NT · fclk

where f is the technology feature size, N T is the Normalized Throughput, A is the area occupation and fclk is the clock frequency. The term 320 · f 2 represents the minimum gate area, according to [33]. NTAR is measured as decoded bit per cycle; we believe that it can be a meaningful metric to estimate how well an architecture is able to exploit the active area it needs.
As far as the area occupation is concerned it is important to consider both the logic gates contribution as well as the memory requirements. From Table III it is possible to observe how our architecture exhibits a small logic gate count, while a very significant memory footprint. This difference is mainly due to two factors: the storage and the retrieval of extrinsic information exchanged between nodes and the use of memory to control the whole NOC behavior. However one should also consider how the presented results are absolutely not limited to the code we are using. All the other architectures presented have been optimized for a specific set of codes ( [29], [30], [31]) or can only work with some custom ones ( [12])
It is also interesting to analyze throughput results. It should be noted how decoding net throughput of considered cases falls between 48 and 63 Mbps. Our decoder is able to achieve 56 Mbps with 10 decoding iterations: this figure seems important especially if one considers that no code characteristics have been exploited at the architectural level. In Table III we also include an additional throughput figure called Normalized Throughput: these data are extrapolated from the net through-

588 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

put multiplied by the total number of decoding iterations. As far as Normalized Throughput is concerned it is important to note how in [12] the authors claim a throughput of 1.2 Gbps without giving the correspondent iteration count. For this reason we will just use the net throughput claimed as the Normalized Throughput as well.
Finally observing the NTAR results it is important to emphasize how the proposed flexible decoder outperforms the previously published NOC–based one by more than a order of magnitude. This represents a concrete proof of how InterIP ASNOC could be exploited to build a totally flexible, yet efficient, channel decoder.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we showed how NOC paradigm can be employed to build flexible and scalable LDPC decoders with negligible area overhead. We also introduced a novel taxonomy for NOC depending upon their application domain: two different IntraIP NOC have been described and tried as interconnection fabric for a real decoder implementation. The former is based on the binary de Bruijn network with on–line routing while the latter is based on more traditional torus mesh topology but with off–line message routing. Both solutions have been characterized in terms of area occupation and throughput: the obtained results showed how the area overhead associated with the network is limited, making these two solutions very attractive.
Finally we presented the performance of a whole LDPC decoder based on the so–called Zero–Overhead NOC approach.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the European-Commission funded Network of Excellence NEWCOM++ and by WiMAGIC Project under the 7th Framework Programme.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Benini and G. De Micheli, “Networks on chips: a new soc paradigm,” Computer, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 70–78, Jan 2002.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low Density Parity Check Codes,” IRE Trans. Information Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Finite precision implementation of ldpc decoders,” Communications, IEE Proceedings-, vol. 152, no. 6, pp. 1098–1102, Dec. 2005.
[5] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of ldpc codes,” Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[6] A. Hemani, A. Jantsch, S. Kumar, A. Postula, J. Oberg, M. Millberg, and D. Lindqvist, “Network on chip: An architecture for billion transistor era,” in Proc. of the IEEE NorChip Conf, 2000, pp. 166–173.
[7] K. Goossens, J. Dielissen, and A. Radulescu, “Aethereal network on chip: concepts, architectures, and implementations,” Design and Test of Computers, IEEE, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 414–421, Sept.-Oct. 2005.
[8] Y.-L. Jeang, W.-H. Huang, and W.-F. Fang, “A binary tree architecture for application specific network on chip (asnoc) design,” Circuits and Systems, 2004. Proceedings. The 2004 IEEE Asia-Pacific Conference on, vol. 2, pp. 877–880 vol.2, Dec. 2004.
[9] P. Pande, C. Grecu, A. Ivanov, R. Saleh, and G. De Micheli, “Design, synthesis, and test of networks on chips,” Design and Test of Computers, IEEE, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 404–413, Sept.-Oct. 2005.

[10] L. Benini, “Application specific noc design,” Design, Automation and Test in Europe, 2006. DATE ’06. Proceedings, vol. 1, pp. 1–5, March 2006.
[11] J. Delorme and D. Houzet, “A complete 4g radiocommunication application mapping onto a 2d mesh noc architecture,” Circuits and Systems, 2006 IEEE North-East Workshop on, pp. 93–96, June 2006.
[12] T. Theocharides, G. Link, N. Vijaykrisham, and M. J. Irwin, “Implementing LDPC Decoding on Network–On–Chip,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. on VLSI Design (VLSID’05), 2005, pp. 134–137.
[13] F. Quaglio, F. Vacca, C. Castellano, A. Tarable, and G. Masera, “Interconnection framework for high-throughput, flexible LDPC decoders,” in Proceedings of the conference on Design, automation and test in Europe: Designers’ forum. European Design and Automation Association 3001 Leuven, Belgium, Belgium, 2006, pp. 124–129.
[14] A. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks. Prentice Hall PTR, 2002. [15] M. Scarpellino, A. Singh, E. Boutillon, and G. Masera, “Reconfigurable
architecture for ldpc and turbo decoding: A noc case study,” in Proc. of IEEE International Symposium on Spread Spectrum Techniques and Applications, ISSSTA ’08., August 2008, pp. 671–676. [16] A. Tarable, S. Benedetto, and G. Montorsi, “Mapping interleaver laws to parallel turbo and LDPC decoders architectures,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 2002–2009, Sept. 2004. [17] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a Flexible LDPC Decoder,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems, pp. 542– 546, 2007. [18] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sumproduct algorithm,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb 2001. [19] V. Kumar, A. Grama, A. Gupta, and G. Karypis, Introduction to Parallel Computing: Design and Analysis of Algorithms. Redwood City, CA: Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Company, 1994. [20] [Online]. Available: http://www.cs.umn.edu/∼metis [21] N. G. DeBruijn, “A combinatorial problem,” in Proc. Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie v. Wetenschappen, vol. 49, 1946. [22] M. Samatham and D. Pradhan, “The de bruijn multiprocessor network: a versatile parallel processing and sorting network for vlsi,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 567–581, April 1989. [23] R. Rowley and B. Bose, “Fault-tolerant ring embedding in de bruijn networks,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 1480–1486, Dec. 1993. [24] M. Hosseinabady, M. Kakoee, J. Mathew, and D. Pradhan, “Reliable network-on-chip based on generalized de bruijn graph,” in Proc. IEEE International High Level Design Validation and Test Workshop HLVDT 2007, 7–9 Nov. 2007, pp. 3–10. [25] F. Kienle, M. J. Thul, and N. Wehn, “Implementation issues of scalable ldpc decoders,” in Proc. 3rd International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Related Topics, 2003, pp. 291–294. [26] H. Moussa, A. Baghdadi, and M. Jezequel, “Binary de bruijn onchip network for a flexible multiprocessor ldpc decoder,” in Proc. 45th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference DAC 2008, 8–13 June 2008, pp. 429–434. [27] W. Dally and B. Towles, Principles and Practices of Interconnection Networks. San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2003. [28] S. Daeho, A. Akif, L. Won-Taek, R. Nauman, and T. Mithuna, “Nearoptimal worst-case througput routing for two-dimensional mesh networks,” in Proc. of the 32nd International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA05), vol. 1, 2005. [29] T. Brack, M. Alles, T. Lehnigk-Emden, F. Kienle, N. Wehn, N. L’Insalata, F. Rossi, M. Rovini, and L. Fanucci, “Low complexity ldpc code decoders for next generation standards,” in Proc. of Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition, 2007. DATE ’07, April 2007, pp. 1–6. [30] S. Xin-Yu, Z. Cheng-Zhou, L. Cheng-Hung, and W. An-Yeu, “An 8.29 mm2 52 mw multi-mode ldpc decoder design for mobile wimax system in 0.13 μm cmos process,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 672–683, March 2008. [31] L. Chih-Hao, Y. Shau-Wei, C. Chih-Lung, C. Hsie-Chia, L. Chen-Yi, H. Yar-Sun, and J. Shyh-Jye, “An ldpc decoder chip based on selfrouting network for ieee 802.16e applications,” IEEE Journal of SolidState Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 684–694, March 2008. [32] [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/ CodesFiles.html [33] [Online]. Available: http://www.itrs.net

589 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

