S.-W. Kim et al.: Design of a High-throughput LDPC Decoder for DVB-S2 Using Local Memory Banks

1045

Design of a High-throughput LDPC Decoder for DVB-S2 Using Local Memory Banks

Seong-Woon Kim, Chang-Soo Park, and Sun-Young Hwang, Member, IEEE

Abstract — This paper proposes a novel LDPC (Low-Density iteratively [5]. The probabilities can be represented by two Parity Check) decoder architecture to increase throughput for methods: one represented by real probability and the other

DVB-S2, a second generation standard of ETSI (European represented by LLR (Log Likelihood Ratio). While decoding,

Telecommunications Standards Institute) for European satellite digital video broadcasting system, which is employed in European digital TVs. The proposed architecture clusters nodes of a Tanner graph into node groups utilizing the properties of IRA (Irregular Repeat-Accumulate) LDPC codes. Functional modules, which perform calculations for node groups, read and store messages at predetermined local memory banks. The memory banks are designed to avoid memory conflicts by differentiating read and store timings. Hence, throughput of the proposed architecture can be increased. Experimental results show that the throughput of the proposed architecture is increased by 104% ~ 479%, when compared to previous architectures1.

messages represented by the former are multiplied with one another, whereas messages represented by the latter are added to one another. Hence, the latter is more efficient [6]. The encoding complexity of LDPC codes is generally very high [7]. DVB-S2 LDPC codes have an IRA structure to reduce the encoding complexity [8]. IRA-LDPC codes have linear encoding complexity and are known that there is little BER (Bit Error Rate) performance loss [9].
DVB-S2 standard provides various services including HDTV and full duplex data communication [1]. As the services become more diverse and the required data size larger, the time to process received data increases. Therefore, the throughput of

Index Terms — LDPC codes, DVB-S2, European satellite digital TV, memory bank, Tanner graph.

FEC decoder must be sufficiently high to ensure proper data processing. In addition, high throughput enables the FEC decoder to consume less power by applying Dynamic Voltage

I. INTRODUCTION

Scaling. In this paper, we propose a novel DVB-S2 LDPC

DVB-S2 is an enhanced specification for satellite broad-band applications to replace the DVB-S standard, which is the original standard for satellite broadcasting, and ratified by ETSI [1], [2]. DVB-S2 has been gradually replacing DVB-S for global satellite digital TVs, and many HDTV channels are served by DVB-S2 standard in Europe and Japan. To maximize channel efficiency, DVB-S2 has adopted a powerful FEC (Forward Error Correcting) scheme based on serial concatenation of BCH (Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem) codes and LDPC codes. The FEC scheme, combined with high order modulations, such as 32APSK (Amplitude and Phase-Shift Keying), is able to provide capacity gain of about 30% over the existing DVB-S standard [2]. LDPC codes are linear block

decoder architecture which produces higher throughput than existing architectures. The proposed architecture clusters 360 bitnodes and checknodes into a bitnode group and a checknode group, respectively, utilizing the properties of matrix H. The node groups are implemented as functional modules, which process messages containing probabilities. The memory architecture to store these messages is designed to differentiate read and store timings, thus avoiding memory conflicts.
The next section introduces DVB-S2 LDPC codes and existing decoder architectures. In Section III, we describe the proposed architecture utilizing the properties of matrix H. Experimental results are shown in Section IV, and final conclusions are presented in Section V.

codes proposed by Gallager in 1963 [3], and are defined by sparse parity check matrix (matrix H) and represented by

II. PROCEDURE FOR PAPER SUBMISSION

Tanner graph [4]. Tanner graph consists of bitnodes, In this section, DVB-S2 LDPC codes and existing decoder

checknodes, and edges between these two types of nodes. architectures for implementing the codes are introduced.

Bitnodes and checknodes are mapped to columns and rows of matrix H, respectively. The bitnodes and checknodes corresponding to columns and rows of nonzero elements in matrix H are connected by edges. One of the decoding algorithms for LDPC codes is the message passing algorithm, which makes bitnodes contain reliable probabilities by exchanging the probabilities between bitnodes and checknodes

A. DVB-S2 LDPC Codes
DVB-S2 uses the IRA-LDPC codes, which are known to have linear encoding complexity. DVB-S2 LDPC encoder generates codewords with coderate-k/n by concatenating information bits i = (i0, i1, ..., ik-1) and parity bits p = (p0, p1, ..., pn-k-1) [1]. Eleven different coderates are specified which range from 1/4 to 9/10, and there is an encoding table for each

coderate in the standard. The encoder initializes all parity bits

1 This research work has been supported by Nano IP/SoC Promotion Group of Seoul R&BD Program in 2009.
The authors are with the Department of Electronics Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul, 121-742, Korea (e-mail: hwang@sogang.ac.kr).

to zero, and determines the parity bits by performing the operation of (1) referring to information bits and the values in the encoding table.

Contributed Paper

Manuscript received May 28, 2009

0098 3063/09/$20.00 © 2009 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:04:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1046

IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, Vol. 55, No. 3, AUGUST 2009

p j = p j ⊕ im

(1)

m = 0,1," , k − 1

j = {x + q(m mod 360)} mod (n − k )

Here, q is a coderate-dependent parameter, n and k are lengths of the codeword and the information bits, respectively. Symbol x denotes the address of the parity bit accumulator in (m div 360)-th row of the encoding table. Matrix H of DVBS2 LDPC codes is shown in Fig. 1 [8], and the Tanner graph obtained from matrix H is depicted at Fig. 2. Matrix H of Fig. 1 is divided into matrix A and matrix B. Parity check equations can be obtained by multiplying matrix A with information bits and matrix B with parity bits. Bitnodes of Fig. 2 are also divided into two classes: information bitnodes and parity bitnodes. The information bitnodes correspond to information bits of the codeword and are connected to checknodes in an irregular fashion. The parity bitnodes correspond to parity bits of the codeword and are connected to checknodes in a regular zigzag pattern. In Fig. 2, the edges of the dashed line represent irregular connections and the edges of the solid line represent the regular zigzag connections.

Fig. 1. Matrix H of DVB-S2 LDPC codes.

decoder architecture initiates the same number of functional modules as the number of bitnodes and checknodes in the Tanner graph. Throughput of the architecture can be high, but the area of the architecture is large due to multiplicity of functional modules [12]. For DVB-S2, the parallel decoder architecture cannot be realized due to its huge area required and the serial decoder architecture cannot be employed due to its low throughput. Hence, the partially parallel decoder architecture is the only feasible architecture [13].
A partially parallel LDPC decoder architecture with 360 functional modules for DVB-S2 was proposed by F. Kienle [13]. Here, edges of the Tanner graph in the proposed architecture are divided into two groups: edges between information bitnodes and checknodes, and edges between parity bitnodes and checknodes. Connectivity of 360 edges between information bitnodes and checknodes are determined by only one value of the encoding table. These edges are implemented as memory banks, and messages stored in the memory banks are processed simultaneously by 360 functional modules. Each functional module receives a message per each clock cycle and produces at most one calculated message per each clock cycle. Throughput of the architecture is 255 Mbps.
A DVB-S2 LDPC decoder architecture which uses a restructured version of matrix H was proposed by J. Dielissen [14]. The decoder architecture adopts UMP-BP (Uniformly Most Powerful – Belief Propagation) algorithm and staggered decoding scheme. BER performance of the UMP-BP algorithm is not far below that of the message passing algorithm and the hardware complexity for implementing this algorithm is relatively low due to the absence of LUT (Lookup Table). In the staggered decoding scheme, messages can be overwritten immediately after they are read. Thus, the memory requirement of this architecture can be reduced by half. Con-sequently, the architecture proposed by J. Dielissen can reduce the memory usage by half over the architecture proposed by F. Kienle, but has a relatively low throughput level of 90 Mbps.

Fig. 2. Tanner graph of DVB-S2 LDPC codes.
B. Existing Decoder Architectures for DVB-S2 LDPC Code
Architectures of LDPC decoder are, in general, classified into serial, parallel, and partially parallel decoder architectures [10]. The serial decoder architecture consists of a few functional modules. Area of the architecture may be minimal but throughput of the architecture is limited due to the restricted number of functional modules [11]. The parallel

III. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
In this section, key features of the proposed architecture are introduced.

A. Clustered Nodes

The properties of matrix H of DVB-S2 LDPC codes can be expressed by (2) and (3).

α r + q×i,(c+i) mod 360+360×(c mod 360) = α r ,c

(2)

i = 0,1," , 359 r = 0,1," , q − 1

c = 0,1," , k − 1

β(r +i) mod (n−k ),(c+i) mod (n−k ) = β r,c

(3)

r = 0,1

c=0 i = 0, 1, " , n − k

β 0,0 = β1,0 = 1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:04:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

S.-W. Kim et al.: Design of a High-throughput LDPC Decoder for DVB-S2 Using Local Memory Banks

1047

Here, n and k are lengths of the codeword and the information bits, respectively, while α and β are elements of matrix A and matrix B, respectively. Symbol q is a coderatedependent parameter in the standard. Bitnodes and checknodes of the Tanner graph can be clustered utilizing the properties of matrix H described in (2) and (3). Note that formula αrc = 1 implies that there is an edge between the c-th information bitnode and the r-th checknode. Equation (2) shows that, for r and c with αrc = 1, each of consecutive 360 information bitnodes beginning with the (360(c div 360))-th information bitnode is connected to each of the q-th checknodes beginning with the r-th checknode. There are 360 edges between the information bitnodes and the checknodes, and the edges can be expressed in terms of r and (360(c div 360)). The set of the 360 edges can be regarded as an edge between an information bitnode group and a checknode group. Then, the information bitnode group consists of 360 consecutive information bitnodes from the (360(c div 360))-th information bitnode, and the checknode group consists of all q-th checknodes from the r-th checknode. Therefore, utilizing (2), 360 information bitnodes and checknodes are clustered into an information bitnode group and a checknode group, respectively. In the same manner, Equation (3) shows that all q-th parity bitnodes and checknodes beginning with the first q parity bitnodes and checknodes can be clustered into q parity bitnode groups and q checknode groups, respectively. An example of a clustered Tanner graph with coderate-1/2 and q = 90 is shown in Fig. 3.
Each node group is implemented as a functional module. DVB-S2 LDPC codes are irregular codes, and the degrees of bitnodes are 8, 3 or 2 with coderate-1/2. Fig. 4 shows a BFM (Bitnode Functional Module) which performs calculations of the 360 bitnodes clustered into a bitnode group sequentially.

checknode group consisting of 360 checknodes is implemented as a CFM. CFMs calculate messages to be sent to BFMs sequentially. 2's complement representation of messages at input ports of CFMs is converted to signed magnitude representation. The conversion causes area reduction of CFMs due to reduction of LUT entries and the word length of adder's input. Components in CFMs are pipelined, and 365 clock cycles are also required to complete the calculation.
B. Memory Architecture
Messages are exchanged between BFMs and CFMs via memories. In this paper, we propose a shared local memory architecture which consists of the same number of memory banks as edges of the clustered Tanner graph. The shared local memory architecture is designed to enable read and store messages at a clock cycle by reading at the rising edge and storing at the falling edge. The read and store timings are

Fig. 4. Bitnode functional module.

Fig. 3. Example of a clustered Tanner graph.

It calculates messages to be sent to CFMs (Checknode Functional Modules) using 5-stage pipelined 16 adders, and determines the transmitted symbol. A BFM needs 365 clock cycles to complete entire calculations of a bitnode group including pipelining latency. A checknode functional module, whose degree is 7 with coderate-1/2, is shown in Fig. 5. A

Fig. 5. Checknode functional module.
synchronized to be different, thus avoiding memory conflicts. Memory banks play the role of local memories for each functional module. Thus, memory banks provide all of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:04:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1048
required messages for functional modules at each clock cycle simultaneously.
In the proposed architecture, shared local memory consists of the same number of memory banks as the edges of the clustered Tanner graph, and 360 messages are stored at each memory bank. The number of messages that functional modules require simultaneously is the same as the degree of consisting nodes. Functional modules can read all of the required messages simultaneously, since functional modules are directly connected to the same number of memory banks as the required messages and a message per bank is provided to functional modules. Functional modules read messages from the directly connected memory banks, calculate messages to be sent and send the calculated messages to other types of functional modules connected by edges. Functional modules, which should receive the messages, are defined in matrix H. Shuffling network derives routing information from matrix H and keeps the information, and then guides messages to be stored at memory banks connected to functional modules where the messages arrive.
An iteration of the decoding procedure consists of bit-tocheck half iteration and check-to-bit half iteration. In the proposed architecture, messages that are already read at half iteration are not needed anymore during the half iteration. Therefore, new messages for the next half iteration are overwritten in the location. Fig. 6 describes the memory access procedure of the proposed architecture with coderate1/2. During the bit-to-check half iteration, all BFMs read messages at the rising edge of each clock cycle, calculate messages to be sent to CFMs and send the calculated messages to CFMs connected by edges via the shuffling network. The sent messages are stored at memory banks connected to the CFMs at the falling edge of each clock cycle. Upon repeating the procedure for 365 times, the bitto-check half iteration is over and memory banks are full of messages for the check-to-bit half iteration. During the check-to-bit half iteration, the same procedure is performed in reverse.

IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, Vol. 55, No. 3, AUGUST 2009
(a)
(b) Fig. 6. Memory access procedure. (a) Bit-to-check half iteration, (b) Check-to-bit iteration.

C. Structure of Proposed Architecture
Fig. 7 depicts the block diagram of the proposed architecture. Solid lines and dashed lines in Fig. 7 show flows of messages and control signals, respectively. During the bit-to-check half iteration, BFMs are active, CFMs are blocked, and memory banks perform the role of local memories for BFMs. During the check-to-bit half iteration, CFMs are active, BFMs are blocked, and memory banks function as local memories for CFMs. Functional modules read messages from their local memories, calculate messages to be sent, and let the calculated messages stored at predefined memory banks via the shuffling network at each clock cycle. Upon performing the procedure for 365 cycles, the half iteration is completed and the other half iteration begins.

Fig. 7. Block diagram of the proposed architecture.
IV. Experimental Results The proposed architecture was synthesized by a 90 nm technology using a commercial synthesizer. The area of the proposed architecture is partitioned into three parts of memory, functional module and shuffling network. Throughput of the decoder can be obtained by performing the operation of (4).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:04:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

S.-W. Kim et al.: Design of a High-throughput LDPC Decoder for DVB-S2 Using Local Memory Banks

1049

T=

Ib N dec

f clock

(4)

Ib is length of information bits, Ndec is the number of clock cycles to decode a frame of LDPC codes, and fclock is the clock frequency. During initialization of decoding procedure, a clock cycle to initiate memory addresses and 360 clock cycles to store channel LLRs are needed. After starting to iterate, it takes 365 clock cycles to complete calculation considering pipelining latency and an additional clock cycle to reset message memory addresses for both of bit-to-check half iteration and check-to-bit half iteration. The maximum iteration of the proposed architecture is set to 25 after exhaustive computer simulation and the operating frequency is 300 MHz. Hence, throughput of the proposed architecture becomes 520 Mbps.
Table I presents the comparison between the proposed architecture and the existing architectures proposed by F. Kienle and J. Dielissen in terms of area and throughput. The proposed architecture in this paper and the architecture proposed by J. Dielissen were synthesized by a 90 nm technology, while the architecture proposed by F. Kienle was synthesized by a 0.13 um technology and scaled to a 90 nm technology for comparison purpose [14]. The memory architecture in the proposed architecture is designed to avoid memory conflicts and 360 nodes share a functional module. As a result, throughput of the architecture has been increased significantly with a slight area increase. Throughput of the proposed architecture increases by 104% and 479% whereas the area of the proposed architecture increases by only 9% and 195%, when compared to those of architectures proposed by F. Kienle and J. Dielissen, respectively.

TABLE I COMPARISON OF AREA AND THROUGHPUT

Architectures
Experimental results

Kienle’s Dielissen’s

architecture architecture

[13]

[14]

Proposed architecture

Input memory

1.0

1.8

1.59

Message memory

4.5

1.2

5.57

Memory controller

0.0

0.1

1.24

Area (mm2)

Functional module

5.4

0.8

3.79

Controller

0.1

0.1

0.00

Shuffling network

0.3

0.2

0.18

Total area

11.34 -

4.2

12.37

-

(+9% / +195%)

Throughput (Mbps)

255

-

90

520

-

(+104% / +479%)

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper we propose a novel LDPC decoder architecture for DVB-S2 with an IRA structure. Key features of the architecture are clustered node groups and the shared local memory. The architecture enables 360 nodes to share a functional module through node clustering, while the shared memory architecture lets memory conflicts be avoided and the functional modules read messages sequentially. These features result in high throughput with a relatively small area increase. Experimental results of the proposed architecture show that the throughput increases by 104% and 479% over those of architectures proposed by F. Kienle and J. Dielissen, respectively. For a further study, the proposed decoder architecture should be expanded for other applications that make use of LDPC codes of IRA structures
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research work has been supported by Nano IP/SoC Promotion Group of Seoul R&BD Program in 2009.
REFERENCES
[1] ETSI, “Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and other Broadband Satellite Applications,” EN 302 307, V1. 1. 1, Jun. 2004.
[2] A. Morello and V. Mignone, "DVB-S2: The Second Generation Standard for Satellite Broad-Band Services," Proceeding of the IEEE, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 210-227, Jan. 2006.
[3] R. Gallager, "Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," IRE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[4] R. Tanner, "A Recursive Approach to Low Complexity Codes," IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
[5] D. MacKay, "Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices," IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399431, Mar. 1999.
[6] F. Kschischang and B. Frey, "Iterative Decoding of Compound Codes by Probability Propagation in Graphical Models," IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219-230, Feb. 1998.
[7] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, "Efficient Encoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638-656, Feb. 2001.
[8] M. Gomes, G. Falcao, V. Silva, V. Ferreira, A. Sengo, and M. Falcao, "Flexible Parallel Architecture for DVB-S2 LDPC Decoders," in Proc. GLOBECOM, Washington DC, pp. 3265-3269, Nov. 2007.
[9] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, "Irregular Repeat-Accumulate Codes," in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Brest, France, pp. 1-8, Sept. 2000.
[10] E. Yeo and V. Anantharam, "Iterative Decoder Architectures," IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 132-140, Aug. 2003.
[11] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, "High Throughput Low-Density Parity-Check Decoder Architectures," in Proc. GLOBECOM, San Antonio, TX, pp. 3019-3024, Nov. 2001.
[12] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, "A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, Rate-1/2 Low-Density Parity-Check Code Decoder," IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404-412, Mar. 2002.
[13] F. Kienle, T. Brack, and N. Wehn, "A Synthesizable IP Core for DVBS2 LDPC Code Decoding," in Proc. DATE, Munich, Germany, vol. 3, pp. 100-105, Mar. 2005.
[14] J. Dielissen, A. Hekstra, and V. Berg, "Low Cost LDPC Decoder for DVB-S2," in Proc. DATE, Munich, Germany, vol. 2, pp. 1-6, Mar. 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:04:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1050

IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, Vol. 55, No. 3, AUGUST 2009

Seong-Woon Kim received the B. S. degree in electronic engineering from Sogang University, Seoul, Korea, in 2006. He is currently working towards the M. S. degree in electronic engineering at Sogang University. His current research interests include error correcting code decoder for mobile and low power VLSI design.
Chang-Soo Park received the B. S. degree in electronic engineering in 2002, the M. S. degree in 2004 from Sogang University, Seoul, Korea. He is currently working towards the Ph. D. degree in electronic engineering at Sogang University. His current research interest is in SoC design and embedded system design.

Sun-Young Hwang (M’86) received the B.S degree in electronic engineering in Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 1976, the M. S degree from Korea Advanced Institute of Science in 1978 and the Ph. D. degree in electrical engineering from Stanford University, California, U. S. A., in 1986. Since 1986, he has been with the Center for Integrated Systems at Stanford University, working on design of a high-level synthesis and simulation system. In 1986 and 1987, he held a consulting position at Palo Alto Research Center of Fairchild Semiconductor Corporation. In 1989, he joined the Department of Electronic Engineering at Sogang University, where he is now a professor. His current research interests include hardware/software co-design, DSP/VLSI systems design, and embedded system design.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:04:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

