ICROS-SICE International Joint Conference 2009 August 18-21, 2009, Fukuoka International Congress Center, Japan
Development of a High Throughput LDPC Codec with 1Gb/s and OFDM Transmission System Utilizing MBD Takashi Maehata
Sumitomo Electric Industries, Japan (Tel : +81-6-6466-6530; E-mail: maehata-takashi@sei.co.jp)
Abstract: Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, which are among the most powerful error correcting codes, can achieve performance close to the Shannon limit. It is difficult to evaluate the performance of LDPC codes by software simulation only, because it takes much time and labor. To solve this problem, we have developed the䎃 design environment for designing and evaluating LDPC codes on hardware.
Keywords: Model-Based Development, MBD, HILS, LDPC, Codec, FPGA, HDL Code Generation.

1. INTRODUCTION
High speed and high quality are always demanded of communication systems. As one of the approaches for achieving these requirements, the development of error correcting codes that correct more errors is attracting attention. Low-density parity-check codes (LDPC codes) are known as powerful codes that are able to perform close to the Shannon limit. Therefore several standards have decided to adopt LDPC codes, and implementation is taking place gradually.
At the same time, in the data storage field, the advent of high-definition displays and high-definition television broadcasting has stimulated technological developments such as Blu-ray Discs and holographic memories that can record large volumes of data. High-density recording techniques are essential to achieving a large storage capacity. When reading from the recording media, the strength of magnetic field or reflected light can vary and can be weak and so the data read is likely to be susceptible to errors. Consequently, in order to achieve high-density recording that maintains the same data quality, still stronger error correcting codes are needed. This situation is similar to that in a communication system, in which communication must be maintained with the same quality with increased higher speed data rate. LDPC codes are an area of active research in advanced communication systems, advanced data storage systems, and similar systems.
2. DESIGN ENVIRONMENT
Typically applications require the quality of better than 10-12 bit error rates. In the case of developing a new LDPC code, we need to verify that the number of errors is less than 10 bits among 1013 bits in order to confirm that a new code has better performance than this specification. It is not realistic to carry out this verification only by software because of the amount of time software-only-based verification will take. In addition, there is a threat that the ability for error

correction will deteriorate due implementation errors such as fixed-point settings when we introduce HILS to speed up the verification. Therefore we have developed design environment by model-based development (MBD) that hardware cooperated with software as one method to solve these problems.
We show this environment in Fig.1 and introduce the functionality by each step.
Fig. 1 Design Environment
As the first step, the LDPC code design and codec algorithm design are carried out. The second step is to visualize the signal processing algorithms and implement the hardware models. Here, we developed the model generator that deals with all parts of LDPC codec automatically after entering parameters to optimize models. In the third step, HILS is carried out using a development tool from the FPGA vender. HDL code is generated automatically and used to evaluate the ability of error correction and a circuit scale, and the throughput of the codec. The fourth step shown in Fig.2 implements the transmission channel close to an actual channel with complicated frequency characteristics, white noise source on FPGA and carries out real-time simulation in a fully digital simulation environment. The simulation here is aimed at collecting the error

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on- 1Ju8n7e52-4,2026 at 06:59:59 UTC from IEEE XpPloRr0e.00R2e/s0tri9c/ti0on0s0a0p-p1l8y.75 ¥400 © 2009 SICE

event in a bit error rate with 10-12. Because the throughput of design environment is 1Gb/s, it is an event to occur at frequency of one bit error in 15 minutes. As the real-time simulation executes, the input and output data of codec and noise are recorded. we employ a model of second step based on this log and can reproduce the situation when the error occurs. That is why we can determine the root cause of the event by comparing the results of second step and the log. Using the work flow mentioned above, we are able to tell an implementation error from potential limitation of the algorithm so we can define the next course of actions.
Fig. 2 Configuration of the Fourth Step Finally we are going to introduce codec algorithm, an actual machine and the automatic generation tool in our presentation.
5. SUMMARY
We showed that with our design environment we could distinguish an implementation error from a limit of the potential ability of the algorithm. By this environment, highly precise verification with 10-12 order is possible in real time.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on- 1Ju8n7e62-4,2026 at 06:59:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

