876

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, AUGUST 2009

Capacity-Approaching Protograph Codes
Dariush Divsalar, Sam Dolinar, Christopher R. Jones, Kenneth Andrews

Abstract—This paper discusses construction of protographbased low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Emphasis is placed on protograph ensembles whose typical minimum distance grows linearly with block size. Asymptotic performance analysis for both weight enumeration and iterative decoding threshold determination is provided and applied to a series of code constructions. Construction techniques that yield both low thresholds and linear minimum distance growth are introduced by way of example throughout. The paper also examines implementation strategies for high throughput decoding derived from first principles of belief propagation on bipartite graphs.

P

h

C

Fig. 1. Copy and permute operation for a protograph to generate larger graphs.

Index Terms—Protograph codes, LDPC codes, weight enumeration, iterative decoding threshold, rate-compatible codes, decoder Implementation.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were proposed by Gallager [1] in 1962. After introduction of turbo codes by Berrou et al [2] in 1993, researchers revisited LDPC codes, and extended the work of Gallager using the code graphs introduced by Tanner [3] in 1981. After 1993 there have been many contributions to the design and analysis of LDPC codes; see for example [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], and references therein. A large volume of work has been conducted on the design of LDPC codes with imposed substructures, starting with the introduction of multi-edge-type codes in [10] and [11]. One such structured code design is based on protographs. A protograph [12], or projected graph [13], is a Tanner graph with a relatively small number of nodes. A “copy-and-permute” operation [12] can be applied to the protograph to obtain larger derived graphs of various sizes. When the protograph is replicated N times, each protograph edge becomes a bundle of N edges, connecting N variable nodes to N check nodes. The copies of the protograph are interconnected by permuting these variable-to-check pairings within each bundle. The derived graph is the graph of a code N times as large as the code corresponding to the protograph, with the same rate and the same distribution of variable and check node degrees. LDPC codes with protograph structure are a subclass of multi-edge-type LDPC codes. When the permutations applied to each protograph edge are circulants, the resulting code is particularly amenable to high speed decoding.
As a simple example, we consider the protograph shown in Fig. 1. This graph consists of 3 variable nodes and 2 check nodes, connected by 5 edges. In this example we have 5 edge types, i.e., each edge in the base protograph represents an edge type.
Manuscript received 1 October 2008; revised 18 March 2009. The authors are with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91109-8099 (e-mail: {divsalar,sdolinar,crjones,andrews}@jpl.nasa.gov). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSAC.2009.090806.

π

permutation

(interleaver)

D

Repeat 3

accumulator

(a)

Repeat 3 accumulator (b)

Fig. 2. (a) A rate-1/3 RA code with repetition 3, and (b) its corresponding protograph.

As another example for protograph-based LDPC codes, we consider the Repeat-Accumulate (RA) code of rate Rc = 1/3 depicted in Fig. 2(a). For this code the maximum erasure probability threshold with iterative decoding is pit = 0.6173, where the capacity threshold pcap = 1 − Rc = 0.6667. This code has a protograph representation shown in Fig. 2(b), as long as the interleaver π is chosen to be decomposable into permutations along each edge of the protograph. The iterative decoding threshold is unchanged despite the additional constraint imposed by the protograph. The protograph consists of 4 variable nodes and 3 check nodes, connected by 9 edges. Three variable nodes are connected to the channel (transmitted nodes) and are shown as dark filled circles. One variable node is not connected to the channel (i.e., it is punctured) and is depicted by a blank circle. The three check nodes are depicted by circles with a plus sign inside.
Repeat-Accumulate (RA) [14], Irregular RepeatAccumulate (IRA) [15], and Accumulate-Repeat-Accumulate (ARA) [16] codes, with suitable definitions of their interleavers, all have simple protograph representations. These codes provide capacity-approaching iterative decoding thresholds but have sublinear asymptotic minimum distance growth (to be defined shortly).
This paper discusses protograph codes that benefit from both capacity-approaching thresholds and linear minimum distance growth. In the sections that follow we describe asymptotic weight enumerator computation for a given protograph as well as iterative decoding threshold determination via reciprocal channel approximation. We then provide a series of constructions in which each benefits from incremental building blocks presented as the paper unfolds. The paper concludes with a discussion of practical methods for manipulation of

0733-8716/09/$25.00 c 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIVSALAR et al.: CAPACITY-APPROACHING PROTOGRAPH CODES

877

belief propagation that we have found useful in protograph code decoding.
II. PROTOGRAPH DESIGN CRITERIA

∑ rse = schan +

sse'

v e'∈ev \e

rre = R(rse )

Our aim is to design rate-compatible protograph-based LDPC codes that simultaneously achieve low iterative decoding thresholds and linear minimum distance growth. In the next two subsections, we give methods to compute iterative decoding thresholds and asymptotic ensemble weight enumerators for protograph-based LDPC codes. The asymptotic ensemble weight enumerators are used to determine whether the code ensemble achieves linear minimum distance growth.

e
sse = R(rse )

c

∑ rse =

rre'

e'∈ec \ e

Fig. 3. The reciprocal channel approximation in use on a protograph.

A. Computation of iterative decoding thresholds

at variable nodes, and the reciprocal parameter r is addi-

For a given channel such as the binary erasure channel (BEC) or the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BIAWGN) channel, the ensemble of LDPC codes built from a particular protograph can be characterized by an asymptotic iterative decoding threshold. This threshold is the minimum channel quality that supports reliable iterative decoding of asymptotically large codes drawn from this ensemble.

tive at check nodes. Chung’s self-inverting reciprocal energy function, R (x) = C−1 (1 − C (x)), transforms between the parameters s and r, namely r = R(s) and s = R(r).
To apply the RCA technique to a protograph we first identify all transmitted variable nodes and select a target channel
SNR schan. As shown in Fig. 3 messages s e are passed along edges leaving variable nodes. Initially, s e = schan

Iterative decoding thresholds for protograph codes can be computed exactly for the BEC and approximately for the BIAWGN channel by message passing on the protograph. Exact density evolution for the case of a BEC is accomplished by passing only one real-valued parameter around the graph. Messages can be either erasure probabilities or equivalently their complements, non-erasure probabilities. At variable nodes, outgoing erasure probabilities are computed as products of incoming erasure probabilities. At check nodes, outgoing non-

from transmitted nodes and s e = 0 from punctured nodes. The transformation R( s e) is applied and an extrinsic return
message, r e, is determined by computing the sum of all incoming messages save the one along edge e. Transformation
R(·) is then reapplied to produce se. The process continues and a threshold is determined by the smallest value of schan for which unbounded growth of all messages s e can be achieved.

erasure probabilities are products of incoming non-erasure probabilities. Equivalently, if s represents the negative of the B. Asymptotic ensemble weight enumerators

logarithm of an erasure probability message and r represents Methods to compute the asymptotic ensemble weight enu-

the negative of the logarithm of a non-erasure probability merators for LDPC codes with protograph structure were

message, then s is additive at variable nodes, r is additive originally presented in [18] and [19]. A review of these

at check nodes, and s and r are reciprocal in the sense that techniques is presented here. These methods have also been e−s + e−r = 1. Since C(x) = 1 − e−x is the capacity of a extended to protograph-based generalized LDPC codes [20]. BEC with erasure probability e−x, this reciprocity condition Related computational tools for unstructured irregular LDPC

can also be written as C(s)+C(r) = 1. The iterative decoding ensembles have appeared in [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26],

threshold is the smallest message value s input from the [27], [28], [29].

channel, or equivalently the largest channel erasure probability = e−s, for which unbounded growth of all messages can be
achieved throughout the protograph.
Iterative decoding thresholds for the BI-AWGN channel

We start by defining the normalized logarithmic asymptotic

weight distribution of a general code ensemble as r(δ) =

lim supn→∞ rn(δ), where rn(δ)

=

ln(Anδ n

)

,

w

=

nδ

are

the possible Hamming weights (0 ≤ w ≤ n) for a code

can be obtained via a fast and accurate approximation to of length n from this ensemble, and Aw is the ensemble density evolution originally proposed by Chung et al. in [17]. weight enumerator for codes of this length and rate Rc. We Less than 0.005 dB deviations from true density evolution note that r(δ) can be used to obtain an upper bound on

thresholds have been observed by the application of this the minimum Eb/N0 threshold when the code ensemble is approximation to protograph codes over BI-AWGN channels. used on an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel

Motivated by the earlier application to the BEC, the reciprocal with maximum likelihood decoding. This bound has been

channel approximation (RCA) for the BI-AWGN channel derived in [30], and it is the tightest closed-form threshold

makes use of a single real-valued parameter, in this case signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) s, as a stand-in for full density evolution. For every value of s, a reciprocal of SNR, r, is defined such that C(s) + C(r) = 1, where C(x) denotes the capacity of the BI-AWGN channel with SNR x. In the

on minimum Eb/N0. It can be written as

Eb N0

min

≤

1 Rc

max(1
δ

−

e−2r(δ))

1

− 2δ

δ

(1)

The normalized weight distribution r(δ) can also be used

reciprocal channel approximation, the parameter s is additive to determine whether or not the minimum distance of typical

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

878

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, AUGUST 2009

codes in the ensemble increases linearly with code length n. Starting from r(0) = 0, the function r(δ) may or may not go

Aci wi

w1

Ac (w ',l )

negative for δ > 0. If r(δ) initially goes negative before returning to (and crossing) zero at δ = δmin > 0, this first zero crossing at δmin is called the typical minimum distance ratio. In this case, consider Pr(0 < w ≤ nδmin) ≤ 0<δ<δmin enrn(δ). The contribution of codewords with weights w < nδmin to this sum becomes exponentially small with n because rn(δ) < 0 for all δ < δmin. Hence, the normalized minimum distance is almost surely greater than δmin − for any > 0. In other words,
with high probability the minimum distance of most codes in

w1
wi w2
wqic

ci w '

wq

l

wq1
w ''

Dummy
l Degree-2
Variable

Node

wqic

Ac (w",l )

the ensemble increases linearly with n with proportionality constant δmin.
The foregoing analysis applies to general code ensembles. Now we turn to computing the ensemble weight enumerator for an LDPC code ensemble built from a protograph. Let the protograph have nc check nodes and nv = nt + nu variable nodes, where nt of the variable nodes are transmitted and nu are not. Suppose that this protograph is lifted (copied

Fig. 4. A degree-qic check and its equivalent representation.

where

ac(δi)

=

lim supN→∞

ln AN c δi N

is a normalized loga-

rithmic asymptotic weight distribution for check node ci with

normalized partial weight vector δi, and H(x) = −x ln x −

(1 − x) ln(1 − x) is the binary entropy function. Finally, the

normalized logarithmic asymptotic weight distribution r(δ) for

the protograph code ensemble is evaluated as

and permuted) by a factor of N to form a code of length n = N nt. For each variable node vj, j = 1, . . . , nv, in the

ntr(δ) = max r(δ) = max rt(δt)

(5)

δ:|δt |=nt δ

δt :|δt |=nt δ

protograph, let qjv denote its degree and let wj = N δj denote where rt(δt) for any subvector δt of normalized partial the partial Hamming weight (0 ≤ wj ≤ N ) associated with the weights of the transmitted variable nodes is obtained by

N copies of vj. Let w = N δ denote the vector of all such partial weights, w = (w1, . . . , wnv ) and δ = (δ1, . . . , δnv ).
Let wt = N δt denote the subvector of nt partial weights that correspond to the protograph’s transmitted variable nodes only. Finally, for each check node ci, i = 1, . . . , nc, in the protograph, let qic denote its degree and let wi = N δi denote the subvector of qic partial Hamming weights corresponding to the qic variable nodes connected to ci.
The weight enumerator Aw for this protograph code en-

an unconstrained maximization of r(δ) over the remaining components of δ corresponding to non-transmitted variable
nodes. Note that the code ensemble’s normalized logarithmic asymptotic weight distribution r(δ) and the scalar normalized total codeword weight δ = w/n appearing as its argument are both normalized by the codeword length n = N nt, whereas the corresponding vector-based quantities r(δ) and δ are normalized by the lifting factor N . This accounts for the factors of nt on the left side of (5) and in the maximization condition on the right side of (5).

semble can be obtained [19] by summing contributions from

partial weight vectors w that yield total codeword weight w:

⎡

⎤

Aw =
w:|wt|=w

nc
⎣ Awc i
i=1

nv

N

qjv −1
⎦

j=1 wj

(2)

At a degree-3 check node in the protograph, any triplet of normalized partial weights ( 1, 2, 3) satisfying the check constraint must necessarily satisfy the condition
max{ 1, 2, 3} ≤ ( 1+ 2+ 3)/2 = σ ≤ 1, because otherwise one or more of the N copies of that check node would have

where | · | represents L1 norm, or sum of components in this case since the partial weights are nonnegative. Each term in this sum is a product of contributions from all of

either one or three nonzero inputs and not be satisfied. For
normalized partial weight triplets satisfying this condition, the function ac(·, ·, ·) is evaluated explicitly as

the protograph’s check nodes, normalized by a product of binomial coefficients corresponding to all of the protograph’s variable nodes. Each check node contribution is written in terms of a vector weight enumerator Acwi of the partial weights wi of the qic variable nodes connected to check node ci.
Let rN (δ) denote the normalized logarithm of the bracketed term in (2),

rN (δ) =

nc

ln AcNδi − N

nv

(qjv − 1) ln N

N N δj

(3)

i=1

j=1

and let r(δ) = lim supN→∞ rN (δ) denote a corresponding normalized logarithmic asymptotic weight distribution for

ac( 1, 2, 3) = H4 (σ − 1, σ − 2, σ − 3, 1 − σ) (6)

where H4(x1, x2, x3, x4) = −

4 i=1

xi

ln

xi

is

the

quaternary

entropy function.

For checks of degree 4 and higher, the asymptotic weight
enumerators can be calculated by splitting the higher-degree checks. Any check node ci with degree qic and partial weight vector wi can be split into an equivalent subgraph with two check nodes of degrees q + 1 and qic − q + 1, connected by a degree-2 non-transmitted variable node. Figure 4 shows a degree-qic check and its equivalent representation. The partial weight vectors of the two new checks can be denoted as (w , l)
and (w , l), where w and w are subvectors of the original

each vector δ of partial weights:

node’s partial weight vector wi, corresponding to the two

nc

nv

r(δ) = ac(δi) − (qjv − 1)H(δj)

i=1

j=1

subsets of variable nodes connected to the two new checks,
(4) and l is the weight associated with the new degree-2 nontransmitted variable node. The vector weight enumerator of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIVSALAR et al.: CAPACITY-APPROACHING PROTOGRAPH CODES

w1

v1

c0

w2 v2
(a)

w1

c1

v1

c2

w2

c3

v2

c4

dummy variables
l1 l2 l3

r( )

879

0.08

0.07

0.06

Precoded (25%)

0.05

(3,6) regular LDPC

0.04

0.03

(3,6) regular LDPC 0.02

Precoded (50%) (3,6) regular LDPC

rate 1/2 random codes

0.01 min=0.023

0.00

min=0.028

min=0.11

-0.01

min=0.033

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.10 0.11 0.12 0.13 0.14 0.15

(b)
Fig. 5. (a) Protograph of a (3,6) regular LDPC code, and (b) equivalent protograph for ensemble weight enumeration.

the original check is expressed in terms of the vector weight enumerators of the new checks as

Acwi =

N

A(cw ,l)Ac(w ,l)
N

(7)

l=1

l

Taking q + 1 = 3 in Fig. 4, the split produces one degree-3 check node, for which ac( 1, 2, 3) can be calculated from (6), and a second check node with degree one less than that of the original check. This splitting can be repeated qic − 3 times to produce a subgraph with qic − 2 check nodes all of degree-3. Then (3) through (7) can be applied repeatedly to compute the
contribution of the higher-degree check to the ensemble weight
enumerator. We have used such computations to evaluate δmin for specific protographs and also to prove general theorems
regarding the linear minimum distance growth property.

As an example, consider a (3,6) regular LDPC code with a
protograph as shown in Fig. 5(a). After three check node splits,
the original protograph containing one degree-6 check node is converted into the equivalent protograph in Fig. 5(b) with nc = 4 degree-3 check nodes, nu = 3 degree-2 non-transmitted variable nodes, and the original nt = 2 degree-3 transmitted variable nodes. The normalized logarithmic asymptotic weight distribution r(δ) is determined as

r(δ) = max rt(δ1, δ2)/nt = max rt(δ1, δ2)/2 (8)

δ1 +δ2 =nt δ

δ1 +δ2 =2δ

where δ1, δ2 are the normalized partial weights of the two transmitted variable nodes, and rt(δ1, δ2) is obtained by maximizing (4) over the normalized partial weights λ1, λ2, λ3 of the three non-transmitted nodes:

Fig. 6. Asymptotic weight distributions and zero crossings for (3,6) regular LDPC with: no precoding, 25 percent precoded nodes, 50 percent precoded nodes, and rate-1/2 random codes.
ues of λ1, λ2, λ3 (between 0 and 1), since the partial weights of the non-transmitted variable nodes do not contribute to the normalized total codeword weight δ in (8).
Classic regular LDPC codes, in addition to simplicity, have low error floors. However, their iterative decoding thresholds are high. For example the (3,6) regular LDPC codes have an iterative decoding threshold of 1.102 dB while their typical minimum distance ratio is 0.023. For comparison the typical minimum distance ratio of random codes is 0.11, but random codes are impractical to decode. This typical minimum distance ratio or growth rate δmin is a characteristic of the specific protograph from which the LDPC code ensemble is constructed. Fig. 6 compares the asymptotic weight distribution of (3,6) regular LDPC codes to that of rate-1/2 random codes. Other protographs of interest are also presented in the figure.
III. PROTOGRAPH DESIGN METHODS
In this section we start by first considering protographs with all variable node degrees 3 and higher. Code ensembles constructed from such protographs are guaranteed to have linear minimum distance growth,1 but their iterative decoding thresholds can generally be improved upon by allowing the protographs to have some degree-2 and/or degree-1 variable nodes. The first subsection discusses ways to construct ratecompatible protograph families having no degree-2 or degree1 variable nodes. The two subsequent subsections discuss methods to judiciously add such nodes to improve the iterative decoding threshold while preserving the linear minimum distance growth property.

rt(δ1, δ2) = max {ac(δ1, δ1, λ1) + ac(δ1, λ1, λ2)
λ1 ,λ2 ,λ3
+ac(δ2, λ2, λ3) + ac(δ2, δ2, λ3)

−2H(δ1) − 2H(δ2)

−H(λ1) − H(λ2) − H(λ3)}

(9)

where ac(·, ·, ·) is given by (6) for a generic degree-3 check node. Note that the maximization here is over all possible val-

A. Protographs with variable node degrees at least 3
Some of the protographs and simulation results in this section originally appeared in [31].
1This property is well known for regular Gallager codes and for irregular unstructured LDPC code ensembles [5], and it can be shown to carry over to protograph code ensembles as well.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

880

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, AUGUST 2009

(a)

(b)

Fig. 7. (a) An 8-node rate-1/2 protograph with node degrees 3, and (b) the same protograph with one node of degree 16.

Fig. 9. A 12-node rate-1/2 protograph with 11 nodes of degree 3 and one node of degree 18, achieving better decoding threshold than the protograph in Fig. 8.
C

B

Fig. 8. An 8-node rate-1/2 protograph with 7 nodes of degree 3 and one

A

node of degree 16, with edge assignments changed from those in Fig. 7(b)

to improve the decoding threshold.

1) An example of constructing a good low-rate proto-

graph: Optimized degree distributions for irregular unstruc-

tured LDPC codes can be computed using [32]. The computer

search for rate-1/2 codes with all node degrees at least 3, and

a maximum degree constraint anywhere from 17 to 49, yields optimal degree distributions λ(x) = 0.642x2 + 0.289x15 + 0.069x16 and ρ(x) = 0.5x7 + 0.5x8 for variable and check

nodes, respectively. These optimized distributions result in an iterative decoding threshold of 0.719 dB. In this subsection we show by example how this decoding threshold can be lowered

Fig. 10. Construction of rate-compatible protographs of rates 5/8, 3/4, and 7/8, starting from the 8-node rate-1/2 protograph in Fig. 8.

further with careful design of protograph-based structured LDPC codes subject to similar constraints on the minimum and maximum variable node degrees.
We start with a rate-1/2, eight-node protograph with all variable node degrees 3 as shown in Fig. 7(a). The iterative decoding threshold for this code is 1.102 dB. Next we change one of the nodes to degree 16 as shown in Fig. 7(b). This is motivated by the fact that optimum degree distributions for unstructured codes have a fraction of high-degree nodes,

This is equivalent to constraint combining in the protograph. The highest-rate code is achieved when all constraints are combined into a single high-degree constraint node. If this constraint is connected to variable nodes of degree at least three, then the graph will have linear minimum distance growth. Therefore, starting with variable nodes of degree at least 3 for rate 1/2 guarantees that the linear minimum distance property will be preserved at higher rates.

which serve to lower the decoding threshold. The iterative Fig. 10 shows such a construction for the 8-node protograph

decoding threshold for the protograph in Fig. 7(b) is 0.972 dB. in Fig. 8. The protograph in Fig. 10 can be used for rates 1/2,

Note that only a small improvement is obtained in this 5/8, 3/4, and 7/8 if the non-transmitted nodes A, B, C are

case by substituting one high-degree node. Now change the handled differently. If all three nodes A, B, C are constrained

connections of variable nodes to check nodes asymmetrically. to take on bit value 0, this is equivalent to removing these

After a few hand-selected searches we obtain the rate-1/2 three nodes and their edges, and the resulting protograph

protograph shown in Fig. 8, which has a threshold of 0.618 dB. is equivalent to the rate-1/2 protograph in Fig. 8. A rate-

5/8 protograph is obtained if node A is an ordinary non-

It is possible to obtain an even lower threshold of 0.544 dB transmitted node with no bit assignment, but nodes B and

if the number of nodes in the protograph is increased to 12 C are set to 0. A rate-3/4 protograph results from removing

and the highest node degree is set to 18 as shown in Fig. 9. the 0-bit assignment from nodes A, B, but keeping it for

2) Constructing a family of high-rate protographs from node C. Finally, the rate-7/8 code is obtained by freeing all

a low-rate protograph: Higher-rate codes are obtained by three nodes A, B, C from any bit assignments. At the decoder

connecting check nodes with degree-2 non-transmitted nodes. the ordinary non-transmitted nodes with no bit assignment are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIVSALAR et al.: CAPACITY-APPROACHING PROTOGRAPH CODES

881

100

RJA r12 n=5792 k=2896

10−1

RJA r58 n=5792 k=3620 RJA r34 n=5792 k=4344

RJA r78 n=5792 k=5068

10−2

Rate 2/3

10−3

BER/FER

10−4

Rate 2/3

10−5

10−6

10−7

Rate 1/2

10−8

10−9 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 Eb/No

Fig. 12. Constructing a rate-1/2 R4JA protograph from a rate-2/3 protograph.

Fig. 11. Performance of codes of length n = 5792 and rates 1/2, 5/8, 3/4, 7/8, lifted from the rate-compatible family of protographs in Fig. 10.
treated as ordinary punctured nodes and given zero reliability values, while the non-transmitted nodes constrained to take bit value 0 are assigned highly reliable values. Iterative decoding thresholds computed via RCA for rates 1/2, 5/8, 3/4, and 7/8 are 0.618 dB (gap to capacity 0.43 dB), 1.296 dB (gap to capacity 0.48 dB), 1.928 dB (gap to capacity 0.30 dB), and 3.052 dB (gap to capacity 0.21 dB), respectively.
3) Simulation results: The protograph in Fig. 10 was lifted by a factor of 4 using progressive edge growth [33] to remove all multiple parallel edges. The resulting graph was then lifted using the ACE algorithm [34] to determine circulant permutations of size 181. Since the protograph in Fig. 10 has 8 transmitted variable nodes, this construction yields protographbased LDPC codes of length n = 8 × 4 × 181 = 5792 for all four rates 1/2, 5/8, 3/4, 7/8. The circulant permutations are identical for all four rates, but circulants along edges attached to nodes set to 0 may be ignored. Alternatively, to achieve a common decoder implementation, all circulants could be retained for all rates, but with highly reliable 0-bits input to those non-transmitted nodes that were set to 0 to distinguish each rate.
Fig. 11 shows bit (solid curves) and frame (dashed curves) error rate FPGA simulation results computed by JPL’s Universal Decoder for Sparse Codes. The lowest three rates exhibit no error flooring at frame error rates of 3 × 10−7 and higher. However, the rate-7/8 code does display error events near the 10−6 level due to error trapping sets.
B. Protographs with some degree-2 variable nodes
From Richardson and Urbanke’s earliest analysis of optimized degree distributions for unstructured LDPC codes [5], it has been known that the best iterative decoding thresholds for LDPC codes are obtained by including a substantial fraction of degree-2 variable nodes. The same is true for LDPC codes constructed from protographs [12]. However, adding too many degree-2 variable nodes can destroy the linear minimum distance growth property. In this section, we

introduce a check node splitting technique that adds degree2 nodes to a protograph in a way that preserves the linear minimum distance growth property if the original protograph possessed it. Then we identify and prove a general condition on a protograph having degree-2 variables that guarantees the linear minimum distance growth property regardless of whether the protograph was originally constructed via check node splitting. Some of the protographs and simulation results in this section and the next section originally appeared in [35].
1) The check node splitting technique: We use the check node splitting idea depicted in Fig. 4 to construct protograph LDPC codes that include degree-2 variable nodes to achieve good iterative decoding thresholds, yet also have minimum distance growing linearly with block size. Start with a highrate protograph LDPC code where the degrees of all variable nodes are at least 3. We know that such a code ensemble has minimum distance that grows linearly with block size. Next we split a check node in the protograph into two checks and distribute the total number of edges into the original check between the two new checks, and then connect these two checks with a non-transmitted degree-2 variable node. The resulting protograph has one additional check node and one new non-transmitted degree-2 variable node. The corresponding protograph LDPC code ensemble will have the same average weight enumerator, and so its ensemble minimum distance will grow linearly with block size with the same linearity coefficient. The overall code rate remains the same. Finally, if we change the new degree-2 variable node from an untransmitted node to a transmitted node, we obtain a lower-rate code, with typical minimum distance at least as large as before and typical minimum distance ratio δmin proportionately reduced by no more than the reciprocal of the number of transmitted nodes in the new protograph. Thus, the property that the ensemble minimum distance grows linearly with block size will be preserved.
We can continue spliting additional check nodes to generate lower-rate protograph LDPC codes. Figure 12 shows an example of such a construction to obtain a rate-1/2 R4JA code [36], starting with a rate-2/3 code.
Linear minimum distance growth is preserved if we attach additional variable nodes of degree-3 and higher to the low-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

882
2n

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, AUGUST 2009
code rate = (n+1)/(n+2) n = 0, 1, ......
16

(a)

Fig. 13. The R4JA family of protographs with rates 1/2 and higher.

8 8

rate protograph in Fig. 12. This is true in general whenever

variable nodes of degree-3 and higher are added to a proto-

graph that has the linear minimum distance growth property.

We can thus conclude that the entire R4JA family shown in

Fig. 13, has ensemble minimum distance growing linearly with

block size. From here it is a simple step to precode the R4JA



family in Fig. 13, as described in the next section, to obtain

(b)

the AR4JA family of protograph codes described in [36].

The next example illustrates that use of a high-degree node

provides one technique for achieving low decoding thresholds (as well as linear minimum distance growth). We start with

a rate-4/5 protograph with four degree-3 variable nodes and

one degree-16 variable node. Then we apply check node

splitting to obtain rate-2/3 and rate-1/2 codes as shown in

Fig. 14. Reversing the construction process, we note that

the higher-rate protographs in Fig. 14 can be obtained by

simply puncturing some of the degree-2 nodes of the rate-



1/2 protograph. The iterative decoding thresholds for the

(c)

protographs in Fig. 14 are 2.460 dB for rate 4/5, 1.338 dB for rate 2/3, and 0.496 dB for rate 1/2.
Note that the rate-1/2 code in Fig. 14 has λ (0)ρ (1) = 1.37. Thus the code does not satisfy the relation λ (0)ρ (1) < 1 [37],

Fig. 14. Example of (a) a rate-4/5 protograph with one high-degree node, used to successively construct (b) a rate-2/3 protograph and (c) a rate-1/2 protograph.

where λ(x), ρ(x) are the degree distributions for variable condition if each connected subgraph Pi(mi) has exactly and constraint nodes. For a protograph code this condition mi + 1 checks.
is a sufficient, but not a necessary, condition for minimum Lemma: If and only if a protograph P satisfies the check

distance growing with n. Specifically, the ensemble asymptotic node splitting condition, then it can be constructed by our

minimum distance over block size for this protograph is a node splitting technique starting with a higher-rate ancestral

small but positive number, δmin = 0.005.

protograph P+ having only transmitted variable nodes of

2) Preservation of the linear minimum distance property: degree 3 and higher.

Up to now we have used our check node splitting technique Theorem: If a protograph P satisfies the check node

to generate examples of protograph codes having degree-2 splitting condition, then P will inherit the property from its

variable nodes that nonetheless possess the desirable property ancestral protograph P+ that its ensemble minimum distance

that their ensemble minimum distance grows linearly with grows linearly with block size.

block size. In this section, we tackle the converse problem and Proof: The theorem follows from the lemma by the ar-

identify a condition which, if satisfied by a given protograph guments given in the previous section. The proof of the

having degree-2 variables, will insure that the corresponding ensemble minimum distance grows linearly with block size.
Definition: Let P denote any protograph containing only transmitted variable nodes of degree 2 and higher. Let P denote the subgraph of P that contains only its degree-2

lemma is trivial in one direction. Every check node i in the ancestral protograph P+ that is split mi times in succession
will generate a corresponding subgraph Pi(mi) of mi degree2 variable nodes and mi +1 attached checks, because one new
check node and one new degree-2 variable node are created

variables and their attached edges and checks. If this subgraph
is not connected, decompose it into its disjoint connected
pieces, P = ∪iPi(mi), where mi is the number of degree-2 variable nodes in the connected subgraph Pi(mi). We say that the original protograph P satisfies the check node splitting

with each split. Furthermore, this subgraph Pi(mi) will be disconnected from the subgraph Pj(mj ) created by splitting any other check node j = i in the ancestral protograph P+.
To prove the converse, it is sufficient to show that each connected subgraph Pi(mi) of mi degree-2 variable nodes and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIVSALAR et al.: CAPACITY-APPROACHING PROTOGRAPH CODES

883

10 1

FPGA Simulations

10 0

RJA LDPC code Family input block k=3680 bits

Rate 1/2

10-1

Solid: BER

10 -2

Dashed: FER

precoder
10 -3

Bit and Frame Error Ratees

10-4

Fig. 16. The rate-1/2 AR4JA protograph.

10 -5

10 -6

10-7

random codes

Th=0.496 dB

rate 1/2

random codes

Th=1.338 dB rate 2/3

random codes

Th=2.460 dB rate 4/5

10 -8

10 -9

10 -10

10 -11 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8

were performed using JPL’s Universal Decoder for Sparse Codes.
C. Protographs with some degree-1 variable nodes Degree-1 variable nodes are anathema to unstructured
LDPC codes, because there is a nonzero probability that a pair of such nodes will be connected to the same check

Eb/No, dB

node, and in that case these two nodes can never be decoded

Fig. 15. Performance of LDPC codes with input block size k = 3680 lifted from the rate-1/2 protograph of Fig. 14(c), and from rate-2/3 and rate-4/5 protographs obtained by puncturing the rate-1/2 protograph.

with reliability higher than the reliability of raw channel symbols. However, Richardson observed with his introduction of multi-edge type codes [10] that it is possible to design

mi + 1 attached check nodes can be derived by applying the
node splitting technique to a single check node in an ancestral protograph P+. First select any check node of degree 1 within
the subgraph Pi(mi). This is always possible, because there are more checks than variables in Pi(mi), and all variables in this subgraph are degree-2. The single degree-2 variable

reliably decodable LDPC codes having a few degree-1 nodes as long as the codes are built with a structural constraint that prohibits pairs of degree-1 nodes from being attached to the same check node. He also noted that it is possible to obtain improved iterative decoding thresholds by introducing a few such degree-1 nodes while simultaneously puncturing higherdegree nodes elsewhere in the code graph.

node attached to the selected check node is also attached to
one other uniquely determined check node in Pi(mi). This second check node must have degree ≥2 in Pi(mi), because otherwise the subgraph consisting of these two checks and

Judiciously placed degree-1 nodes can similarly improve the iterative decoding thresholds of protograph-based LDPC codes. When applied to protographs, this construction is usually called precoding, because it was first introduced by

their connecting variable would be disconnected from the
remainder of Pi(mi). Merge these two checks and delete the connecting variable. The result is a subgraph Pi(mi − 1) consisting of mi − 1 degree-2 variables and mi checks. This subgraph Pi(mi −1) is also connected, since the second check included in the merger from Pi(mi) must have been connected to the remainder of the graph. By the same procedure applied
to Pi(mi), merge another pair of checks from Pi(mi − 1) and delete the connecting variable to obtain a smaller subgraph
Pi(mi − 2) with the same properties. Continue this process until obtaining Pi(0) consisting of one check node and zero degree-2 variable nodes. Finally, reverse this process starting
with Pi(0) to obtain the original connected subgraph Pi(mi). Each check node merger and variable node deletion is reversed

Abbasfar et al [16] as an encoding technique, corresponding to the initial accumulator in their ARA codes.
Precoding places a constraint node between a degree-1 variable node and a higher-degree variable node, which is then optionally erased. Precoding often lowers the iterative decoding threshold of a given protograph without altering its rate [16]. Precoding is generally most useful at lower rates, because iterative decoding thresholds for very high-rate regular LDPC codes are already satisfactory. Fig. 6 compares the asymptotic weight distribution of (3,6) regular LDPC codes with and without precoding to that of rate-1/2 random codes. In this case we see that precoding improves both the iterative decoding threshold and the asymptotic growth rate of dmin.
1) Construction of the AR4JA family of protographs: In

by a corresponding check node split and new variable node Figure 16 we attach an accumulator as a precoder to lower

creation and attachment.

the iterative decoding threshold of the rate-1/2 R4JA code

Note that while the lemma provides an if-and-only-if condi- in Fig. 12. The iterative decoding threshold for this rate-1/2

tion for determining whether our node splitting method can be AR4JA code is 0.628 dB, and the asymptotic growth rate of applied to prove asymptotically growing ensemble minimum the ensemble minimum distance is δmin = 0.015. distance, the theorem does not rule out the possibility of Similarly, by precoding only one node in Fig. 13, we obtain

protographs failing this condition for which linearly growing the entire AR4JA family, originally described in [36] and

minimum distance could be proved by other means.

redrawn in Fig. 17, with ensemble minimum distance growing

3) Simulation results: Fig. 15 shows simulation results for linearly with block size. Iterative decoding thresholds achieved LDPC codes with k = 3680 built from the rate-1/2 protograph by this family for rates (n + 1)/(n + 2), n = 0, 1, 2, . . . , 6 are

in Fig. 14(c), for which a high-degree node was used in also provided in the figure.

the base protograph. The rate-2/3 and rate-4/5 protographs in 2) Simulation results: Fig. 18 shows bit and frame er-

Fig. 15 are obtained by puncturing the rate-1/2 protograph. ror rate simulation results for LDPC codes with dimension Protographs were lifted using the ACE algorithm [34] to k = 4096 expanded from the rate-1/2 through rate-4/5 AR4JA

find circulants for each edge of the protograph. All simulations protographs in Fig. 17 for which precoding was used to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

884

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, AUGUST 2009

code rate = (n+1)/(n+2)

101

100
n = 0, 1, ...... 10-1
2n 10-2

FPGA Simulations AR4JA LDPC Code Family
BPSK modulation K is input block size
Solid: BER Dashed: FER

Bit and Frame Error Rates

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6

10-7

10-8

Code Rate
1/2

Protograph
Threshold (dB) 

Capacity Threshold
(dB)

Gap to Capacity
(dB)

0.628

0.187

0.441

10-9
10-10 0.5

Rate=1/2 K=4096 bits

Rate=2/3 K=4096 bits

Rate=3/4 Rate=4/5 K=4080 bits K=4096 bits

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

Eb/No, dB

2/3

1.450

1.059

0.391

3/4

2.005

1.626

0.379

Fig. 18. Performance of AR4JA code family with input block size k = 4096.

4/5

2.413

2.040

0.373

5/6

2.733

2.362

0.371

6/7

2.993

2.625

0.368

is punctured). Similarly, a constraint node’s log-a-posteriori probability U AP P is determined from all of its input messages.

7/8

3.209

2.845

0.364

Fig. 17. The AR4JA family of protographs with rates 1/2 and higher.

lower the decoding threshold. Protographs were lifted using the ACE algorithm [34] to find circulants for each edge of the protograph. All simulations were performed using JPL’s Universal Decoder for Sparse Codes.

IV. IMPLEMENTATION OF HIGH-THROUGHPUT DECODERS

The extrinsic information departing from a constraint node to the ith variable node is denoted by Ui = U AP P \vi. Message vi represents intrinsic information that is left purposefully absent in the computation of the extrinsic information message
Ui. Unlike the case at variable nodes, the log-a-posteriori probability U AP P and the extrinsic information messages Ui departing from constraint nodes are not directly computable
by simple functions like addition and subtraction. The log-a-posteriori probability U AP P computed at a con-
straint node can be calculated using the “Log-Hyperbolic-

The remainder of the paper is committed to practical
techniques associated with the construction of high-throughput decoders for protograph-based codes. Much of this material is
drawn from [38]. The Tanner graph representing an LDPC code is a bipartite
graph with variable nodes on one side and check nodes or
constraint nodes on the other. An iterative LDPC decoder evaluates a multi-dimensional function at each node of this graph at each iteration. A degree-dc check node takes inputs from dc variable nodes and produces dc outputs to send back to the same nodes. A degree-dv variable node takes inputs from dv check nodes, plus one additional input from the channel if the corresponding variable is transmitted, and produces dv outputs to send back to the check nodes. In our notation, messages u arrive at variable nodes, and messages V depart. Similarly, messages v arrive at constraint nodes, and messages U depart. All four message types are log-likelihood ratios
(LLRs). A variable node’s log-a-posteriori probability V AP P is
obtained by summing all of its input messages. The extrinsic information Vj = V AP P \uj departing from a variable node to the jth constraint node is computed conveniently from V AP P
by “backing out” individual terms by subtraction:

Tangent” formula [39] as

U AP P

=

⎡
dc
⎣
j=1

⎤ sgn(vj )⎦

ln

⎛ ⎝⎜⎜ 1
1

+ −

P dc −
e j=1
P dc −
e j=1

„ ln

1+e−|vj 1−e−|vj

| |

„ ln

1+e−|vj 1−e−|vj

| |

« «

⎞ ⎟⎟⎠

.

(11)

Equivalently, this formula can be rewritten recursively in terms

of a function Λln BP (v) = ln

1+e−|v| 1−e−|v|

, as

⎡

⎤

⎛

⎞

dc

dc

U AP P = ⎣ sgn(vj )⎦ Λln BP ⎝ Λln BP (vj )⎠ (12)

j=1

j=1

The corresponding extrinsic messages Ui are obtained simi-

larly, by omitting the ith terms from the summation and the

product of signs in (12):

⎡

⎤

⎛

⎞

Ui = ⎣ sgn(vj )⎦ Λln BP ⎝ Λln BP (vj )⎠ (13)

i=1,...,dc

j=i

j=i

The summations in (13) can be performed efficiently by first summing terms obtained from all dc inputs to the check node, and then “backing out” individual terms via subtraction:

dv
V AP P = uj
j=0

Vj = V AP P − uj,
j=1,...,dv

dc

(10)

Λln BP (vj ) = Λln BP (vj ) − Λln BP (vi), i = 1, . . . , dc

j=i

j=1

(14)

where dv is the variable node degree and u0 represents By this method, computation of the summation in (13) for an input from the channel (u0 = 0 if the variable node all dc outgoing messages requires dc − 1 additions and dc

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIVSALAR et al.: CAPACITY-APPROACHING PROTOGRAPH CODES

885

subtractions, the same as the requisite computations at a degree-dc punctured variable node. Similarly, computation of the signs of the constraint node’s dc outgoing messages entails dc − 1 (single-bit) exclusive-or operations to form the AP P extrinsic sign, followed by dc incremental exclusiveor operations to “back out” the appropriate intrinsic message sign to form each outgoing extrinsic message sign. Finally, the complete computation of all dc outgoing messages Ui via (13) also requires dc applications of the critical function Λln BP (v) on the way in, and dc additional applications of the same function on the way out. The function Λln BP (v) thus transforms the set of computations required at constraint nodes
to approximately the same complexity as those required at
variable nodes, except for the additional burden of computing this function 2dc times at each constraint node of degree dc.
Although the approach in (13) allows very efficient orga-
nization of the requisite constraint node computations, the critical function Λln BP (v) appearing in both the inner and
outer recursions of (13) is notoriously difficult to approximate.
It is usually evaluated via table look-up, but due to dynamic range issues a large table is needed for accurate approximation. An alternate approach evaluates U AP P and Ui in terms of the Min∗ function, as described below.

0.7

0.6

y(x) = Ŧ0.25|x| + 0.6875 |x| < 2.75
0.5

y(x) = Ŧ0.375|x| + 0.6875

|x| < 1.0

0.4

= Ŧ0.1875|x| + 0.5 1.0 < |x| < 2.625

0.3

0.2

y(x) = ln(1 + eŦ|x|)

0.1

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

x

Fig. 19. Non-linear function Min∗ at the core of the constraint-node algorithm, compared to single- and double-line approximations to this function that can easily be implemented in combinational logic.

and double-line approximations to Min∗ that can easily be implemented in combinational logic are shown in Fig. 19.

B. Efficient organization of the extrinsic computations

A. Computation of extrinsics using the Min∗ function

Because of the non-linearity of the recursion (16), it is not possible to first combine all dc inputs to form U AP P and then

For the special case of dc = 2, the log-a-posteriori probability U AP P = ΛBP ∗ (v1, v2) is evaluated from (11) as

ΛBP ∗ (v1, v2) = sgn(v1)sgn(v2) ln

1 + e|v1|+|v2| e|v1| + e|v2|

(15)

After an application of the Jacobian logarithmic identity, ln(ea +eb) = max (a, b)+ln 1 + e−|a−b| [40], together with the identity |v1| + |v2| = min(|v1|, |v2|) + max(|v1|, |v2|), this reduces to
ΛBP ∗ (v1, v2) = sgn(v1)sgn(v2)Min∗(v1, v2) (16)

where

Min∗(v1, v2) = min (|v1| , |v2|) + ln 1 + e−(|v1|+|v2|)

to “back out” terms one at a time via subtraction to obtain the individual extrinsic messages Ui. Thus, a straightforward application of (16) would require dc (dc − 2) calls to ΛBP ∗ to update all dc extrinsic messages departing from a degree-dc constraint node. This quadratic complexity compares unfavorably to the 2dc look-up operations (augmented with 2dc − 1 additions and subtractions) needed to compute all extrinsic message magnitudes using (13) and (14).
However, the numerical computation advantages of the Min∗ approach have led to strategies for efficiently organizing the applications of Min∗, such that the full set of dc outgoing extrinsic messages can be computed with a number of operations linear in dc rather than quadratic in dc. This reduction is possible because many of the dc (dc − 2) ΛBP ∗ operations used to produce dc unique extrinsics share similar partial products. Next we describe a generic scheduling of

− ln 1 + e−||v1|−|v2||

(17)

these operations that produces the dc requisite extrinsics with minimum applications of the ΛBP ∗ operation.

Note that (16) is not an approximation. Furthermore, it is easy The method of (16) and (17) is to decompose the computa-

to show that dc − 1 applications of ΛBP ∗ yield exactly U AP P in (11) or (12) for a general degree-dc constraint node, and

tions of the extrinsic messages departing a degree-dc constraint node into a series of binary operations ΛBP ∗(v1, v2). This

that each of the individual extrinsic messages Ui in (13) can be computed by dc − 2 applications of ΛBP ∗.

binary operation is commutative and associative, and it is convenient to denote it generically by v1 v2 ΛBP ∗ (v1, v2),

Computations based on (16) and (17) have a significant as introduced in [38]. The desired dc outputs from the degree-

advantage over computations based on (13) and (14) in that dc node are

the function Min∗(v1, v2) is much easier to approximate accurately than the function Λln BP (v). The main reason is that the function ln 1 + e−|x| , used to compute the two correction terms in the definition of Min∗, ranges over a
small interval [0, ln 2], whereas the range of the function Λln BP is [0, ∞]. It is very difficult to represent the outputs of Λln BP accurately in this unbounded range, but accurately

Ui = v1 . . . vi−1 vi+1 . . . vdc,.
i=1,...,dc

(18)

Note that only the input vi is missing from this “generalized summation” for obtaining the extrinsic message Ui.
If has a readily computable (and equally primitive) inverse operator , one can first compute

representing the outputs of Min∗ is quite manageable. Single-

U AP P = v1 . . . vdc

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

886

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, AUGUST 2009

by combining all inputs using , and then obtain the dc The BP-Based method searches for the first and second

requisite outputs by “backing out” the individual vi terms minimum values entering a check node and assigns the second

using the “generalized subtraction” inverse operator:

minimum to the edge whose incoming magnitude was the first

Ui = U AP P vi.
i=1,...,dc

This algorithm requires dc − 1 applications of , plus dc applications of . This approach is the basis for the efficient

organization of computations at variable nodes, as represented
by (10), where in this case represents ordinary addition and represents ordinary subtraction.2

At constraint nodes, however, the primitive oper-

ation

is the nonlinear function ΛBP ∗(v1, v2) =

sgn(v1)sgn(v2)Min∗(v1, v2) defined in (16). While well-

behaved approximations are known for Min∗(v1, v2), the same

is not true for its inverse. In fact, if Min∗(v1, v2) is replaced by

its 0th-order approximation, min(v1, v2), this operation is not

invertible. We note that non-invertibility can also happen with

finite-precision implementations of variable nodes, if the sum

of all inputs uj exceeds the quantizer’s saturation level. For

these reasons it is useful to find algorithms that compute all

of the requisite outputs using only operations, and without

requiring application of the inverse operator .

An algorithm A∗(dc) that uses only 3(dc − 2) operations
to correctly compute the dc outputs U1, . . . , Udc, for any set of dc inputs v1, . . . , vdc , is the following: First form dc − 1 intermediate quantities y1 = v1, and yi = yi−1 vi, for i = 2, . . . , dc − 1, by successively “accumulating” the inputs in ascending order. Form another dc − 1 intermediate quantities ydc = vdc , and yi = yi+1 vi, for i = dc − 1, . . . , 2, by accumulating the inputs in descending order. Finally, set U1 = y2, Udc = ydc−1, and compute the remaining dc − 2 outputs as Ui = yi−1 yi+1, for i = 2, . . . , dc − 1.
The algorithm A∗(dc) is optimal in the sense that no algorithm A(dc) using only operations can compute the

dc requisite outputs U1, . . . , Udc for all possible values of the dc inputs v1, . . . , vdc , using fewer than 3(dc −2) operations.
This simple-to-prove result is somewhat obscure in the LDPC

coding literature, but it has been long noted (e.g., by Mackay
[41] or by Hu et al [42]) that the complexity of calculating dc unique extrinsics using the BCJR algorithm is 3(dc −2). Proof is by backward induction, starting with any algorithm A(dc) that correctly computes the dc outputs for a degree-dc node, and then deriving from A(dc) a valid algorithm A(dc − 1) for a degree-(dc − 1) node that omits at least three of A(dc)’s
applications of .

minimum and the first minimum to all other edges. Searching

for the two smallest magnitudes costs at least dc+ log2 dc −2 comparison operations [45]. The technique loses up to 1 dB

of performance compared to Full-BP. However, incremental-

cost variations, for instance Offset-BP-Based [43] updating,

can be tuned such that only 0.1 to 0.2 dB is lost. Another

attractive feature of these techniques is that they obviate the

SNR-scaling dependent correction term in Min* and therefore

permit decoder designs that are free of the typically required

channel SNR estimate. Approximate-Min*-BP operates using

ΛBP ∗ (v1, v2),

but passes a result whose magnitude is exactly equal to U AP P to all edges save the edge with the lowest incoming

reliability. This edge gets the appropriate extrinsic magnitude U AP P \vmin. The total cost is dc−1 comparisons (to find vmin) followed by dc − 1 applications of . In addition to relatively
low complexity, the technique exhibits less than 0.05 dB of

loss from Full-BP. This has been verified in [44] and in

extensive field programmable gate array based tests across a

wide family of LDPC codes at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.

The method works because the edge that ‘most needs’ accurate

extrinsic information (the weakest arriving edge) gets it. All

other outgoing messages in Full-BP would be dominated by

the weakest arriving edge, such that inclusion of an additional

intrinsic value in each of these is apparently not detrimental.

A disadvantage of Approximate-Min*-BP is that it relies on

Min* and therefore requires a reasonable SNR estimate such

that initial variable observations are appropriately scaled.

D. A decoder for structured protograph-based codes
LDPC decoders implemented in hardware are typically partially parallel, partially serial machines. The decoding graph for an LDPC code generally has several hundred to several thousand variable and check nodes, while a typical FPGA or ASIC is only large enough to perform the simultaneous computations associated with a few to a few score graph nodes.
For LDPC codes with a protograph structure, it is natural to build a decoder that updates all of the variable (or check) nodes in one copy of the protograph simultaneously, and that updates each of the copies serially. The graph for an (n = 12, k = 4) LDPC code is sketched in Figure 20, built from a protograph

with three variable nodes and two check nodes, and expanded

C. Reduced extrinsic approximations
Further complexity reductions are possible with approximations that do not require the constraint nodes to produce dc unique extrinsic outputs. We include by reference the BPBased [43] and the Approximate-Min*-BP [44] techniques. Each is similar in that it produces two, rather than dc, unique magnitudes per constraint node (sign information is assigned identically as in Full-BP).

by a factor of four. Variable nodes are shown as circles, check nodes as squares, and the copies of the protograph are interconnected by cyclic shifts within the bundles of edges. A decoder for this code is assembled by placing memories on each graph edge as shown, and interconnecting them with computation circuits at each of the graph nodes. This example contains three variable node computation circuits, two check node computation circuits, and eight memory blocks.
Before decoding begins, the received noisy channel symbols

2except note that the computations in (10) require one extra operation at a transmitted variable node to account for its one extra input message (u0) from the channel.

are stored in the channel symbol memories at the top of the figure, and all the edge memories are cleared. In the first clock cycle of the first half-iteration in the decoding process,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIVSALAR et al.: CAPACITY-APPROACHING PROTOGRAPH CODES

887

channel sym memory

channel sym memory

channel sym memory

design protographs that achieve performance measures of interest. These include check-node splitting to preserve linear

minimum distance growth while reducing rate, pre-coding

and/or strategic use of high degree variable nodes in order

edge edge memory memory

edge

edge

memory memory

cyclic shift

cyclic shift

cyclic shift

cyclic shift

edge memory
cyclic shift

to lower iterative decoding thresholds, and several approaches to rate compatibility. We have also discussed the problem of defining a sufficient condition to determine whether a given protograph possesses the linear minimum distance growth property. We described field tested ‘best practice’ decoder

derivations that afford reduced precision decoding implemen-

tations and can operate with a high degree of parallelism

through exploitation of protograph structure. Many of the Fig. 20. Top level view of an architecture for structured protograph decoding. codes described in this paper are undergoing review for

adoption in deep space direct-to-Earth links as well as landerthe three variable node circuits act as the top variable node to-orbiter links in NASA’s Deep Space Network (DSN). of each stack in the figure. Simultaneously, each fetches the

first channel symbol from its channel memory, and the first incoming messages from each of the edge memories. Each computes new outgoing messages, and writes these values back to the edge memories. In the second clock cycle, the variable node processing units repeat the process for the

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

second layer in the figure, and so on, until all the variable nodes in the graph have computed output messages. This

REFERENCES

completes the first half-iteration, and leaves the edge memories filled with messages bound from variable nodes to check nodes.
The second half-iteration proceeds similarly, with the two check node processing units consecutively updating copies of the check-node half of the protograph. Rather than accessing the edge memories in sequence, the check nodes add an offset (modulo the circulant size) to the memory addresses to implement the circulant shifts. Iterations continue in this fashion, until all check equations are satisfied or some maximum number of iterations is reached. This decoder is particularly convenient in hardware because there is no need for a switch matrix to manipulate edge connections, or for a large description of the LDPC code with which to control that switch matrix. Instead, the protograph is wired in place, and the circulant “phases” are stored as a small number of constants used to adjust the memory addresses used by the check node processors.
In practice, the hardware resources available may not be well matched to the size of the protograph. This is readily solved by expanding the protograph to fill the circuit area available, with minor modifications to the memory addressing circuits. It is also probable that the node computation circuits cannot perform full message updates in a single clock cycle; they are readily pipelined without memory access problems, because the permutations for each edge bundle are simple cyclic shifts.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper has shown that practical capacity-approaching coding solutions are available and ready for use. It is possible to closely predict performance characteristics prior to simulation within the described framework of asymptotic weight enumeration and threshold determination for ensembles of codes derived from particular protograph structures. It is also possible to follow construction methodologies to successfully

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., Vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, October 1996.
[3] M. R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533-547, 1981.
[4] D.J.C. MacKay, R.M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 32, Issue 18, 29 Aug. 1996, p. 1645.
[5] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low- density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619-637, 2001.
[6] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Analysis of low density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585-598, 2001.
[7] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message- passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599-618, 2001.
[8] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M.P.C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, Nov., 2001, pp. 2711 -2736.
[9] F. R. Kschischang, “Codes defined on graphs,” IEEE Commun. Mag., Vol. 41, Issue 8, Aug., 2003, pages 118 -125.
[10] T. Richardson, “Multi-Edge Type LDPC Codes,” presented at the Workshop honoring Prof. Bob McEliece on his 60th birthday, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, May 24-25, 2002.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke,“The Renaissance of Gallager’s LowDensity Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Commun. Mag., pages 126-131, August, 2003.
[12] Jeremy Thorpe, “Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes Constructed from Protographs,” JPL IPN Progress Report 42-154, August 15, 2003.
[13] Richardson, et al., “Methods and apparatus for decoding LDPC codes,” United States Patent 6,633,856, October 14, 2003.
[14] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. McEliece, “Coding theorems for Turbo-like codes,” in Proc. 1998 Allerton Conference, 1998.
[15] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd International Symposium on Turbo Codes, 2000.
[16] A. Abbasfar, D. Divsalar, and K. Yao, “Accumulate Repeat Accumulate Codes,” (abstract) 2004 IEEE Intl. Symp. on Inform. Theory, Chicago, IL, June 27-July 2, 2004, and IEEE Globecom 2004, Dallas, Texas, 29 November - 3 December, 2004.
[17] S. Y. Chung, “On the Construction of Some Capacity-Approaching Coding Schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Sept. 2000.
[18] S.L. Fogal, R. McEliece, J. Thorpe “Enumerators for Protograph Ensembles of LDPC Codes,” 2005 IEEE Intl. Symp. on Inform. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, 4-9 September, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

888

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, AUGUST 2009

[19] D. Divsalar, “Ensemble Weight Enumerators for Protograph LDPC Codes,” Proceedings of 2006 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Seattle, Washington, July 9-14, 2006.
[20] S. Abu-Surra, W. E. Ryan, and D. Divsalar, “Ensemble Enumerators for Protograph-Based Generalized LDPC Codes,” Proceedings of IEEE Globecom 2007, Washington, DC, November 26-30, 2007.
[21] R. Ikegaya, K. Kasai, T. Shibuya, K. Sakaniwa, “Asymptotic weight and stopping set distributions for detailedly represented irregular LDPC code ensembles,” Proc. International Symposium on Information Theory, 27 June-2 July 2004, page 208.
[22] C. Di, A. Montanari, R. Urbanke, “Weight distributions of LDPC code ensembles: combinatorics meets statistical physics,” Proc. International Symposium on Information Theory, 27 June-2 July 2004, page 102.
[23] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, pp. 929-953, Mar. 2005.
[24] D. Burshtein, G. Miller, “Asymptotic enumeration methods for analyzing LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Volume 50, Issue 6, June 2004 Page(s):1115 - 1131
[25] S. Litsyn, V. Shevelev, “Distance distributions in ensembles of irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Volume 49, Issue 12, Dec., 2003, pp. 3140 - 3159.
[26] S. Litsyn, V. Shevelev, “On ensembles of low-density parity-check codes: asymptotic distance distributions,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Volume 48, Issue 4, April 2002, pp. 887 - 908.
[27] I. Sason, E. Telatar and R. Urbanke, “Asymptotic input-output weight distributions and thresholds of convolutional and turbo-like codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory , vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3052-3061, December 2002.
[28] H. Pfister, I. Sason and R. Urbanke, “Capacity-achieving ensembles for the binary erasure channel with bounded complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory , vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2352–2379, July 2005.
[29] J. P. Tillich, “The average weight distribution of Tanner code ensembles and a way to modify them to improve their weight distribution,” Proc. International Symposium on Information Theory, 27 June-2 July 2004, page 7.
[30] D. Divsalar, E. Biglieri, “Upper Bounds to Error Probabilities of Coded Systems Beyond the Cutoff Rate,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, No. 12, December 2003.
[31] D. Divsalar, C. Jones, “Protograph LDPC Codes with Node Degrees at Least 3,” Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2006.
[32] EPFL, “Degree distribution optimizer for irregular unstructured LDPC codes (LdpcOpt),” (http://ipgdemos.epfl.ch/ldpcopt/)
[33] Xiao-Yu Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D. M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, GLOBECOM 2001, Volume 2, 25-29 Nov. 2001, pp. 995 -1001.
[34] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, R. D. Wesel, “Characterization and selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., Aug., 2004, pp. 1242–1247.
[35] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. Jones, “Construction of Protograph LDPC Codes with Linear Minimum Distance,” International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), July. 2006.
[36] D. Divsalar, C. Jones, S. Dolinar, J. Thorpe, “Protograph Based LDPC Codes with Minimum Distance Linearly Growing with Block Size,” IEEE Globecom 2005.
[37] C. Di, R. Urbanke, T. Richardson, “Weight distributions: how deviant can you be?” Proc. 2001 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2001. 24-29 June 2001, p. 50.
[38] C. Jones, S. Dolinar, K. Andrews, D. Divsalar, Y. Zhang, W. Ryan, “Functions and Architectures for LDPC Decoding,” Information Theory Workshop, Sept. 2007, pp. 577-583.
[39] J. Haguenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke,“Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429-445, Mar. 1996.
[40] E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and A. Dholakia, “A reduced-complexity decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” IEE Electron. Letters, vol. 37, pp. 102-104, Jan. 2001.
[41] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices”, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999.

[42] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D. Arnold, A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementations for the sun-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes”, Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2001.
[43] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M.P.C. Fossorier, H. XiaoYu, “Reduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes”, IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, pp. 1288-1299, Aug. 2005.
[44] C. Jones, E. Valles, M. Smith, and J. Villasenor, “Approximate-Min* constraint node updating for LDPC code decoding”, Proc. IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM), vol. 1, pp. 157-162, Oct. 2004.
[45] D. E. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, Reading, MA. Addison Wesley, 1973, vol. 3, pp. 181-242.
Dariush Divsalar received the Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) in 1978. Since then, he has been with Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), California Institute of Technology (Caltech), Pasadena, where he is a principal scientist.
Sam Dolinar received the S.B. degree in Physics, and S.M., E.E., and Ph.D. degrees in Electrical Engineering, from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in the 1970s. After four years at MIT Lincoln Laboratory, he has been at JPL since 1980. His primary research interests are error correcting codes and data compression.
Christopher R. Jones received B.S. (95), M.S. (96), and Ph.D. (03) degrees in Electrical Engineering from the University of California, Los Angeles. He worked with Broadcom Corp from 1997-2002. He has been with JPL since 2004.
Kenneth S. Andrews Is a member of the Communications Systems and Research Section, Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena. He received the B.S. degree in Applied Physics from Caltech in 1990 and Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from Cornell in 1999. His current research work is in error correcting code design and implementation, particularly for Low Density Parity Check and Turbo codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

