17th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO 2009) 
Glasgow, Scotland, August 24-28, 2009 
ON THE PERFORMANCE AND NUMERICAL STABILITY OF SOFT-DECISION 
REED-SOLOMON DECODING 
Marcel Bimberg, Emil Matus, Gerhard P. Fettweis 
Vodafone Chair Mobile Communications Systems 
Technische Universitat Dresden, D-01069 Dresden, Germany 
Email:{bimberg.matus.fettweis} @ifn.ettu-dresden.de 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper we numerically analyze soft-decision Reed­
Solomon decoding based on adaptive Belief Propagation 
(ABP) algorithm in an additive white Gaussian noise 
(AWGN) and Rayleigh fading environment. 
We compare 
modifications of ABP in terms of frame-error-rate perfor­
mance and decoding latency, while focusing on efficient im­
plementations in software or hardware. Main outcome of the 
paper is the analysis of quantization effects when ABP is im­
plemented employing fixed-point values. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Since their discovery in 1960 [1], Reed-Solomon (RS) 
have been probably the most widely applied error-correction 
codes (ECCs) in many digital communications and record­
ing systems. Besides numerous applications in the past, RS 
codes are still incorporated into today's state-of-the-art com­
munications systems such as WiMAX, DVB, DAB and the 
newly developed WirelessHD standard [2]. Due to their 
ability to correct burst errors and the existence of efficient 
hard-decision based algebraic en- and decoding algorithms, 
RS codes are still favored over other codes in environments 
where delay sensitive services combined with robust com­
munication become necessary. Moreover, in order to cope 
with low latency requirements in multimedia networks, PHY 
headers and control messages of MAC protocols demand the 
usage of shorter block lengths. With their property of being 
maximum-distance-separable (MDS) codes, RS codes there­
fore provide good error-correcting performance also at rela­
tive small block lengths. 
As the rediscovery of low-density parity-check (LDPC) 
codes in the early 90's showed, the use of long block codes 
(in order of tens of thousands bits) combined with itera­
tive, message-passing algorithms allows to asymptotically 
approach the capacity of the AWGN channel. However, ap­
plying the standard BP decoding to RS codes leads to poor 
error-correcting capability due to many short cycles in the 
high-density parity-check (HDPC) matrices. In order to im­
prove the performance of BP also for HDPC matrices, Jiang 
and Narayanan recently proposed in [3] an iterative, adap­
tive BP (ABP) algorithm. This algorithm compares favor­
ably with other soft-decision decoding algorithms and can be 
regarded as a fundamental step towards message passing de­
coding of RS codes. EI-Khamy and McEliece later concate­
nated in [4] ABP with the Koetter-Vardy [5] algebraic soft­
decision decoding (ASD) algorithm, which enabled them to 
achieve near optimal performance for relatively short, high­
rate codes. In [6] a combination of ABP and the ordered­
statistics-decoding (OSD) was used to improve the error cor­
recting capability of medium length codes. 
Due to the significant performance gains ABP and it's mod­
ifications are able to achieve when decoding RS codes, we 
investigate in this paper performance-cost trade-offs when 
ABP based algorithms are considered for implementation in 
software or hardware. Moreover, since these algorithms are 
based on the same operations as decoding algorithms for 
LDPC codes, future multi-standard, mobile devices could 
easily extend their decoding capabilities into a domain usu­
ally demanding dedicated hardware units, thereby saving 
cost-intensive chip area and implementation time. Beside 
performance studies for the AWGN and Rayleigh fading 
channel, we therefore present as a first step towards an em­
bedded application, numerical results regarding quantization 
effects and explore modifications which generally result in 
considerable complexity and latency reduction. 
The remainder of this work is organized as follows. Some 
preliminaries including the system model are given in the 
following section 2. Simulation results and corresponding 
discussions are provided in section 3. Finally, section 4 con­
cludes the paper and suggests further research directions. 
2. ITERATIVE DECODING OF REED-SOLOMON 
CODES USING ABP 
2.1 Description and Properties of RS codes 
Let RS(N, K) be a Reed-Solomon code which is defined over 
a finite field GF(2q),q E N and let f3 be a primitive ele­
ment of the field. K represents the number of information 
symbols, while the block length N is equal to N = 2q - 1. 
The minimum distance of the RS code can be denoted by 
dm;n = N - K + 1. Let m 
= [m(),ml,'" ,mK-l] be a mes­
sage of K information symbols. These symbols can be as­
sociated with an information polynomial m(x) = mo +mlx+ 
... + mK -10 -1, which is encoded through multiplication by 
N-K 
a generator polynomial g(x) = n (x - f3j) employing the 
j=1 
equation c(x) = m(x)g(x). By this definition, each codeword 
C 
= [CO,CI, ... ,CN-d,Ci E GF(2q) is interpreted as a code 
polynomial c(x). On decoder side, one could verify the valid­
ity of c by evaluating the well known parity-check equation 
c· Hr = 0, with Hq being a (N - K) x N dimensional matrix 
consisting of (N - K) codewords spanning the dual code of 
RS(N,K) [7]: 
r; 
13 
f3(N-l) 
132 
f32(N-I) 
Hq= 
(1) 
13 (N-K) 
f3(N-I)(N-K)) 
© EURASIP, 2009 
1166 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Because the ABP algorithm operates on bit-level reliability 
values, Hq as well as C need to be transformed into an equiv­
alent binary image representation Hb and Cb, respectively. 
Depending on the chosen basis for representing the symbols 
of GF(2q) one could get different binary images of Hq. In 
this paper, we assume normal basis representation for which 
the transformation can be found e.g. in [8]. Correspond­
ingly, each element of Hq will be represented by a q x q 
sub-matrix in the binary image Hb. Hence, Hb will be of 
size ( N  - K)q x Nq. Now let n = N· q and k = K ·  q be the 
length of the codeword and the information at bit level, re­
spectively. Again, we can compute the syndrome Cb . HI, 
which becomes zero ifcb = [CO,CI, ... ,cn-Il,ci E GF(2) is a 
valid codeword. 
2.2 System Model 
Before describing the ABP algorithm formally, we first as­
sume that the encoded bits Cj, (j = 0, . . .  ,n - 1) are modu­
lated using antipodal BPSK with a sent symbol taking the 
value Sj = (-1 )Cj. 
The binary symbols are either trans­
mitted over an AWGN or a Rayleigh fading channel (Fig. 
1). On receiver side, the input values can be specified by 
rj = lajlsj + nj, with nj being real valued additive white 
Gaussian noise and aj being the complex fading factor which 
becomes a = 1 for the AWGN, and lajl being Rayleigh dis­
tributed otherwise. By setting E( lajI2) = 1 we suppose there 
is no loss of energy during transmission. Additionally, for 
the Rayleigh channel, aj is assumed to be constant for q con­
secutive BPSK symbols, i.e. a slowly fading channel model 
is applied. 
data 
source 
data 
sink 
Figure 1: System Model 
2.3 Adaptive Belief Propagation 
The BP algorithm as original proposed in [9] has found nu­
merous application in the decoding of linear block codes 
with sparse graph representations, as e.g. LDPC codes. In 
[10] it was shown that using BP decoding for LDPC codes 
can approach the Shannon limit. However, the binary im­
age Hb of the parity-check matrix of a RS code is of high­
density, leading to many short cycles in the corresponding 
Tanner graph representation. These short cycles counteract 
the BP algorithm in converging to the correct codeword, as 
they introduce correlation between exchanged belief infor­
mation. Messages, sent from check nodes to variable nodes 
and vice versa, are therefore loosing their independence, re­
sulting in poor error-correcting performance of the BP algo­
rithm. In [3] a modified version of BP, namely ABP, was 
proposed where the parity-check sub-matrix corresponding 
to the n - k least reliable bits (LRBs) in Hb is reduced into 
an identity matrix before standard BP decoding is applied. 
Hence, error propagation from the unreliable bits is effec­
tively reduced, which facilitates ABP decoding also to im­
prove the soft-decoding performance of linear block codes 
having HDPC matrices with a large number of short cycles. 
2.3.1 BP decoding 
In relation to [11], each parity-check matrix Hb can be de­
scribed by a bipartite graph consisting of n variable and 
(n - k) check nodes, that are connected with each other by 
edges when the corresponding entry H(i,j) in Hb (i being the 
row index, j being the column index) equals one. Decoding 
using BP can be accomplished by iteratively exchanging re­
liability information (called messages) between variable and 
check nodes. Messages mx--+y passed along the edges are cal­
culated in two stages according to the following decoding 
equations: 
• Check node update: 
• Variable node update: 
Symbols: 
I 
LIO) (rj) 
Ii 
f(x) 
count index for inner BP iterations 
initial log-likelihood ratio of bit j 
variable node attenuation coefficient (0 < Ii 'S I) 
f(x) L log ;;i:i: 
message passed from variable node .i to check node i 
message passed from check node i to variable node .i 
(2) 
(3) 
set of all variable nodes connecting to check node i except for node.i 
set of all check nodes connecting to variable node j except for node i 
Before the BP algorithm iterates on a matrix Hh, variable 
node messages are initialized by the current bit-reliability 
values m)i = L(O) (rj). In the first iteration of BP decoding 
these values can be expressed in terms of log-likelihood 
ratios (LLRs) as observed from the channel: 
(4) 
with R = K/Nbeing the rate of the RS( N,K) code and Eb/NO 
the signal-to-noise ratio used during transmission. We as­
sume that aj is known to the receiver (perfect channel state 
information). In the last iteration of BP, variable node up­
dates are skipped and new bit-reliability values are computed 
according to: 
L(k+I)(rj)=L(k)(rj)+a. Lm01)), (O<a::;l) (5) 
iEC) 
with k being the outer iteration index and L(k) (rj) the LLR of 
bit j at iteration k. As the BP algorithm is only suboptimal 
when decoding dense parity check matrices, the parameters 
a and e, which attenuate the influence of the extrinsic in­
formation, need to be chosen carefully for each individual 
code (this is different from LDPC codes, where a and e can 
usually be set to one as the BP decoding is considered to be 
optimal due to the nonexisting short cycles). 
2.3.2 ABP decoding 
As mentioned above, the ABP algorithm first adopts the 
matrix Hb according to the LRBs. This can be accomplished 
by first sorting the LLRs, followed by Gaussian elimination 
1167 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Figure 2: Decoding chains incorporating the ABP algorithm: 
a) ABP-HD 
b) ABP-BM 
(GE) of the columns which correspond to the LRBs. After­
wards, the BP decoding algorithm is applied to the adopted 
matrix Hik+l) = ¢(Hik), IL(k)l) with a preset number of 
inner iterations lmax = BPi!. Depending on a chosen stop­
ping criterium there are then several possibilities to continue: 
a) ABP-HD: 
Perform hard decisions on the updated bit-reliability values 
{ 0 
if 
L(k+I)(r) > 0 
Cj = 
J 
-
and check if BP decod-
1 
else 
ing has been successful by computing c . Hb. Decoding is 
finished if it is equal to zero, otherwise ABP continues with 
a new outer iteration unless a maximum number of outer 
iterations kmax = Nl has been reached. 
b) ABP-BMlKV: 
After each bit-reliability update (5), the corresponding word 
is added to a global list which can be used as input for a sec­
ond decoder D (e.g. a hard-in hard-out Berlekamp-Massay 
(BM) or a soft-in hard-out Koetter-Vardy (KV) decoder). 
Decoding stops if the maximum number of outer iterations 
has been reached. Finally, the codeword c is selected from 
the list of valid codewords decoded by the decoder D, 
using e.g. minimum Euclidean distance. In this paper, we 
restrict our comparison to the ABP-HD against the ABP-BM 
decoder as they are pictured in Fig. 2. 
3. SIMULATION SETUP AND RESULTS 
3.1 Comparison of ABP-BM with ABP-HD 
Considering the two decoding chains from an implementa­
tion point of view, it gives reason to the question on the cod­
ing gain loss if the less complex ABP-HD is deployed instead 
of ABP-BM. Independent of the decision if the ABP algo­
rithm is going to be implemented as software on a digital 
signal processor (DSP) or if a dedicated hardware acceler­
ator is going to be used, ABP-BM would require a second 
decoder D which would demand at least more computational 
power and result in higher latency. In particular the fact that 
both the BerJekamp-Massay as well as the Koetter-Vardy al­
gorithm are based on algebraic operations over higher order 
fields, would not only require additional instructions for the 
corresponding field arithmetic, but also much more area due 
to dedicated computational units (e.g. for Galois field multi­
plication) [12]. Therefore, as ABP-HD isjust based on oper­
ations over GF(2), it would fit the requirement for universal­
ity of future multi-standard mobile devices very well. Hence, 
an implementation would not be restricted to some specific 
code parameters q and g(x) as it usually becomes necessary 
for the BM as well as the KV algorithm. In Fig. 3(a) the BM, 
ABP-HD and the ABP-BM algorithms are compared with 
each other for the AWGN and in Fig. 3(b) for the slowly fad-
10' <rc±---t²³=-´µ¶-,----:.,.,..,.,.,-,.,-
-=---, 
-
* - 8M, RS(31.22), q=5 
- • - 8M, RS(63.45), q=6 
- • - 8M, RS(127,90), q=7 
--e- ABP-HD. RS(31.22), a;=1f8 
Eb/No (dB) 
(a) AWGN channel 
1O'±""""k²³´µ¶·¸ - A - 8M, RS(31,25), q=5 
- A - 8M, RS(64,48), q=8 
- A. - 8M, RS(204,188), q=B 
--a- ABP-HD, RS(31,25) 
\ 
--a- ABP-HD, RS(64,48) 
--a- ABP-HD, RS(204,188) 
. .  + ABP-8M, RSI31,25) 
. .  + ABP-BM, RSI64,48) 
. .  + ABP-BM, RSI204,188) 
(b) Rayleigh channel 
Figure 3: Performance of BM, ABP-HD and ABP-BM for ditler­
ent RS codes 
ing Rayleigh channel. NI we set to a maximum number of 50 
iterations, while BPTt was set to one, hence variable node up­
dates were skipped and instead bit reliabilities were updated 
immediately according to (5) after completion of check-node 
updates. 
If we compare ABP-HD with ABP-BM under AWGN 
conditions, one can observe for larger block lengths the 
growing cO.ding ¥ain loss of ABP-HD as the SNR icreases. 
At FER ot 10-· the loss compared to ABP-BM IS about 
:::: 0.3 dB for the RS(63,45) and:::: 0.4 dB for RS(127,90). 
For smaller block lengths, as e.g. for RS(31,22), we ob­
served almost no difference between both algorithms down 
to the FERs presented here. As all codes in Fig. 3(a) were 
chosen to have R :::: 0.71, one can also notice the shrinking 
coding gain of ABP-based algorithms compared to classical 
BM as the block length becomes larger . At a FER of 10-3 
the gain is:::: 2.3 dB for RS(31,22), while for RS(127,90) it 
shrinks down to:::: 0.8 dB. From wireless system design point 
of view, this suggests to use e.g. LDPC codes for larger block 
lengths, while RS codes decoded by ABP would be well 
suited for smaller block lengths. For the Rayleigh channel 
1168 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
we investigated two shortened RS codes which are included 
e.g. in WiMAX (RS(64,48),q = 8) and in DVB standards 
(RS(204, 188), q = 8). One can observe the large coding gain 
improvement of;::: 6 dB which ABP-HD is able to achieve 
at a FER of 10-3 for this more practical system model. Un­
like for the AWGN channel, we could not notice valuable 
coding gain when ABP-BM is used instead. From the simu­
lations we also observed, that the larger the number of parity 
checks, the more carefully the damping coefficient a needs 
to be chosen. For a RS(31, 25) code a could be set to  
or k resulting in almost no difference in FER performance, 
while for the RS(64,48) and RS(204, 188) we found the best 
results only for a = ft (we restricted a to values of power of 
two which could be easily implemented on DSPs using shift 
registers). Moreover, considering especially shorter block 
lengths with FER being less sensitive to a, we recommend 
to set a as large as possible, as this reduces the number of it­
erations necessary to find a valid codeword, hence decoding 
latency can be decreased. 
3.2 Sum-Product vs. quantized Min-Sum Algorithm 
Even if some state-of-the-art DSPs possess complex floating 
point operations, one is still faced with the need to imple­
ment the function f(x) and its inverse for check-node opera­
tion (2). Especially if a parallel implementation of the ABP 
algorithm is aspired, the approximation of f(x) by means of 
lookup-tables would increase the area as well as power con­
sumption significantly. As already known from LDPC codes, 
equation (2) can be approximated by the Min-Sum (MS) al­
gorithm which overcomes the restriction to use lookup-tables 
with: 
(1+1) 
IT
'
 ( (I) ) 
. (I (I) I) 
mj-t j = 
sIgn m j'--ti .
. )lUn 
m i' --ti 
. 
,., EV\.. 
. 
J EVj\i 
. 
, 
l I 
(6) 
In Fig. 4(a) and 4(b) we investigated the FER perfor­
mance of the ABP-HD algorithm using the Sum-Product al­
gorithm (SPA) and its quantized MS approximation for a 
RS(31,25) and the RS(64,48) code. For all the quantized 
simulations we skipped the scaling factor 4 in equation (4) 
and applied instead L(O) (rj) = lajIR;rj. We further used 
a uniform quantization scheme which clips the soft-input 
values and exchanged messages into the range spanned by 
- Th ::; L(O) (rj) ::; +1/1' with 1/1 being the optimal thresh­
old found by simulations. Depending on the number of 
bits W used for quantization of soft-information, the quan-
tization interval is given by ,1 = 21),1' Due to the sum­
mation in (5) we assumed the addition to be more precise 
than the given bit-width W of the exchanged messages. This 
does not cost much complexity as the summed values can 
be stored locally in registers. For RS(31, 25) it can be ob­
served that 6 bit message quantization (with 8 bits for sum­
mation) results in negligible performance loss for the AWGN 
(;::: 0.05 dB @FER= 10-4) as well as for the Rayleigh chan­
nel (;::: 0.15 dB @ FER = 10-4) if one compares it with;::: 2 
dB and 7 dB coding gain respectively over BM algorithm. 
For RS( 64,48) 6 bit message quantization even coincides 
with SPA floating point implementation in a Rayleigh fad­
ing environment. Considering the smaller RS(31,25) code 
with only 4 bit message quantization and 6 bit summation, 
the FER of MSA compared to SPA degrades by ;::: 0.2 dB for 
AWGN and;::: 1.0 dB for the Rayleigh channel at FER= I 0-4. 
(a) AWGN channel 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
EliNo(dB) 
(b) Rayleigh channel 
Figure 4: Performance of quantized MSA in comparison to SPA 
For the larger RS( 64,48) code, we found a minimum of 5 
bits adequate for message quantization. This corresponds to 
the quantization which is usually employed for LDPC codes. 
In Fig. 5(a) and 5(b) we also compare the average num­
ber of iterations executed until a valid codeword was found. 
Clearly, the number of iterations decreases as the SNR be­
comes larger. For the RS(31,25) in a low SNR, Rayleigh 
fading environment we found a large increase in the number 
of iterations if only 4 bits are used for message quantiza­
tion. Considering the variance, which is also plotted for the 
sake of clarity, one can also notice a large increase for the 
AWGN channel. Much better results we obtain if 6 bits are 
employed, which not only improves FER but also reduces the 
average number of iterations for low SNR values compared 
to the SPA. Although MSA is originally used as an approx­
imation of the SPA, SPA is not optimal for decoding HDPC 
matrices. Hence, MSA seems to be better suited at least for 
low SNR values as it can reduce latency. As the operating 
point is moved towards lower FERs, the difference between 
SPA and quantized MSA diminishes. A similar behavior can 
be observed for the RS(64,48) code. 
1169 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
RS(31,25), (l=1f8 
301C--34-567============8 
...... SPA, mean 
25 
20 
15 
--<1- . SPA, mean+o" 
-+- MS, Th=1 3, 4 bit, mean 
-+- MS, Th=1.3, 4 bit, mean+o 
...... MS, Th=2 0, 6 bit, mean 
-0- ' MS, Th=2.0, 6 bit, mean+o 
...... red. MS (50%), Th =1.3, 6 bit, mean 
--<J-
red. MS (50%), Th =1.3, 6 bit, mean+a 
2.5 
3.5 
4 
4.5 
EbfNo (dB) 
(a) AWGN channel 
RS(3125) 11=118 
5.5 
der to emphasize the large reduction in decoding time when 
the reduced MSA is employed, we provide the average de­
coding time per iteration for several RS codes in table 1. We 
would like to point out, that the saving in decoding time for 
reduced complexity MSA would be even higher if the GE 
step would be optimized as e.g. proposed in [4]. In order to 
achieve the same FER as with the full MS update in a AWGN 
channel, the reduction could not be made as small as for the 
Rayleigh channel. The reason for that basically comes from 
the AWGN distribution, which leads to a smaller difference 
between least- and most reliable bits, hence more bits are re­
quired to be updated for better belief propagation. 
SPA 
fullMS 
red. MS (25%) 
RS(31,25) 
0.02187 (100%) 
0.00496 (23%) 
0.00087 (4%) 
RS(64,48) 
0.92191 (100%) 
0.20617 (22%) 
0.08740 (9%) 
RS(204,188) 
13.77440 (100%) 
2.78330 (20%) 
0.53878 (4%) 
Table 1: Average decoding time per iteration for ABP-HD (in sec­
onds), measured on a Intel Xeon CPU (2.8 GHz) using Microsoft 
Visual C++ 2005 Compiler 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we investigated soft-decision decoding of RS 
codes based on the ABP algorithm. We focused on the 
performance-cost trade-offs that become necessary if ABP 
is employed in future wireless, embedded systems and pro-
°6L-©ª«
-¬IO­II
-®I2-,¯3°14 
EI:i'No(dS) 
vided adequate parameter settings in order to achieve accept­
°6c----c:--S:--,:----c,C:-O 
---:" able error-correcting performance. We showed for short to 
Eb'rb(dB) 
(b) Rayleigh channel 
Figure 5: Average number of iterations using SPA and MSA 
3.3 Performance of Complexity Reduced MSA 
Especially if BPIt is set to one and the LLRs are therefore re­
ordered every iteration, one can restrict the bit-reliability up­
dates to the LRBs, hence reducing the number of operations. 
Besides, we can take advantage of the fact that we already 
know the sorting index of the input LLRs from the GE step. 
Therefore, no extra sorting operations become necessary. 
Updating only the LRBs can be justified by the fact that the 
corresponding bits are with higher probability in error than 
the most-reliable bits (MRBs). Especially for the Rayleigh 
fading channel, where the fading factor ai dominates the re­
liability of the received bits, the deployment of complexity 
reduced MSA can save significant amount of computation 
while still providing competitive FER performance. For the 
RS(31,25) code we simulated the MSA with a partial reli­
ability update incorporating only 25% of the bits with the 
lowest LLR. From Fig. 4(b) it can be observed that with 6 
bit message quantization the results almost coincident with 
full MS update. The same we obtained for the RS( 64,48) 
code using 6 bit message quantization while updating only 
35% of the LLRs (not shown in the figures). Reducing quan­
tization to 5 bits still results in good FER, while the number 
of iterations increases slightly for low SNR values. Further 
restriction of updated LLRs leads to noticeable performance 
loss. However, updating only 20% of all LLRs still results 
in :::: 4.1 dB coding gain over BM at a FER of 10-3. In or-
medium length codes, that ABP-HD based on 5 to 6 bit quan-
tized MS approximation can provide significant lower de­
coding complexity than the SP algorithm at almost no loss 
of FER performance in Rayleigh fading environments. Be­
sides, under Rayleigh conditions, decoding latency of MS al-
gorithm can be further decreased employing partial reliabil­
ity updates. Future work will investigate the trade-ott's when 
the number of BP iterations is not restricted to be one as in 
the analysis presented here. Also, timing measurements of 
the proposed quantized MSA in an actual, embedded system 
would be of interest. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 1. S. Reed and G. Solomon, "Polynomial Codes over Certain Finite Fields," Jour­
nal of Society jor Industrial and Applied Mathematics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 300-304, 
June 1960. 
[2] WirelessHD Specification Version 1.0, www.wirelesshd.org, 2007 
[3] J. Jiang and K. R. Narayanan, "Iterative soft decision decoding of Reed-Solomon 
codes based on adaptive parity check matrices," in Froc. IEEE Inti. Symp. In{ 
Theory, 201J4, p. 261 
[4] M. EI-Khamy and R. J. McEliece, "Iterative Algebraic Soft-Decision List De­
coding of Reed-Solomon codes," in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Commu­
nications , vol. 24, no. 3, March 2006 
[5] R. Koetter and A. Vardy, "Algebraic soft-decision decoding of Reed-Solomon 
codes," in IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 2809-2825, Nov. 
2003 
[6] A. Kothiyai, O. Y. Takeshita, W. Jin, M. Fossorier, "Iterative Reliability-Based 
Decoding of Linear Block Codes with Adaptive Belief Propagation," in IEEE 
Comm. Lett., vol. 9, no. 12, Dec. 2005 
[7] S. Lin, D. J. Costello, "Error Control Coding," 2nd edition, 2004 
[8] J. Bellorado, "Low-Complexity Soft Decoding Algorithms for Reed-Solomon 
Codes," PhD thesis, Harvard University, 2006 
[9] R. Gallager, "Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," Ph.D. Thesis, MIT Press, Cam­
bridge, MA, 1963 
[10] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, "Near Shannon limit performance of low den­
sity partiy check codes," lEE Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645-1646, Aug. 
1996. 
[II] R. Tanner, "A recursive approach to low complexity codes," in IEEE Trans. In{ 
Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, Sep. 1981 
[12] J. Dielissen, N. Engin, S. Sawitzki, K. van Berkel "Multi standard FEC Decoders 
for Wireless Devices," in IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems, vol. 55, no. 3, March 
2008 
1170 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
