17th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO 2009)

Glasgow, Scotland, August 24-28, 2009

FULLY PROGRAMMABLE LAYERED LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE Christiane Beuschel and Hans-Jo¨rg Pfleiderer
Institute of Microelectronics, University of Ulm University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 43, 89081 Ulm, Germany phone: + (49) 731 5026210, fax: + (49) 731 5026222, email: christiane.beuschel@uni-ulm.de

ABSTRACT In this article we present a fully programmable layered LDPC decoder architecture together with an optimum mapping and scheduling algorithm. In contrast to other designs proposed in the literature, we use one-phase message passing. This allows for the first time the design of a fully programmable layered decoder. The proposed mapping and scheduling algorithm exploits the full parallelism of the architecture at any time for any code, which means that the mapping algorithm achieves collision-free memory access and 100% utilization of the architecture. Compared to existing programmable designs without layered decoding we double the data throughput. The parallelism of the architecture is unconstrained and fully scalable so that hardware cost and data throughput can be exchanged with fine granularity.
1. INTRODUCTION Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are known to perform very close to the Shannon limit [1]. They are proposed for error correction in many current and next generation communication standards, e.g. WiMax [2], Wifi [3], DVB-S2 [4]. Iterative decoding of LDPC codes is based on message passing between check and variable nodes. Today’s state of the art LDPC decoders use partly-parallel processing schemes. Between successive updates in the nodes the messages are stored in memory banks. However, access patterns on the stored data are different during check and variable node processing. Thus a key challenge in partly-parallel decoder design is to avoid memory access collisions.
The programmable architectures presented in the literature usually involve heuristic mapping algorithms to resolve memory access collisions, which lead to stall cycles or idle processing units [5], [6]. It is widely unknown that a partly-parallel decoder architecture with collision-free memory mapping for arbitrary LDPC codes exists. However, while the architecture and the mapping presented in [7] can resolve all memory access collisions, it uses two-phase messages passing. In current LDPC decoder designs this approach is not used any more as it reduces the data throughput.
In this article, we present a fully programmable LDPC decoder architecture with one-phase message passing, collision-free memory access, and free choice for parallelism p. The identical hardware can decode any structured or unstructured LDPC code.
For LDPC code design, the error correction performance of a large set of candidate codes has to be simulated to determine the best code. Especially for low bit error rates, software simulations are very time consuming. Thus a hardware accelerator performing the decoding is an important tool to speed up the slow software simulations. Our proposed programmable decoder can be used as such a hardware acceler-

ator as it can decode any LDPC code. Furthermore, no hardware knowledge is necessary to reconfigure the hardware accelerator for a different LDPC code.
With more and more upcoming standards using LDPC codes for error correction, another application for a fully programmable decoder is a multi-standard decoder. Most reconfigurable decoders presented in the literature are restricted to one code class [8]. With the mapping and scheduling algorithm presented in this article it is possible to implement an ASIC decoder core which can decode arbitrary LDPC codes by changing only the initialization of the control memory.
In the following, we present to the best of our knowledge the first fully programmable layered LDPC decoder architecture. The proposed mapping and scheduling algorithm guarantees collision-free memory access for any LDPC code and allows one-phase message passing. The parallelism of the architecture is fully scalable.
The structure of this article is as follows: Section 2 shortly introduces LDPC codes, in Section 3 we present the optimum mapping and scheduling algorithm, and in Section 4 we propose two fully programmable LDPC decoder architectures which match the mapping algorithm: one uses one-phase flooding schedule whereas the other one uses layered decoding. Section 5 compares the proposed architectures against other programmable decoder architectures and finally Section 6 gives the conclusion.

2. DECODING OF LDPC CODES

A binary (N, K) LDPC code is defined by a sparse M x N

parity-check matrix H. Equivalently the LDPC code can be

described by a bipartite graph with M check nodes corre-

sponding to the rows and N variable nodes corresponding to

the columns of H. Check node m is connected to variable

node n if hmn = 1. M(n) is the set of check nodes that are

connected to variable node n and N(m) is the set of vari-

able nodes that are connected to check node m. E is defined

as the number edges in the bipartite graph. The vector y is

the transmitted codeword with yi ∈ {−1, +1} and r is the received corrupted codeword. The degree of variable node n is

agligvoenritbhymdVc,ann.

The iterative be described

belief propagation (BP) decoding by the following equations:

1. Initialization, l = 0

• intrinsic (channel) values for each n

λn

=

ln

P(yn P(yn

= =

+1|rn −1|rn

) )

,

Sn(0) = λn

(1)

• for each (m, n) ∈ (i, j)|hi j = 1

R(ml)→n = 0

(2)

© EUAuRthAorSizeIPd l,ic2en0s0ed9use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on1J1un5e624,2026 at 07:04:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2. Iteration l = l + 1 • check node update for each (m, n) ∈ (i, j)|hi j = 1

∏ R(ml)→n=

2

·

tanh−1
j∈N

(m),

tanh
j=n

 

S(jl−1)

− 2

R(ml−→1j)

 

(3)

• variable node update for each n = 0 . . . N − 1

∑ Sn(l) = λn +

R(i→l) n

(4)

i∈M(n)

3. Decision: If the maximum number of iterations I is reached, decode for each n qn = sign Sn(l) , else continue with 2.

3. COLLISION-FREE MEMORY ACCESS In this section, we give a universally valid solution to the memory collision problem for arbitrary LDPC codes. We present a collision-free mapping and scheduling algorithm for a fully programmable layered LDPC decoder architecture.

3.1 Mapping function First a mapping function is defined. Given a set

V = {v0, ..., vE−1}

(5)

of E elements vi where E can be factorized as E = L · p, we arbitrarily define two partitions P and P with

P = {V0, ...,VL−1} and P = {V0, ...,VL−1} (6) where each subset Vi or Vj contains p elements of V . A mapping function T is defined with

T : {v0, ..., vE−1} → {0, ..., p − 1}

(7)

such that the following two conditions are fulfilled for every k = 0, ..., L − 1 and every i, j = 0, ..., E − 1 with i = j:

vi, v j ∈ Vk ⇒ T (vi) = T (v j) vi, v j ∈ Vk ⇒ T (vi) = T (v j).

Thus any two values vi and v j which are in the same subset are always mapped to different values. The authors of [7] prove that such a mapping function always exists and furthermore give an algorithm to find it.

3.2 Mapping and scheduling algorithm We now define a collision-free mapping and scheduling algorithm for one-phase message passing, which is the key for a programmable layered decoder. In contrast to [7] we use dynamic instead of static assignment of values to memory banks. Furthermore, memory access collisions are resolved for the sum values instead of for the extrinsic values.
The partly-parallel decoder architecture with parallelism p uses sequential node processing. In each clock cycle p extrinsic values Rm→n in (3) are updated and a partial update of p sum values Sn in (4) is performed. Each extrinsic value is updated exactly once during a decoding iteration. p extrinsic memory banks are required for the parallel update of

p extrinsic values. The extrinsic values are stored in linear order in each memory bank and no memory access collisions occur.

Different from that, each sum value Sn is read and written

darVc,nhittiemcteusreins,

each iteration. For quasi-cyclic (QC) decoder collision-free memory access on p sum values

in parallel can be guaranteed as for each access always the

same p sum values are needed in parallel. This is different for

a fully programmable decoder architecture: the parity-check

matrix is unstructured so that in each clock cycle a “random”

combination of p sum accesses on sum value

values is accessed. In each Sn, the value is accessed in

oafdtihffeerdeVn,nt

combination with other sum values. Therefore we have to

assure that each of these “random” combinations of p sum

values (defined by the parity-check matrix of the code) can

be accessed without memory access collisions. Thus, the p

sum values for each “random” combination have to be stored

in p different memory banks.

To achieve this, memory access collisions for all possible combinations of sum values for a given code have to be resolved. In the following we present a solution in three steps, which is valid for any structured or unstructured LDPC code:

1.

Copy value

ecaocphiessuemxivsta,luaenddVe,ancthimceosp.yTihsisacmceesasnesdthoantlyE

sum once

for read and once for write in each iteration.

2. Determine a memory bank for each copy using the mapping function from Section 3.1.

3. Remove sum value copies: interpret each copy of a sum value as the same sum value at a different point in time. This means that in the final implementation only the N original sum values are stored and that a sum value resides in different memory banks throughout one iteration.

In the following, these three steps are explained in more

detail using an example with parallelism p = 3 and an irregular LDPC code with dimensions N = 8, M = 6 and paritycheck matrix

1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0

01011010



H

=

 



1 1

1 0

1 0

0 1

1 0

0 0

0 0

0

 

1

. 

(8)

0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0

00100011

Step 1): Fig. 1a shows N = 8 sum values Sn in the top

line. Each Sn is copied responding variable node

ddVeg,nreteimaensd

according to the corarranged in the same

way as the parity-check matrix of the code. This is illus-

trated by the gray squares in Fig. 1a. An overall number of

E sum value copies exists. Then an access index for each

sum value copy is determined. Therefore we assume that de-

coding starts with processing of the first p = 3 check nodes

which correspond to lines 0 to 2 in the matrix and continues

with the next p check nodes which correspond to lines 3 to

5. Each check node itself is processed sequentially as in (3).

To meet the constraint that in each column each access in-

dex is used only once, the order in which the edges of one

check node are processed can be modified. The resulting ac-

cess indices for the sum value copies are given on the right

in Fig. 1a.

Step 2): In this step, the mapping function from Sec-

tion 3.1 is applied. The set V in (5) with cardinality E is

defined as the set of all sum value copies. Partition P in (6)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on1J1un5e724,2026 at 07:04:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

is defined by the access indices: sum value copies with the

same access index i form one subset Vi. Partition P is defined

as shown in Fig. 1b: the access indices within each column

are permuted such that each index is replaced by the next

smaller one and the smallest index is replaced by the biggest

isnudmexvainlutehceocpoileusmwni.thStuhbesseatmVie

of partition P consists permuted access index

of the i. The

cardinality of ping function

each subset T from (7) is

Vapi polrieVdi.

is p The

= 3. Then the maprange of the function

consists of p = 3 values which are represented by the shapes

square (red), hexagon (green) and circle (blue). A possible

solution for the mapping function is shown in Fig. 1c. In the

decoder architecture exactly p memory banks for the sum

values exist. Each shape (color) corresponds to one memory

bank, and it can be seen that copies with the same access in-

dex are located in different memory banks. Thus no memory

access collisions occur.

Step 3): So far all operations were performed on the E

sum value copies. This was necessary to explain how the

mapping of sum values to memory banks is performed. In

the actual implementation, only N sum values and no copies

exist. In the following we explain how all copies can be re-

moved. The upper part of Fig. 1d shows again the sum value

copies for partition P with access indices and shapes (col-

ors) for memory banks. In the final system, all sum copies in

one column of the matrix correspond to the same sum value.

During initialization of the sum memory, each sum value Sn is written to the memory bank where the first read is per-

formed from. This corresponds to the memory bank with the

smallest access index in a column as indicated by the arrows

in the upper part of Fig. 1d. The first read accesses the three

values S0, S1, and S4 according to V0. It can be seen that different shapes (colors) are assigned to the three values which

means that they are located in different memory banks. Then

the values are written back to the same memory banks ac-

cacocrdoirndgintgotVo0V. 1.NAexlst othtehessuemthvreaeluveasluSe0s,

S2, are

and S3 are read read from three

different memory banks. Writing back is performed in per-

muted order, e.g. S0 was read from the “square” memory bank but is written back to the “hexagon” bank, S2 was read from “hexagon” and is written to “circle” and S3 was read from “circle” and is written to the “square” bank according to

Vin1

. Thus after the different banks

write operation, the sum values as before and are prepared for

are stored their next

read access. The same process continues until all sum values

varaeluuepsdaarteedagdaVin,n

times. in their

At the end of the iteration, original memory banks.

all

sum

4. FULLY PROGRAMMABLE DECODER ARCHITECTURES AND SCHEDULING
In this section we present a fully programmable layered decoder architecture which doubles the data throughput at no additional hardware cost compared with [7]. Using the mapping algorithm described in Section 3.2, an optimum scheduling of operations is achieved which exploits the full parallelism of the architectures at any time for any LDPC code. Before we discuss the details for the layered architecture, we present a one-phase flooding schedule architecture which updates variable nodes during check node processing and thus also doubles the data throughput of [7].

N=8 sum values S0 S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7
copy

E=21 sum value copies
(a)

access

0 12 3

0 12 3

123 0

4

5

6

4

56

4

65

access indices for sum value copies

subset V0

partition P = access index

0 12 3

0 12 3

123 0

4

5

6

4

56

4

65

subset V'0
(b)

partition P'

4 41 6

4 50 6

001 5

1

2

5

2

23

3

36

partition P

partition P'

0 12 3

4 41 6

0 12 3

4 50 6

123 0

001 5

4

5

6

1

2

5

4

56

2

23

4

65

3

36

(c)

0 12 3

0 12 3

123 0

4

5

6

4

56

4

65

sum value, initialization

S0 S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7

read V0 write V'0 read V1 write V'1
read V2 write V'2
read V3 write V'3

...

...

read V6 write V'6

sum value, end of iteration

S0 S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7
(d)

Figure 1: Mapping and scheduling algorithm: illustration of (a) step 1: copies and access indices; (b) and (c) step 2: partitions and mapping function; (d) step 3: removal of copies

4.1 Flooding schedule decoder architecture The architecture in Fig. 2 consists of p intrinsic memory banks IMi for the values λn in (1), p extrinsic memory banks EMi for the extrinsic messages Rm→n in (3), p sum memory banks SMAi and p sum memory banks SMBi to store the previous and current total sum Sn in (3), (4). Each memory bank 0 corresponds to the shape “square” in Fig. 1d, bank 1 to “hexagon” and bank 2 to “circle”. All memories are dual-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on1J1un5e824,2026 at 07:04:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

controller control memory
controller control memory
FIFO

SMA0

p2 SMA1

SMA2

p0

CFU0

EM0 CFU1 EM1 CFU2 EM2

CP

SM0

SM1

SM2

CFU0 CP

EM0

p0 CFU1 EM1 CFU2 EM2

p1

IM0

IM1

IM2

VFU0 SMB0 VFU1 SMB1 VFU2 SMB2

p3

VFU0

VFU1 p1

VFU2

Figure 3: Fully programmable layered decoder architecture (p = 3)

Figure 2: Fully programmable flooding schedule decoder architecture (p = 3): dashed lines indicate reversed data paths for even iterations, see Section 4.3
port memories allowing simultaneous and independent read and write access on two data entries. The four permutation networks πi can be realized as Benesˇ networks. p check and p variable node functional units (CFUi resp. VFUi) perform the node computations, the core function for check node processing is implemented in the CP blocks. In the VFUs the sum of all incoming values is sent to the output. Each CFU and each VFU updates one data value in each clock cycle, thus 2p data values are updated in each clock cycle. A controller and a control memory are needed to configure the permutation networks and to generate the addresses for the sum memory banks. A different LDPC code can be decoded by changing the initialization of the control memory.
4.2 Layered decoder architecture Fig. 3 shows the fully programmable layered decoder architecture. Compared with the flooding schedule decoder architecture, the hardware cost can be significantly reduced, which is consistent with results for QC decoder implementations [9]. Thus we can save the two permutation networks π2 and π3 and the reversed data paths as well as the p sum memory banks SMBi and the p intrinsic memory banks IMi while we can still perform 2p data updates in each clock cycle. Scheduling of check nodes is performed in reverse order in every second iteration. This modified layered schedule increases the convergence speed compared to the flooding schedule.
An inherent constraint for layered decoding is to choose the order of check node processing such that the total sum values in the SMi memory banks are not needed again before the last update was finished. The constraint can be relaxed by introducing idle states, which reduce the throughput. Simulations using simulated annealing show that in general a solution with less than 5% additional processing time can be found for p = 16 by rearranging the order of check node processing.

4.3 Mapping and scheduling on decoder architecture

Mapping and scheduling are first explained in detail for the

flooding schedule decoder architecture and then the results

are transfered to the layered architecture. Decoding of a

received corrupted codeword starts with initialization of all

memories in Fig. 2 according to (1) and (2). The intrinsic

value λn corresponds to column n in the parity-check matrix and is written to the memory bank indicated in the line “sum

value, initialization” in Fig. 1d. In our example this means

that λ0 is written to the “square” banks SMA0 and IM0, λ1 to the “circle” banks SMA2 and IM2. The address within each memory bank is increased by one for each value which is

written to the same memory bank during initialization.

During the decoding iterations, linear addressing is used

for the EM memory banks and “random” addressing for the

SM banks. p total-sum values which correspond to the copies

in Vk are read at time t = k from the SMAi. Then the sum

values are written back over π2 to the same memory ad-

dresses but possibly different banks as indicated by Vk . E.g.

for t from

= 1 according (SMA0, SMA1,

to V1, SMA2)

Va1ndthwe rvitatleunesba(cSk0

, S2, S3) are read in permuted or-

der to (SMA1, SMA2, SMA0). Each CFUi sequentially updates

the extrinsic messages of one check node, writes the updated

messages to the EMi bank and also sends them to the VFUs. Permutation network π0 assigns the correct message to each CFU and π1 performs the inverse permutation of π0.

In the VFUs the variable node update is performed ac-

cording to (4). However, the Ri→n values for one variable node do not arrive sequentially but in “random” order. Thus

a temporary total sum is read and always one value is accu-

madudleadte. dRweaidthinSgn,akn+d1

w=riStnin,kg+thRei→tontaulnstuilmalvladluV,ens

values in the

were SM Bi

memory banks is performed in the same order as for the SMAi

banks, only a delay in time is added.

After the update of all extrinsic messages in the first de-

coding iteration, the second iteration is started by swapping

the two sum memories SMA and SMB. All operations are now performed in reverse order, meaning that some data paths are

inverted as indicated by the dashed lines in Fig. 2 and that the

subsets ending

are processed with V0. After

itnheresveecrosnedoirtdeerratsitoanrtainllgswumithvValLu−e1s

and are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on1J1un5e924,2026 at 07:04:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Table 1: Comparison of hardware cost and data throughput

[5]

[6]

[7]

prop. arch.

flooding layered

perm. net.

1†

2†

2

4

2

VFUs

p

p

p

p

p

CFUs

p

p

p

p

p

idle FUs

yes

yes

yes

no

no

mem. size, N + 4E N + E N + E 3N + E N + E

E = 3.5N utilization

= 15N = 4.5N = 4.5N ≈ 40%‡ ≈ 80%‡ 100%

= 6.5N 100%

= 4.5N 100%

updates per clock

≈ 0.4p‡ ≈ 0.8p‡

p

2p

2p

† significant additional number of multiplexers needed ‡ average value over a set of benchmark codes

again in the original memory banks at the original addresses. The next iterations are processed equivalently.
Processing on the layered decoder architecture can be directly derived from processing on the flooding schedule architecture. A simplification for the layered architecture is that instead of the reversed data paths, different configurations for the permutation networks π0 and π1 are used in even and odd iterations.
5. COMPARISON The presented LDPC decoder architectures together with the mapping and scheduling algorithm achieve collision-free memory access and 100% utilization for arbitrary LDPC codes. Compared to [7] we double the data throughput by using one-phase message passing. Other approaches presented in the literature use heuristic mapping algorithms, which result in a significant number of idle processing units and thus lower the data throughput [5], [6].
Table 1 compares the different architectures. A fair comparison for the number of permutation networks is only possible for the last three designs as the first two designs need a significant number of additional multiplexers. The number of VFUs and CFUs is the same for all designs. However, in [5], [6] and [7] VFUs and CFUs are used alternately, while our proposed architectures use VFUs and CFUs in parallel so that no idle units exist. The memory size is counted in multiples of messages to be stored. The required memory size to store the extrinsic, intrinsic and sum values for our proposed layered architecture is as small as in [6] and [7].
The next line in the table measures the utilization of the architecture. Heuristic mapping algorithms are applied in [5], [6] which achieve significantly lower values compared with our algorithm which is optimum on the proposed architectures. For any structured or unstructured code, we reach a utilization of 100% on the flooding architecture and a utilization of 100% on the layered architecture given the code is suitable for layered decoding.
For the heuristic mapping algorithms in [5], [6] the number of data updates per clock strongly depends on the code and in general is below the optimum p. Mapping in [7] is optimum and p messages are updated in each clock cycle. However, for our proposed designs the number of updated messages is twice or even five times as high as for the other implementations. In contrast to [7] where a static mapping function is applied on the extrinsic values, our proposed architecture applies a dynamic mapping function on the sum

values. Thus we are able to process check and variable nodes in parallel and double the data throughput compared with [7].
Comparing our programmable architectures with the corresponding QC decoders with flooding and layered decoding [9], our approach needs the same amount of extrinsic, intrinsic and sum memory. Instead of each barrel shifter two permutation networks are used. Storage of a random paritycheck matrix inherently requires more memory than storage of a QC parity-check matrix in the control memory. However, using the same parallelism, the developed scheme for collision-free memory access on the programmable architectures achieves the same data throughput as QC architectures.
6. CONCLUSION In this article we presented a fully programmable layered decoder architecture together with an optimum mapping and scheduling algorithm. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time a fully programmable layered decoder architecture is presented. The proposed design enables collision-free memory access for arbitrary LDPC codes. Any structured or unstructured LDPC code can be decoded with an architecture utilization of 100% on the identical hardware. Reconfiguration for a different code is achieved by changing the initialization of the control memory. In contrast to other programmable architectures where static mapping of messages to memory locations is used, our dynamic mapping increases the data throughput by a factor two to five.
REFERENCES
[1] D.J.C. MacKay and R.M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 33 (6), pp. 457-458, 1997.
[2] IEEE 802.16e, “Air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems,” IEEE P802.16e/D12, 2005.
[3] IEEE 802.11n, “Wireless LAN medium access control and physical layer specifications: Enhancements for higher throughput,” IEEE P802.16n, 2006.
[4] European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), ”Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) Second Generation ,” EN 302 307 V1.1.1.
[5] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible LDPC decoder,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 54 (6), pp. 542–546, 2007.
[6] C. Beuschel and H.-J. Pfleiderer, “FPGA implementation of a flexible decoder for long LDPC codes”, IEEE International Conference on Field Programmable Logic and Applications, FPL, pp. 185–190, 2008.
[7] A. Tarable, S. Benedetto, and G. Montorsi, “Mapping interleaving laws to parallel turbo and LDPC decoder architectures,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50 (9), pp. 2002–2009, 2004.
[8] K. Gunnam, G. Choi, M. Yeary, and M. Atiquzzaman, “VLSI Architectures for Layered Decoding for Irregular LDPC Codes of WiMax,” IEEE International Conference on Communications, pp. 4542–47, 2007.
[9] T. Brack, M. Alles, T. Lehnigk-Emden, F. Kienle, N. Wehn, N. L’Insalata, F. Rossi, M. Rovini, and L. Fanucci, “Low complexity LDPC code decoders for next generation standards,” DATE, pp. 331–336, 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on1J1un6e024,2026 at 07:04:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

