IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 8, AUGUST 2009

3479

Guessing Facets: Polytope Structure and Improved LP Decoder
Alexandros G. Dimakis, Student Member, IEEE, Amin A. Gohari, Student Member, IEEE, and Martin J. Wainwright, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We investigate the structure of the polytope underlying the linear programming (LP) decoder introduced by Feldman, Karger, and Wainwright. We first show that for expander codes, every fractional pseudocodeword always has at least a constant fraction of nonintegral bits. We then prove that for expander codes, the active set of any fractional pseudocodeword is smaller by a constant fraction than that of any codeword. We further exploit these geometrical properties to devise an improved decoding algorithm with the same order of complexity as LP decoding that provably performs better. The method is very simple: it first applies ordinary LP decoding, and when it fails, it proceeds by guessing facets of the polytope, and then resolving the linear program on these facets. While the LP decoder succeeds only if the ML codeword has the highest likelihood over all pseudocodewords, we prove that the proposed algorithm, when applied to suitable expander codes, succeeds unless there exists a certain number of pseudocodewords, all adjacent to the ML codeword on the LP decoding polytope, and with higher likelihood than the ML codeword. We then describe an extended algorithm, still with polynomial complexity, that succeeds as long as there are at most polynomially many pseudocodewords above the ML codeword.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, bit guessing, decimation, error-correcting codes, iterative decoding, linear programming (LP), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, linear programming (LP) decoding, pseudocodewords.

algorithms for intermediate block lengths. Feldman, Karger, and Wainwright [5] introduced the linear programing (LP) decoding method, which is based on solving a linear-programming relaxation of the integer program corresponding to the maximum likelihood (ML) decoding problem. In practical terms, the performance of LP decoding is roughly comparable to min-sum decoding and somewhat inferior to sum-product decoding. In particular, for LDPC codes with short to medium block lengths, the LP decoder is comparable to sum-product decoding, whereas for longer block lengths, there seems to be some performance loss relative to sum-product.
However, in contrast to message-passing decoding, the LP decoder either concedes failure on a problem, or returns a codeword along with a guarantee that it is the ML codeword, thereby eliminating any undetected decoding errors. On the conceptual level, the correctness of LP decoding reduces to geometric questions about cost vectors and polytope structure, so that the method is well suited to questions of finite-analysis. Indeed, all of the analysis in this paper applies to finite-length codes.
A. Related Work

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are a class of graphical codes, originally introduced by Gallager [1], that come very close to capacity for large blocklengths even when decoded with the suboptimal sum-product algorithm. The standard techniques for analyzing the sum-product algorithm, including density evolution [2] and EXIT charts [3], are asymptotic in nature (see the book [4] for a comprehensive introduction). For many applications that require low-delay or very low error rates, asymptotic methods may not be suitable for explaining or predicting the behavior of the decoding
Manuscript received June 18, 2007; revised April 28, 2008. Current version published July 15, 2009. This work was supported in part by the NSF by Grant DMS-0528488, Grant CAREER CCF-0545862, by a Microsoft Research Fellowship, and by a UC-MICRO grant through Marvell Semiconductor. This work was presented in part at the International Symposium on Information Theory, Seattle, WA, July 2006.
A. G. Dimakis and A. A. Gohari are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA (e-mail: adim@eecs.berkeley.edu; aminzade@eecs.berkeley.edu).
M. J. Wainwright is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, and the Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA (e-mail: wainwrig@eecs.berkeley.edu).
Communicated by T. J. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of Figures 1 and 2 in this paper are available online at http:// ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2023735

Feldman et al. [5], [6] first introduced and studied the basic idea of LP decoding for turbo and low-density parity check codes. There are various connections to message-passing algorithms [7], [8], including links between the reweighted maxproduct algorithm and dual LP relaxations [8], [9], and the standard max-product algorithm and graph covers [10]. For the binary symmetric channels and suitable expander codes, it has been shown that LP decoding can correct a linear fraction of random [11] or adversarial [12] bit-flipping errors. Koetter and Vontobel [13], [10] established bounds on the pseudoweight for the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, showing that it grows only sublinearly for regular codes, and hence that the error probability of LP decoding cannot decay exponentially for the AWGN channel. Subsequent work [14] exploited the constant fraction guarantee [12] to show that LP decoding error decays exponentially for Gaussian channels if the likelihoods are suitably truncated. Other researchers have studied efficient algorithms for solving the LP relaxation, including the reweighted max-product algorithm [9], other forms of iterative dual algorithms [15], and adaptive procedures [16]. As with the work described here, a related line of work has studied various improvements to either standard iterative decoding [17], [18] or to LP decoding [19]–[21]. It should be noted that in a broad sense, the facet guessing algorithms introduced in this paper fall within the class of cutting-plane methods for finding integral

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3480

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 8, AUGUST 2009

points of LP relaxations [22]. However, in contrast to many cut- The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In

ting plane methods, our algorithm never introduces new vertices Section II, we provide background on low-density parity

in the polytope, as can happen with many cutting plane methods check codes and linear programming relaxations for decoding.

which introduce new constraints. In independent work, Yang Section III presents some results on the structure of the LP

et al. [19] explored branch-and-bound techniques, based on ex- decoding polytope for suitable classes of expander codes. In

ploring the solution space and generating bounds on the optimal Sections IV and V, we describe and analyze improved versions

cost. This method can also be viewed within the cutting plane of LP decoding that leverage these structural properties. We

framework, but unlike the methods analyzed here, it does not conclude with a discussion in Section VI.

have polynomial complexity in general. Following the connec-

tion between iterative methods and linear programming relaxations, facet guessing is the LP analog of bit guessing and decimation-procedures [23]–[25] used in iterative message-passing algorithms.
B. Our Contributions

II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we provide basic background on binary linear codes, factor graphs, and decoding based on linear programming.

The LP decoder operates by solving a linear program over a A. Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes and Factor polytope which constitutes a relaxation of the original com- Graphs

binatorial codeword space. The polytope , referred in the liter- A binary linear code of blocklength consists of a linear sub-

ature as the relaxed polytope or fundamental polytope, has two space, where arithmetic is performed modulo two, of the set of

types of vertices: integral vertices with 0–1 components corre- all binary sequences

. A code of rate

can

sponding to codewords, and fractional vertices that correspond be specified by a parity check matrix

: in partic-

to pseudocodewords. The first contribution of this paper is to ular, the code consists of all vectors

that satisfy

characterize several geometric properties of this relaxed poly-

in modulo two arithmetic. Of interest in this paper are

tope for suitable classes of expander codes. For a given (frac- low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], meaning that the

tional) pseudocodeword, we define the fractional support as the number of ones in each row and column of the parity check ma-

subset of coordinates that are nonintegral. For general codes, trix remains bounded independently of the blocklength.

there may exist pseudocodewords with very small fractional A convenient representation of any LDPC code is in terms of supports. Our first result is to show that that for suitable classes its factor graph [26], [27], a bipartite graph consisting of a set of

of expander codes, the fractional support always scales linearly variable nodes

corresponding to the columns

in the blocklength. In conjunction with known results on the AWGN pseudoweight [13], [10], this fact implies that the size of the minimal nonzero entry in these pseudocodewords must be vanishing at a rate faster than inverse blocklength. In addition,

of , and a set of factor nodes

corresponding

to the rows of . The factor graph has an edge

between

bit and check if and only if , so that check imposes a

constraint on bit .

we show that the relaxed polytope has the property that many more (a constant fraction of the blocklength) facets are adjacent B. Decoding Via Linear Programming

to integral vertices relative to fractional ones. Motivated by this geometric intuition, we propose an
improved LP decoding algorithm that eliminates fractional pseudocodewords by guessing facets of , and then decodes by re-solving the optimization problem on these facets. We

The problem of maximum likelihood (ML) decoding is to determine the most likely codeword on the basis of an observation from a noisy channel. For a binary linear code, the ML decoding problem can be formulated as an integer program of the form

also provide some theoretical performance guarantees on this

improved solver: in particular, for suitable expander codes we

(1)

prove that it always succeeds as long as there are at most some

constant number of pseudocodewords with higher likelihood where is a channel-dependent quantity. As a concrete illustra-

than the ML codeword. Despite the relative conservativeness tion, if the all-zeroes codeword were transmitted over the binary

of this guarantee, our experimental results show significant symmetric channel with crossover

, then

performance improvements, particularly at high SNR, for small with probability , and

with probability . In the

and moderate blocklengths. In addition, we analyze another absence of additional structure, the ML decoding problem (1)

type of randomized facet-guessing, still with polynomial com- requires an exhaustive search over an exponentially large space,

plexity, and prove that it succeeds as long as there are at most and is known to be computationally difficult [28]. It is straight-

a polynomial number of pseudocodewords, all adjacent to the forward to convert the ML decoding problem into a linear pro-

ML codeword and with higher likelihood.

gram over the convex hull of all codewords, a polytope known

Although previous work [13], [10] shows that for the AWGN as the codeword polytope [5]. Unfortunately, for a general bi-

channel, there do exist pseudocodewords with sublinear pseu- nary linear code, the number of constraints (or facets) required

doweight, it would be interesting to see if their number can to characterize the codeword polytope grows in a nonpolyno-

be polynomially or exponentially large. In the first case, if the mial manner with blocklength. Even more strongly, the exis-

number of such bad pseudocodewords is bounded by a polyno- tence of a polynomial-time separation oracle for the codeword

mial, our algorithm could yield an error exponent for AWGN polytope of a general linear code is very unlikely since ML de-

while it is known that LP decoding [10] does not.

coding for arbitrary linear codes is NP-hard [28].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIMAKIS et al.: GUESSING FACETS: POLYTOPE STRUCTURE AND IMPROVED LP DECODER

3481

The technique of LP decoding [5] is based on solving a linear

program over a relaxation of the codeword polytope that can

be characterized with a polynomial number of inequalities. The

standard approach to date is based on a polytope obtained

by enforcing a set of local constraints associated with each bit.

This polytope is referred to as a tree-based relaxation, since it is

guaranteed to be exact for any tree-structured factor graph [9].

In order to specify this first-order relaxation, for each check

we define a local codeword polytope (LCP): it is given

by the convex hull of the bit sequences that satisfy the check,

which are known as local codewords. For example, for a check

of degree three, the LCP will be the convex hull of the points

in the three adjacent variables. One way to

write down explicit inequalities for an LCP of general degree

is the following: for each check

, consider the set of bit

sequences

that fail to satisfy check , meaning that

. We denote this set of forbidden sequences by .

The local codeword polytope

associated with check

consists of all vectors

that are at Hamming distance

at least one from each

—viz.

LCP

III. STRUCTURE OF THE RELAXED POLYTOPE
In this section, we turn to some theory concerning the structure of the relaxed polytope. In particular, we begin by addressing the question of the minimal number of fractional coordinates in any fractional pseudocodeword, a quantity that we term the fractional support. Although it is possible to construct codes with an arbitrarily small fractional support,1 we show that for expander codes, the fractional support has size linear in blocklength. We then address a second structural property of the polytope: namely, the number of constraints that are active at any vertex. By dimensionality arguments, the size of this active set scales as . Moving beyond this basic observation, we establish that there is a dramatic difference between the active sets associated with fractional pseudocodewords and those associated with (integral) codewords. More specifically, for expander codes, the active set of any fractional pseudocodeword is smaller than the active set size of any codeword by at least a constant fraction (in blocklength) of constraints. We leverage these structural results in Section IV to develop a randomized algorithm for improving the performance of the LP-decoder by guessing facets of the relaxed polytope and resolving the optimization problem.

A. Fractional Support of Pseudocodewords

(2)

The result of this section is to show that the fractional support of any pseudocodeword in any LDPC code defined by

an expander graph scales linearly in blocklength. We begin by

(Note that any element with not in the neighborhood

defining the notion of an expander graph:

of check is completely unconstrained.) For the 3-check ex-

ample, the forbidden sequences are

, and the

first one corresponds to the inequality

,

assuming the three adjacent variables are , , .

We refer to set of

inequality constraints defining the

LCP as the forbidden set inequalities, and we refer to the in-

equalities

as the box inequality constraints. Overall,

the relaxed polytope is defined as the intersection of the LCPs

over all checks—namely,

. Note that for any

check with degree , the number of local forbidden sequences

is

, so that for a check-regular code the total number of

forbidden sequences is

. For low-density parity-check

codes, the maximum degree is bounded so that the relaxed poly-

tope can be described by a linear number of inequalities. (For

higher degree checks, there are alternative characterizations of

the LCPs that are more efficient than the naive one described

here; see the papers [5], [29], for details.)

Definition 1: Given parameters

, we say that a

-regular bipartite graph is an

expander if, for all

subsets

, there holds

.

Expander graphs have been studied extensively in past work

on coding [31], [32], [12], [11]. Indeed, it is well-known that

randomly constructed regular LDPC graphs are expanders with

high probability (see, e.g., [12]).

The fractional support of a pseudocodeword is defined as

follows.

Definition 2: The fractional support of a pseudocodeword

is the subset

of bits indices in which

has fractional coordinates. Similarly, the subset of checks that

are adjacent to bits with fractional coordinates of is denoted

by

.

The following result indicates that all fractional pseudocode-

words in an expander code have substantial fractional supports:

If the LDPC graph has no cycles, the local forbidden sequences would identify all the possible noncodewords, and the relaxation is guaranteed to be exact by a special case of the junction tree theorem [9], [30]. However, for a general factor graph

Proposition 1: Given an

-expander code with

,

any pseudocodeword has fractional support that grows linearly

in blocklength

with cycles, there exist vertices with non

coordinates that

and

satisfy all the local constraints individually, and yet are not code-

words (nor linear combinations of codewords). Such sequences

Proof: The proof exploits the following well-known prop-

are called (fractional) pseudocodewords. To simplify the pre- erty [31] of expander graphs.

sentation, in this paper, we use the term pseudocodeword for Unique neighbor property: Given an

expander with

all vertices of the relaxed polytope, including codewords. The , any subset

of size at most satisfies the unique

term fractional pseudocodewords then designates the vertices of the relaxed polytope that happen to have at least one fractional coordinate.

1For instance, such a code can be constructed as follows: begin with a small
code that has a fractional pseudocodeword, and then add to it n copies of a
nonfractional bit, by adding degree two checks and bits.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3482

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 8, AUGUST 2009

neighbor property, i.e there exists

such that

. To establish this claim, we proceed via proof by contradiction:

suppose that every

has two or more neighbors in .

Then the total number of edges arriving at

from is at

least

But the total number of edges leaving has to be exactly ,

which yields a contradiction.

We now prove the stated proposition. Consider any set of

fractional bits of size

. Using the expansion and the

unique neighbor property, the set

must contain at least one

check adjacent to only one bit in . However, we claim that in

any pseudocodeword , no check is adjacent to only one frac-

tional variable node. Indeed, suppose that there were to exist

a check adjacent to only one fractional bit: then the associated

local pseudocodeword is in the local codeword polytope (LCP)

for this check and therefore can be written as a linear combina-

tion of two or more codewords [33]. But these local codewords

would have to differ in only one bit, which is not possible for a

parity check.

Therefore, the check must be adjacent to at least one addi-

tional fractional bit (not in ). We then add this bit to , and

repeat the above argument until

, to conclude that

. Finally, the bound on

follows

by applying the expansion property to a subset of fractional bits

of size less than or equal to .

Fig. 1. (a) Vertex-facet diagram of the relaxed polytope. Circles on the left-
hand side (LHS) correspond to vertices (codewords x and fractional pseudocodewords x ) of the relaxed polytope; hexagons on the right-hand side
(RHS) correspond to facets (hyperplane inequalities) defining the relaxed poly-
tope. The neighborhood of the LHS node associated with a pseudocodeword
x defines its active set (x ). (b) Illustration of proof of Corollary 1. Ver-
tices (codewords and pseudocodewords) are ordered by likelihood on LHS. The
facet-guessing algorithm fails only if the active set (x ) of the ML codeword is fully covered by the active sets (x ) of pseudocodewords with higher likelihood. Here facet F remains uncovered so that the algorithm succeeds.

the sizes

and

of the (fractional) pseudocode-

word and codeword active sets.

Theorem 1: For any

code with

, the active

set of any codeword has

Remark: In fact, a careful examination of the proof reveals that we can make a slightly stronger claim. Given a pseudocodeword with fractional support , consider the graph induced by the fractional bits, which may have multiple connected components. The proof of Proposition 1 shows that the size of every connected component must grow linearly in the blocklength for suitable expander codes.

(3)

elements. For an

-expander code with

, the active set

of any fractional pseudocodeword is smaller than the active

set of any codeword by a linear fraction—in particular,

(4)

B. Sizes of Active Sets

where the constants are

and

For any vertex of a polytope, its active set

is the set

of linear inequalities that are satisfied with equality on . Geo-

metrically, this corresponds to the set of facets of the polytope

that contain the vertex . For LP decoding, the set of possible

vertices includes both codewords and (fractional) pseudocode-

words. The key property that we prove in this section is that

for expander codes, codewords have active sets which are larger

by at least a constant factor than the active sets of fractional

pseudocodewords.

Before stating and proving this result, let us introduce the

. (Note that .) Proof: We begin by proving (3). By the code-symmetry of the relaxed polytope [5], every codeword has the same number of active inequalities, so it suffices to restrict our attention to the all-zeroes codeword. The check inequalities active at the allzeros codeword are in one-to-one correspondence with those forbidden sequences at Hamming distance 1. Note that there are such forbidden sequences, so that the total number of constraints active at the all-zeroes codeword is simply

vertex-facet diagram [33] that describes the relation between the

polytope vertices and facets. This diagram can be understood

as a bipartite graph with the set of all codewords and pseu-

docodewords (vertices of ) on its left-hand side, and the set as claimed.

of all constraints (facets of ) on its right-hand side. Any given We now turn to the proof of the bound (4) on the size of the

(pseudo)codeword is connected to a given facet if and fractional pseudocodeword active set. Recall that the relaxed

only if

; see Fig. 1 for an illustration. In this diagram, polytope consists of two types of inequalities: forbidden set con-

the active set

of a given pseudocodeword is simply straints (denoted ) associated with the checks, and the box in-

the set of neighbors of the LHS node representing . The main equality constraints

(denoted ) associated with

result of this section concerns the degrees of the LHS nodes, or the bits. The first ingredient in our argument is the fact (see

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIMAKIS et al.: GUESSING FACETS: POLYTOPE STRUCTURE AND IMPROVED LP DECODER

3483

Proposition 1) that for an

-expander, the fractional sup-

port

is large, so that a constant fraction of the box

inequalities will not be active.

Our second requirement is a bound on the number of for-

bidden set inequalities that can be active at a pseudocodeword.

We establish a rough bound for this quantity using the following

lemma:

Lemma 1: Suppose that belongs to a polytope and is not a

vertex. Then there always exist at least two vertices , such

that

.

PROOF: Since belongs to the polytope but is not a vertex,

it must either belong to the interior, or lie on a face with dimen-

sion at least one. If it lies in the interior, then

, and

the claim follows immediately. Otherwise, must belong to a

face with

. Then must contain [33] at least

vertices, say and . Consequently, since

, and all belong to and is not a vertex, we must have

and

, which yields the claim.

of . For each such check, exactly forbidden set constraints are active, thereby contributing a total of

active constraints. Now consider one of the remaining

fractional checks, say . Consider the restriction

of the pseudocodeword to the check neighbor-

hood of . Since

contains fractional elements, it is

not a vertex of the local codeword polytope associated with .

Therefore, by combining Lemmas 1 and 2, we conclude that

Overall, we conclude that the upper bound (5) holds.
Using Lemma 3 and Proposition 1, we can now complete the proof of Theorem 1. In particular, we re-write the RHS of the bound (5) as

Given a check and codeword , let

denote the

restriction of to bits in the neighborhood of (i.e., a local

codeword for the check ). With this notation, we have:

From Proposition 1, we have

and

Lemma 2: For any two local codewords

and

, from which the bound (4) follows.

of a check , the following inequality holds

IV. IMPROVED LP DECODING

Various improved decoding algorithms have been suggested

Proof: The intersection

is

given by the forbidden sequences that have Hamming distance

1 from

, ,2 (i.e., forbidden sequences such that

for ,2). Thus, if such an exists, then

by the triangle inequality for Hamming distance, we have

in past work, both based on extensions of standard iterative decoding (e.g., [17], [18], as well as extensions of LP decoding [21], [19]). Based on the structural results that we have obtained, we now describe an improved decoding algorithm for which some finite-length theoretical guarantees can be made. We begin with some simple observations: (i) ML decoding cor-

responds to finding the vertex in the relaxed polytope that has

the highest likelihood and integral coordinates; and (ii) Standard

But so that we must have

LP decoding succeeds if and only if the ML codeword has the for any two local codewords, highest likelihood over all pseudocodewords.
These observations highlight the distinction between LP de-

coding and ML decoding. An LP solver, given the (polynomially

many) facets of the relaxed polytope, determines the vertex with

Consequently, we are looking for all the forbidden (odd) se- the highest likelihood without having to go through all the expoquences of length that differ in one bit from two local code- nentially many vertices of . In contrast, the ML decoder can go

words that are different in two places. Clearly there are only two down this list, and determine the first vertex which has integral

such forbidden sequences, so that the claim follows.

coordinates. This motivates facet-guessing: suppose that there

We can now establish a bound on the size of the active sets of

pseudocodewords for

-expanders:

Lemma 3: For every pseudocodeword , the size of the

active set

is upper bounded by

exists only one fractional pseudocodeword that has higher

likelihood than the ML codeword . The LP decoder will

output the pseudocodeword , resulting in a decoding error.

However, now suppose that there exists a facet

such

that

but

. Consider the reduced polytope

Proof: The proof is based on the decomposition:

(5)

created by restricting the relaxed polytope to the facet

(i.e.,

). This new polytope will have a vertex-facet

graph with vertices

i.e., all the vertices that

are contained in . The likelihoods will be the same, but

will not belong in and therefore we can use an LP solver

The cardinality

is equal to the number of integral to determine the vertex with the highest likelihood in . If we

bits in the pseudocodeword, given by

. We now had chosen the correct facet, this vertex would be the ML code-

turn to upper bounding the cardinality

. Consider word . Based on this intuition, we now formally describe

the

checks that are adjacent to only integral bits the facet-guessing algorithm for improved LP decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3484

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 8, AUGUST 2009

Facet Guessing Algorithm

1) Run LP decoding: if outputs an integral codeword,

terminate. Otherwise, go to Step 2).

2) Take as input:

• fractional pseudocodeword from the LP decoder;

• likelihood vector .

3) Given a natural number

, repeat for

:

(a) Select a facet

, form the reduced

polytope

.

(b) Solve the linear program with objective vector in

, and save the optimal vertex .

4) From the list of optimal LP solutions

, output

the integral codeword with highest likelihood.

Remarks:

(a) We can consider two variations of facet guessing: exhaus-

tive facet guessing (EFG) tries all possible facets (i.e.,

), while randomized facet guessing

(RFG) randomly samples from

a constant

number of times (e.g.,

).

(b) Regardless of the problems, the exhaustive facet-guessing

(EFG) algorithm has polynomial-time complexity, since

the number of calls to the LP solver grows linearly as

We now combine this characterization of the success/failure of facet-guessing with our earlier structural properties of expander codes. Doing so yields the following result.

Corollary 1: For expander codes, the EFG algorithm will al-

ways succeed if there are

fractional pseudocodewords

with likelihood higher than the ML codeword. Moreover, under

this same condition, each iteration of RFG succeeds with con-

stant probability

Proof: From Lemma 4, the EFG algorithm fails if and only if every facet in also contains another fractional pseudocodeword with higher likelihood. But for expander codes, Lemma 3 yields that the size of the active set of any fractional pseudocodeword is upper bounded as

while the size of active sets of any codeword is always

. Therefore, if there exist fractional pseudocodewords

with likelihood higher than , the total number of facets adjacent

to these fractional pseudocodewords is at most

. There-

fore, if we have

it is impossible to completely cover and EFG succeeds. Also

On the other hand, the RFG algorithm requires only a constant number of calls to an LP solver, and therefore has the same order of polynomial complexity as standard LP decoding. When these algorithms are applied to a sequence of decoding problems, one would expect that the average

RFG at each iteration selects a random facet and there are facets that contain but not any fractional pseudocode-
word with higher likelihood. The total number of facets is and therefore each iteration of RFG has
probability of success larger than

complexity is typically very close to LP decoding, since

the facet-guessing routines (Step 2) run only if the LP de-

coder has already failed.

We now provide a simple necessary and sufficient character- as claimed.

ization for the EFG algorithm to fail.

Notice that this corollary only provides a worst case bound.

Lemma 4: The exhaustive facet-guessing algorithm fails to Indeed, the bound is achieved in a somewhat unlikely manner:

find the ML codeword

every facet

it requires a set of fractional pseudocodewords all with higher

contains a fractional pseudocodeword with likelihood greater likelihood than the ML codeword , all of whose active sets

than .

are entirely contained within the active set

of the ML

Proof: Denote the set of fractional pseudocodewords with codeword, and all of whose active sets are pairwise disjoint. (See

likelihood higher than by

. Assume there exists a Fig. 1(b) for an illustration.) More typically, one could expect

facet such that

and

for all pseudocode- the facet guessing algorithm to work even if there are many more

words

. Then the facet-guessing algorithm will fractional pseudocodewords with higher likelihoods.

at some round select the facet , and the LP solver will output Our preliminary experimental results (Fig. 2) show that the

, as the vertex in with the highest likelihood. Conse- facet guessing algorithm can indeed correct many pseudocode-

quently, the ML solution will be in the list of LP solutions words for which both sum-product and LP decoding fail. The

in step (4). Since is the ML codeword, there can be no experiments where performed by first running the sum-product

other integral codeword with higher likelihood in the list, so decoder on two small codes. For the noise realizations where

that the algorithm must output . Conversely, suppose that sum-product failed we used the Linear programming decoder

every facet

contains a fractional pseudocodeword (which almost always also failed). The random facet guessing

with likelihood greater than . Then, the ML codeword

algorithm was subsequently executed

times. A list

will never be the output of the LP solver at any round, since of 20 pseudocodewords was formed and the integral vertex

some pseudocodeword will always have higher likelihood. Con- with higher likelihood was the output. The RFG performance

sequently, the ML codeword will not appear in the final list, so plot is made by counting all the noise realizations for which

that the facet-guessing method must fail.

sum-product, LP decoding or the facet guessing steps where

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIMAKIS et al.: GUESSING FACETS: POLYTOPE STRUCTURE AND IMPROVED LP DECODER

3485

N = 20 Fig. 2. Comparison of different decoding methods: standard sum-product decoding, and randomized facet-guessing (RFG) with

(3; 4) n = 200 panels show two different codes: (a) Tanner’s group-structured code. (b) Random

LDPC code with

.

iterations. The two

successful. We observed that the RFG algorithm leads to a A. Random Bit Guessing

significant performance gains, frequently recovering the ML

codeword in cases for which both sum-product and LP de-

coding fail. As shown in Fig. 2, the gains are pronounced for

higher SNR, as high as 0.5dB for the small blocklengths that

we experimentally tested. The added complexity corresponds

to solving a constant number of LP optimizations; moreover,

the extra complexity is required only if LP decoding fails.

Recently, Chertkov [34] proposed a facet guessing algorithm

that uses critical loops to select appropriate facets and showed

that the proposed scheme achieves essentially ML performance

for the

Tanner code.

It should be noted that while our theoretical result guarantees

a correctable constant number of bad pseudocodewords, is un-

The basic intuition underlying our random bit-guessing algo-

rithm is simple. Since the LP decoding algorithm runs in polyno-

mial time, we can afford to solve up to a polynomial number of

linear programs to decode. Accordingly, we propose to choose

a subset of bits, with size scaling as

for some constant

, and to try all

possible 0–1 configurations

indexed by bits in this subset. In one of these trials, the chosen

configuration of

bits will match with the corresponding

bits in the ML codeword. The algorithm will only fail if a “bad”

pseudocodeword happens to coincide with the ML codeword in

all

positions. The formal description of the algorithm is

as follows:

clear how these performance gains would scale in practice, for a Randomized bit guessing (RBG) algorithm fixed number of iterations, as the blocklength of the code grows.

In other words, while there is a provable performance gain, for a 1) Run LP decoding: terminate if it outputs an integral

constant number of guesses for expander graphs, this gain could

codeword; otherwise go to step 2).

be decreasing and asymptotically vanishing in the blocklength 2) Choose

bits (randomly or deterministically),

. Investigating this performance gain relates to the interesting

.

open questions that we discuss in Section V.

3) Take as input the likelihood vector , and repeat the

following loop for

times:

V. IMPROVED THEORETICAL GUARANTEES

a) Consider a new 0–1 configuration out of the total

configurations for the

bits, say

The facet-guessing algorithm described in the previous sec-

tion is based on choosing facets at random. Note that the chosen

facet may either be of the forbidden set type, or the box con-

straint type (e.g.,

). In this section, we describe

a particular type of facet-guessing algorithm that chooses only

box inequalities, and hence has the natural interpretation of a

bit-guessing algorithm [18]. We show how this facet-guessing

algorithm can be used to find the ML codeword in polynomial

.

b) Add the equations

for

to

the set of inequalities defining the relaxed polytope

and solve the linear program with objective vector

in . Save the optimal vertex .

4) From the list of optimal LP solutions

,

output the integral codeword with highest likelihood.

B. Analysis

time, as long as the number of fractional pseudocodewords with Suppose that the set of

bits are chosen randomly.

higher likelihood is bounded by a polynomial.

The main theorem of this section shows that this random

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3486

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 8, AUGUST 2009

bit-guessing (RBG) algorithm succeeds if there are at most polynomially many “bad” pseudocodewords. More formally, we let denote the number of pseudocodewords that
(a) have higher likelihood than the ML codeword , and (b) are adjacent to ML-codeword on the relaxed codeword
polytope, meaning that the intersection is nonempty. With this definition, we have the following.

Theorem 2: Given an

-expander code with

, the

RBG algorithm finds the ML-codeword with probability

Consequently, for any order

of polynomial growth,

the RBG algorithm succeeds with probability converging to one

for all

Proof: By the code symmetry of the relaxed polytope [5],

we may assume without loss of generality that is the all-ze-

roes codeword (although the algorithm does not know this in-

formation). If is the all-zeroes word, then the key iteration

of the RBG algorithm is the step at which it sets

for

. From Proposition 1, since the graph is an

-expander code, every pseudocodeword has at least

fractional coordinates. Therefore, a randomly chosen bit from

any pseudocodeword will be integral with probability at most

1- . Consequently, if we force a set

bits to zero (as in

the key step described above), then the probability that all the

bits fall outside the fractional support of any given pseudocode-

word is at most

. Otherwise stated, with proba-

bility at least

, a random selection of

bits will exclude any particular pseudocodeword as a possible

output of the RBG algorithm. By a union bound, any set of

pseudocodewords are excluded with probability at least

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have investigated the structure of the polytope that underlies both the LP method and the sum-product algorithm for decoding of low-density parity check codes. For codes based on suitable expander graphs, we proved a number of structural properties of this polytope, including the fact that any (fractional) pseudocodeword has at least a constant fraction of nonintegral bits, and that the number of active sets differ substantially between pseudocodewords and codewords. Inspired by these structural properties, we proposed a number of efficient decoding algorithms that offer quantifiable improvements over basic LP decoding. First, we described a facet-guessing algorithm and provided both theoretical and empirical results on the performance gains that it achieves. We also proposed a randomized bit-guessing algorithm, and proved that it can still recover the ML codeword as long as there are at most a polynomial number of pseudocodewords with higher likelihood.
The results of this paper raise an interesting question concerning the structure of pseudocodewords in various code families. Previous work by Koetter and Vontobel [10] established that for any bit-check regular LDPC code, there exist pseudocodewords for the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with sublinear pseudoweight. This fact implies that standard LP decoding cannot have an error exponent for the AWGN, meaning an exponential decay in error probability.2 While standard LP decoding can be compromised by a single “bad” pseudocodeword, the improved decoding procedures in this paper can still tolerate a polynomial number of such bad pseudocodewords. Therefore, it would be interesting to identify families of codes which have a bounded number of such bad pseudocodewords. Theoretical understanding of properly guided facet guessing techniques, such as the one developed by Chertkov [34], and connections to bit guessing and decimation schemes in message-passing [23]–[25] are also interesting directions for future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would also like to thank the anonymous re-

viewers for their constructive suggestions that helped to

Consequently, if there are at most pseudocodewords with improve the paper.

likelihood higher than the ML codeword, then the RBG algo-

rithm will succeed with at least this probability. In order to complete the proof, we need to show that it is
sufficient to exclude only higher likelihood pseudocodewords that are also adjacent on the relaxed polytope to the all-zeroes ML codeword. In order for the all-zeros to not be the output of the restricted LP at the key step (in which the set of bits are set to zero), there must exist a pseudocodeword in the restricted polytope
with higher likelihood. Any such pseudocodeword is certainly adjacent to the all-zeroes codeword, since they share all the box

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[3] A. Ashihkmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 2657–2673, 2004.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[5] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[6] J. Feldman, D. R. Karger, and M. J. Wainwright, “Using linear programming to decode LDPC codes,” in Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., Mar. 2003.

constraints

. Therefore, it is sufficient to exclude only

“bad” pseudocodewords that are adjacent to the ML-codeword

on the relaxed polytope.

2Subsequent work [14] showed that LP decoding does have an error exponent if the log likelihoods are suitably thresholded; however, doing so discards potentially useful information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIMAKIS et al.: GUESSING FACETS: POLYTOPE STRUCTURE AND IMPROVED LP DECODER

3487

[7] J. Feldman, D. R. Karger, and M. J. Wainwright, “Linear programming-based decoding of turbo-like codes and its relation to iterative approaches,” in Proc. 40th Ann. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Oct. 2002.
[8] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “MAP estimation via agreement on (hyper)trees: Message-passing and linear programming approaches,” in Proc. 40th Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Oct. 2002.
[9] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “Exact MAP estimates via agreement on (hyper)trees: Linear programming and message-passing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, pp. 3697–3717, Nov. 2005.
[10] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding of finite length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Sep. 2003.
[11] C. Daskalakis, A. G. Dimakis, R. M. Karp, and M. J. Wainwright, “Probabilistic analysis of linear programming decoding,” in Proc. 18th Ann. Symp. Discrete Algorithms (SODA), Jan. 2007.
[12] J. Feldman, T. Malkin, R. A. Servedio, C. Stein, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding corrects a constant fraction of errors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 82–89, Jan. 2007.
[13] P. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Lower bounds on the minimum pseudoweight of linear codes,” in Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT ’04), Chicago, IL, Jun. 2004.
[14] J. Feldman, R. Koetter, and P. O. Vontobel, “The benefit of thresholding in LP decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2005, pp. 307–311.
[15] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Towards low-complexity linear-programming decoding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006.
[16] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive linear programming decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006.
[17] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 908–917, May 2001.
[18] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “On decoding of LDPC codes over the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 439–454, 2004.
[19] K. Yang, J. Feldman, and X. Wang, “Nonlinear programming approaches to decoding low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 24, pp. 1603–1613, Aug. 2006.
[20] S. Draper, J. Yedidia, and Y. Wang, “ML decoding via mixed-integer adaptive linear programming,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2007.
[21] M. Chertkov and V. Y. Chernyak, “Loop calculus helps to improve belief propagation and linear programming decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Computing, Monticello, IL, Sep. 2006.
[22] D. Bertsimas and J. Tsitsikilis, Introduction to Linear Optimization. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 1997.
[23] M. J. Wainwright and E. Maneva, “Lossy source coding by message-passing and decimation over generalized codewords of LDGM codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, arxiv:cs.IT/0508068.
[24] M. Mézard, G. Parisi, and R. Zecchina, “Analytic and algorithmic solution of random satisfiability problems,” Science, vol. 297, pp. 812–812, 2002.
[25] A. Montanari, F. Ricci-Tersenghi, and G. Semerjian, “Solving constraint satisfaction problems through belief propagation-guided decimation,” in Proc. Allerton Conf., 2007.
[26] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1980.

[27] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[28] E. Berlekamp, R. McEliece, and H. van Tilborg, “On the inherent intractability of certain coding problems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 384–386, 1978.
[29] K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman, “Cascaded formulation of the fundamental polytope of general linear block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2007.
[30] M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan, Graphical Models, Exponential Families, and Variational Inference Univ. Calif., Dep. Statist., Berkeley, Tech. Rep., No. 649, 2003.
[31] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[32] A. Barg and G. Zémor, “Error exponents of expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1725–1729, 2002.
[33] G. M. Ziegler, Lectures on Polytopes. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1995.
[34] M. Chertkov, “Reducing the error floor,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), 2007.
Alexandros G. Dimakis (S’05) received the Ph.D. degree in 2008 from the University of California, Berkeley (UC Berkeley). He received the Diploma degree in electrical and computer engineering from National Technical University of Athens, Greece, in 2003.
He was a Postdoctoral Scholar at the Center for the Mathematics of Information at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), Pasadena, and he is currently an Assistant Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department, University of Southern California, Los Angeles. His research interests include communications, coding theory, signal processing, and networking, with a current focus on network coding, message passing algorithms and sparse graph codes.
Dr. Dimakis received the Eli Jury dissertation award in 2008, two outstanding paper awards, a UC Berkeley Regents Fellowship and a Microsoft Research Fellowship.
Amin A. Gohari (S’06) is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree with the Electrical Engineering Department, University of California. He received the B.Sc. degree from Sharif University of Technology and joined Berkeley in 2004.
His research interests include coding and multiuser information theory.
Martin J. Wainwright (M’05) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and computer science (EECS) from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the University of California, Berkeley, with a joint appointment between the Department of Statistics and the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences. His research interests include statistical signal processing, coding and information theory, statistical machine learning, and high-dimensional statistics.
Dr. Wainwright has been awarded an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Fellowship, an NSF CAREER Award, the George M. Sprowls Prize for his dissertation research, a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada 1967 Fellowship, and several outstanding conference paper awards.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:03:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

