2023 2nd International Conference on Edge Computing and Applications (ICECAA) | 979-8-3503-4757-9/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICECAA58104.2023.10212353

Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Edge Computing and Applications (ICECAA 2023) IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP23BV8-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3503-4757-9

FPGA based High Bandwidth LDPC using Channel Coding Technique

S. Yuvaraj Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kattankulathur, Chennai, Tamil Nadu,
India y uvarajs@srmist .edu.in

P. Latha Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, R.M.K. Engineering College,
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India lathadrb@gmail.com

E. M alarvizhi Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, St.Joseph’s College of Engineering, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
malarvizhi0702@gmail.com

Balaji M adhavan Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Agni College of Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India dr.balaji_madhavan@rediffmail.co m
Abstract—Error-correcting codeword’s using Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) have been the subject of many studies in the communications field. Because of excellent error correction performance, low-complexity calculations, and appropriateness for parallel hardware design, this has also become typical digital modulation schemes in various protocols. Meanwhile, significant work has gone into creating LDPC decoders that can run on Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) devices instead of Application-S pecific Integrated Circuit (AS IC) systems due to their faster processing speeds and parallel processing capabilities. However, it is difficult to compare and e ven more difficult to implement the FPGA-based LDPC encoder solutions that are available in the open literature. A corrected signal decoding method with several design optimizations that lower the expenses of supporting several different codes The decoder's development findings show that it can achieve better bandwidth utilization than earlier flexible FPGA-based LDPC decoders while still meeting the requisite amount of extensibility and satisfactory error-correcting effectiveness.
Keywords—Forwarding error correction, Field programmable gate array, Application specific integrated circuit, Inverse fast Fourier tran sform, Low density parity check, Encoder, Decoder
I. INT RODUCT ION
Forwarding Error Correction (FEC) codes like LowDensity Parity-Check codes may be used to repair transmission errors in communication systems that are very near to their theoretical capacity. These codes are also known as LDPCC codes. Since then, this has had a rebirth, since it has been the focus of a significant amount of research in the area of teleco mmunications and has shown the potential for beneficial co mponent-based outcomes [1]. Given the evergrowing need for electrical processing power, LDPC codes have found their way into many cutting-edge internet protocols, including as IEEE 802.11n.
LDPC codes possess a number of favorable qualities, which is one of the reasons why they are appropriate for the application. The LDPC decoding approach may be carried

out with fewer co mputations, which leads to processor hardware that has low costs for testing and manufacture [2]. The inherent parallelism of the LDPC deco mpression technique makes it simple to transfer to distributed parallel compute units when the application involves modest modulation. When processing communications with long block lengths, LDPC codes are also repeatedly decoded, just like turbo codes, in order to reach error-correcting to successfully perform to the theoretical maximu m. [3] This is done in order to reach the theoretical maximu m. In contrast to preceding, LDPC decoders may be created with a vast array of various algorithms and degrees of parallelization.
Bit Error Rate (BER) readings were shown to be lower when LDPC codes were used. It is important to note that unlike Trellis, this decoding method is iterative. The decoding difficulty of LDPC codes also lowers as block length increases, which is a significant benefit. This provides designers with a selection of alternatives from which to pick in order to acquire the required attributes. Several functional features interact intricately to form the architecture of a full LDPC decoder. These functional features include having to process bandwidth, being associated with lost, device resource needs, error checking capability, required to process energy efficiency, high bandwidth, and extensibility [4].
While different processing elements are relatively simple to construct, A full LDPC decoder's design involves a complicated interplay of these properties. These features may be affected by a variety of variables, including the structure, the LDPC code that is being used, the technique that is being employed, and the frequency of decoding rounds [5]. Due to the complex nature of the interactions that occur between these elements and qualities, developing a client-side LDPC decoding algorithm that is both efficient and user-friendly is a challenging and labor-intensive endeavor. An education on FPGA-based LDPC decoders is provided long before the presentation of the most recent survey and ground-breaking designs [6]. Th is is accomplished by providing a general overview of Forward Error Correction (FEC), which serves

979-8-3503-4757-9/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

1537

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:33:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Edge Computing and Applications (ICECAA 2023) IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP23BV8-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3503-4757-9

as an introduction to the ideas and terminologies that will be employed in the subsequent sections of this work.
The nature of the data supplied by the demodulator impacts the error-correcting capacity of an FEC decoder [7]. Figure 1 shows a transceiver channel of communication. Rather than employing serious choices to turn incoming symbols into packetized bits, an analog signal using soft preferences can provide better error detection and correction .
Ant enna

T ransmitter

Receiver

Encoder

Decoder

Fig. 1. T ransceiver Communication Channel

II.

RELAT ED WORKS

To enhance the decoder's performance for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes, victimization and folding are explored in [8], both of which take use of the programmab le data-width and depth of embedded memory in an FPGA. These alterations are made with the intention of using the embedded memory's customizable data-width and -depth to its full potential. It has been shown that extremely circulant quasi-cyclic LDPC codes may be built on FPGAs with a relatively low nu mber of integrated memo ry blocks. Th is outcome was achieved by folding. It is shown how an FPGA 's resource parameters and the H matrix fro m a quasi-cyclic LDPC code may be fed into a synthesis program called QCSyn to generate a vector or folded architecture automatically. Through careful consideration of the optimal degree of fo lding and/or vectorization, this architecture optimizes decoding throughput for a given FPGA and code.

A novel use of the parity-check matrix (PCM) that yie lds a significant improvement in throughput is represented in [9]. Blocks and, by extension, layers may be processed in parallel using a partitioned version of the node processing approach. By decomposing the PCM into layers and super layers, we may also derive a limit on the depth of two-layer pipelining used in the compact representation. Using the FPGA IP compiler in NI Lab VIEW CSDS, a Xilin x Kintex-7 FPGA is built and used to test the decoder. The QC-LDPC is an IEEE standard from 2012. For this, we use the FPGA IP compiler.

The most significant aspects of designing an FPGA based LDPC decoder are discussed in [10] which also offer a comprehensive analysis of the research that have been done before on the topic. The authors conduct in -depth comparisons across 140 published designs (both academic and industry), and they describe, analyze, and show the corresponding performance tradeoffs. There are seven important performance aspects that are discussed here: performance in terms of co mputation, delay, hardware requirements, error detection and correction, power consumption, data transfer rate, and flexibility.

For the purpose of decoding the cyclic (4095, 3367) sequence, reference nu mber [11] describes the development

of a tri-mode decoder on a field-programmable gate array (FPGA ). The LDPC coding for Euclidean geometry. The smallest trapping set size in this code is 65, and it has no lower limit. For this imp lementation, we have combined three complementary decoding techniques into a single decoder. The OS-M LGD method, along with two iterative binary message passing (IBMP) approaches, is one of the three decoding algorithms that were derived fro m the OS MLGD method. One IBMP method relies on subjective assessments of dependability, whereas the other uses objective measures of performance. These three algorithms only need single-bit messages, integer additions, and binary logical operations, making them far simpler to implement than the sum-product method. As a consequence, their hardware requirements are drastically reduced while performance drops by just a small amount in their implementations. This method makes use of the Xilin x Virtex-4 FPGA's high-speed dual-ported block RAMs. It is predicated on a mostly parallel design.
There are two techniques, both of which are documented in [12], by which the performance of the Quasi-Cyclic LowDensity Parity-Check (QC-LDPC) decoder architecture may be enhanced. The Xilin x Kintex-7 FPGA in the NI USRP2953R has been used to successfully verify the second method of getting a 2.48 GB/s QC-LDPC decoder implementation operating at 200M Hz. The first strategy included developing an algorithm to imp rove the decoder's capacity for parallel processing. Highly-parallel architecture was accomplished in the second method by adapting the decoder design. Using an algorithmic co mpiler; developed the most efficient QC-LDPC decoder based on FPGA technology that complies with industry standards.
The development of a parameterizable FPGA -based LDPC decoder that is able to quickly process any collection consisting of one or more quasicyclic LDPC codes is discussed in [13]. The versatility of this approach may be used with any quasicyclic LDPC code. With the use of an offline design procedure, we want to show a decoder that can automatically provide a high-quality HDL description for a limited set of coding systems.
A layered QC-LDPC decoder design, as described in [14], has the advantages of a high coding rate, minimal complexity, a high throughput, and great error performance. Creating a feasible channel coding scheme that meets the needs of a fast code rate, min imal co mplexity, high throughput, and a very low error floor has proven to be a formidable challenge. FPGA was used to implement the design, and the results for error performance are encouraging.
A detailed evaluation of the existing NB-LDPC decoding hardware is presented with a particular emphasis on the optimization of these parameters is discussed in [15]. Despite improvements in complexity and memory optimization, throughput, power consumption, and physical footprint, modern NB-LDPC decoders still fall short of their binary ancestors. Even if these decoders have been optimized, this remains the case. One of the most difficult tasks has been developing a practical channel coding scheme that satisfies the requirements of a h igh code rate, minimu m co mplexity, high throughput, and a very low error floor.

979-8-3503-4757-9/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

1538

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:33:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Edge Computing and Applications (ICECAA 2023) IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP23BV8-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3503-4757-9

III.PROPOSED MET HOD
A decimat ion filter is beneficial at the receiver when an ADC sa mples the data at a greater frequency than the signal's frequency. Whenever the signal is amplified by the oscillation at the reception, undesired signals are produced. To reduce these unwanted signals, a low pass filter is required. While the information may be retrieved from an oversampled signal, more calculat ions and hence more power is necessary. The value of imp lementing more samples includes the ability to do better according to and estimates of the received symbol. Filter with many stages It is typically preferable to build the reduction filter in phases rather than in a single step. The sample rate is reduced by a proportion of the total decrease at every stage. The constraints on the filters may be decreased by decreasing the sampling frequency in settings, leading to lower absorption of new duties.
As the decoder relies on hard decision LLRs rather than tricky co mmunication bits, it must simultaneously examine every possible message word when decoding an LDPC trigger word, making it much more difficult than encoding. This is why it is emphasized in this synthesis on LDPC decoders. For simp licity's sake, however, we'll go through the encoding process quickly. Belief propagation (BP) is a typical method for deciphering LDPC codes, in which information is iteratively passed along the edges between connected nodes. When a node receives an incoming communication, when triggered, it sends a response signal back to the nodes with wh ich it is associated. As a result, instead of having a single monolith global solution, the execution of the LDPC encoder is outsourced to the numerous distinctive computations conducted by the different nodes. A vital feature of the fuzzy clustering method is that each message delivered to a specific node is independent of the message that was received after that node.
The LDPC decoder's schedule determines the Sequence in which nodes are activated. The error-correcting capabilities of the LDPC decoder, including its other qualities The Sequence wherein VNs and CNs, are handled, including whether several sites are operated in parallel, are determined by the LDPC decoder process schedule. There are many schedule variants. The three most common are described, though: Layer Belief Dynamic Scheduling and Propagation of Information One of the simplest methods of decoding LDPC is flooding. In this scenario, the component graph is processed repeatedly, with each iteration including the input and output signals of all CNs, then those of all VNs. LBP has the benefit that the knowledge gathered when in a repetition may be used to help the next iteration. Nevertheless, it lacks the same more fantastic standard of concurrency as the coding schedule, which may result in lower processor performance and increased processing delay. As contrasted to the usage has increased timetable, As m CN activations and dc x m VN activations occur at each iteration, it is clear that a considerable computational burden is incurred at each iteration.
Carrier synchronization is required when the message can be impacted by phase and/or resonance frequencies and then when the synthesizers in the transmitter and person receiving the signal fluctuate in frequency. Carrier synchronization can be accomplished in two ways. The first approach is to employ a pro logue that the receiver may use to synchronize the frequency and loudness. The message signal is simply

used to synchronize the carrier in the second step. Complete carrier synchronization and fine carrier synchronization are the two most common forms of carrier synchronization. Because rough receiver synchronization occurs at periods, drifting clocks become such a concern when only coarse carrier synchronization is performed. Fine syncing can coordinate forever, but it can only synchronize slight differences. By executing a rough carrier synchronizing accompanied by acceptable carriers synchronizing, the significant error would be reduced to a proper error again for OK channel syncing. To investigate how various algorithms evaluate one another, additional metrics other than power utilization must be assessed. In addition to power utilization, the transmission ratio will be estimated. The usage of eye sketches will be utilized to evaluate how well the instrumentation is performing.
LDPC to decode
Parallelis m
LLR illustration
Memory access / Data path
CN and VN
Decoder
Data I/O ports
Fig. 2. Proposed LPDC Decoder Stages
An LDPC decoder requires hardware to control the full iterative decoding process seen in Figure 2, in additio n to traditional data processing capabilit ies and memory. This must provide a signal from the outside world to not only start, stop, and reset the decoding process, but also choose which PCMs are allo wed to be used. The controller is also responsible for determining the success or failure of the decoding process. The next sections will go through each of these factors in turn. It was discovered that the fixed-point FPGA-based LDPC decoder architecture fixes a serious flaw in prior FPGA -based LDPC decoder designs: limited adaptability during execution. This fixed-point architecture may be used to process Quasi-Cyclic produced from any number of modern commun ication protocols. The cost of this endeavor, however, is more than what is needed for the other non-flexib le encoder and decoder used in the scholarly study. This is because LDPC decoders need a great deal of routing to establish intricate connections in dynamic factor graphs. Multi-bit Logarithmic-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) signals sent between nodes eat up much of the FPGA's networking or logical resources, exacerbating the problem. Long critical paths through the decoder are another side effect of e xcessive

979-8-3503-4757-9/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

1539

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:33:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Edge Computing and Applications (ICECAA 2023) IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP23BV8-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3503-4757-9

hardware consumption, which lowers both the maximu m permissible frequency responsiveness and throughput.
IV .RESULT S AND DISCUSSIONS
Error correction performance in a fixed-point decoder may suffer greatly if the width of the fixed-point LLRs is reduced to reduce hardware needs.. This might be because of the lesser amount and quality given by LLRs with narrower scope, as well as the fact that at extreme or minimu m levels, this quickly becomes saturated. This has the effect of raising the likelihood that a little transmitted fault can result in an inaccurate bit with perfect certainty, introducing further errors in any associated nodes. Table 1 displays the slices for various randomized channel models of existing and proposed method.

TABLE I.

PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS

Existing method Proposed method

Max frequency 140.73MHz

214.4MHz

S l i ce s

2920

2758

The Forwards-Backwards method is used in the Manual transmission design. The Sequence of data architecture, on the other hand, portrays all two purposes as clearly specified calculations, with the goal of mimicking the basic structure of an FPGA. Although this architecture has a shorter roadmap length, it necessitates much more logic capabilit ies than design alternatives. This is about 1% less than the system's overall area usage’s and discussed the slices for various randomized channel models of existing and proposed method as shown in Figure 3, the efficiency of both installations is similar. Lookups designs calculate each output separately, removing the need for the reverse process .

AREA UTILIZATION
Existing Proposed

2920 2758

SLICES USED
Fig. 3. T he Performance of Both Deployments
V.CONCLUSION
The FPGA-based LDPC decoding topologies shown gained some automated design-time flexib ility because to the integrated design row. This is made more accessible by presenting the suggested designs in a completely generic way, allowing them to be tailored to any arbitrary collection of QC PCMs purely computer algorithms. The selected group of quality control PCMs will need to be processed in order to extract the crucial decoder addressable. When the clocking rate and byte cannot be reduced any further, it is helpful to contrast various ways. Details of the computational methodologies used to construct many of the more complicated components of the suggested designs were also presented. Such elements reflect the synthesized decoder parts that predominate the final reading execution features,

which drive the specific optimizations detailed here. Multiple parameterizations of this technology were again synthesized and described, revealing its potential to handle any mixture of PCMs in numerous cutting-edge wireless networking standards. Co mpared to previous FPGA-based LDPC decoders that lacked walk flexibility, the results show that the proposed resolved structure keeps its higher degree of concurrency without sacrificing error correction efficiency. However, this comes at the expense of a typically greater underlying hardware requirement because of the need for a large number of very sophisticated adaptable routing elements to connect multi-bit signals between the Variab les Node Processing Elements and the Checking Node Processing Elements.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Wang, N. Juarez, E. Kohm, Y. Liu, J. Yuan, and H. Song, “Integration of SDR and UAS for malicious wifi hotspots detection In 2019 Integrated Communications,” Navigation and Surveillance Conference, pp. 1-8, 2019.
[2] L. Dai, F. Fang, Z. Yang, P. Chen, and Y. Li, “Protograph LDPCcoded BICM-ID with irregular CSK mapping in visible light communication systems,” IEEE T ransactions on Vehicular T echnology, vol. 70, no. 10, pp.11033-11038, 2021.
[3] O. Hiari, and R. Mesleh, “A reconfigurable SDR transmitter platform architecture for space modulation MIMO techniques,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp.24214-24228. 2017.
[4] R. Ferreira, J. Gaspar, P. Sebastião, and N. Souto, “Effective GPS Jamming T echniques for UAVs using low-cost SDR platforms,” Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 115, no .4, pp.2705-2727, 2020.
[5] M. Milicevic, C. Feng, L.M. Zhang, and P.G. Gulak, “Quasi-cyclic multi-edge LDPC codes for long-distance quantum cryptography,” NPJ Quantum Information, vol. 4, no. 1, pp.1-9. 2018.
[6] Y. Zhang, K. Peng, Z. Chen, and J. Song, “ Construction of ratecompatible raptor-like quasi-cyclic LDPC code with edge classification for IDMA based random access,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp.30818-30830, 2019.
[7] V. Jaiganesh, S. Murugan, “PC based heart rate monitor implemented in xilinx fpga and analysing the heart rate,” Proceedings of the Third IASTED International Conference on Circuits, Signals, and Systems, pp. 319–323, 2005.
[8] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin and V. Akella, “Memory System Optimization for FPGA-Based Implementation of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes Decoders,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 98-111, 2011.
[9] S. Mhaske, H. Kee, T. Ly, A. Aziz and P. Spasojevic, “HighThroughput FPGA-Based QC-LDPC Decoder Architecture,” 82nd Vehicular T echnology Conference, pp. 1-5, 2015.
[10] P. Hailes, L. Xu, R. G. Maunder, B. M. Al-Hashimi and L. Hanzo, “A Survey of FPGA-Based LDPC Decoders,” IEEE Communications Surveys & T utorials, Secondquarter vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1098-1122, 2016.
[11] X. Chen, Q. Huang, S. Lin and V. Akella, “FPGA-based lowcomplexity high-throughput tri-mode decoder for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” 47th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing pp. 600-606, 2009.
[12] S. Mhaske, D. Uliana, H. Kee, T. Ly, A. Aziz and P. Spasojevic, “A 2.48Gb/s FPGA-based QC-LDPC decoder: An algorithmic compiler implementation,” 36th IEEE Sarnoff Symposium, pp. 88-93, 2015.
[13] P. Hailes, L. Xu, R. G. Maunder, B. M. Al-Hashimi and L. Hanzo, "A Flexible FPGA-Based Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Decoder," IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 20965-20984, 2017.
[14] C. -W. Sham, X. Chen, W. M. Tam, Y. Zhao and F. C. M. Lau, “A layered QC-LDPC decoder architecture for high speed communication system,” IEEE Asia Pacific Conference on Circuits and Systems, pp. 475-478, 2012.
[15] O. Ferraz et al., “A Survey on High-Throughput Non-Binary LDPC Decoders: ASIC, FPGA, and GPU Architectures,” IEEE Communications Surveys and T utorials, Firstquarter. vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 524-556, 2022.

979-8-3503-4757-9/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

1540

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:33:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

