XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE 
Impact of Non-Gaussian Noise Distribution by 
Artificial Neural Network-based Equalizers 
Weiqi Lu  
School of Optical and Electronic 
Information 
Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology 
Wuhan, China 
luweiqi@hust.edu.cn 
 Xiaoxiao Dai  
School of Optical and Electronic 
Information 
Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology 
Wuhan, China 
daixx@hust.edu.cn 
 
Zexu Liu  
College of Information Science and 
Electronic Engineering 
Westlake University 
Hangzhou, China 
liuzexu@westlake.edu.cn 
 
Qi Yang  
School of Optical and Electronic 
Information 
Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology 
Wuhan, China 
yangqi@hust.edu.cn 
 
Lei Liu  
College of Information Science and 
Electronic Engineering 
Westlake University 
Hangzhou, China 
liulei181@mails.ucas.ac.cn 
 
William Shieh  
College of Information Science and 
Electronic Engineering 
Westlake University 
Hangzhou, China 
shiehw@westlake.edu.cn 
 
Abstract—The non-Gaussian noise distribution by an 
artificial neural network (ANN) equalizer causes degradation to 
LDPC performance. Accurate estimation of LLR based on non-
Gaussian noise distribution can improve receiver sensitivity by 
about 0.7 dB. 
Keywords—Artificial 
Neural 
Network; 
LDPC; 
Noise 
Distribution; LLR; GMI 
I. INTRODUCTION 
There has been steady demand for higher capacity in 
datacenter networks [1] driven by the popularity of many AI-
centric applications such as ChatGPT. In the meantime, direct-
detection (DD) systems are preferred over coherent detection 
systems for short-reach communication in datacenters because 
of their lower cost and simple arrangement. However, the 
square-law detection of DD converts the linear response of the 
optical channel into a nonlinear one that is difficult to 
compensate by a linear equalizer. Research in machine 
learning has become a popular topic in recent years in the 
optical communication community, and many machine 
learning techniques such as ANN have also been explored as 
nonlinear equalizers to compensate for nonlinear channel 
penalties[2]. 
Low-Density Parity Check Code (LDPC) has been 
adopted to improve noise margin by a large number of 
communication systems and international standards because 
of its excellent performance [3] and can be only 0.0045 dB 
away from the Shannon limit in a Gaussian noise channel [4]. 
However, the ideal performance of LDPC is often based on 
the assumption of Gaussian noise distribution, while the 
nonlinear equalization of DSP may modify the Gaussian noise 
distribution. For example, in DFE, the output noise 
distribution is altered because of the feedback structure [5]. 
The different distribution of noise affects the mutual 
information of the channel, and the value of the mutual 
information under the same communication system is a good 
metric of the LDPC performance [6]. Thus it is anticipated that 
LPDC performance will be influenced by non-linear Gaussian 
noise in ANN-equalized systems.  
This paper investigates the effect of ANN on channel noise 
distribution and the impact of non-Gaussian noise distribution 
on LDPC performance in a 20-km 50-Gb/s pulse amplitude 
modulation4 (PAM4) DD system. For a fixed post-corrected 
BER, the required GMI for the signal after nonlinear 
equalization is higher than that for a Gaussian distribution. 
The reason is that nonlinear equalization reshapes the original 
Gaussian noise into a non-Gaussian distribution which 
subsequently reduces the LDPC coding gain. For the same 
ANN-equalized signal, soft-decoding by computing the LLR 
using the true distribution brings about a 0.7 dB improvement 
in the receiver sensitivity after LDPC decoding.  
 
II. PRINCIPLE 
A. Schematic of Feedforward (A)NN (F-NN) 
  
 
Fig. 1. 
Schematic of a 2-layer FNN [7]. The insets (i) and (ii) are the 
signal distribution at the input (Gaussian) and output of FNN (non-
Gaussian).  
A schematic diagram of the two-layer feedforward NNs 
(F-NN) equalization is shown in Fig. 1. This paper uses a 
simple NN with a single hidden layer, which is sufficient to 
equalize the penalty of the PAM4 signal in the DD system. A 
hidden layer ANN with enough number of neurons capable of 
estimating many continuous functions has been demonstrated. 
2023 Opto-Electronics and Communications Conference (OECC) | 978-1-6654-6213-6/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/OECC56963.2023.10209616
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:34:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
The sequence ሾ𝑥ଵ, 𝑥ଶ, ⋯, 𝑥௜ሿ is the detected signal and is the 
input into the FNN. The output layer is a single ideal signal y, 
rather than multiple levels of categorical output [7]. the 
relationship between the output and input layers of the FNN 
can be expressed as: 

𝑦ൌ∑∑𝑤௝ଵ
ሾଶሿ𝑓ቀ𝑤௜௝
ሾଵሿ𝑥௜൅𝑏௜௝
ሾଵሿቁ൅𝑏௝ଵ
ሾଶሿ
௜
௝


where 𝑤௜௝
ሾଵሿ ሺ𝑏௜௝
ሾଵሿሻ, 𝑤௝ଵ
ሾଶሿ( 𝑏௝ଵ
ሾଶሿ ) are respectively the weights 
(biases) of the connections between the i-th neuron in the 0th 
layer and the j-th neuron in the 1st layer, and those between 
the j-th neuron in the 1st layer and the 1st neuron in the 2nd 
layer.  𝑓ሺ∗ሻ is the nonlinear activation function, which is the 
key element of the equalizer that can compensate for the 
nonlinear distortion. Commonly used nonlinear activation 
functions include hyperbolic tangent (Tanh) and rectified 
linear unit (Relu), etc.  
The DD system is dominated by electronic thermal noise 
which is commonly considered as Gaussian. However, while 
compensating the signal nonlinear distortion, the nonlinear 
activation function also reshapes the Gaussian noise of the 
signal at the ANN input to non-Gaussian one at the output, as 
shown in the insets of Fig. 1. In a nutshell, in general, the noise 
at the output of an ANN equalizer is non-Gaussian, which will 
subsequently influence the performance of LDPC.  
 
B. LLR in LDPC decoding 
The Log likelihood ratio (LLR) needs to be calculated for 
the output signal of the equalizer for LDPC soft-decoding. The 
LLR is given by [8]: 

𝐿𝐿𝑅ൌlog ൭
୔୰൬𝑏ൌ0ฬ𝑟ൌሺ𝑥, 𝑦ሻ൰
୔୰൬𝑏ൌ1ฬ𝑟ൌሺ𝑥, 𝑦ሻ൰൱

where Pr ሺ𝑏ൌ0|𝑟ൌሺ𝑥, 𝑦ሻሻ is the (a posteriori) probability 
that the bit 0 is being sent when the received symbol is ሺ𝑥, 𝑦ሻ. 
Typically, all symbols are assumed to be independent and 
identically Gaussian distribution for simplicity of calculation, 
namely 

𝐿𝐿𝑅ൌlog ൭
∑
௘
షభ
഑మሺሺೣషೞೣሻమశሺ೤షೞ೤ሻమሻ
ೞചೄబ
∑
௘
షభ
഑మሺሺೣషೞೣሻమశሺ೤షೞ೤ሻమሻ
ೞചೄభ
൱

However, this simplified formula can only accurately 
estimate the LLR for the Gaussian noise channel. For non-
Gaussian distributed noise, the formula (3) inevitably 
inaccurately computes the LLR, which leads to a lower 
decoding performance of LDPC than optimum. 
To obtain the true LLR, the noise distribution of the known 
signal (pilot signals or training signals) is first fitted with a 
statistical probability density distribution. Namely, the ‘true’ 
probability density distribution of the output noise 
corresponding to each input symbol is acquired from the 
curve-fitting results. After that, for each output signal, 
Pr൫𝑏ൌ0ห𝑟ൌሺ𝑥, 𝑦ሻ൯
 and 
Pr൫𝑏ൌ1ห𝑟ൌሺ𝑥, 𝑦ሻ൯
 are 
calculated based on the calculated probability density to 
obtain the true LLR. For non-Gaussian distributed noise, such 
method will obtain a different value of LLR than the 
conventional Gaussian noise based estimation, enabling a 
better decision with a lower error probability for soft LDPC 
decoding. 
III. SYSTEM SETUP AND RESULTS  
A 50-Gb/s PAM4 DD optical communication system 
simulated with VPI Photonics 11.3 is shown in Fig. 2. The 
PAM4 electrical signal at the transmitter after the digital-to-
analog converter (DAC) is modulated onto a 1550 nm CW 
laser with a Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM). The PAM4 
signal is quadruple up-sampled in the Tx DSP and then pulse 
shaped with a root-raised cosine filter (RRC) with a 0.1 roll-
off factor. Two groups of simulation are performed for 
comparison: (i) One group is 10-GHz bandwidth-limited 
signal passing through 20-km fiber with a dispersion 
coefficient of 1.7 𝑝𝑠/𝑛𝑚/𝑘𝑚 , and (ii) the other group is that 
the signal bypasses the fiber (or back-to-back). At the receiver 
side, the signal is input into a variable optical attenuator (VOA) 
to adjust the received optical power (ROP) for the two groups. 
The signals of both groups are added with the same level of 
Gaussian noise at the detection of Photodetector (PD). The 
digitalized signal is subsequently fed into an NN-based 
nonlinear equalizer. The input layer of NN has 21 neurons, the 
hidden layer has 30 neurons, and the nonlinear activation 
functions are Relu or Tanh. The equalizers are trained with 
high SNR. The code rate of LDPC is 5/6, and maximum 
decoding iterations is 20. 
 
Fig. 2. 
Setup of a 50-Gb/s PAM4 DD optical communication system.  
 
Fig. 3. 
 Noise distribution after ANN with (a) Tanh and (b)Relu versus 
Gausssion distribution  
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:34:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
The noise distribution of the ANN equalization output 
using different activation functions is shown in Fig. 3. The red 
dashed line in both figure is the Gaussian distribution. It can 
be seen that both equalizers reshape the noise into a non-
Gaussian distribution. Further, the ANN equalizer output 
noise with Relu seems to have more probability density 
distortion than that with Thanh.  
Fig. 4 shows decoded BER as a function of GMI or ROP 
at Back-to-Back (BtB) and 20-km transmission with ANN 
equalizers. The dashed line in the figure is the estimated LLR 
based on the Gaussian distribution (GN-LLR), and the solid 
line is the estimated true LLR (True-LLR). The green line in 
Fig. 4b shows that the signal pass through 20-km fiber and is 
unequalized. The GMI is calculated based on the true LLR by 
fitting the signal distribution as discussed in last section.  
 
Fig. 4. 
 BER performance versus (a) GMI and (b)ROP of the LDPC 
code. True-LLR: LLR is estimated by true noise distribution; GN-LLR: 
LLR is estimated by Gaussion distribution.  
As shown in Fig.4a, compared to the BtB, ANN-equalized 
signal requires a higher GMI for a BER at 1x10-5 after LDPC 
decoding. It is already known that before LDPC, the GMI at 
the same pre-corrected BER could decrease because of non-
Gaussian noise distribution and error propagation[5]. Judging 
from Fig 3, the GMI also decreases for the same ROP of the 
signal after ANN equalization caused by both the nonlinear 
distortion of channel and the non-Gaussian distribution noise. 
While for the same GMI, the non-Gaussian distributed noise 
in the ANN-equalized signal still degrades the post-corrected 
BER. The reason for the LDPC performance penalty could be 
that LDPC is designed for a Gaussian channel, and is not 
optimal for non-Gaussian channel.  
For signals with the same noise distribution, accurate 
estimation of LLR can improve the performance of LDPC 
decoding. As shown in Fig. 4b, when LLR is estimated 
accurately, there is a gain of 0.4 dB for ANN with Tanh and 
0.7 dB for ANN with Relu, with almost no change in BtB. 
This result may vary depending on the conditions of neural 
network training. Therefore, when using the ANN equalizer, 
the noise distribution of the results needs to be estimated in 
advance with the training data to improve the LDPC 
performance. Also, the penalty caused by incorrect estimation 
in ANN with Relu is larger.  
IV. CONCLUSION 
The effect of ANN on channel noise distribution and the 
impact of non-Gaussian noise distribution on LDPC 
performance is demonstrated in a 50-Gb/s PAM4 DD optical 
communication system. Compared to a Gaussian channel, the 
ANN-equalized signals would require a higher GMI to have 
the same post-corrected BER. For the ANN equalizer, 
accurate estimation of LLR can improve the receiver 
sensitivity by about 0.7 dB.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Aleksic S. The future of optical interconnects for data centers: A review 
of technology trends[C]//2017 14th International Conference on 
Telecommunications (ConTEL). IEEE, 2017: 41-46. 
[2] 
Da Ros F, Ranzini S M, Dischler R, et al. Machine-learning-based 
equalization for short-reach transmission: neural networks and 
reservoir computing[C]//Metro and Data Center Optical Networks and 
Short-Reach Links IV. SPIE, 2021, 11712: 1171205. 
[3] 
Healy C T, Al Rawi A, Tsimenidis C C. LDPC-Coded Modulation 
Performance Analysis and System Design[J]. IEEE Access, 2020, 8: 
212166-212176. 
[4] 
Chung S Y, Forney G D, Richardson T J, et al. On the design of low-
density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit[J]. 
IEEE Communications letters, 2001, 5(2): 58-60. 
[5] 
Mahadevan A, Lefevre Y, Lanneer W, et al. Impact of DFE on soft-
input LDPC decoding for 50G PON[C]//2021 Optical Fiber 
Communications Conference and Exhibition (OFC). IEEE, 2021: 1-3. 
[6] 
Alvarado A, Agrell E, Lavery D, et al. LDPC codes for optical channels: 
Is the “FEC limit” a good predictor of post-FEC BER?[C]//Optical 
Fiber Communication Conference. Optica Publishing Group, 2015: 
Th3E. 5. 
[7] 
Xu Z, Sun C, Ji T, et al. Computational complexity comparison of 
feedforward/radial basis function/recurrent neural network-based 
equalizer for a 50-Gb/s PAM4 direct-detection optical link[J]. Optics 
Express, 2019, 27(25): 36953-36964. 
[8] 
Fehenberger T, Alvarado A, Böcherer G, et al. On probabilistic shaping 
of quadrature amplitude modulation for the nonlinear fiber channel[J]. 
Journal of Lightwave Technology, 2016, 34(21): 5063-5073. 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:34:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
