A High Throughput QC-LDPC Decoder Architecture for Near-Earth Satellite 
Communication
K. M. Sankar Nampoothiri, Kalyani N Menon, Sayed Muhsin, Senna Manoj, Sooraj P, Dhanaraj K J, Deepthi P P  
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering 
National Institute of Technology Calicut 
Kerala, India 
e-mail: {9193sankar, kalyaninmenon23, sdmuhsin, sennamanoj, soorajp1992}@gmail.com, {dhanaraj, deepthi}@nitc.ac.in  
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a high throughput decoder 
architecture for the (8176,7154) quasi-cyclic (QC) low density 
parity check (LDPC) code (C2) recommended by the 
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) for 
near-earth applications. The architecture avoids memory 
conflict through the use of multiple shift register based 
memory circuits and a pipe stage forwarding mechanism, thus 
allowing for heavy pipelining of the core processing unit. The 
decoder is implemented on the Xilinx XCVU9P FPGA 
platform and achieves a throughput of 2.65 Gbps at 10 
iterations at a clock frequency of 253 MHz. 
Keywords-QC-LDPC, CCSDS, FPGA, NMSA, Memory 
Conflict, High Throughput 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Low-Density-Parity-Check 
(LDPC) 
codes 
were 
discovered by Gallager in 1962 [1] and were shown to 
approach Shannon capacity in the late 1990s. A subclass of 
LDPC codes, quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes, have hardware 
efficient, high-speed decoder implementations, owing to the 
regularity of their parity check matrices and are hence 
selected 
as 
the 
recommended 
standard 
for 
space 
communication by the consultative committee for space data 
systems (CCSDS) [2]. For near-earth satellite applications, 
CCSDS recommends a special class of QC-LDPC codes 
termed type-II QC-LDPC codes [3]. 
Originally, 
two phase message 
passing 
(TPMP) 
algorithm was used for decoding QC LDPC codes. Multiple 
high throughput TPMP decoder architectures have been 
proposed [4]. However, the TPMP algorithm suffers from 
low convergence speeds [5], demanding a large number of 
iterations for low BER. Thus, turbo decoding message 
passing (TDMP) decoding of LDPC codes was proposed as a 
faster alternative to TPMP [5]. 
TDMP architectures which make use of the Normalized 
Min Sum (NMSA) algorithm have been traditionally used 
for high throughput applications [6]. These are primarily 
used for decoding LDPC codes with circulant weight 1 and 
hence do not take into consideration the possibility of 
memory conflicts. Multiple TDMP decoders have been 
proposed [7], [8] for multi-weight circulants. These, however, 
fail to achieve throughput of the order of Gbps despite high 
clock frequencies. 
Liao et al. has proposed an architecture that achieves a 
throughput of the order of Gbps at relatively low clock 
frequencies. Liao et al. do so by analyzing the best degree of 
parallelism that avoids memory conflict. However, their 
memory architecture is such that there exists a trade-off 
between pipelining depth of the row calculation unit and 
degree of parallelism, making their architecture unsuitable 
for high frequency operations, thus limiting a further 
increase in throughput. 
This paper proposes a method to overcome the memory 
conflict through shift register based memory circuits, thereby 
removing the constraint on pipelining depth of the core 
processing unit. For fair comparison, the decoder is 
implemented with the same degree of parallelism as that of 
Liao’s, achieving a much higher decoding throughput of 2.65 
Gbps at 10 iterations at a clock frequency of 253 MHz. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
A. QC-LDPC Codes 
LDPC codes are linear block codes characterized by the 
sparseness of their parity check matrix 𝐻. QC LDPC codes 
are a subclass of LDPC codes, where the 𝑚× 𝑛 𝐻 matrix is 
made of an array of 𝑍× 𝑍 cyclic circulant matrices. The 𝐻 
matrix is thus vertically divided into 
𝑚
𝑍 layers and 
horizontally into 
𝑛
𝑍 blocks. The cyclic nature of the circulants 
allows efficient decoder implementations. 
The decoding of LDPC codes can be visualized using the 
tanner graph, which consists of n check nodes corresponding 
to the columns and m bit nodes corresponding to H matrix 
rows. Check node i is connected to bit node j if ith row’s jth 
column in the H matrix is unity. Each bit node maintains a 
soft 
log 
likelihood 
ratio 
(LLR) 
𝐿𝑗=
𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑃(𝑥𝑗=0))
𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑃(𝑥𝑗=1))  
corresponding to the jth bit of the codeword. The n check 
nodes use these values to generate extrinsic beliefs for each 
connected bit node. Multiple extrinsic beliefs arriving from 
the check nodes are consolidated at the bit node to update its 
belief. Thus, the beliefs are passed back and forth between 
check nodes and bit nodes to iteratively improve each bit’s 
belief using information from other bits. 
B. TDMP Algorithm 
To increase the convergence speed of decoding, 
Mansour et al. has proposed TDMP algorithm for LDPC 
codes. For an m×n 𝐻 divided into 𝑙𝑦 layers, the algorithm 
runs for multiple iterations, where one iteration implies 
processing of all rows of 𝐻. As per the TDMP algorithm, 
23
2021 4th International Conference on Circuits, Systems and Simulation
978-1-7281-6752-7/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
2021 4th International Conference on Circuits, Systems and Simulation (ICCSS) | 978-1-7281-6752-7/20/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICCSS51193.2021.9464195
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:05:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
for an H matrix constructed through submatrices of circulant 
weight Wt, each symbol is updated Wt times in a layer. This 
update rule is given by 
 
𝐿𝑙,𝑟
𝑖 = 
{  
  𝐿𝑙𝑦,𝑊𝑡
𝑖−1
−𝐸𝑙,𝑟
𝑖−1 + 𝐸𝑙,𝑟
𝑖    𝑖𝑓  𝑟 =  1, 𝑙 =  1 
𝐿𝑙−1,𝑊𝑡
𝑖−1
−𝐸𝑙,𝑟
𝑖−1 + 𝐸𝑙,𝑟
𝑖  𝑖𝑓  𝑟 =  1, 𝑙 > 1 
𝐿𝑙,𝑟
𝑖
−𝐸𝑙,𝑟
𝑖−1 + 𝐸𝑙,𝑟
𝑖       𝑖𝑓   𝑟>  1               
 
}  
  
   (1) 
where 𝐿𝑙,𝑟
𝑖 and 𝐸𝑙,𝑟
𝑖 are the output LLR and extrinsic message 
corresponding to a symbol for the 𝑟𝑡ℎ update of the 𝑙𝑡ℎ layer 
in the 𝑖𝑡ℎ iteration. Note that the first updated LLR of a layer 
𝑙 takes the last (𝑟= 𝑊𝑡
𝑡ℎ) updated LLR of the previous layer 
as input and the first update of an iteration takes the previous 
(𝑖−1)𝑡ℎ iteration’s last layer’s (𝑙= 𝑙𝑦) final updated LLR 
as input. 
C. Memory conflict 
The direct implementation of row-wise TDMP, 
described in (1), cannot provide high throughput. This is 
because, for H matrices with Wt > 1, the rth  update requires 
the (r − 1)th updated LLR as input. This results in a memory 
conflict that limits the degree of parallelism and pipeline 
depth of the decoder. Liao et al. [9] derives the relationship 
between pipelining depth and degree of parallelism as 
 
                             P x DepthP  ≤  Omin                                (2) 
 
where Omin is the smallest row distance between 1s in a 
column of a layer of H, and DepthP is the depth of 
pipelining. For an (8176, 7154) decoder, Omin = 104 and 
thus for P = 26, Liao’s Row Calculation Unit (RCU) 
pipelining depth cannot exceed 
𝑂𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑃
 =  4, thus severely 
limiting the maximum operable frequency of the decoder, 
thereby making the architecture unsuitable for further 
throughput improvement. 
III. 
PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE 
To overcome the aforementioned limitation, we have 
modified the implementation of layered decoding proposed 
in [10] by incorporating a single parsing phase to update both 
check nodes and bit nodes for near-earth code. In this 
method, the rth update of a symbol is given by 
 
                        𝐿𝑙,𝑟
𝑖
= 𝑄𝑙,𝑟
𝑖−1 + 𝐸𝑙,𝑟
𝑖+ 𝐷𝑙,𝑟−1
𝑖
                           (3) 
 
where 𝑄𝑙,𝑟
𝑖−1 = 𝐿𝑙−1,𝑊𝑡
𝑖−1
−𝐸𝑙,𝑟
𝑖−1and 𝐷𝑙,𝑟
𝑖= 𝐸𝑙,𝑟
𝑖−𝐸𝑙,𝑟
𝑖−1 + 𝐷𝑙,𝑟−1
𝑖
 
is generated during the rth update. Since Wt = 2, Di
l,1 is 
simply Ei
l,1 − Ei−1
l,1 and is generated during the first update to 
be used during the second update. With this update rule, only 
the 2nd update of LLR is written to memory. This method 
eliminates the need for a separate phase to consolidate 
extrinsic messages to update LLR as in [10]. 
To implement this update rule, the proposed architecture 
(Fig. 1) contains the following modules: a row calculation 
unit (RCU) where (3) is implemented, a supporting pipe 
stage forwarding mechanism for forwarding of D values( D 
memory), a shift register based bit node memory for storing 
LLR values( L-memory) and RAM-based storage for 
extrinsic messages( E-memory). Each module is designed to 
achieve low critical path delay and to avoid memory conflict 
mentioned in II-C.  
 
Figure 1. Near-earth decoder block diagram 
A. Row Calculation Unit 
The Row Calculation Unit is the main processing unit of 
the decoder and it carries out bit node as well as check node 
processing using NMSA. The RCU in the proposed 
architecture is a modified version of the RCU proposed in [9], 
with necessary changes made to incorporate D memory 
pipestage forwarding mechanism. The RCU computes𝐸, 𝐷 
24
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:05:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
and updated 𝐿 corresponding to a check node using 
algorithm 2. 
 
Figure 2. Row calculation unit 
The delay bottleneck of the row calculation unit was 
observed to be with the min finder module, which finds the 
first two minimums and index of the first minimum of a list 
of LLRs. Hence, to reduce the critical path delay while 
implementing the min-finding algorithm, the min-finder is 
designed in a tree-like structure as proposed by Wey et al. 
[11] with additional pipeline stages added after every stage 
of comparison. Additionally, pipelining is done at each 
submodule to achieve the least possible critical delay as 
shown in Fig. 2, where each FF block indicates a pipeline 
register. The input to the RCU comes from 3 different 
memory modules, the LLR input is taken from L-memory, 
the extrinsic message value is accessed from E-memory and 
the intermediate D value is provided by the pipe stage 
forwarding circuit. The RCU used by Liao et al. [9] already 
takes in LLR as well as extrinsic messages as input, and 
therefore necessary modifications only need to be made for 
accommodating the D memory. The D values are generated 
during the processing of the first update of bit node symbols 
and are read for their second update. The RCU hence sends a 
reaccess request to the D memory to fetch the required D 
value, at exactly one cycle before it is required for the row 
processing operation. 
 
Algorithm 1 Decompress Algorithm 
  Input: Ecomp  // Compressed Extrinsic message 
  Output: Erec  // Uncompressed Extrinsic message 
  {min1, min2, indexmin1, S} ← Ecomp // Unpack 
  Erec ← Array of length S.length 
  for i = 1 to S.length do 
        if i = indexmin1 then 
             Erec[i] = S[i] x min2 
        else 
              Erec[i] = S[i] x min2 
         end 
   end 
 
 
   Algorithm 2 NMSA Algorithm 
    
   Input: Lin, Din, Ein 
   Output: Lout, Eout, Dout 
1.  α  ← 0.75 
2. {min1, min2, indexmin1, S} ← Ecomp // Unpack 
3. Erecin  ← Decompress (Ein) 
4. Q ← Lin – Erecin 
5. Qabs ← α x |Q| 
6. Qsigns  ← sgn(Q) 
7. Q’signs ← ∏k
k
=
=
N
1 Qsigns[k] x Qsigns 
8. {min1, min2} ← First two minima of Q 
9. Eout = {min1, min2, indexmin1, Q’signs} 
10. Erecov = Decompress(Eout) 
11. Dout = Erecov – Erecin 
12. Lout = Q + Erecov + Din  
 
The proposed design also employs parallelism for 
achieving higher throughput and hence, a set of P RCUs 
operate simultaneously for the processing of P rows in a slice. 
The total number of cycles required for the processing of one 
entire layer is thus⌈(
511
𝑃)⌉. With this RCU, the degree of 
parallelism constraint can now be obtained as 
 
                                     𝑃× 𝐾≤𝑂𝑚𝑖𝑛                                    (4)  
 
where K is the number of cycles taken for the 𝐷𝑙,𝑟
𝑖value to be 
available for reading after it is written to the memory. The 
above pipeline constraint is only applicable to the path 
between production and consumption of D value. By making 
sure that this K value is small, the design ensures that 
memory conflict is successfully avoided as shown in Fig. 3 
enough to satisfy (4). 
 
Figure 3. Memory conflict avoidance 
25
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:05:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
B. E-memory 
Each RCU generates Wt × Bl values based on the output 
of the minfinder, where Bl represents the total number of 
circulant blocks in a single layer of the H matrix. Since the 
extrinsic messages of each row need to be stored for 
computations in the next iteration, RAMs were found to be 
the ideal choice for storage. Due to the nature of the min-
sum algorithm, rather than storing all Wt × Bl symbols, 
storing the output of min-finder and the sign updater is 
sufficient as this compressed form can be converted back to 
extrinsic message values as and when required. This reduces 
the memory requirement for E-memory. As P rows are 
processed in parallel, P separate memory elements are used 
to store the compressed extrinsic values, as one memory 
element stores the data output from a single RCU. 
C. L-memory 
 
 
Figure 4. Bit node memory 
The given H-matrix is divided into ly = 2 layers, layer 0 
and layer 1. The output data pattern after the processing of a 
layer is different from the input data pattern of the next 
layer’s processing. Hence, having just one memory location 
for each symbol would require both a read alignment and 
write alignment circuits, which would be resource 
inefficient for large P. Additionally, conventional memory 
elements like RAMs which are available in FPGA are not 
suited for this type of storage. Thus, it is proposed to use 
shift register based memory, where only read alignment 
circuits are required and all data can be accessed in any 
pattern required. Furthermore, the use of 2 separate memory 
circuits, L_01 and L_10 is proposed as shown in Fig. 4. 
During the processing of layer 0, the RCU reads the input 
LLRs from L_10 and parallely writes the output LLRs to 
L_01. The roles of L_01 and L_10 are swapped when layer 
1 is processed. This system allows some symbols to be 
updated (without write alignment) while other symbols are 
still being read. 
For layer 0 processing, the symbols are read in layer 0 
pattern from L_10, which contains the required data in layer 
1 pattern. Thus, a multiplexer based selection network is 
used to align data from one pattern to another. This selection 
network fetches symbols required at each clock cycle 
(corresponding to a slice being processed), through 
hardwired connections generated through a matlab script 
that analyses the H matrix. The shift register memory is of 
dimensions (Wt × P × W) × FD ×Bl , where W is the number 
of bits used for representing D value and FD is the depth of 
the shift register memory. The write and read ports are of 
data width (Wt × P × W). Since LLR is only updated after 
the second access, the depth FD of the shift register depends 
on the slice that generates the first symbol after reaccess 
begins. 
D. Shift Register Based D Memory Forwarding Mechanism 
Implementing the update rule given by (3) requires 𝐷𝑙,1
𝑖 
values generated during the first processing of a symbol to be 
stored. The stored D value is then read back into the RCU 
during the second processing of the same symbol within the 
same layer. For Wt = 2 matrices, the first access write pattern 
and second access read pattern are different. Therefore, for 
reading the required intermediate value, a multiplexer based 
selection network, similar to the L-memory selection 
network is used. The read operation is done in the required 
read 
pattern 
by 
hard-wiring 
the 
multiplexer 
input 
connections using a matlab script that generates these 
connections based on the analysis of input and output pattern 
of each slice row from H-matrix. Since D values need not be 
saved for later processing of layers or iterations, the same 
shift register network can be used for both the layers by 
using two separate selection networks. This results in lower 
resource utilization. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
For the (8176, 7154) code used for near-earth satellite 
communication, the H matrix comprises of two layers with 
16 circulants each of dimensions 511 × 511 and weight Wt = 
2. The degree of parallelism P for the current implementation 
is fixed to be 26, same as that of [9], in order to provide a fair 
comparison with the same. The row calculation unit is 
implemented with maximum pipelining of 13 stages as 
shown in Fig. 2 (where each FF block corresponds to one 
pipeline register) owing to which the least possible critical 
delay is achieved for the row processing unit, thus enabling 
the use of high-frequency clock, thereby improving the 
decoding throughput. The write-to-read latency K for the D 
memory forwarding mechanism is fixed as 3 for the current 
26
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:05:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
implementation, and the implemented design successfully 
overcomes 
memory 
conflict. 
Since 
shift 
register 
continuously shifts the data while it is being read, long 
sections of the shift register end up being un-accessed by the 
multiplexer selection network. As such, significant portions 
of the shift register are implemented as shift register LUT 
primitives rather than flip flops, making the D memory 
resource-efficient. For the proposed layer to layer shift 
register based memory, the dynamic power consumed by the 
circuit is reduced to an extent by designing the LLR memory 
in such a way that shift operation is paused during reading 
and is resumed during the write operation. The proposed 
decoder is implemented on a Xilinx XCVU9P FPGA board. 
Heavy pipelining of the row compute unit resulted in a 
critical path delay of 3.95 ns after place and route, thus 
allowing the decoder to operate at a frequency of 253 MHz. 
The decoding throughput of the decoder is computed as 
𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑔ℎ𝑝𝑢𝑡= 
𝑙𝑒𝑛
𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑙𝑘𝑐𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑠× iter × Tclk
     (5) 
where decodeclkcycles is the number of cycles per iteration, 
iter is the number of iterations, and len = 7136 is the length 
of the decoded codeword excluding the first 18 bits, which 
have an apriori known result (zero). 
V. 
RESULTS 
Table I shows the comparison of the proposed decoder to 
existing decoder architectures. The proposed architecture is 
able to achieve a throughput of 2.65 Gbps at 10 iterations at 
a clock frequency of 253 MHz, which is much higher than 
that of [9], with the same degree of parallelism. This increase 
in the throughput came at the expense of LUT and FF as 
shown in Table II, but at the same time reduces the amount 
of BRAMs used. This architecture could remove the 
constraint on the pipeline stages by modifying the LLR 
update steps. 
TABLE I.  
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH EXISTING 
ARCHITECTURES 
Parameter 
Wang 
[8] 
Xiang 
[12] 
Chen 
[13] 
Liao 
[9] 
Proposed 
Resources/
Technology 
Virtex-
II 
CMOS 
XC4VL
X-160 
Kintex
7 
XCVU9P 
Clock 
frequency 
(MHz) 
193 
214 
212.2 
105 
253 
Degree 
of 
parallelism 
2 
2 
4 
26 
26 
Iteration 
15 
10 
15 
10 
10 
Throughput
(Mbps) 
199.2 
728 
713.8 
1600 
2650 
TABLE II.  
RESOURCE  UTILIZATION OF THE PROPOSED DECODER  ON 
THE XILINX XCVU9P FPGA PLATFORM 
Resource 
Utilization 
Available 
Utilization% 
LUT 
194479 
1182240 
16.450045 
FF 
252306 
2364480 
10.67 
F7 Mux 
24332 
591120 
4.12 
F8 Mux 
27 
295560 
<0.01 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, a QC-LDPC decoder architecture that is 
compliant with the CCSDS specifications prescribed for 
near-earth 
applications 
is 
presented. 
The 
FPGA 
implementation of the proposed architecture validates that it 
is highly suitable for high throughput applications. The 
design can be potentially further improved by eliminating 
post-layer stall cycles due to the partitioning of LLR memory. 
Additionally, it is feasible to achieve higher throughput by 
increasing the degree of parallelism. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Gallager, R.G, ”Low-density parity-check codes”. IRE Trans. Inf. 
Theory 8(1), 21–28 (1962). 
[2] ”Low Density Parity Check Codes for Use in Near-Earth and Deep 
Space Applications”, Orange Book, Issue 2, Consultative Committee 
for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) Experimental Specification 131.1-
O-2, 2007. 
[3] G. Zhang, Y. Hu, Y. Fang and J. Wang, ”Constructions of Type-II 
QC-LDPC Codes With Girth Eight from Sidon Sequence,” in IEEE 
Trans. on Comm., vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 3865-3878, June 2019. 
[4] W. Ren and H. Liu, ”The Design and Implementation of High-Speed 
Codec Based on FPGA,” 2018 10th International Conf. on Comm. 
Software and Networks (ICCSN), Chengdu, China, 2018, pp. 427-532. 
[5] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Turbo decoder architectures 
for low-density parity-check codes,” Global Telecommunications 
Conference, 2002. GLOBECOM ’02. IEEE, Taipei, Taiwan, 2002, pp. 
1383-1388 vol.2. 
[6] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “High-throughput layered decoder 
implementation for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas 
Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 985–994, Aug. 2009. 
[7] C. Zhou, Y. Ge, X. Chen, Y. Chen and X. Zeng, ”An area-Efficient 
LDPC decoder for multi-standard with conflict resolution,” ASAP 
2011 - 22nd IEEE Int. Conf. on Application-specific Syst., 
Architectures and Processors, Santa Monica, CA, USA, 2011. 
[8] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “Low-Complexity High-Speed Decoder Design 
for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes,” IEEE Trans. on Very Large Scale 
Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 104-114, 2007. 
[9] Liao R., Fu Y., Liu T. (2016) “FPGA-Based High Throughput TDMP 
LDPC Decoder.” In: Xu W., Xiao L., Li J., Zhang C., Zhu Z. (eds) 
Computer 
Engineering 
and 
Technology. 
NCCET 
2016. 
Communications in Computer and Information Science, vol 666. 
Springer, Singapore. 
[10] S. A. A. Zaidi, M. Awais, C. Condo, M. Martina and G. 
Masera, ”FPGA accelerator of quasi-cyclic EG-LDPC codes decoder 
for NAND flash memories,” 2013 Conf. on Design and Architectures 
for Signal and Image Processing, Cagliari, Italy, 2013, pp. 190-195. 
[11] C. Wey, M. Shieh and S. Lin, ”Algorithms of Finding the First Two 
Minimum Values and Their Hardware Implementation,” in IEEE 
Trans. on Circuits and Syst. I: Regular Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 
3430-3437, Dec. 2008. 
[12] B. Xiang and X. Zeng, ”A 4.84 mm2 847–955 Mb/s 397 mW dual-
path fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder for the WiMAX system in 
0.13 µm CMOS,” 2010 Symp. on VLSI Circuits, Honolulu, HI, USA, 
2010, pp. 211-212. 
[13] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin and V. Akella, ”Memory System 
Optimization for FPGA-Based Implementation of Quasi-Cyclic 
LDPC Codes Decoders,” in IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Syst. I: 
Regular Papers, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 98-111, Jan. 2011. 
 
27
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:05:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
