 
Information Bottleneck Message Passing for 
Military Applications
Jan Lewandowsky, Marc Adrat  
Communication Systems 
Fraunhofer FKIE 
Wachtberg, Germany 
{firstname.lastname}@fkie.fraunhofer.de 
Gerhard Bauch 
Institute of Communications 
Hamburg University of Technology 
Hamburg, Germany 
bauch@tuhh.de 
  
Abstract—Military communication systems naturally have 
strong requirements concerning the reliability and the 
robustness of their physical layer data transmission schemes. 
Modern channel coding and modulation schemes can meet these 
requirements in general, but their detection and decoding at the 
receiving end requires complex and power demanding high-
precision implementations of digital algorithms, which are often 
not suitable for military applications. This motivates to explore 
novel techniques to build simple detection and decoding 
algorithms with good performance. In this article, we present 
novel results on the recent idea of using a machine learning 
framework termed the Information Bottleneck method to 
replace demanding implementations of the sum-product 
algorithm with very simple quantized message passing schemes. 
We provide a novel explanation, which links the Information 
Bottleneck decoder processing to the sum-product algorithm. 
Moreover, we present a novel Information Bottleneck 
demodulation scheme for quadrature amplitude modulation 
and discuss special advantages of the Information Bottleneck 
system design approach for military applications. 
Keywords—quantization, 
channel 
decoding, 
information 
bottleneck method, message passing algorithms 
I. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION 
Today’s military operations require reliable and robust 
digital communication services for their success, as these 
services are key for the information exchange on the tactical 
and the strategic level. Typically, military communication 
services require high robustness and reliability of the 
communication link. Moreover, more and more military 
applications require high data throughputs, for example, to 
establish real time and high quality simultaneous video and 
audio links. The aforementioned demands have to be 
addressed by the application of modern physical layer 
technologies, for example, powerful forward error correcting 
channel codes and higher order modulation schemes. 
Unfortunately, the corresponding detection and decoding 
algorithms at the receiving end are often based on the sum-
product algorithm [1, 2] and their implementations are power 
demanding and complex, hence resulting in bottlenecks in the 
receiver implementation [3]. These bottlenecks especially 
affect military radios carried in the field which are typically 
battery supplied, but require a very long autonomous 
operating time without recharging in military missions. As a 
result, the development of reduced complexity physical layer 
algorithms for detection and channel decoding is of special 
interest for military applications.  
The number of bits used for the signal representation in 
detection and decoding algorithms, also known as the bit 
width, directly relates to their power consumption and their 
implementation complexity [3]. While low bit widths are 
desirable from an implementation perspective, they typically 
offer worse performance than high-precision implementations 
of the optimum signal processing algorithms. A natural trade-
off exists between the bit width used and the resulting 
detection and decoding performance in conventional detection 
and decoding algorithms.  
Several recent works [4-12] consider an information 
centric design method for detection and decoding algorithms 
with low bit widths. A common idea applied in these works is 
to design signal processing algorithms that aim for the 
maximum preservation of mutual information under 
quantization, that is, for a given bit width per sample in the 
hardware. On an information theoretical level, this design 
approach is an instance of the Information Bottleneck method 
introduced by Tishby et al. in [13]. This information 
theoretical method has its origins in machine learning, where 
it has been successfully applied to an enormous number of 
applications already. The aforementioned communications 
related works [4-12] describe applications of several variants 
of Information Bottleneck like design approaches to quantized 
receiver algorithms for detection and channel decoding. All of 
these papers focus on specific applications of the principle, for 
example, the decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) 
codes [4-9] and polar codes [10] and the design of channel 
output quantizers and detection algorithms [11, 12]. 
Interestingly, they have in common that the resulting receiver 
algorithms can compete with high-precision implementations 
of the corresponding state-of-the-art signal processing 
algorithms while using very low bit widths, typically between 
four and five bits per sample. This paper continues our 
preliminary works [7, 8] and [12] on detection and decoding 
with the Information Bottleneck method.  
Concisely, the novel contributions of this article are: 
- 
We present a novel Information Bottleneck based 
quantized demodulator for quadrature amplitude 
modulation (QAM) and study its performance in an 
LDPC encoded transmission.  
- 
We explain the relationship between Information 
Bottleneck detection and decoding and the sum-
product algorithm.  
- 
We illustrate that the Information Bottleneck design 
approach for demodulation and channel decoding 
schemes is very generic.   
- 
We discuss why the Information Bottleneck design 
approach is particularly interesting for military 
communication systems. 
2021 International Conference on Military Communication and Information Systems (ICMCIS) | 978-1-6654-4586-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICMCIS52405.2021.9486405
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:06:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
We structure the article as follows: The following Sec. II 
introduces the notation and some preliminaries. Sec. III 
compares conventional decoding approaches based on the 
sum-product algorithm with the Information Bottleneck 
approach and discusses their basic connection. In Sec. IV we 
investigate a novel QAM demodulator from the Information 
Bottleneck design approach based on this discussion. Sec. V 
highlights interesting aspects of the proposed method for 
military applications, before Sec. VI concludes the paper.  
II. PRELIMINARIES 
A. Notation 
Throughout the paper, we use the following notation. A 
random variable X  has the realizations  𝑥∈𝒳.  The 
corresponding probability distribution is 𝑝(𝑥) and 𝑝(𝑥|𝑦) is 
the respective conditional distribution of X given  Y.  The 
expression I(X; Y)  denotes the mutual information of the 
random variables X  and Y.  The function 𝛿(𝑥)  denotes the 
Kronecker delta function. |𝒳| denotes the cardinality of the 
set 𝒳. The function loga 𝑏 is the base 𝑎 logarithm of 𝑏. We 
neglect the base 𝑎 for the natural logarithm. 
Moreover, we use the factor graph notation from [1], 
where factor nodes are drawn as square nodes and variable 
nodes are drawn as circle nodes.  
B. Information Bottleneck Method 
The Information Bottleneck method presented in [13] is a 
generic information theoretical framework, which considers a 
Markov chain of discrete random variables X →Y →T. The 
random variable Y is considered to be observed. The aim of 
the method is determination of an optimum compression 
mapping 𝑝(𝑡|𝑦)  which maps the realizations 𝑦 onto the 
realizations 𝑡 while preserving the mutual information 
 I(X; T) ≤I(X; Y). Simultaneously, the mutual informa-
tion I(Y; T) shall be minimized. The idea of this setup is that 
T is a compressed representation of Y (hence, I(Y; T) →min).  
The variable X determines which features in Y are considered 
to be relevant and, therefore, shall be preserved under the 
applied compression (hence, I(X; T) →max). Fig. 1 shows a 
compact overview of the intended information relations 
between the mentioned random variables and mentions their 
respective 
probability 
distributions 
𝑝(𝑡|𝑦), 𝑝(𝑦)
 and 
𝑝(𝑥|𝑡), 𝑝(𝑡) that determine the mutual information I(Y; T) 
and I(X; T), respectively. 
The side constrained optimization problem of finding an 
optimum 𝑝(𝑡|𝑦)  which minimizes I(Y; T)  and simul-
taneously maximizes I(X; T)  can be formalized by 
introducing a Lagrangian multiplier 𝛽≥0. Like this, one 
ends up with the aim of finding a valid conditional probability 
distribution 𝑝(𝑡|𝑦) which minimizes the Lagrangian 

ℒ{𝑝(𝑡|𝑦)} = I(Y; T) −𝛽I(X; T)

In this setup, the parameter 𝛽 is a trade-off parameter allowing 
to weigh the aim of preserving relevant information, that 
is, I(X; T) →max. The case   𝛽→+∞ is the most interesting 
case for this paper, as we aim to design decoding algorithms 
with maximum preservation of relevant information. 
Therefore, we focus on it in the remainder of the paper. 
However, if no other constraint is imposed, for 𝛽→+∞, the 
trivial solution Y = T  or any other invertible mapping 
minimizes (1), hence not resulting in any compression. A 
constraint on the compression for 𝛽→+∞, however, can be 
introduced by limiting the cardinality of 𝒯 such that it is 
smaller than the one of 𝒴. Like this, 𝑡 can take fewer values 
than 𝑦 and one can adjust the compression level by adapting 
the cardinality |𝒯|. 
 
Several Information Bottleneck algorithms exist in the 
literature (see, e.g., [14]) which input the joint distribution 
𝑝(𝑥, 𝑦),  the desired compression cardinality  |𝒯|  and 
eventually some finite value of 𝛽. They deliver a locally 
optimum compression mapping 𝑝(𝑡|𝑦) that achieves a local 
minimum of (1). In the case 𝛽→+∞, these algorithms 
deliver deterministic mappings 𝑝(𝑡|𝑦), meaning that each 𝑦∈
𝒴 is mapped onto a 𝑡∈𝒯 with probability 1. This implies that 
𝑝(𝑡|𝑦) = 𝛿(𝑡−𝑓(𝑦)), where the function 𝑓(𝑦) is a discrete 
input/output relation which maps each 𝑦 onto the 
corresponding 𝑡, that is, 𝑡= 𝑓(𝑦). Since 𝑦 is considered to be 
discrete, the mapping 𝑡= 𝑓(𝑦) can be stored in a simple 
lookup table which holds 𝑡 for every possible 𝑦. In addition to 
the mapping 𝑝(𝑡|𝑦),  the available Information Bottleneck 
algorithms from the literature also deliver the probability 
distributions 𝑝(𝑥|𝑡)  and 𝑝(𝑡)  as side products. These 
distributions determine the mutual information I(X; T). 
III. TUTORIAL ON BUILDING DECODING ALGORITHMS WITH 
THE INFORMATION BOTTLENECK METHOD 
 
In order to understand how the Information Bottleneck 
method described above can be used to build very simple and 
quantized detection and decoding operations, the aim of this 
section is to first provide an easy-to-understand example, 
which explains how the well-known conventional soft 
decision decoding operation box-plus [15] can be replaced 
with a lookup table designed with the Information Bottleneck 
method.  
 
Let 𝑏0, 𝑏1 ∈{0,1} denote two bits signaled over a binary 
input and discrete output channel with transition probability 
𝑝(𝑦𝑘|𝑏𝑘). We consider a quantized output channel, such that 
the 𝑦𝑘∈{0,1, … , 2𝑞−1}. The 𝑦𝑘 are quantization indices 
from an applied 𝑞 bit channel output quantizer. Having 
received the channel outputs 𝑦0, 𝑦1 our aim is determination 
of extrinsic information on a bit 𝑥 which is given by the 
outcome of the binary XOR connection of 𝑏0 and 𝑏1, that is, 
𝑥= 𝑏0 ⊕𝑏1.  
A. Conventional Soft Decision Decoding using Log-
Likelihood Ratios 
In the considered example, a proper method to obtain the 
desired extrinsic information is determining the log-likelihood 
ratio (LLR) 𝐿(𝑥) from the channel LLRs 𝐿(𝑏0) and 𝐿(𝑏1) 
using Hagenauer’s box-plus operation from [15] as 

𝐿(𝑥) = 𝐿(𝑏0) ⊞𝐿(𝑏1) = log
1+exp (𝐿(𝑏0)+𝐿(𝑏1))
exp(𝐿(𝑏0))+exp (𝐿(𝑏1)) .
 
Fig. 1: Compact overview of the random variables and probability 
distributions in the Information Bottleneck method. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:06:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
This operation is illustrated in Fig. 2. It is used in many 
channel decoders, for example, belief propagation decoders 
for LDPC codes and also in polar decoders. As shown in 
Fig. 2, the operation maps two incoming LLRs 𝐿(𝑏0), 𝐿(𝑏1) 
onto the outgoing LLR 𝐿(𝑥). 
 
The downside of evaluating (2) for generation of extrinsic 
information is that the inherent processing of the LLRs 
requires representing the LLRs in the hardware using many 
bits per LLR to represent the belief on their underlying bit 
appropriately, as LLRs are continuous values. Moreover, the 
involved mathematical functions in (2) are complex to 
evaluate in hardware. As a result, rather than using the 
optimum operation (2), practical decoders often use simpler 
approximations of (2) at the expense of a performance 
degradation. 
A 
well-known 
example 
for 
such 
an 
approximation is the min-sum operation [7]. 
B. Quantized Decoding Operations from the Information 
Bottleneck Method and the Sum-Product Algorithm 
 
A different view on the problem of obtaining extrinsic 
information on 𝑥= 𝑏0 ⊕𝑏1 from 𝑦0, 𝑦1 is provided in Fig. 3. 
Here, we want to make direct use of the fact that 𝑦0 and 𝑦1 are 
discrete. Since 𝑦𝑘∈{0,1, … , 2𝑞−1} , there exist 22𝑞 dif-
ferent possibilities (𝑦0, 𝑦1). Other than real valued LLRs, the 
𝑞 bit integers 𝑦𝑘 can be represented very compactly in the 
receiver hardware. As a result, it is desirable to be able to 
obtain extrinsic information on 𝑥 without using LLRs, but 
rather directly from 𝑦0, 𝑦1. It turns out, that this aim can be 
achieved with the Information Bottleneck method.  
 
We consider the relevant variable X = B0 ⊕B1 and the 
two-dimensional observation Y = (Y0, Y1). According to the 
explanation in Sec. II B, feeding the joint distribution  
𝑝(𝑥, 𝑦0, 𝑦1) to an Information Bottleneck algorithm with 𝛽→
+∞ delivers a mapping 𝑡= 𝑓(𝑦0, 𝑦1), which maps the inputs 
(𝑦0, 𝑦1)  from Fig. 3 onto the output 𝑡 while aiming 
for  I(X; T) →max . As it also has been explained, this 
mapping can be stored in a lookup table which holds the 
respective 𝑡 for every possible (𝑦0, 𝑦1) . As a result, the 
designed system obtains extrinsic information on 𝑥 without 
using any real valued LLRs, but only with a simple lookup of 
the integer 𝑡∈{0,1, … , 2𝑞out −1}. The output bit width 𝑞out 
is a design parameter of the applied Information Bottleneck 
algorithm, as 𝑞out = log2 |𝒯|. Our preliminary work [7] 
illustrates that when the described technique is applied for all 
nodes in an LDPC decoder, the resulting decoder has 
performance enormously close to that of double precision 
belief propagation decoding with 𝑞out = 4  bit messages. 
More evidence of this fact is deferred to Sec. IV where the 
decoding principle will be used extensively.  
 
A question arising that we want to discuss in this paper is, 
how the resulting operation is linked to the box-plus operation 
used in many channel decoders or, more general, to the 
generic sum-product algorithm which passes messages on 
factor graphs in many technical applications. An important 
result on this was described in [6], where an inequality for the 
LLRs calculated from 𝑝(𝑥|𝑡) in our notation is obtained that 
links these LLRs to the LLRs obtained using the non-
quantized node operation in a belief propagation decoder for 
LDPC codes (for more details, please see [6]). In this paper, 
as a novel contribution, we want to provide an interpretation 
based on the general sum-product algorithm on a factor graph. 
For this purpose, consider the factor graph of the joint 
distribution 𝑝(𝑥, 𝑏0, 𝑏1, 𝑦0, 𝑦1) depicted in Fig. 4. As shown 
there, this joint probability distribution factorizes as 
𝑝(𝑥, 𝑏0, 𝑏1, 𝑦0, 𝑦1) = 
        𝑝(𝑦0|𝑏0)𝑝(𝑦1|𝑏1)𝑝(𝑏0)𝑝(𝑏1)𝑝(𝑥|𝑏0, 𝑏1).

This factorization structure reflects that the bits 𝑏0, 𝑏1 and 
their respective corresponding channel outputs 𝑦0, 𝑦1  are 
modeled to be statistically independent. The factor 
𝑝(𝑥|𝑏0, 𝑏1) expresses that the bit 𝑥 can be calculated from 𝑏0 
and 𝑏1 as 𝑥= 𝑏0 ⊕𝑏1. As a result, the factor 𝑝(𝑥|𝑏0, 𝑏1) =
𝛿(𝑥⊕𝑏0 ⊕𝑏1), which takes value 1 if and only if 𝑥= 𝑏0 ⊕
𝑏1 and 0 otherwise. It is well known that the sum-product 
algorithm can be used to calculate the marginal posterior 
distribution 𝑝(𝑥|𝑦0, 𝑦1)  by message passing on the factor 
graph of 𝑝(𝑥, 𝑏0, 𝑏1, 𝑦0, 𝑦1). 
 
In this algorithm, messages 𝜇 are passed along the edges 
of the factor graph that are functions of the variables involved.   
Moreover, generic update rules have to be performed at the 
variable and the factor nodes in the message passing process. 
Let 𝑁(𝑥) and 𝑁(𝑓) denote the sets of neighboring nodes of a 
variable node 𝑥 and a factor node 𝑓 in a factor graph, 
respectively. Then, the aforementioned generic update rules 
are [1, 2] 

𝜇𝑥→𝑓(𝑥) = ∏
𝜇𝑔→𝑥(𝑥)
𝑔∈𝑁(𝑥)\{𝑓}


for the variable nodes and 
𝜇𝑓→𝑥(𝑥) = ∑
𝑓(𝑁(𝑓))
~{𝑥}
∏
𝜇𝑥𝑚→𝑓 (𝑥𝑚)
𝑥𝑚∈𝑁(𝑓)\{𝑥}


 
Fig. 2: Generation of extrinsic information using the box-plus operation. 
𝑏0 →𝐿(𝑏0)
⊞
𝐿𝑥= 𝐿(𝑏0 ⊕𝑏1)
𝑏1 →𝐿(𝑏1)
conventional signal processing:
 
Fig. 3: Generation of extrinsic information using a lookup table designed 
with the Information Bottleneck method. 
𝑏0 →𝑦0
𝑓(𝑦0,𝑦1)
𝑡representing
𝑥= 𝑏0 ⊕𝑏1
𝑏1 →𝑦1
Information Bottleneck signal processing:
𝑡∈{0,1, … , 2𝑞out −1}
𝑦𝑘∈{0,1, … , 2𝑞−1}
 
Fig. 4: Factor graph of the joint probability distribution 𝑝(𝑥, 𝑏0, 𝑏1, 𝑦0, 𝑦1). 
𝑦0
𝑦1
𝑏0
𝑏1
 𝑥
𝑝(𝑏0)
𝑝(𝑏1)
𝑝(𝑦0|𝑏0)
𝑝(𝑦1|𝑏1)
𝑝(𝑥|𝑏0, 𝑏1)
𝑓0
𝑓1
𝑓2
𝑓 
𝑓 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:06:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
for the factor nodes. In Eq. (5), the not-sum notation ~{𝑥} 
from [1] was adopted which describes that the sum is taken 
over the event spaces of all variables, but excluding the one 
of 𝑥. It is common to normalize the messages sent in the sum-
product algorithm such that they sum to 1, as the messages 
passed can be considered to be probability distributions. 
 
Next, we apply the general update rules (4) and (5) to 
develop a message passing algorithm that obtains the marginal 
posterior distribution  𝑝(𝑥|𝑦0, 𝑦1)  and relate it to the 
Information Bottleneck based lookup operation depicted in 
Fig. 3 to explain their relation. For a better understanding, we 
switch over to a concrete numerical example that compares 
both message passing algorithms. 
 
Consider a transmission channel which can take four 
different outputs 𝑦𝑘∈{0, 1, 2, 3} together with the channel 
transition probabilities 𝑝(𝑦𝑘|𝑏𝑘)  depicted in Table I. 
Furthermore, consider both bits 𝑏0, 𝑏1 ∈{0,1}  with equal 
probability. Now assume that the pair (𝑦0, 𝑦1) = (0,2)  was 
received from the transmission channel. In this case, the pair 
(𝑦0, 𝑦1) = (0,2)  becomes so called evidence [2], which 
disappears from the original factor graph from Fig. 4.  
 
The factor graph in Fig. 5 then illustrates a two-step 
message passing algorithm to obtain extrinsic information on 
𝑥. Arrows label the messages exchanged in the consecutive 
steps labeled 1 and 2 in the figure. In step 1, the leaf factor 
nodes 𝑓0, 𝑓1 and 𝑓2, 𝑓  pass their local functions to the variable 
nodes 𝑏0 and 𝑏1 respectively. The messages sent by factor 
nodes 𝑓0 and 𝑓1 in step 1 are 

𝜇𝑓0→𝑏0(𝑏0) = [
𝜇𝑓0→𝑏0(0)
𝜇𝑓0→𝑏0(1)] = [ 0.8
0.01] ∝[0.988
0.012]


𝜇𝑓1→𝑏1(𝑏1) = [𝜇𝑓1→𝑏1(0)
𝜇𝑓1→𝑏1(1)] = [0.04
0.15] ∝[0.211
0.789].

The factors 𝑓2 and 𝑓  just pass the constant factors 0.5, as we 
assume that both bits 𝑏0, 𝑏1 ∈{0,1} with equal probability. 
Finally, the variable nodes 𝑏0 and 𝑏1 multiply their incoming 
messages according to Eq. (4) and send outgoing messages to 
node 𝑓 . Due to the uninformative priors 𝑝(𝑏0) and 𝑝(𝑏1), the 
messages 𝜇𝑓0→𝑏0(𝑏0) and 𝜇𝑓1→𝑏1(𝑏1) do not change here after 
proper normalization, such that the messages 𝜇𝑏0→𝑓4(𝑏0) =
𝜇𝑓0→𝑏0(𝑏0) and 𝜇𝑏1→𝑓4(𝑏1) = 𝜇𝑓1→𝑏1(𝑏1) are passed towards 
factor node 𝑓 .  
In the following step 2, the factor node 𝑓  performs its update 
to generate 𝜇𝑓4→𝑥(𝑥) using Eq.  (5). 
According to Eq. (5), the message 𝜇𝑓4→𝑥(𝑥) is given by 
𝜇𝑓4→𝑥(𝑥) = 
∑
∑
𝛿(𝑥⊕𝑏0 ⊕𝑏1)
𝑏1
𝜇𝑏0→𝑓4(𝑏0)𝜇𝑏1→𝑓4(𝑏1)
𝑏0

 
Using that 𝛿(𝑥⊕𝑏0 ⊕𝑏1) = 1  for 𝑥= 𝑏0 ⊕𝑏1 and 0 
otherwise, this can be resolved as 
𝜇𝑓0→𝑏0(𝑏0) = [
𝜇𝑏0→𝑓4(0)𝜇𝑏1→𝑓4(0) + 𝜇𝑏0→𝑓4(1)𝜇𝑏1→𝑓4(1)
𝜇𝑏0→𝑓4(0)𝜇𝑏0→𝑓4(1) + 𝜇𝑏0→𝑓4(1)𝜇𝑏1→𝑓4(0)]
= [0.988 ⋅0.211 + 0.012 ⋅0.789
0.988 ⋅0.789 + 0.012 ⋅0.211] ∝[0.218
0.782].

As the next step, we want to discuss how the above message 
passing process relates to the extraction of relevant 
information on 𝑥 with the Information Bottleneck approach 
from Fig. 3. For this purpose, Table II shows the lookup table 
representation of 𝑝(𝑡|𝑦0, 𝑦1) that has been obtained using an 
Information Bottleneck algorithm from [7] with output 
cardinality |𝒯| = 4 for the considered example. 
 
Since we have received (𝑦0, 𝑦1) = (0,2)  from the 
channel, the lookup table tells that the respective outcome of 
the operation 𝑡= 𝑓(0,2) = 1, as it is highlighted in bold. The 
urgent question is how this fact can provide extrinsic 
information on the bit 𝑥. Please recall that the Information 
Bottleneck algorithm applied to design the lookup table from 
Table II also provides the distributions 𝑝(𝑥|𝑡) and 𝑝(𝑡). The 
distribution 𝑝(𝑥|𝑡) provides a belief on 𝑥 for a given 𝑡. Table 
III shows this distribution for the considered example. In this 
table, we see that the observed case 𝑡= 1 corresponds to  

𝑝(𝑥|T = 1) = [Pr(X = 0|T = 1)
Pr(X = 1|T = 1)] = [0.234
0.766]
 
Fig. 5: Message passing on the factor graph of the joint probability 
distribution 𝑝(𝑥, 𝑏0, 𝑏1, 𝑦0, 𝑦1) in the sum-product algorithm. 
𝑏0
𝑏1
 𝑥
𝑝(𝑏0)
𝑝(𝑏1)
𝑝(𝑦0|𝑏0)
𝑝(𝑦1|𝑏1)
𝑝(𝑥|𝑏0, 𝑏1)
𝑓0
𝑓1
𝑓2
𝑓 
𝑓 
1
1
1
2
TABLE III. 
PROBABILITIES IMPLIED BY 𝑝(𝑥|𝑡). 
𝑡 
X = 0 
X = 1 
0 
0.024 
0.976 
𝟏 
𝟎. 𝟐𝟑𝟒 
𝟎. 𝟕𝟔𝟔 
2 
0.766 
0.234 
3 
0.976 
0.024 
TABLE I. 
EXEMPLARY TRANSITION PROBABILITIES 
𝑦𝑘→ 
0 
1 
2 
3 
𝑝(𝑦𝑘|B𝑘= 0) 
0.8 
0.15 
0.04 
0.01 
𝑝(𝑦𝑘|B𝑘= 1) 
0.01 
0.04 
0.15 
0.8 
 
TABLE II. 
LOOKUP TABLE FOR 𝑡= 𝑓(𝑦0, 𝑦1). 
𝑦0 
𝑦1 
𝑡 
𝑦0 
𝑦1 
𝑡 
0 
0 
3 
2 
0 
1 
0 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
𝟎 
𝟐 
𝟏 
2 
2 
2 
0 
3 
0 
2 
3 
2 
1 
0 
2 
3 
0 
0 
1 
1 
2 
3 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
3 
2 
2 
1 
3 
1 
3 
3 
3 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:06:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
A comparison to the right hand side of Eq. (9) which holds the 
respective message passed in the sum-product algorithm 
reveals that the obtained belief 𝑝(𝑥|𝑡) on 𝑥 approximates 
𝑝(𝑥|𝑦0, 𝑦1) that has been obtained by the sum-product 
algorithm on the factor graph of 𝑝(𝑥, 𝑏0, 𝑏1, 𝑦0, 𝑦1). 
We go a step further and interpret the described lookup 
operation from Fig. 3 as a discretized variant of the sum-
product algorithm on the factor graph of 𝑝(𝑥, 𝑏0, 𝑏1, 𝑦0, 𝑦1) 
considered above by pointing out equivalences between both 
message passing algorithms. The node labeled 𝑓(𝑦0, 𝑦1) in 
Fig. 3 receives the integer messages 𝑦0, 𝑦1 from the channel. 
This is equivalent to the situation after step 1 in the considered 
sum-product algorithm from Fig. 5, as these messages 
represent beliefs 𝑝(𝑏0|𝑦0) and 𝑝(𝑏1|𝑦1) on the bits 𝑏0 and 𝑏1 
obtained from the channel, respectively. Then the Information 
Bottleneck based lookup operation obtains 𝑡= 𝑓(𝑦0, 𝑦1). 
This step is analogous to the factor node update of factor node 
𝑓  to generate 𝜇𝑓4→𝑥(𝑥) in Fig. 5, as the generated message 𝑡 
has a belief 𝑝(𝑥|𝑡)  associated. Like this, both message 
passing schemes obtain a belief on 𝑥 and we have seen in the 
example above that 𝑝(𝑥|𝑡) = 𝑝(𝑥|𝑓(𝑦0, 𝑦1)) ≈𝑝(𝑥|𝑦0, 𝑦1). 
The approximation is designed to preserve a maximum 
possible amount of relevant information I(X; T) ≤I(X; Y0, Y1) 
with the Information Bottleneck method. Hence, the lookup 
operation 𝑡= 𝑓(𝑦0, 𝑦1) implements an approximated variant 
of the sum-product algorithm with a very rational design aim, 
that is, the preservation of relevant information under 
quantization. 
 
A key fact is that in the Information Bottleneck based 
decoders presented in [7], the distribution 𝑝(𝑥|𝑡)  is not 
considered during decoding, but only for the design of 
connected Information Bottleneck based lookup tables. 
During decoding, only the integer indices 𝑡 that can be 
represented very compactly in the hardware are exchanged. 
From the example above, we know that each such integer has 
a belief 𝑝(𝑥|𝑡) associated, which compares to the message 
exchanged in the sum-product algorithm, but this belief is 
never needed during the actual decoding process, but only for 
the design of the connected lookup tables. In addition, [7] and 
the results presented in Sec. IV show that typically it is enough 
to design all lookup tables only once and for a particular 
design-𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 . Once designed, we use the lookup tables 
mismatched to the actual 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 on the channel. Like this, the 
entire implementation of the sum-product algorithm for 
detection and channel decoding collapses to the passing of 
integers between static and offline designed lookup tables. 
Hence, 
the 
implementation 
complexity 
is 
reduced 
mentionably in comparison to the sum-product algorithm, 
which requires the processing of real valued messages and to 
perform very complex factor node updates. 
 
A key message we want to deliver in this paper is that the 
described process to replace the sum-product algorithm is 
generic and can be applied to replace too demanding high-
precision implementations of the sum-product algorithm with 
simple integer message passing schemes that only require 
lookup operations in a generic manner. The existing literature 
already describes this technique for LDPC [4-9] and polar 
decoding [10], channel estimation and detection [11, 12]. In 
the next section, we apply it to a novel demodulation scheme 
for a QAM signal and again highlight the connection to the 
sum-product algorithm to augment our argumentation. We 
also illustrate the remarkable performance of the resulting 
message passing algorithm with very low bit widths. 
IV. AN INFORMATION BOTTLENECK DETECTION AND 
DECODING SCHEME FOR QAM SIGNALS 
In this section, we design an Information Bottleneck based 
demodulation scheme for QAM signals. For this purpose, we 
first again consider the conventional sum-product and LLR 
based approaches to this problem. Afterwards, we introduce 
the respective Information Bottleneck approach and study its 
performance. 
Consider the transmission of an 𝑀-QAM signal over an 
additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. The 𝑀-
QAM transmit signal consists of complex symbols 𝑠𝑘=
𝑠𝑘
re + 𝑗𝑠𝑘
im  from a complex modulation alphabet with 
cardinality𝑀. The index 𝑘 is the respective discrete time 
index. 
Each 
modulation 
symbol 
has 
a 
bit 
label 
𝑐𝑘,0, 𝑐𝑘,1, … , 𝑐𝑘,log2 𝑀−1 assigned to according to a particular 
bit labeling. We denote the corresponding complex and 
continuous received baseband signal for the transmitted 
modulation symbol 𝑠𝑘 by 𝑟̃𝑘= 𝑟̃𝑘
re + 𝑗𝑟̃𝑘
im = 𝑟̃𝑘+ 𝑛̃𝑘. The 
noise sample 𝑛̃𝑘 is a realization from an uncorrelated 
circularly symmetric complex Gaussian random process with 
variance 𝜎𝑛̃
2 and mean 0. 
A. Conventional Demodulation using LLRs and the Sum-
product Algorithm  
A widely used LLR based approach to detection of the 
considered QAM signal is the generation of LLRs using the 
equation 
             𝐿ch(𝑐𝑘,𝑙) = log
∑
𝑝(𝑟̃𝑘|𝑠𝑘)
𝑠𝑘∈𝒮𝑙,0
∑
𝑝(𝑟̃𝑘|𝑠𝑘)
𝑠𝑘∈𝒮𝑙,1


where the sets 𝒮𝑙,0 and 𝒮𝑙,1 are the subsets of symbols in the 
modulation alphabet which have bits 0 and 1 assigned to at 
position 𝑙 in the bit label.  
We exemplarily consider a 16-QAM scheme with a bit 
labeling described in the IEEE 802.11 wireless LAN standard 
[16] and shown in Fig. 6 in the following, but the ideas 
presented easily generalize also to other bit labelings. The 
 
Fig. 6: 16-QAM modulation pattern with Gray bit labeling from the IEEE
802.11 wireless LAN standard [16]. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:06:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
considered bit labeling has the characteristic that the first two 
bits 𝑐𝑘,0, 𝑐𝑘,1 only determine the real part 𝑠𝑘
re of 𝑠𝑘 and the 
last two bits 𝑐𝑘,2, 𝑐𝑘,  only determine the imaginary part 𝑠𝑘
im. 
For this constellation scheme, the evaluation of Eq. (11) is 
equivalent to considering the message passing algorithm 
depicted in Fig. 7 on the factor graph of the joint probability 
distribution 𝑝(𝑐𝑘,0, 𝑐𝑘,1, 𝑐𝑘,2, 𝑐𝑘, , 𝑠𝑘
re, 𝑠𝑘
im, 𝑟̃𝑘
re, 𝑟̃𝑘
im). Here, the 
sum-product algorithm is used to obtain the marginal 
posterior distributions 𝑝(𝑐𝑘,𝑙|𝑟̃𝑘
re, 𝑟̃𝑘
im) for all 𝑙∈{0, 1, 2, 3}. 
The considered message passing process of the sum-product 
algorithm is very similar to the one already discussed above. 
The outcomes of the depicted step 1 are the messages 
𝜇𝑠𝑘
re→𝑓4(𝑠𝑘
re)  and 𝜇𝑠𝑘
im→𝑓5(𝑠𝑘
im).  These messages provide 
beliefs on 𝑠𝑘
re  and 𝑠𝑘
im  from the channel observations 
𝑟̃𝑘
re, 𝑟̃𝑘
im. Moreover, the leaf variable nodes 𝑐𝑘,𝑙 send uniform 
distributions in the directions of 𝑓  and  𝑓5 in step 1. In step 
2, then the factor nodes 𝑓  and 𝑓5 can generate their outgoing 
messages to be sent to the variable nodes  𝑐𝑘,𝑙 that provide the 
posterior distributions 𝑝(𝑐𝑘,𝑙|𝑟̃𝑘
re, 𝑟̃𝑘
im) for all 𝑙∈{0, 1, 2, 3}. 
Please note that the factor nodes 𝑓  and  𝑓5 reflect the applied 
bit labeling of the considered modulation scheme. 
B. Information Bottleneck Based Demodulation 
Exactly equivalent to the procedure from Sec. III, we 
replace the sum-product based message passing algorithm 
from Fig. 7 with an Information Bottleneck based lookup 
table equivalent that mimics the sum-product algorithm by 
passing integers. We illustrate the respective lookup tables 
using the Information Bottleneck graph notation introduced 
in [12] in Fig. 8. In this notation, each lookup table is depicted 
as a trapezoid node, which is labeled with the respective 
relevant random variable that the node aims to preserve 
information on. The compression variables of the shown 
trapezoid nodes are connected to the shortest sides of the 
respective nodes. The other connected variables are the inputs 
to the respective compression mappings.  
In the shown structure, first the continuous samples 
𝑟̃𝑘
re, 𝑟̃𝑘
im from the transmission channel are quantized using 
quantizers that aim to preserve the maximum possible 
information on the real part 𝑠𝑘
re and the imaginary part 𝑠𝑘
im of 
the transmitted modulation symbol, respectively. This step 
corresponds to a coarse analog-to-digital conversion. We 
design the applied quantizers with the Information Bottleneck 
method, as explained in detail in [8]. They deliver 
quantization indices 𝑟𝑘
re, 𝑟𝑘
im ∈{0,1, … , 2𝑞quant −1} that we 
feed to the Information Bottleneck compression mappings 
𝑝(𝑡𝑘,𝑙|𝑟𝑘
re)  and 𝑝(𝑡𝑘,𝑙|𝑟𝑘
im)  to obtain integers 𝑡𝑘,𝑙∈
{0,1, … , 2𝑞dem −1} informative about the bits 𝑐𝑘,𝑙. Please 
note that it is very easy to adapt the respective output bit 
widths used for quantization and demodulation in this scheme 
by just choosing the output cardinality |𝒯| of the applied 
Information Bottleneck algorithms. The design of the channel 
output quantizers 𝑝(𝑟𝑘
re|𝑟̃𝑘
re)  and 𝑝(𝑟𝑘
im|𝑟̃𝑘
im)  with the 
Information 
Bottleneck 
method 
requires 
the 
joint 
distributions 𝑝(𝑠𝑘
re, 𝑟̃𝑘
re)  and 𝑝(𝑠𝑘
im, 𝑟̃𝑘
im) . These follow 
directly from the channel model and the source statistics. The 
design algorithms for the quantizers deliver 𝑝(𝑠𝑘
re, 𝑟𝑘
re) and 
𝑝(𝑠𝑘
im, 𝑟𝑘
im). These distributions have to be used to design the 
compression mappings 𝑝(𝑡𝑘,𝑙|𝑟𝑘
re) and 𝑝(𝑡𝑘,𝑙|𝑟𝑘
im) with an 
Information Bottleneck algorithm. The joint distributions 
required for the design of  𝑝(𝑡𝑘,𝑙|𝑟𝑘
re) and 𝑝(𝑡𝑘,𝑙|𝑟𝑘
im) are 
given by 
   𝑝(𝑐𝑘,𝑙, 𝑟𝑘
re) = ∑
𝑝(𝑐𝑘,𝑙|𝑠𝑘
re)𝑝(𝑠𝑘
re, 𝑟𝑘
re)
𝑠𝑘
re


   𝑝(𝑐𝑘,𝑙, 𝑟𝑘
im) = ∑
𝑝(𝑐𝑘,𝑙|𝑠𝑘
im)𝑝(𝑠𝑘
im, 𝑟𝑘
im)
𝑠𝑘
im


In these equations 𝑝(𝑐𝑘,𝑙|𝑠𝑘
re) and 𝑝(𝑐𝑘,𝑙|𝑠𝑘
im) describe the bit 
labeling used and the distributions 𝑝(𝑠𝑘
re/im, 𝑟𝑘
re/im)  are 
obtained from the design algorithm used to design the 
channel output quantizer. The structure of the Information 
Bottleneck graph from Fig. 8 is very similar to the one of the 
factor graph shown in Fig. 7. Again, we argue that the 
considered message passing process of passing the 
quantization indices 𝑟𝑘
re  and 𝑟𝑘
im  to the compression 
mappings 𝑝(𝑡𝑘,𝑙|𝑟𝑘
re)  and 𝑝(𝑡𝑘,𝑙|𝑟𝑘
im)  in Fig. 8 can be 
considered to be analogue to the step 1 of the sum-product 
algorithm from Fig. 7, as it corresponds to delivering beliefs 
𝑝(𝑠𝑘
re|𝑟𝑘
re)  and 𝑝(𝑠𝑘
im|𝑟𝑘
im)  to the next concatenated 
compression mappings. These mappings then deliver 𝑡𝑘,𝑙 
from 𝑟𝑘
re and 𝑟𝑘
im and can be considered to be analogous to 
the factor node updates of factor nodes 𝑓  and 𝑓5. Like this, 
the message passing process on the factor graph from Fig. 7 
gets replaced with a simple message passing process that only 
requires integers and lookup operations. 
C. Performance Analysis 
In this section we analyze the performance of the 
proposed demodulation scheme in an LDPC encoded data 
 
Fig. 7: Sum-product algorithm processing on the factor graph of the joint 
probability distribution  𝑝(𝑐𝑘,0, 𝑐𝑘,1, 𝑐𝑘,2, 𝑐𝑘, , 𝑠𝑘
𝑟𝑒, 𝑠𝑘
𝑖𝑚, 𝑟̃𝑘
𝑟𝑒, 𝑟̃𝑘
𝑖𝑚). 
𝑠𝑘
re
𝑠𝑘
im
𝑐𝑘,0
𝑐𝑘,1
𝑐𝑘,2
𝑐𝑘, 
1
2
𝑝(𝑟̃𝑘
re|𝑠𝑘
re)
𝑝(𝑟̃𝑘
im|𝑠𝑘
im)
𝑝(𝑠𝑘
re)
𝑝(𝑠𝑘
im)
𝑝(𝑐𝑘,0, 𝑐𝑘,1|𝑠𝑘
re)
𝑝(𝑐𝑘,2, 𝑐𝑘, |𝑠𝑘
im)
𝑓0
𝑓1
1
1
1
2
𝑓2
𝑓 
𝑓 
𝑓5
2
2
1
1
 
Fig. 8: Information Bottleneck based demodulation scheme in Information 
Bottleneck graph notation. 
𝑡𝑘,2
𝑡𝑘, 
𝑟𝑘
im
𝑡𝑘,0
𝑡𝑘,1
𝑟𝑘
re
𝑟̃𝑘
re
𝑟̃𝑘
im
𝑠𝑘
re
𝑠𝑘
im
𝑐𝑘,0
𝑐𝑘,1
𝑐𝑘,2
𝑐𝑘, 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:06:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
transmission scheme over an AWGN channel using 16-QAM 
and 64-QAM with bit labelings taken from the wireless LAN 
standard [16]. We use random (𝑑v, 𝑑c)-regular LDPC codes, 
where 𝑑v  and 𝑑c  denote the variable and the check node 
degrees, respectively. We pair the proposed Information 
Bottleneck demodulator with the Information Bottleneck 
based LDPC decoder presented in [7] which also only works 
by passing integers with the described method. For this 
purpose, we apply the message alignment technique from [8] 
to the demodulator outputs 𝑡𝑘,𝑙 (please see [8] for further 
details). The lookup tables in the proposed demodulation 
scheme are designed with the KL-means Information 
Bottleneck algorithm from [14] for a hand optimized and 
fixed design-𝐸𝑏/𝑁0. We consider conventional detection and 
decoding algorithms with double floating point precision, 
that is, 64 bits per LLR, as benchmark algorithms. Our aim 
is to approach the performance of these algorithms as close 
as possible while using a significantly reduced bit width. 
Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 show bit error rates of several detection 
and decoding algorithms in the considered setup over 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0. 
The results in Fig. 9 refer to the 16-QAM constellation from 
Fig. 6. The applied channel code was a length 8, 000 (3,6)-
regular LDPC code from [17].  All decoders investigated in 
Fig. 9 perform 50 decoding iterations. We consider two 
reference systems for our proposed Information Bottleneck 
detection and decoding scheme (red curve), which employ 
double precision belief propagation decoding (blue curve) 
and double precision min-sum decoding (black curve). As the 
conventional decoders require LLR inputs, we provide 
double precision LLRs to these decoders that result directly 
from Eq. (11). Hence, the reference systems do not suffer 
from any mentionable quantization loss. The Information 
Bottleneck system, in contrast, just receives plain 4 bit 
indices 𝑟𝑘
re and 𝑟𝑘
im from the channel output  quantizer and 
performs the demodulation using the lookup table scheme 
from Fig. 8. However, it is visible in Fig. 9 that the proposed 
Information Bottleneck detection and decoding scheme 
comes enormously close to the double precision reference 
system with belief propagation decoding. The remaining loss 
is just around 0.2 dB over 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 in the waterfall region. The 
double precision reference system with min-sum decoding is 
even outperformed by the strongly quantized Information 
Bottleneck system. This is particularly interesting because in 
[9] we presented an implementation of the considered 
Information Bottleneck decoders on a digital signal processor 
that had even lower complexity than the min-sum decoder. 
Fig. 10 shows similar results for a 64-QAM constellation. 
In this case, the maximum number of decoding iterations was 
40 and the applied code was a random (7,20)-regular LDPC 
code with length 12,000.  It is intuitive that a 64 -ary 
modulation pattern requires higher resolution of the channel 
output quantizer to preserve a significant amount of relevant 
information than a 16 -QAM. Therefore, we use 6  bit 
quantization indices 𝑟𝑘
re , 𝑟𝑘
im ∈{0,1, … ,63}  for channel 
output quantization and 5  bit integer indices 𝑡𝑘,𝑙∈
{0,1, … ,31}  which are used for decoding with the 
Information Bottleneck LDPC decoder. This decoder uses the 
5 bit integers 𝑡𝑘,𝑙 as channel messages. However, it internally 
only passes 4 bit messages. Please recall again that it is very 
easy to adapt the bit widths in the Information Bottleneck 
system by just choosing the desired output cardinalities of the 
applied Information Bottleneck algorithms. Like this, we 
reduce the bit width from the channel to the decoder to 4 bits 
per message systematically. Also in Fig. 10, we observe that 
the performance of the strongly quantized Information 
Bottleneck detection and decoding scheme can compete with 
the double precision belief propagation reference and that it 
outperforms the min-sum scheme.  
V. MILITARY ASPECTS OF INFORMATION BOTTLENECK 
DETECTION AND DECODING 
The Information Bottleneck approach for signal 
processing in detection and decoding could be very 
interesting for military applications, especially for mobile 
and handheld radios. Typically, such radios have severe 
energy and power consumption constraints, as they require a 
long autonomous operating time. At the same time, they have 
to use state-of-the-art channel coding and modulation 
schemes that require costly processing for detection and 
decoding to meet range, reliability and throughput 
requirements on the physical layer. The digital baseband 
 
Fig. 10: Bit error rate of several detection and decoding schemes for 64-
QAM modulated transmission over an AWGN channel with a length 12,000 
(7,20)-regular LDPC code with code rate 0.65 and 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥= 40 decoding 
iterations. 
 
Fig. 9: Bit error rate of several detection and decoding schemes for 16-
QAM modulated transmission over an AWGN channel with a length 8,000 
(3,6)-regular LDPC code with code rate 0.5 and 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥= 50 decoding 
iterations. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:06:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
processing for detection and channel decoding is the main 
bottleneck in digital radio receivers [3]. Lowering the bit 
width used for the signal representation has a drastical impact 
on the routing complexity and the area and power efficiency 
of a digital baseband receiver on a chip. As it has been 
illustrated in this article, the Information Bottleneck approach 
to signal processing is a very flexible approach to replace 
demanding high-precision implementations of the sum-
product algorithm with low bit width algorithms, without 
suffering from mentionable performance losses. Hence, it 
could help to increase the autonomous operating time of 
mobile radio devices in military applications.  
Another aspect that we consider in this context is that 
today software defined radios are very important for military 
missions, as modern software defined waveforms can provide 
powerful features and the flexibility required to adapt to 
changing tactical scenarios. The lookup tables designed with 
the Information Bottleneck method are constructed once and 
offline and then stored and used mismatched to their actual 
design parameters. As it was illustrated, they can replace 
detection and demodulation algorithms and channel decoding 
operations with remarkable performance, anyway. On a 
software defined radio, it is very easy to change the signal 
processing chain with Information Bottleneck components by 
just loading a novel set of pre-generated lookup tables. 
Hence, the approach is very practical for software defined 
radios. In our preliminary work [9], we have presented an 
implementation of an LDPC decoder on a software defined 
radio development platform and illustrated significant 
throughput gains in comparison to conventional decoding 
methods. Hence, we are of the opinion that the signal 
processing with the Information Bottleneck method could be 
beneficial for software defined radios that become more and 
more important in military applications. 
Finally, we would like to stress that the general method to 
replace too demanding implementations of the sum-product 
algorithm could also be interesting for other military 
applications, for example, in distributed networks [18]. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
We have proposed a novel demodulation and decoding 
scheme for LDPC encoded QAM signals and studied its 
performance. The proposed scheme offers performance close 
to that of a double precision floating point reference system 
with belief propagation decoding and even outperforms one 
with min-sum decoding while using very low bit widths 
between four and six bits per sample. In the designed system 
no complex signal processing operations, but only lookup 
operations delivering integers are required. In addition, we 
provided a vivid interpretation of the resulting integer and 
lookup operations and compared them with the sum-product 
algorithm in illustrative examples. Finally, we have discussed 
aspects, which make the proposed Information Bottleneck 
signal processing for detection and decoding particularly 
interesting for military applications. From the results 
presented, we draw the conclusion that further research on 
Information Bottleneck based signal processing in the 
military context is promising. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and 
the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, 
pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001 
[2] F. R. Kschischang, “Codes defined on graphs,” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 118–125, Aug. 2003 
[3] C. Kestel, M. Herrmann, and N. Wehn, “When channel coding hits the 
implementation wall,” in Proc. 2018 IEEE 10th International 
Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing 
(ISTC), Hong Kong, China, Dec. 2018, pp. 1–6. 
[4] B. M. Kurkoski, K. Yamaguchi, and K. Kobayashi, “Noise thresholds 
for discrete LDPC decoding mappings,” Proc. 2008 IEEE 
GLOBECOM, New Orleans, USA, Nov. 2008, pp. 1–5. 
[5] F. J. C. Romero and B. M. Kurkoski, “LDPC decoding mappings that 
maximize mutual information,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, 
no. 9, pp. 2391–2401, Sep. 2016. 
[6] M. Meidlinger, G. Matz and A. Burg, "Design and decoding of 
irregular LDPC codes based on discrete message passing," IEEE Trans. 
Commun., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1329–1343, Sep. 2019 
[7] J. Lewandowsky and G. Bauch, “Information-optimum LDPC 
decoders based on the information bottleneck method,” IEEE Access, 
vol. 6, pp. 4054–4071, Jan. 2018. 
[8] J. Lewandowsky, M. Stark, and G. Bauch, “Message alignment for 
discrete LDPC decoders with quadrature amplitude modulation,”  
Proc. 2017 IEEE ISIT, Aachen, Germany, Jun. 2017, pp. 2925–2929. 
[9] J. Lewandowsky, G. Bauch, M. Tschauner, and P. Oppermann, 
“Design and evaluation of information bottleneck LDPC decoders for 
digital signal processors,” IEICE Trans. Commun., vol. E102-B, no. 8, 
pp. 1363–1370, Jan. 2019. 
[10] A. Shah,  M. Stark, and G. Bauch,  “Coarsely quantized decoding and 
construction of polar codes using the information bottleneck method,” 
Algorithms. vol. 12., p. 192, Sept. 2019  
[11] L. Wang, T. Takahashi, S. Ibi and S. Sampei, "A study on replica 
generation using LUT based on information bottleneck for MF-GaBP 
in massive MIMO detection," Proc. 2019 IEEE 90th VTC-Fall, 
Honolulu, HI, USA, 2019, pp. 1-6. 
[12] J. Lewandowsky, M. Stark, and G. Bauch, “Information bottleneck 
graphs for receiver design,” Proc. 2016 IEEE ISIT, Barcelona, Spain, 
Jul. 2016, pp. 2888–2892. 
[13] N. Tishby, F. C. Pereira, and W. Bialek, “The information bottleneck 
method,” Proc. 37th Allerton Conference on Communication and 
Computation, Monticello, USA, Sep. 1999, pp. 368–377. 
[14] J. A. Zhang and B. M. Kurkoski, “Low-complexity quantization of 
discrete memoryless channels,” Proc. 2016 ISITA, Monterey, USA, 
Oct. 2016, pp. 448–452. 
[15] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary 
block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 
2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996. 
[16] “IEEE Standard for Information Technology - Telecommunications 
and information exchange between systems - Local and metropolitan 
area network - Specific requirements - Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium 
Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications.” 
IEEE Std. 802.11-2016, 2016 
[17] D. J. C. MacKay, “Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes,” visited on 
Nov. 14th 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy. 
cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html 
[18] M. Stark, J. Lewandowsky and G. Bauch, "Iterative message alignment 
for quantized message passing between distributed sensor nodes," 2018 
IEEE 87th VTC-Spring, Porto, 2018, pp. 1-5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:06:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
