2784

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 5, MAY 2021

Error Floor Estimation of LDPC Coded Modulation Systems Using Importance Sampling
Peyman Neshaastegaran , Member, IEEE, Amir H. Banihashemi , Senior Member, IEEE, and Ramy H. Gohary, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— One of the key weaknesses of low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes is the error floor that they typically exhibit at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). Such an error floor is usually attributed to problematic structures known as trapping sets (TSs). The overwhelming majority of existing error floor estimation schemes consider the case of binary phase shift keying (BPSK) signalling. Unfortunately, these schemes are not readily extensible to estimate the error floor of high order LDPC coded modulation systems considered herein. To provide such a scheme, in this work, we use mean-shift importance sampling (MS-IS) to develop a novel error floor estimation methodology for high-order pulse amplitude modulation (PAM) and quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) LDPC coded systems. First, a computationally efficient graphical-based approach is used to identify the TSs of a given LDPC code. Subsequently, a novel analytical approach is devised to identify the TSs that are likely to have a higher contribution in the error floor. These TSs are referred to as potentially dominant TSs (PDTSs). Finally, a new methodology for categorizing the PDTSs into equivalence classes is developed. A representative PDTS of each equivalence class is chosen and an MS-IS framework is devised to obtain the error rate corresponding to each equivalence class. To arrive at the desired MS-IS scheme, we develop an algorithm that invokes the geometry of the constellation to determine the MS value. In contrast with the conventional MS-IS method used in BPSK signalling, in the proposed MS-IS scheme, the MS value is a variable that is determined based on the TS and the transmitted codeword. The computational complexity of the three main steps of our methodology, viz. extracting the PDTSs, determining the MS values, and applying the MS-IS scheme, depends merely on the size of the constellation and the structure of the code, but not on the SNR. Numerical simulations confirm the efficacy and accuracy of the proposed technique at different SNRs.
Index Terms— LDPC codes, trapping sets, importance sampling, error floor estimation, coded modulation schemes.
I. INTRODUCTION
T O SUPPORT reliable communication of high data rates over a given bandwidth, forward error correction (FEC) codes, e.g., the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are
Manuscript received July 6, 2020; revised December 2, 2020 and January 28, 2021; accepted February 1, 2021. Date of publication February 8, 2021; date of current version May 18, 2021. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was L. Chen. (Corresponding author: Peyman Neshaastegaran.)
The authors are with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: peymanneshaastegaran@sce.carleton.ca).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TCOMM.2021.3057625.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2021.3057625

typically combined with high order modulation schemes, e.g., high-order pulse amplitude modulation (PAM) and quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) [1]–[4]. Combining LDPC codes with high order modulation schemes results in serious challenges to the system design [3], [5]. One of these challenges pertains to assessing the high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) performance of the system. In particular, systems using LDPC codes in conjunction with higher-order modulations tend to exhibit an error floor, whereby the error-rate performance ceases to decay as rapidly with the increase in the SNR [6]. Given the wide range of applications that rely on combining LDPC codes with higher-order modulation, it is necessary to investigate the level of the error floor and the SNR at which it occurs. Traditionally, this investigation would be performed using standard Monte Carlo (MC) simulations. However, for many practical systems using LDPC codes, error floors arise at frame-error rates (FERs) orders of magnitude less than those that can be accurately assessed using such simulations within a reasonable time frame.
LDPC codes can be represented using the so-called Tanner graphs [7], wherein the encoded bits form the variable nodes (VNs), and the constraints imposed by the code form the check nodes (CNs). LDPC codes are typically decoded using an iterative close-to-optimal message-passing algorithm. Particular structures in the Tanner graph, known as Trapping Sets (TS) [6], may cause the decoding progress to cease, yielding undesirable error floors. In the high SNR regime, failures in the decoder are usually dominated by the errors caused by TSs [6]. A TS spans a particular subgraph in the Tanner graph that describes the given LDPC code. The structure of such subgraphs can be used to classify various types of TSs, see e.g., [8]–[13].
The error rate performance of linear block codes, including LDPC ones, can be estimated using a computationallyefficient technique known as importance-sampling (IS), see e.g., [14], [15]. By invoking the TS structure, this technique can also be used to assess the error floor performance of LDPC codes [6], [16]. To do so, the IS technique induces rare error events more frequently through the use of the analytical expressions of the noise distribution to control the frequency with which error events occur. A key element in using the IS technique in assessing error floor is to identify TSs and force them to cause errors at orders of magnitude higher than their actual rate. Approaches for inducing such errors in binary phase shift keying (BPSK) systems were introduced in [6]

0090-6778 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NESHAASTEGARAN et al.: ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF LDPC CODED MODULATION SYSTEMS

2785

through an orthogonal transformation of the signalling bases and in [16] through selective biasing of noise components.
Based on the premise that the error floor of a given LDPC code is an artifact of its underlying TS structures, several approaches have evolved to use the IS technique and variations thereof to efficiently predict these error floors for various channels and TS structures, see e.g., [16]–[29]. For instance, in [17] an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel is considered and a method for identifying the error boundary of the decoder for a given TS is proposed. This boundary is subsequently used to evaluate the error floor by invoking the IS technique. An approach similar to the one in [17] has been proposed in [22] but for the case of Rayleigh fading channel. Other applications of IS for evaluating the error floor of the LDPC codes in AWGN channels are based on shifting the mean of the noise distribution to induce more frequent errors in the TSs without considering a deterministic error boundary, e.g., [16], [21], [23]. This approach is also adopted to evaluate the error floor performance of the LDPC codes for other channel models, e.g., the partial response channel [18], and the magnetic recording channel [19]. The application of IS scheme has also been extended to the case of non-binary LDPC codes in [24]. As an alternative approach, some authors propose the code-independent scheme to estimate the error floor in LDPC codes [25], [26], [28], [30]. In this scheme, the error rate performance of a given TS is estimated independent of the code’s Tanner graph. Such error rate can then be used in any code (block code, or spatially coupled code) that contains that TS [26], [29].
Apart from [20], the majority of existing work in the area of error floor estimation based on IS application to TS structures has focused on the case of BPSK signalling. However, future communication systems are likely to rely on coded modulation schemes. Unfortunately, such LDPC coded schemes with higher order modulation are not amenable to the error floor prediction methods developed for BPSK signalling [17], [21], [23]. Towards predicting bounds on the error floor of LDPC coded modulation systems, in [20], the method proposed in [6], is extended to a system with M −PAM signalling. In this method, bounding the error floor relies on using MC simulation to identify the so-called “stable TSs”. By construction, such a search is not conclusive: it relies on simulating random events that are not guaranteed to occur over any finite number of simulation trials. This drawback becomes more pronounced as the number of stable TSs becomes larger. In such a case, considerably more block errors must be observed in order for the majority of TSs to be detected. The complexity inherent in the approaches in [6] and [20] is further compounded when the modulation scheme is nonbinary. In such a case, assuming that performance is invariant to the choice of the transmitted codeword is invalid. Hence, using the methods in [6] and [20] to bound the error floor in the case of non-binary modulation requires individual codewords, or distinct representatives thereof, to be considered, rather than just the all-zero codeword. This approach is useful in finding lower bounds on the error floor when the number of TSs is relatively low. However, it suffers from two main weaknesses. First, the tightness of the lower bounds yielded by

this approach is not guaranteed, and second, this approach is computationally prohibitive when the number of TSs is large.
In this work, we develop a novel error-floor estimation technique analogous to the technique developed in [16] for BPSK but for higher-order LDPC coded modulation systems. The new technique is computationally efficient and hence enables the assessment of general LDPC coded modulation systems in the error-floor region, a task which was practically infeasible using existing techniques, e.g., the one in [20]. To achieve this goal for a given LDPC code, we use the approach in [12] and [13] to identify all the ETSs of a particular class. This approach relies on the graphical characterization of the TSs to find an exhaustive collection of ETSs without invoking any simulations. Hence, this approach offers the potential of alleviating one of the key pitfalls of the method proposed in [20]. However, direct application of the approach in [12] and [13] may result in a prohibitively large number of TSs, resulting in excessive computational burden in estimating the error floor especially for large code lengths. To circumvent this difficulty, we propose a categorization scheme whereby the TSs that are likely to have a higher impact on performance are identified. These sets will be referred to as potentially dominant TSs (PDTSs). Subsequently, we define an equivalence class whereby each class corresponds to TSs that map to the same bit position in the constellation. This classification can be readily applied to high-order modulation schemes and subsumes the method developed in [16] for BPSK constellation as a special case. For each equivalence class, we choose a representative PDTS on which we apply an IS framework to obtain the corresponding error rate performance. An estimate of the error rate performance of the entire equivalence class is obtained by scaling the error rate performance of the representative by the cardinality of the equivalence class. Applying this approach to all equivalence classes of a particular class yields an estimate of the error performance of the TSs of that class. An estimate of the overall error rate performance is obtained by adding the contribution of all the considered TS classes. From this discussion, it can be seen that the proposed technique effects substantial computational savings by distilling the TSs in three successive steps. In the first step, the graphical approach in [12] and [13] is used to identify the TSs instead of the MC-based approach used in [20]. In the second step, PDTSs within all the TSs of a particular size are identified using a novel analytical approach. Finally, in the last step members of each PDTS group are categorized into equivalence classes using a generalized version of the approach developed in [21] for BPSK. We notice that the computational burden of extracting and distilling the TSs depends merely on the constellation size and the code structure, but not on the SNR.
Applying the IS method used in [16] and [21] directly to non-binary signalling scenarios seems difficult. In particular, in non-binary signalling, the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of bits within a given symbol are not statistically independent. Hence, to alleviate this difficulty, we modify the method in [16] and [21] to make it applicable in non-binary signalling. To do so, we replace the biasing of the LLR that underlies the original IS method in [16] and [21] with the biasing of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2786

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 5, MAY 2021

received signal. This change not only facilitates the biasing procedure of the IS technique, which otherwise appears to be a daunting task, but also removes the requirement of deriving and evaluating the typically intricate LLR probability distribution functions (PDF) [31].
For Gray labeled constellations, we develop an algorithm that makes use of the constellation geometry to determine a range of mean shift (MS) values that ensures appropriate biasing of the received signals pertaining to a given TS. For a given TS, the range of MS values is a variable that is determined based on the transmitted codeword. This is in contrast with the approach in BPSK signalling wherein the all-zero codeword is assumed and the MS values are fixed [16], [21]. Numerical simulations show that the proposed framework is capable of estimating the error floor of LDPC coded modulation systems orders of magnitude faster than MC simulations. In particular, whereas the complexity of the proposed approach is independent of the operating SNR, the complexity of the MC scheme grows fast with SNR.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, a brief review of LDPC codes, TSs, and the LDPC coded modulation systems is presented. In Section III, we describe the IS technique, and its application in the error floor estimation of LDPC codes with BPSK signalling. Section IV contains the main contribution of this work. In this section, we develop a novel IS technique based on the one in Section III to estimate the FER of high order LDPC coded modulation systems with PAM signalling. Furthermore, we develop algorithms for efficient extraction of the PDTSs and for identifying the corresponding equivalence classes. In Section V, the proposed scheme is extended to the LDPC coded modulation systems using QAM signalling. In Section VI, we provide numerical results, comparisons, and analysis. Section VII concludes the paper.
Boldface lower and upper case letters are used to represent deterministic and random vectors, respectively. A random variable X will be declared Gaussian with mean μX and variance σX2 by writing X ∼ N (μX , σX2 ), and EX {·} denotes the expectation with respect to X.
II. BACKGROUND
A. LDPC Codes and TSs
An (N, K) binary LDPC code is a linear block code of dimension K and block length N . The parity check matrix, H, can be represented by a bipartite Tanner graph, G, which consists of N VNs and N −K CNs. A VN which is connected to a CN by an edge is called the neighbor of that CN. An LDPC code is bi-regular if all the VNs are of the same degree dv and all the CNs are of the same degree dc. If the VN degrees are the same but the CN degrees are different, the code is called variable regular. An LDPC code which is neither bi-regular nor variable regular is called irregular [7]. Given a subset of a VNs from G, an (a, b) TS (also known as class (a, b) TS) is a subgraph of G consisting of those a VNs and their neighboring CNs, from which b CNs are unsatisfied (odd degree), cf. Fig. 1. The parameter a is referred to as the size

Fig. 1. Part of the Tanner graph of an LDPC code is shown. Three VNs in error are highlighted. The induced subgraph of those VNs is also highlighted. Among the four CNs in the TS, only two are unsatisfied. The size of the TS is (3, 2).
Fig. 2. Block diagram of the LDPC coded modulation system.
of the TS. In AWGN channels, the error floor of LDPC codes is known to be mainly caused by elementary TS (ETS), i.e., TSs with the CNs of a degree less than or equal to 2 [8], [12], [30], [32]. Hence, in the forthcoming approach, all the ETSs within a given class will be considered.
To obtain the list of all the ETSs of a given class, we use the graphical-based search algorithm in [12], [13], [33]. Therein, it is shown that the ETS structures are layered supersets of short cycles [33], and a small number of other graphical structures within the Tanner graph of the code [12], [13]. Such property results in a simple search algorithm that is guaranteed to find all ETSs starting from short cycles, and/or other graphical structures.
B. LDPC Coded Modulation The block diagram of an LDPC coded modulation system
is shown in Fig. 2. The LDPC encoder receives K binary bits from the source and generates a codeword of length N at its output. The codewords are denoted by C and the coded bits within a codeword are denoted by {ci}Ni=1. In the mapper, every m = log2 M bits are Gray-mapped to the symbols from an M −ary signal constellation. The number of such symbols for mapping the bits of a codeword, C, to the constellation points is assumed to be Ns. The symbols in this set are denoted by {sk}Nk=s1. The position of a bit in Gray label of a symbol will be referred to as the bit level (BL). The first BL corresponds to the most significant bit (MSB), which is the most protected. Analogously, the m-th BL corresponds to the least significant bit (LSB), which is the least protected.
Similar to [16], [21], we herein consider an AWGN channel, however for the case when the constellation is a general M -ary. The Gaussian noise samples are represented with random variable W , where W ∼ N (0, σW 2 ). The received signals

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NESHAASTEGARAN et al.: ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF LDPC CODED MODULATION SYSTEMS

2787

are used to generate the LLRs corresponding to each bit. Using these LLRs, the decoder employs a message passing algorithm, in which upon completing a prescribed number of iterations, the decoder will either converge to a codeword or it fails. In this paper, we are concerned with decoding failures which happen at high SNRs, i.e., when failure events are dominated by the decoder being trapped in a TS.
III. USING IS TO ESTIMATE THE FER OF BPSK-MODULATED LDPC-CODED SYSTEMS
In this section, we review the application of the IS scheme in evaluating the FER of LDPC codes [15] and the error floor of LDPC coded systems with BPSK modulation [16], [21]. This description will be used to establish our methodology for higher order modulations in Section IV.

A. Application of MC and Is Schemes for FER Estimation of LDPC Codes

The input of the LDPC decoder is a length-N random

vector, L, containing the channel LLRs corresponding to

the received bits. The probability that the decoder fails is

calculated as PE = EL {ILE (l)}, where LE denotes the error region containing all N -tuple LLRs which cause the decoder

to fail, and ILE (l) denotes the indicator function, whereby

ILE (l) = 1 if l ∈ LE and zero otherwise. The MC simulation

estimates PE by approximating the expectation EL {ILE (l)}

using a finite number of trials, NMC . In particular, the MC

estimate

of

PE ,

PEM C

=

1 NM C

NM C i=1

IL(i)E (l).

In the IS technique, the channel LLRs are chosen from a

biased distribution. Let fΛ(λ) be the joint PDF of the channel

LLRs when the noise distribution is biased, e.g., by shifting its

mean. Biasing the noise distribution results in a biased estimate

of PE. Hence, to obtain an unbiased estimate, the IS scheme introduces a weighting function, w(λ), to the formulation as

follows:

PE =

w(λ)fΛ(λ)dλ = EΛ {w(λ)ILE (λ)} . (1)

λ∈LE

The LLRs can be expressed in terms of the received signals, which we denote by R. In particular, each entry of the received vector R yields m LLRs. Hence, the integration in (1) can be expressed in terms of the joint PDF of R, fR(r). This will be useful in deriving the IS scheme for the case of non-binary signalling. However, for BPSK sig-

nalling it suffices to use the expression in (1). To obtain an

unbiased estimate of PE using (1), the weight function is set to w(λ) = fL (λ) /fΛ (λ). The IS algorithm performs NIS trials to estimate EΛ {w(λ)ILE (λ)}, which we denote by

PEI S

=

1 NIS

NIS i=1

w(i)(λ)IL(i)E (λ).

(2)

Since E PEIS = PE , the IS estimator is unbiased. For non-binary signalling, we will find it convenient to use an
analogous derivation based on the received signals, R, rather than Λ.

Comparison Between MC and Is Schemes

Reliability Comparison: To compare the reliability of the

MC and IS estimators, we consider the variance of normalized

estimation error denoted by γ. In particular, for the MC

scheme,

this

parameter

is

calculated

as

γM C

=

1 NM C

1 PE

−

1 [21]. For the IS scheme, we have [21]:

γIS

=

var

PEI S PE2

⎛ = 1 ⎝ EΛ
NIS

w(i)(λ)IL(i)E (λ) 2 PE2

⎞ −1⎠ ,

(3)

where var{·} denotes statistical variance. To calculate γMC

and γIS, we note that neither PE nor EΛ w(i)(λ)IL(i)E (λ) 2

is known and hence the estimated values will be used.

An estimate of EΛ w(i)(λ)IL(i)E (λ) 2 can be obtained as

1 NIS

NIS i=1

w(i)(λ)I(Li)E (λ) 2.

A Comparison of Computational Efficiency: To compare

the computational efficiency of the MC and IS schemes,

we consider the number of trials required by each scheme to

achieve the same reliability, i.e., γMC = γIS = α. We denote these numbers by NMC (α) and NIS(α) for the MC and IS

schemes, respectively. Using these numbers, the computational

gain of IS scheme over the MC scheme can be expressed as

ηα

=

. NMC (α)
NIS (α)

The

simulation

results

reported

in

Section

VI

illustrate that ηα is significantly greater than one, which is

indicative of the computational advantage of the IS estimator

over its MC counterpart.

B. Using Is for Error Floor Estimation of LDPC Codes With BPSK Signalling

In this section, we describe the application of the IS

scheme in estimating the error floor of LDPC codes [21]. This

approach is limited to the BPSK modulated systems. Applying

this technique to non-binary signalling requires reformulation

of the IS framework and the underlying biasing mechanism.

We will undertake this task in Sections IV, and V below.

Towards estimating the error floor of a particular LDPC code,

we will use the assumption in [21], [30], [34] whereby, for a

given class of TSs, the error rate of the decoder is identical for

all isomorphic TSs, i.e., TSs that can be objectively mapped

to each other, for instance by relabelling the CNs and VNs.

Consider a BPSK modulated LDPC coded system.

We assume sk = 1 − 2ck, k ∈ {1, . . . , N }, and the AWGN

channel model with σW 2 = N0/2. The k-th received signal

can be expressed as rk = sk + wk and the LLR of the k-th

received thus, Lk

bit, denoted

∼

N

(

4 N0

sk ,

by Lk, is given by

8 N0

).

Hence,

the

joint

Lk = PDF

4 N0

rk

of the

[31]; LLRs

fL(l) =

N k=1

fLk (lk).

To

estimate

the

error

rate

induced

by

an (a, b) TS, T(a,b), the IS scheme biases the LLR vector to

prompt the decoder to be trapped in T(a,b). Let ζT(a,b) be an

ordered set containing the indices of the symbols to which the

bits in T(a,b) are mapped. We note that in BPSK signalling, each bit is mapped to one symbol and hence in this case ζT(a,b) contains the labels of the VNs in T(a,b). Later, we will consider non-binary signalling, in which case the mapping between the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2788

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 5, MAY 2021

entries in ζT(a,b) and those in T(a,b) depends on the size of the constellation. In BPSK signalling, each received signal

corresponds to one channel LLR; thus, the set ζT(a,b) contains the indices of the LLRs that the IS scheme ought to bias.

This biasing is performed by shifting the mean of additive

noise samples, wk, k ∈ ζ , T(a,b) to ensure that the sign of the respective LLRs are reversed with high probability. We will

refer to this scheme as mean shift IS (MS-IS) [21].

Let DF denote the event that the decoder fails to converge

to a valid codeword and let Pr(DF , T(a,b)) be the probability that the DF event occurs due to the decoder being trapped

in T(a,b). In the forthcoming discussion, we will estimate this probability using the general expression in (2). To obtain

an estimate of Pr(DF , T(a,b)), the IS scheme biases the mean of the noise samples indexed by the entries of ζ . T(a,b) Let μk be the mean shift (MS) of the noise sample wk. For convenience, in [21] the same MS value, μ0, is used for all
the noise samples. Since the all-zero codeword is assumed to

be transmitted, sk = 1 for all k and hence the IS scheme uses

μ0 < 0. Using this MS, the received biased signals can be

expressed as rk = 1 + μ0 + wk. Subsequently, the respective

biased LLRs will be the samples of the random variable

Λk,

where

Λk

∼

N

(

4 N0

(1

+

μ0),

8 N0

),

k

∈

ζ , T(a,b)

while

the

distribution of rest of the LLRs remains unchanged. Hence,

for

k

∈

{1, . . . , N },

we

have

Λk

=

Lk

+

4μ0 N0

IζT(a,b)

(k),

where IζT(a,b) (k) = 1 if k ∈ ζT(a,b) and zero otherwise.

Samples of this Λk will be the elements of the vector λ

used to calculate the IS weight function. The joint PDF

of the N LLRs after biasing can be derived as fΛ(λ) =

f λ − k∈ζT(a,b) Lk

k

4μ0 N0

k∈{1,...,N }\ζT(a,b) fLk (λk) .

By using the biased and unbiased PDFs, the weight function

in (2) is calculated as

w(λ) =

fLk (λk) ,

(4)

f λ − k∈ζT(a,b) Lk k

4μ0 N0

where λk is a sample from the biased distribution Λk. By using (4) in (2), Pr(DF , T(a,b)) can be readily estimated over NIS trials. To estimate the FER of the code in the error floor region, all the ETSs of a given class should be considered.
Let T(a,b) be the set of all (a, b) ETSs. Such ETSs can be partitioned into disjoint subsets of isomorphic TSs. Let the jth subset of such TSs be denoted by T(ja,b) and let the total number of such subsets be Jab. Hence, ∪Jj=ab1T(ja,b) = T(a,b). The FER in the error floor region can be approximated as
follows [7]:

Pr(DF ) ≈

Pr DF , T(a,b)

(a,b)∈B

Jab

=

Pr DF , T(ja,b) ,

(5)

(a,b)∈B j=1

where Pr DF , T(a,b)

and Pr DF , T(ja,b)

are

the probabilities that the decoder is being trapped

in T(a,b) and T(ja,b), respectively. The set B

{(a, b)|a, b ∈ N, I(a, b) = 1, a ≤ amax, b ≤ bmax}, where

I(a, b) = 1, if the class (a, b) is considered in the error

floor estimation and I(a, b) = 0, otherwise. This set contains the index pairs that characterize all the TSs considered in estimating the error floor of the code. Note that choosing the TS classes in B depends on the LDPC code. In this paper, this set is determined by using MC simulation. In particular, amax and bmax are set to the largest a and b values that are observed in the early error floor stage, respectively. This
is because the error contributions of smaller TSs, i.e., with smaller a and b, tend to dominate the error floor as the SNR increases [8], [33], [35]. Hence, we take a conservative approach by identifying all the TSs with a number of VNs
less than or equal to those of the TSs that are found at lower
SNRs via MC simulations. Furthermore, combining MC simulations at lower SNRs with the graphical method in [12]
and [13] alleviates the possibility of missing any TSs that may appear at higher SNRs. In such a case, increasing amax and bmax increases estimation complexity but without making substantial improvement in the estimation accuracy. Since the ETS entries in T(ja,b) are isomorphic, the corresponding error rates can be assumed to be identical [21], [30], [34] and Pr(DF ) in (5) can be approximated by

Jab

Pr(DF ) ≈

|T(ja,b)| Pr DF , Tj(a,b) ,

(6)

(a,b)∈B j=1

where |T(ja,b)| is the cardinality of the set T(ja,b), and Tj(a,b) is an arbitrary ETS in that set. To use MS-IS to estimate
Pr DF , Tj(a,b) , we invoke (2) with (4) in the IS scheme.

IV. ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF LDPC CODES WITH PAM SIGNALLING
In this section, we describe our proposed method to estimate the error floor of LDPC coded modulation systems with PAM signalling. We begin by highlighting the main difficulties encountered in estimating the error floor in these systems when the underlying signalling is non-binary [20]. To circumvent these difficulties, we develop a novel MS-IS scheme that exploits the relationship between the constellation point closest to the received signal and the corresponding channel LLR values. The proposed MS-IS scheme takes the ETSs of the given LDPC code as its input and yields an estimate of the error floor of that code. For practical codes, the number of ETSs can be large rendering the application of MS-IS scheme computationally prohibitive. Hence, to reduce the number of ETS candidates, we note that, in contrast with binary signalling, in the non-binary case, the bits are not equally protected, giving rise to the so-called unequal error protection property. In fact, the protection of each bit depends on its BL in the symbol and the location of the symbol in the constellation. Using this observation, we develop a novel technique for extracting the PDTSs of the given LDPC code. The philosophy of this technique is to invoke the structure and binary labelling of the constellation to rank the TSs based on the likelihood that they cause the decoding procedure to fail. In particular, in the case of non-binary constellation, multiplying Pr DF , T(ja,b) by |T(ja,b)| as in (5) is not valid. This is because in this case, TSs that are isomorphic may have different protection

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NESHAASTEGARAN et al.: ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF LDPC CODED MODULATION SYSTEMS

2789

Fig. 3. A Gray mapped 8−PAM constellation.

levels from the constellation thereby yielding different error rates. Our numerical results show that the joint application of the two algorithms (MS-IS and PDTS extraction) results in computationally efficient estimation of the error floor of LDPC coded modulation systems with PAM signalling.1

A. Considerations for Evolving From BPSK to PAM
Signalling
In this subsection, we will highlight the key differences between the estimation of error floors in LDPC coded modulation systems with BPSK and PAM signalling. These differences will be used to infer guidelines that will be instrumental in developing our proposed MS-IS scheme.
1) Effect of BL on Error Protection: Unlike BPSK signalling, in a PAM-based system, the coded bits do not receive equal protection from the constellation. For instance, referring to Fig. 3, the first bit of s6 is more protected than the second bit. This is because a noise sample that places the received signal corresponding to s6 in the vicinity of s4 will result in an LLR with the same sign for the first bit, but with a reversed sign for the second one. An analogous argument applies to the first and third bits in s6 and s7, respectively. This observation implies that in the PAM case, the error rate generated by two isomorphic TSs are not necessarily equal, since the indices of the VNs in such TSs may correspond to different BLs and hence different error protection levels.
Example 1: For the MacKay (1008, 504) LDPC code [36], the (4, 2) TS class is known to be dominant [12]. Two such TSs are T1 with VNs {139, 194, 521, 989} and T2 with VNs {396, 467, 548, 570}, where T1 and T2 are isomorphic [12]. When this code is used in an LDPC coded modulation system with 32−PAM signalling, the BLs in the constellation symbols corresponding to these VNs are given by the ordered sets πT1 = {4, 4, 1, 4} and πT2 = {1, 2, 3, 5}, respectively. The fact that πT1 = πT2 implies that the error rates incurred by T1 and T2 are different. In fact, it is expected that T1 is more dominant than T2 since three of its VNs correspond to bits located at a relatively weak position of BL = 4, in contrast with only one VN of T2 that corresponds to the weak LSB position of BL = 5. This example highlights the fact that BL sets with non-identical elements do not necessarily have the same contribution to the error floor even though they belong to isomorphic TSs. Furthermore, the ordering of the elements in the BL sets plays a role in the error contributions. The following example illustrates this effect.
Example 2: Consider the isomorphic TSs: T1 = {441, 478, 586, 843}, and T2 = {449, 726, 847, 858} from the
1The methodology described in this section makes an implicit assumption that the underlying LDPC code is binary. Applying this methodology to non-binary LDPC coded modulation systems entails fundamental changes in the formulation of the weight functions and the MS, which is beyond the scope of the current work.

Fig. 4. Error rate of TSs T1 and T2 in Example 2.
class (4, 2) of the MacKay (1008, 504) LDPC code when 16−PAM signalling is used. The corresponding BL sets are πT1 = {1, 2, 2, 3}, and πT2 = {1, 2, 3, 2}, respectively. The elements of πT1 and πT1 are identical, but the ordering of the elements in the two sets are different. In Fig. 4, the error rates of T1 and T2 are estimated using the proposed MS-IS scheme. It is observed that the error rates of these two isomorphic TSs are different. This difference is attributed to the non-identical ordering of the BL sets corresponding to T1 and T2.
Since the TSs with BL sets of different order may have non-identical error rates (cf. Example. 2), the order of the BL sets must be included in the categorization of the TSs.
2) Effect of Noise Biasing on Channel LLRs: In the PAM scenario, there are m = log2 M bits mapped to each symbol. In this case, the m LLRs corresponding to each received symbol are dependent [31], and this dependency complicates the derivation of the joint PDF of the LLRs, and renders the biasing of the LLRs as suggested in Section III-B a formidable task. To circumvent this difficulty, we note that, notwithstanding the complications arising from this dependency, the received signals (conditioned on the transmitted symbol) are statistically independent of each other, and each of these signals can be one-to-one mapped to a corresponding set of m LLRs. This observation is key to the development of an MS-IS scheme that is appropriate to use in the case of PAM signalling.
3) Effect of Transmitted Codeword: In the previous section, we showed that the error contribution of isomorphic TSs may not be identical if their BL sets are not identical. In this section, we will show that the error contribution of a given TS depends on the particular codewords being transmitted. To do so, we note that the estimation of the error floor in LDPC coded systems which use BPSK signalling is facilitated by assuming that the all-zero codeword is always transmitted [14], [16], [21]–[23]. In particular, fixing the transmitted codeword in each trial implies that MS values are constant, that is, one MS value is used for all the trials used to estimate the error rate contribution of a given TS. In contrast with BPSK modulation, in the case of PAM signalling, the codewords and the corresponding constellation symbols are not equally protected by the constellation. Hence, the MS value must be adjusted for each transmitted codeword. The following

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2790

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 5, MAY 2021

example illustrates the effect of the transmitted codeword on
the protection offered by the constellation for the VNs of a
given TS.
Example 3: Consider the TS T2 in Example 1 when 8−PAM is used. In this case, the set of BLs is given by πT2 = {3, 2, 2, 3}. Suppose that two random codewords, C1 and C2, are generated, and the coded bits are grouped in two sets, each set consists of 336 binary vectors, and each vector is of length 3. Suppose that out of the 336 binary vectors corresponding to C1 and C2, 4 binary vectors contain bits that correspond to the VNs of T2. Let these binary vectors be Π1 = {010, 011, 111, 100} and Π2 = {010, 000, 100, 110} for C1 and C2, respectively. From Fig. 3, the set of symbols corresponding to Π1 and Π2 are S1 = {s2, s3, s7, s4} and S2 = {s2, s0, s4, s6}, respectively. From these sets, we notice that both have s2 in the first VN. Hence, this VN has the same protection level in C1 and C2. For the fourth VN, s4 is transmitted for C1 and s6 is transmitted for C2. We note for these symbols, the VN corresponds to BL 3, i.e., the LSB.
Hence, similar to the first VN, the fourth VN has the same protection level in C1 and C2. We now consider the second VN, which corresponds to BL 2. For this VN, the symbol s3 is transmitted for C1 and the symbol s0 is transmitted for C2. From Fig. 3, it can be seen that at BL 2, s3 is more protected than s0. A similar observation applies to the third VN, corresponding to s7 for C1 and s4 for C2. Hence, it can be seen that, despite the fact that both Π1 and Π2 correspond to πT2 , they are protected differently by the constellation, effectively causing C2 to be more likely to be trapped in T2 than C1.
The previous example suggests that the estimation of the
error floor for LDPC coded systems with PAM signalling
depends on the particular codewords being transmitted. Hence,
assuming that the all-zero codeword is transmitted throughout
is not valid in this case. This further implies that the MS
value in the MS-IS scheme must be adjusted to account for
the various levels of error protection offered by each symbol
in the constellation.

B. Proposed MS-IS Scheme

In this subsection, we use the guidelines developed in Section IV-A to propose a novel MS-IS scheme for estimating the error floor of PAM-based LDPC coded modulation systems. Towards that end, we reconsider the summation in (5). To begin with, we modify the way that ETSs of each class are partitioned. Rather than considering all the isomorphic structures in one set, the ETSs are identified as having the same error rate only if they are isomorphic and have identical ordered BL sets. Such ETSs form what we refer to as an “equivalence class”. Doing so yields the following expression for estimating the rate of decoding failure:

Jab Nab,j

Pr(DF ) ≈

|T(ja,,tb)| Pr DF , Tj(a,t,b) , (7)

(a,b)∈B j=1 t=1

where T(ja,,tb) ⊆ T(ja,b) is the t-th subset of T(ja,b) = t T(ja,,tb), and the elements of T(ja,,tb) have identical ordered BL sets. The

TS Tj(a,t,b) is an arbitrary element of the set T(ja,,tb) and Nab,j is the total number of subsets {T(ja,,tb)} corresponding to distinct BL sets. To calculate the summation in (7), two challenges
must be overcome. First, Pr DF , T(ja,t,b) must be estimated for each j ∈ {1, . . . , Jab} and t ∈ {1, . . . , Nab,j}. Second,
the cardinalities Jab and Nab,j can be large, which implies that the evaluation of all the probabilities, Pr DF , T(ja,t,b) , can be computationally prohibitive. In the following, we will

describe our proposed algorithms to alleviate these challenges. 1) Estimating Pr (DF , T(ja,t,b)): For ease of exposition, in the
forthcoming discussion we will drop the subscript (a, b) and

the superscript j, t, i.e., we focus on estimating Pr DF , T

for a given ETS, T.

a) Formulation of MS-IS for PAM systems: To use (2)

to estimate Pr(DF , T) for a PAM-based system, initially, the joint PDFs of the biased received signals, denoted by Z, and

the unbiased received signals, denoted by R, for a given trans-

mitted codeword must be derived. Note that both R and Z are

deterministic functions of the transmitted codeword and noise.

The joint PDF of R corresponding to a given transmitted

codeword, C, is denoted by fR|C(r) =

Ns k=1

fRk (rk),

where

Rk

∼

N

(sk ,

N0 2

).

In

an

analogous

fashion,

the

joint

PDF

of Z corresponding to the transmitted codeword, C, can be

expressed as

⎛

⎞

fZ|C(z) = ⎝

fRk (zk − μvT(k))⎠

k∈ζT

⎛

⎞

×⎝

fRk (zk)⎠ , (8)

k∈{1,...,Ns}\ζT

where, as per the definition in Section III-B, ζT = {ζTv}va=1 is the ordered set of indices of the symbols mapped to

VNs in T. We note that in higher-order modulation, the

set ζT can be obtained from T by taking into considera-

tion the number of bits per symbol. For instance, consider

T = {396, 467, 548, 570} (as in Example 1) when a 16-PAM

constellation is used. In this case, the v-th element of ζT,

ζTv is given by

T(v) 4

,

where T(v)

is

the v-th

element of

T.

Hence, ζT = {99, 117, 137, 143}. In (8), the v-th element of

{μTv(k)}va=1 is the MS corresponding to the transmitted symbol

indexed by ζTv, that is k is the v(k)-th element of ζT. For

instance, in the foregoing example, k = 117 corresponds to

the second element of ζT and hence v(117) = 2. Using the

biased and unbiased PDFs, the weight function corresponding

to C is

wC (z )

=

fR|C (z ) fZ |C (z )

=

k∈ζT

fRk

fRk (zk) (zk − μvT(k)

)

.

(9)

We note that, in the MS-IS technique, the biased received signal is highly likely to lie in the vicinity of the mean of the biased PDF. Hence, with high probability, the weight function is less than 1. Using (9), the IS estimate for Pr(DF , T) can be obtained using a formula analogous to (2). In particular,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NESHAASTEGARAN et al.: ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF LDPC CODED MODULATION SYSTEMS

2791

by replacing the LLRs with biased received signals we have

Pr(DF , T) = EZ {wC (z(C, W ))IRE (z(C, W ))}

(10)

≈

1 NIS

NIS
wC(i)(z(C, W ))IR(i)E (z(C, W ))
i=1

(1. 1)

In (10), RE is the union of all Ns-tuple received signals which cause the decoder to be trapped in T. This region is

equivalent to the error region, LE, parameterized by the LLRs in Section III-A. The indicator function IR(i)E (z(C, W )) = 1 if z(C, W ) ∈ RE and zero otherwise. We note that wC(i)(z) is the weight function corresponding to the i-th trial, in which the i-

th randomly generated codeword, denoted by C, is transmitted.

The variance of normalized estimation error for all the TSs represented by T, i.e., T(ja,,tb) can be obtained using the weight function in (9) yielding

⎛

γI S (T)

=

1 NIS

⎜⎜⎝ EZ

wC(i)(z)I(Ri)E (z) 2 Pr(DF , T)2

⎞ − 1⎟⎟⎠ , (12)

where in writing (12), we have replaced PE in (3) with Pr(DF , T).

b) Methodology for calculating the MS values: In the

previous section, we formulated the MS-IS scheme in the case

of PAM signalling. This formulation depends on the MSs, {μvT(k)}, to compute the biased PDFs corresponding to each TS, T. In this section, we will propose a methodology for

calculating these MSs.

Definition 1 (Neighbor Zone): The neighbor zone of a

given point s in a constellation Γ, Vs, is given by Vs = x x − s 2 ≤ x − sˆ 2, ∀sˆ = s, s, sˆ ∈ Γ . For implementing the MS-IS scheme for a given TS, T ,

of size a, the symbols to which the bits, i.e., the VNs of

this TS are mapped must be biased in a particular way, see

Example 3. These bits will be referred to as “target bits”,

and to identify them, let πT be the BL set corresponding to a TS, T (cf. Example 1) and let ST be the set of symbols corresponding to the VNs of T . The q-th element in πT and ST are denoted by πTq and sTq , respectively, and the cardinality of both sets is a, i.e., |πT | = |ST | = a. Then, we have the following definition.

Definition 2 (Target Bit): The target bit within the m bits that correspond to the symbol sTq of the TS T is the πTq -th bit.

The following example illustrates how the target bits are

determined.

Example 4: Consider the TS T2 = {396, 467, 548, 570}

in Example 1 when 32-PAM signalling is used. The set of

symbols corresponding to T2 is denoted by ST2 =

sqT2

4 q=1

,

which depends on the transmitted codeword. As in Example 1,

the BL set of T2 is given by πT2 = {1, 2, 3, 5}, and hence from

Definition 2 the target bits for the elements of ST2 are the first

bfiifttUhosfbinistg1To2Df, etshfiT4e2n.isteiocnosnd1

bit of s2T2 , the third bit of and 2, we now describe

s3T2 our

, and the method-

ology in calculating the MS vector. We note that the purpose

of shifting the mean of noise samples is to bias the LLRs

of the target bits in ST . In particular, consider the symbol sqT ∈ ST , for which the πTq -th bit is the target bit. We seek an
MS value which ensures that the received signal corresponding to sqT ∈ ST falls in a region of the constellation where, with
high probability, the two following conditions are met: 1) The sign of the LLR of πTq -th bit (target bit) is reversed; and 2) The signs of the LLRs of other m − 1 bits remain unchanged.

To satisfy these two constraints, we note that in an AWGN

channel the probability of receiving a transmitted symbol in its

neighbor zone is highest compared to any other location on the

constellation. We use this observation to obtain the MS value

which satisfies the aforementioned conditions when biasing the

signals. In particular, let the length-m vector corresponding to

the the

bits mapped to the symbol sTq noise sample corresponding to

be denoted by bsqT . To the transmitted symbol

bias sTq ,

so that the sign of the LLR of target bit is reversed whilst those

trcMitobonoaofittSrsh¯rStrheoqTeeTsmefrsu−,ptatbchsorishsanaTqnTqqTnnid,tn,.shstsmgTawhTqttoeh(ih.tmattiamhTetced−huhiesniams,1syinyt)qieihmemuoabelenfbdiptMsosctlohiloerSafenessmtsqToncththfoeeaeiwarltislrhtnra,eeegtvsufciipoeonnvecornocievtnihenopsedvareodbiennib¯ysrgnsgyaseitmqTg,dtnrsn¯.,poaTqawlTinles.sheeiWmcisflssoieaiertpnmtrqceeeuhtdpswhaoplesleooyvπstnimeoesTdqcbit-sst¯nhooteTqhgertl

μsqT = s¯Tq − sTq , ∀sTq ∈ ST .

(13)

It is worth noting that the MS in (13) is not unique since

any MS that causes the received signal to fall within the neighboring zone of s¯Tq meets the aforementioned conditions.
In this paper, we rely on the variance of the normalized

error of the estimation in (12) to determine the number of

required trials. Hence, deviating from (13) by less than half

the minimum distance of the constellation in choosing the MS

value will have a negligible effect on the performance of the

proposed MS-IS scheme.
2) Identifying the PDTSs Out of the Nab,j Partitions of T(ja,b): The total number of times that Pr(DF , Tj(a,t,b)) is estimated in (7) is determined by the following three parameters:

1) the number of TS classes considered in the summation, i.e., |B|, 2) the number of isomorphic subsets within a given (a, b) class, i.e., Jab, and 3) the number of subsets with identical BLs within each isomorphic set, i.e., Nab,j. The first two parameters, i.e., |B| and Jab, depend solely on the code and are otherwise invariant to the size of the underlying constellation.

In contrast, the third parameter, i.e., Nab,j, depends on the size of the constellation through the number of bits that are mapped

to each symbol. Hence, one way to reduce the computational burden of estimating Pr(DF ) is to find a technique whereby

the subsets with identical BLs within each isomorphic set

that make negligible contributions to the summation in (7)

are eliminated from the computation. This approach reduces

the upper limit of the innermost summation in (7) from Nab,j to a smaller integer, which results in a significant reduction in

the overall computation.

To identify the BL sets with negligible contribution to the

summation (7), we will establish a relationship between the probability of decoding failure, Pr(DF , T), and the BL set of the TS T. This relationship will enable us to identify the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2792

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 5, MAY 2021

most influential BL sets. Towards that end, by using (11) the probability of decoding failure can be written as:

Pr(DF , T)

=

1 NIS

NIS
wC(i)(z)I(Ri)E (z)
i=1

≈

1 NIS

NIS
wC(i) (z ).
i=1

(14)

In (14), we assume that biasing the mean will almost surely cause the decoding failure, i.e., IR(i)E (z) = 1.2 This assumption is justified on the basis that the MS technique is, by construc-
tion, designed to ensure that the LLRs of the VNs of the target TS are strongly erroneous, thereby instigating IR(i)E (z) = 1 with high probability. For the weight function in (14) we note
that:

wC(z) ⎡

⎤

=

exp ⎣ 1 N0
⎡

k∈ζT

(zk

−

μTv(k)

−

sTv(k))2 − ⎤

(zk

−

sTv(k) )2 ⎦

=

exp ⎣ 1 N0
⎡

k∈ζT

wk2

−

(wk

+

μTv(k) )2 ⎦

⎤

(15)

=

exp ⎣ 1 N0

k∈ζT

wk2

−

(wk

+

s¯Tv(k)

−

svT(k) )2 ⎦,

(16)

where in writing (15), we used the fact that zk = svT(k) +

wk + μvT(k), and (16) is obtained by substituting for μvT(k)

from (13). To obtain an estimate of

NIS i=1

wC(i) (z ),

we

will

invoke two approximations: 1) We consider the case of high

SNRs, which will enable us to compare weights based on the

distance between points in the constellation, 2) We neglect the

impact of the weights that make negligible contribution to the

computation of Pr(DF , T).

For the first approximation, we partition the NIS weights in

the summation in (14) into two categories. The first category

includes the weights in which the symbols sTv(k) and s¯vT(k)

have the least Euclidean distance. We denote the number

of such weights by NˆT. The second category includes the

remaining NIS − NˆT weights. Using this categorization we

have

NIS i=1

wC(i) (z )

=

NˆT i=1

wC(i)

(zˆ

)

+

NIS i=NˆT+1

wC(i) (z ),

where zˆ

{z|s¯vT(k) = arg mins |svT(k) − s¯vT(k)|, ∀k ∈ ζT}.

Since the least Euclidean distance between two constellation

points is constant, at high SNRs, the noise wk in (16)

becomes negligible, and wC(i)(zˆ) ≈ exp

−ad2 N0

, where d is the

minimum distance of the constellation. Using this observation,

we have

NIS
wC(i)(z) ≈ NˆT exp
i=1

−ad2 N0

NIS

+

wC(i) (z ).

i=NˆT +1

(17)

2We note that the assumption of I(Ri)E (z) = 1 is used exclusively in the PDTS extraction stage for approximating Pr(DF, T). In other words, this assumption is not used to estimate the error floor using the proposed MS-IS scheme, e.g., in implementing (11) or (12).

For the second approximation, we note that because wC(i)(z) in the second summation correspond to distances between

constellation symbols that are strictly greater than d, and since

the exponent in the expression of wC(i)(z) in (16) depends

quadratically on this distance, we have that, at high SNRs,

wC(i) (z )

exp

−ad2 N0

. Hence, we conclude that the contri-

bution of the second summation is negligible in computing

the left hand side of (17). Using this approximation and by

combining (17) and (14) we have:

Pr(DF , T) ≈ NˆT exp −ad2 .

(18)

NIS

N0

From (18) it is implied that the transmitted codewords corre-

sponding to the symbol pairs (sTv(k), s¯vT(k)) such that |svT(k) −

s¯vT(k)| = d To identify

make these

a significant contribution codewords from the rest,

to the we let

error floor. b(s) be the

m-dimensional binary vector corresponding to the symbol s, and let the i-th element of b(s) be denoted by b(s)(i). Using

this notation, we make the following definitions for a given

TS, T with a corresponding BL set πT.

Definition 3 (Weak Symbol at the πTk-th BL): The symbol s is defined as a weak symbol at the πTk-th BL if there

exists an adjacent symbol to s, denoted by s¯, such that

abn(sd)(bπ(Tks))(i=) =b(s¯b)((s¯π)Tk(i))⊕, ∀1i, Using this definition,

where ⊕ =weπTkc.an

denotes the XOR operation, characterize the codewords

for which all the symbols corresponding to T are weak in the

positions given in the corresponding BL set. We refer to such

codewords as T-weak, which are formally defined as follows.

Definition 4 (T-Weak Codewords): A T-weak codeword is

defined as the codeword for which all the elements in ST are weak at the BLs corresponding to T, i.e., they are weak at the

BLs determined by the From this definition,

elements of πT. it can be seen that

the

NˆT

in

(18)

is

precisely the number of T-weak codewords. Hence, the frac-

tion

NˆT NIS

can be

interpreted as the

probability of having NˆT

T-

weak codewords in the NIS trials. Using this observation, (18)

can be expressed as follows:

Pr(DF , T) ≈ Pr T-weak codeword exp −ad2 . (19) N0

From (19) it is observed that the probability of decoding

failure is proportional to both Pr T-weak codeword and

exp

−ad2 N0

. However, the second term depends solely on

the minimum distance of the constellation, but not on the

BL sets. In contrast, we will show that the first term, i.e.,

Pr T-weak codeword , is intimately related to the BL sets.

In particular, in Appendix we prove that

a

Pr T-weak codeword = 2(πTi −m),

(20)

i=1

whence we have

Pr(DF , T) ≈ exp −ad2

a
2(πTi −m),

(21)

N0 i=1

which establishes the connection between Pr(DF , T) and the structure of the BL set corresponding to T. Using (21) enables

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NESHAASTEGARAN et al.: ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF LDPC CODED MODULATION SYSTEMS

2793

us to obtain the relative contribution of different BL sets and

to decide whether a BL set is included in the error floor

estimation or it is ignored. To clarify this comparison further,

we provide the following example.

Example 5: We estimate the error rate corresponding to a

TS class (6, 2) when 32−PAM signalling is used. The TSs

are partitioned in different BL sets. According to (21) for the

BL set, πT, represented by T we have 2−24 exp

−ad2 N0

≤

Pr(DF , T) ≤ exp

−ad2 N0

. More specifically, consider two

BL sets πT1 and πT2 with Pr (T1-weak codeword) = 2−18

and Pr (T2-weak codeword) = 2−8. For the TSs belonging

to πT1 and πT2 , using (21) yields Pr(DF , T2) = 210 ×

Pr(DF , T1). In this case, the BL set πT1 and all the cor-

responding TSs are removed from the innermost summation

in (7) since their contribution is negligible. In summary, to extract the most influential BL sets, we con-

sider the class (a, b) TS and the j-th isomorphic subset in (7).

We then use (20) to calculate Pr T-weak codeword for all

the BL sets involved in the innermost summation in (7), i.e.,

Nab,j BL sets. To compare all the BL sets collectively, these probabilities are normalized with respect to their maximum

value. By comparing the normalized probability with a prescribed threshold, which we denote by βTth, we choose the BL sets that are considered in the calculation. In particular, any

BL set for which the normalized probability that a TS be T-

weak falls below this threshold is discarded.
We choose the threshold, βTth, empirically, and by making the following two observations: 1) For a TS class with PTmax (cf. Step 4 in algorithm 1) close to 1, the probability of a

random codeword being weak against the TSs of that class is

high. Hence, in addition to the TSs corresponding to PTmax, other TSs with Pr T-weak codeword less than PTmax have
the chance of becoming dominant, and we need to loosen the

selection criterion such that more BL sets are chosen. This is equivalent of selecting a smaller βTth, 2) For a TS class with small PTmax (e.g., PTmax < 10−3), all the TSs have a small chance of becoming dominant. Hence, even the TSs

corresponding to PTmax are, by definition, unlikely to become
dominant. Therefore, for BL sets with small PTmax , we choose large βTth values, which result in a smaller number of extracted TSs.

As a side note, we emphasize that derivation of (21) invokes

several approximations, which renders it rather crude for

obtaining an estimate of the error floor. However, this equation

provides valuable guidance in choosing the TSs that are likely

to make a significant contribution to the error floor. A summary

of PDTS extraction technique is presented in Algorithm 1.

V. EXTENSION TO QAM SIGNALLING
In Section IV, we described the proposed scheme for estimating the error floor of LDPC coded modulation systems using PAM signalling. In this section, we extend this scheme to LDPC coded modulation systems using QAM signalling. Towards that end, we will use the fact that a QAM symbol can be decomposed into an in-phase and a quadrature component, each belonging to a PAM constellation. To use this observation, we apply the method proposed in Section IV to the

Algorithm 1 PDTS Extraction Technique

Input: Set of all the TSs under study T(ja,b), Number of TS VNs a, Constellation size 2m, PDTS extraction design

threshold

corresponding

to

T(ja,b) ,

β . th
T(ja,b)

Output: Set of extracted PDTSs Tˆ(ja,b), Number of extracted

BL sets Nˆab,j.

1: Find the BL sets for all the TSs in T(ja,b).

2:

Let

T(ja,b)

=

∪Nab,j
t=1

T(ja,,tb)

,

where

all

the

TSs

in

T(ja,,tb)

have

the same BL set.

3: For every t ∈ {1, . . . , Nab,j}, define Pt

Pr T-weak codeword where T is an arbitrary TS

in T(ja,,tb).

4: Use (20) to calculate Pt, ∀t ∈ {1, . . . , Nab,j}, and define

PTmax

max
t

Pt

.

5: 6:

Let Let

tβˆt==0.PTPmtax , ∀t

∈

{1, . . . , Nab,j}.

7: for t = 1 to Nab,j do,

8:

if

βt

> βth
T(ja,b)

then,

9:

tˆ+ 1 → tˆ.

10:

Let Tˆ(ja,,tˆb) = T(ja,,tb).

11: end if

12: end for 13: Let Nˆab,j = tˆ. 14: Let Tˆ(ja,b) = Nˆab,j Tˆ(ja,,ib), where the sets Tˆ(ja,,ib) are obtained
i=1
from Step 10.

in-phase and the quadrature components of the received signals independently. Doing so requires modifying the transmit and receive sides of the system, as we elaborate below.
1) Labelling the BLs: In Section II-B, we considered Gray-labeled M −PAM constellation with M = 2m symbols. We then assigned a BL of 1 to the MSB and a BL of m to the LSB. The philosophy of this assignment is that the bits that receive more protection from the constellation are indexed with lower BLs. To follow a similar labelling scheme in a QAM constellation of size 22m, we treat the bits corresponding to the in-phase and the quadrature components independently. Let us assume that s = si + jsq is a QAM symbol where si and sq are the in-phase and quadrature components, respectively. To apply the same BL assignment philosophy as in the PAM case, we label the bits corresponding to each component from 1 to m. Hence, while the number of bits mapped to each QAM symbol is 2m, there are only m BLs involved in our calculations.
2) Calculating the MS values: In a 22m-QAM system, the noise samples corresponding to the transmitted symbols are complex values. Hence, the MS values can be added to the real, imaginary, or both components of the noise samples. To determine which component of a noise sample needs to be biased, we identify the TS VNs that are connected to the in-phase components, and those that are connected to the quadrature components of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2794

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 5, MAY 2021

transmitted symbols. The TS VNs that are mapped to

the in-phase and the quadrature components are treated

as two hypothetical TSs in a PAM system with constellation size 2m. To elaborate, we will now explain the

MS calculation procedure for a TS of size a in a system using a 22m-QAM constellation.

For a TS, T, of size a, the set of VNs mapped to the

in-phase and the quadrature components of the trans-

mitted symbols are denoted by Ti, and Tq, respectively.

Let |Ti| = ai, and |Tq| = aq, where ai + aq = a.

Applying the MS calculation scheme of Section IV-B.1.b

to Ti, we analogous

obtain ai MS values, approach, we obtain aq

{μTv i }av=i 1. MS values,

Using an {μvTq }va=q 1

corresponding to Tq. We now identify the indices of the

noise samples to which the calculated MS values are

added. ζTq =

To do so, {ζTvq }av=q 1,

we as

build the sets ζTi per the definition

= in

{ζTvi }av=i 1 and Section III-B.

The elements of ζTi determine the indices of the noise

samples, which are biased by adding the corresponding

elements from {μvTi }va=i 1 to their real part. Similarly, the noise samples indexed with the elements of ζTq

are biased by adding the corresponding MS values in

{μvTq }av=q 1 to their imaginary part. As an illustrative example, consider the TS T =

{396, 467, 548, 570} (cf. Example 1) when a 64-QAM

constellation is used. In this case, Ti = {396, 548, 570},

Tq = {467}, ζTi = {66, 92, 95}, and ζTq = {78}.

We consider Ti and an 8-PAM constellation, and use

the scheme described in Section IV-B.1.b, to obtain three

aMsSinvgalleueMs,S{μvTvaliu}e3v,=μ1.T1Sq ,imtoilabrely,adTdqedis

used to calculate to the imaginary

part of the noise sample with index 78.

3) Calculating the weight function: To obtain the weight

function in a QAM-based system, the joint PDFs of the

biased and unbiased received signals should be calcu-

lated. To do so, we use the following observation: For a

given codeword, C, the joint PDF of the received signals

is identical to the joint PDF of their real and imaginary

components. For instance, the joint PDF of the unbiased

received signals fR|C(r) = fRi|C(ri)fRq|C(rq), where fRi|C(ri), and fRq|C(rq) are the joint PDFs of the
real and the imaginary parts of the received signals,

respectively. It can be readily seen that fRi|C(ri) =

Ns k=1

fRi,k

(ri,k ),

where

the

subscript

i, k

denotes

the

real

part

of

the

k-th

element,

and

Ri,k

∼

N (si,k,

N0 2

).

Similarly, fRq|C(rq) =

Ns k=1

fRq,k

(rq,k ),

where

the

subscript q, k denotes the imaginary part of the k-th

element,

and

Rq,k

∼

N (sq,k,

N0 2

).

The

joint

PDF

of

the

biased where

received signals fZ|C(z fZi|C(zi) is obtained by

) = fZi|C replacing

({zμiTv)fi }Zvaq=i|C1(,zaqn)d,

ζTi

in

(8).

Hence, ⎛

⎞

fZi|C(zi) = ⎝

fRi,k (zi,k − μTv(ik))⎠

k⎛∈ζTi

⎞

×⎝

fRi,k (zi,k)⎠ .

k∈{1,...,Ns}\ζTi

In a similar {μvTq }va=q 1,

fashion, and ζTq

fZ q |C (z q in (8) to

) is calculated obtain

by

replacing

⎛

⎞

fZq|C(zq) = ⎝

fRq,k (zq,k − μvT(qk))⎠

k⎛∈ζTq

⎞

×⎝

fRq,k (zq,k)⎠ .

k∈{1,...,Ns }\ζTq

The weight function in a QAM-based system, is obtained
by taking the ratio of fR|C(r), and fZ|C(z) as follows:

wC (z)

=

fRi|C (ri) fRq|C (rq) fZi|C (zi)fZq|C (zq)

=

k∈ζTi,k

fRi,k (zi,k) fRi,k (zi,k − μTv(ik))

×

k∈ζTq

fRq,k (zq,k) fRq,k (zq,k − μvT(qk)

)

.

(22)

To estimate Pr(DF , T) for an LDPC coded modulation system using QAM signalling, we use (11), with wC(i)(z(C, W )) being calculated from (22). The rate of the decoding fail-
ure in the error floor region is estimated using (7), where T(ja,,tb) and Nab,j are obtained as in Section IV-B using the BL sets corresponding to the QAM constellation under
consideration.

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A. Simulation Results
In this section, we present the simulation results of the proposed error floor estimation scheme. In particular, the FER curves corresponding to the conventional MC simulation and the proposed MS-IS scheme are drawn. We consider four widely used LDPC codes, i.e., the Tanner (155, 64) [37], the MacKay (1008, 504) [36], the WiMAX (1152, 960) [1], and the AR4JA (2560, 1024) [38] LDPC codes. The first two are regular codes while the last two are irregular quasi-cyclic (QC) codes with lifting degrees 48, and 128, respectively. For the AR4JA (2560, 1024) LDPC code, the last four columns of the base matrix are punctured, and hence are not transmitted. We consider M −PAM signalling, where M = 2m, m ∈ {3, . . . , 7}, and M −QAM signalling, where M = 22m, m ∈ {2, . . . , 5}. The decoder is chosen to be the conventional min-sum one [39] with the following parameters: the number of quantization bits is set to 6, the maximum number of iterations is set to 100, and the clipping (saturation) threshold of quantization for each case is stated on the corresponding figure’s legend using the notation ‘sat’. The normalized error for both MC and MS-IS schemes is set to 5%. To apply the PDTS extraction technique, the threshold βTth is set to the values given in Table I below. These values are found empirically, and by using the following observation: large PTmax values (cf. Algorithm 1) require more BL sets and thus smaller thresholds in the estimation. The impact of βTth on the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NESHAASTEGARAN et al.: ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF LDPC CODED MODULATION SYSTEMS

2795

Fig. 5. The MC (solid-line) and the MS-IS (dashed-line) results for the Tanner (155, 64) LDPC code.

Fig. 6. The MC (solid-line) and the MS-IS (dashed-line) results for the MacKay (1008, 504) LDPC code.

TABLE I THE EMPIRICAL VALUES OF THE THRESHOLD βTTH IN ALGORITHM 1
performance of proposed MS-IS scheme will be investigated in Section. VI-B.
We begin the simulation by estimating the error floor of the aforementioned codes using MC and proposed MS-IS scheme. We relegate the analysis of the results to Section. VI-B. For the Tanner (155, 64) LDPC code, we have 2 dominant TS classes, namely (8, 2) and (10, 2) [12]. The MC simulation verifies that both classes are present when the non-binary constellations are used. Thus, we set amax = 10 and bmax = 2. Figure 5 shows the MC and the MS-IS FER estimation results for this code when PAM, and QAM signalling schemes are used. It can be seen that the MS-IS estimation and the MC simulation curves

give similar results. This shows that the proposed MS-IS estimation scheme can effectively estimate the FER in the error floor region. To further verify the effectiveness of the proposed MS-IS scheme, the FER curves for the MacKay (1008, 504) LDPC code using the MC simulation and the proposed MS-IS estimation schemes are displayed in Fig. 6. The MC simulation at the early error floor region demonstrates that the class (8, 2) is the largest size TS class with non-negligible FER. Hence, we set amax = 8 and bmax = 2, and to estimate the FER we should consider 3 TS classes, namely (4, 2), (6, 2), and (8, 2). At the SNRs for which the results for both MC and MS-IS are available, it can be seen that both methods yield similar FER estimate.
For the WiMAX LDPC code the FER curves are shown in Fig. 7 to illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed technique for estimating the error floor when using the irregular LDPC codes with non-binary signalling. From MC simulation at early error floor region we obtain amax = 7 and bmax = 2. Using these values we consider 9 TS classes, namely (3, 1),

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2796

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 5, MAY 2021

Fig. 7. The MC (solid-line) and the MS-IS (dashed-line) results for the WiMAX (1152, 960) LDPC code.

(4, 1), (5, 1), (6, 1), (7, 1), (4, 2), (5, 2), (6, 2), and (7, 2) [13], to estimate the error floor. As it is shown in Fig. 7, both schemes result in similar FER curves. We note that the computational complexity of estimating the error floor can be further reduced by invoking the QC structure of this code. This is because for a QC-LDPC code, the TSs in one class can be partitioned into subsets such that within each subset, dividing the indices of VNs of TSs by m results in an identical set of remainders. Compared to the random codes, this property will decrease the number of unique BL sets, Nab,j in (7), i.e., the number of partitioned TS candidates in each class.
For the AR4JA LDPC code the results are shown in Fig. 8. Using MC simulation, the largest TS class with non-negligible contribution in the error floor is class (5, 5). Hence, to estimate the error floor we considered 11 TS classes, namely, (2, 3), (2, 4), (2, 5), (3, 3), (3, 4), (3, 5), (4, 3), (4, 4), (4, 5), (5, 4), and (5, 5). By applying the proposed MS-IS scheme on these TSs, we obtained the estimated FER of the code as shown in Fig. 8. From this figure, it can be seen that, except for the case of 128−PAM, the proposed MS-IS scheme consistently under-estimates the FER of the code. This is indicative of the fact that some of the bit errors are not caused by the TSs. In other words, some block errors pertain to the isolated bit errors that are not connected to any common CN. Hence, those errors are not accounted for in the proposed estimation scheme.
B. Discussion and Interpretation of Numerical Results
Figs. 5-8 attest to the effectiveness of the proposed MS-IS scheme in estimating the error floor of LDPC coded modulation systems with PAM and QAM signalling. We now investigate the performance of the proposed MS-IS scheme from different aspects in more detail. To perform this investigation in Table II we provide detailed information on the simulation results presented in Fig. 5. Although these results correspond to the Tanner code, similar trends are observed for other codes including those simulated in Figs. 6, 7, and 8. The tables corresponding to the latter figures have been omitted for space considerations. Five aspects will be considered:

Fig. 8. The MC (solid-line) and the MS-IS (dashed-line) results for the AR4JA (2560, 1536) LDPC code.

1) the performance of PDTS extraction technique presented in Section. IV-B.2, 2) the effect of the threshold βTth in Algorithm 1 on the estimation performance, 3) the comparison of time efficiency between the MC scheme and the proposed
MS-IS scheme, 4) the number of required trials in the MS-IS
scheme, and 5) the number of PDTSs corresponding to a given TS class.

1) Performance of PDTS extraction technique: To illustrate

the effect of this technique, in Table II we show the

numerical value of

Jab j=1

Nˆab,j t=1

|Tˆ(ja,,tb)|,

where

Nˆab,j

and Tˆ(ja,,tb) are calculated using Algorithm 1. This number

is the total number of TSs that are considered to estimate

the error rate contribution of class (a, b) TSs and is

compared to the total number of TSs in that class.

Table II shows that the PDTS extraction technique

significantly reduces the number of TS candidates. For

example for TS class (10, 2), the |T(10,2)| = 1395. Now, for 32−PAM signalling at an SNR of 20 dB and

with βTth = 0.025 the corresponding number of PDTSs is 25 and the total number of TSs with non-identical BL

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NESHAASTEGARAN et al.: ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF LDPC CODED MODULATION SYSTEMS

2797

TABLE II
THE NUMBER OF ESTIMATED TSS, THE RELATIVE CONTRIBUTION OF GIVEN TS IN THE TOTAL ESTIMATED FER, AND THE TOTAL NUMBER OF TRIALS FOR THE ESTIMATION OF A TS CLASS ARE PROVIDED FOR THE ESTIMATED FERS IN FIG. 5

TABLE III
THE NUMBER OF PDTSS AND THE REQUIRED TRIALS FOR ESTIMATING THE ERROR FLOOR OF TANNER (155, 64) CODE AT SNR 27 dB FOR 128-PAM SIGNALLING IS DISPLAYED. THREE βTth VALUES ARE CONSIDERED

Fig. 9. Effect of βTth on the performance of proposed MS-IS technique is illustrated for three threshold values. The solid line and the dashed line show the FER curves corresponding to MC and MS-IS schemes, respectively.

sets is

Jab j=1

Nab,j t=1

|T(ja,,tb)|

=

1171.

Hence,

the

number

of TSs considered in our method is only 2.1% of all the

TSs within this class. 2) Effect of βTth on the estimation performance: The PDTS
extraction technique is based on a prescribed thresh-
old, βTth, to select the TS candidates for which the estimation is performed. The value of βTth provides a trade-off between the estimation accuracy and computational complexity; decreasing βTth improves estimation accuracy but increases the computational complexity.

This trade-off is illustrated in Fig. 9 for the Tanner

(155, 64) code with 128−PAM signalling. In this figure
we consider three values of βTth, namely 0.125, 0.05, and 0. From this figure it can be observed that by decreasing
the value of βTth, the estimation accuracy is improved. However, this improvement is relatively small. The

marginal difference between the curves corresponding to βTth = 0 and the other two thresholds shows that the PDTS extraction technique precisely selects the TS

candidates that are more prone to errors. In other words,

the error rate contribution of the TSs discarded by the

PDTS is negligible.

To compare the computational complexity corresponding to each value of βTth in Table III we show the number of PDTSs and the total number of trials to estimate

the error floor in each case at an SNR of 27 dB. It is observed that the FER corresponding to βTth = 0 is the

most accurate since it corresponds to the cases when the MS-IS scheme considers the contributions of all the TSs, i.e., when the PDTS scheme is not used. This table confirms that the PDTS extraction technique yields a significant reduction in the number of required trials to estimate the error rate contributions. For instance, the number of trials corresponding to βTth = 0.125 (the threshold initially chosen using Table I) is less than 0.03% of the number of trials corresponding to the case when the PDTS extraction is not used, i.e., when βTth = 0. 3) Comparison between the time efficiency of MC and MS-IS: When MC simulation is used, the number of required trials for maintaining a constant estimation variance is inversely proportional to the FER rendering it impractical for estimating the low FERs. In contrast with the MC simulation, the accuracy of MS-IS scheme does not depend on the FER. As the SNR increases and we enter deeper into the error floor region, the constant number of required trials of the MS-IS scheme gives it an important advantage over its MC counterpart. For example, from Table II, the number of required trials to estimate the FER of the Tanner code with 32−PAM signalling at SNRs of 20 dB and 21 dB for the proposed MS-IS scheme is 2.17 × 107 and 2.24 × 107, whereas these numbers for the MC scheme are 1.21 × 108 and 8.1 × 108, respectively. This confirms that the time efficiency of the MS-IS scheme increases with the SNR. We note that the computational complexity required by the proposed MS-IS scheme to obtain the required TS classes is negligible since this simulation is performed only once at the early error floor region. 4) Number of required trials in the MS-IS scheme for different constellation sizes: Although the number of required trials increases with the size of the TS, this trend is not observed when the size of the constellation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2798

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 69, NO. 5, MAY 2021

increases. In particular, the number of required trials to estimate the error rate of a given TS class may increase or decrease with the size of the constellation. This is because the BL set of a given TS depends on the constellation size, which implies that the parameters PTmax and βTth in Algorithm 1 will depend on the constellation size. The number of required trials to meet the accuracy threshold of the estimation will be lower for the BL sets with large PTmax (and vice-versa); however, by increasing the constellation size, PTmax may increase or decrease. This non-monotonic behavior results in the lack of certain trend in the number of required trials for the MS-IS scheme when the constellation size goes up. For example, for the case of the Tanner code in Table II, the number of required trials to estimate the error rate of class (8, 2) is approximately 3.6 × 106 and 1.1 × 106 for the 8−PAM and the 16−PAM, respectively. This is a reduction of almost 60% in the number of required trials. 5) Number of PDTSs corresponding to a given TS class for different constellation sizes: From Table II it can be observed that in the majority of cases, for a given TS class the number of PDTSs decreases as the constellation size increases. To explain this behavior, we note that as the constellation size increases, the values of Pr (T-weak codeword) are distributed over a wider range, cf. (20). Hence, the number of BL sets with higher Pr (T-weak codeword) values decreases. For instance, the number of PDTSs for class (10, 2) TS is 136 for 8−PAM, 30 for 16−PAM, and 7 for 128−PAM.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we developed a novel error floor estimation scheme for high-order LDPC coded modulation systems using PAM and QAM signalling. The proposed method is based on the importance sampling approach. In particular, an MS-IS scheme is designed to estimate the error rate contribution of each TS class. We show that for non-binary signalling the contribution of TSs within a given class are different. To exploit this property, we developed a PDTS extraction technique to obtain the list of TSs with non-negligible contribution in the error floor. This technique, and the proposed MS-IS scheme enables error floor estimation of high order LDPC coded modulation system that is significantly more time efficient than existing MC schemes.
APPENDIX DERIVATION OF (20)
We begin by calculating the number of weak symbols at each BL. For a Gray labeled PAM constellation, this number at the MSB position is always 2, while at the LSB position is equal to size of the signal set, i.e., M . In general, for the b-th BL, the number of weak symbols is 2b, where 1 ≤ b ≤ m, and m = log2 M . Hence, assuming that the symbols corresponding to a VN are independent and uniformly distributed, for an M −PAM constellation, the probability of a symbol being weak at b-th position is 2b−m. For the T-weak codewords all

the symbols corresponding to T are weak at their respective BLs. Hence, we obtain:

Pr T-weak codeword

a

= Pr ( siT is a weak symbol at BL πTi )

i=1

a

=

2(πTi −m).

(23)

i=1

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Peyman Neshaastegaran would like to thank Yoones Hashemi for valuable help and fruitful discussions on the implementation of graphical-based trapping set search algorithm. The authors also wish to acknowledge an Associate Editor and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful suggestions and insightful comments.

REFERENCES
[1] Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access SystemsAmendment for Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands, Standard IEEE 802.16, Working Group, 2005.
[2] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications; Part 2: DVB-S2 Extensions (DVB-S2X), ETSI Standard EN 302 307-2 V1.1.1, Feb. 2015.
[3] L. Michael and D. Gómez-Barquero, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 181–188, Mar. 2016.
[4] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of low-density parity check codes for 5G new radio,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28–34, Mar. 2018.
[5] M. Jang, H. Lee, S.-H. Kim, S. Myung, H. Jeong, and J. Kim, “Design of LDPC coded BICM in DVB broadcasting systems with block permutations,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 327–333, Jun. 2015.
[6] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun, Control, Comput., vol. 41, 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[7] S. Lin and D. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1983.
[8] S. Landner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Netw., Commun. Mobile Comput., vol. 1, Jun. 2005, pp. 630–635.
[9] B. J. Frey, R. Kotter, and A. Vardy, “Skewness and pseudocodewords in iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Aug. 1998, p. 148.
[10] T. Richrdson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of various low-density parity-check ensembles for the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2002, p. 1.
[11] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes via hardware simulation,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Jun. 2006, pp. 1–6.
[12] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for leafless elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6713–6736, Dec. 2016.
[13] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Characterization of elementary trapping sets in irregular LDPC codes and the corresponding efficient exhaustive search algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 3411–3430, May 2018.
[14] B. Xia and W. E. Ryan, “On importance sampling for linear block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), vol. 4, May 2003, pp. 2904–2908.
[15] B. Xia and W. E. Ryan, “Importance sampling for tanner trees,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 2183–2189, Jun. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NESHAASTEGARAN et al.: ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF LDPC CODED MODULATION SYSTEMS

2799

[16] E. Cavus, C. L. Haymes, and B. Daneshrad, “Low BER performance estimation of LDPC codes via application of importance sampling to trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1886–1888, Jul. 2009.
[17] C. Cole, S. G. Wilson, E. Hall, and T. R. Giallorenzi, “A general method for finding low error rates of LDPC codes,” 2006, arXiv:cs/0605051. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0605051
[18] X. Hu, B. V. K. V. Kumar, Z. Li, and R. Barndt, “Error floor estimation of long LDPC codes on partial response channels,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2007, pp. 259–264.
[19] X. Hu, Z. Li, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, and R. Barndt, “Error floor estimation of long LDPC codes on magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1836–1839, Jun. 2010.
[20] A. Ramamoorthy and N. Varnica, “Error floors of LDPC coded BICM,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2007, pp. 839–844.
[21] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Evaluation of the low frame error rate performance of LDPC codes using importance sampling,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Sep. 2007, pp. 202–207.
[22] S.-K. Ahn, K. Yang, and D. Har, “Evaluation of the low error-rate performance of LDPC codes over Rayleigh fading channels using importance sampling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 2166–2177, Jun. 2013.
[23] R. Holzlohner, A. Mahadevan, C. R. Menyuk, J. M. Morris, and J. Zweck, “Evaluation of the very low BER of FEC codes using dual adaptive importance sampling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 163–165, Feb. 2005.
[24] A. Poloni, S. Valle, and S. Vincenti, “NB-LDPC: Absorbing set and importance sampling,” in Proc. 7th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Aug. 2012, pp. 101–105.
[25] A. Farsiabi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error floor estimation of LDPC decoders—A code independent approach to measuring the harmfulness of trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 2667–2679, May 2020.
[26] H. Hatami, D. G. M. Mitchell, D. J. Costello, and T. E. Fuja, “Performance bounds and estimates for quantized LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 683–696, Feb. 2020.
[27] N. Raveendran, D. Declercq, and B. Vasic´, “A sub-graph expansioncontraction method for error floor computation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 3984–3995, Jul. 2020.
[28] A. Tomasoni, S. Bellini, and M. Ferrari, “Thresholds of absorbing sets in low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 3238–3249, Aug. 2017.
[29] H. Hatami, D. G. M. Mitchell, D. J. Costello, and T. Fuja, “Performance bounds for quantized spatially coupled LDPC decoders based on absorbing sets,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2018, pp. 826–830.
[30] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “Error floor approximation for LDPC codes in the AWGN channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 7416–7441, Dec. 2014.
[31] A. Alvarado, L. Szczecinski, R. Feick, and L. Ahumada, “Distribution of L-values in gray-mapped M 2−QAM: Closed-form approximations and applications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 2071–2079, Jul. 2009.
[32] C. Schlegel and S. Zhang, “On the dynamics of the error floor behavior in (regular) LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3248–3264, Jul. 2010.
[33] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
[34] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “LDPC decoder strategies for achieving low error floors,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, Jan. 2008, pp. 277–286.
[35] C. Wang, “On the exhaustion and elimination of trapping sets: Algorithms & the suppressing effect,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2007, pp. 2271–2275.
[36] D. Mackay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. Accessed: Oct. 20, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/ mackay/codes/data
[37] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Jul. 2001, pp. 365–370.

[38] Research and Development for Space Data System Standards, Low Density Parity Check Codes for Use in Near-Earth and Deep Space Applications, Standard CCSDS 131.1-O-2, 2007. [Online]. Available: https://public.ccsds.org/Pubs/131x1o2e2s.pdf
[39] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
Peyman Neshaastegaran (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from the Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 2009 and 2013, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 2021. In 2019, he joined the Wireless Advanced Competency Center, Huawei, Canada, Ottawa Research Center, where he currently works as a Senior Wireless Algorithm Engineer. His research interests include coding theory, coded modulations schemes, and the emerging technologies for designing the physical layer of 5G Beyond and 6G wireless communication systems.
Amir H. Banihashemi (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 1997.
In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, where he was a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. He joined the Faculty of Engineering, Carleton University, in 1998, where he is currently a Professor with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include coding and information theory, digital and wireless communications, network coding, theory and implementation of communication algorithms, and compressed sensing and sampling. He has been involved in many international conferences as the Chair, and a member of the Technical Program Committee and an Organizing Committee. He was a member of NSERC’s Electrical and Computer Engineering Evaluation Group from 2013 to 2016 and the last two years as a Section Chair. He was also a two-time recipient of the NSERC Discovery Accelerator Supplement in 2008 and 2013. He served as the Co-Chair for the Communication Theory Symposium of Globecom07, the TPC Co-Chair for the Information Theory Workshop 2007, a member of the Organizing Committee for the International Symposium on Information Theory 2008, and the Co-Chair for the Canadian Workshop on Information Theory 2009. He served as an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2003 to 2009.
Ramy H. Gohary (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. (Hons.) degree from Assiut University, Egypt, in 1996, the M.Sc. degree from Cairo University, Egypt, in 2000, and the Ph.D. degree from McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada, in 2006, all in electronics and communications engineering.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. He has coauthored more than 100 IEEE journal and conference papers, and co-supervised more than ten Ph.D. and master’s students. He is the co-inventor of eight US patents. His research interests include analysis and design of MIMO wireless communication systems, applications of optimization and geometry in signal processing and communications, and information theoretic aspects of multiuser communication systems. Dr. Gohary has been named the “Best Professor” from the Carleton Student Engineering Society, in 2015. He is a registered Limited Engineering Licensee (LEL) in the province of Ontario, Canada.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

