LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES WlTH VARIABLE RATE AND RANDOMIZED CONSTRAINTS FOR ADVANCED MAGNETIC TAPE RECORDING
Zongwang Li. Jin Xic, B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar zwli@andrew.cmu.edu.jxie@eee.emu.edu, kumarBccc.cmu.edu Data Slomge System Center (DSSC). Carnegic Mellon Univsrsity, Pinsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Variable rate and randomized run length limited (VR2 RLLj constraint is used in some

magnetic tape recording systems [l]. The variable rate encoding aIgorithm monitors the

incoming data stream for conditions such as run length limit (RLL)constraints. If one of the

conditions is violated, a bit is inserted into the data stream. The purpose of the VR2 RLL

constraint is to ensure that the encoded data contains adequate tracking and amplitude

information for reliable data detection and prevent the preamble pattern from occurring

during the data field. Although the VR2 approach to RLL constraint is effective, it has the

disadvantages of variable block length and error propagation. Furthermore, VR2 is not

suitabte for soft decision decoding needed by Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes being

investigated because of their good performance. low complexity and inherent parallel

decoding architecture. LDPC codes usually exhibit excellent error correction performance and

the LDPC decoder may be able to recover the codeword even if we deliberately introduce some errors in the codeword in order to satisfy RLL constraints [2].Based on this observation,

we propose a scheme of combining LDFC codes with the VR' RLL constraint based on bit

W

flipping. In addition to providing soft decision decoding to achieve large coding gain, the

0 br

proposed scheme has the advantages of no error propagation and fixed block length.

I

The proposed scheme is shown at the left side of Fig. I.First, a user bit block is encoded io

an LDPC codeword. Then the codeword is XOR'ed with a pseudo-random sequence

generated by a linear feedback shift register (LFSR) with a certain initial value. Then the VR2

RLL constraint is incorporated into the XOR'ed sequence by deliberately flipping

bits (inslead of inserting bits) wherever VR2 RLL constraints are violated. If the pre-defined

number of XOR attempts is reached, the XOR'ed sequence with the smallest number of

flipped bits is recorded. Otherwise, the initial value of LFSR is changed and we obtain a new

XOR'ed sequence, and then the bit flipping continues. The corresponding detection and

decoding scheme is shown o n the right side of Fig. I. The channel detector is a symbol by

symbol a posteriori probability detector (using either BCJR algorithm or SOVA). The log

likelihood ratio (LLR) values from thc channel detector are separated into two parts: the hard

decision bit part and the reliability value part. Based o n the initial value of LFSK from the

data header [ l ] (the initial value may be protected by a strong short code), the pseudo-random

sequence can be replicated. Then the hard decision bit part is XOR'ed with the replicated

pseudo-random sequence. Then LDPC decoder performs decoding based on the XOR'ed

sequence and the reliability value part. The LDPC decoder outputs decoded user bits if the

decoding result is a codeword or the maximum number of decoding and detection iterations

are reached. Otherwise, the extrinsic information from LDPC decoder is separated into the hard decision and reliability value parts and the hard decision part is XOR'ed with the

replicated pseudo-random sequence. Both the XOR'ed hard decision part and the reliability

value part are fed to the channel detector to perform iterative channel detection and LOPC decoding.
Initial value from data header

Fig.2 shows the simulation and real data (est results. A quasi-cyclic LDFT code with code length 4608 and rdte 819 [3] is evaluated i n both cases. The left side of Fig. 2 is the simulation results of the proposed scheme over EPR4 channel. The LDPC code with VRZconstraint and one XOR attempts has 0.6dB loss compared with the case of no VR2 constraint at bit error rate (BER) I O 6 and 0.8 db loss at block error rate (BLERj The loss is less than 0.1 dB with 8 XOR attempts at BER 10" and BLER IO4. The right side of Fig.2 shows the real data results from a magnetic recording cape testbed at DSSC (see configurations in Fig. 2). The VRZconstraint without LDPC code has high BLER. The proposed scheme has no error for
recording densities from 220kbpi to 250kbpi for several thousands test blocks. In conclusion, the proposed scheme has good performance. Furthermore, it has the advantages of no error propogation and constant block length compared with the original VR' R I L constraint.
(Media of tape: MPJ Tape widrh: half inch Tape speed: 80 inch per second Recording clock frequency: 16M-24MHa

Tape density

LDPC code with VRZ

"IQD

I 1 (2124 blacks tested) 5.00E-03 0

Fig. 2. Performanceof LDPC code with VRZRl.l.!onstminl under simulation and with real data

ReSerences
111 M. D. Gray, "Variable Rate Bit lnserter for Digital Data Storage," Unite States patent,

patent number: 5815514, Sep. 29, 1998. 121 B. Vasic and K. Pedagani, "Run-Length-Limited Low-Density Parity Check Codes Based
on Deliberate Error Insertion," IEEE Trans. On Magnetics Vol. 40 No. 3, pp. 1738-1743,

May 2004.

[3] 2. t i and B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar, "A Class of Good Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Panty

Check Codes Based on Progressive Edge Growth Graph," Presented at IEEE Asilomx

conference 2004, Nov. 2004.

0-7803-9009-1/05/$20.00

02005 IEEE

GC 09

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:00:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

