GC 06

Field Programmable Gate Array-based Investigation of the Error Floor of Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes for Magnetic Recording Channel

. Lingyaii Sun', Hongwei Song', B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar', Zak Keim2 ( I ) Camegie Mcllon University, Pittsburgh, PA. 15213 (2) Agere Systems, Longmont, CO, 80504

Introduction

Low density parity check (LDPC) codes [l] have shown 3 to 5 dB coding gain, at bit error

rates (BER) around lo'', over the un-coded partial response maximum-likelihood (PRML)

channels [Z]. However, the error floor of LDPC codes is still an open question and is one of

the major concerns in applying LDPC codes in high density recoding channel. Due to the

suboptimal nature of decoding schemes and the difficulties in code spectrum analysis, the

performance analysis of LDPC code at very low BER region is very difficult, if not

impossible. Therefore, the performance of LDPC codes is usually evaluated through Monte

Carlo simulations. The sequential nature of the conventional C simulations limits their

capability for BER investigation. It takes months to evaluate the performance of codes in

'

partial response (PR) channel at l o 9 BER using optimized C code and a 2GHz computer. To investigate the error floors, we have developed a high-throughput, fully-reconfigurable field programmable gate array (FPGA) platform for the evaluation of LDPC codes in PR channel.

00

8

In this paper, we describe the architecture, main features and throughput of the channel

I

simulator on FPGA. The error floor of one type of LDPC code is shown as an example,

Code simulator on FPGA The architecture of the FPGA simulator is shown in Fig.1. It consists of two parts: write processor and read processor. In the write processor, random data generator (RDG)generates a random data sequence which is encoded by LDPC encoder (ENC). The encoded sequence is buffered and sent to a random interleaver. The output of interleaver is passed through an ideal PR channel and added with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). In the read processor, a soft output Viterbi decoder (SOVA) takes the noisy samples from the write processor and produces initial soA information for LDPC decoder. An LDPC decoder takes the deinterleaved output from the SOVA, improves on the soft information and gives the output after certain iterations. This is called one channel iteration. For the next channel iteration, the SOVA will take the interleaved output from LDPC decoder, calculate the prior information and produce improved soft information for the LDPC decoder. The main challenge in building simulator on hardware is to have enough flexibility while achieving good throughput and small size to fit in a single chip. The simulator Is built following modular design methodology. Each function block in Fig. 1 is standalone for easy updating. The parameters including bit width, iteration number, and signal to noise ratio (SNR) are all reconfigurabte. A single decoder with easy configuration of block length, code rate and even different code structures is used for decoding 131. The final output is the number of bit errors, block errors and total blocks. The FPGA sends the output to PC using

the PCI port at 33MHz. For error floor investigation, the throughput is limited by clock frequencyichannel iteration number. At one channel iteration, the sample processing speed is IOOM samplesisecond and rcduced to half at two channel iterations.
Fig.1 LDPC Code ~imularoronFPGA
Error floor investigation For an LDPC code to be used in magnetic recording channel, its complexity and error floor are two major issues. Structured codes are preferred because o f their lower decoding complexity. Quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes are of great interest because of their simple structures. We evaluated two types of QC-LDPC codes using the simulator: Array code and Disjoint Difference sets (DDS)code [2]. Low column weights are considered and the channel iteration number is set to two. The error floor of those codes are found. In Fig. 2 we show the error floor of the DDS code with column wcightj=5, 25 LDPC iterations and two channel iterations in EPR4 channel as well as the performance in AWGN channel at 50 LDPC iteration. It takes around 1.5 hours to observe 5ER with samples processed.

Sld?

References

Fig 2. DOS J=5 error fluor (region where BER YS SNR curve slows down)

[ I ] R. G. Gallager, "Low-Density Parity Check Codes, MIT Press,"Cambridge, MA, 1963. [2] H. Song,"lterative soft detection and decoding for data storage channels," Ph.D dissertation, Dept. of ECE, Camegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA, Dec. 2002. [3] L. Sun, l3.V.K Vijaya Kumar "Field programmable gate array implementation of a generalized decoder for structured low-density parity check codes," accepted by IEEE international conference on field programmable technology, 2004.

" " " . - - - - , " " "

, , " . I . -

I"

I."r

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:00:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

