IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

1313

Extremes of Information Combining
Ilan Sutskover, Shlomo Shamai (Shitz), Fellow, IEEE, and Jacob Ziv, Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Extreme densities for information combining are found for two important channel models: the binary-input symmetric parallel broadcast channel and the parity-constrained-input symmetric parallel channels. Following, upper and lower mutual information thresholds are stated for per-bit maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) decoding and low-density parity-check (LDPC) code ensembles.
Index Terms—Channel coding, extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts, information combining, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, mutual information, turbo codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N the iterative decoders used to decode low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes [2] or turbo codes [3], an operation of “information combining” [4], [5] is performed at each stage. That is, several information conveying messages are combined to yield a new informative message. A device that performs this operation is called the combining operator. Examples are: variable nodes (combination by summation at log-likelihood ratio domain), check nodes, Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [6], etc. In the iterative decoding literature, information is frequently classified as being either intrinsic or extrinsic. Intrinsic information stands for information about a symbol extracted from a direct (noisy) measurement, whereas extrinsic information stands for information extracted from (noisy) observations of other symbols tied to it by a code constraint. The theory presented in this paper applies to each type solely or jointly.
Analysis of LDPC decoding is usually carried out using the asymptotic tree property [2]. This property asserts that a randomly chosen edge in the graph spans a tree up to any fixed depth, with probability that approaches one as the block length approaches infinity. When the channel is itself memoryless, this property allows claiming independence of the incoming messages to a randomly chosen node. Similarly, analysis of turbo decoding is usually carried out for asymptotically infinitely long interleavers. This again implies that the incoming messages (where extrinsic information are outputs of BCJR [3], [6] decoders) are independent.
Decoding is usually analyzed by means of density evolution [2] or extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts [7], [8]. By
Manuscript received December 30,2003; revised November 16, 2004. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 41st Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003.
The authors are with the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Technion–Israel Institute of Technology, 32000 Haifa, Israel (e-mail: ilan@siglab.technion.ac.il; sshlomo@ee.technion.ac.il; jz@ee.technion.ac.il).
Communicated by K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2005.844077

tracking the densities of the messages passed along the decoding process, density evolution provides an exact characterization of the decoding. This makes it a valuable tool for performance analysis of algorithms such as sum–product [9], though less suitable for performance analysis of intricate algorithms such as BCJR. Complex combining operators, such as BCJR, can be analyzed using Monte Carlo simulations, as is commonly done with EXIT charts analysis. However, as EXIT chart tracks a single parameter (mutual information) rather than densities, it sacrifices rigor by assuming a model on the densities of the input messages of the combining operators.
This paper trades EXIT charts’ approximations with rigorous bounds. While mutual information is still the only parameter tracked along decoding, the extreme input densities to the combining operators are found and used to set bounds on the output mutual information as a function of the input mutual information. Part of this work generalizes recent results by Land et al. [5] and was summarized in [1]. The extremes of information combining may serve for some other applications as well, e.g., as exemplified in [10] (and see Section VI-A), and may also go beyond iterative decoding applications (see Section VI-E).
The structure of this paper is as follows: Section II introduces the problem and the channel models that are associated with it. Section III solves the problem for the first channel model. This model suits, for example, variable nodes in LDPC graphs as combining operators. Section IV solves the problem for the second channel model, which suits check nodes in LDPC graphs as combining operators. Then, Section V applies the extreme distribution results to iterative decoding of LDPC codes, where upper and lower bounds on the threshold for optimal decoding (sum–product) are obtained. These bounds are compared with Burshtein et al. [11] and with Wang et al. [12]. Section VI extends the results and discusses the role of channel symmetry in the validity of the results, the definition of the combining operator, and the relations of this work to previous works on information combining. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
The first model to be discussed concerns multiple observations of a single bit that are to be combined into a single informative message. When decoding of LDPC codes is considered, this model matches the combining of input messages to a variable node. When decoding of turbo codes is considered, relevant combining is performed when the output from one constituent decoder is combined with channel output measurements associated with the corresponding systematic bit. Alternatively, when more than two constituent decoders are used (see, for example, [13]) the outputs of some of them are combined in

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

the same manner. We call the model above the parallel broad-

cast channel.1 Formally, according to this model, a single bit

is transmitted over several parallel channels to yield

a vector of outputs

, where

binary symbols satisfying a parity-check constraint. The infor-

mation from the first symbols is combined to yield information

about the

th symbol, where exactly

symbols par-

ticipate (in a random order) at the considered code constraint.

Denote

and

correspond to probability functions in the discrete

case or probability density functions (pdfs) in the continuous

case.2 A binary-input symmetric-output channel is a channel

that abides by

(1)

where

are obtained by parallel channels from

, respectively. With all inputs,

being

binary, independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.), and

uniformly distributed, we write

A parallel broadcast channel shall be called symmetric if and only if all its constituents are binary-input symmetric-output channels.
Throughout this paper, the channel input is required to be uniformly distributed, that is,

to emphasize the dependence on the channel distributions alone. The channel model considered here may be referred to as parityconstrained-input parallel channels, which is called symmetric if all its constituents are symmetric.
The questions to be asked are as follows.

All of the results in this paper (except for Theorem 7) involve a

single transmission over a channel, so that time-domain depen-

dence is irrelevant to the results. The results naturally extend to

the memoryless setup, where both the channel and its inputs are

memoryless.

To emphasize the dependence of the considered mutual in-

formation terms on the channel probability distributions, we

shall exchange the notation

and the notation

.

With respect to the parallel broadcast channel, two questions

are considered in this paper

Question 1: Given the set of channels

and the channel

, what is the individual channel

distribution

that maximizes the mutual information

given that

?

Question 3: Given the set of channels

and the channel

, what is the individual channel

distribution

that maximizes the mutual information

given that

?

Question 4: Given the set of channels

and the channel

, what is the individual channel

distribution

that minimizes the mutual information

given that

?

Note that for a single channel,

. The opti-

mizing channel of Question 3 (resp., Question 4) is the most

(resp., least) informative through the check constraint optimal

combining. Note also that the optimal combining is given, in

the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) domain, according to the equa-

tion [14], [15]

For iterative decoding, the optimizing individual channel thus maximizes the information passed from the input
message to the output message. In this sense it may be called “the most informative channel.”

where

is the output of the combining operator.

Before continuing, we observe that the log-likelihood trans-

formation is defined by

Question 2: Given the set of channels

and the channel

, what is the individual channel

distribution

that minimizes the mutual information

given that

?

For iterative decoding, the optimizing individual channel thus minimizes the information passed from the input
message to the output message. In this sense it may be called “the least informative channel.”
For the example of decoding LDPC codes, a different type of information combining is applied at the check nodes. Here, the input messages are the outputs of parallel channels, fed by

(2)
and the second equality in (2) does not hold unless .
It is easy to show that for a symmetric channel, the mutual information between the channel output and the binary channel input is given by

1The term parallel channels stands for independent channels. 2No distinction is made between upper case and lower case letters for the description of probability mass functions or pdfs.

Using change of measures

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUTSKOVER et al.: EXTREMES OF INFORMATION COMBINING

1315

we write

The output equivocation

mutual information with the

introduction of instead of is given by

From the fact that the maximum a posteriori probability

(MAP) decision,

, is a functional of the LLR vari-

able defined in (2), we conclude that the transformation

is information lossless. Therefore,

III. EXTREME DISTRIBUTIONS FOR THE BINARY-INPUT SYMMETRIC PARALLEL BROADCAST CHANNEL

A. The Most Informative Channel
Theorem 1: For binary-input symmetric parallel broadcast channels, a constituent channel which is a binary erasure channel (BEC) is maximizing the output information for a given input information. That is, the solution for Question 1 when all given channels are symmetric, is given by

where the second equality is by explicit calculation for the BEC and the inequality follows from Lemma 1 below. More-
over, by induction we can claim such a chain of inequalities up to any number of channels, that is,

in the LLR domain,3 and for

.

Proof: It is well known that the optimal combining of

LLR messages, corresponding to outputs of a parallel broadcast

channel, is their sum. Thus,

and the order of the replacement of channels with channels is arbitrary of course.

Lemma 1: For any two4 independent binary-input sym-

metric-output channels

and

This lemma is proven in Appendix I.

where

denote inputs expressed in the LLR domain. The

channel to the sum variable

is, of course, sym-

metric, as the individual channels themselves are symmetric.

Denote by

the pdf associated with the log-likelihood

variable corresponding to the output of the symmetric th indi-

vidual channel conditioned on the event

. We will

also use henceforth the notation

We have

B. The Least Informative Channel
Notation: Let the binary entropy function and let

denote denote its inverse, i.e.,

Theorem 2: For binary-input symmetric parallel broadcast channels, a constituent channel which is a binary-symmetric channel (BSC) is minimizing the output information for a given input information. That is, the solution for Question 2 when all given channels are symmetric is given by

in the LLR domain, and for

.

Proof: Start with

Note that can be regarded as parallel channels, but also as

a single channel corresponding to the sum of the outputs, i.e.,

its distribution is the convolution of the individual channels’

distributions.

Set as the erasure channel distribution (in the LLR do-

main) such that

; this guarantees that the input mu-

tual information is the same for both distributions. Obviously,

this implies that for ,

, where is the erasure prob-

ability.

where is distributed according to (that is, the convolu-

tion distribution) and is distributed according to . The first

equality follows from the fact that

is a Markov chain.

The conditional distribution,

, is now written using

the notation of [16]

3Note that the representative densities in the LLR domain are unique.

4By induction, this lemma can be expanded to any number of channels.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1316

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

Now

Fig. 1. An equivalent representation of a check node of degree 6 using several check nodes of degree 3.

is easily proved using the identities

where the equality is proven in Appendix II, and inequality

is an application of the extension to the lemma known as

“Mrs. Gerber’s lemma” in [16].

The term

is the transition probability of a BSC

having a mutual information of

,

and thus, it is proven that the equality is in fact achieved with

equality for a channel

which is a BSC with the same

amount of mutual information.

IV. EXTREME DISTRIBUTIONS FOR INFORMATION COMBINING AT CHECK NODES

In this section, the notation introduced above (as )

and its sibling

are used; they

stand for mutual information and conditional entropy when a

parity-check constraint is satisfied. It is hereby emphasized that

these terms are in general not equal to and (i.e., terms like

) that are associated with the parallel broad-

cast channel used in the previous sections. However, for a single

individual channel,

and

.

Lemma 2:

where event section.

stands here for the pdf of conditioned on the , unlike in the definition used in the previous

and

An immediate application is the following result.

Corollary 1: With respect to binary-input symmetric-output channels, a constituent channel which is a BEC (resp., a BSC) is minimizing (resp., maximizing) the output information of a degree check node for a given input information.
Proof: A distribution that minimizes given a fixed must maximize by Lemma 3, and vice versa.

Theorem 3: For binary-input symmetric-output channels,

the BEC (resp., BSC) distribution is minimizing (resp., max-

imizing) the check node output information for a given input

information.

Proof: Corollary 1 is the proof for a check node of de-

gree . If the check node has more than two input messages

(degree

), then we represent its output as the output of

serially concatenated check nodes of degree with any

arbitrary order (see as an example Fig. 1 which corresponds to

a check node of degree ). We can absorb, for example, into

the distribution of the distributions of all the messages ex-

cept one (which is distributed by ), and apply Corollary 1 to

the constituent -channel, while keeping intact the distribution

. Then, the absorbed messages can be extracted again, and

the process may continue with other input messages if desired.

Note that absorption can be done because the modulo- sum

has a recursive nature—a property that can be viewed also by

the output message evaluation in the LLR domain (as noted by

[14]) appearing in (3)

The lemma is proven in Appendix III.

Lemma 3: Let the distributions and stand for two symmetric channel distributions of messages incoming to a check node which is of degree . Let denote the mutual information between a code bit and the check-to-variable message emanating from this check node toward the variable node associated with that bit. Then

(3) V. APPLICATION: BOUNDS ON EXIT CHARTS

where the terms on the right-hand side correspond to a model of binary-input parallel broadcast channel, and is the combined information at its output.
Proof: The sufficient condition

The reduction of extrinsic information messages to BEC/BSC, with the communication channel output distribution being fixed, gives upper and lower bounds on EXIT curves. To be more precise, a substitution of BEC for check-to-variable messages and BSC for variable-to-check messages gives an

upper bound on the performance (i.e., “best performance”

bound) for a fixed communication channel. A substitution of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUTSKOVER et al.: EXTREMES OF INFORMATION COMBINING

1317

BSC for check-to-variable and BEC for variable-to-check gives a lower bound on the performance (i.e., “worst performance” bound) for a fixed communication channel. The following discussion is restricted to symmetric communication channels (which imply symmetric messages [2]). For a regular LDPC code, stands for the variable node degree and for the check node degree. For irregular LDPC codes

The combination of the best performance bounds for a LDPC code

and
are the left edge degree sequence and right edge degree sequence, respectively. The rate of the code is lower bounded by

yields a necessary condition for successful decoding, which results in the following theorem (whose proof can be found in Appendix IV).
Theorem 4: Define

with equality if the parity-check matrix associated with the bipartite graph does not contain linearly dependent rows.
Notation: The mutual information obtained by the channel measurements is denoted by . The mutual information between a message emanating from a variable (resp., check) node toward a check (resp., variable) node and the code bit associated with that variable node is denoted by (resp., ). Also, throughout this section, all extrinsic information messages incoming into a node are presumed to be i.i.d.
Consider first the best performance bounds. When the input messages to a degree- check node form BSCs, the output is also distributed according to a BSC, and the mutual information at the output is given as [17]
Note that for irregular codes
(4)

For any

LDPC code, if the communication channel pos-

sesses an amount of mutual information

then suc-

cessful decoding is not possible.

Corollary 2: Any

LDPC ensemble for which

,

where is the code rate, cannot achieve capacity by iterative

decoding over any memoryless binary-input symmetric-output

channel.

Proof: Falsely assume that both

holds and the

code achieves capacity, i.e.,

where is the channel

capacity. The mutual information is actually the capacity

, as the input distribution is uniform (i.e., capacity achieving).

Thus, if

, then by Theorem 4, successful

decoding is impossible, which is a contradiction to the capacity

achieving property of the code.

We now address the worst performance bounds. When the distribution of the input messages to a degree- check node corresponds to a BEC, the mutual information is given as

(5)
and observe that (4) is an upper bound on performance, but (5) is not. The latter expresses a result by the polynomial .
With respect to the variable node, when the distribution of the input messages corresponds to a BEC, the output information is given by
or for irregular codes

The output information at a degree- variable node when the

distribution of the input messages corresponds to a BSC is given

by (6) (at the bottom of the page), where

and

is the distribution of the measurement-to-variable message.

In analogy to Theorem 4, we may now suggest Theorem 5,

which is a combination of both lower bounds, given an input

conditional distribution of measurements. This theorem bounds

the performance of the optimal per-symbol MAP decoding al-

gorithm.

Theorem 5: Consider a

LDPC code, and let de-

These terms depend on the communication channel only note the LLR pdf corresponding to the measurement-to-variable

through its mutual information value.

messages. If (7) (see the bottom of the page) has no fixed point

(6)
(7)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1318

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

in the open interval

, then successful decoding is

(asymptotically) assured, for per-symbol MAP decoding.

Applying Theorem 5 to an input channel which is a BSC yields the following theorem.

Theorem 6: Consider a

LDPC code, then successful

decoding is (asymptotically) assured for per-bit MAP decoding

over any binary input memoryless symmetric-output commu-

nication channel possessing a mutual information

if

there is no fixed point in the open interval

for (8)

(see the bottom of the page).

Fig. 2 demonstrates the best case bounds and the worst case

bounds for a

LDPC code. For the worst case bounds, note

the small possible difference among communication (measure-

ment) channels, expressed as the gap between a communication

channel which is a BSC and a communication channel which

is a BEC. Observe, however, that in the depicted case, the gap

is sufficient to yield successful decoding for some channels and

unsuccessful decoding for other. Fig. 3 depicts the difference

between the susceptibility of check nodes and variable nodes to

their input distributions. Using the duality theorem of [8, The-

orem 4], the check node curves are reflected over their dual code

curves (i.e., the variable node curves) when the communication

channel is neutralized. Note that reflection is done by setting

, where

is the primal

code extrinsic information transfer function. Using this repre-

sentation, the BSC-to-BEC gap is evidently greater for check

nodes than for variable nodes.

We compare in Table I the bounds obtained in this paper with

the bounds obtained by Burshtein and Miller in [11], over the

codes in [2, Table 1] and the irregular code from [18] given by

and
The irregular code was optimized to yield a very low threshold over the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BIAWGN) channel. The exact thresholds were obtained by means of density evolution. The bounds of Burshtein and Miller are obtained in a similar manner to the technique used in this paper; however, where mutual information

is tracked in this paper, conditionally expected a posteriori

probability,

is tracked in [11].

The communication channel considered in both cases is the

Fig. 2. Worst case EXIT chart for a (3; 6) LDPC code is in (a). The bottom-most curve is the (least informative, BEC) check node curve. The upper curves correspond to the least informative extrinsic messages (BSC) when the communication channel is itself the most informative (BEC, dashed line) or the least informative (BSC, solid line). In (b), the best case EXIT chart for the same code and the same input mutual information. The best case curves depend on the communication channel only via its mutual information quantity.
BSC, over which the weaker bounds coincide with the stronger bounds (Theorem 6 with Theorem 5 and [11, Theorem 5] with [11, Theorem 4]). The bounds, as reflected on the threshold, are compared using the common term of probability of transition. Note that Theorem 6 provides a lower bound on the threshold and Theorem 4 provides an upper bound on the threshold.
Table I implies that the lower bounds (on the threshold in terms of probability of transition) of [11] seem slightly tighter than the lower bounds derived in this paper. The reason may

(8)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUTSKOVER et al.: EXTREMES OF INFORMATION COMBINING
TABLE I COMPARISON OF THE BOUNDS IN THIS PAPER WITH THE BOUNDS ACCORDING TO [11]

1319

message distribution when the expectation operator is consid-

ered. Thus, in [11] only a single channel degradation is required

(at the variable-node inputs), while when mutual information

terms are considered, a degradation of the input channel of both

the variable node and the check node is required. Compared to

the bounds stated in Table I, the bounds in [12] are too loose to

be included. For example, the lower bound on the

code

threshold for a BSC is probability of transition equals to

instead of , or

instead of

for the

code.

Interestingly, the upper bounds obtained by [11] are slightly

worse than the bounds obtained in this paper. Since both upper

bounds depend on the communication channel only via its pa-

rameter (mutual information or expected a posteriori proba-

bility), the comparison may stress the advantage of mutual in-

formation after all.

Note that by Corollary 2 the

code

ensembles are not capacity achieving over any memoryless bi-

nary-input symmetric-output channel. Indeed, as the average

right degree of these codes is finite, these codes cannot achieve

capacity on any channel [19]. However, with infinite average

right degree Corollary 2 may still be found useful. The inability

of the specified ensembles to achieve capacity can also be ex-

plained by arguments on the density of the parity-check matrices

as in [20].

In Table II, we compare the upper bounds on the threshold

(in terms of

in decibel units) and the lower bounds on

the threshold over the BIAWGN channel. In this case, both the

weaker upper bound of Theorem 6 as well as the tighter upper

bound of Theorem 5 are given. The former is independent of the

communication channel, as is also the lower bound. The lower

bounds are about 1.2 dB below the exact thresholds. With re-

spect to the regular codes’ upper bounds, the tighter bounds lie

roughly about 0.5 dB from the exact threshold, while an addi-

tional gap of no more than 0.3 dB exists toward the universal

bounds. The irregular code, on the other hand, is clearly not

Fig. 3. The different behavior of variable nodes and check nodes is illustrated
by the help of the duality theorem of [8, Theorem 4], where check nodes curves are reflected over their dual code. The communication channel is set to I = 0, and the same degree is set for the variable node and the check node (degree 3 in (a) and degree 10 in (b)). The solid line corresponds to variable nodes with
2 BSC as extrinsic information input distribution, the dotted line corresponds to
check nodes with BSC as input distribution, and the line corresponds to both
types of nodes with BEC as input distribution (as here both variable nodes and
check nodes share the same curve according to [8, Theorem 4].) The figures
illustrate the susceptibility of the check node over the variable node to their
input distributions.

captured well by the upper bounds, with a gap of 6 to 7.5 dB

in

.

VI. EXTENSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS
A. Relation to Previous Works on Information Combining
The term “information combining” was introduced for the first time by Huettinger and Huber in [4], where in turbo decoding of multiple constituent codes, the input of a certain BCJR decoder is the combination of the outputs of multiple

other BCJR decoders. There, the term “information combining”

lie in the fact that the check combining operation, when ex- was coined, and simple examples such as the BSC and BI-

pressed in a posteriori probability terms, is independent of the AWGN channels demonstrated the strong relation between

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005
TABLE II COMPARISON OF THE BOUNDS IN THIS PAPER WITH THE ACCURATE THRESHOLDS OVER BIAWGN

the mutual information of the combined outputs and between the mutual information of the constituent inputs. Later, in the following works [21]–[23], this technique was extended to estimation of the constituent channel mutual information from the combined output (i.e., estimation of the amount of mutual information buried in the extrinsic information, based on the amount of mutual information of the combination of extrinsic and intrinsic information). Also, in those works, a bi-directional relation was proposed between the EXIT charts and information processing characteristics (IPC) of end-to-end communication systems (see [10]); this relation is based on information combining as well.
However, the general case of broadcasting through independent binary-input symmetric-output channels was considered for the first time only by Land et al. [5] who proved upper and lower bounds on the combining of two such independent channels. Stronger results were published soon after by Sutskover et al. [1].
The results in this paper, which are based on the preliminary work in [1], extend the work of [5] in several ways: First, tight bounds on information combining are provided for the parallel broadcast channel (variable-node model) when an arbitrary number of constituent channels are considered. Second, the check node model (the parity-constrained-input parallel channels) is considered (see also [1]); tight bounds are given here for this model. Third, all of the bounds are tight even when only a few of the constituent channels are “degenerated” (into BSC or BEC) while the rest of the channels are kept intact, unlike [5] that degenerates all channels simultaneously. The application of information combining to study the entire iterative decoding process of LDPC codes is also considered here for the first time (but cf. [11]).

C. On the Role of Channel Symmetry
One may ask whether the extreme distributions found above are also the extreme distributions when the constituent channels are not symmetric. The following counterexamples show that indeed symmetry is a necessary condition for Theorem 1 (and, in fact, to its base, Lemma 1) and Theorem 2. By Lemma 3 this is a necessary condition also for Theorem 3.

Example 1: We will now show that the BEC does not

bound from above the mutual information when considering a

binary-input parallel broadcast channel with two asymmetric

constituent channels. Let the two constituent channels,

and

, be binary Z-channels such that

and
. Then

and (9)
Now it is not hard to verify that (10)

B. A Unified Representation of the Problems
The four questions raised in Section II can be unified into a single representation by addressing the mutual information

for any values of

, which contradicts Lemma 1.

As (10) is achieved in equality for a constituent channel that

is a BEC, this shows that symmetry is indeed a necessity for

Theorem 1.

where

represent independent measurements made di-

rectly on , while

designate measurements made

on independent binary variables, which are connected to by

a single parity-check relation. Such a representation can be used

when some more constraints are imposed on the measurements,

or even when different constraints are imposed on the input and

on the output.

Example 2: Using the same two channels, we can now show that the BSC does not bound from below the mutual information. Consider the replacement of both Z-channels with binarysymmetric channels, one with transition probability
and the other with transition probabiilty

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUTSKOVER et al.: EXTREMES OF INFORMATION COMBINING
Then, when the two BSCs are considered

Proof: With the notation outputs at time instant , write

1321
, for the

(11)

Now Now, one can verify that in fact (11) is greater than (9) for

any

. This shows that indeed BSC does not

lower-bound the binary-input parallel broadcast channel when

its two constituents are both asymmetric, which concludes this

example.

since is independent of given for

However, all the above theorems may be generalized to a case here

.

where all constituent channels are symmetric but one (without Define the following LLR terms:

loss of generality we assume it to be the th channel in the text

below). This can be shown from the fact that

. We define

and

where

is equal to

and observe that and

are all independent given .

Thus, we may think of a parallel broadcast channel, con-

sisting of the

channels: the symmetric constituent

channels

and the single asymmetric

channel

. By the symmetrization process in-

troduced above, each channel

can now be

replaced by a BEC (resp., BSC) to maximize (resp., minimize)

the output mutual information.

so that by (1) and (2)

which means that

behaves as if all constituent

channels were symmetric. In fact, the only asymmetric channel,

, is replaced by a symmetric channel

D. Generalization of the Combining Operator Definition

Another issue worth noting is the definition of the combining

operator. The derivations above assumed optimal combining, in

which no information loss is incurred by the combining oper-

ator. Thus, if

is the output message and

are

the input messages, then with optimal combining

For example, when the inputs of the combining operator stem

This symmetrization process is equivalent to an introduction of

a switch choosing between the channel

and the

channel

, where the switch chooses to use ei-

ther channel with probability . Note that an introduction of a

single switch to many constituent channels simultaneously re-

sults in a dependence among them and they cease to be parallel.

out of the binary-input parallel broadcast channel (not necessarily symmetric), the optimal combiner’s output can be pleasantly expressed in the LLR domain as the sum of the input LLR values. However, in general suboptimal combiners may be of importance, too. For example, the check node combiner of the min-sum [9] algorithm, whose operation is described by

Also, an introduction of many switches (one per channel) re-

sults in a model that does not match a single binary variable at

the input. Thus, we conclude that symmetrization can be applied

in general only to a single asymmetric constituent channel.

is a suboptimal combiner. In this paper, suboptimal combining

Theorem 7: Consider the memoryless binary-input sym- was not investigated. However, it is noted that bounds on such

metric parallel broadcast channel. The BEC (resp., BSC) is the combiners may be of great interest as well. Applications where

most (resp., least) informative constituent channel even if the such suboptimal combiners will be found contain, for example,

source has memory but its first-order statistics is uniform.

iterative decoding in the presence of channel uncertainty (i.e.,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1322

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

compound channels [24]) or application of the min-sum algorithm (with full channel knowledge).

APPENDIX I PROOF OF LEMMA 1

E. Various Applications
The usefulness of information combining was demonstrated in Section V for the analysis of iterative decoding of LDPC codes. Some more related applications were mentioned in Section VI-A, mainly following [10]. However, information combining can be used for the analysis of other settings as well.
For example, when CDMA signals are considered over a multipath channel and at a low signal-to-interference-and-noise ratio (SINR) conditions, binary modulation is typically used. With a RAKE receiver, if the processing gain (spreading factor) is big enough, then the outputs of different fingers closely represent independent measurements of the same transmitted bit. Again, Theorems 1 and 2 can be used to bound the RAKE’s performance as a function of its fingers’ performance.
Another example when multiple independent measurements of a single bit may be obtained is the relay channel [25].

We use the notations

,

,

and

, where the channel distributions of

and

are given in the LLR domain by the symmetric

distributions and .

We have in (12) and

in (13)

(12) VII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

In this paper, we explored the capability of a constituent

binary-input symmetric channel to convey information in the

sense of optimizing the amount of information jointly available

by this constituent channel together with other binary-input

symmetric constituent channels fed by the same input, while

keeping intact that amount of information available at the indi-

vidual constituent channel. The input is assumed to be binary,

memoryless, and uniform. For the two types of channels intro-

duced, the binary-input symmetric parallel broadcast channel

and the parity-constrained-input parallel channels it was shown,

in a somewhat surprising result, that the extreme constituent

channel distributions are independent of the distributions of the

other constituent channels involved.

(13)

For the binary-input symmetric parallel broadcast channel, the most information conveying channel is the BEC and the least information conveying channel is the BSC. These results were extended also to the case where the input is not memoryless but has a first-order uniform distribution and to the case where the input is memoryless but at most a single constituent channel is asymmetric. For the parity-constrained-input symmetric parallel channels, the BEC was found to be the least informative and the BSC was found to be the most informative.
The two types of channels are good models for the inputs of combining operators in iterative decoding schemes. In particular, the binary-input parallel broadcast channel models inde-

where

,

, defined

for nonnegative arguments, are the magnitude distributions

(therefore, the integrand is considered with conditional proba-

bilities of the sign).

Then, a sufficient condition for

is that the in-

tegrands above obey the inequality for any

and

. In

some works, addressing the integrand is identified as working

in the probability domain.

By making the substitutions

and

, we now wish to prove that the

following function is nonnegative:

pendent messages concerned with the identity of a single bi-

nary symbol, as is the case with variable nodes in LDPC codes

decoding. The parity-constrained-input parallel channels model

independent messages relating to different binary symbols that

participate in a single parity check constraint, as is the case with

check nodes in LDPC codes decoding.

For iterative decoding of LDPC codes, the extreme distributions were used to derive upper and lower bounds on the threshold of per-symbol MAP decoding (sum–product algorithm), and the results are found to be comparable with bounds

where is the binary entropy function, and

is the en-

tropy function corresponding to a probability vector .

To show the nonnegativity of

we will show that

derived in [11].

1)

;

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUTSKOVER et al.: EXTREMES OF INFORMATION COMBINING

1323

2)

has a unique extremum point which is a maximum

at

for arbitrary

(

or

results of course in

for any ).

Now

Proof: Define

and

The unique extremum of

, which is a maximum, is proved

by Claim 1.

The combination of the two items, together with the conti-

nuity of

, yield the desired proof.

Claim 1: The function

, as a function of for an arbi-

trary

, has a unique extremum point which is a max-

imum.

Proof: To show that

has a unique extremum which

is a maximum inside the interval, we will show that its first

derivative with respect to , for an arbitrary , crosses zero at

a single point, from a positive value to a negative value.

The first derivative with respect to is

We will show that

1)

;

2)

is monotone decreasing with respect to (for

);

3)

;

so that

must cross zero exactly once in

at some

, and the crossing is from a positive value to a negative

value. Therefore, the function

has a unique extremum

point, which is a maximum, at . The fact that

is

the proof that

is strictly increasing around

from

the positive side of the origin.

It is trivial that the limit is equal to

, and that this

function is negative (since

and

Also,

for ).

so

if and only if

, which is true

because

is convex and its two boundaries,

and

, are connected by the straight line

.

Finally, define

Then

Substitute get

(hence,

) to so

is monotone decreasing in for

is monotone increasing in for

However,

if and only if .

and for

and

all terms are positive. Thus,

We will show now the following.

is monotone increasing. This concludes the proof.

1)

;

An interesting interpretation of the preceding proof is the fol-

2)

;

lowing. Define a random variable having four-letters alphabet

3)

, as a function of , has a unique extremum point according to

which is a maximum;

4)

, as a function of , is strictly increasing in a close

positive neighborhood of

;

so that

must be crossing zero, and it must be from a

strictly positive value to a negative value (since it first increases

above zero). Finally, the functions

and

have the

same behavior, as

.

The first two properties are easy to verify and the latter two

and define three random variables that are obtained by means of processing of
or otherwise

properties are proved by Claim 2.

or

Claim 2: The function

, as a function of

otherwise

for an arbitrary

, is strictly increasing near

and

has a unique extremum point which is a maximum.

or otherwise.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1324

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

The claim,

, is now equivalent to saying that

where the second equality is due to (14). Obviously, for we can immediately write

where

for

since

and

for

, and is a Schur-concave

function [26].

Note also the following properties:

1)

for ;

2)

for

,

(which means that and are

independent);

3)

.

APPENDIX II Consider the function

where it is recalled that is the inverse of the binary entropy function . By [16, eqs. 2 and 15] it is easily seen that

(14)

for both definitions:

and

Consider a definition in which

we can write

. . Then, if

(15) so we conclude that (15) represents both cases.

APPENDIX III PROOF OF LEMMA 2

The series of equalities in (16) (at the bottom of the page)

forms the proof of this lemma, where is the event of sat-

isfaction of check node , whose adjacent variable nodes are

associated with code bits

and and only with

these nodes. All bits values are in

. Equality is by

(2), equality is by the symmetry of the channel (note that

), equality is by change of arguments, and equality

is by the “symmetry” of the check node (where a flip of a

single input implies a flip of the output).

In fact, any message-passing algorithm that obeys the all-

zeros codeword assumption [2] (i.e., whose performance is in-

dependent of the transmitted word) may be treated using the

technique exemplified above. For any such algorithm and any

codeword of a subcode associated with a finite depth directed

neighborhood, the output message obeys

and thus, if the information quantity is a function of

,

the expectation of that function is the same as the conditional

expectation under the all-zero codeword.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(16)

SUTSKOVER et al.: EXTREMES OF INFORMATION COMBINING

1325

APPENDIX IV PROOF OF THEOREM 4

This proof follows the guidelines of [27], [28].

Define

. Under the conditions of the theorem,

if the recursive equation

(17)

has a fixed point at

, then successful decoding

is impossible. Note that because the binary entropy function,

, is less than or equal to , then at any iteration

.

The information threshold below which no successful decoding

is possible corresponds to the maximum measurement-to-vari-

able conditional entropy, , such that (17) does terminate with

(i.e.,

). For

it is assured that suc-

cessful decoding does not terminate with asymptotic zero error

probability.

The term is the maximum over such that the equa-

tion

does not have a solution

.

Solving for , we get that

that is, for any

there is a unique

is the fixed point.5 If

then

definition. Therefore,

where

for which by

Since

for any

(because the binary en-

tropy function is less than or equal to ) we may replace the

optimization domain with the interval

.

Let

. Then,

which proves the claim.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Igal Sason for his insightful comments.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Sutskover, S. Shamai, and J. Ziv, “Extremes of information combining,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1446–1455.
[2] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
5There are infinitely many solutions for x = 0, owing to the full knowledge
by the extrinsic information that renders the channel measurements superfluous.

[3] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. 1993 Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[4] S. Huettinger and J. Huber, “Design of “multiple-turbo-codes” with transfer characteristics of component codes,” in Proc. Conf. Information Sciences and Systems (CISS). Princeton, NJ, Mar. 20–22, 2002.
[5] I. Land, P. A. Hoeher, S. Huettinger, and J. Huber, “Bounds on information combining,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 39–42.
[6] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[7] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[8] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.
[9] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elec. Eng., Univ. Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[10] S. Huettinger and J. Huber, “Information processing and combining in channel coding,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 95–102.
[11] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Bounds on the performance of belief propagation decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 112–122, Jan. 2002.
[12] C. -C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Density evolution for asymmetric memoryless channels,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 121–124.
[13] S. ten Brink, “Convergence of multi-dimensional iterative decoding schemes,” in Proc. 35th IEEE Int. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems and Computers, vol. 1, Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 4–7, 2001, pp. 270–274.
[14] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[15] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[16] N. Chayat and S. Shamai (Shitz), “Extension of an entropy property for binary input memoryless symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 1077–1079, Sep. 1989.
[17] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[18] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[19] D. Burshtein, M. Krivelevich, S. Litsyn, and G. Miller, “Upper bounds on the rate of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 2437–2449, Sep. 2002.
[20] I. Sason and R. Urbanke, “Parity-check density versus performance of binary linear block codes over memoryless symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1611–1635, Jul. 2003.
[21] S. Huettinger and J. Huber, “Extrinsic and intrinsic information in systematic coding,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun./Jul. 30–5, 2002, p. 116.
[22] S. Huettinger, J. Huber, R. Fischer, and R. Johannesson, “Soft-outputdecoding: Some aspects from information theory,” in Proc. 4th ITG Conf. Source and Channel Coding, Berlin, Germany, Jan. 2002, pp. 81–89.
[23] S. Huettinger and J. Huber, “Performance estimation for concatenated coding schemes,” in Proc. Information Theory Workshop (ITW) 2003, Paris, France, Mar./Apr. 31–4, 2003, pp. 123–126.
[24] A. Lapidoth and P. Narayan, “Reliable communication under channel uncertainty,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 2148–2177, Oct. 1998.
[25] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley, 1991.
[26] A. W. Marshall and I. Olkin, Inequalities: Theory of Majorization and Its Applications. New York: Academic, 1979.
[27] L. Bazzi, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Exact thresholds and optimal codes for the binary symmetric channel and gallager’s decoding algorithm a,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, Jun. 2000, p. 203.
[28] , “Exact thresholds and optimal codes for the binary symmetric channel and Gallager’s decoding Algorithm A,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 2010–2021, Sep. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

