Short-Block LDPC Codes for a Low-Frequency Power-Line Communications System
Quentin H. Spencer Distribution Control Systems, Inc. 945 Hornet Dr., Hazelwood, Missouri, 63042, USA
qspencer@ieee.org

Abstract— The TWACS power-line communication system is used by electric utilities for communicating over long distances with power meters and other devices. Data packets tend to be short, and increasing demand for bandwidth requires that error detection and correction add minimal overhead. We have investigated Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes as a replacement for the existing error control coding scheme. In this paper we investigate the error detection capabilities of LDPC codes with high rate and short block size. Under these constraints, increasing the density of the code adds short cycles to the Tanner graph of the code. This degrades the overall error rate, but we have found that it also improves the undetected error rate, resulting in a trade-off between error correction and detection that can be adjusted by changing the density of the code. Using this approach, an LDPC code can be designed that improves on both the error detection and correction capabilities of the existing scheme.
I. INTRODUCTION
TWACS (Two-Way Automatic Communication System) is a power-line communication technology that has been successfully used by electric utilities for some time [1], [2]. The most common application is automated meter reading, but the system can also be used for a variety of other applications of interest to a utility, such as load control. While it has a relatively low data rate, the TWACS signal can be detected at very long distances from the source, even with multiple transformers in the signal path (including documented cases of up to 140 km). The advantage of this approach is that no hardware is required other than the communications equipment at the distribution substation and a transponder located in the power meter.
As utilities have required more frequent access to power meter data and explored new applications of the TWACS system, there has been an increasing need for bandwidth efficiency. This includes a need to ensure the reliability of communication so that bandwidth is not wasted by retransmissions. Traditional methods of error detection and correction have been used in the system up to this point, but new developments in coding such as Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes could potentially provide improved reliability. In this paper we consider the design of LDPC codes with high rate and small block size, and we investigate their properties for both error detection and correction. We begin in the next section with a brief overview of the TWACS technology and its error-control coding requirements. Section III discusses the error detecting properties of short-block LDPC codes,

section IV describes the class of codes we have considered and section V discusses a method of finding good codes.
II. ERROR CONTROL CODING IN THE TWACS SYSTEM
The TWACS inbound (from meter to substation) signal is generated by inserting current pulses into the 60 Hz waveform at the zero-crossing point. Because the energy in the pulse is concentrated at low frequencies, it is able to penetrate transformers without modification. Furthermore, the signal level is low enough that it has no measurable impact on power quality. For a more detailed description of the signaling scheme, see [1], [2].
The TWACS system would seem to be an ideal application for LDPC codes because of its system architecture. The inbound receiver is located at a distribution substation, where it typically captures the signals from every transponder associated with that substation. Thus, while cost savings in the meter transponders is critical, it is acceptable to add moderate amounts of complexity in the inbound receiver, which typically receives data from thousands of meters, in order to obtain performance gains. Implementing an iterative decoder that improves overall reliability can offer important benefits with a potentially negligible impact on total system cost.
While encoding of LDPC codes is less expensive than decoding, it is still typically an O(N 2) process. Cost constraints on the TWACS transponder dictate that the encoding complexity be less than this. The encoder is implemented in software, and the memory required to store the code must be minimal.
The way in which the TWACS system is used (automated meter reading is the most common application) results in relatively short packet lengths (in the range of 100-150 bits). Furthermore, bandwidth efficiency requires that the overhead due to error control coding be minimal. Currently, error detection is performed using a 16-bit cyclic redundancy check (CRC), and 1 bit of error correction is obtained using a shortened (255, 247) Hamming code. This is a total of 24 bits of overhead per data packet, which at maximum packet sizes results in effective code rates of up to 0.85. A replacement coding scheme must improve on both the error detection and correction properties, while having a similar code rate and small block size. The design of high rate, short block LDPC codes is known to be a particularly challenging problem [3].


 0-7803-8844-5/05/$20.00 c 2005 IEEE.

95

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:00:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

Hamming/CRC

BCH/CRC

10−1

(155, 124) LDPC

10−2

Error Probability

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

0

2

4

6

8

10

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 1. Performance of various error control schemes. Solid lines are overall packet error rate and dashed lines are undetected error rate.

III. LDPC CODES AS ERROR DETECTING CODES
The most unusual requirement in the last section is that an LDPC code provide adequate error correction and detection. LDPC codes perform best as their size increases, so typical designs are for much larger block sizes. With large LDPC codes, virtually all errors are detectable by the decoder because they result in decoding failures. At high code rates and short block sizes, however, undetected errors do occur [3]. The addition of a separate detection scheme such as CRC to such small packets would have an unacceptable impact on overall bandwidth efficiency, so an LDPC code must be designed with a good undetected error rate.
Eliminating short cycles in the Tanner graph of an LDPC code is critical to obtaining optimum performance. In large randomly constructed codes, these occur with low probability and can be easily found and removed. With the high rate and short blocks we are considering, it is virtually impossible to avoid short cycles with random constructions. For this reason, combinatorial designs such as Steiner triple systems and cyclic difference families have been used as the basis for high-rate LDPC codes because they avoid cycles of length 4 by design [3]–[5]. For a code of weight 3, with M bits of redundancy, the longest block size for which a parity-check matrix can be constructed free of 4-cycles is N = M (M − 1)/6 [3]. For M =25, the result is a (100, 75) code, which has a rate of 0.75. If M is increased to 31, codes without 4-cycles of size (155, 124) can be constructed, which have rate 0.8. Although this is 7 bits more overhead than the existing scheme, it comes closer to meeting our rate and maximum block size requirements, so in this paper we consider designs of this size.
Figure 1 compares the overall and undetected error probabilities of three error-control coding schemes. The horizontal axis has been extended down to Eb/N0 = 0 dB to illustrate the error detection characteristics at very low signal to noise ratios (SNR). The first two codes are a shortened (255, 247) Ham-

ming code and (255, 239) BCH code combined with CRC-16 for error detection. Assuming data payloads of 124 bits in all cases, the effective size of the overall error detection/correction schemes are (148, 124) and (156, 124), respectively. The third code is a regular (155, 124) LDPC code of weight 3 (code number 1 in Table I). It has minimum distance 6 and is free of 4-cycles.
Because it is a perfect code, the Hamming code provides no intrinsic error detection; the undetected error rate is purely a function of the CRC. Because a CRC is unable to detect some error patterns, and due to a 2−16 probability of any randomly selected sequence having a valid CRC, there is a bound on the undetected error rate even as the SNR goes to zero. The BCH code used in conjunction with CRC improves on the undetected error rate of the Hamming/CRC scheme because some error patterns lie beyond the minimum distance of the code and are thus detectable by the BCH decoder (the “imperfectness” of the code becomes an advantage from this perspective). In contrast, the LDPC code offers overall performance gains of more than 2 dB relative to the BCH code, but the undetected error rate is orders of magnitude higher. The peak in undetected error rate that occurs at moderate SNR is due to the fact that undetected errors are usually caused by error patterns with low Hamming weight, which occur with highest probability at moderate SNR. As SNR decreases, highweight error patterns that result in detectable errors become more likely. It has been noted that the minimum distance of a code generally increases with block size [6], which is why large LDPC codes do not suffer from undetected errors.
The slope of the undetected error rate curve for the LDPC code at low SNR seems to indicate that if the signal is completely absent, so that the LDPC decoder is processing only noise, the undetected error rate goes to zero. This was verified in a separate simulation, where the decoder attempted to decode more than 107 Gaussian noise sequences, and there were no cases of convergence to a valid codeword. This property of the LDPC decoding process is useful for TWACS because it is a synchronous communications system. A signal could be absent because of a communication failure in the outbound direction or a power outage. In such cases, the decoder is processing noise only, so the LDPC decoder would virtually guarantee detection of the error. However, it is important to have low undetected error rate across all SNR values, so alternate LDPC designs must be considered.
IV. CODE DESIGN
In considering LDPC code designs, we must ensure very low encoding complexity. Two approaches have generally been taken to reducing encoding complexity: complexity-reducing schemes that have application to general LDPC codes, and classes of codes that have inherently low encoding complexity. We have taken the second approach here mainly due to storage requirements. Specifically, we have restricted attention to LDPC codes with a block-cyclic structure such as those proposed recently in [4], [5]. We define as block-cyclic any

96
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:00:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a)

(b)
Fig. 2. Images of (a) the parity-check matrix H and (b) the resulting lower portion of GT created using the construction in equation (2) for code number 1 in Table I.

code whose parity check matrix H can be expressed as:

H = C1 C2 · · · CL ,

(1)

where each Cj is a square circulant matrix, and L = N/M . A systematic generator matrix G can be constructed for such a matrix H using the following scheme:

GT =

IK G1 G2 · · ·

GL−1

,

(2)

where Gj = CL−1Cj and IK is a K × K identity matrix. Note that the Gj matrices are also circulant. Let the vector d represent the data to be encoded, which we partition into L − 1 sections of length M :

dT = dT1 d2T · · · dL−1

(3)

The encoded codeword c associated with d is

c = GT d =

d

L−1 j=1

Gj

dj

.

(4)

The parity check bits of the codeword are a sum of products of the form Gjdj. Each of these products is a circulant matrix multiplied by a section of the data bits, which can be generated using a series of simple shift-register operations, and it is only necessary to store one vector for each of the Gj blocks. Codes with this structure have been constructed from cyclic difference families, which allow them to avoid 4-cycles [4], [5]. Figure 2 shows images of of the parity-check matrix of code 1 in Table I, and the generator matrix that results from the construction we have described, where the identity matrix portion of G is omitted. While H is sparse, G is clearly not, but its cyclic structure enables encoding with minimal complexity.
In designing codes with the cyclic structure we are considering, there are additional requirements to consider. First, because the blocks Gj are defined in terms of CL−1, CL must be invertible in GF(2). If it is not invertible, but H is full-rank, it is still be possible to construct a systematic generator matrix, but the cyclic structure of the encoder is lost. A necessary condition for a circulant matrix in GF(2) to have full rank is

that it have odd weight [7]. While most odd-weight circulant

matrices are invertible, this is not a sufficient condition. This is

readily observed by considering the (31, 3, 1) cyclic difference

family listed in Table III of [5]. All of the 5 circulant blocks

that compose the resulting 31×155 parity-check matrix are

rank deficient, so it does not meet our requirements (the

resulting code is also undesirable because it has minimum

distance 4). An improved design was found by a search, and

it is listed as code 1 in Table I. While only one of the circulant

blocks needs to be invertible, there are benefits for codes with

low minimum distance in requiring that all blocks have odd

weight. The column sum of a code with entirely odd column

weights is a vector of all ones. This implies that the code is

even, meaning that all codewords have even weight [5]. If a

code with minimum distance 6 can be modified to remove all

codewords of weight 6, there are no codewords of weight 7,

so the minimum distance will be 8. We will demonstrate in the

next section that this can have important effects on undetected

error rates for short-block codes.

With restrictions on block size, the only way of changing

the Hamming weight spectrum of a code is to change the

number or placement of ones in the parity check matrix. For

the block-cyclic construction we are using, every codeword

belongs to a set of M codewords, where each codeword can be

created from another codeword by circularly shifting length-M

sub-blocks of the codeword by a fixed amount. This structure

also implies that adding or subtracting ones from the H

matrix amounts to adding or subtracting a circular permutation

matrix from one of the Cj blocks. Given a specific code

with a set of low-weight codewords, it may be possible to

eliminate the particular set of codewords by adding a circular

permutation matrix to one of the blocks of H. On the other

hand, in doing so, it is also possible to create a new set of

codewords with low weight. In general, however, there is a

correlation between higher weight parity check matrices and

higher minimum distance. This can be illustrated by observing

the error detection properties of randomly generated codes.

Figure 3 shows the average overall packet error rate and

undetected error rates for randomly generated regular block-

cyclic LDPC codes of weights 3, 5, and 7. For each weight, 10

codes were generated, with the only constraint being that no

two blocks of the code be identical. Blocks are considered to

be identical when one is a circular permutation of another, so

for weight w there are

M w

/M unique blocks. The randomness

of the test cases produced a few codes with high error

floors, particularly in the case of weight 5, which led to the

inconsistent behavior of the averaged overall error rates below 10−4. The size constraints we are considering imply that all of

the codes will have 4-cycles (except for a few weight-3 cases

that are unlikely to be found randomly), and that the more

dense parity-check matrices will have more 4-cycles, which

explains the increased packet error rate as weight increases.

However, the losses in overall error rate are accompanied

by even larger improvements in undetected error rate, with

a reduction by a factor of over 100 between weight 3 and

weight 5 parity check matrices.

97
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:00:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Error Probability

100

weight=3

weight=5

10−1

weight=7

10−2

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

0

2

4

6

Eb/N0 (dB)

TABLE I OPTIMIZED (155, 124) LDPC CODE DESIGNS

Min. Row Dist. Wt.

Block Definitions

16

15

C1 = {0, 1, 17}, C2 = {0, 2, 12}, C3 = {0, 3, 9}, C4 = {0, 4, 11}, C5 = {0, 5, 13}

26

C1 = {0, 7, 14, 17, 19, 20, 22}, 23 C2 = {0, 6, 10, 18, 22}, C3 = {0, 3, 4, 10, 11},
C4 = {0, 2, 4}, C5 = {0, 11, 16}

38

C1 = {0, 1, 4, 13, 16}, C2 = {0, 2, 4, 12, 23}, 25 C3 = {0, 3, 9, 14, 19}, C4 = {0, 3, 11, 17, 25},
C5 = {0, 6, 7, 11, 20}

48

C1 = {0, 1, 4, 5, 13, 16, 19}, C2 = {0, 1, 4, 10, 15, 18, 20}, 35 C3 = {0, 2, 4, 12, 13, 21, 23}, C4 = {0, 3, 6, 7, 11, 20, 26}, C5 = {0, 3, 11, 12, 17, 21, 25}

8

10

Fig. 3. Performance of randomly generated Block-Cyclic LDPC codes with column weights 3, 5, and 7. Solid lines are overall packet error rate and dashed lines are undetected error rate.
This demonstrates that there is a trade-off between overall error rate and undetected error rate. If error detection is important in a high-rate short-block LDPC code, the code with the lowest bit error rate will likely have excessive undetected errors, but it is possible by increasing the overall code density to substantially reduce undetected errors while still achieving a coding gain relative to traditional coding methods. The remaining challenge is to design the best possible code of a given weight.
V. CODE OPTIMIZATION
In the previous section, we observed the performance of randomly generated block-cyclic LDPC codes. We would like to further improve performance by finding the best possible code with a particular weight distribution. Typically, this is measured in terms of overall error rate, but since we are interested in eliminating undetected errors as much as possible, we will use as our primary consideration the number of lowweight codewords. In finding codes with optimal code weight distributions, the method of Hu, et al. [8] was used to find low-weight codewords. Because this is in general an NP-hard problem, the algorithm provides a good estimate of the low end of the weight spectrum, but is not exhaustive. Because of the small code size we are dealing with, the computation time for this is reasonable, but non-trivial.
A potentially large number of possible codes can be tested given enough time, but random searches for good codes are not likely to be particularly productive. Instead, we used a local search approach. This is based on the idea that a good code is likely to be similar to other good codes. With the type of codes we are looking at adding or removing ones from the parity check matrix must be done in sets of size M . Each of these sets are circular permutation matrices. Given two blockcyclic codes H1 and H2 ∈ GF(2), H2 can be created from H1 by adding permutation matrices to each of the blocks.

We define the “distance” between the two codes as the total
number of permutation matrices needed to form H1 + H2. Stated differently, if hj,k is the kth row of Hj, this distance is equivalent to the Hamming distance between h1,k and h2,k
(given the cyclic structure, the Hamming distance is the same
for all values of k). A M × N parity-check matrix H1 will have a total of N H2 matrices that are a distance of one away. If H1 is regular with weight 3, all of the matrices at a distance
of one will have one block of weight 2 or 4, with the remaining

blocks of weight 3.

In order to search for the “best” code at a distance of one

from a particular code, it is also necessary to define a measure

of fitness. Since our primary goal is eliminating low-weight

codewords, the hamming weight spectrum was estimated and

a weighted sum was used to find the best one. If there are

n

codewords

of

weight

w,

then

n/

N w

is the fraction of

sequences of weight w that are codewords. If a code’s weight

spectrum is known up to a value of v, the fitness was quantified

as

v i=1

ni

/

N i

, which is the fraction of all patterns of weight

≤ v that are codewords.

Good codes were found using progressive searches. The best

code at a distance of 1 from a base code is found, and then

that code is used as a base for further searching. Typically

the best code has higher overall density than the base code,

but this is not always the case. Finding the good codes of a

particular density involved either starting with a lower-density

code and progressively building up to meet a specific weight

distribution, or beginning with a code with the desired weight

distribution and alternately subtracting and adding permutation

matrices.

To describe codes belonging to the block-cyclic class we

are considering, we use notation similar to that used in [4]. Specifically, a code consists of L blocks, which due to their

circulant structure can be described by their first column.

Because these column vectors are sparse, they can be described compactly by the location of the ones. The set Cj contains the indices of the ones in the first column of the circulant matrix Cj. If Cj has weight wj, then Cj = {cj,1, cj,2, . . . , cj,wj }.

98
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:00:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

BCH/CRC

LDPC Code 1

10−1

LDPC Code 2

LDPC Code 3

LDPC Code 4

10−2

Error Probability

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

0

2

4

6

8

10

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 4. Performance of optimized LDPC codes in Table I and the original Hamming/CRC scheme. Solid lines are overall packet error rate and dashed lines are undetected error rate.

The column vector can also be described in polynomial

notation as aj = xCj =

x wj cj,i
i=1

[4].

Block definitions of the best codes found for various densi-

ties are listed in Table I, along with their minimum distances

and row weights. Code 1 was found by a search of all possible

weight-3 cyclic constructions. It has no 4-cycles, minimum

distance 6, and has the fewest weight-6 codewords of any

weight-3 code we tested. Codes 3 and 4 are also regular codes,

with column weights of 5 and 7. Code 2 is an irregular code

with a weight distribution of {7, 5, 5, 3, 3}, so the row weight

is 23, compared to 25 for code 3 and 15 for code 1.

The performance of codes 1-4 is shown in Figure 4. Codes 1, 3, and 4 correspond in weight to the three random ensembles of codes in Figure 3. In both plots, there is a clear trade-off between overall error rates and undetected error rates. The optimized codes have improved performance in overall and undetected errors relative to the randomly generated codes, and the performance gap is largest for the weight-3 code and smallest for the weight-7 code. Note that codes with the same minimum distance do not necessarily have the same undetected error rates; the number of codewords with minimum weight is also an important factor. Code 2 is only slightly less dense than code 3, but shows performance that is almost halfway between codes 1 and 3. For a reference, Figure 4 also includes the performance of the combined BCH/CRC error control scheme from Figure 1. Code 4 achieves better undetected error rates even at the worst SNR, and achieves a gain in overall performance of about 1.4 dB. Compared to the original Hamming/CRC scheme in Figure 1, code 3 achieves a similar undetected error rate, with a gain in overall performance of about 3 dB, and code 4 has a substantially reduced undetected error rate with a 2.5 dB overall gain, although the gains come at the cost of a small reduction in rate. It should be noted that some of the coding gain achieved by the LDPC codes

can be attributed to the use of soft-decision inputs to the LDPC decoder, since the Hamming code was decoded with hard decisions. For codes of rate 0.8, the Shannon bounds for soft and hard decision decoding differ by about 1.5 dB [9].
While the LDPC codes considered here are too small to approach the theoretical bounds, it is clear that iterative decoding methods can still offer improvements in both error detection and correction. Using an LDPC code such as code 3 or code 4 in the TWACS system would not only improve overall communication reliability, it would eliminate undetected errors due to absence of a signal, reduce undetected errors at low SNR, and reduce the range of SNR values at which there is a risk of undetected errors.
VI. CONCLUSION
In order to design an LDPC code with low encoding complexity, high rate, and short block size, we have chosen a class of block-cyclic codes with regular row weight and irregular column weight. However, codes with such short block sizes have a relatively low minimum distance, resulting in an unacceptably high probability of undetected error. We have tested various codes with higher weight, and discovered that in general they tend to have better minimum distance properties, which leads to reduced undetected error rates. The downside of this is that under the dimension constraints we have imposed, this inevitably adds short cycles to the Tanner graph of the code, increasing the overall block error probability. The result is a trade-off between overall error rate and undetected error rate. Given this trade-off, codes have been found that have a lower probability of undetected error than the existing error detecting code as well as a gain in overall performance relative to the existing error correcting code.
REFERENCES
[1] S. T. Mak and R. L. Maginnis, “Power frequency communication on long feeders and high levels of harmonic distortion,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1731–1736, October 1995.
[2] S. T. Mak and J. Thomas G. Moore, “TWACS, a new viable twoway automatic communication system for distribution networks. Part II: Inbound communications,” IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, vol. PAS-103, no. 8, pp. 2141–2147, August 1984.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and M. C. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications,” in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models, ser. IMA Volumes in Mathematics and its Applications, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer, 2000, vol. 123, pp. 113–130. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/CodesRegular.html
[4] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “A family of irregular LDPC codes with low encoding complexity,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 79–81, February 2003.
[5] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, June 2004.
[6] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 1449–1454, October 1999.
[7] D. E. Hocevar, “Efficient encoding for a family of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM), vol. 7. IEEE, December 1-5 2003, pp. 3996–4000.
[8] X.-Y. Hu, M. P. C. Fossorier, and E. Eleftheriou, “On the computation of the minimum distance of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Communications, vol. 2. Paris: IEEE, June 20-24 2004, pp. 767–771.
[9] J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, 3rd ed. McGraw Hill, 1995.

99
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:00:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

