IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

549

Transactions Letters________________________________________________________________

On Implementation of Min-Sum Algorithm and Its Modifications for Decoding Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes
Jianguang Zhao, Farhad Zarkeshvari, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—The effects of clipping and quantization on the performance of the min-sum algorithm for the decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes at short and intermediate block lengths are studied. It is shown that in many cases, only four quantization bits suffice to obtain close to ideal performance over a wide range of signal-to-noise ratios. Moreover, we propose modifications to the min-sum algorithm that improve the performance by a few tenths of a decibel with just a small increase in decoding complexity. A quantized version of these modified algorithms is also studied. It is shown that, when optimized, modified quantized min-sum algorithms perform very close to, and in some cases even slightly outperform, the ideal belief-propagation algorithm at observed error rates.
Index Terms—Clipping, iterative decoding algorithms, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, max-product algorithm, max-sum algorithm, min-sum algorithm, modified min-sum algorithms, quantization.
I. INTRODUCTION
F OR THE PAST few years, there has been a great amount of research devoted to the analysis and design of iterative coding schemes, in general, and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [7], in particular. This has been mainly due to the excellent performance/complexity tradeoff that these schemes offer. Iterative decoding algorithms for LDPC codes can be naturally described by “message passing” on the Tanner graph (TG) [11] of the code. Depending on the decoding algorithm and the type of messages, certain computations are performed at the symbol nodes and the check nodes of the TG, and the algorithm is executed by exchanging messages between check nodes and symbol nodes through the edges of the graph, in both directions
Paper approved by M. Fossorier, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received June 25, 2002; revised August 1, 2003; March 28, 2004; and May 25, 2004. This work was supported in part by Zarlink Semiconductor Corp. (formerly Mitel Semiconductor Corp.), and in part by National Capital Institute of Telecommunications (NCIT). This paper was presented in part at IEEE Globecom, Taipei, Taiwan, November 17–21, 2002, and in part at the 21st Biennial Symposium on Communications, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada, June 2–5, 2002.
J. Zhao was with the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre and Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada.
F. Zarkeshvari was with the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre and Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada. He is now with the Department of Electronics, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: farhad@sce.carleton.ca)
A. H. Banihashemi is with the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre and Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.836563

and iteratively. Decoding complexity per iteration is low, due to the sparseness of the TG.
The best performing, yet the most complex, algorithm for decoding LDPC codes is known to be the “belief propagation” (BP) or “sum-product” [7], [11], [12]. In this letter, we focus on another well-known iterative decoding algorithm: “min-sum” (MS) [4], [11], [12]. Other common names for MS are “max-product” and “max-sum,” depending on the type of messages and the corresponding operations performed in symbol and check nodes. As for MS, the messages are log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) (for a description of the MS algorithm, see, e.g., [4]). Although, in general, the error performance of MS is a few tenths of a decibel inferior to that of BP, it is much simpler to implement, and no estimate of noise power is needed for an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. Moreover, in this letter, we show that the implementation of MS is more robust against quantization error, compared with a similar implementation for the BP algorithm.
In the rest of the letter, we discuss the effects of clipping and quantization on the performance of the MS algorithm. We observe that although quantization, in general, degrades the performance, clipping can provide improvement, and that in many cases, the overall effect is such that only four quantization bits results in near or even better than ideal performance over a wide range of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Note that the results of [10] for a rate- code with block length 60 000 shows that at least six bits are required for the implementation of the BP algorithm in the LLR domain. We also propose simple modifications (conditional and unconditional corrections) that can considerably improve the performance of MS with negligible cost in complexity. Interestingly, the quantized version of our modified MS algorithms can perform very close to, and in some cases, even slightly outperform, the ideal BP algorithm. (One should notice that this is theoretically possible on graphs with cycles, as BP is only optimal on cycle-free graphs.) A modification identical to our “unconditional correction” has been independently proposed by Chen and Fossorier in [4] and [5]. In [5], they have also studied quantized MS for regular LDPC codes. We discuss the results of Chen and Fossorier in more detail in the following sections.
II. CLIPPING AND QUANTIZATION
We consider the transmission of information over a binary input AWGN channel using bipolar signaling . The received vector at the output of the channel is processed by an MS decoder, and the decoding stops if the estimated vector is a codeword, or a maximum number of iterations is reached.

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

550

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

To implement the MS algorithm, we consider the received

values to be clipped symmetrically at a threshold , and

then uniformly quantized in the range

. There are

quantization intervals, symmetric with respect to the

origin, and each represented by quantization bits. Integer

numbers

are assigned to the intervals.

Operations are performed on integers, and at bit nodes, an

outgoing message is clipped to

if it exceeds the

threshold.

As we will see in Section IV, clipping can improve the per-

formance of the MS algorithm over a wide range of SNR, and

with optimized , only four quantization bits provides near or

even slightly better than ideal performance. Clipping, however,

introduces an early error floor. The error floor, as well as the

performance in the waterfall region, can be improved consider-

ably by simple modifications to the MS algorithm, as presented

in the next section.

In [5], the effect of quantization on MS was studied by den-

sity evolution as well as simulations on a (3, 6)-regular (8000, Fig. 1. Correction factor f (d) for MS algorithm. 4000) code. It was also observed in [5] that clipping (as part

of quantization) can improve the threshold of the MS algorithm

and be the input messages to with

and

and also can introduce an early error floor at finite block lengths.

. Also, denote the output message by . For

No effort, however, was made in [5] to optimize and study BP, we then have

the variations of optimal with , SNR, and the choice of the

code. In this letter, we show that although optimal is rather

insensitive to and SNR, it varies considerably by the choice

of the code. In [5], due to nonoptimized , one can observe

abnormalities in the reported results for quantized MS applied

(1)

to the (8000, 4000) code, e.g., the BER curve for

outper-

forms the BER curve for

. The clipping thresholds used

for these cases are about

and , respectively. We

have reported simulation results for the same code in Fig. 3(c).

Our results indicate that the optimized for this code, regard-

while for MS,

. The two messages

have the same sign, but a different magnitude [2]. Now, as-

suming

(high SNR regime), in (1) can be

simplified as

less of , is about 1.25 over a wide range of SNR values. Our

optimized results also show a graceful improvement in the per-

formance of quantized MS [for both bit-error rate (BER) and

word-error rate (WER)] by increasing , and no sign of error

floor for

in BER and WER down to

and , re-

spectively. This is while the results reported for

in [5]

(2)

The function

is plotted in Fig. 1. It is al-

ways negative and larger than

for

. Comparing (2)

to , one can see that the term , which is only a func-

tion of the magnitude of the difference between the incoming

show an error floor starting at around

and

for BER messages, is the correction factor that should be added to the

and WER, respectively. Also, our optimized results for

, magnitude of the output message of the check node in the MS

and all outperform ideal MS (with no quantization) in the wa- algorithm to make it almost the same as that of BP.

terfall region. In [5], however, although the BER curve for

The precise implementation of is, however, complex. In

outperforms ideal MS, the one for

performs almost the this letter, we use the following simple stepwise approximation

same as ideal MS. Moreover, for WER, the trend changes, and for the correction factor:

while

still performs more or less the same as ideal MS,

for , quantized MS performs much worse than ideal MS at

higher SNR values. Unlike these results, for our optimized re-

sults given in Fig. 3(c), BER and WER curves follow the same

trends by changing .

if otherwise.
The correction factor is applied to the magnitude of the outgoing MS messages from check nodes based on the following correction step (signs remain the same as those in conventional

MS).

III. MODIFICATIONS TO MS

1) Conditional Correction: For each edge , let denote the set of extrinsic incoming messages. Also, use the no-

For a given code and a given channel model, and a prescribed

tations

and

to denote the message with

error rate, MS usually requires up to a few tenths of a decibel

the smallest magnitude in , and the outgoing mes-

more transmitted power than BP. Inspection of the MS and BP

sage along , respectively. Based on the MS algorithm,

algorithms in the LLR domain reveals that the two algorithms

we have

. The correction starts by re-

perform the exact same operation in bit nodes (addition), and the

moving

from , and performing the following

difference is only in the operations performed in check nodes.

step iteratively until the set is empty. Randomly se-

Suppose that we have a check node with degree 3, and let

lect a message from , and update

with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

551

, if

, for some predetermined positive and nonnegative

real numbers and , respectively. Otherwise, leave

unchanged. Remove from .

It is easy to see that in the above correction process, if

, then the order in which the incoming messages

from the set

are processed does not affect

the final value of

. In fact, in this case, the correc-

tion factor is applied at most once for each outgoing

message. Parameters and are optimized through

simulation. A modification of the conditional correction

in 1) is to apply the correction factor only once

if there exists a message in

such that

. We distinguish the two

conditional corrections by labels A and B, where A refers

to the one described in 1). While correction B is simpler

to implement than A, our simulation results show that

both corrections, when optimized, perform more or less

the same. The following yet simpler correction is a spe-

cial case of conditional correction B when

(as-

suming that all check nodes have degree at least three).

2) Unconditional correction: For each edge , the

magnitude of the outgoing message is

, for some predetermined positive

real number .

Based on our simulations, for coarse quantization (four bits

and less), conditional correction has a clear advantage over the

unconditional one. For a larger number of quantization bits,

however, the two algorithms, when optimized, perform very

closely. This makes the unconditional correction a more attrac-

tive choice due to its lower complexity.

There has been some recent work to partially close the per-

formance gap between MS and BP [1]–[6], [8]. In [1], [3], [6],

and [8], the authors apply a corrective term to the output of

check nodes in the MS algorithm, which is an approximation

of

in (1). In [1]

and [6], the approximation is a constant which is nonzero

over a region specified by not only the difference, but also the

sum, of and , while in [3] and [8], lookup tables and

piecewise linear approximations are also used. The approach

of [2] is to normalize the output of check nodes, while in [4]

and [5], an algorithm identical to our unconditional correction,

called “offset BP-based,”1 has been independently proposed. In

[4], the performance of offset MS for regular LDPC codes was

analyzed using density evolution, and optimal correction param-

eters for some ensembles of rate- LDPC codes, including

(3, 6)-regular codes, were obtained. The optimal correction pa-

rameter for (3, 6) codes was then used in the simulation of the

(3, 6)-regular (8000, 4000) code, and results as close as about

0.05 dB to BP were reported. The application of density evo-

lution to the quantized version of offset MS for regular LDPC

codes was then presented in [5]. Numerical results for threshold

values of these algorithms for different values of quantization

steps , different numbers of quantization bits , and dif-

ferent offset values ,2 were also given in [5]. These results

are for two rate- ensembles of (3, 6) and (4, 8) codes and no

1The “BP-based” algorithm is the same as MS. We use them in the rest of the letter interchangeably.
2Parameter , used in [5], is the same as y in our unconditional correction
algorithm, presented in 2).

Fig. 2. BER curves for code I (—), II (- -) and III (- 1 -) decoded by ideal MS (), clipped MS (no character), and ideal BP ().

explicit effort in optimizing the clipping threshold was made.

The values of and were, however, chosen in such a way

that they can generate offsets equal to the optimal offset value

in the continuous case. Simulation results for quantized offset

MS (

, and

) applied to the (3, 6)-reg-

ular (8000, 4000) code were also given in [5], and performance

results that are about 0.1 dB away from BP were reported. This

example, which has close-to-optimal parameters, is the only ex-

ample provided in [5] on the application of quantized offset MS

to finite-length codes.

In this letter, we not only study MS with unconditional cor-

rection in more detail, but also introduce MS with conditional

correction. For modified MS algorithms, and by extensive sim-

ulations on three short and intermediate-length LDPC codes,

we obtain optimal clipping thresholds and correction parame-

ters, and make the following observations: 1) MS with condi-

tional correction outperforms MS with unconditional correction

for coarse quantization (four bits or less); 2) optimal clipping

threshold for modified MS algorithms, that is mainly a func-

tion of the code and is rather insensitive to and SNR, is dif-

ferent than that for the standard MS algorithm (for example, for

the (8000, 4000) code, optimal changes from 1.25 to 2.5);

3) the early error floor caused by clipping in standard MS can

be much improved using modified MS algorithms; and 4) for

shorter codes, modified MS algorithms can outperform the BP

algorithm. None of these observations was made in [5]. In par-

ticular, phenomena 3) and 4) are specific to finite-length codes

and do not appear in the asymptotic density evolution analysis

used in [4] and [5].

IV. SIMULATIONS AND DISCUSSIONS

For simulations, we consider three codes, one irregular and

two regular. The irregular code, constructed in [9], has parame-

ters

, with and being the block length

and the dimension of the code, respectively. The regular codes,

taken from [13], have parameters (273, 191) and (8000, 4000).

For future reference, these codes are labeled as I [(1268, 456)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

552

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

Fig. 3. (a)–(c) BER (—) and WER (- - -) curves of ideal and quantized MS for codes I, II, and III, respectively. (d) Effect of clipping threshold c on error performance of quantized MS for code I at E =N = 2 dB.

code], II [(273, 191) code], and III [(8000, 4000) code]. For all error floor at higher values of SNR, as can be seen for codes I

simulation results in this paper, the maximum number of iter- and II in Fig. 2.3

ations is chosen to be 200. Also, for each SNR, enough code To investigate the effect of quantization, BER and WER

words are simulated to result in 100 codeword errors. More- curves for the three codes resulting from quantized MS

over, when the error performances of different algorithms are with different number of quantization bits ( ) are plotted in

compared, the corresponding decoders are set to operate in par- Fig. 3(a)–(c). The error-rate curves for ideal MS are also given

allel on the same set of received vectors.

as reference. For each code, the clipping threshold is fixed and

To study the effect of clipping, the BER for the three codes is chosen to be 2, 1.5, and 1.25, for codes I, II, and III, respec-

versus

under ideal (no clipping or quantization) and tively. It is observed that the optimum clipping threshold is

clipped (no quantization) MS are given in Fig. 2 ( and

almost the same for different values of , and over a wide range

are the average energy per information bit and the power spectral of SNR values. For code I, the effect of on BER for different

density of AWGN, respectively). Results for the BP algorithm number of quantization bits at

dB is shown in

are also given as reference. For each code, the optimum clipping Fig. 3(d). It can be seen that optimal is approximately equal

threshold (resulting in the smallest BER) appears to be almost a to 2, regardless of . Fig. 3(a)–(c) show that by using

,

constant over a wide range of SNR. This is equal to

, one can obtain near or better than ideal performance over a

and for codes I, II, and III, respectively. As can be seen in wide range of SNR values. In fact, since our simulation results

Fig. 2, clipping closes part of the performance gap between MS and BP. This is due to upper bounding the overconfident reliabilities at the output of check nodes, which is expected to improve the performance of MS. Clipping, however, results in an early

3It has been shown in [14] that for higher values of SNR, the optimal clipping threshold increases with SNR. Selecting a variable clipping threshold improves the error floor of the algorithm, compared with what is reported in this letter. The same thing applies to the quantized version of MS and modified MS algorithms.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

553

Fig. 4. BER curves of MS, BP, and modified MS algorithms for codes I (a), II (b), and III (c).

for five and six bits are almost identical, one would expect that is rather constant over a wide range of

values. It is almost

for the number of bits larger than six, the results practically equal to 3, 2, and 2.5 for codes I, II, and III, respectively. The

coincide with those for six bits in the observed range of SNRs. optimal values of and are also rather insensitive to

.

In [14], it is shown that, in general, the optimal increases The results for modified clipped MS in the waterfall region are

with SNR. This improves the error-floor performance under very close to those of modified ideal MS. The former, however,

quantized MS. For example, the results of [14] indicate that still suffers from an earlier error floor, compared with the latter.

for code I, by increasing the threshold to its optimal values This error floor, though, is lower than the original error floor

at higher

, the error floors reported in Fig. 3(a) are for clipped MS [14]. The reason for this is the increase in the

improved by about an order of magnitude.

optimal clipping threshold for modified algorithms.

The effects of conditional and unconditional corrections on For the quantized version of modified MS algorithms, it ap-

ideal, clipped, and quantized MS for the three codes are studied pears that the optimal for each code is almost constant over

with extensive simulation. For ideal MS, optimal values of a wide range of

and for different number of quantization

and for conditional correction, and the optimal value of bits, and is more or less the same as that of modified clipped MS

for unconditional correction, are rather insensitive to

, algorithms, i.e., 3, 2, and 2.5, for codes I, II, and III, respectively.

and are mainly functions of the code. The modified algorithms For a given number of bits and , the optimal values of and

considerably outperform MS and perform very close to, or in do not depend much on

. Fig. 4 shows the BER curves

some cases even slightly outperform, BP. An example of this can of modified quantized MS algorithms with the best and pa-

be seen in Fig. 4(a) for code I, when unconditional correction rameters. For , we have reported the BER curves for condi-

with

outperforms BP by about 0.2 dB at BER

. tional A and unconditional corrections. Results of ideal MS and

For clipped MS, our simulations show that the best clipping BP are also given as reference. For code II, Fig. 4(b) is zoomed

threshold for all modified MS algorithms is almost the same, and into the high-SNR region of the curves. The results for four bits

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

554

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

are not shown in this case, as they are more or less the same as

those of standard MS in Fig. 3(b). Fig. 4(a) and (c) show that

for four bits, conditional correction considerably outperforms

unconditional correction. It can also be seen in Fig. 4(a)–(c)

that modified quantized MS algorithms perform close to ideal

BP and even slightly outperform BP at higher

values

for codes I and II. This is a significant improvement, compared

with the quantized version of the conventional MS algorithm,

particularly for codes I and III. As a final note, by comparing

Fig. 3(a)–(c) with Fig. 4(a)–(c), one can see that although for

the MS algorithm, four-bit quantization may be sufficient, this

may not be the case for modified MS algorithms. In particular,

Fig. 4(a) shows a considerable improvement in the error perfor-

mance for code I, when is increased from 4 to 5. Similarly

for code III, the increase from four to five bits results in about

0.2 dB gain in SNR.

V. CONCLUSION
The effects of clipping and quantization on the MS algorithm are investigated. It is shown by simulating three LDPC codes that with the optimum clipping threshold, a four-bit uniform quantizer and four-bit messages provide near (sometimes even better than) ideal performance over a wide range of SNR values. We also propose modifications to the MS algorithm that can improve the performance significantly with a minor increase in complexity. At observed error rates, modified MS algorithms, even the quantized versions, perform very close to, or sometimes even outperform, BP with much less complexity. Our results indicate that at a given SNR, proper attention should be given to the choices of the clipping threshold and the required precision for obtaining the best performance/complexity tradeoff. These choices depend on the code and are related to the selected version of MS algorithm.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the Editor and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Anastasopoulos, “A comparison between the sum-product and the

min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” in

Proc. IEEE Globecom, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 1021–1025.

[2] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near-optimum universal belief-propaga-

tion-based decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans.

Commun., vol. 50, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.

[3] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Near-

optimal reduced-complexity decoding algorithms for LDPC codes,” in

Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun.

30–Jul. 5, 2002, p. 455.

[4] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based

decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, pp.

208–210, May 2002.

[5]

, “Density evolution for BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC

codes and their quantized versions,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, Nov.

2002, pp. 1378–1382.

[6] E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and A. Dholakia, “Reduced-complexity

decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” IEE Electron.

Lett., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 102–104, Jan. 2001.

[7] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[8] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D.-M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient im-

plementation of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,”

in Proc. IEEE Globecom, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 1036–1036E.

[9] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-den-

sity parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.

Communications, vol. 1, 2001, pp. 41–44.

[10] L. Ping and W. K. Leung, “Decoding low-density parity-check codes

with finite quantization bits,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 4, pp. 62–64,

Feb. 2000.

[11] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.

[12] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Dept. Elec. Eng., Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.

[13] [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/

codes/data.html#s14

[14] J. Zhao, “Effects of clipping and quantization on min-sum algorithm and

its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check codes,” M.Sc.

thesis, Dept. Syst. Comput. Eng., Carleton Univ., Ottawa, ON, Canada,

2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

