766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

Block-LDPC: A Practical LDPC Coding System Design Approach
Hao Zhong, Student Member, IEEE, and Tong Zhang, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a joint low-density parity-check (LDPC) code-encoder-decoder design approach, called BlockLDPC, for practical LDPC coding system implementations. The key idea is to construct LDPC codes subject to certain hardware-oriented constraints that ensure the effective encoder and decoder hardware implementations. We develop a set of hardware-oriented constraints, subject to which a semi-random approach is used to construct Block-LDPC codes with good error-correcting performance. Correspondingly, we develop an efficient encoding strategy and a pipelined partially parallel Block-LDPC encoder architecture, and a partially parallel Block-LDPC decoder architecture. We present the estimation of Block-LDPC coding system implementation key metrics including the throughput and hardware complexity for both encoder and decoder. The good error-correcting performance of Block-LDPC codes has been demonstrated through computer simulations. With the effective encoder/decoder design and good error-correcting performance, Block-LDPC provides a promising vehicle for real-life LDPC coding system implementations.
Index Terms—Decoder, encoder, low-density parity check (LDPC), very large-scale integration (VLSI) architecture.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes have recently attracted tremendous research interest because of their excellent error-correcting performance and highly parallel decoding scheme. LDPC codes have been lately selected by the digital video broadcasting (DVB) standard and are being seriously considered in various real-life applications such as magnetic storage, 10 Gb Ethernet, and high-throughput wireless local area network (LAN). Invented by Gallager [1] in 1962, LDPC codes have been largely neglected by the scientific community for several decades until the remarkable success of Turbo codes that invoked the re-discovery of LDPC codes, pioneered by MacKay and Neal [2] and Wiberg [3]. The past few years experienced significant improvement in LDPC code construction and performance analysis. For the practical LDPC coding system implementations, it has been well recognized that the conventional code-to-encoder/decoder design approach, i.e., first construct the code and then develop the encoder/decoder hardware implementations, is not appropriate and we must jointly consider the code construction and encoder/decoder hardware implementation. This is referred to as
Manuscript received March 29, 2004; revised July 12, 2004. This work was supported in part by SRC under Contract 2004-HJ-1192. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor Z. Wang.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (e-mail: zhonga@rpi.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2005.844113

Fig. 1. Message-passing decoding based on LDPC code bipartite graph.
joint LDPC coding system design. Following the theme of joint design, we developed a design solution, called Block-LDPC, for practical LDPC coding system implementations.
An LDPC code is defined as the null space of an sparse parity check matrix. It can be represented by a bipartite graph, between check (or constraint) nodes in one set and
variable (or message) nodes in the other set. An LDPC code can be decoded by the message-passing decoding algorithm [4], [5] that directly matches the code bipartite graph as illustrated in Fig. 1: After variable nodes are initialized with the channel messages, the decoding messages are iteratively computed by all the variable nodes and check nodes and exchanged through the edges between the neighboring nodes.
In the context of LDPC decoder hardware implementation, the challenge is how to realize the parallel message passing. There are two decoder implementation styles: 1) fully parallel decoder that realizes fully parallel message passing by directly instantiating the entire code bipartite graph into the hardware, and 2) partially parallel decoder that realizes partially parallel message passing by mapping a certain number of variable nodes or check nodes to a single hardware unit in time-division multiplexed mode. Fully parallel decoder can achieve very high decoding throughput, e.g., a 1 Gbps decoder for 1024-bit, rate 1/2 LDPC code has been physically demonstrated [6]. However, due to the typically large code length (at least few thousand bits) and widespread code bipartite graph connectivity, fully parallel decoder suffers from prohibitive implementation complexity, especially the routing overhead with a large number of global routing wires. This restricts the applications of fully parallel decoder to a very limited extent.
Aiming to achieve appropriate tradeoff between implementation complexity and decoding throughput, partially parallel decoder is of practical interest to most real-life applications and becomes the target of most prior work on LDPC decoder hardware design. In this context, how to realize message passing is more challenging because the fully parallel bipartite graph

1057-7122/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHONG AND ZHANG: BLOCK-LDPC

767

connectivity has to be realized part-by-part in cooperation

among a small-size interconnection network, a reduced number

of decoding hardware units, and a decoding message storage

fabric. It has been well recognized that the code construction

and partially parallel decoder hardware design must be consid-

ered jointly to facilitate the partially parallel LDPC decoder

implementation, which is the basic principle underlying all the

recent work on LDPC decoder design. Interestingly but not

surprisingly, nearly all the recently proposed LDPC decoder

design schemes [7]–[13] employ the essentially same joint

design approach: The LDPC code parity check matrix is a block

structured matrix that can be partitioned into an array of square

block matrices, where each block matrix is either a zero matrix

or a permuted identity matrix, even though the specific decoder Fig. 2. Joint code-encoder-decoder design methodology. architectures may largely differ among different proposed

design solutions.
In the context of LDPC encoder design, the straightforward method is to multiply the information bits with the dense generator matrix derived from the sparse parity check matrix. The denseness of the generator matrix and typically large code length make this straightforward method impractical due to very high implementation complexity. Richardson and Urbanke [14] demonstrated that, if the parity check matrix is approximate lower (or upper) triangular, the encoding complexity can be largely reduced by performing the encoding directly based on the sparse parity check matrix. Most recently proposed low-complexity encoder hardware design schemes [15]–[17] essentially follow this idea.
The above summarized state-of-the-art LDPC encoder/decoder design practice shows that the essence of joint design is to apply certain implementation-oriented constraints on LDPC code construction to facilitate the LDPC encoder/decoder hardware implementations. A complete joint design solution should successfully address the following three interleaved questions.

The contribution of this paper is to provide a complete joint code-encoder-decoder design approach, called Block-LDPC, to address the above weaknesses. The Block-LDPC consists of three integral parts: 1) a semi-random implementation-oriented code construction approach; 2) a low-complexity encoding process and pipelined partially parallel encoder hardware architecture; 3) a partially parallel decoder hardware architecture. The entire joint design methodology can be visualized as Fig. 2, where the appropriate LDPC code construction plays the essential role by determining both the error-correcting performance and feasibility/efficiency of the encoder/decoder hardware implementations.
Block-LDPC code is constructed subject to two types of constraints that ensure the effective encoder and decoder hardware implementations, respectively, and leave enough space for code error-correcting performance optimization. Our computer simulations show that Block-LDPC codes can achieve good error-correcting performance with little degradation compared with the codes constructed without any implementation-ori-

1) What constraints should be used in LDPC code construction to facilitate the hardware implementation?
2) How to preserve the good error-correcting performance under those code construction constraints?
3) What are the appropriate encoder and decoder architectures?
The state-of-the-art LDPC coding system design solutions in the open literature mainly have two weaknesses: 1) most prior work addressed the above questions only in terms of decoder design and left encoder design unconsidered, and 2) most prior work did not address how to further optimize the code error-correcting performance under the corresponding imple-

ented constraints. We develop a low-complexity pipelined partially parallel Block-LDPC encoder architecture that can realize high encoding throughput with rather low implementation complexity. The partially parallel decoder architecture is relatively straightforward from the Block-LDPC code construction and the decoder architecture presented in this paper basically follows the one we presented in [11].
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the Block-LDPC code construction. In Section III, we present the efficient encoding strategy and its corresponding encoder architecture. Section IV addresses the Block-LDPC decoder design. Conclusions are drawn in Section V.

mentation-oriented constraints. The authors of [8], [16], [17] considered both encoder and decoder design for regular LDPC codes that are typically worse than irregular ones in terms of error-correcting performance. Hocevar [10], [15] developed encoder/decoder design solution for irregular LDPC codes, but the specific code construction largely relies on hand-craft code template in lack of systematic construction approach. Moreover, the

II. BLOCK-LDPC CODE CONSTRUCTION
A Block-LDPC code is constructed subject to two types of constraints, referred to as implementation-oriented constraints and performance-oriented constraints that ensure the efficient encoder/decoder hardware implementations and good error-correcting performance, respectively.

encoder design [15] process involves an off-line Gaussian elimination that will increase the denseness of the matrix based on A. Implementation-Oriented Constraints

which the encoding is performed, leading to higher encoding The implementation-oriented code construction constraints

computational complexity.

consist of a decoder-oriented constraint and an encoder-ori-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

H Fig. 3. Parity check matrix subject to implementation-oriented constraints.

application dependent. LDPC codes with carefully designed irregular node degree distributions typically outperform regular ones;1 3) Not too many small cycles: Too many small cycles in the code bipartite graph will seriously degrade the effectiveness of the message-passing decoding algorithm, which will result in worse error-correcting performance. 4) Widespread bipartite graph connectivity: Any subset of the nodes in the LDPC code bipartite graph should have a large number of neighbors so that the messages generated by each node can distribute more quickly throughout the graph to improve the decoding performance.

The performance-oriented constraints in Block-LDPC code

ented constraint that demand the code parity check matrix

should have the structure as shown in Fig. 3.

Decoder-oriented constraint forces the code parity check

matrix to be block structured with circular block matrices, i.e.,

the entire parity check matrix can be partitioned into an array

of

block matrices, each one denoted as . Each block

matrix is either a zero matrix or a right cyclic shift of an

identity matrix. The value of is an important parameter de-

termining the decoding parallelism. Such block-structured con-

straint is the key in the development of several different partially

parallel decoder architectures [7]–[12] with different tradeoffs

among decoding throughput, hardware complexity, and code

structure re-configurability. As we will see in Section IV, the

decoder architecture presented in this paper is more suitable for

the applications demanding very high decoding throughput with

minimal requirement on code structure re-configurability.

Encoder-oriented constraint forces the code parity check

matrix to be lower macro-block triangular as shown in the

shaded region of Fig. 3. The identity matrices

are called macro-block identity matrices. The size of each is

a multiple of and decreases as the index increases from 1 to

. The value of is also a multiple of (

as shown in

Fig. 3). Let denote the

square matrix

containing

, and denote the submatrix of

that contains , as illustrated in Fig. 3. Moreover, the maximum

column weight of each submatrix is 1. The encoder-oriented

constraint ensures a low-complexity pipelined partially parallel

encoder that only performs a few sparse matrix-vector multipli-

cations and one small dense matrix-vector multiplication. The

detailed encoding process and encoder architecture design will

be discussed in Section III.

construction directly originate from the above last three rules of thumb (note that the code length is typically determined by the specific applications). The appropriate node degree distributions are obtained by a well-known standard design technique, i.e, density evolution [19]. To avoid too many small cycles, we explicitly set a constraint on the girth2 of the code bipartite graph during the code construction in a similar way as the bit-filling approach [20].
Moreover, we note that the variable nodes with higher degree tend to converge more quickly than those with lower degree during the message-passing iterative decoding. This suggests that, with finite number of decoding iterations, not all the small cycles in the code bipartite graph are equally harmful, i.e., those small cycles passing low-degree variable nodes degrade the performance more seriously than the others. Thus, it is intuitive that we should put more effort to prevent small cycles from passing low-degree variable nodes. To this end, we introduce a concept, the degree of a cycle, which is similar to the concept of ACE proposed in [18].
Definition 2.1: We define the degree of a cycle to be the sum of degrees of all variable nodes found along the path of a cycle.
It is intuitive that the error-correcting performance can be improved if we make the degree of the unavoidable small cycles as large as possible, which has been verified through our computer simulations.
The widespread graph connectivity is not explicitly used as a code construction constraint, but we implicitly ensure the widespread graph connectivity by incorporating randomness in the overall code construction that can guarantee the widespread connectivity almost for sure. Hence, based on the above discussion, we explicitly use the following three performance-oriented constraints in the code construction to

B. Performance-Oriented Constraints

ensure the good error-correcting performance. 1) Node degree distribution constraint: The code construc-

To achieve good error-correcting performance, LDPC codes should have the following properties.
1) ) Large code length: The performance improves as the code length increases, and the code length cannot be too small (typically at least few thousand bits).

tion must comply with the desired node degree distribution. 2) Girth constraint: The code bipartite graph does not contain too many small cycles and is free of 4-cycle if possible.

2) Carefully designed node degree distribution: The node degree distribution, particularly variable node degree distribution, heavily affects the error-correcting performance. Design of appropriate node degree distribution is largely

1We note that some recent results suggest that irregular codes may be more seriously subject to error floor and how to deal with this issue has been discussed in [18].
2The girth is defined as the minimum cycle length in a graph.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHONG AND ZHANG: BLOCK-LDPC

769

3) Degree of cycle constraint: It prevents the variable nodes with lower degree from passing small cycles to further preserve the effectiveness and fast convergence of the message-passing iterative decoding algorithm.
We note that, in practice, the typical values of small cycle length are 4 and 6, and the typical degree of low-degree variable nodes is 2.

TABLE I PARAMETERS OF EXAMPLE CODES

C. Block-LDPC Code Construction

subject to the hardware-oriented constraints and per-

The overall Block-LDPC code construction process consists

of three steps: 1) determine the code parity check matrix pa-

rameters; 2) construct a group of code parity check matrices; 3)

select one code from the code group for real application.

Step 1) We first determine the parameters of the code parity

check matrix, including the size of code parity check

matrix, the value of (the size of each block ma-

trix), node degree distribution, the value of (or ),

the value of (the number of macro-block identity

matrices s), and the size of each . The size of

the parity check matrix should be determined by

the desired code length and code rate of the specific

application, only subject to the constraint of being

multiples of , i.e.,

. The value of is de-

termined by the desired encoder/decoder throughput

(as we will see in Sections III and IV, the encoder/de-

coder throughput directly depends on ). The node

degree distribution is obtained by the density evo-

lution. Strictly speaking, the selection of involves

the tradeoff between encoding complexity reduction

and code performance optimization space, i.e., the

smaller the value of , the less encoding complexity

but the smaller space left for code performance op-

timization. Nevertheless, our computer simulations

show that even the minimum value, i.e., , seems

to be enough for constructing Block-LDPC codes

formance-oriented constraints. RBFS starts from a

nearly zero block structured

matrix in

which the only nonzero portion is the macro-block

identity matrices

in the shaded region as

illustrated in Fig. 3. RBFS proceeds by flipping a zero

block matrix once a time in the ungrayed region to a

right cyclic shift of an identity matrix while keeping

the gray region untouched. The position of each

flipped zero block matrix and the cyclic shift value

are chosen randomly subject to the constraints on the

degree of a cycle and girth. The number of flipped

zero block matrices on each block column and block

row is determined by the node degree distribution.

The constraints on degree of a cycle and girth are

initialized as reasonably large numbers such as 12

and 10. During the code construction process, the

constraint on degree of a cycle or girth is relaxed (re-

duced) if the RBFS can not proceed with the current

value after trying certain number of random choices.

Repeating the RBFS process with different random

number seeds, we can obtain a group of Block-LDPC

codes.

Step 3) From the codes obtained in Step 2), we select the code

for real application based on a metric called cycle ef-

fect metric, which is also known as loopiness [21].

The cycle effect is defined as:

with good error-correcting performance. Hence we

suggest to simply set

in practice, which means

the right-most block column3 always has the weight

of 2. As we will see in Section III, the value of affects
the tradeoff between encoder throughput and code performance optimization space, i.e., small value of
will lead to high encoder throughput but leave less space for code performance optimization. Our computer simulations show that 4 6 should be the appro-

where is the number of cycles with the length of

and

is a value chosen for the sum to converge.

The code with smaller value of cycle effect tends

to have less small cycles and better error-correcting

performance. Thus, we simply pick the code leading

to the minimum value of .

priate range for . The size of each should decrease D. Code Examples

as the index increases from 1 to in order to leave more code performance optimization space. Our experience is to consecutively scale down the size by 2 with the increase of . Step 2) We apply a random block flipping/shifting (RBFS) method to construct a group of LDPC code parity check matrices. The basic principle of RBFS is to randomly construct the code parity check matrix block-by-block (the size of each block matrix is )

To demonstrate the error-correcting performance, we con-

structed two rate-1/2 and two rate-7/8 Block-LDPC codes. The

specific code parameters are given in Table I. The sizes of the

macro-block identity matrices

scale down

approximately by factor of 2 as the index increases from 1 to

5. The two codes with the rate of 1/2 have the node degree dis-

tribution as follows: a) check nodes: degree of 6 69%, degree

of 7 31%; b) variable nodes: degree of 2 27%, degree of 3

45%, degree of 4 14%, degree of 5 14%. The two codes

3We use block column and block row to represent each successive p columns with the rate of 7/8 have the node degree distribution as follows:

and rows in the block structured parity check matrix.

a) check nodes: degree of 24 100%; b) variable nodes: degree

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

and mainly involves a few sparse matrix-vector multiplications and a small dense matrix-vector multiplication, hence the overall computational complexity is not significant, and 2) encoding carries out in a partially parallel fashion via hardware resource sharing for further complexity reduction. In the following, we first describe the encoding process, then present a hardware architecture design for the sparse matrix-vector multiplication involved in the encoding, finally show the overall encoder architecture and the estimated implementation metrics.
A. Encoding Process
Following the idea of encoding based on approximate lower (or upper) triangular parity check matrix, Block-LDPC encoding process has the same data flow as the algorithm described in [14]. According to Fig. 3, we can write the Block-LDPC code parity check matrix4 as

(1)

where is

, is

,

the lower triangular matrix is

,

is

, is

, and is

.

Let

be a codeword decomposed according to (1), i.e,

is the information bit vector with the length of

,

redundant parity check bit vectors and have the length of

and

, respectively. The encoding process performs

the computation of the vectors and as follows [14]:

Fig. 4. BER versus SNR simulation results.

of 2 26%, degree of 3 55%, degree of 4 12%, degree

of 5 7%.

We simulate the code error-correcting performance with

the assumption that each code is modulated by BPSK and

transmitted over additive whit Gaussian noise (AWGN)

channel. Fig. 4 shows the simulated bit error rate (BER) versus

signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). For the purpose of comparison, we

also constructed four LDPC codes without any implementa-

tion-oriented code construction constraints, i.e., setting

and

(eliminating the lower triangular part) and then

using the same code construction process as described above.

As shown in Fig. 4, the performance degradation incurred by

the implementation-oriented constraints is not significant.

where

. In the entire encoding process,

the multiplications with and may lead to significant

computational complexity overhead since they are most likely

dense matrices. To reduce the computational complexity of the

multiplication with , which is linearly proportional to ,

we mainly rely on the minimization of in the code construction

(note that is a multiple of the block size , i.e.,

). As

we pointed out in Section II-C, our simulations show that

(or

), is typically enough for constructing Block-LDPC

codes with good error-correcting performance. Hence, we can

fix

( is typically a small number such as 16 and 32)

to minimize the computational complexity of the multiplication

with .

To reduce the computational complexity of the multiplication

with , we replace the direct multiplication with a -stage

back substitution. Recall that the lower triangular matrix con-

tains macro-block identity matrices along the diagonal as il-

lustrated in Fig. 3 and can be written as

III. BLOCK-LDPC ENCODER DESIGN
Exploiting the structural properties of the Block-LDPC code parity check matrix, we developed a low-complexity pipelined

...

... . . . ...

(2)

partially parallel encoder hardware architecture. As we will show later, the low complexity comes from two aspects: 1) the encoding is performed based on the sparse parity check matrix

m p 4We assume that the parity check matrix is full rank, i.e., the 1 rows are
linearly independent. In our simulations, all the matrices constructed are full rank.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHONG AND ZHANG: BLOCK-LDPC

771

where

are the macro-block identity matrices; typically small, e.g., 16 and 32, the overall matrix-vector mul-

each is a block structured matrix composed of an array tiplication can still achieve high speed. Clearly, because of the

of

zero and right cyclic shifted identity matrices; inter-vector-serial operation, the computations of all the bits

represents zero matrix. Given the matrix and input vector in the same subvector can share the same hardware resource

, instead of directly computing the output in a time-division multiplexed mode for implementation com-

vector as

plexity reduction.

To compute

bit by bit consecu-

tively, we only need to retrieve each involved subvector bit

...

...

...

. . . ...

...

(3) by bit consecutively. Hence, it can be easily conceived that, in the hardware implementation, we can store each subvector

in an individual register file and use a binary counter to gen-

where and

are -bit subvectors, we can

solve each consecutively by using -stage back substitution

as

erate the access address, where the binary counter is initialized to the value of . However, since each may participate in the computations of more than one ’s and the corresponding
’s have different values, in order to support the parallel com-

(4)

putation of all ’s, we have to use either multiport register file or several single-port register file blocks for the storage of each

Hence, the multiplication with

is replaced by a series

of sparse matrix-vector multiplications and vector additions,

leading to significant reduction of the computational com-

plexity.

, both of which will increase the implementation complexity. In the following, we will present a method to further trade the speed for the storage complexity reduction and present the corresponding matrix-vector multiplication hardware architecture.
1) Storage Complexity Reduction via Task Scheduling: With

B. Block Structured Matrix-Vector Multiplication
From the above discussion, we know that the overall encoding process mainly consists of a certain number of sparse matrixvector multiplications and one small dense matrix-vector multiplication. The complexity and speed metrics of the encoder is largely determined by how to implement these sparse matrix-vector multiplications. We note that each sparse matrix involved in the multiplication is block structured and the corresponding matrix-vector multiplications can be written as

the goal of reducing implementation complexity, we store each input subvector only in one -bit single-port register file associated with one binary counter for address generation. Hence, each input subvector at most can participate in the computation of one output subvector at once. Nevertheless, since the weight of each block column in the block structured matrix might be larger than one, each input subvector may participate in the computation of more than one output subvectors. Therefore, instead of computing all the output subvectors in fully parallel, we have to schedule the computations in a partially parallel fashion

to ensure each input subvector at once participate in the compu-

...

...

tations of at most one output subvector, which can be interpreted

...

...

...

(5) as the following task scheduling problem.

Task Scheduling Problem: Schedule the computations of

where each

block matrix is either a zero matrix or a

right cyclic shift of an identity matrix, and each and are

subvectors.

We can leverage the circular structure of all the nonzero block

matrices to develop efficient matrix-vector multiplication hard-

ware architecture. Define a set

.

Since each nonzero is a right cyclic shift of an identity

matrix, we have

, where is the

right cyclic shift value of and

represents cyclic

shifting up the subvector by positions. Thus, the matrix-

vector multiplication reduces to a set of vector XORs (modulo

2 summations)

. Al-

though the direct parallel implementation of theses vector XORs

can easily achieve extremely high speed, such high speed is not

necessary for most applications, and appropriate tradeoff be-

tween implementation complexity and speed in encoder design

is desirable.

Such a tradeoff can be realized by using an inter-vector-par-

all the output subvectors into time slots subject to two constraints. 1) If the computations of two output subvectors need the same input subvector, then we must compute these two output subvectors in different time slots. 2) The value of should be minimized in order to maximize the speed.
To solve the above scheduling problem, we first represent the block structured matrix with a graph as follows: (1) represent each block row as a node in the graph, and (2) if two block rows have nonzero block matrices in the same block column position, then connect the two corresponding nodes with an edge. Clearly, two nodes connected with an edge in the graph indicate that the computations of the two output subvectors corresponding to the two block rows share the same input subvector, and hence cannot be performed in the same time slot. If we use different color to represent different time slot, the above task scheduling problem can be directly transformed into the following classic graph coloring problem.

allel/intra-vector-serial computational style: compute all the

Coloring Problem: Color the nodes in the graph with

subvectors

in parallel, but only 1 out of the bits

the minimum number of colors such that adjacent nodes

in each subvector is computed at once. Since the value of is

have different colors.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

Fig. 5. Block structured matrix-vector multiplication example.

Fig. 6. Graph with the solution to the coloring problem.

There are many well established algorithms that can effec-

tively solve the above coloring problem. Interested readers are Fig. 7. Hardware architecture for block structured sparse matrix-vector referred to [22]. Given the solution to this coloring problem, we multiplication.

simply schedule the computations of the output subvectors cor-

responding to the block rows with the same color in the same

time slot. In this way, the implementation complexity can be re-

duced by storing each input subvector in one -bit single-port

register file.

Example 3.1: Let us consider the multiplication between the

block structured matrix and vector as illustrated in Fig. 5,

where all the fifteen nonzero block matrices,

,

are right cyclic shift of an identity matrix. The block structured

matrix is represented by a graph for which three different

colors are enough to solve the coloring problem, as illustrated

in Fig. 6. Thus, we compute the five output subvectors in three

time slots: in the first time slot, we compute and bit by bit,

which involves five input subvectors

. Similarly,

we compute

and in the second and third time slot,

respectively.

2) Matrix–Vector Multiplication Hardware Architec-

ture: Fig. 7 shows the proposed hardware architecture to

hardwired interconnection network to the input of the XOR tree if participates in the computation of .
Suppose the size of each block matrix is and different colors are used in the task scheduling, we arrange all the output subvectors into groups, and the subvectors in the same group are computed bit-by-bit in the same clock cycles. The entire matrix-vector multiplication requires clock cycles. At the beginning of each clock cycles, we have the following.

• If subvector participates in the computation of sub-

vector in the following clock cycles, the binary

counter

is initialized to the cyclic shift value ;

• If subvector does not participate in any computation in

the following clock cycles, the register file will be

disabled;

• The binary counter WAG is always initialized to 0;

• The register file will be disabled if subvector is not

computed in the following clock cycles.

implement the sparse block structured matrix-vector multiplication in the partially parallel style as described in the above. C. Overall Encoder Structure

Each input subvector and output subvector are stored Fig. 8 shows the structure of the pipelined partially parallel

in register files and , respectively. The read address of Block-LDPC encoder that mainly contains 7 function blocks:

each register file is generated by a binary counter

. The four function blocks A, B, C, and E realize the multiplica-

The write address of all the register files ’s is generated by tions with the block structured sparse matrices , , , and ,

a binary counter WAG. The output of is routed through the respectively. These four function blocks are directly designed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHONG AND ZHANG: BLOCK-LDPC

773

TABLE II NUMBER OF REGISTERS REQUIRED IN ENCODER

Fig. 7. Each sparse matrix-vector multiplication block requires

two sets of register files to store the input vector, i.e., the two

sets of input register files alternatively receive the output from

the preceding pipeline stage and provide the data for the current

computation. The register file complexity in terms of number of

bits needed for each pipeline stage are listed in the Table II.

Let denote the maximum number of colors used in the

task scheduling in all the sparse matrix-vector multiplications.

Except the pipeline stages for function blocks , T1 and T2, any

other pipeline stage at most takes

clock cycles to com-

plete the present computation. Because of the small size (i.e.,

) of the dense matrix , it is feasible to implement the

function block (multiplication with ) in fully parallel, i.e.,

implemented as a -bit input -bit output XOR array. The latency

of such fully parallel implementation of function block will

be much less than

clock cycles. As for the function block

T1 and T2, since the maximum collum weight of each subma-

trix is 1 (according to the encoder-oriented constraint as

Fig. 8. Pipelined Block-LDPC encoder structure.

described in Section II-C), each of these submatrix and vector

multiplications can be performed in 1 time slot, i.e., clock cy-

cles. Thus each of T1 and T2 requires

clock cycles to

complete the present computation. Therefore, the pipeline stage

latency of this pipelined encoder is

clock cy-

cles, i.e., each pipeline stage takes

clock cy-

cles to complete the present computation and moves the output

to the next pipeline stage. Let denote the clock frequency of

the encoder, the encoding throughout would be

.

To estimate the encoder logic gate complexity in terms of

the number of 2-input NAND gates, we count each 2-input XOR

gate as three 2-input NAND gates and each -bit binary counter

as 2-input NAND gates. Let denote the total number of

nonzero blocks in the parity check matrix. Let denote the ratio

Fig. 9. Structure of function blocks T1 and T2.

of the number of nonzero blocks in the lower triangular subma-

trix divided by . For the function block A, B, C, E, T1

as described in Section III-B. The function block realizes the multiplication with the small dense matrix . The two identical function blocks T1 and T2 realize the multiplication with
by using the -stage back substitution as described in Section III-A. Each dashed horizontal line in Fig. 8 represents one pipeline stage. Fig. 9 shows the structure of function blocks T1 and T2, where each subblock performs the multiplication with the submatrix in the lower triangular matrix . Since

and T2, we need approximately

XOR gates

and

counters in total. Thus the number of NAND

gates is about

. We assume the function block

consumes

XOR gates, i.e.,

NAND gates. Fur-

thermore, we need approximately

bits of ROM to

store the initialization values for all the counters. We summarize

the estimation of the key metrics of the encoder in the Table III.

all the submatrices are also block structured, we can again use the architecture described in Section III-B for each multi-

IV. LDPC DECODER DESIGN

plication.

In this section, we briefly present the partially parallel Block-

Pipelining is realized by the input/output register file banks in LDPC code decoder architecture and its implementation met-

each sparse matrix-vector multiplication block as illustrated in rics estimation. Fig. 10 shows the decoder architecture for a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

774

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

TABLE III SPEED AND COMPLEXITY ESTIMATION OF THE ENCODER

TABLE IV SPEED AND COMPLEXITY ESTIMATION OF DECODER

message passing between neighboring nodes in the code

bipartite graph. In each clock cycle, each CNU retrieves

one variable-to-check message from each connected

DMMB, convert it to one check-to-variable message,

and send the check-to-variable message back to the same

DMMB. The memory access address of each

Fig. 10. Decoder architecture.

is generated by a binary counter that is initialized to the right cyclic shift value of the nonzero block matrix

Block-LDPC code with an

parity check matrix. It con-

tains check node computation units (CNUs) and variable

node computation units (VNUs), where each

and

perform the computations, respectively, for the rows (or check

nodes) and columns (or variable nodes) in the same block

row and block column in time-division multiplexing fashion.

It contains

channel message memory blocks (CMMBs),

each CMMB stores the messages associated with columns in

the same block column. Two sets of CMMBs alternatively

store the channel messages for current decoding and receive the

channel messages of the next block to be decoded.

Let

denote the block matrix with the position

in the Block-LDPC code parity check matrix, and set

. The total number of

nonzero block matrices in the parity check matrix is .

The

decoding messages are stored in decoding

message memory blocks (DMMBs), each

(where

) stores the messages associated with the 1’s

in . The decoder contains -bit hard decision memory

blocks (HDMBs) to store the hard decision bits. The access

address of each

,

or

is generated

by an individual binary counter. Each

connects with all

the

s with the same index . Each

connects

with all the

,

and

with the same

at the beginning of check node processing.

(2) During the variable node processing, the decoder per-

forms the computations of all the variable nodes. In each

clock cycle, each VNU retrieves one check-to-variable

message from each connected DMMB and one channel

message from the connected CMMB, convert each

check-to-variable message to variable-to-check message,

and send it back to the same DMMB. The memory access

addresses of each memory block are generated by the

counters that are set to zero at the beginning of variable

node processing.

The number of node computation units (CNU and VNU) in

this partially parallel decoder is reduced by the factor com-

pared with its fully parallel counterpart. This partially parallel

decoder is well suited for high speed hardware implementations

because of the regular structure and simple control logic.

Given each decoding message uniformly quantized to bits,5

we estimate that each CNU and VNU require

and

gates (in terms of 2-input NAND gate), respectively. The total

sizes of DMMBs, CMMBs, and HDMBs are

bits,

, and bits, respectively. Let denote the clock frequency

of the decoder and the number of iterations is , the decoding

throughput can be up to

. We summarize the

estimated key metrics of the decoder in Table IV.

index . The decoding process consists of an initialization phase and

V. CONCLUSION

an iterative decoding phase as described in the following.

Initialization: Upon the received code block data, CMMBs

are initialized to store the channel messages associated with all

the variable node. The content of each

is copied to all

the

s with the same index as the initial variable-to-

check messages.

Iterative Decoding: Each decoding iteration is completed in

clock cycles, and the decoder works in check node processing

mode and variable node processing mode during the first and

second clock cycles, respectively.

(1) During the check node processing, the decoder performs the computations of all the check nodes and realizes the

This paper presented a joint code-encoder-decoder design solution, called Block-LDPC, for practical LDPC coding system implementations. The key is to construct LDPC codes subject to certain implementation-oriented constraints and performance-oriented constraints, simultaneously. We presented the code construction constraints and developed a semi-random approach for Block-LDPC code construction. Computer simulation showed that the Block-LDPC codes have insignificant error-correcting performance degradation compared with LDPC
5We note that recent results suggest that uniform quantization with too small value of q may lead to error floor in the decoding. Interested readers are referred to [23].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHONG AND ZHANG: BLOCK-LDPC

775

codes constructed without any implementation-oriented con-
straints. Leveraging the implementation-oriented constraints,
we developed a pipelined partially parallel Block-LDPC code
encoder and a partially parallel Block-LDPC code decoder. We
believe the Block-LDPC design approach will provide commu-
nication system designers an unique opportunity to explore the
attractive merits of LDPC codes in many real-life applications.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[3] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linkoping Univ., Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[5] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[6] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[7] J. Thorpe. (2003, Aug.) Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs (IPN Progr. Rep.). [Online]. Available: http://ipnpr.jpl.nasa.gov/tmo/progress_report/42-154/154C.pdf
[8] S. Olcer, “Decoder architecture for array-code-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. Global Telecomm. Conf., Dec. 2003, pp. 2046–2050.
[9] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Architecture-aware low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Circuits Systems, Bangkok, Thailand, May 2003, pp. 57–60.
[10] D. E. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, 2003, pp. 2708–2712.
[11] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Design of VLSI implementation-oriented LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Semiann. Vehicular Technology Conf., vol. , Oct. 2003, pp. 670–673.
[12] Flarion Technologies, “Methods and apparatus for decoding LDPC codes,” US Patent # 6 633 856 B2, Oct. 2003.
[13] J. M. F. Moura, J. Lu, and H. Zhang, “Structured low-density paritycheck codes,” IEEE Signal Processing Mag., no. 1, pp. 42–55, Jan. 2004.
[14] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[15] D. E. Hocevar, “Efficient encoding for a family of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. Global Telecomm. Conf., vol. 7, 2003, pp. 3996–4000.
[16] E. Eleftheriou and S. Olcer, “Low-density parity-check codes for digital subscriber lines,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, 2002, pp. 1752–1757.

[17] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “Joint (3; k)-regular LDPC code and decoder/encoder design,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1065–1079, Apr. 2004.
[18] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, 2003, pp. 3125–3129.
[19] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[20] J. Campello and D. S. Modha, “Extended bit-filling and LDPC code design,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecomm. Conf., 2001, pp. 985–989.
[21] J. Thorpe, “Design of LDPC graphs for hardware implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, 2002, p. 483.
[22] The Boost Graph Library [Online]. Available: http://www.boost.org/ libs/graph/
[23] D. Declercq and F. Verdier, “Optimization of LDPC finite precision belief propagation decoding with discrete density evolution,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics , Brest, France, Sep. 2003.
Hao Zhong (S’03) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from the SYACE Institute, Shenyang, and Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 1997 and 2000, respectively. He is working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY.
His research interests include the design of very large-scale integration architectures and circuits for digital signal processing and communication systems. He is currently working on the hardware design for low-density parity-check coding system.
Tong Zhang (M’98) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from the Xian Jiaotong University, Xian, China, in 1995 and 1998, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering fromt the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, in 2002.
Currently, he is an Assistant Professor in the Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY. His current research interests include design of very large-scale integration (VLSI) architectures and circuits for digital signal processing and communication systems, with the emphasis on error-correcting coding, multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) signal processing, and asynchronous VLSI signal processing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

