1500

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

Optimization of LDPC-Coded Turbo CDMA Systems
Xiaodong Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, Guosen Yue, Member, IEEE, and Krishna R. Narayanan, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We consider the analysis and design of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for turbo multiuser detection in multipath code division multiple access (CDMA) channels. We develop techniques for computing the probability density function (pdf) of the extrinsic messages at the output of the soft-input soft-output (SISO) multiuser detectors as a function of the pdf of input extrinsic messages, user spreading codes, channel impulse responses, and signal-to-noise ratios. Of particular interest is the soft interference cancellation plus minimum mean square error (SIC-MMSE) multiuser detector, for which the pdf of the extrinsic messages can be characterized analytically. For the case of additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels, the extrinsic messages can be well approximated as symmetric Gaussian distributed. For the case of asynchronous multipath fading channels, the extrinsic messages can be approximated by a mixture of symmetric Gaussian distributions. We show that the expectation–maximization (EM) algorithm can be used to compute the parameters of this mixture. Using these techniques, we are able to accurately compute the thresholds for LDPC codes and design good irregular LDPC codes. Simulation results are in good agreement with the computed thresholds, and the designed irregular LDPC codes outperform regular ones significantly.
Index Terms—CDMA, code optimization, iterative (turbo) receiver, low-density parity check (LDPC) code, multipath fading, multiuser detection.

I. INTRODUCTION

M OST works on turbo multiuser detection are confined to the use of convolutional codes or parallel concatenated

convolutional codes (PCCCs) [9]. Recent results [11], [12]

show that carefully designed irregular low-density parity-check

(LDPC) codes can outperform PCCCs for long code lengths

and provide near-capacity performance on memoryless chan-

nels. It is then natural to attempt to design good LDPC code

ensembles for turbo multiuser detection.

The main idea used in the design of LDPC codes is to em-

ploy the technique of density evolution [1], [12], where the pdf

of extrinsic messages is computed as a function of iteration and

the given degree profiles for the LDPC code in order to com-

pute the thresholds (in SNR or

). Then, an optimization

procedure is used to find optimum degree profiles that result in

the least thresholds (or near capacity performance). It has been

shown that for a small sacrifice in the resulting thresholds, the

Manuscript received September 21, 2003; revised April 24, 2004. This work was supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-0207550 and in part by the U.S. Office of Naval Research under Grant N00014-03-1-0039. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Dr. Constantinos B. Papadias.
X. Wang is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 USA (e-mail: wangx@ee.columbia.edu).
G. Yue was with the Electrical Engineering Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA. He is now with NEC Laboratories America, Princeton, NJ 08540 USA.
K. R. Narayanan is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2005.843726

design procedure can be simplified by making the assumption that the messages (extrinsic information) at the output of the check nodes and the bit nodes have a Gaussian distribution [2]. For turbo multiuser detection, the LDPC codes will be used in conjunction with a soft-input soft-output (SISO) multiuser detector. In order to extend the aforementioned technique to design good LDPC codes for the turbo multiuser receiver, we need a technique to characterize the pdf of the extrinsic messages at the output of the detector as a function of the input pdf and channel characteristics. In this paper, we will primarily focus on the SISO multiuser detector based on soft interference cancellation (SIC) and instantaneous linear minimum mean square ereror (MMSE) filtering: a technique first proposed in [18]. Other receivers, i.e., the optimal detector and the matched filter, are also discussed. We show how to characterize the input–output pdfs of the extrinsic information analytically for these multiuser detectors and use this to design good LDPC codes.

II. TURBO MULTIUSER RECEIVER FOR LDPC-CODED CDMA

We consider an LDPC-coded CDMA system with users, em-

ploying normalized modulation waveforms

, and

signaling through their respective multipath channels with addi-

tive white Gaussian noise. The block diagram of the transmitter

end of such a system is shown in the upper half of Fig. 1. The

binary information data

for user are LDPC encoded.

The interleaved code bits of the th user are binary phase shift

keying symbol mapped. Each data symbol is then modu-

lated by a spreading waveform

and transmitted through

its multipath channel. As shown in the lower part of Fig. 1, the

overall receiver is an iterative receiver that performs turbo mul-

tiuser detection by passing extrinsic messages on the code bits

between a SISO multiuser detector and an LDPC decoder. In each

turbo iteration, several inner iterations are performed within the

LDPC decoder during which extrinsic messages are passed along

the edges in the biparitite graph of the code.

Notation: The variable is used to refer to extrinsic mes-

sages (in log-likelihood form). The variable is used to denote

the pdf of the extrinsic information , and is used to denote

the mean of . Superscript

is used to denote quantities

during the th round of inner decoding within the LDPC de-

coder and th stage of outer iteration between the LDPC de-

coder and the multiuser detector. For the quantities passed be-

tween the multiuser detector and the decoder, only one super-

script , namely, the turbo multiuser detection iteration number,

is used. A subscript

denotes quantities passed from the

multiuser detector to the LDPC decoder, and vice versa. Sim-

ilarly, quantities passed between the bit nodes and the check

nodes of the LDPC code are denoted by

and

,

respectively. The degree of the th bit node is denoted by ,

and the degree of the th check node is denoted by . Denote

1053-587X/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:59:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF LDPC-CODED TURBO CDMA SYSTEMS

1501

Fig. 1. LDPC-coded CDMA system with iterative receiver.

by

the set of edges connected to the th bit

node and by

the set of edges connected to

the th check node. The particular edge or bit associated with an

extrinsic information is denoted as the argument of .

The turbo multiuser detection algorithm for LDPC-coded

CDMA systems is as follows:

0

Initialization:

, and

.

1

Turbo multiuser detection iterations: For

Bit node update: For each of the bit nodes , and for all edges connected to it, compute
(2)
Check node update: For each of the check nodes , and for all edges connected to it, compute [3]

1a SISO multiuser detection: The SISO multiuser de-

(3)

tector computes

1c Compute extrinsic messages passed back to the mul-

tiuser detector:

(1)

(4)

1d Store check to bit messages: For all edges, set

where denotes the SISO multiuser detector.

1b LDPC decoding: For

2

Iterate between bit node update and check node

update: For

(5)

Final hard decisions on information and parity bits:

sign

(6)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:59:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1502

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

III. SISO MULTIUSER DETECTORS In this section, we outline three SISO multiuser detectors. For clarity, we first discuss these detectors in the context of a synchronous CDMA systems, in which the received (real-valued) signal is given by
(7)

of the matched filter output after ideal interference cancellation, which is given by

(16)

where

(17)

where

is the spreading waveform of the th user and th

symbol, and is the number of the data symbols per user. A

sufficient statistic for demodulating

is

given by

(8)

4) Extension to Asynchronous CDMA With Multipath Fading: The received signal in an asynchronous CDMA system with multipath fading channels can be written as
(18)

Denote

. Then (9)

where

diag

; and

is in-

dependent of .

1) Exact SISO Multiuser Detector: [18]: Denote

. Simi-

larly, define . We have the exact expression for the extrinsic

messages from the multiuser detector in (10), shown at the

bottom of the page.

2) SIC-MMSE SISO Multiuser Detector: [18]: A low-com-

plexity approximate SISO multiuser detector was developed in

[18], which is based on soft interference cancellation and instan-

taneous linear MMSE filtering and is summarized as follows.

Denote as the th unit vector in . Define

where is the number of resolvable paths in each user’s

channel;

and are, respectively, the complex gain

corresponding to the th symbol and the delay of the th path

of the th user’s channel. Assume that the multipath spread of

any user signal is limited to at most symbol intervals, where

is a positive integer. Define

The received signal filter to obtain

(19) in (18) is first passed through a matched

(11) (20)

and

(12)

where

are zero-mean complex Gaussian random se-

quences with covariance

Denote

and

Then, we have

where

.

(21) (13)
Define the quantities shown at the bottom of the next page. We can then write (20) in the following vector form: (14)

(15)

(22)

3) SIC-MF SISO Multiuser Detector: A further simplifi-

cation on the above SIC-MMSE detector is to skip the linear and from (21), the covariance matrix of the complex Gaussian

MMSE filtering step. In this case, the output is a scaled version vector sequence

is

. Define

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:59:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(10)

WANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF LDPC-CODED TURBO CDMA SYSTEMS

is given by

. Then,

1503

Hence,

has a Gaussian distribution with mean

and variance given, respectively, by

(23)

Var

(27) Var

where is a sequence of zero-mean complex Gaussian vectors with covariance matrix

(24)

Now, define

trix),

diag

(

(

write in (23) in a matrix form as

(

ma-

diagonal matrix), and

-vector). We can then

(25)

where

. Based on (25), both the

SIC-MMSE and the SIC-MF SISO multiuser detectors can

be similarly applied as in the synchronous and additive white

Gaussian noise (AWGN) cases. Specifically, the extrinsic

information

is given by

(26)

(28)

Thus, the extrinsic message has a Gaussian distribution of the

form

, with

. Given

, and , and the a priori

code bit LLR distribution

. We can compute

as follows:

For

(number of samples) and for

, do the following.

• Draw i.i.d.

. Let

diag

• Compute

. , and
.

Finally,

is calculated as

.

Note that the a priori code bit LLR from the LDPC decoder

is typically modeled as mixture symmetric Gaussian, i.e.,

where, as before,

, and

are, respectively, the

output, mean, and variance of the MMSE or matched filter (after

soft interference cancellation).

IV. DISTRIBUTION OF MULTIUSER EXTRINSIC MESSAGES
In this section, we describe how to compute the pdf of the extrinsic LLRs at the output of the SISO multiuser detector as a function of the pdf of the input a priori LLRs.

A. AWGN Channels

1) SIC-MMSE SISO Multiuser Detector: We first con-

sider the SIC-MMSE SISO detector in a synchronous CDMA

system. The extrinsic message in this case is given by (13). As

discussed in [18], the output

of the instantaneous linear

MMSE filter is well approximated by a Gaussian distribution.

(29)

where and are, respectively, the mean and the variance

of the th component. Here, is the fraction of the bit nodes of

degree , and we assume that the output extrinsic LLR at a node

of degree is symmetric Gaussian with mean [2], [15].

2) Exact and SIC-MF SISO Multiuser Detector: For these

two detectors, simulations show that the extrinsic messages are

also well approximated by symmetric Gaussian distributions.

The means can be calculated via Monte Carlo as follows.

For

(number of samples)

• For

: Draw i.i.d.

;

Set according to (9).

; Compute

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

diag
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:59:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1504

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

• For

: Compute the extrinsic information

according to (10) for the exact SISO

detector or according to (14) for the SIC-MF SISO de-

tector. Set

.

We now demonstrate the validity of Gaussian assumption

through following example. Consider estimating the pdf of ex-

trinsic information at the output of the multiuser detector for a

two-user synchronous system with fixed at 0.5 for

when

dB. The pdf of the input a priori infor-

mation to the multiuser detector is

. Fig. 2 shows the histograms

of the extrinsic information at the optimal, SIC-MMSE, MF

multiuser detectors by simulating the channel and the detector.

The symmetric Gaussian pdf’s with same means are also shown.

It can be seen that the match is quite close for each detector,

indicating that the underlying pdf is well approximated by the

symmetric Gaussian.

B. Fading Channels

Consider the SIC-MMSE detector in a synchronous

CDMA system with fading channels. Conditioned on the

channels

, the extrinsic mes-

sage from the multiuser detector has a Gaussian distribu-

tion, i.e.,

, with

. Hence, the pdf of the output

extrinsic message is given by

(30)

Fig. 2. Histograms for the multiuser detectors extrinsic information in a two-user synchronous CDMA system and the symmetric Gaussian approximations by Monte Carlo simulation.

• E-step: Compute • M-step: Solve

. .

Define the following hidden data

,

where is a -dimensional indicator vector such that

,

if

, and

plete data is then

, otherwise. The com. We have

, where

; hence

In general, the pdf in (30) cannot be well approximated

as Gaussian. However, we can approximate

as

a mixture of symmetric Gaussian pdf’s, i.e.,

. Note that in the limit as

, this

can approximate (30) arbitrarily closely. For a fixed number of

mixtures , based on the observations

,

the parameters

can be estimated

using the expectation–maximization (EM) algorithm as fol-

lows.

Denote

as the pdf of an

random vari-

able. Then, the maximum likelihood (ML) estimate of the pa-

rameters is given by

(32)
where is some constant. The E-step can then be calculated as follows:

(33)

(31)

where

(34)

Direct solution to the above maximization problem is very dif-

ficult. The EM algorithm [4], [7] is an iterative procedure for In addition, the M-step is calculated as follows: solving this ML estimation problem. In the EM algorithm, the

observation is termed incomplete data. The algorithm postu-

lates that one has access to complete data , which is such that

(35)

can be obtained through a many-to-one mapping. Typically,

the complete data is chosen such that the conditional density

is easy to obtain and optimize. Starting from some ini-

tial estimate , the EM algorithm solves the ML estimation

problem (31) by the following iterative procedure.

(36)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:59:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF LDPC-CODED TURBO CDMA SYSTEMS

1505

Finally, the EM algorithm for calculating the Gaussian mixture parameters for the extrinsic messages in fading channels is summarized as follows: Given the detector extrinsic messages , the number of mixture components , and the total number of EM iterations , starting from the initial parameters , for
:

• Let

, and calculate

according to (34).

• Calculate

according to (35), and

calculate

according to (36). Set

.

The algorithm can be applied to the SISO multiuser detector in

fading channels by letting

, where

is given by (26).

In the above EM algorithm, the number of mixture compo-

nents is fixed. Note that when increases,

in-

creases, or

decreases. The minimum description

length (MDL) principle can be used to select the optimal number

of the components in a Gaussian mixture [6], [13]. In the MDL

criterion, a penalty term

is introduced. In addition,

the optimal number of components is given by

(37)

Hence, we can first set an upper bound of the number of mixture

components, , and for each

, we run the above

EM algorithm and calculate the corresponding MDL value. Fi-

nally, we choose the optimal with the minimum MDL.

We now demonstrate the efficiency of the mixture Gaussian

modeling of the multiuser detector extrinsic information de-

veloped in this section through the following example. Con-

sider a five-user asynchronous CDMA system in an indepen-

dently Rayleigh fading channel and an

dB em-

ploying MMSE multiuser detector when the input LLR dis-

tribution is

. The histogram of the multiuser detector output

extrinsic information obtained using Monte Carlo simulations is

plotted in Fig. 3. The approximation of the pdf using a mixture

of symmetric Gaussian distributions computed via the EM algo-

rithm is also shown in the figure. Note that the two curves are al-

most indistinguishable, indicating that the approximation is very

accurate. On the other hand, a symmetric Gaussian pdf that has

the same mean as that of the histogram is also shown. It is seen

that such a single symmetric Gaussian approximation of the

extrinsic information distribution is quite inaccurate. This con-

firms that the extrinsic information delivered by the SIC-MMSE

multiuser detector in fading channels cannot be assumed to be

Gaussian, whereas a mixture of symmetric Gaussian pdf offers

a good approximation. In this example, the codeword length is

for each user. The average number of mixture com-

ponents given by the MDL criterion is

.

Fig. 3. Histogram for the SIC-MMSE multiuser detector extrinsic information in a five-user asynchronous CDMA system with fading and the approximations by a single symmetric Gaussian pdf and by a mixture of symmetric Gaussian pdf’s obtained using the EM algorithm.

extrinsic LLRs as i.i.d random variables and to compute their

pdf at each iteration [2], [5], [12]. In [2], the pdf of the extrinsic

LLRs at each bit or check node was assumed to be Gaussian

and symmetric (variance is twice the mean), and hence, it is

sufficient to track the mean of the extrinsic LLRs. While this

is a good approximation for the singler-user AWGN channel,

this is not a good approximation for fading channels. Therefore,

we will assume that the output of the multiuser detector and,

hence, the input at every bit node is a mixture of symmetric

Gaussian densities. We will show that this assumption allows

us to track the pdfs of the extrinsic LLRs accurately without

having to numerically convolve or evaluate pdfs. In computing

the pdfs of the extrinsic LLRs, we will assume that the all-zeros

codeword is transmitted but the coded bits are modulated in to

in a random order which is known to the receiver. Therefore,

density evolution can still be performed, assuming the all-zeros

codeword as reference, even though the overall system is not

geometrically uniform. We next specify the procedure for com-

puting the pdf’s of the extrinsic messages passed around in the

turbo multiuser detection algorithm described in Section II. De-

note

.

0

Initialization: Set

, and

.

1

Turbo multiuser detection iterations: For

1a Compute the pdf of the multiuser detector extrinsic

messages:

is computed as a function of

and

using the appropriate procedure from Sec-

tion IV (for static channels) or Section V (for fading

channels) to obtain

(38)

V. DESIGN OF LDPC CODES A. Computing Threshold

1b Compute the pdf of the LDPC extrinsic messages: 1bi Iterate between bit node update and check node up-

In this section, we first describe how to compute the thresh-

date: For

olds for LDPC codes with the afore mentioned receiver em-

At a bit node of degree : The pdf of the extrinsic LLR

ploying turbo multiuser detection. The main idea is to treat the

passed along an edge connected to a bit node of degree

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:59:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1506

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

is denoted by is given by

. From (2), we can see that (39)

The threshold is defned as the minimum

for

which the mean

or

tends to . That is

(45)

where denotes convolution, and

denotes -fold

convolution. We can simplify this by making the as-

sumption that the output extrinsic from the bit node of

degree , excluding the contribution from the channel,

is Gaussian. The same assumption has been made in

[2]. That is

(40)
The pdf of the extrinsic message passed from the bit to check nodes along an edge is then

(41)

At check node of degree : Assume that the th check

node is of degree and that the extrinsic LLR at

the output of this check node is Gaussian with mean

. To compute

, we take the expectation

on both sides of (3) and get

(42)

where (42) follows from the fact that

and

are identically distributed and are indepen-

dent for

. Since the distribution of

will be same for all , distribution), we can drop .

Therefore

B. Design of LDPC Codes

The procedure for computing the threshold for a given degree

profile

can be used in conjunction with an opti-

mization procedure to design optimal LDPC codes for the mul-

tiuser detection. The idea is to find optimal and such

that the threshold is minimized. Note that the rate of the LDPC

code is

. If a rate of is re-

quired, the optimization problem can be stated as follows: Find

and such that we minimize

subject to the fol-

lowing constraints: 1)

, and

2)

[computed using (38)–(44)].

A nonlinear optimization procedure called differential evo-

lution [10], [11] has been used to perform this optimization.

This technique involves choosing several candidates for

and and computing thresholds for each pair during the op-

timization. Without the Gaussian mixture assumption for the ex-

trinsic LLR pdfs, the pdf’s have to be evaluated numerically

within the LDPC decoder and by using Monte Carlo in the mul-

tiuser detector. However, with this assumption, only the means

of the components in the mixture need to be evaluated, which is

a very significant reduction in complexity. This is a key advan-

tage of the SIC-MMSE multiuser detection since the output pdf

from the multiuser detector can be computed relatively easily.

VI. RESULTS

A. Two-User Synchronous CDMA System With Periodic Spreading Sequences

We first present results for a two-user synchronous CDMA

system in AWGN channel. With periodic spreading sequences,

the cross correlation matrix is fixed. Set

for

. Three different receivers were simulated (i.e., optimal,

SIC-MMSE, and matched filter). The theoretical thresholds for

a (3, 6) rate

regular LDPC code, and the simulation results

for a (3, 6) rate

regular LDPC code of length

bits are shown in Figs. 4–6. It is seen that the actual simulation

results are within 0.2 dB of the theoretical thresholds for three

different detectors, indicating that the Gaussian assumption and

the characterization of the input–output pdf of the multiuser

detector extrinsic information is quite accurate. Optimum

degree profiles were computed for the same channel using algo-

rithms and the technique discussed in Section V. The optimum

degree profile for optimal multiuser detector was

(43) ,

1bii Message passed back to the multiuser detector: At bit and

. The resulting

node of degree , by taking expectation on both sides threshold is shown in Fig. 4. The performance of a ran-

of (4), we get

. Since of the domly constructed LDPC code with the optimum degree

nodes have degree

profile of length

is also shown in Fig. 4.

It is seen that the performance is about 0.15 dB from the

(44) threshold at BER of

. The optimum degree profile

for MMSE multiuser detector was

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:59:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF LDPC-CODED TURBO CDMA SYSTEMS

1507

Fig. 4. Thresholds and simulation results for the (3, 6) regular LDPC codes and for the optimum irregular LDPC codes in a two-user synchronous system with optimal receiver.

Fig. 6. Thresholds and simulation results for the (3, 6) regular LDPC codes and for the optimum irregular LDPC codes in a two-user synchronous system with MF receiver.

B. Achievable Information Rate

The achievable information rate for a two-user synchronous

CDMA system with binary modulation can be computed for a

given

and

as follows. The equivalent signal

space diagram for the two-user system can be obtained by pro-

jecting the received signal on to two basis functions

and

[16]. The four points in the two-dimensional signal space cor-

responding to the transmitted bits

,

and

can then be shown to be

Fig. 5. Thresholds and simulation results for the (3, 6) regular LDPC codes and for the optimum irregular LDPC codes in a two-user synchronous system with MMSE receiver.

. The sufficient statistic can be expressed as

(46)

with the choice of basis functions given above

,

where

and is the 2 2 identity matrix. For

noncooperative coding between the two users, the information

rate is maximized by the equiprobable distribution

. The achievable information rate can be computed using

(47)

and

. The performance

bits

(48)

of the constructed irregular LDPC code, which is shown in The integral in (48) can be computed numerically after noting

Fig. 5, is around 0.15 dB from the threshold. The performance that

is

.

of the MMSE receiver is only 0.1 dB worse than optimal For

, the required

to achieve 0.5

receiver. The optimum degree profile for the MF detector bits/user/channel use is 0.46 dB. The threshold for the op-

was

timized irregular LDPC code with the optimal receiver (in

Fig. 4) is less than 0.3 dB away corroborating the effectiveness

of the proposed design methodology.

and

. As shown in 1) Five-User Synchronous System With Aperiodic Spreading

Fig. 6, the simulation result of the randomly constructed LDPC Sequence: Next,wepresentsomesimulationresultsforfive-user

code is about 0.15 dB from the threshold 1.25 dB. The results synchronous system using aperiodic spreading in the AWGN

presented here show that the irregular codes provide about 0.5 channel. For each user, the spreading code is a random code

dB better performance than the regular codes.

with processing gain

, which varies with symbol . The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:59:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1508

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

Fig. 7. Thresholds and simulation results for the (3, 6) regular LDPC codes and for the optimum irregular LDPC codes in a five-user synchronous system with MMSE receiver.

Fig. 8. Thresholds and simulation results for the (3, 6) regular LDPC codes and for the optimum irregular LDPC codes in a five-user synchronous system with MF receiver.

randomly chosen spreading sequence is an accurate model when

a pseudonoise sequence spans many symbol periods [17]. With

aperiodic random spreading, the cross correlation matrix after the

matched filter is dynamically change symbol by symbol. The theo-

retical thresholds for the (3, 6) rate- regular LDPC code with

maximum number of iterations between the multiuser detector

and decoder

are shown in Figs. 7 and 8 with MMSE and

MF receiver, respectively. Both receivers have the performance

for the regular LDPC code within 0.05 dB from the thresholds. The

irregular LDPC code was designed, and the resulting optimum

degree profiles of MMSE receiver with

was

and

. The threshold for

the above degree profile and simulation results for a randomly

constructed LDPC code of length

are shown in

Fig. 7. It is seen that the simulation results agree well with the

theoretical thresholds and that the irregular LDPC code is about

0.65 dB better than the (3, 6) regular LDPC code, indicating

the usefulness of the proposed techniques for designing good

LDPC codes. The optimum degree profile for the MF detector

was

and

. As shown in

Fig. 8, the performance is only 0.1 dB from the threshold, and

the irregular LDPC codes are 0.5 dB better than the (3, 6) regular

LDPC code.

Fig. 9. Thresholds and simulation results for the (3, 6) regular LDPC codes and for the optimum irregular LDPC codes in a five-user asynchronous system with fading using the MMSE receiver.

length

are shown in Fig. 9 for the MMSE

receiver and in Fig. 10 for the MF receiver. It is seen that

the simulated BER performance matched quite well with the

thresholds, indicating that the threshold computation is fairly

accurate. Then, we designed optimal degree profiles with

and rate-

for both receivers. The resulting

optimal degree profiles for the MMSE receiver were

C. Five-User Asynchronous System in Fading

and

. The resulting optimal

Finally, we consider a five-user asynchronous CDMA system degree profiles for the MF receiver were

in random fading channel with aperiodic random spreading.

Each user’s channel contains four paths, i.e.,

. The

relative path power gains are

, and dB, and the

relative delay is

. The theoretical thresholds and

The simulation results for a randomly con-

for a (3, 6) rate-

regular LDPC code and simulation structed LDPC code with these degree profiles for a length of

results for a randomly constructed regular LDPC code of

are shown in Figs. 9 and 10. At a BER of ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:59:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF LDPC-CODED TURBO CDMA SYSTEMS

1509

Fig. 10. Thresholds and simulation results for the (3, 6) regular LDPC codes and for the optimum irregular LDPC codes in a five-user asynchronous system with fading using the MF receiver.
the performance is about 0.2 dB away from the thresholds. The irregular codes outperform the regular ones by about 0.6 dB for both receivers. These results show that by using the EM algorithm, we can accurately model the extrinsic information as a mixture of Gaussian densities and use this to design good irregular LDPC codes.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have shown how to characterize the pdf of the extrinsic information at the output of the multiuser detector as a function of the pdf of the input extrinsic information, the

[2] S. Y. Chung, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[3] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, C. Meason, and M. Mörz, “Decoding and equalization with analog nonlinear networks,” Eur. Trans. Telecom., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 659–680, Nov.–Dec. 1999.
[4] E. L. Lehmann and G. Casella, Theory of Point Estimation. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[5] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Analysis of low-density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” in Proc. ACM Symp. Theory Comput., Dallas, TX, 1998, pp. 249–258.
[6] P. McKenzie and M. Alder, “Selecting the optimal number of components for a Gaussian mixture mode,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 1994, p. 393.
[7] G. J. McLachlan and T. Krishnan, The EM Algorithm and Extensions. New York: Wiley, 1997.
[8] K. R. Narayanan, X. Wang, and G. Yue, “LDPC code design for MMSE turbo equalization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun. 2002.
[9] H. V. Poor, “Turbo multiuser detection: A primer,” J. Commun. Networks, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 196–201, Sep. 2001.
[10] K. Price and R. Storn, “Differential evolution—A simple and efficient heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces,” J. Global Optim., vol. 11, pp. 341–359, 1997.
[11] T. Richardson, A. Shokrohalli, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching irregular low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[12] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Capacity of low density parity check codes under message passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[13] J. Rissanen, Stochastic Complexity in Statistical Inquiry, Singapore: World Scientific, 1989.
[14] M. Sellathurai and S. Haykin, “Turbo-BLAST for wireless communications: Theory and experiments,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2538–2546, Oct. 2002.
[15] S. ten Brink, “Convergence of iterative decoding,” Elec. Lett., vol. 35, no. 13, pp. 1117–1118, Jun. 1999.
[16] Multiuser Detection, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1998, p. 111.
[17] S. Verdu and S. Shamai, “Spectral efficiency of CDMA with random spreading,” Electron. Lett., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 622–640, Mar. 1999.
[18] X. Wang and H. V. Poor, “Iterative (turbo) soft interference cancellation and decoding for coded CDMA,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 1046–1061, Jul. 1999.

, and the cross correlation matrix of spreading codes for

CDMA systems through AWGN channels or multipath fading

channels. For the synchronous system in AWGN, we have

shown that the pdf can be assumed to be symmetric Gaussian,

whereas for asynchronous system with multipath fading, the pdf

can be approximated as a mixture of symmetric Gaussian densities. Then, we have shown how to compute the thresholds for a given irregular LDPC code degree profile and to design good irregular LDPC codes. In all cases, the computed thresholds match very well with simulations, and the designed irregular codes significantly outperform regular LDPC codes. The differences between computed thresholds and the simulations are within 0.2 dB. From the simulation, the performance of the designed irregular codes are about 0.6 dB closer to the capacity than regular LDPC codes for the synchronous sytem through AWGN and 0.45 dB for the asynchronous CDMA system with multipath fading. Finally, we note that the proposed framework can also be applied to optimize the turbo equalization systems [8] and turbo BLAST systems [14].
REFERENCES
[1] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved bp-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.

Xiaodong Wang (M’98–SM’04) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering and applied mathematics (with the highest honor) from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 1992, the M.S. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, in 1995, and the Ph.D degree in electrical engineering from Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, in 1998.
From July 1998 to December 2001, he was an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station. In January 2002, he joined the Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY, as an Assistant Professor. His research interests fall in the general areas of computing, signal processing, and communications. He has worked in the areas of digital communications, digital signal processing, parallel and distributed computing, nanoelectronics, and bioinformatics and has published extensively in these areas. His current research interests include wireless communications, Monte Carlo-based statistical signal processing, and genomic signal processing. Dr. Wang received the 1999 NSF CAREER Award and the 2001 IEEE Communications Society and Information Theory Society Joint Paper Award. He currently serves as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:59:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1510

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

Guosen Yue (S’04–M’05) received the B.S. degree in physics and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from Nanjing University, Nanjing, China in 1994 and 1997, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from Texas A&M University, College Station, in 2004.
Since August 2004, he has been with NEC Laboratories America, Princeton, NJ, conducting research on broadband wireless systems and mobile networks. His research interests are in the area of advanced modulation and channel coding techniques for wireless communications.

Krishna R. Narayanan (M’98) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, in December 1998.
He is currently an associate professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station. His research interests are in the areas of communication theory and signal processing for communications, specifically the areas of modulation and coding, joint source-channel coding, equalization, joint design of physical and MAC layers, and hardware implementation of decoders. His current research focuses on concatenated coding (turbo codes, low-density parity check codes), space-time coding, and iterative processing for wireless communications and magnetic recording. Dr. Narayanan is currently serving as an editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS. He received the NSF CAREER award in 2001, the Outstanding Young Faculty Award from the College of Engineering in 2001, and the Outstanding Professor Award from the Department of Electrical Engineering in 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:59:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

