EP 05

DEC0I)ING FOR. MAGNETlC 1tECOR.DlNGMEDIA WITH 0VER.LAPPING TRACKS

nave er^ Singla, .lost:pliA. O'Sidlivaq Clayton T. Miller, aird I h i d t l S. Irideck
Departmerit of Electrical and Systems Wigineering, Wushingtan ~tlevewit~S,t. Louis, MU G3130
emnil:{singla,jau. ctniller23. rsz) Owustl.e h

Introduction

We s t d y the effwts of track overlap in magnetic recording rncdiiirn vis-a-vis the decodiiig performance and user bit-density. A inicrorriagiictic modcl for lorigitudind recording developed by U. G. Porter [ 11 is used t,o sinidate the rccording process. Witli track overlap the

hcad receives significant inter-track interference (ITI)duririg rcarlback. When coiiihined kith dowritrack int,ersyiiiboljnt,erfcrerice(]SI): this gives rise to a two-dimensional (2D) IS1 model

for the chatincl. Varions deccding scheincs for climinels with 2U IS1 have been proposed by Singla, et al., [2], [31. These schernesdiffer from pwvious work o ~2iD IS1 izi that they perform

equalization followed by error-control coding, rcsultirig in significant performance improve-

,

ment. 111this paper wc use t,lic full graph algorithn [Z], wliicli pcrfornis message-passing on the joint graph ol the ctiarincl IS1 inid the error-control codc for decoding.

P

We a w m c a lincar rrintlcl for tlie 2U ISI. The reatllmk signal, R, is a blurred and

2 noisy version of the recorded data; R = h * *Xf W. The recorded data, X! are hinary

I f l atid ase obthiried by encoding the user {lata using a low-derisit,y parity-check (LDPC)

code. Thc noise: W! is wsimicd t,o be additive white Gaussian with x w o Iiieaii and vxiance

cr2~h is tlie 2D channcl point. spread fimction (PSF), dctcrrriiticd by t h h c d serisitivity

fiinction, which is estininted using the Iriicrornagrietic sirnulation. To this cntl, a siriiiilatioii

of t,hc rccorclirig process was run, a knowrr (lata pattern was written on 3 ueighboririg tracks.

Then by analyzing t,hc rwidting sirriitlat~cdreaclback signal from the midtlle track t.he PSF

is estimated assuriiirig that tlie ciiaiiriel is linear. This ostitriatcd PSI; is then iiscd in tht:

full graph schcrnc to delermine its pcrforiiimncc. Ttic read wid1.h is fixed to the track width

wlieii tliere is 110 overlap. The outer tracks are allowed to overlap oil the rnidtlla track to

st,ridy the effect of incrsasirig TTI. Wheti the outer tracks overlap 10% 011 the niiddlc track the IT1 is about, 11% as c:oriiparctl to an IT1 of 33% when the overlap is 20%. S i d a t i o n

results show sigiiificaiit,perfvrrnance iiriprovcmeiitover previoiis work for inagrictic rt:cording channels with IT1 (see [4] and rdcrcnccs thcrcin) . Thc full graph algoritmliIiaillows rciiablc

ciecotling for iiicdia witti bit aspocf,ratio as low ifs 2 and shorild also pcrform well as the bit aspect ratio goes to 1.

R.esrilts iind Discussion
Fig. 1 shows the hit-crror-rate vcrsiis signal-tc-noise ratio (SNR) curves when thc full
graph algoritlirri is iiscd for tlccotliug OIL the irietlia with tlitfercrit track overlap. T h e SNR.is

. l o , +

.

,

.

,

,

(4

it))

Faguw: 3: (a) Com.parisoa of fu14 graph dccodiny for media witti d i f l m n t truck uwerlup. ( b ) Cow

panson o f f i l l graph decoding for medium with lo% overlap and diflerent late LDPC cudes.

calcrilated a5. S N R = 10-ltgl~

where c is the ratc of the LnPC code. The parameter

a is thc fraction of t h e rniddle track that the rtwl head sees, for example for a 10% overlap

rr = 0.8. Fig. l(a) cotripares the results for three media; rnedirirrr 1 tiat: rio overlap; rtrediuni

2 has 10% overlap aiid nictliuni 3 has 20% track ovcrlap. All ttic or,hcr paratiiclcrs for thcse

rncdia wcrc kept the same. Looking at the first, third, fifth curvcs in Fig. l(a) \vc scc! that an

overlap of 20%results iii a loss of aboiit 2.5 dI3 in SNR.ovw the I:WC when thcrc is no overlap

wherew the loss is a h i t 0.5 dB for 10% overlap. The iiser hit, density is proportional to the

rate c and iiiversely proportiorid to cr. Then for a fixed rate, Iriccliiirri 3 11% t h e highest uscr

bit, densitmyfollowed by rnediurn 2 arid t h i ~ricdiurii1. So we concl~idcthat for increasjrig

density thcre is a loss in pcrforma~icc. Thc second arid forirth curves ftom thc lcft shows

that by rising lower rate LDPC codes for medium 2 arid medinin 3 wc can improvi: the

performauce whilst keeping the user density higher.

Fig. l(b) iliiistratcs that tlic use of low-rate codes is more beneficial for a storage sys-

tem that miploys the fill1 graph sdierne. The first, aiid third curves from the lcft are the

pcrformarrce for mcdiurri 1 using a rate 0.5 arid 0.8 1,DPC (:ode rcspectivcly. Althoiigh Llic

11s~o:f a lower rate code rcduccs the user bit, density, the gain in SNR. out,weighs this loss in

dciisity. To iHust,ratcthis point inediiim 1 was simulated with twice thc writc frequency as

before and tlic full graph scherric with a rate 0.5 LDPC cock was applied to t,hc resulting

PSF. The resiilt of this is Llic rnidtllc ciirve in Fig. l(1)). Here the iiser bit density is more

ilian tlic cils~:whcu 8.rate 0.8 code is u s i d m d thc pcrforrnatice is Iictter. This alal,ysis will

be cxtciicled to usitig the dccotler on data read direci.ly from a. Iriagnetfic hard drivc and t,o

a study of the performancc versus storagc dcnsi1.y trade-off.

[l]D. G . Porter, D.Sc. Thesis, Washington University, St.I,ouis, MO: I99G. (21 N. Singla, et d.!IEEE Trans. Muyn., vol. 38, pp. 2328-2330, St:pt,. 2002. [:j] Y . Wu, et id., IEEE Trans. hfaga., vol. 39,pp. 2115-2120>Jiily 2003. [4] B. G.Rob, 16EE T ~ T whf.a,qnv~o>l. 38, ~ p 1.830-1838, July 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:02:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

