1594

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

Improved Bit-Flipping Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Nenad Miladinovic, Student Member, IEEE, and Marc P. C. Fossorier, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this correspondence, a new method for improving hard-de-

cision bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is

presented. Bits with a number of unsatisfied check sums larger than a pre-

determined threshold are flipped with a probability

1 which is inde-

pendent of the code considered. The probability is incremented during

decoding according to some rule. With a proper choice of the initial , the

proposed improved bit-flipping (BF) algorithm achieves gain not only in

performance, but also in average decoding time for signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) values of interest with respect to = 1.

Index Terms—Bit flipping, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2] were first proposed by Gallager in the 1960s and later resurrected by MacKay and Neal [3], [4]. They have since been given great attention. Like turbo codes, LDPC codes are Shannon-limit approaching codes [5], [6]. LDPC codes are less subject to error floor than turbo codes and in general have relatively good distance properties.
An LDPC code is defined as the null space of a matrix H , the parity-
check matrix, which contains a small number of ones compared to
the total number of entries. A regular (N; K)(J; L) LDPC code, with block length N and dimension K, has a parity-check matrix H of M
 0 rows, M N K and N columns with exactly L “ones” in each
row and J “ones” in each column. An additional condition is that the number of “ones” in common between any two rows of H , denoted , is at most one. The rows of the matrix H are referred to as check
sums and the elements of these check sums as code bits. Therefore,
each check sum is checking L bits and each bit is checked by J check sums. Based on its parity-check matrix H , an LDPC code can also
be represented by a bipartite graph, with one subset of nodes representing the bits, and the other subset of nodes representing the check
sums [7]. An edge between bit i and check sum j exists if and only
 if bit i is checked by check sum j. The condition  1 guaran-
tees a girth of at least six, which is very important for good iterative decoding of the code. There also exist irregular LDPC codes, whose check sums have different weights [5], [6]. In other words, the degrees of the bit nodes and check sum nodes in the bipartite graph are no longer constant. It has been reported that irregular LDPC codes can achieve better performance than regular ones [5], [6]. Special families of LDPC codes, such as one-step majority logic decodable (OSMLD) codes, can also be constructed based on finite geometries [8], [9]. Both soft-decision decoding and hard-decision decoding can be used to iteratively decode LDPC codes. In his seminal paper, Gallager has proposed two hard-decision bit-flipping (BF) algorithms, and one soft-decision
Manuscript received August 11, 2003; revised November 1, 2004. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR–0098029. The material in this correspondence was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu HI 96822 USA (e-mail: nenad.miladinovic@gmail.com; marc@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu).
Communicated by K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2005.844095

probabilistic decoding algorithm. The probabilistic decoding algorithm proposed by Gallager is essentially the same as the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm [4]. Since the standard BP algorithm handles probabilities, it is complex, computationally expensive, subject to numerical problems, and hardware implementation becomes subject to all of these drawbacks. There have been many works on improving the BP algorithm. Simplified algorithms for soft-decision decoding with good performance–complexity tradeoff have been proposed, some of these with very small degradation in performance. On the other hand, there has not been much work on improving hard-decision decoding algorithms. Hard-decision decoding algorithms have an error performance less exceptional than that of soft-decision decoding algorithms but these algorithms have other advantages. They are simple, very fast, easy to implement in hardware, and are the only way to decode LDPC codes if only hard decisions are available at the receiver. For example, for the next generation of optical communications systems operating at 40 Gb/s, the current circuit technology does not accommodate soft-decision decoding and only hard-decision decoding is possible.
In this correspondence, a simple method to improve the performance of LDPC codes over the binary-symmetric channel (BSC) is presented. Since only hard decisions are available at the output of the channel, all
the bits are equally reliable, or equally unreliable. For (J; L) LDPC
codes, it has been observed that estimates corresponding to a number
d e close to J=2 unsatisfied check sums become quite unreliable due to
multiple errors, cycles in the code graph, and equally likely a priori hard decisions. Consequently, the occurrence of these events should be reduced in order to improve the decoding. An algorithm that utilizes this feature has been proposed [10], but in a different context, as it needs soft information.
In this correspondence, the following method is proposed: whenever the number of unsatisfied check sums suggest that a bit should
 be flipped, it is flipped with some probability p 1 rather than being
flipped automatically. In [10], the reliability of the soft information determines whether a bit is flipped or not when the check sums results suggest to do so. Other hybrid BF algorithms have been proposed [9], [11]–[13] but contrarily to the proposed approach, the use of soft information implicitly assumes an underlying channel of capacity larger than that of the BSC. A probabilistic updating rule has also been proposed in [14] but in a very different context as BP decoding is considered and the updating probabilities are determined from the cycle distribution of the graph representation of the code. However, both methods have the same purpose, namely, to slow down the propagation of information in the less reliable parts of the graph.
In this correspondence, it is shown that the proposed decoding algorithm slows down the decoding in the case of an ideal code whose bipartite graph has a tree structure, with no performance gain to be expected. However, for LDPC codes with cycles in their graph representations we observe an improvement not only in error performance, but also in decoding time for signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) values of interest. In general, significant improvements are obtained for codes with
J = 3. For J > 3, the influence of the instances with a number of un-
d e satisfied check sums close to J=2 rapidly declines as J increases.
As a result, the potential improvement also rapidly decreases as J in-
creases. Nevertheless, the average decoding time can still remain significantly smaller with the proposed approach. This last property is
elaborated due to its counter-intuitive nature, as a choice p < 1 seems
to slow down the convergence of the algorithm. Finally, the proposed probabilistic decoding algorithm is combined with parallel decoding of the same received sequence and with a reinitialization procedure when convergence to a noncodeword has been identified. The first procedure is based on the fact that probabilistic decoding of the same sequence

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:01:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

1595

 can result in different outputs and therefore a combined approach can with some probability p 1 instead of being flipped automatically.

improve the decoding at all SNR values, while the second procedure is In a tree graph, this slows down the algorithm, and decreases the

intended to lower the error floor.

fraction of incorrect as well as correct estimates passed from bit nodes

The rest of the correspondence is organized as follows. In Section II, to check nodes. However, no improvement in error performance is

we briefly review Gallager’s BF algorithms. In Section III, the con- expected as information is passed in a forward way only in the tree. In

cept of probabilistic bit flipping is introduced and explained. Section IV a graph with cycles, reduction of the fraction of correct estimates has

gives a theoretical analysis and in Section V we present some character- no major drawbacks except slowing down the decoding process. How-

istic examples. In Section VI, simulation results are given for different ever, the reduction of incorrect estimates is important for codes with

LDPC codes, and concluding remarks are given in Section VII.

short cycles in their graph representation as these errors can rapidly

influence subsequent iterations due to the feedback of information

II. GALLAGER’S DETERMINISTIC BIT-FLIPPING (BF) ALGORITHMS

introduced by the cycles. This procedure also helps breaking some of the periodic patterns associated with cycles, because estimates passed

Gallager proposed in [1] two simple hard-decision decoding algo- from the bit nodes involved in a periodic pattern may be allowed to

rithms for decoding LDPC codes over a BSC. The decoder computes change. Furthermore, with some of the periodic patterns corrected, the

 0 all the parity-check sums and then changes any digit that is contained probabilistic BF procedure may reach the convergence point, where
in a fixed number b J 1 or more unsatisfied check sums. Parity messages passed between nodes no longer change, even more rapidly.

checks are then recomputed using these new values. The process is re- Thus, if a stopping criterion recognizing this occurrence is used, the

peated until all the check sums are satisfied or until some maximum average decoding time can be reduced.

number of iterations is reached. If the check sum weights are small, Probabilistic BF is expected to be most useful when the number of
d e this procedure is reasonable since enough check sums are likely to con- unsatisfied check sums is close to J=2 . The probability p, with which

tain either one error or no errors. Thus, when most of the parity-check bits are flipped, is a design parameter that depends on the crossover

sums intersecting on one bit are violated, there is a strong indication
that this bit is in error. The number b is referred to as threshold, and the
two algorithms proposed by Gallager differ in the way the threshold is
0 chosen. When threshold is fixed at b = J 1, the corresponding al-

probability of the BSC, the threshold for a given code, and the itera-
tive step. These dependencies are further elaborated in the convergence
analysis of Section IV-A. If J > 3, bits with a different number of
unsatisfied check sums should be flipped with different probabilities.

gorithm is referred to as Algorithm A (BFA). If the threshold can vary,

d e   0 with

J 2

b J 1 during decoding, the algorithm is referred to as

Algorithm B (BFB). Algogrithm A is simple and easy to implement,

but as J increases its performance degrades, as only a fraction of in-

formation is used. Algorithm B is more effective, but its performance
depends upon the threshold setup. For codes with J = 3, the two al-

gorithms are equivalent.

One of the main problems in the hard-decision decoding of LDPC

The greater the number of unsatisfied check sums is, the greater the
reliability of the information obtained is. As a result, these bits can be
flipped with a higher probability. For J = 3, Algorithm A (or equiva-
0 lently B) flips a bit in one check sum only if the J 1 = 2 other check
sums are unsatisfied. In that case, only one probability value p needs to be updated as the algorithm progresses (p is gradually increased with the iteration number). For Algorithm A with J > 3, the candidate bits
0 for flipping are those with J 1 unsatisfied check sums. When J is

codes is the presence of short cycles in the graph representation of the
 code. The condition  1 only ensures that there are no cycles of
length four in the graph, but cycles of length six may still remain and

large, these estimates are very reliable and slowing down the decoding
may not be beneficial. For Algorithm B, given that the threshold b be-
d e comes close to J=2 , all the bits with more than b unsatisfied check

influence the error performance. In particular, short cycles in the graph sums are candidates for flipping. However, not too many bits are ex-
0 of the code can cause periodic error patterns in the set of messages, pected to remain erroneous since the algorithm started with b = J 1.

and the decoding algorithm cannot cope with these periodic patterns.
Assume that at some point of the decoding, the set of messages is S0,
and that after a number of additional iterations, which define the period
of the pattern, the set of messages is again S0. Due to its deterministic
nature, the algorithm is now trapped into an infinite periodic pattern,
which it cannot resolve. However, if a fraction of errors caused by these
periodic patterns is corrected, some improvement can eventually be
expected.

The same reasoning applies to irregular LDPC codes.
B. Parallel Decoding With Reinitialization
The proposed probabilistic decoding algorithm achieves considerable gain in both performance and decoding time in the waterfall part
of the error performance curve, especially for J = 3. However, the
algorithm is not able to improve the error floor that has been observed for Gallager’s deterministic BF decoding. The error floor occurs mainly

due to the BF strategy in conjunction with the presence of cycles in the

III. NEW METHOD FOR IMPROVING BF DECODING A. Probabilistic BF Algorithm

code graph, which often induces periodic error patterns with small period. Probabilistic BF is more helpful in breaking periodic patterns of large period, than that of small period (especially of period one). The

In both Gallager’s BF decoding algorithms, a bit is flipped if the number of unsatisfied check sums is greater than a predetermined
 0 threshold b, b J 1. For small J, this decision may not be reliable

following procedure is proposed to help resolve this problem for LDPC
codes with J = 3. Generalization to codes with J > 3 is straightfor-
ward.

enough due to the unreliable a priori hard-decision values and cycles At the end of the decoding process, if the decoded word is not a code-

in the graph of the code. Moreover, a bit reliability decreases as the word, all bits with one or more unsatisfied check sums are flipped and
d e number of unsatisfied check sums it contributes to approaches J=2 . p is reset from 1 to a value less than 1 which does not need to be the
Thus, if a wrong decision is made at iteration i, it is likely to affect initial value of p. This ensures that all bits involved in a cycle are simul-

subsequent iterations, especially if it propagates within cycles in taneously flipped, but it also flips a number of correct bits. However,

the graph. Since we have no means to evaluate the reliability of the unless a new periodic pattern is created, iteratively decoding this new

estimates, except via the number of unsatisfied check sums, Gallager’s sequence may lead to the correct codeword. The number of additional
BF algorithms can be modified in the following way in an attempt to iterations and the reset value of p depend on one another and can be

improve these reliabilities. Whenever the number of the unsatisfied found by optimizing the decoding in terms of performance or delay. If

check sums is greater than the predetermined threshold, a bit is flipped a valid codeword is not obtained after these steps, a new periodic error

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:01:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1596

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

is generally created. This procedure is iteratively repeated until either a Therefore, the average probability that bit in iteration i+1 is in error

valid codeword is obtained or some predetermined maximum number is

of iterations is reached. The probabilistic nature of the proposed algorithm can be further
exploited in conjunction with parallel decoding. Since the decoding

0 0 0 +1 0 0 + 0 pi = p

pp F (pi) + p(1 p )F (pi):

(1)

algorithm is probabilistic and a large number of iterations can be used, it is very unlikely that a number of decoders fed with the same input and working in parallel produce the same output unless it is a codeword. Since each decoder proposes a candidate word, the following set of decision rules has been established to obtain a final decoded word.

It is readily verified that this algorithm is optimal for p = 1. However, this algorithm can still converge to zero and achieve the same threshold as Gallager’s Algorithm A if p is increased as the algorithm progresses. If the algorithm starts with a suboptimal value p < 1, the algorithm may reach a nonzero point of convergence. Hence, p should be

• If there is only one codeword among the candidate words, that increased by a predetermined step, if not already 1. Although this algo-

is the final decoded word.

rithm has no practical value, its convergence analysis is exact assuming

• If there is more than one codeword among candidate words, a cycle-free code. Importantly the analysis suggests that p should be in-

choose the one closest in Hamming distance to the received creased as the decoding progresses in order to avoid static points, i.e.,

word.

points of nonzero convergence.

• If none of the candidate words obtained from decoders working Next, we consider a slightly modified algorithm in which if a de-

in parallel is a codeword, the final decoded word is obtained cision of not flipping a bit is taken despite its check sums indicating

using a majority logic rule for each bit based on all the candidate otherwise, the values sent at the previous iteration from that bit are

words.

sent again to the checks (instead of the initial value). An error in the

Undetected errors are very unlikely to occur for Gallager-type LDPC codes, and no undetected errors were recorded in the simulations presented in Section VI. Therefore, it is unlikely that two decoders having the same sequence as input and working in parallel converge to different codewords. Hence, the second decision rule is introduced just for completeness of the decoding procedure.
IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR CYCLE-FREE CODES
A. Convergence Analysis
The proposed approach has been designed for codes with cycles in their graph representation and although previous comments suggest a different behavior for codes with a tree representation, a theoretical analysis of this latter may still be useful. Furthermore, such an analysis is the only theoretical approach known at this time. This analysis was first proposed by Gallager in [1], [2].
In this section, we derive the recursive equation that describes the proposed iterative algorithm in the case of a cycle-free code. First, we consider the following algorithm. If all its check sums suggest flipping,

first iteration is caused by the same instances as in the previous example. Therefore, the probability of error of a bit in iteration 1 is the same as in the previous example and is given by (1). The probability of error of a bit in iteration 2 is slightly different due to the difference in the second of the three previous error events and the fact that one more instance may occur. If the bit is received in error and its check sums suggest flipping, but it is decided not to flip (an event of proba-
0 bility p0(1 + p)F (p1)), the value that is passed to iteration 2 is the bit
value obtained in iteration 1 that has the average probability of error
p1. Therefore, the probability of error of a bit in iteration 2 for this
0 instance is p0(1 + p)F (p1)p1. The new instance that may occur cor-
responds to the bit being received correctly, suggested for flipping, but we decide not to flip in which case the bit value in iteration 2 is again bit value obtained in iteration 1. Hence, the probability of error of a bit
0 0 in iteration 2 for this instance is (1 p0)(1 0 p)F (p1)p1. Therefore,
the average probability of error of a bit in iteration 2 is
0 0 0 p2 = p0(1 F+(p1)) + (1 0 1 p )pF (p ) 0 0 0 + [p0F+(p1) + (1 0p )F (p1)] p1(1 p):

a bit is flipped with probability p, and flipping is omitted with proba-
0 bility 1 p, in which case the algorithm sends the initial value given
by the channel. For a bit-error probability x
0 + F (x) = 1 + (1 2x)L01 J01 2

 By induction it follows that if pi is the probability of error of a bit in
iteration i then, for i 1
0 0 0 pi+1 = p0(1 + F (pi)) + (1 0p )pF (pi) 0 0 0 0 + 0 + [p F (pi) + (1 p )F (pi)] pi(1 p): (2)

0 represents the probability of an even number of errors in J 1 orthog- or equivalently

onal check sums and
0 F (x) =

0 0 1 (1 2x)L01 J01
2

0 represents probability of an odd number of errors in J 1 orthogonal
check sums. Let p0 represent the crossover probability of a BSC and

let pi represent probability of a bit error after i > 0 iterations. Than, there are three instances that cause a bit to be in error at iteration i + 1.

0 0 0 pi+1 = p0 p0F+(pi)(1 (1 p)pi) 0 0 0 0 +(1 p )F (pi)(p + (1 p)pi): (3)
Unlike the previous analysis, this analysis is not exactly true, as we assume that each bit is independent of its past. Apart from the cycle-free code assumption, this is yet another assumption necessary to make this analysis possible. Without this assumption it would be impossible to keep track of dependencies between bits at iteration i, and bits in all

• The bit is received incorrectly, and has not been corrected be- prior iterations. Note that a similar assumption was used in the model

cause the check sums did not suggest flipping. This event has of [15]. With respect to [15], our assumption is less stringent as related

0 probability p0(1 F+(pi)).

to only some of the error events.

 • The bit is received incorrectly, has been suggested to be flipped, Notice that pi+1 in (1) is at least equal to pi+1 in (3) since F+(pi)

0 but the decision of not flipping was made. This event has prob- 0 F (pi). Therefore, (3) outperforms (1) and we can guarantee conver-

ability p0(1 + p)F (pi).

gence of the sequence pi in (3) to zero as both sequences are nonneg-

• The bit is received correctly, but has been flipped because all ative and the sequence pi in (1) converges to zero [1]. As suggested

check sums suggest so, and decision is made to flip. This event by the previous analysis, the random flipping probability p has to be

0 has probability (1 0 0p )pF (pi).

updated during the iterative process.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:01:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

1597

The choice of the initial provement over Algorithm

value A can

p3
be

oexf ppecatfefedcftosrthvealsuteastipc3po<in1ts.onImly-.

   For L 10, such is the case for J = 3 and L 6, but not for J 4.

Convergence analysis and threshold computation can be devised based

on (3) but too optimistic values are found since correlations between

iterations are ignored.

As a design parameter, the flipping probability p has two degrees of

freedom, the initial value and the increment value. There exists no gen-

eral way to optimize p by choosing these two parameters, but the con-

ovefrpgeinscpe3a,naanldystihseoifnfecrrsema egnotosdcagnuibdeanfcoeu.nTdhaes

minimum initial value maximum increments

that allow convergence for the case of a tree-like code. The values pro-

vided this way should be revised down for finite length applications.

B. Range of the Probabilistic BF Algorithm

A careful analysis of the convergence can predict the classes of

LDPC codes for which improvement in performance can be expected.

Consider (2) and the following equation:

0 0 pi+1 = p0(1 F+(pi)) + (1 p0)F0(pi)

(4)

due to Gallager for Algorithm A. The last two terms in (2) can be viewed as higher order terms compared to the first two terms and can be safely ignored in this analysis. Hence, we introduce the following

value as a figure of merit about the gain of the probabilistic BF algo-

rithm over Gallager’s Algorithm A:

0 0 0 0 G(p; pi; J; L) = (1

p0)(1

1 p)

(1

2pi)L01

J01
;

2

which corresponds to the difference between pi+1 in (4) and (2), with
the last two terms of (2) neglected. It is readily seen that G(p; pi; J; L) is nonincreasing with J and nondecreasing with L, and therefore the optimal values are J as small as possible and L as large as possible.
Although the results derived in this section apply to codes with a tree representation, the occurrence of static points with respect to the choice of p should still influence decoding on graphs with cycles. The convergence analysis presented can also be extended to Gallager’s Algorithm B in the case of a tree-like code, but the results of this section suggest

Fig. 1. State diagram corresponding to decoding of (7; 3; 4) LDPC code with deterministic BF algorithm.
in error. If the number of transmission errors is 0, 1, 6, or 7, deterministic BF correctly decodes. Since the conditional bit-error probabilities given the number of transmission errors are known, an analytic expression can be readily derived for the bit-error rate (BER)

little potential for the approach with J > 3. Therefore, our focus is on the class of (3; L) codes.

V. CODES WITH CYCLES

so that

Pe(i) = 0; 4
Pe(i) = 7 ;

for i = 0; 1; 6; 7 for i = 2; 3; 4; 5

The following two examples are aimed to give insight about the performance of a probabilistic BF algorithm for codes with cycles and the performance gain that can be achieved over Gallager’s deterministic BF Algorithm A.
A. A Special Example: The (7; 3; 4) Cyclic Code
Consider a (7; 3; 4)(3; 3) LDPC code. This code is the null space of the parity-check matrix obtained by cyclic shifts of [1011000]. It is chosen because it is short, and therefore easy to analyze. It is saturated with cycles of length six and eight, so that the benefits of probabilistic BF can be easily illustrated. Furthermore, its symmetry and invariance properties significantly reduce the number of error patterns that have to be considered. After an exhaustive consideration of all relevant error

0 5
Pe =
i=2

7 i(1 i

)70i 4 7

(5)

where  is the crossover probability of the BSC, Pe(i) and Pe are the

conditional probability of bit error given the initial state i and the av-

erage probability of bit error, respectively.

A similar analysis can be conducted for the probabilistic BF algo-

rithm. Once again, a state diagram that describes the performance of

0 cthoerraelcgtoarbiltehm(incainitbeeractioonnsst)ruwctiethd.aAplrlosbianbgilleittyransijm0=i11s(s1ion

errors pj )pi

remain , where

pj is the BF probability for iteration j. For high enough SNR values,

low-weight error patterns are most likely to occur, and since all single

errors are correctable, double transmission errors become the most in-

patterns, the performance of this code under Gallager’s deterministic BF algorithm can be illustrated with the state diagram of Fig. 1.
Each state represents either the number of initial errors in the received word, or the number of errors in the decoded word after one iteration of the algorithm. Directed branches represent transitions after one iteration of the algorithm. Clearly, the state diagram is divided into two clusters, indicating that no error pattern of weight 2; 3; 4; or 5 can be decoded correctly. Those error patterns are decoded with four bits

teresting and are considered next. The state diagram, depicted in Fig. 2, corresponds to the case of two transmission errors and is associated with an underlying Markov chain that helps us to derive a theoretical bound for the BER.
It is important to note that the state zero in Fig. 2 can be reached from any other represented state with nonzero probability, unlike the case of the state diagram of deterministic BF. Also, with this initialization of the decoder (two errors), state 7 is never reached

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:01:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1598

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

considered and all the bits connected to this cluster are assumed correct.

The intent is to compare the propagation of the errors from the cluster to

the rest of the graph for a tree structure and a cycle, and to illustrate the

potential advantage of applying probabilistic rather than deterministic

BF. The following labeling is adopted for Fig. 4. Circles represent bit

nodes and their passed messages, and squares represent check nodes

and their passed messages. Solid circles represent incorrectly received

bits for states and incorrect bit decisions for messages. Empty circles

represent correctly received bits for states and correct bit decisions for

messages. The same notation is used for squares with respect to check

sums. Engulfed bit messages represent messages that are flipped due to

the deterministic BF algorithm. Messages engulfed with a bold double

circle represent messages leaving the cluster where improvement with

probabilistic BF can be achieved.

We observe that with deterministic BF, in both cases, the number of

incorrect messages leaving the tree cluster is smaller than the number

of corresponding messages leaving the cycle cluster. This suggests a

larger propagation of errors from the cycle cluster than from the tree

Fig. 2. State diagram corresponding to decoding of (7; 3; 4) LDPC code with probabilistic BF algorithm and two initial transmission errors.
and is omitted in Fig. 2. This figure indicates that some of the errors that could not be corrected with deterministic BF can now be corrected with some probability with the probabilistic algorithm. We used computer simulation to find otherwise analytically intractable steady-state probabilities of the state diagram in Fig. 2. The probabilistic BF algorithm is implemented with fixed BF probability p = 0:7 as we need the transition probabilities in the corresponding Markov chain to be constant. The steady-state probabilities for the case of two initial transmission errors obtained by computer simulation are Pi(2) = 0:34; 0:019; 0:016; 0:037; 0:588; 0; 0, for i = 0; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6, respectively. Note that the steady-state probability of state 4 is reduced to 0:588 compared to 1 for the case of deterministic BF and two transmission errors, which is a considerable

cluster. However, probabilistic BF can reduce this effect for the cycle cluster. One of the incorrect outgoing bit messages can be corrected, if restrained from flipping. For the case of three errors represented in
0 the Fig. 4, the best case scenario, with probability p2(1 p) to occur,
is that the two error messages which stay within the cycle are flipped and that the outgoing error message is not flipped. Another likely event is that the outgoing message is passed correctly but some of the messages within the cycle are passed incorrectly. In both scenarios, error propagation is prevented, however, in the latter case, there is some local degradation due to incorrectly passed messages. This local degradation does not cause degradation in performance as it only causes delay due to additional iterations necessary to resolve the problem. Therefore, as long as the number of incorrect outgoing messages is decreased in comparison to the deterministic BF, some gain in global performance is possible due to the reduced error propagation. Other structures of cycles of length 6 and 8 have been studied in a similar way [16].

gain. Next, we can use this result to calculate the conditional BER

given two transmission errors

6

Pe(2) = Pi(2)Pe(i) = 0:359

(6)

i=1

where

i

Pe(i)

=

: 7

VI. SIMULATIONS
Since p has to be increased from its initial value to p = 1 during the iterative decoding process, the probabilistic BF algorithm is implemented in the following manner. Initialize p at the beginning of decoding, say p = 0:1. Perform the probabilistic decoding algorithm as described in Section III-A. After each iteration, compare the values of the bit nodes with their values at the previous iteration. If no change

and Pi(2) represents probability that the decoding ends in state i given

two initial transmission errors. The remaining probabilities were ob-

tained along the same lines and yielded the BER of the (7; 3; 4) code

7
Pe = i=2

0 0 7 i(1
i

)7 iPe(i):

(7)

The improvement in the conditional BER for the double error pat-

terns is a

reduction

from

4 7

=

0:57 to

0:359. Since, apart

from the

cor-

rectable single error patterns, double error patterns are the most likely

error patterns to occur, this is where the performance gain is achieved.

The error performance of each decoding algorithm is depicted in Fig. 3.

Although this code is very specific due to its structure and has no prac-

tical value, it serves as a good example to illustrate the benefits of prob-

abilistic BF. It clearly shows that state 0, which could not be reached

from states 2; 3; 4; and 5 with deterministic BF is now accessible with

probabilistic BF.

is detected, increase p by a predetermined step (for all simulations in this section, the step is 0:1). After updating p, the algorithm resumes in a similar manner until p = 1. At that point, the updating criterion becomes a stopping criterion and when satisfied, the decoding stops (note that the updating rule can be viewed as a stopping criterion for each value of p). The following labeling is adopted in the figures: “BFA and BFB” for Gallager’s BF Algorithms A (p = 1) and B, respectively, “BFAprob and BFBprob” for the corresponding proposed probabilistic BF algorithms; and “BP over BSC” represents the BP algorithm initialized with the crossover probabilities  of the BSC. This latter is the best possible algorithm for a BSC, but it is quite complex and  is not always available. However, it can be used as a benchmark for our BF algorithms. The proposed algorithm was first applied to decode a (1008; 504)(3; 6) regular LDPC code. Fig. 5 illustrates how the performance can be improved with the introduction of probabilistic BF.
As expected from Section IV-A, we observe that for a fixed choice of

B. General Structures

p, the smaller p is, the better the performance at low SNR but the higher the error floor due to the static point. It is interesting to notice that in-

Another example is the comparison of BF decoding on a tree and creasing p as the algorithm progresses provides the best error perfor-

on a graph with cycles. Only a local cluster of the graph with errors is mance corresponding to the envelope of fixed p curves. We observe that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:01:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

1599

Fig. 3. BER for (7; 3; 4)(3; 3) LDPC code.

more than 1 dB coding gain is achieved over Algorithm A for the SNR performance curve, a smaller number of iterations are processed by the

values corresponding to the waterfall region of the curves. Unfortu- probabilistic BF algorithm in both cases. Consequently, the proposed

nately, no improvement in the error floor is achieved with probabilistic algorithm not only improves the error performance of Algorithm A for

BF decoding. This can be explained by the fact that the error floor is (3; 6) codes, but also reduces the average decoding time.

generally caused by errors which remain within cycles and therefore This reduction which differs from decoding on the tree (see Sec-

no improvement can be expected. The same behavior is observed as N tions III and IV-A), can be explained as follows. The proposed

increases, as shown in Fig. 6 for a (40000; 20000)(3; 6) code.

probabilistic BF algorithm reduces the fraction of incorrect messages

In order to further address the error floor issue, a (40000; 20000) (3; 6) code with girth ten was constructed using the progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm of [17]. Despite significant improvement, the error floor was not removed.
In an attempt to improve both the waterfall and the error floor regions, the modifications suggested in Section III-B are applied to the decoding of the (1008; 504)(3; 6) code with girth six in Fig. 7. A girth eight (1008; 504)(3; 6) code was also simulated and exhibited similar behavior, but did not yield much gain over the girth six code. As expected, parallel decoding with reinitialization improves the error performance in both the waterfall part and the error floor region. We observe that increasing the number of parallel decodings beyond some point is not beneficial due to saturation.
The results for the (40000; 20000)(3; 6) code are also presented in Fig. 6. Due to the steep slope of the waterfall region, probabilistic BF in parallel with reinitialization cannot achieve significant gain in this part of the curve. However, it is capable of significantly lowering the error floor beyond the simulated BERs. The point at 4.2 dB has been simulated but no error was recorded after 20 000 simulated blocks. Simulations with increased maximum number of iterations (max. 2000) were also performed, but no performance improvement was achieved with respect to the maximum numbers reported in the figures.

passed from the bit nodes to the check nodes. Indeed, it also reduces by a similar amount the fraction of correct messages initially in error in the received sequence. In a tree-like structure, only a slow down (or possibly stopping) of the algorithm is expected as correct messages are passed only in the forward direction and when the algorithm converges, their numbers decreases with iterations. On the other hand, cycles introduce feedback propagation of incorrect messages and probabilistic BF reduces this effect. Reducing the number of incorrect messages passed at early iterations slows down the algorithm at these iterations, but also reduces the propagation of these errors at subsequent iterations. As a result, the point at which messages exchanged no longer change can eventually be reached more rapidly. As the SNR value increases, a priori values become more and more reliable, less and less iterations are required on average, and the number of blocks for which probabilistic BF is helpful decreases: early iterations dominate the average number of iterations and probabilistic BF becomes slower than deterministic BF. This behavior also suggest that little gain in either performance or speed can be expected for probabilistic BF of irregular codes
 since bit nodes with degree J 3 influence the decoding in its
late stage. In Section IV-A, we derived criteria to evaluate the gain that can pos-
sibly be achieved with the proposed algorithm. Those criteria suggested

The average number of iterations per codeword decoding is depicted that by increasing the value of L for fixed J , a larger gain should be

in Fig. 8 for the two (1008; 504)(3; 6) codes of girth 6 and 8. We ob- expected over Algorithm A. We simulated a (1680; 1176)(3; 10) code

serve that for SNR values corresponding to the waterfall part of the whose results are depicted in Fig. 9.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:01:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1600

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

Fig. 4. One iteration of decoding on tree and cycle of length six given two transmission errors.

The “BDD” curve in this figure represents the performance of a same trend as for the (40000; 20000)(3; 6) code of Fig. 6 regarding the bounded distance decoder with correcting capability corresponding to error floor. The point at SNR value 4.75 dB was simulated with 25 000

the Elias’ bound on the minimum distance [18, pp. 163–164]. As ex- blocks and no errors.

pected, the gain improved from

1o.v1erdABlgaot r1it0h0m4

A increased as L increased. The for the (1008; 504)(3; 6) code

gain (see

Fig. 5) to 1.9 dB for the (3; 10) code. Although the comparison is not

strictly fair due to the different lengths and rates, the general trend is

verified. Unfortunately, the method proposed to improve performance

at the error floor failed for this (3; 10) code. Due to the short code

length and large value of L, the reinitialization procedure does not im-

The probabilistic BF algorithms A and B were also applied to a (4000; 2000)(4; 8) code. Algorithm BFBprob was devised such that bits with three unsatisfied check sums are first flipped with probability p0 = 0:9, due to their high reliability, and bits with two unsatisfied check sums were then flipped with probability p1 = 0:65. The simulation results are reported in Fig. 11.
We observe that the performance improvement provided by the pro-

prove performance as it generates new periodic patterns of short period. posed algorithm is relatively small, as expected from the results of Sec-

Therefore, this procedure is applied to decode a (3; 10) LDPC code of tion IV-A. It influences only the last part of Algorithm B, at which meslength 40 000. Simulated results are depicted in Fig. 10. We observe the sages are either very reliable or very unreliable. This is confirmed by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:01:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

1601

Fig. 5. BER for a (1008; 504)(3; 6) LDPC code and different values of p; maximum of 200 iterations.

Fig. 6. BER for (40000; 20000)(3;6) LDPC codes with parallel decoding and reinitialization; maximum of 300 iterations. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:01:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1602

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

Fig. 7. BER for a (1008; 504)(3; 6) LDPC code with parallel decoding and reinitialization; maximum of 200 iterations.
Fig. 8. Average number of iterations per codeword decoding for (1008; 504)(3; 6) LDPC codes; maximum of 200 iterations. the fact that probabilistic BF Algorithm A marginally improves its de- explained by the fact that the probabilistic BF improves the last part of the terministic counterpart. On the other hand, the proposed algorithm sig- converging process. In a (4; 8) code, this last part may be reached quite nificantly reduces the average decoding time of Algorithm B, as shown rapidly (when needed) by Algorithm B (which has only two parts). Since in Fig. 12 (plotted in log scale). This somewhat surprising result can be the number of short cycles in the code graph is larger than that of a (3; 6)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:01:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

1603

Fig. 9. BER for a (1680; 1176)(3; 10) LDPC code; maximum of 200 iterations.
Fig. 10. BER for a (40000; 28000)(3; 10) LDPC code; maximum of 300 iterations. code of the same length, the convergence for the (4; 8) code is likely to potential average savings in iterations with probabilistic BF are larger for be slower than for the (3; 6) code with deterministic BF. As a result, the the (4; 8) code than for the (3; 6) code of the same length.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:01:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1604

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

Fig. 11. BER for a (4000; 2000)(4; 8) LDPC code and fixed p s (p = 0:9, p = 0:65); maximum of 2000 iterations.
Fig. 12. Average number of iterations per codeword decoding for a (4000; 2000)(4; 8) LDPC code; maximum of 2000 iterations. Probabilistic BF decoding was also simulated for the (273; 191) timates based on the number of unsatisfied check sums less than 14 are
(17; 17) projective geometry (PG) LDPC code [9]. The algorithm was unreliable, bits with less than 14 unsatisfied check sums were flipped applied in a similar manner as for the (4; 8) code. Assuming that the es- with the probabilities given in Fig. 13.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:01:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

1605

Fig. 13. BER for the (273; 191)(17; 17) PG LDPC code and fixed p s (p = 0:9, p = 0:8, p = 0:7, p = 0:6, p = 0:55, p = 0:35); maximum of 200 iterations.

In this example, the number of instances with close to dJ=2e unsat- for these codes, improvements both in the waterfall and error-floor

isfied check sums is much smaller than in the previous example. Again, regions were achieved with independent parallel decoding and reini-

as shown in Fig. 13, no significant improvement over Algorithm B has been achieved, as expected. However, since PG codes have very good distance properties compared to regular LDPC codes, the performance of BF Algorithm B is only within 0.5 dB of that of BP over BSC, so

tialization of the decoding when it is not a codeword. For codes with
J = 4, the improvement in performance is not as large as for the codes with J = 3, as implied by the theoretical analysis, but the reduction in decoding time remains significant. For codes with large value of J, the

that the improvement is small but meaningful. On the other hand, the approach provides only small gains in error performance or decoding

average number of iterations for probabilistic BF is negligibly reduced time, but Algorithm B is already very efficient for such codes.

compared to that of Algorithm B. Again, this latter is already quite

small [9].

Irregular LDPC codes were also briefly considered. Low-degree bit

nodes for which probabilistic BF decoding is expected to improve per-

formance are last included into decoding, at which point most of the

errors have already been corrected. Therefore, no significant improve-

ment in decoding is expected. Furthermore, the scheduling of threshold

updates in conjunction with that of flipping probabilities becomes more
complex to implement. We simulated a (4947; 2499) irregular LDPC code of rate 0:5052 with degree distributions (x) = 0:1x2 + 0:6x3 + 0:3x15 and (x) = x9. Only degree three nodes are decoded with

1pr0o0b6a.bTilhisitsicslBigFh;t

a 0.1 dB performance gain is improvement in performance

achieved at is consistent

the BER with our

analysis.

VII. CONCLUSION
In this correspondence, an improved BF decoding algorithm has been presented. The algorithm has been analyzed theoretically using the well-known assumption of a code with a tree representation.
Simulations verified the largest improvement for codes with J = 3,
where gains in both performance and average decoding time have been achieved for the waterfall part of the performance curves. Furthermore,

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] , “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[5] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. D. Spielman, “Impeoved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and belief propagation,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 171.
[7] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 6, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[8] R. Lucas, M. P. C. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of one-step majority logic decodable codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 931–937, Jun. 2000.
[9] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:01:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1606

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 4, APRIL 2005

[10] A. M. Chan and F. R. Kschischang, “A simple taboo-based soft-decision decoding algorithm for expander codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 7, pp. 183–185, Jul. 1998.
[11] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[12] A. Nouh and A. Banihashemi, “Bootstrap decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 391–393, Sep. 2002.
[13] Z. Liu and D. Pados, “Low complexity decoding of finite geometry LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., to be published.
[14] Y. Mao and A. Banihashemi, “Decoding low density parity check codes with probabilistic scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 414–416, Oct. 2001.
[15] M. Mihaljevic and J. Golic, “A method for convergence analysis of iterative probabilistic decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 2206–2211, Sep. 2000.
[16] N. Miladinovic, “Iterative decoding of LDPC and GLDPC codes on BSC,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elec. Eng., Univ. Hawaii at Manoa, , 2005, to be published.
[17] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” in Proc. 2001 Global. Telecommun. Conf., vol. 2, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 995–1001.
[18] R. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication. New York: Wiley, 1968.
Single-User Tracing and Disjointly Superimposed Codes
Miklós Csu˝rös and Miklós Ruszinkó

does not. It is assumed that the transmission is bit and block synchronized. The destination of the messages is a single receiver that observes the bitwise OR vector of the vectors

y=

xi

8i active

associated to the active users. Moreover, suppose that at most r users are active simultaneously. In the classical framework of superimposed coding, the receiver has to be able to identify the set of all active users from the output vector y of the channel. That is, the code must satisfy
  the property that for all choices of x1; . . . ; xk and z1; . . . ; z` of code-
words with 1 k; ` r and fx1; . . . ; xkg 6= fz1; . . . ; z`g, we have

k

`

xi =6

zj:

i=1

j=1

Although the rate of these codes have been studied extensively in, e.g., [1]–[6], it remains to be determined: the gap between the known upper and lower bounds is still substantially large.
Here we investigate the case when the receiver has to be able to identify just one user out of at most r active ones. Clearly, if a code is superimposed in the classical sense then it satisfies this requirement: being able to identify all active users, the receiver can always name just one. A practical motivation for studying r-single-user-tracing (r-SUT) families rises from applications of combinatorial designs in genomics, reviewed in Section II. Section III discusses our results on the rate of SUT superimposed codes. Section IV introduces the class of disjointly superimposed codes, and analyzes their extremal properties. Section V concludes the correspondence with some open questions.

Abstract—The zero-error capacity region of -out-of- user mul-

tiple-access OR channel is investigated. A family of subsets of

[ ] = 1 ...

is an -single-user-tracing superimposed code

( -SUT) if there exists such a single-user-tracing function : 2

that for all

with 1

,(

)

. In this

correspondence, we introduce the concept of these codes and give bounds

on their rate. We also consider disjointly -superimposed codes.

Index Terms—Codes, group testing, physical mapping, superimposed codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

Suppose that T users share a common channel. A binary vector of

length n is associated to each user. The ith user transmits its vector

xi

=

(x1i ;

2 xi ;

..

. ; xni )

(i

=

1; 2; . . . ; T ) if it is active, otherwise it

Manuscript received July 29, 2004; revised October 25, 2004. This work was supported by NSERC under Grant 250391-02, and by OTKA under Grants T038198 and T046234. This work relates to Department of the Navy Grant N00014-04-1-4034 issued by the Office of Naval Research International Field Office and to the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, NSAF, Grant FA 8655-05-1-3017. The United States Government has a royalty-free license throughout the world in all copyrightable material contained herein. AMS classification numbers: 94B65, 94B25, 94A40. The material in this correspondence was presented in part at the IEEE Symposium on Information Theory, Chicago, IL, June/July 2004.
M. Csu˝rös is with the Department of Computer Science and Operations Research, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada (e-mail: csuros@iro.umontreal.ca).
M. Ruszinkó is with the Computer and Automation Research Institute, the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, P. O. Box 63, H-1518, Hungary (e-mail: ruszinko@ lutra.sztaki.hu).
Communicated by A. E. Ashikhmin, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2005.844097

II. SUPERIMPOSED CODES FOR THE PHYSICAL MAPPING OF GENOMIC CLONES
A recently emerging application of superimposed codes, and group testing methods in general, is for the analysis of genomic data. Examples include the quality-control of DNA chips [7], and diverse applications related to genome sequencing: closing the remaining gaps at the end of a sequencing project [8], and clone library screening [9], which we consider here in more detail. The sequencing of large genomes (such as human) rely on genomic clones. We describe here briefly the relevant procedures, somewhat simplifying the problem. A recent overview of large genome sequencing techniques is given by Green [10]. The genome of an organism can be described by a sequence over a four-letter alphabet, corresponding to the four nucleotides used in DNA. Mammalian genome sizes are in the order of billions. For our purposes, a genomic clone is a random contiguous fragment of the genome. (Fragments are inserted into a host cell, which multiplies and thus creates many identical copies of the original cell containing the same piece of inserted foreign DNA fragment, hence the term “clone.”) Typical clone fragment sizes are 100–200 thousand nucleotides. A clone library is a collection of genomic clones, produced using a large number of random fragments from many genome copies. The fragments correspond essentially to a uniform sampling of the whole genome. The information on which part of the genome the fragments originate from is lost in the course of random sampling, and needs to be determined using additional techniques. In a preliminary step to complete genome sequencing, called physical mapping, this information is established, by exploring overlaps between clone fragments. Using the physical map, a smaller set of minimally overlapping clones is selected in order to sequence the clones one-by-one. For instance, while sequencing the human genome, more than 300 thousand genomic clones were analyzed and about 30 thousand were selected for complete sequencing [11].

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:01:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

