O N LDPC CODES SATISFYING THE (0, k ) CONSTRAlNT

Sharareh Babvey'

Steven W. McLaughlin'

( 1) Uepurtmelrt of Compurer Science, Georgia State University, Allunlu, GA 30302-3994, USA (2) School of Ekctricai olrd Compurer Engineering, Georgia lnstilate of Technology,Arlunru. CA 30332. USA

Abstract In this paper, we use the stochastic expcctation-maximization method to illustrate how to comc close to achieving the capacity of the noisy (0, k ) constrained AWGN channels. We use the bitflipping based constrained coding system proposed by Vasic to transmit (0, k ) constrained LDPC codewords ovcr an AWGN channel. In the original approach of Vasic, if the number o f flippcd bits is largc, thc message-passing decoder of LDPC codes fails to correct all thc crrors and thc system is prone to an error floor even at high SNR values [I]. We propose a flip decoder that exploits the infomation from the message-passing decoder to correct the flipped bits. We illustrate that the message-passing decoder and the flip decodcr together correct both the channel and flip errors, and achicve rates close to the noisy (0, k) channel capacity,
1. Introduction Bit-flipping based constrained coding [ I ] is a low complexity approach for designing Constrained
codes. For a (0, k) constraint [2], encoding proceeds in two steps: (1) Encode a message using an error control code. (2) Flip the k+lth zero on any run of k+lconsecutive zeros. For example, ~ codeword C = I lO00OlOOl does not satisfy the (0, 3) constraint. However, if we flip the sixth bit, 8 the resulting codeword satisfies the constraint. We use this coding method to transmit low density I parity-check (LDPC) codes [3] over a (0, k ) constrained AWGN channel, and introduce a new decoder for the joint LDPC and (0, k) constrained system. The proposed decodcr achieves rates close to the noisy (0,k)channel capacity.
2. The Proposed Decoding Scheme Each iteration of the proposed decoder has three steps: (I) Run an iteration of the message-passing algorithm. (2) Employ 'utzzip' to correct thc deliberately flipped bits. (3) Employ 'reflip'to detect those bits that arc incorrectly changed by unJIip. Tbus, our flip decoder includes two steps: 'unjlip' and 'rezip'which both use thc information obtained from the message-passing decoder to correct
w , the dcliberately flipped bits. For a code with length N , we define random variables IM,, UR,(where
I r j 5 and contradict a s follows. I 4 is the sum of all messages from b i t j to all the parities
including bit j . URj is the sum of all messages to bit j from all the parities that includc bit J . Finally, contradict is the number of b i t s j for which ]Mi and UR,differ in sign. For a binary (0, k )
Iv constraint, a bit ci is zinflipped if: ( I ) Bit ci follows a run of k consecutive zeros. Thus, for b i t s j = i
- I , i - 2 ... i - k we have < 0. (2) Bit c, realizes itself to be one with higher probability than
zero, o r /Mi > 0. (3) Bit c, = 0 satisfies all of the parity-checks that includc this bit with higher probabilily than ci= I. In other words, all messages the bit-node receives are negative.
If bit c, satisfies conditions 1 , 2 and also the majority of the parity-checks that include this bit are negative (UR,< 0) then ci is an unflip candidate. After a number o f iterations, if contradict is larger than a given threshold T I then we unflip the candidates. Alternatively, assume that un$p changes bit d,. Reflip flips d, again, if after a number o f iterations UR,increases for hit d, and gets larger than a givcn positive threshold T2,so if URi > T2.

3. Simulation Results We use the stochastic expectrttion-maximization method [4]to compute the capacity bounds for (0, k ) constraincd AWGN channels (Figure 1). The channel input is a Markov proccss of length n = IO4 with k+l statcs for a (0, k ) constrained system. The capacity bounds for constrained channels lay betow the unconstrained (ideat) case. For constraints with k > 4. the gap bctwccn thc capacity bounds is fairly small. Then, we apply the proposed decoder to transmit (0, k) constrained LDPC codcs over an AWGN channel. Figure I shows the achievable rates for (0, 7 ) constrained and unconstrained regular LDPC codes for error rates smaller than le-5. All codes have parity-check matrices of column-weight three. According to the figure, the (0, 7) constrained LDPC code (plottcd with diamonds), and the unconstrained LDPC code (plotted with circles) achieve comparable rates. Moreover, the performance of the constrained LDPC codes is close to the unconstrained case and both codes are about the same distance from their respective capacities. Figure 2 shows how the proposed decoder eliminates the error floor for a (0, 9) constrained LDPC code of rate 0.95 bps. As the figurc shows the error floor of the constrained LDPC code is limited by the error floor of the unconstrained LDPC code, not by the bit flipping system.
p-j_._.-.-.

09

.,_-,-..........................

..I'

1

o*

.i. . .

Figurc 1 Achieved capacities in bit pcr second (bps).

BER vs, SNR for the proposeddecoder compared with the messagc-passing decoder.

4. Conclusions Ln this paper, we used the stochastic expectation-maximization method to illustrate that the (0, k) constrained AWGN channels with k > 4 achieve capacities close to the unconstrained AWGN. W e also used the bit-flipping based constrained coding systcm (due to its Low complexity) to transmit LDPC codewords over (0,k ) constrained AWGN channels. However, this system is prone to an error floor even at high SNR vahes, if the numbcr of flipped hits is largc. Therefore, we designed
an efficient flip decoder to correct the deliberately flipped bits and introduced a new decoder that achieves rates fairly closc to thc noisy (0, k ) constrained channel.

References [ l ] E.Vasic, K. Pedagani IEEE Inrernotionol ConJ on Cum., vol. 5 pp. 3 1 I5 - 3 119,2003.
121 S . Datta, S.W. McLaughIin. IEEE Tronr. h ~ w m T. heory, vol. 45, pp. 2199-2204, Sep. 1999 [3] R. G.Gallager, IRE 7"rmis. Infurm. Tfieoty,vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28. Jan. 1962. [4] A. Kavcic, IEEE Global Communiccrriuns Conference. pp. 2997-3001, Nov. 2001

0-7803-9009-1 /05/$20.00 02005 IEEE

EP 12

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:59:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

