Deep Learning Based Joint Detection and Decoding of Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access Systems
Fuqiang Sun, Kai Niu, and Chao Dong Key Laboratory of Universal Wireless Communications, Ministry of Education Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China 100876
Email: {sunfuqiang, niukai, dongchao}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract—In recent years, many studies have applied deep learning techniques to the field of communication. Many of them have achieved reduced complexity or improved performance. In this paper, we apply deep learning techniques to joint multiuser detection and decoding of non-orthogonal multiple access system. We construct the neural network detector and decoder based on message passing algorithm (MPA) and belief propagation (BP) algorithm, respectively. And the decoder is cascaded with the detector to form a larger neural network. To achieve this, we assign weights to the edges of the respective factor graphs and then use deep learning approaches to train these weights to get better performance. Compared with the conventional method (i.e. MPA for multiuser detection and BP for decoding), the proposed method improves the joint detection and decoding performance, while the computational complexity is not greatly increased.
I. INTRODUCTION
After decades of development, many excellent training methods and neural network structures have been invented in the field of deep learning to accomplish various tasks [1], [2], [3]. In some areas, deep learning methods outperform traditional methods, especially in computer vision and speech processing [4]. In the last decade, there have been continuous attempts to apply deep learning methods to the field of communications. And many satisfactory results [5], [6], [7]have demonstrated that this method is feasible.
The fifth-generation wireless communication requires higher spectral efficiency, lower latency, and massive connections. Current orthogonal multiple access technologies hardly meet these requirements [8]. Non-orthogonal multiple access(NOMA) is a feasible solution to meet these requirements [8], [9]. Unlike orthogonal multiple access, an orthogonal resource can be allocated to multiple users in NOMA system. At the transmitting end, messages from different users are sent non-orthogonally and interference information is actively introduced. Compared to OMA system, the receiver complexity is increased in NOMA system, but higher spectral efficiency can be achieved. Like linear codes, such as BCH codes and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, a NOMA system can be represented by a factor graph in which there are two types of nodes, variable nodes (VNs) corresponding to the users, and function nodes (FNs) corresponding to the orthogonal resource elements (REs). Message passing algorithm can be performed in this factor graph to do multiuser detection.
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61671080, No.61601047).

The message passing algorithm is essentially the same as the belief propagation (BP) algorithm commonly used in LDPC decoding. In the two algorithms, messages are both transmitted over edges of the factor graph. In [5], the author assign weights to the edges of the Tanner graph that represents corresponding linear code. And then these weights are trained by deep learning method. Inspired by this, We suspect that the weights on the edges of the NOMA factor graph may affect the performance of multiuser detection. So we design a neural network multiuser detector which is an alternative representation of the factor graph. The nodes in the neural network multiuser detector is corresponding to messages transmitted over edges. Due to the multi-ary modulation, multiple messages are delivered over one edges of the factor graph when the node is updated.
In this paper, we proposed a scheme of joint detection and decoding of NOMA systems based on deep learning. Unlike the fully connected neural network, the proposed neural network is constructed based on the corresponding factor graph and is a sparse neural network. And if only multi-user detection is performed, the gain from channel coding cannot be utilized. So we design the multi-user detector and decoder as neural networks to form a large neural network. And then use deep learning technologies to train the whole neural network to get better performance.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly describes the system model of NOMA. We present the proposed deep neural network in Section III. The numerical results and conclusion are presented in Section IV and Section V.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

Consider a simplified uplink non-orthogonal multiple access system where V users multiplex onto F orthogonal resource elements. For vth user, each K-bit input binary data uv is channel-coded into an N -bit coded block cv.

cv = uvG

(1)

Where G is the generator matrix. Given the modulation order

J, each user’s N -bit codeword block will be transmitted in

N J

time slots. For the tth

time

slot,

t

=

1, 2, · · ·

N J

,

every

J

bits in cv of the vth user constitute a J-bits vector btv and are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Un9iv7.8D-1o-w5n3l8o6a-d4e9d20o-n6J/1u8n/e$2341,.20002©6 2a0t 1183:I2E6E:3E3 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

directly mapped to a F -dimensional codeword vector xvt .

btv = (c(vt−1)J+1, cv(t−1)J+2, · · · , cvtJ ) = (btv,1, bvt ,2, · · · btv,J )

(2)

xtv = (xvt ,1, xvt ,2, · · · xtv,F )

(3)

The struct of NOMA system can be represented by a factor graph, which is a bipartite graph with V variable nodes (VNs) corresponding to users and F function nodes (FNs) corresponding to the orthogonal resource elements (REs). The edge of vth VN and f th FN means that the f th element of the codeword vector xv is not equal to zero. Vf (Fv, respectively) denotes the set of VNs (FNs) connected to FN f (VN v). The factor graph is illustrated in Fig. 1 for a NOMA system with 6 users and 4 REs.

8VHU 91

8VHU 8VHU

8VHU

8VHU 8VHU

)1 5(

5(

5(

5(

Fig. 1. The factor graph of a NOMA system with 6 users and 4 REs.

In the tth time slot, the received signal vector yt = (y1t , y2t , · · · yFt ) can be represented as:

yt = ∑ V diag(htv)(xvt )T + zT ,

(4)

v=1

Where htv is the vth user’s channel gain vector in the tth time slot. And z is a complex additive white Gaussian noise vector

with mean 0 and variance N0I. After receiving the signal y, multiuser detection and channel

decoding will be performed to recover the data sent by each

user. In this paper, both multiuser detection and channel

decoding are achieved with deep neural networks.

conditional probability, a prior layer (APL) associated with the prior probability, hidden layer and output layer. The nodes in the hidden layer correspond to the messages transmitted over the edges in the factor graph. These nodes are called neurons. Since non-orthogonal multiple access systems involves multiary modulation, the likelihood probability of all codewords needs to be calculated when the nodes are updated. So one neuron in the proposed neural network consists of several subneurons. Given the modulation order J and one FN’s degree d, each neuron consists of 2J sub-neurons except for the CPL. 2J sub-neurons associated with 2J different messages transmitted over the edges. And one neuron in the CPL consists of 2Jd sub-neurons associated with the conditional probability of 2Jd different codeword combinations.
For the ith hidden layer, i = 0, 1, 2, · · · 2L − 1, if i is odd(even), it corresponds to FN(VN) update. For the odd hidden layer, the neuron corresponding to the edge e = (v, f ) is connected to the neuron corresponding to f th neuron of CPL. And it is also connected to the neuron corresponding to the edge e = (v′, f ), v′ ∈ Vf /v in the hidden layer i − 1. If i is even, the neuron corresponding to the edge e = (v, f ) is connected to the neuron corresponding to the edge e = (v, f ′), f ′ ∈ Fv/f in the hidden layer i − 1. And it is also connected to the neuron corresponding to vth neuron of the prior probability layer. If i = 0, the neuron is only connected to the neuron of the APL. The architecture of neural network detector based on the factor graph in Fig. 1 is illustrated in Fig. 2.
+LGGHQ/D\HU $3/

III. THE PROPOSED DEEP NEURAL NETWORK
The neural network decoder in the proposed scheme is designed based on the belief propagation algorithm. And it is constructed according to [5]. So we will briefly introduce the neural network decoder and see [5] for details.

A. The Structure of Neural Network Multiuser Detector
The proposed scheme makes use of the similarity between MPA factor graph and neural networks, and uses a multi-layer network to implement the iterative process in standard MPA. We consider a deep neural network multiuser detector with 2L hidden layers (i.e. L iterations in the standard MPA).
Let e = (v, f ) denote the edge between the variable node numbered v and the function node numbered f in the factor graph. Vf /v (Fv/f , respectively) denotes the set Vf (Fv) with VN v (FN f ) excluded.
Neural network detector consists of four kind layers: conditional probability layer (CPL) associated with the input

Fig. 2. The structure of neural network detector with 4 hidden layers based on the factor graph in Fig. 2 for a NOMA system with 6 users and 4 REs. CPL is not plotted in above figure. Conditional probability and prior probability are plotted as small red bold lines and small black bold lines respectively
B. Weighted Message Passing Algorithm The weighted MPA is similar to the standard MPA except
that the weighted MPA will assign weights to the edges in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:26:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the factor graph. And the weights are then trained using deep
learning techniques. The following describes the weighted
MPA calculation process in conjunction with the proposed
neural network detector.
ap(xv) denotes the the prior likelihood probability of vth user’s codeword xv. And I(iv,f)(xv) represents the output of sub-neuron corresponding to the code word vector xv in the neuron corresponding to the edge e = (v, f ) in the ith hidden
layer.
First calculate the log-domain conditional probability Θf (x) and initialize I(0v,f)(xv)

1

∑

2

Θf (x) = − N0 yf −

hv,f xv,f ,
v∈Vf

(5)

where x = {xv} with v ∈ Vf . For all v and f ∈ Vf , set I(0v,f)(xv) = ap(xv).
Then calculate the output of ith hidden layer. For odd value

of i, 1 ≤ f ≤ F and all v ∈ Vf ,

∑

I(iv,f ) (xv )

=

max
xu :u∈Vf

{Θf
\v

(x)

+

u∈Vf \v

I(iu−,1f ) (xu )},

(6)

Normalization is needed and calculated as follows:

I(iv,f ) (xv )

=

I(iv,f ) (xv )

−

max
xv ∈Xv

{I(iv,f

)

(xv

)}.

(7)

For even value of i, 1 ≤ v ≤ V and all f ∈ Fv,calculate

C. Neural Network Decoder

The neural network decoder is constructed similarly to the

neural network detector and is simpler than it. Let e = (v, c)

denote the edge between the variable node numbered v and

the check node (CN) numbered c in the Tanner graph of linear

codes. Vc/v (Cv/c, respectively) denotes the set Vc (Cv) with

VN v (CN c) excluded.

Neural network detector consists of three kind layers: input

layer associated with the input log likelihood ratio, hidden

layer and output layer. We consider a deep neural network

decoder with 2L hidden layers (i.e. L iterations in the standard

BP algorithm). For the ith hidden layer, i = 1, 2, · · · 2L , if i is

odd (even, respectively), its output corresponds to the variable

node (check node, respectively) update. For the odd hidden

layer, the neuron corresponding to the edge e = (v, c) is

connected to the neuron corresponding to vth neuron of input

layer, and it is also connected to the neurons corresponding

to the edge e = (v, c′), c′ ∈ Cv/c of hidden layer i − 1 (if

this layer exists). If i is even, the neuron corresponding to the

edge e = (v, c) is connected to the neuron corresponding to

the edge e = (v′, c), v′ ∈ Vc/v of hidden layer i − 1. One instance of neural network decoder architecture is

illustrated in Fig. 3. And its corresponding parity check matrix

is





011010

F = 

1 0

0 1

1 0

0 1

0 0

1 1



(13)

100110

I(iv,f ) (xv )

=∑wi,v (xv )ap(xv ) + l∈Fv\f wi,(v,l)(xv

)Il(→i−v1)

(xv

)

(8)

,QSXW/D\HU

+LGGHQ/D\HU

2XWSXW/D\HU

Normalization is calculated as follows:

I(iv,f ) (xv )

=

I(iv,f ) (xv )

−

max
xv ∈Xv

{I(iv,f

)

(xv

)}

(9)

Finally calculate the output of the neural network detector Qv(xv) and bit log likelihood ratio (LLR) Λ(bv,j)

Qv (xv )

=∑w2L−1,v + l∈Fv\f

(xv )ap(xv wi,(v,l)(xv

) )Il(→2Lv−1)

(xv

)

(10)

Λ(bv,j) = max {Qv(xv)} − max {Qv(xv)}

xv :xjv =1

xv :xjv =0

(11)

where w(xv) is the weight of the edge connected to the subneuron corresponding to the codeword xv. The above is also the forward calculation process of the neural network detector.
These weights will be trained in the training process. And
then the bit log likelihood ratio output by the neural network
detector is sent to the subsequent neural network decoder for decoding. Note that we use the max function to replace the max∗ operation. And The main complexity of MPA is the exponential operation of the max∗. Where

max∗(a, b) = ln(ea + eb)

(12)

Fig. 3. The structure of neural network decoder with 4 hidden layers (2 full BP iterations). And the input LLR are plotted as short bold lines

Let lv denote the input LLR and Ii,(v,c) denote the output of the neuron corresponding to the edge e = (v, c) in the ith

hidden layer. For odd hidden layer,

1

∑

Ii,(v,c) = tanh( 2 (wi,vlv +

wi,(v,c′)Ii−1,(v,c′))) (14)

c′∈Cv /c

where I0,(v,c′) = 0 and for even hidden layer,

∏

Ii,(v,c) = 2tanh−1(

Ii−1,(v′,c))

(15)

v ′ ∈Vc /v

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:26:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

For the output layer,

∑

ov = σ(wvlv +

w2L+1,(v,c′)I2L,(v,c′))

(16)

c′ ∈Cv

where σ(x) = (1 + e−x)−1. And the weights w will also be

trained during the training phase.

D. Training Procedure
One well-known property of belief propagation is that its performance is independent of the transmitted codeword [5]. So BP neural network can use a single codeword to train. The proposed neural network cannot be trained by a single codeword. Because the neural network detector is based on MPA. And the MPA of this scheme does not have the above property. The performance of MPA is greatly affected by the codebook. It’s best to train the proposed neural network with all codewords. Since the channel coding, we can not guarantee that one mini-batch contains all the SCMA codewords. So the binary data used for channel coding is randomly generated. In order to make neural network have better generalization capabilities, the SNR of the AWGN channel was randomly selected between minimum and maximum for each example in one mini-batch.
There are many options for the loss function. The commonly used is cross-entropy. Similar to the multiloss described in [5], multiloss can also be used in our proposed scheme to increase the gradient update at the backpropagation algorithm.

'HWHFWRU

'HFRGHU

 v 'HWHFWRU n

n J  'HFRGHU v

J

nJ

Fig. 4. The parallel structure of joint detection and decoding.
The parallel structure of joint detection and decoding is illustrated in Fig. 4. A detector outputs J LLRs for each user. Therefore, ⌈N/J⌉ detectors are needed to perform parallel operations. The structures of these detectors are exactly the same, and the weights of each detector are optimized through training. And the number of users of the SCMA system is V , so V decoders are required. The structure of the V decoders is also the same. The dashed box below the Fig. 4 shows the connection between the nth detector and the vth decoder. For the beauty of drawing, only the J outputs of the detector’s vth user is drawn in the dashed box.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we present the BER performance of conventional method and deep learning method. In our experiment, the channel coding is BCH (63,45) code. And 6 users are

multiplexed on 4 resource elements. The factor graph is illustrated in Fig. 1. Since the modulation order is 2, and the code length of the BCH is odd, the channel coded codeword is zeropadded. And then the codebook mapping is performed. After multi-user detection, the output of the zero-padding position is discarded. There are 3 iterations and 5 iterations in standard MPA and BP algorithm respectively. The parity check matrix and codebook were taken from [10] and [11] respectively. For deep learning method, neural network detector has 6 hidden layers and neural network decoder has 10 hidden layers. And we used cross entropy as our loss function. Multiloss and RMSPROP rule were applied to increase the gradient update. We set the learning rate equal to 0.01. At training process, each user has 20 BCH(63,45) codewords(i.e. a mini batch has 6 ∗ 20 ∗ (63 + 1)/2 = 3840 examples for neural network detector). And the SNR of the AWGN channel was randomly selected from 10dB to 16dB(13dB to 18dB for fading channel) for each example in one mini batch. And the epoch is 10000.
At the testing process, we performed SNR-by-SNR simulations and then counted the BER. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the deep learning method improves the BER performance compared to conventional method(i.e. MPA for multiuser detection and BP for decoding). Compared with conventional method, the deep learning method has a gain of 2 dB at BER of 10−4. For fading channel, the proposed method can also improve the performance. Fig. 6 shows the BER results over fading channel. We obtain an improvement of about 1dB. Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 depict weights histogram of last hidden layer of neural network decoder and weights histogram of neural network detector. We can see that the weights of last hidden layer of neural network decoder range from −0.9 to 2.2. And weights of neural network detector range from 0.33 to 0.94. As we previously thought, the weights of the edges in the factor graph do affect performance.
As for the computational complexity, it can be seen from section III that the forward calculation of the whole neural network is weighted MPA and BP. So if we have trained the weights, the computational complexity of the proposed method is not increased compared to standard MPA and BP. And the training process can be done offline.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we made use of the similarity between factor graphs and neural networks and applied deep learning methods to solve the problems of multiuser detection and decoding in NOMA system. We designed a neural network detector for multi-ary modulation system based on MPA. When the parameters of the neural network have been trained, we can achieve performance improvement without increasing the computational complexity compared to the conventional method.
For multi-ary modulation systems, the performance of the MPA is related to the modulation mode (codebook in this paper). So we can’t use a single codeword to train the neural network. Our future work is exploring new deep learning method with lower computational complexity to improve the performance of multiuser detection.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:26:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

 

FRQYHQWLRQDOPHWKRG '/PHWKRG

%(5%LW(UURU5DWH

























(V1G%

Fig. 5. BER of conventional method and deep learning method over AWGN channel.

 

IDGLQJFRQYHQWLRQDOPHWKRG IDGLQJ'/PHWKRG

%(5%LW(UURU5DWH



















(V1G%

Fig. 6. BER of conventional method and deep learning method over fading channel.

:HLJKWVKLVWRJUDPRIODVWKLGGHQOD\HURIQHXUDOQHWZRUNGHFRGHU 

 
 
 

3UREDELOLW\





























YDOXH

Fig. 7. Weights histogram of last hidden layer of neural network decoder.

3UREDELOLW\

:HLJKWVKLVWRJUDPRIQHXUDOQHWZRUNGHWHFWRU 



































YDOXH

Fig. 8. Weights histogram of neural network detector.

REFERENCES
[1] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift, arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167, 2015.
[2] N. Srivastava, G. E. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdinov, Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1929C1958, 2014.
[3] B. Bakker, Reinforcement learning by backpropagation through an LSTM model/critic, Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE International Symposium on Approximate Dynamic Programming and Reinforcement Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, April 1-5, 2007.
[4] I. T. Kun Han, Dong Yu, ”Speech emotion recognition using deep neural network and extreme learning machine”, Proceedings of INTERSPEECH, 2011.
[5] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, Loren, W.J. Gross, D. Burshtein and Y. Beery, Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes, arXiv:1706.07043, 2017
[6] A. Bennatan, Y. Choukroun, P. Kisilev,Deep Learning for Decoding of Linear Codes - A Syndrome-Based Approach , arXiv:1802.04741, 2018
[7] Minhoe Kim, Nam-I Kim, Woongsup Lee, Dong-Ho Cho,Deep Learning-Aided SCMA,IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 4, pp. 720-723, APRIL 2018
[8] F. Boccardi, R. W. Heath, A. Lozano, T. L. Marzetta and P. Popovski, Five disruptive technology directions for 5G, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 74-80, Feb. 2014.
[9] L. Dai, B. Wang, Y. Yuan, S. Han, C. l. I and Z. Wang, Non-orthogonal multiple access for 5G: solutions, challenges, opportunities, and future research trends, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 74-81, Sep. 2015.
[10] M. Helmling and S. Scholl, Database of channel codes and ml simulation results, www.uni-kl.de/channel-codes, University of Kaiser-slautern, 2016.
[11] [Online]. Available: http://www.innovateasia.com/5g/en/gp2.html.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:26:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

