IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018

45

LLR-Distribution-Based Non-Uniform Quantization for RBI-MSD Algorithm in MLC Flash Memory
Shijie Ouyang, Guojun Han, Yi Fang , and Wenjie Liu

Abstract— Multi-level cell (MLC) technique has been widely used to improve the storage capacity of NAND flash memory at the price of sacrificing some storage reliability. As a type of excellent error-correction codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes can significantly enhance the performance of flash memory. However, the conventional decoding algorithms for LDPC codes suffer from the drawback of high complexity. To address this problem, we propose a serial reliability-based iterative minsum decoding (RBI-MSD) algorithm for LDPC-coded MLC flash memory systems to strike a desirable trade-off between the performance and complexity. Furthermore, we conceive a novel log-likelihood-ratio (LLR)-distribution-based non-uniform quantization method for the RBI-MSD algorithm. Unlike conventional quantization methods, the proposed non-uniform quantization method substantially exploits the distribution characteristics of channel initial LLRs in MLC flash memory. Simulation results indicate that the proposed non-uniform quantization method not only exhibits more excellent error performance than the conventional non-uniform and uniform counterparts, but also is applicable to other RBI decoding algorithms.
Index Terms— LDPC codes, NAND flash memory, non-uniform quantization, reliability-based iterative min-sum decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
S INCE multi-level-cell (MLC) flash memory has many attractive characteristics such as non-volatility, high performance, and low power consumption, it has been widely applied in digital electronic products in the past five years. However, there are a myriad of challenges needing to be addressed in MLC flash memory, such as date-storage reliability. To tackle this issue, error-correction codes (ECCs) have been introduced to such systems. In particular, LDPC codes have gained a great deal of attention due to their superior error-correction capability and thus have appeared to be a promising candidate for MLC flash memory [7], [8].
Recently, many decoding algorithms have been conceived for LDPC codes to achieve desirable performance. In general, the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [3], [4] provides excellent performance but requires high complexity among all the decoding algorithms for LDPC codes. To overcome this shortcoming, the min-sum decoding (MSD) algorithm that can
Manuscript received August 21, 2017; accepted September 16, 2017. Date of publication September 21, 2017; date of current version January 8, 2018. This work was partially supported by the NSF of China (Nos. 61471131, 61701121, 61501126), the NSF of Guangdong Province 2016A030310337, the Guangdong Province Universities and Colleges Pearl River Scholar Funded Scheme (2017), the Guangdong Innovative Research Team Program (No. 2014ZT05G157), and the Hong Kong Scholar Program (No. XJ2016027). The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was C. Feng. (Corresponding author: Yi Fang.)
The authors are with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: oysjgdut@163.com; gjhan@gdut.edu.cn; fangyi@gdut.edu.cn; wenjie_liu@ yeah.net).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2017.2755023

significantly reduce the complexity at the cost of sacrificing a little performance has been developed [7]. As an improved version of the MSD algorithm, the reliability-based iterative (RBI) MSD algorithm strikes a desirable trade-off between the performance and complexity [1], and thus is preferable in flash memory systems. On the other hand, the RBI-MSD algorithm can significantly improve the performance of the RBI majority-logic decoding (MLGD) algorithm [2] by slightly increasing the complexity. Thanks to the above-mentioned advantages, in this letter, we propose an improved version of the conventional (flooding) RBI-MSD algorithm, referred to as the serial RBI-MSD algorithm, which can accomplish better performance without increasing the decoding complexity.
To facilitate the implementation of iterative decoding algorithms, several quantization methodologies have been proposed in recent years [1], [5], [8], [9]. For example, the quasiuniform quantization method in [5] is used to quantize the key function in the extrinsic log-likelihood ratio (LLR) expression while the non-uniform quantization method in [9] is used to quantize the channel initial LLRs. With an aim to improving the error performance and accelerating the convergence speed of the serial RBI-MSD algorithm, we propose a new LLRdistribution-based non-uniform quantization method for serial RBI-MSD algorithm. In particular, the quantization function of the proposed quantization method can extract the maximal amount of knowledge regarding the probability density function (PDF) of channel initial LLRs. Simulation results show that the proposed non-uniform quantization method not only possesses remarkable gains over the counterparts in [1] and [9], but also is effective for other RBI decoding algorithms.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
A. MLC NAND Flash Memory
According to the open literature [6]–[8], the distortion sources for threshold voltage in NAND flash memory include cell-to-cell interference (CCI), programming noise, random telegraph noise (RTN), date retention, etc. Among all the impairments, CCI is the major noise source that dominates the overall performance of such systems. For this reason, the block diagram of the LDPC-coded MLC NAND flash memory system can be simply described as in Fig. 1. Based on such a system model, we can estimate the memory cell threshold voltage and hence obtain the channel initial LLRs.
B. Initial LLR Calculation for LDPC Codes
Let Vth denote the sensed threshold voltage of a memory cell, and bι,i ∈ {0, 1} denote the i -th bit stored in the ι-th cell, where i = 1, 2, . . . , nb, ι = 1, 2, . . . , n/nb, nb is the

1558-2558 © 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:20:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

46

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the LDPC-coded MLC flash memory system.

Fig. 2. Hard-decision reference voltages for a 2 bits/cell flash memory.

number of bits stored in each memory cell, n is the codeword length of the LDPC code, and  ·  is the ceiling function. We can express the LLR of bι,i as

L bι,i = ln[Pr Vth | bι,i = 1 / Pr Vth | bι,i = 0 ]. (1)

In fact, there are totally K = 2nb storage states. The state 0
corresponds to the erased state and the other states correspond to the programmed state. Assuming that i) pτ (x) is the PDF of the threshold voltage, where the subscript τ = 0, 1, . . . , K − 1 denotes the τ -th storage state; ii) pe (x) is the PDF of the threshold voltage without CCI in the erased state;
iii) pp,τ (x) is the PDF of the threshold voltage without CCI in the programmed state; and iv) pc (x) is the PDF of the threshold voltage with CCI. If the victim cell is in the
erased state, the PDF of its threshold voltage with CCI can be described as p0(x) = pe(x) ⊗ pc(x). Otherwise, i.e., if the victim cell is in the programmed state, the PDF of its threshold voltage with CCI is given as pτ (x ) = pp,τ (x ) ⊗ pc(x ), where ⊗ denotes convolution operation.
Let Sι,i be the set of states whose (ι, i )-th bit is 1. Moreover, we assume that the threshold voltage Vth of a cell falls into the range of [Rl , Rr ], where Rl and Rr are two adjacent reference voltages. Then, the channel initial LLR of the i -th bit stored in the ι-th cell can be expressed by [7]

L(bι,i ) = log

Rr Rl τ

Rr Rl τ  Sι,i
pτ (x )d x −

pτ (x )d x
Rr Rl τ  Sι,i

. pτ (x )d x

(2)

In this letter, LDPC codes are utilized as the ECCs for flash memory channels, and thus the decoding process requires the channel initial LLR messages. To sense the threshold voltages of the flash cell and calculate the such LLR values, a harddecision reference voltage is set between each two adjacent states. For instance, Fig. 2 presents the hard-decision reference voltages, i.e., Vr1, Vr2, and Vr3, for a 2 bits/cell flash memory.

III. NON-UNIFORM-QUANTIZATION-BASED RBI-MSD ALGORITHM FOR MLC FLASH MEMORY
A. LLR-Based Non-Uniform Quantization Method
In this subsection, we propose a novel quantization method to quantize the channel initial LLRs. Fig. 3 shows the PDFs of channel initial LLR messages with different cell-to-cell coupling strength factors s. We can find that for a given s the PDF of initial LLR messages have two peaks, which are almost symmetrically located in the two sides of zero. Nevertheless, the two LLR values corresponding to both peaks

Fig. 3. PDFs of the channel initial LLRs with different values of s.
have a non-trivial distance to zero. Owing to this reason, we can adopt a new non-uniform quantization method to deal with the initial LLR messages so as to enhance the performance of the decoding algorithm. The main idea of the proposed nonuniform quantization method is that allocating more quantization levels for the areas close to the two peaks, while allocating fewer quantization levels for the area far from them (i.e., the area close to zero). By appropriately devising the quantization intervals, one can effectively reduce quantization noise [10]. Therefore, the new LLR-distribution-based nonuniform quantization method is described as follows.
Let w be the quantization level for the RBI-MSD algorithm and  be the unit quantization interval. In the proposed method, we can only consider the absolute values of LLR messages of the LDPC code, i.e., |L| = {|L0|, |L1|, . . . , |Ln|}, for simplicity.1 The largest LLR message can be easily obtained, denoted by |Lmax| = max{|L j |}, j = 1, 2, . . . , n. Subsequently, the quantization procedure of the LLR messages is started from the largest LLR value |Lmax|, for which the smallest quantization interval, i.e.,  is allocated. More specifically, the quantization interval should be gradually increased as the LLR absolute value reduces from |Lmax| to 0 because there are fewer LLR messages distributing in the area close to zero. Fig. 4 illustrates an example of the proposed non-uniform quantization method with w = 3.
In general, for the w-bit (w = 1, 2, . . .) quantization, there are 2w quantization intervals. Then, the quantization interval vector should be set to = (2w, (2w − 1) , · · · , ), where the 2w-th quantization threshold |Lmax|. Hence, the parameter  is expressed by  = |Lmax|/((1 + 2w) 2(w−1)).
According to principle of the proposed non-uniform quantization method, the μ-th quantization threshold Lth(μ) can be
1Assuming that all the coded bits {v j } are successively stored in n/nb memory cells, one can easily obtain the mapping rule for {v j } ↔ {bι,i }.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:20:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OUYANG et al.: LLR-DISTRIBUTION-BASED NON-UNIFORM QUANTIZATION FOR RBI-MSD ALGORITHM

47

Fig. 4. Illustration of the proposed non-uniform quantization method.

computed as

Lth (μ) = ((2(w+1) − μ + 1)μ)/2 ,

(3)

where μ = 1, 2 . . . , 2w.

As a result, the initial LLR messages L =

(L0, L1 . . . , Ln−1) can be quantized into integer reliability

messages q = (q0, q1, . . . , qn−1) by

⎧

qj

=

⎪⎨⎪⎪ssiiggnn ⎪⎪⎩⎪sign

Lj Lj
Lj

(2w) , (2w − p) ,
,

L j ≥ Lth (2w) Lth (2w − 1 − p) ≤ L j
< Lth (2w − p)
0 ≤ L j < Lth (1) ,

(4)

where j = 0, 1, . . . , n−1 and p = 0, 1, . . . , 2w−2. Obviously, q j is an integer reliability value ranging from −2w to +2w.

B. Serial RBI-MSD Algorithm for LDPC Codes Assuming that i) R(jk) is the reliability information with
respect to the variable node v j at the k-th iteration, ii) z(k) = (z0(k), z1(k), . . . , zn(k−)1) is the hard-decision vector, and iii) s = z H T = (s0, s1, . . . , sm−1) is the syndrome vector. Afterwards, the relationship between s and z is formulated as

si(k) =

⊕z(k)
j

⊕z(k−1),
j

(5)

j  Ni

j  Ni

j <j

jj

where ⊕ denotes the modulo-2 operation. The extrinsic mes-

sage passing from the check node ci to the variable node v j

after the k iterations, i.e., Ui(,kj), can be calculated as

⎧

⎫

⎪⎪⎨

⎪⎪⎬

Ui(,kj) =

2σi(,kj) − 1

min⎩⎪⎪j

min
 Ni \ j

R(k)
j

, min
j  Ni \ j

R(k−1)
j

⎪⎭⎪.

j <j

j >j

(6)

Here, σi, j = si ⊕z j is the information about z j provided by all

the other received bits in the syndrome si . The overall message

ξ

(k) j

collected

by

the

variable

node

vj

from

all

adjacent

check

nodes is measured by [1]

⎡

⎤

ξ

(k) j

=

⎣α

Ui(,kj)⎦ ,

(7)

iMj

where α is a scaling factor, which can be optimized using discredited density evolution [1]. Based on the aforementioned

Algorithm 1 Serial RBI-MSD Algorithm With LLR-

Distribution-Based Non-Uniform Quantization

• Input: received vector L, quantization interval , w,

scaling factor α and maximum iteration number Imax ;

• Initialization: quantize L into q according to (4); set the

loop counter k = 0; for j = 0, 1, . . . , n − 1,set R0j = q j ;

• Iterations: while k < Imax , do the following steps.

1)

For

j

=

0,

1,

.

.

.

,

n

−

1,

make

the

decision

z

(k) j

=

1

if

R(jk)

0

and

z

(k) j

=

0,

otherwise;

2) For i = 0, 1, . . . , m − 1, compute the syndrome according

to (5), if s = 0, exit the iteration;

3) compute the extrinsic message Ui(,kj) exploiting (6);

4)

For

j

=

0,

1,

.

.

.

,

n

−

1,

compute

the

overall

message

ξ

(k) j

according to (7);

5) For j = 0, 1, . . . , n − 1, update the reliability information R(jk+1) = R(j0) + ξ (jk);
6) Set k = k + 1;

• Output: z(k) as the decoded codeword.

• Finalization: Terminate the algorithm until the

codeword is successfully decoded or the maximum

number of iterations is reached.

knowledge, the proposed serial RBI-MSD algorithm with nonuniform quantization is summarized as Algorithm 1.
Remark: It can be easily analyzed that the proposed serial RBI-MSD algorithm and the conventional RBI-MSD algorithm [1] possess the same computational complexity in each iteration. However, both RBI-MSD algorithms possess slightly high complexity than that of the RBI-MLGD algorithm [2].
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
To investigate the performance of the proposed decoding algorithm in MLC flash memory, we consider two irregular quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes, which are constructed based on algebraic approaches. The two codes are i) rate-0.838 (378, 2331) irregular QC-LDPC code with the column-weight dv = 5, 6, and ii) rate-0.784 (504, 2331) irregular QC-LDPC code with the column-weight dv = 7, 8. In all simulations, the number of bits stored in each cell is set to nb = 3, the scaling factor α of the RBI-MSD algorithm is set to 0.25, and the maximum number of iterations is set to 100.
Fig. 5 shows the BER curves of the proposed non-uniform, Chen’s non-uniform and uniform quantization methods [1], [9], where the serial RBI-MSD, conventional RBI-MSD and RBI-MLGD algorithms are considered. Referring to Fig. 5(a) in which the (378, 2331) QC-LDPC code is adopted, the proposed non-uniform quantization method not only is applicable to all three RBI decoding algorithms, but also possesses remarkable gains over Chen’s non-uniform and the uniform quantization methods. More importantly, for a given quantization method, the proposed serial RBI-MSD algorithm is superior to the conventional RBI-MSD algorithm [1] and RBI-MLGD algorithm [2]. Similar observations are also observed from Fig. 5(b), in which a different LDPC code is adopted.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:20:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

48

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018

Fig. 7. BER curves of the proposed non-uniform and uniform quantization methods with different number iterations, where both the serial and conventional RBI-MSD algorithms are considered. The (504, 2331) QC-LDPC code is adopted as the channel code.

Fig. 5. BER curves of the proposed non-uniform, Chen’s non-uniform and uniform quantization methods, where three RBI decoding algorithms are considered. The (378, 2331) and (504, 2331) QC-LDPC codes are adopted in (a) and (b), respectively.

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this letter, we have proposed a serial RBI-MSD algorithm to decode LDPC codes in MLC flash memory for keeping a good balance between the complexity and performance. To enhance the error performance and accelerate the convergence speed of the serial RBI-MSD algorithm, we have conceived a novel LLR-distribution-based non-uniform quantization method. In particular, we have designed an efficient quantization function to convert the channel initial LLRs into integer-based reliability values according to their distribution characteristics. As a further insight, the feasibility of the proposed quantization method in other RBI decoding algorithms has been explored. Compared with the existing non-uniform and uniform quantization methods, the proposed non-uniform method not only achieves better performance, but also realizes faster convergence speed. Therefore, our design may be more attractive for future NAND-flash-memory applications.

Fig. 6. BER curves of the non-uniform-quantization-based serial RBI-MSD algorithm with different quantization levels, where the (378, 2331) QC-LDPC code is adopted as the channel code.
Fig. 6 shows BER curves of the non-uniform-quantizationbased serial RBI-MSD algorithm with different quantization levels. As can be seen, the performance of RBI-MSD algorithm can gradually improve as the quantization level becomes larger. Nevertheless, this algorithm obtains trivial performance gain when the quantization level exceeds 4.
As a further study, we compare the BER performance of the proposed non-uniform and uniform quantization methods with different number of iterations in Fig. 7, where s is set to 1.16. In this this figure, both the serial and conventional RBI-MSD algorithms are considered. It can be seen that the serial RBI-MSD algorithm converges faster than conventional one. For example, exploiting the 4-bit non-uniform-quantization method, the serial RBI-MSD algorithm with 7 iterations accomplishes identical BER performance as the conventional RBI-MSD algorithm with 30 iterations. In addition, the serial RBI-MSD algorithm with 4-bit non-uniform quantization only requires 7 iterations to achieve a BER of 2 × 10−4, while its uniform counterpart requires 20 iterations to do so.

REFERENCES
[1] H. Chen, K. Zhang, X. Ma, and B. Bai, “Comparisons between reliability-based iterative min-sum and majority-logic decoding algorithms for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 1766–1771, Jul. 2011.
[2] Q. Huang, J. Kang, L. Zhang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Two reliability-based iterative majority-logic decoding algorithms for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 3597–3606, Dec. 2009.
[3] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[4] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, K. Cai, and G. Han, “Informed fixed scheduling for faster convergence of shuffled belief-propagation decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun. Lett, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 32–35, Jan. 2017.
[5] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Quantized iterative message passing decoders with low error floor for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 1–14, Jan. 2014.
[6] X. Wang, G. Dong, L. Pan, and R. Zhou, “Error correction codes and signal processing in flash memory,” in Flash Memories. Rijeka, Croatia: InTech, 2011.
[7] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[8] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Read and write voltage signal optimization for multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1613–1623, Apr. 2016.
[9] H. Chen et al., “Iterative reliability-based modified majority-logic decoding for structured binary LDPC codes,” J. Commun. Netw., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 339–345, Aug. 2015.
[10] Y.-C. He, S.-H. Sun, and X.-M. Wang, “Fast decoding of LDPC codes using quantisation,” Electron. Lett., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 189–190, Feb. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:20:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

