SPECIAL SECTION ON ADVANCES IN CHANNEL CODING FOR 5G AND BEYOND
Received November 7, 2018, accepted November 17, 2018, date of publication November 26, 2018, date of current version December 19, 2018. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2883292

QFEC ASIP: A Flexible Quad-Mode FEC ASIP for Polar, LDPC, Turbo, and Convolutional Code Decoding

WAN QIAO , DAKE LIU , (Senior Member, IEEE), AND SHAOHAN LIU
Institute of Application Specific Instruction-Set Processors, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing BJ 10, China
Corresponding author: Dake Liu (dake@bit.edu.cn)
This work was supported by the National High Technical Research and Development Program of China (863 program) under Grant 2014AA01A705.

ABSTRACT In this paper, we extend polar decoding function to our previous design, and propose a flexible quad-mode forward error correction application specific instruction-set processor (QFEC ASIP) that supports polar, low-density parity-check (LDPC), turbo, and convolutional code (CC) decoding with multiple code lengths and code rates. A unified polar/LDPC/turbo/CC quad-mode algorithm framework is presented. The top level architecture of QFEC ASIP and the polar data path are designed on the basis of the algorithm framework. A quad-mode confliction-free global memory system is proposed. 65.2% of global memory banks, 48.9% of global memory bits, and 29.7% of global memory area are saved via hardware sharing. Specially accelerated FEC decoding instructions make the decoding procedure fully programmable and ensure the high throughput. Synthesis using 65-nm technology shows that the total area of QFEC ASIP is 4.26 mm2. QFEC ASIP provides the maximum throughput of 1345 Mb/s for polar, 917 Mb/s for LDPC (WiMAX), 320 Mb/s for turbo, and 387 Mb/s for CC (64 states) at the clock frequency of 344 MHz. QFEC ASIP occupies much smaller silicon area than the sum of the silicon area of 4 single-mode FEC decoders that together provide a similar function range as QFEC ASIP.
INDEX TERMS Multimode application-specific instruction-set processor (ASIP), forward error correction (FEC), single-instruction-multiple-data (SIMD), polar code, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, turbo code, convolutional code (CC), software defined radio (SDR).

I. INTRODUCTION Wireless communication standards are dynamically in progress. Baseband chips have to support multiple standards to provide access to ubiquitous wireless communication networks. Forward error correction (FEC) improves communication reliability, and thus is important to a baseband system. FEC decoding is one of the modules requiring heavy computing in a baseband system [1]. Furthermore, FEC decoders must support multiple decoding algorithms for different communication standards within limited hardware cost. These bring great challenges for designing FEC decoders.
The application specific integrated circuit (ASIC) is a traditional solution for applications requiring high performance, low power and small area. However, designing ASICs that support all possible configurations consumes huge no return engineering cost and years of research and develop time because of the high design complexity [2]. In addition, ASICs

have limited flexibility. The product lifetime is threatened since a redesign on ASIC is unavoidable when standard changes. We propose the multi-mode application specific instruction-set processor (ASIP) that supports softwaredefined-radio (SDR) for FEC decoding in complex application scenarios. The system integration using a multi-mode ASIP is easier than that of multiple single-mode decoders. The hardware sharing of multiple modes saves silicon area effectively. Specially accelerated instructions ensure high throughput and sufficient flexibility in the specific application domain, and in turn reserve some design margin for extending the product lifetime.
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC), Turbo and Convolutional Code (CC) are commonly used error correction codes. They have been adopted in various wireless communication standards, such as 2G–4G [3]–[6], WLAN [7] and WiMAX [8]. And many multimode FEC processors

VOLUME 6, 2018

2169-3536 
 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

72189

W. Qiao et al.: QFEC ASIP: Flexible Quad-Mode FEC ASIP for Polar, LDPC, Turbo, and CC Decoding

have been proposed for supporting multiple standards. Alles et al. [9] proposed the first LDPC/Turbo/CC triplemode FEC ASIP, namely FlexiChaP. FlexiChap achieves small silicon area through partly parallel decoding, and provides a throughput of 257 Mbps for LDPC by an efficient 12-stage pipeline. However, the throughput for Turbo mode is only 18.6 Mbps. Condo et al. [10] proposed a networkon-chip-based LDPC/Turbo dual-mode decoder. A 35-node network working at a high frequency of 780 MHz is introduced to avoid the memory confliction between two decoding modes. This decoder provides a high throughput of 455 Mbps for LDPC and 150 Mbps for Turbo. But this decoder does not support CC. In [11], we proposed a high throughput Trellisbased ASIP (TASIP) for LDPC/Turbo/CC triple-mode FEC decoding. TASIP achieves high decoding efficiency by a triple-mode unified forward-backward recursion decoding kernel with an eight-state parallel trellis structure. TASIP can support multiple standards, including the 3rd Generation Partnership Project-Long Term Evolution (3GPP-LTE), WLAN, and WiMAX.
In 2016, Polar code was adopted as the control channel coding scheme for Enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB) scenario in future 5G standard [12]. However, as far as we know, the multi-mode FEC decoder that covers all four important FEC techniques (Polar, LDPC, Turbo, and CC) has not been reported until June 2018. Designing a high speed Polar/LDPC/Turbo/CC quad-mode FEC decoder is thus an essential research orientation.
In this paper, we propose a flexible Polar/LDPC/Turbo/CC quad-mode FEC ASIP (QFEC ASIP) by extending Polar decoding function to our LDPC/Turbo/CC triple-mode former work, TASIP [11]. QFEC ASIP is an intellectual property (IP) core based design. It is an upgrade version of TASIP, and the time cost of the inherited design is obviously reduced compared with the time cost of design from scratch. Compared with TASIP, QFEC ASIP mainly achieves the following innovations. Firstly, a unified Polar/LDPC/Turbo/CC quad-mode algorithm framework is proposed, and the hardware design of QFEC ASIP is based on this framework. Secondly, Polar decoding acceleration instructions are added to the instruction set, and a high paralleled Polar data path is designed. The newly introduced Polar decoding mode is fully programmable, and it supports code lengths from 64 bits to 4096 bits with any code rates. Thirdly, the memory subsystem is redesigned, and a Polar/LDPC/Turbo/CC quad-mode confliction-free global memory system (GMS) is proposed. 65.2% of global memory banks, 48.9% of global memory bits and 29.7% of global memory area are saved via memory sharing of four different modes. QFEC ASIP can be adopted in SDR environments for both terminals and base stations, and the corresponding channel coding functions can be implemented just by software programming.
The rest of this paper is arranged as follows: Section II presents the design methodology of QFEC ASIP. Section III introduces Polar decoding algorithm selection and the unified
72190

Polar/LDPC/Turbo/CC quad-mode algorithm framework. Section IV presents the hardware implementation of QFEC ASIP. Section V introduces the unified quad-mode confliction-free GMS. Section VI analyzes the performance of the Polar decoding mode. Section VII gives comparison results. Finally, Section VIII concludes the paper.
II. QFEC ASIP DESIGN METHODOLOGY The software-hardware cooperative design methodology shown in Figure 1 is adopted in QFEC ASIP design.
FIGURE 1. QFEC ASIP design methodology.
QFEC ASIP is an inheriting design based on TASIP. The primary goal of this paper is to add Polar decoding function to the previous design. The algorithms and the hardware architecture of TASIP are important inputs of the QFEC ASIP design. Polar decoding algorithm that is adaptive to the previous design should be selected firstly, considering the hardware reuse maximization. Then, a quad-mode algorithm framework is designed by the combination of the newly selected Polar decoding algorithm and the algorithms adopted in TASIP. Next, the Polar decoding instructions are determined, and the top level architecture of QFEC ASIP is designed on the basis of the quad-mode algorithm framework. After hardware submodule and firmware design, the function of QFEC ASIP is validated. The hardware submodule and firmware should be checked if the function is not correct. Otherwise, we can go on to finish the silicon design, and validate the area, performance, and power of QFEC ASIP. If the results are unsatisfied, the instruction set and the top level architecture should be optimized. Finally, the hardware and software are integrated.
VOLUME 6, 2018

W. Qiao et al.: QFEC ASIP: Flexible Quad-Mode FEC ASIP for Polar, LDPC, Turbo, and CC Decoding

III. ALGORITHM PRINCIPLE Before ASIP hardware design, a unified algorithm framework including all decoding modes should be designed. Our previous design, TASIP, is based on a unified LDPC/Turbo/CC triple-mode trellis forward-backward recursion (FBR) algorithm kernel [11]. In this paper, we add Polar decoding algorithm to the triple-mode algorithm kernel, and propose a unified Polar/LDPC/Turbo/CC quad-mode algorithm framework for QFEC ASIP.
A. POLAR DECODING ALGORITHM SELECTION In this subsection, we select a Polar decoding algorithm for quad-mode algorithm framework design, and provide some necessary background on the selected algorithm.
As we mentioned in Section II, Polar decoding algorithm that is adaptive to the previous design is more suitable for QFEC ASIP. There are mainly three kinds of Polar decoding algorithms: belief propagation (BP) based algorithms, successive cancellation (SC) based algorithms, and successive cancellation list (SCL) based algorithms [13]. Wherein BP decoding algorithms are based on a bi-directional recursion process that is similar to FBR. Moreover, BP decoding has inherent high parallelism. The operands can be segmented using parallel windows (PWs) and sliding windows (SWs) without reducing the decoding accuracy. Therefore, BP based algorithms are the best candidates for the design of unified quad-mode algorithm framework.
In this paper, we adopt the scaled min-sum (SMS) approximated BP decoding algorithm [14] for easier hardware implementation. The BP decoding procedure can be represented on a factor graph [15], [16]. Figure 2 gives a simple example of Polar factor graph where code length (N ) is 8 bits. The factor
FIGURE 2. The factor graph representation for Polar code (N = 8).
VOLUME 6, 2018

graph has n + 1 columns (n = log2N ). Each column contains N nodes. The decoding calculation contains n stages, and each stage includes N 2 basic computational units (BCUs). The structure of BCU is shown at the top of Figure 2. Each BCU involves two nodes on each side, and (i, j) represents the node coordinates in the factor graph. There are two kinds of intermediate decoding results, R message and L message. Each node carries only one message at a time.
The Polar decoding procedure is shown at the bottom of Figure 2. The BCUs are calculated as (1) and (2) during right-to-left propagation (LP), and calculated as (3) and (4) during left-to-right propagation (RP). The final results are determined by the sum of L0,j and R0,j (0 ≤ j < N ). The criterion is shown in (5). f (x, y) in (1)–(4) is 0.9375 × sign(x)sign(y) min(|x| , |y|).

1 L = f ( 3 L, 4 L + 2 R)

(1)

2 L = f ( 1 R, 3 L) + 4 L

(2)

3 R = f ( 1 R, 4 L + 2 R)

(3)

4 R = f ( 1 R, 3 L) + 2 R

(4)

uˆj =

1, 0,

L0,j + R0,j < 0 L0,j + R0,j ≥ 0

(5)

B. UNIFIED POLAR/LDPC/TURBO/CC QUAD-MODE ALGORITHM FRAMEWORK In this subsection, we propose a unified Polar/LDPC/Turbo/ CC quad-mode algorithm framework. The ASIP hardware will be designed on the basis of this framework.
TASIP adopts turbo-decoding message passing (TDMP) algorithm with Bahl-Cocke-Jelinek-Raviv (BCJR) routine for LDPC mode, maximum a posteriori (MAP) probability decoding based on BCJR for Turbo mode, and the Viterbi algorithm for CC mode [11]. These three algorithms are kept in QFEC ASIP. TDMP algorithm, MAP algorithm, Viterbi algorithm and the newly selected BP Polar decoding algorithm are all base on a bi-directional recursion decoding procedure. For BP algorithm, the bi-directional recursion refers to LP and RP. For TDMP and MAP algorithm, the bi-directional recursion refers to the BCJR routine. For Viterbi algorithm the bi-directional recursion refers to the add-compare-select (ACS) operation and the trace back operation. Thus, these four algorithms can be combined into a unified quad-mode algorithm framework.
The unified Polar/LDPC/Turbo/CC quad-mode algorithm framework is proposed as Algorithm 1. The bi-directional recursion calculation of four single-mode decoding algorithms is implemented by two innermost loops. In Algorithm 1, the ‘‘for’’ loops marked with ‘‘(Pol.)’’ and pseudo codes in the loop bodies marked with ‘‘(Pol.)’’ are used in Polar decoding mode. it represents the loop times of the outermost iteration. p is the serial number of parallel windows. w is the serial number of sliding windows. t is the sliding window address. And Ps is the number of BCUs that can be executed within one clock cycle. Other loops are not
72191

W. Qiao et al.: QFEC ASIP: Flexible Quad-Mode FEC ASIP for Polar, LDPC, Turbo, and CC Decoding

Algorithm 1 Unified Polar/LDPC/Turbo/CC QuadMode Algorithm Framework

1 for it = 0 to Tit − 1 do(Pol.)(*) 2 for p ∈ [0, P − 1] do in parallel (Pol.)

3

for r ← 0 to R do(*)

4

//Forward recursion (right-to-left propagation)

5

for w ← Wf 0 to Wf do(Pol.)(*)

6

for t ← Lf 0 to Lf do(Pol.)(*)

7

Address calculation; (Pol.)

8

Address Transformation;

9

Read global memory and permute; (Pol.)

10

Input data store;

11

for q ← 0 to Ts Ps − 1 do(*)

12

for s ∈ [0, Ps − 1] do in parallel

(Pol.)

13

FR branch metric calculation;

14

Read extrinsic messages;

15

a-priori message calculation and

store;

16

Alpha store and update;

17

Survivor Path Store;

18

L message calculation; (Pol.)

19

end

20

end

21

Permute and write global memory; (Pol.)

22

end

23

end

24

//backward recursion (left-to-right propagation)

25

for w ← Wb0 to Wb do(Pol.)(*)

26

for t ← Lb0 to Lb do(Pol.)(*)

27

Address calculation; (Pol.)

28

Read global memory and permute; (Pol.)

29

Input data recover;

30

for q ← 0 to Ts Ps − 1 do(*)

31

for s ∈ [0, Ps − 1] do in parallel

(Pol.)

32

a-priori Recover;

33

Alpha Recover;

34

BR branch metric calculation;

35

Beta update;

36

LLR update and store;

37

R message calculation; (Pol.)

38

end

39

end

40

Trace back;

41

Output Update;

42

Permute and write global memory; (Pol.)

43

end

44

end

45

end

46

end

47 end

48 for p = 0 to P − 1 do in parallel (Pol.)

49 Final result decision; (Pol.)

50 end

related to Polar decoding mode, and the corresponding loop times are set to 1 during the Polar decoding procedure.
The ‘‘for’’ loops marked with ‘‘(*)’’ are realized by software. Software engineers can adjust the corresponding loop conditions according to different application scenarios. The innermost loops are fixed and accelerated by hardware.
72192

The hardware implementation of Polar decoding mode is introduced in Section IV. Detailed information of algorithm and hardware implementation of LDPC, Turbo and CC mode can be found in [11] and [17].
IV. QFEC ASIP HARDWARE DESIGN The ASIP architecture is the implementation of the Algorithm 1. In this section, we will discuss the general considerations of Polar mode implementation, including the data precision, the degree of data parallel, the storage requirements, and the programmability design. We’ll also introduce the top level architecture of QFEC ASIP and the Polar softin-soft-out module (SISO) implementation.
A. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS OF POLAR MODE IMPLEMENTATION QFEC ASIP adopts fix-point data, and the data quantization scheme of Polar mode is determined firstly. Figure 3 shows the bit error rates (BER) of Polar decoding with N = 1024 bits using different data quantization schemes. When fraction length = 3 bits and integer length = 5 bits, the BER performance of the hardware approaches the extreme value. The performance improvement provided by longer fraction length and integer length is negligible. So that the data width is set to 8 bits, wherein 3 bits are for fraction and 5 bits are for integer.
FIGURE 3. Bit error rates of Polar decoding using different quantization schemes (N = 1024, code rate = 1/2, Eb/N0 = 2dB, AWGN channel).
From Figure 2, we can see that BCUs in the same stage do not have data dependency. Therefore, single-instructionmultiple-data (SIMD) architecture that achieves data-level partial parallel can be adopted, and multiple BCUs in the same stage can be calculated in parallel to enhance the Polar decoding speed. BCUs in the factor graph are segmented using PWs and SWs according to the segmentation scheme in Figure 4, so that the fixed hardware can support multiple code lengths. There are P PWs where n stages are separated as n SWs. P PWs are implemented with P homogeneous Polar SISOs (PSISOs) and the corresponding global memory banks in hardware. We adopt 16 PSISOs that each computes 32 BCUs in parallel, considering the decoding throughput and the hardware reuse of four decoding modes.
To reach the ultimate performance of the SIMD architecture, the data path should be fully loaded every clock cycle.
VOLUME 6, 2018

W. Qiao et al.: QFEC ASIP: Flexible Quad-Mode FEC ASIP for Polar, LDPC, Turbo, and CC Decoding

FIGURE 4. Basic computational unit segmentation scheme.
According to (1)–(4), GMS must be capable of providing 4×32 = 128 operands (128×8 = 1024 bits) for each PSISO in each clock cycle. And all data nodes in the factor graph should be saved in memory for the next iteration of computation. The memory compiler in the 65nm process library only provides memory banks with bandwidth ≤ 144 bits and depth ≥ 32, and we finally have to adopt eight 128-bit×32 memory banks in each parallel window for Polar decoding mode though the adoption ends an imperfect solution. This storage volume can support Polar decoding with N ≤ 4096 bits.
Three Polar decoding hardware accelerated instructions are extract from the unified quad-mode algorithm framework. ‘‘PLEFT’’ is for L message calculation and write back (one step of LP). ‘‘PRIGHT’’ is for R message calculation and write back (one step of RP). And ‘‘PFIN’’ is for final result decision. A slice of assembly program for Polar decoding is shown in Figure 5. Wherein ‘‘c0’’ and ‘‘c1’’ are loop flags,

‘‘as’’ and ‘‘aw’’ control sliding window address and sliding window number separately, ‘‘SWL’’ means the sliding window length, and ‘‘rep = xx’’ repeats the corresponding instruction for ‘‘xx’’ times. The SW movement in this program slice can be observed more intuitively in Figure 4.
B. TOP LEVEL ARCHITECTURE OF QFEC ASIP The top level architecture of QFEC ASIP is shown in Figure 6. Compared with TASIP [11], the modules filled with gray remain completely unchanged (where TSISO represents the unified triple-mode SISO for LDPC, Turbo and CC in TASIP). Apart from these modules, Polar address computation logic is added to the address generation unit (AGU) and the direct memory access module (DMA). Polar permutation networks and PSISOs are newly introduced. GMS is redesigned to meet the high bandwidth requirement of Polar decoding, and eight 128-bit×32 memory banks are adopted in each parallel window.

FIGURE 5. A slice of assembly program for Polar decoding. VOLUME 6, 2018

FIGURE 6. Top level architecture of QFEC ASIP (red blocks are shared by different modes).
From Figure 6, we can see that PSISOs are independent of TSISOs. PSISOs do not need any pipeline registers and buffers. If we integrate PSISOs and TSISOs, only negligible computation logic can be shared. The synthesis results show that the integration can only save 1.56% of the total area. However, the reuse of computation logic will introduce more multiplexing routes to the SISOs, and the critical path of QFEC ASIP will extend from 2.9ns to 3ns (3.45% increment). The integration of PSISOs and TSISOs is considered to be not beneficial. That is why we finally decided to adopt independent PSISOs.
The red lined modules in Figure 6 are shared by four decoding modes. Program control modules, including program memory, program counter, instruction decoder, finite state machine, and parameter registers are fully shared.
72193

W. Qiao et al.: QFEC ASIP: Flexible Quad-Mode FEC ASIP for Polar, LDPC, Turbo, and CC Decoding

Linear address computation logic in AGU and DMA are also fully shared. But these modules only occupies less than 1% of the total area. GMS takes up more than 45% of the total area. And thus global memory sharing contributes most to the hardware efficiency improvement.
It is worth mentioning that TASIP adopts only five 8-bit×512 global memory banks in each parallel window (the design of TASIP GMS can be find in [11]) for LDPC, Turbo, and CC mode. The global memory bandwidth in one parallel window of TASIP is 1 25 of that of QFEC ASIP. But the global memory depth of TASIP is 16 times of that of QFEC ASIP. The completely opposite storage characteristics of Polar decoding mode and other three modes bring great challenges to memory sharing. Data of LDPC, Turbo, and CC mode have to be reallocated to recover the function of these three modes after GMS redesign. The solution to this problem will be discussed in Section V-B.
C. POLAR SISO IMPLEMENTATION The structure of PSISO is shown in Figure 7, where ‘‘⊕’’ stands for addition. Polar decoding adopts 2’s complement data format. The calculation of opposite number is implemented as bitwise NOT operation, and the subtraction is implemented as add after inverse.

During Polar decoding, one column of data can be used as left nodes or right nodes of the BCUs. The access patterns under these two conditions are different, and thus memory confliction will occur if the data are arranged simply in order. For LDPC mode, there are read-after-write conflicts for a posteriori messages access when forward recursion and backward recursion are processed in parallel. For Turbo mode, memory confliction may happen when the extrinsic messages and channel messages are fetched in parallel with the interleaved sequence.
In this section, we propose a Polar/LDPC/Turbo/CC quadmode confliction-free global memory management scheme to avoid all of memory confliction problems mentioned above. The memory management of Polar decoding mode is explained in detail in Section V-A. The memory sharing techniques of LDPC, Turbo, and CC decoding mode in TASIP (with five 8-bit×512 global memory banks in each parallel window) have been explained in detail in [18]. And these techniques are kept in QFEC ASIP by data reallocation that is presented in Section V-B. Four decoding modes can fully share the eight 128-bit×32 memory banks in each parallel window, and the memory sharing results are listed in Section VII.
We adopt single-port memories in QFEC ASIP to minimize the silicon cost. The memory usage of all FEC decoding instructions are summarized in Figure 8, wherein Polar and LDPC instructions may read and write a memory bank at the same time. And thus the global memories have to work at twice the frequency of SISO modules.

FIGURE 7. Polar SISO structure.
The implementation of f (x, y) is shown at the top left corner of Figure 7. The multiplying with 0.9375 is implemented as x − (x >> 4). Guard bits are introduced before add and inverse operations to avoid data overflow. Therefore, data must be saturated before written back as shown at the bottom left corner of Figure 7. The final result hard decision is to output the MSB of the addition result directly.
V. QUAD-MODE CONFLICTION-FREE MEMORY SUBSYSTEM The SIMD architecture proposed in last section can improve the decoding speed by parallel computing. And the ultimate performance of the architecture can be reached when SISOs are fully loaded every clock cycle. However, there are several potential memory confliction problems caused by the parallel data access requirements in Polar, LDPC, and Turbo mode.
72194

FIGURE 8. Memory usage of FEC decoding instructions (red: read operation, blue: write operation, black: read and write at the same time).
A. MEMORY MANAGEMENT FOR POLAR DECODING MODE Figure 2 implies three requirements for confliction-free memory access of Polar decoding. First, two neighbouring columns of data can be accessed at the same time. Second, node j and node j + N 2 in the left column of BCUs can be accessed at the same time. Third, node 2j and node 2j + 1 in the right column of BCUs can be accessed at the same time.
To ensure the flexibility, we propose a memory management scheme for Polar mode that is applicable to any P, n and SWL.
As shown in Figure 4, columns in factor graph are separated into P parallel windows. The memory location of each column in parallel window p (0 ≤ p ≤ 15) is shown in Figure 9. Two neighbouring columns are accessed in the
VOLUME 6, 2018

W. Qiao et al.: QFEC ASIP: Flexible Quad-Mode FEC ASIP for Polar, LDPC, Turbo, and CC Decoding

FIGURE 9. Locations of data nodes in different columns (The blocks connected by a colored line are accessed at the same time. The corresponding sliding window number is marked on the line with the same color).
same sliding window. The columns that are accessed together are linked by a colored line, and the corresponding sliding window number is marked on the line with the same color. Each column only needs 4 memory banks. When sliding window number w is even, the column saved in bank 0-3 is used as the left column of BCUs, and vice versa.
Three examples of data arrangement inside one column are shown in Figure 10. As every SISO module calculates 32 BCUs at a time, 32 neighbouring nodes are regarded as the basic unit of data arrangement. When SWL = 1, data are simply arranged in order. When SWL > 1, the first half of data are still arranged in order, but the second half of data are arranged in reverse order. The blocks filled with the same color are accessed together when this column is used as the left column of the BCUs. The blocks with the same address in all banks are accessed together when this column is used as the right column of the BCUs.

FIGURE 11. Address computation table for Polar mode, where ad 1 = [w >> 1] × SWL, ad 2 = ad 1 + SWL, ad 3 = t >> 1, and ad 4 = [t >> 1] + SWL >> 1 .
addresses of the columns. ad3, ad4 and t are the corresponding offset addresses, where t is the sliding window address.
B. DATA REALLOCATION OF LDPC, TURBO AND CC DECODING MODE As we mentioned at the beginning of this section, the memory sharing techniques of LDPC, Turbo and CC decoding mode in TASIP are kept in QFEC ASIP. And data of LDPC, Turbo and CC mode are reallocated to recover the function of these three modes after the global memory design modifications. The data reallocation of LDPC mode is shown in Figure 12 (a). 40-bit data are saved in one memory address, and the rest 88 bits are filled with 0. Both Turbo mode and CC mode adopts 8-bit operands, and thus these two modes share the same data reallocation scheme as shown in Figure 12 (b). 16 8-bit operands are save in one memory address.

FIGURE 12. Data reallocation for (a) LDPC mode, (b) Turbo and CC mode.

FIGURE 10. Examples (P = 4) for data arrangement inside one column of different Polar codes (a) N = 256 (b) N = 512 (c) N = 1024.
The access addresses of each bank under different conditions are shown in Figure 11. ad1 and ad2 are the start
VOLUME 6, 2018

After data reallocation, the new access addresses and chip selection signals of these modes are calculated on the basis of those in TASIP, and the access procedures are also changed. In LDPC mode, the redundant zeros are removed when memory read, and are added when memory write as shown in Figure 13 (a). In Turbo and CC mode, the required 8-bit data
72195

W. Qiao et al.: QFEC ASIP: Flexible Quad-Mode FEC ASIP for Polar, LDPC, Turbo, and CC Decoding

FIGURE 13. New memory access procedures for (a) LDPC mode, (b) Turbo and CC mode.

by (6), where maximum TP increases as N gets longer. When N = 1024, the hardware utilization rate just reaches 100%, and the maximum TP reaches the maximal value. When N > 1024, the maximum TPs are achieved when p = 16. The calculation of one propagation step takes up more than one clock cycle (SWL > 1). The characteristic of this phase is revealed by (7), where maximum TP decreases as N gets longer.
The throughput results and the supported code length range shown in Figure 14 are valid only when P = 16, Ps = 32, and eight 128-bit×32 global memory banks are used in each parallel window. This Polar decoding architecture is scalable. The supported code length range can be extended simply by increasing the depth of the memories. The architecture can be capable of satisfying higher throughput requirements in future high speed communication standards by increasing P or Ps.

are selected from the 128-bit data when memory read, and the 8-bit result replace 8 bits in the 128-bit data when memory write as shown in Figure 13 (b).

VI. POLAR DECODING PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS In this section, we analyze the performance of the Polar decoding mode, including throughputs, BERs, and the computation complexity. The performance analysis of other three modes can be found in [11], [17], and [19].
A. THROUGHPUT ANALYSIS A complete iteration of Polar decoding contains n − 1 steps of LP and n − 1 steps of RP. The last iteration only contains n − 1 steps of LP and one step of final result judgement. Each step costs SWL clock cycles. And thus the total time cost of Polar decoding is [(n − 1) × 2 × (itr. − 1) + n] × SWL clock cycles, where itr. is the total number of iterations. Code length N = 2n, and the throughput (TP) of the Polar decoding function can be calculated as (6),

FIGURE 14. Maximum throughputs of Polar decoding with different code lengths (P = 16).
B. BIT ERROR RATES The BER performance of the decoding algorithm using floating point data and the 8-bit fixed-point hardware implementation are shown in Figure 15.

f × 2n

TP = [(n − 1) × 2 × (itr. − 1) + n] × SWL

(6)

where f stands for working frequency of the SISO module. SWL = N 2 32p = N 64p, where p represents the number of SISO modules that are actually used in decoding computation. (6) can be rewritten into (7).

64 × f × p

TP = [(n − 1) × 2 × (itr. − 1) + n]

(7)

The maximum working frequency of QFEC ASIP is 344 MHz. Figure 14 shows the relationship between code lengths and the corresponding maximum TPs when P = 16 and itr. = 15. The curve has two phases. When N < 1024, p is always less than 16, and the maximum TPs are achieved when SWL = 1. The characteristic of this phase is revealed

72196

FIGURE 15. The BER performance of the decoding algorithm using floating point data and the 8-bit fixed-point hardware implementation (code rate = 0.5).
VOLUME 6, 2018

W. Qiao et al.: QFEC ASIP: Flexible Quad-Mode FEC ASIP for Polar, LDPC, Turbo, and CC Decoding

Compared with the algorithm using floating point data, the fixed-point hardware has worse BER performance. The errors mainly come from the data quantization, the simplified f (x, y) function implementation and the saturation operation. From Figure 15, we can see that the BER performance difference between the algorithm using floating point data and the 8-bit fixed-point hardware gets larger when code length is larger. This is mainly because more approximate calculation and saturation operations are executed by the hardware during the decoding process when code length is larger. When N = 4096 bits, the 8-bit fixed-point hardware suffers 0.34dB of performance loss compared with the decoding algorithm using floating point data at the BER of 10−5.
C. COMPUTATION COMPLEXITY The computation complexity is measured by the number of basic operations needed for decoding one bit (OPs/bit).
There are two kinds of basic operations in Polar decoding process. First, arithmetic computation operations, including addition, multiplication, division, absolute value computation, comparison and sign function. Second, memory operations, including loading a datum, storing a datum, and permuting a datum.
As we mentioned in Section III-A, the Polar decoding procedure includes three steps: LP, RP and final judgement. The number of basic operations of each step is listed in Table 1.
TABLE 1. The number of basic operations of each step of Polar decoding.

GMS takes up 45.8%, TSISOs take up 26.4%, PSISOs take up 12.5%, permutation networks take up 7.3%, ATU and LUTs takes up 3.7%, pipeline registers and parameter registers take up 3.7%, and the rest of control path takes up only 0.6%. All memory blocks, including PM, LUTs, global memories in GMS, and buffers in TSISOs, occupy 44.8% of the total area.
The core layout of QFEC ASIP is shown in Figure 16, and the floor plan density is 0.68. Most of the silicon area is due to the newly introduced Polar mode modules and the redesigned GMS.
FIGURE 16. QFEC ASIP core layout.
The decoding procedures of all decoding modes in QFEC ASIP are fully programmable, and all supported code configurations are listed in Table 2.
TABLE 2. Supported decoding modes of QFEC ASIP.

From the table, we can see that the number of basic operations of one step of LP (or RP) is 11SWL + 13N , and the number of basic operations of the final judgement is 2N . One normal iteration of decoding contains n − 1 steps of LP and n − 1 steps of RP. The last iteration of decoding contains n steps of LP and the final judgement. And thus, the total number of operations can be calculated as (8). When N = 1024 bits and itr. (the total number of iterations) is 15, the total number of operations is 3492674, and the computation complexity is 3411 OPs/bit.
OPtotal = [(n−1)×2×(itr.−1)+n](11SWL +13N )+2N (8)
VII. RESULTS AND COMPARISON QFEC ASIP is synthesized using Synopsys Design Compiler, and placed and routed using Cadence Encounter. The 65nm CMOS technology (1.1V, 120◦C) is used.
QFEC ASIP adopts 16 PSISOs and 12 TSISOs. The synthesis results show that the total area is 4.26 mm2, wherein
VOLUME 6, 2018

A. GLOBAL MEMORY SHARING RESULTS Global memory sharing results in one parallel window are listed in Table 3. The unified quad-mode confliction-free memory subsystem saves 65.2% of global memory banks, 48.9% of global memory bits and 29.7% of global memory area. The logic area of memory interface increases by 4.9% because extra address transformation logic are introduced for data reallocation of LDPC, Turbo and CC mode. And thus, only 20.1% of total GMS area is saved. The bandwidth requirement of Polar mode is much larger than those of other modes, and only 9.2% of total bandwidth is saved. In this parer, QFEC ASIP adopts TSISOs of TASIP directly. And those TSISOs can only deal with 8 sub layers in LDPC mode and 8 states in CC mode in parrallel. It is possible to increase the computation parallelization of TSISO to improve the global memory bandwidth sharing ratio in our future work.
72197

W. Qiao et al.: QFEC ASIP: Flexible Quad-Mode FEC ASIP for Polar, LDPC, Turbo, and CC Decoding TABLE 3. Memory sharing results of the quad-mode confliction-free memory subsystem (in one parallel window).
TABLE 4. Comparison between QFEC ASIP and the sum of four single-mode FEC decoders.

B. RESULTS COMPARISION As we mentioned in Section I, there are no other Polar/LDPC/ Turbo/CC quad-mode decoders in literature until June 2018. To estimate the performance of QFEC ASIP, we provide two alternative comparisons in this section. The QFEC ASIP is compared with the sum of TASIP and a single-mode Polar decoder to reveal the competitiveness of the newly designed Polar mode. QFEC ASIP is also compared with the sum of four single-mode decoders to prove its high area efficiency.
1) COMPARISON WITH THE SUM OF TASIP AND A POLAR DECODER QFEC ASIP keeps all decoding modes of TASIP, and implements the additional Polar decoding mode without reducing the performance of other decoding modes. The newly added Polar decoding mode supports 64 bits ≤ N ≤ 4096 bits with 2.14 mm2 of area increment (the total area of TASIP is 2.12 mm2 [11]), and the maximum throughput is 1345 Mbps.
There are mainly three kinds of Polar decoders: SC decoders, SCL decoders, and BP decoders.
SC decoders and SCL decoders have low computation complexity. However, they suffer from high decoding latency and low throughputs because of the serial processing nature of the decoding algorithm. Coppolino et al. [20] proposed a multi-code SC Polar decoder that supports code lengths from 2 bits to 4096 bits with an area of 2.01 mm2. The supported code length range is wider than that of QFEC ASIP and the silicon cost is slightly smaller than 2.14 mm2.
72198

However, the throughputs for code lengths that are the power of 2 are only around 350 Mbps, and the decoding latency (measured by clock cycles) is 10 times larger than QFEC ASIP. Yuan and Parhi [21] proposed a single-code SCL Polar decoder. It enhances the decoding speed by determine 2K bits a time. The total area is only 0.62 mm2 when the code length is 1024 bits. However, the maximum throughput is only 675 Mbps when K = 3, and the decoding latency is twice as large as that of QFEC ASIP.
Compared with SC decoders and SCL decoders, BP decoders have relatively high computation complexity and high storage requirements. But they can achieve high throughputs because of the inherent high parallelism. Sha et al. [22] proposed a single-code stage-combined BP Polar decoder that reduces half of memory area than the traditional BP decoders. However, the silicon area is 2.57 mm2 (scaled to 65 nm technology) when N = 4096 bits. We can see that QFEC ASIP achieves better flexibility and smaller area than the sum of those of TASIP and a single-mode BP Polar decoder.
2) COMPARISON WITH THE SUM OF FOUR SINGLE-MODE DECODERS The parameters of QFEC ASIP and four single-mode decoders that together provide the similar function range as QFEC ASIP are listed in Table 4, and QFEC ASIP is compared with the sum of these single-mode decoders. From Table 4, we can see that QFEC ASIP achieves similar energy
VOLUME 6, 2018

W. Qiao et al.: QFEC ASIP: Flexible Quad-Mode FEC ASIP for Polar, LDPC, Turbo, and CC Decoding

efficiency as the single-mode decoders. The normalized throughputs of LDPC mode, Turbo mode and CC mode (64 and 256 states) of QFEC ASIP are smaller than those of single-mode decoders. But QFEC ASIP achieves much smaller area than the sum of area of single-mode decoders, and thus achieves better area efficiency.
VIII. CONCLUSION In this paper, we propose QFEC ASIP, a flexible Polar/LDPC/Turbo/CC quad-mode FEC ASIP, by extending Polar decoding function to our triple-mode previous design, TASP [11]. The newly added Polar decoding function supports any code rates and multiple code lengths (from 64 bits to 4096 bits). The proposed quad-mode confliction-free global memory system avoids all access conflict problems caused by the parallel data access requirements. Memory sharing of four modes saves 65.2% of global memory banks, 48.9% of global memory bits and 29.7% of global memory area. Synthesis result shows that the area of QFEC ASIP is 4.26 mm2 in 65 nm technology. With improved data and SISO parallelization, QFEC ASIP can reach the maximum throughput of 1345 Mbps for Polar, 917 Mbps for LDPC (WiMAX), 320 Mbps for Turbo, and 387 Mbps for CC (64 states) at the clock frequency of 344 MHz. QFEC ASIP achieves better flexibility and smaller area compared with the sum of those of TASIP and a Polar decoder. QFEC ASIP is also compared with the sum of four single-mode decoders that together provide the similar function range as QFEC ASIP, and the results reveal that QFEC ASIP achieves much smaller silicon area and better area efficiency.
Combined with the Reed-solomon decoding function in our another previous design, namely BIT ASIP [26], our research has provided programmable solutions to all important FEC decoding techniques for SDR systems. And thus, our research is very important and practical for future terminals and for future base stations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank Dr. Jun Lin of Nanjing University, Nanjing, China for his valuable suggestions and C model for BP decoding algorithm referred in this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] M. K. Kunchamwar, D. P. Prasad, P. Hegde, T. P. Balsara, and R. Sangireddy, ‘‘Application specific instruction accelerator for multistandard Viterbi and turbo decoding,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Parallel Process. Workshops (ICPPW), San Diego, CA, USA, 2010, pp. 34–43.
[2] D. Liu, ‘‘Baseband ASIP design for SDR,’’ China Commun., vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 60–72, Jul. 2015.
[3] Technical Specification Group GERAN; Digital Cellular Telecommunications System (Phase 2+); Physical Layer on the Radio Path; General Description (Release 4), document 3GPP TS 45.001 V4.0.0, Sep. 2000.
[4] Technical Specification Group (TSG) Radio Access Network (RAN); Working Group 1 (WG1); Multiplexing and Channel Coding (TDD), document 3GPP TS 25.222 V1.0.0, Apr. 1999.
[5] Technical Specification Group (TSG) Radio Access Network (RAN); Working Group 1 (WG1); Multiplexing and Channel Coding (FDD), document 3GPP TS 25.212 V1.0.0, Apr. 1999.
[6] Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; Multiplexing and channel coding (Release 8), document 3GPP TS 36.212 V1.0.0, Mar. 2007.
VOLUME 6, 2018

[7] IEEE Standard for Information Technology—Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Specific Requirements—Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC)and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications Amendment 5: Enhancements for Higher Throughput, IEEE Standard 802.11n-2009, Oct. 2009.
[8] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems— Amendment for Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands, IEEE Standard 802.16e2005, Feb. 2006.
[9] M. Alles, T. Vogt, and N. Wehn, ‘‘FlexiChaP: A reconfigurable ASIP for convolutional, turbo, and LDPC code decoding,’’ in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Rel. Topics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2008, pp. 84–89.
[10] C. Condo, M. Martina, and G. Masera, ‘‘VLSI implementation of a multimode turbo/LDPC decoder architecture,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60-I, no. 6, pp. 1441–1454, Jun. 2013.
[11] Z. Wu and D. Liu, ‘‘High-throughput trellis processor for multistandard FEC decoding,’’ IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 2757–2767, Dec. 2015.
[12] P. Merias, ‘‘Final report of 3GPP TSG RAN WG1 #87 v1.0.0,’’ 3GPP Mobile Competence Centre C/O ETSI, Reno, NV, USA, Tech. Rep. R1-1701552, Nov. 2016.
[13] P. Giard et al., ‘‘Hardware decoders for polar codes: An overview,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits, Syst. (ISCAS), Montreal, QC, Canada, May 2016, pp. 149–152.
[14] B. Yuan and K. K. Parhiin, ‘‘Architecture optimizations for BP polar decoders,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., Vancouver, BC, Canada, May 2013, pp. 2654–2658.
[15] A. Erdal, ‘‘Polar codes: A pipelined implementation,’’ in Proc. Int. Symp. Broadband Commun. (ISBC), Melaka, Malaysia, 2010, pp. 1–3.
[16] A. Pamuk, ‘‘An FPGA implementation architecture for decoding of polar codes,’’ in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst., Aachen, Germany, 2011, pp. 437–441.
[17] Z. Wu, C. Gong, and D. Liu, ‘‘Computational complexity analysis of FEC decoding on SDR platforms,’’ J. Signal Process. Syst., vol. 89, no. 2, pp. 209–224, Nov. 2017.
[18] Z. Wu and D. Liu, ‘‘Memory sharing techniques for multi-standard highthroughput FEC decoder,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Embedded Comput. Syst. Archit., Modeling, Simulation (SAMOS), Agios Konstantinos, Greece, 2014, pp. 93–98.
[19] Z. Wu, ‘‘Multi-standard high performance forward error correction processor,’’ Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Inf. Elect., Beijing Inst. Technol., Beijing, China, 2015.
[20] G. Coppolino, C. Condo, G. Masera, and W. J. Gross, ‘‘A multi-kernel multi-code polar decoder architecture,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 4413–4422, Jul. 2018.
[21] B. Yuan and K. K. Parhi, ‘‘LLR-based successive-cancellation list decoder for polar codes with multibit decision,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 21–25, Jan. 2017.
[22] J. Sha, X. Liu, Z. Wang, and X. Zeng, ‘‘A memory efficient belief propagation decoder for polar codes,’’ China Commun., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 34–41, May 2015.
[23] C. Liu et al., ‘‘Design of a multimode QC-LDPC decoder based on shiftrouting network,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 734–738, Sep. 2009.
[24] A. Ahmed, M. Awais, A. Rehman, M. Maurizio, and G. Masera, ‘‘A high throughput turbo decoder VLSI architecture for 3GPP LTE standard,’’ in Proc. Int. Multitopic Conf., Karachi, Pakistan, 2011, pp. 340–346.
[25] X. Zhao, H. Li, and X. Wang, ‘‘A high performance multi-standard Viterbi decoder,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Electron. Inf. Emergency Commun. (ICEIEC), Macau, China, Jul. 2017, pp. 1–4.
[26] Y. Huo and D. Liu, ‘‘Parallel bit manipulation processor for communication coding and decoding,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Softw. Netw. (ICCSN), Beijing, China, Jun. 2016, pp. 3–7.
WAN QIAO received the B.Eng. degree (Hons.) from the Beijing Institute of Technology, China, in 2016.
She is currently pursuing the master’s degree with the Institute of Application Specific Instruction-Set Processors, Beijing Institute of Technology. Her research interests include FEC decoding algorithms and their implementations upon VLSI.
72199

W. Qiao et al.: QFEC ASIP: Flexible Quad-Mode FEC ASIP for Polar, LDPC, Turbo, and CC Decoding

DAKE LIU (SM’08) received the D.Tech. degree from Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden, in 1995.
He has experiences in the design of communication systems and radio frequency CMOS integrated circuits. He is currently a Professor and the Head of the Institute of Application Specific Instruction-Set Processors (ASIP), Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, and also a Processor with the Computer Engineering Division, Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University. He is the Co-Founder and the Chief Technology Officer of Freehand DSP AB Ltd., Stockholm, Sweden, and the Co-Founder of Coresonic AB, Linköping, which was acquired by MediaTek, Hsinchu, Taiwan. He has authored over 200 papers on journals and international conferences and holds five U.S. patents. His current research interests include high-performance low-power ASIP and integration of on-chip multiprocessors for communications and media digital signal processing. Dr. Liu is enrolled in the China Recruitment Program of Global Experts.

SHAOHAN LIU received the B.S. degree from the Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2014, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in information and electronics. His current research interests include application specific instruction-set processors (ASIP) design and baseband signal processing.

72200

VOLUME 6, 2018

