182

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018

A Reconfigurable LDPC Decoder Optimized for 802.11n/ac Applications
Ioannis Tsatsaragkos and Vassilis Paliouras, Member, IEEE

Abstract— This paper presents a high data-rate low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoder, suitable for the 802.11n/ac (WiFi) standard. The innovative features of the proposed decoder relate to the decoding algorithms and the interconnection between the processing elements. The reduction of the hardware complexity of decoders based on the min-sum (MS) algorithms comes at the cost of performance degradation, especially at high-noise regions. We introduce more accurate approximations of the logsum-product algorithm that also operate well for low signal-tonoise ratio values. Telecommunication standards, including WiFi, support more than one quasi-cyclic LDPC codes of different characteristics, such as codeword length and code rate. A proposed design technique derives networks, capable of supporting a variety of codes and efficiently realizing connectivity between a variable number of processing units, with a relatively small hardware overhead over the single-code case. As a demonstration of the proposed technique, we implemented a reconfigurable network based on barrel rotators, suitable for LDPC decoders compatible with WiFi standard. Our approach achieves low complexity and high clock frequency, compared with related prior works. A 90-nm application-specified integrated circuit implementation of the proposed high-parallel WiFi decoder occupies 4.88 mm2 and achieves an information throughput rate of 4.5 Gbit/s at a clock frequency of 555 MHz.
Index Terms— IEEE 802.11n/ac decoder, interconnection networks, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, min-sum (MS) algorithms, reconfigurable architectures.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes are linear block error-correction codes, defined by a sparse paritycheck matrix (PCM) [1], [2]. In recent years, they have received increased attention, mainly due to their excellent error correction capabilities, the availability of iterative decoding schemes, and their inherent parallelism, which make LDPC decoders suitable for hardware implementation. The flexibility in selecting the various code parameters facilitates their use in a variety of applications. A bipartite Tanner graph [3], which consists of two sets of nodes, is a widely used way to represent a PCM H . Each row of H corresponds to a parity-check equation, graphically represented as a check node of the Tanner graph, while each column of H corresponds to a codeword bit, represented as a variable node. An ace in H indicates
Manuscript received April 14, 2017; revised July 30, 2017; accepted September 8, 2017. Date of publication September 28, 2017; date of current version December 27, 2017. (Corresponding author: Ioannis Tsatsaragkos.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Patras, 26504 Patras, Greece (e-mail: tsatsaragkos@ ece.upatras.gr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2017.2752086

a connection between the corresponding variable and check nodes of the Tanner graph. Message-passing (MP) algorithms for decoding LDPC codes operate by iteratively exchanging information along the edges of the Tanner graph, between connected variable and check nodes. There are a variety of MP decoding algorithms, such as the sum-product (SP) [4], log-SP [5], and min-sum (MS) [6] algorithm.
This paper presents an efficient LDPC decoding architecture for 802.11n/ac applications. The following innovative features are incorporated into the introduced LDPC decoder.
1) Modifications of the MS algorithm improve the decoding performance of the WiFi LDPC decoder. Optimal MS correction factors have been defined, taking into consideration the quantization effects in hardware.
2) A systematic construction method derives a network that is able to rotate any set A of n input messages, where the number n of messages contained in the set is selectable from among any set D of d values, D = {z0, z1, . . . , zd−1}, where 1 < z0 < z1 < . . . < z d −1 .
3) A simple reconfigurable barrel rotator (RBR) efficiently realizes the connectivity between a variable number of processors in the WiFi LDPC decoder.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly reviews popular MP algorithms, while Section III presents the proposed top-level architecture and the basic features of the WiFi decoder. Section IV introduces variations of the MS algorithm that exhibit improved decoding performance, and the corresponding check-node architectures. In Section V, the RBR network is presented, while applicationspecified integrated circuit (ASIC) implementation and bit error rate (BER) performance results, and comparison of the introduced decoder with prior art, follow in Section VI. Finally, conclusions are summarized in Section VII.
II. LDPC DECODING ALGORITHMS
The SP algorithm is very efficient in terms of decoding performance. The log-SP algorithm is a variant of the SP algorithm, implemented in the logarithmic domain, which is suitable for hardware implementations. Multiplication operations required by the original SP are replaced by additions when using the log-SP. The LDPC decoder that implements the log-SP algorithm is initialized with probabilistic information, e.g., in the form of log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) that pertain to bits of a codeword received from the communication channel. Information is exchanged iteratively between the variable and check nodes through an interconnection network, until an

1063-8210 © 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TSATSARAGKOS AND PALIOURAS: RECONFIGURABLE LDPC DECODER OPTIMIZED FOR 802.11n/ac APPLICATIONS

183

estimated codeword is found, or some other stopping criterion

is met. Henceforth, the following notation is used for the presentation of the MP decoding algorithms:

Imax: the maximum number of decoding iterations;

dv / dc: the number of check/variable nodes connected with the variable/check node v / c;

bi : the value of the received symbol that corresponds to

bit i of the codeword;

L

0 v

:

a priori

information (LLR) of the variable node v;

L

n v

:

a posteriori information (LLR) of the variable node

v at iteration n, where 1 ≤ n ≤ Imax ;

Mcn→v : the check-to-variable (c-to-v) message from check

node c to variable node v at iteration n;

Nvn→c: the variable-to-check (v-to-c) message from variable node v to check node c at iteration n;

Sv c: the set of check nodes connected with the variable node v excluding check node c;

Sc v: the set of variable nodes connected with the check
node c excluding variable node v; un: the estimated codeword (bˆ1n, bˆ2n, · · · , bˆkn) at the end
of iteration n.

The log-SP algorithm consists of the following steps. 1) Initialization: All the variable nodes are initialized with the incoming LLR values obtained by

L

0 v

=

−

2bi σ2

(1)

where σ is the standard deviation of the channel noise, assum-

ing binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) symbols transmission

over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.

2) Check-Node Processing: The c-to-v messages are com-

puted as

⎛

⎞

Mcn→v =

sign(Nvn−→1c) · ⎝

(Nvn−→1c)⎠ (2)

v ∈Sc v

v ∈Sc v

where

Nv0 →c

=

L

0 v

,

function

sign(x )

identifies

the

sign

of

x,

and function (x) can be expressed as

(x ) = −1(x ) = − log tanh |x | 2

= log

e|x| + 1 e|x| − 1

.

(3)

3) Variable-Node Processing: The v-to-c messages are computed as follows:

Nvn→c

=

L

0 v

+

Mcn →v .

(4)

c ∈Sv c

4) LLR Update and Hard Decision: The LLR of every symbol is updated as

L vn

=

L

0 v

+

Mcn →v

(5)

c ∈Sv

and a hard decision is taken

bˆin =

0, 1,

if Lvn ≥ 0 otherwise.

(6)

5) Termination Check: Every valid codeword u satisfies

u ⊕ HT = 0

(7)

where ⊕ indicates the modulo-2 addition performed as an XOR operation. If (7) is satisfied for the estimated codeword un, the decoding process stops. Otherwise, steps 2–5 are iteratively applied until either a valid codeword is found, or a predetermined number of Imax decoding iterations are reached.
The implementation of the log-SP check node in hardware requires high complexity. A significant number of lookup tables (LUTs) are required for the implementation of the nonlinear function (x). The MS decoding algorithm is an approximation of log-SP, which reduces the check-node complexity by substituting the calculation of (x) with the identification of the minimum value among a set of positive values, an operation much simpler. Consequently, the MS decoding algorithm differs from log-SP only in the check-node operation (i.e., step 2). MS check-node operation is given by

Mcn→v =

sign(Nvn−→1c) · AMS

(8)

v ∈Sc v

AMS

=

v

min
∈Sc

(|
v

Nvn−→1c

|).

(9)

Message AMS is the absolute value of the Nvn →c message with the lower reliability. We represent the log-SP and MS

c-to-v messages obtained by (2) and (8) as MSP and MMS, respectively. MSP and MMS have the same sign and it is MSP < MMS, i.e., MS overestimates the message with respect to log-SP. The approximation error in the MS check node, due

to the overestimation of the c-to-v messages, degrades the BER

performance, especially at low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)

values. In order to reduce this error, the normalized MS (NMS)

decoding algorithm [7] multiplies the output message of the

MS check node by a multiplicative normalization factor α,

where 0 < α < 1. In another approach, called offset

MS (OMS) [8], a positive offset factor β is subtracted from the

MS output message. Consequently, NMS and OMS decoding

algorithms substitute (8) by

Mcn→v =

sign(Nvn−→1c) · AMS

(10)

v ∈Sc v

where

AMS = α · AMS

(11)

for the NMS and

AMS = max( AMS − β, 0)

(12)

for the OMS. The optimal normalization and offset factors are determined by density evolution or simulations [8], [9]. These two MS algorithms achieve improved decoding performance.

III. PROPOSED WIFI LDPC DECODER
The overall architecture of the proposed decoder is depicted in Fig. 1. Decoding is performed through an iterative process of information exchange between N variable processors and the check processor. Each one of the variable processors consists of z variable-node processing units (VPUs) and one

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

184

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018

Fig. 2. Architecture of the VPU circuit and interconnection with the VPU RAM.
TABLE I MAXIMUM dv VALUES FOR THE WIFI LDPC CODES

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the WiFi LDPC decoder.
VPU RAM. The check processor consists of z check-node processing units (CPUs). A number of N RBR networks [10] realize the connectivity between the processing elements of the decoder, supporting 12 different configuration schemes. The computation path is divided into a number of pipeline stages to increase the operation frequency. Underlined numbers, and the corresponding dashed arrows, in Fig. 1, represent the basic computation stages and data-flow of the decoder; stages 1 and 3 correspond to variable-node and check-node processing, respectively, stages 2 and 4 to transmission of v-to-c and c-to-v messages, respectively, and stage 5 to LLR update. The RBR interface (i/f) selects between v-to-c and c-to-v transmission, without need of a dedicated RBR for each path. Each VPU generates one v-to-c message, and each CPU receives N messages, per clock cycle. A detailed description of the CPU architectures follows in Section IV-B. The relocation of check-node operations to the variable nodes has led to balanced pipeline stages, and consequently higher operating frequency; for example, as detailed below, the absolute values computation in (9) has been merged with the calculation of the v-to-c messages. The design parameters N and z strongly affect the area complexity, speed, and power consumption. Larger values of N and z derive highly parallel multigigabit architectures, while smaller values lead to low-cost decoders. Therefore, this architecture is very flexible and easily adjustable to different design demands and constraints.
The introduced WiFi LPDC decoder implements variations of the MS algorithm, under the layered decoding scheduling [11]. In layered decoding, the rows of the LDPC PCM H are processed in subsets (layers) in successive order. Using the information that has already been updated by previous layers, layered decoding improves the convergence speed by reducing the number of iterations required to achieve a target BER [12]. This comes at the cost of additional clock cycles per iteration due to the increased number of exchanged messages during a single iteration. The sequential schedule of layered decoding

makes it very challenging to achieve high throughput, because parallelization is not straightforward due to data dependencies.
The number of iterations performed by the decoder has a great effect upon latency and decoding performance. The increase of iterations improves the BER performance, at the cost of latency increase. The implementation of a convergecheck operation reduces the average codeword decoding latency, preventing the execution of unnecessary iterations. A convergence signal is asserted at the end of an iteration when the algorithm converges to a valid codeword and therefore terminates (early termination); otherwise, decoding continues until a predetermined Imax.
A WiFi PCM is a quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) [13] code, composed of L horizontal layers, where L equals to 12, 8, 6, and 4 for a coding rate R of 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, and 5/6, respectively. The column weight in each horizontal layer of the PCM is at most one. Consequently, the zi rows composing the layer can be processed in parallel, where zi equals to 27, 54, and 81 for a codeword length Nc of 648, 1296, and 1944 bits, respectively. Accordingly, the WiFi LDPC PCM consists of 24 vertical layers, of zi columns each, with row weight at most one. For an architecture with five pipeline stages, as in Fig. 1, and z = 81, cL = 2 · dc/N + 3 clock cycles are required for the processing of one horizontal layer of H , and L · cL cycles in total for the completion of one decoding iteration. For N = 24, cL equals to five.
The architecture of the VPU circuit and the VPU memory is depicted in Fig. 2. For simplicity, we assume N = 24 and z = 81. The VPU RAM is connected with the z VPUs of the variable processor, which correspond to the z variable nodes of a vertical layer e (1 ≤ e ≤ 24) of the PCM. This memory stores, concatenated in the same memory word, and without suffering of data conflicts, z c-to-v messages sent from the CPUs to the variable processor. The VPU RAM is optimized with respect to the maximum variable-node degree of the specific vertical layer, as derived by the 12 codes of the 802.11n/ac standard (Table I). More specifically, assuming an n-bit data quantization, the size of the VPU RAM is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TSATSARAGKOS AND PALIOURAS: RECONFIGURABLE LDPC DECODER OPTIMIZED FOR 802.11n/ac APPLICATIONS

185

given by max(dv ) × (z · n). The E xt module performs sign extension to the incoming messages (LLRs and c-to-v messages) to prevent overflow during the addition operation. A number of log2(max(dv ) extra bits are used. The updated LLR values are stored in a register (Reg_est). The sign of this value (hard decision—b) is used by a convergence-check operation performed in the CPU (Fig. 7, signal bu). The Sat − Abs module merges two operations: 1) the saturation of the adder’s output in the n-bit quantization dynamic range and 2) the computation of the absolute value. The relocation of the absolute computation, which is an MS check-node operation, into the VPU decreases the CPU critical path. The sign and the magnitude of the computed v-to-c message are concatenated to an n-bit output (out_v). The sign of the v-to-c message is stored to a register, and used by the Sgn module to identify the sign of the new c-to-v message in_v, with respect to (8).
IV. CHECK-NODE PROCESSING UNITS

A. Review of Modified Min-Sum Algorithms
One of the contributions in this paper is the definition of optimal correction factors that minimize the difference between the outputs of the MS and log-SP check nodes, for hardware applications of practical interest. The exact computation of this difference could allow us to more accurately approximate the decoding behavior of log-SP, performing check-node operations that are simpler than the evaluation of (x); such simple operations include comparisons and additions. After identifying a correction factor C f , the AMS value in (10) is obtained by

AMS = AMS + C f .

(13)

Hu et al. [16] proposed a rule to determine correction factors

for check nodes of degree three, dc = 3 ⎧ ⎪⎨c, i f |x + y| < t and |x − y| > t · |x + y|

C f = ⎩⎪−0,c,

if|x − y| < t and |x + y| > t · |x − y| otherwise

(14)

The CPU is a basic submodule of the LDPC decoder, which implements operations that have great impact in the required hardware and the decoding performance. Tsatsaragkos and Paliouras [14] have recently proposed architectures, which reduce the complexity of CPUs based on variations of the MS algorithm. In this paper, we introduce MS-based decoding schemes that improve the corrective capability of a WiFi decoder.
The MS algorithm can be thought as an approximation of the log-SP algorithm for high SNR values [9]. Simulation results have demonstrated a significant degradation of the MS algorithm at low SNR values compared with log-SP. The smaller LLRs dominate the sum of the (x) functions in (2). If the remainder of the v-to-c messages is quite larger than the absolute minimum message AMS, the result of the MS approximation is quite accurate. However, when the nearestminimum (i.e., second minimum) message is close to the minimum one, the MS algorithm suffers a great performance degradation [15]. Both the OMS and NMS algorithms do not take into account this case. For iterative decoders that use short wordlengths, such a case can be frequent. The NMS algorithm uses a multiplicative factor α, where α < 1, to compensate the MS overestimation. This operation does not affect messages with magnitudes close to zero, while messages with greater values are significantly reduced. In the OMS algorithm, the reduction of the output value is constant, without taking into account the magnitude of the minimum message. Messages with values lower than β are set to zero. Furthermore, the normalization factor α and the offset factor β remain constant for all the decoding iterations. To obtain optimum performance, these factors vary depending on the decoding iteration and SNR value [8]. We denote the NMS and OMS c-to-v messages by MNMS and MOMS, respectively. Appropriate normalization and offset factors that satisfy the requirement of equality between the mean values of MNMS (or MOMS) and MSP during the first decoding iteration can be obtained by Monte Carlo simulations, or theoretically [7].

where x and y are the absolute values of the input messages, c = 0.5, and t = 2. A simpler version of (14) has been presented in [9] and implemented in [17]. The computation of C f for dc = 3 may be implemented as an access to a 2-D LUT using as indices the value of the minimum message and the difference x − y [18]. For dc > 3, the check-node output is obtained recursively. The hardware implementation of these approaches requires high complexity for dc > 3, because the check-node operation is performed for every pair of incoming messages. A reduced complexity rule, where the C f of a particular check node is computed using as inputs x and y the two minimum incoming messages, shows inferior decoding performance.
Several authors have proposed modifications that aim to recover the performance loss of the MS, NMS, and OMS algorithms compared with log-SP. Jiang et al. [19] associated the offset factor β with the magnitude of the minimum message AMS; smaller AMS values correspond to smaller β factors. In [15], the value of the nearest-minimum message is taken into consideration to determine the normalization factor α. Xu et al. [20] presented a two-step algorithm: 1) the AMS value is multiplied by α only when it is greater than the arithmetic average of the previous p AMS outputs and 2) the outcome of step 1 is used to modify the offset factor in each decoding iteration. This is a modification of the OMS algorithm, where β is iteratively adjusted with the assistance of a modified NMS algorithm. A combined NMS/OMS approach is proposed in [21] to take advantage of performing both scaling and shifting simultaneously. Wu et al. [22] assumed that if a parity-check equation is not satisfied, then the messages of the corresponding check node are of lower reliability. The output messages of these particular nodes are further reduced, selecting adaptively adjusted normalization/offset factors.
There are modifications of the MS algorithm that associate the computation of the c-to-v messages with the variablenode and check-node degrees. The conventional NMS/OMS algorithms perform normalization/offset operations only to the check-node messages. The idea of a 2-D scaling factor

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

186

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018

Fig. 3. Double-precision BER results for IEEE 802.11n/ac LDPC codes.

for irregular LDPC codes is presented in [23]. Normalization/offset postprocessing in both check and variable nodes is applied, considering the degrees of the nodes in the graph representation of the code. Optimization over l parameters is required, where l is the total number of different variables and check degrees. Howard et al. [24] proposed a decoding approximation where the applied correction factor, with respect to (13), depends on the degree of the particular check node and the minimum-magnitude v-to-c message. In a modification of this paper [25], a different correction factor is applied when the c-to-v message corresponds to the variable node k that sent the minimum message AMS.
B. Proposed Reduced Min-Sum Algorithms and CPU Circuits
The finite-precision data representation strongly affects the decoding performance [26]. A method called discretized density evolution has been utilized to predict the performance of quantized MP algorithms [9]. The obtained results indicate that modifications of the MS algorithm outperform the logSP algorithm at high SNRs. This is justified by the fact that the implementations of quantized SP or MS algorithms are approximations of the infinite-precision algorithms. The SP decoding is optimal for a code without cycles, which is well approximated by LDPC codes of large girth and length. For short and medium length LDPC codes, some performance loss has been reported at low-noise levels for the double-precision log-SP algorithm compared with finite-precision modified MS algorithms [27]. In this paper, we seek for more accurate approximations of the log-SP algorithm at high-noise levels, taking into consideration the quantization effects in hardware LDPC decoder implementations.
We investigate the decoding capabilities of log-SP, MS, NMS, and OMS performing double-precision floating-point MATLAB simulations. In order to speed up our experiments, the mex API has been used to build MATLAB functions from

C functions. Fig. 3 illustrates BER results for LDPC codes defined by the 802.11n/ac standards, with length N = 1944 and rates 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, and 5/6. We assume a BPSK symbols
transmission over an AWGN channel. The simulations were performed adopting a layered decoding scheme for Imax = 10. A normalization factor α = 0.8125 and an offset factor β = 0.5 were applied to the NMS and OMS algorithms, respectively. As revealed by simulation results, the log-SP
algorithm outperforms MS and its approximations at high-
noise levels. For the two low-rate codes, this difference in performance is more evident; about 0.1 dB at a BER of 10−3.
For lower BER values, the MS decoding schemes outperform
log-SP, which suffers from an earlier error floor. Specifically, the intersection point is at a BER of 10−6 for the two low-rate codes and at 10−5 for the two high-rate codes.
As mentioned before, the data representation should be
considered before selecting an appropriate decoding algorithm.
A large number of quantization bits improve the error-
corrective performance, but increase the area complexity.
There are applications where a low-area decoder with an
acceptable coding loss is preferable.
We introduce some MS-based algorithms, which we group
under the name reduced MS (RMS). For a set S that includes
the p absolute values of the messages sent to the check
node c from its adjacent variable nodes, we denote by Sm the set {min1, min2, min3}, which consists of the first, second, and third minimum value in S. Furthermore, we denote by i , j , and k the variable node that sent the message Sm (1), Sm (2), and Sm (3), respectively. The basic hypothesis behind the RMS algorithms is that the Mcn→v output to variable node v depends on the two minimum messages sent by the set Sc v of variable nodes to the check node c. More specifically, the correction factor C f in (13) is identified using the difference between these two messages and the magnitude of the minimum. We define subxy = miny − minx . We propose

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TSATSARAGKOS AND PALIOURAS: RECONFIGURABLE LDPC DECODER OPTIMIZED FOR 802.11n/ac APPLICATIONS

187

two RMS algorithms, optimized for the WiFi LDPC decoder

and specific data quantization schemes. The RMS1 algorithm

is a modified MS algorithm, where the AMS value in (10) is obtained as follows:
⎧ ⎨⎪min −1, if (submin < 2 and min > 1) or

AMS = ⎪⎩min,

(submin = 0 and min = 1) otherwise

(15)

where

min = min2, if v = i

(16)

min1, otherwise

and ⎧ ⎪⎨sub23, if v = i

submin = ⎪⎩ssuubb1132,,

if v = j otherwise.

Fig. 4. Double-precision and finite-precision ([4:0] and [4:1]) BER results for the rate-1/2 (1944, 972) WiFi LDPC code (Imax = 10).
(17)

For the RMS2 algorithm, it is

⎧

AMS

=

⎪⎨⎪⎪mmiinn

−1 −0.5,

⎪⎪⎩⎪min,

if submin = 0 and min > 1 if (submin > 0 or min ≤ 1) and submin < 3 and min > 0 otherwise.

(18)

Assuming uniform LLR quantization schemes [i:f] (i:integer bits, f:fractional bits), the RMS1 algorithm is optimized for a [4:0] scheme and the RMS2 algorithm for a [4:1] scheme.
For the proposed RMS algorithms, the correction operation is implemented as an addition, thus reducing complexity, compared with NMS that utilizes a multiplication operation. The difference between the two minimum messages (submin) is considered to identify optimum correction factors. As revealed by MATLAB simulations, the difference between the outcome of log-SP and MS depends, as well, on the magnitude of the minimum message (min). Specifically, larger reduction factors should be applied to messages with greater values to compensate the MS overestimation. The diversity in the selection of reduction factor has been implemented in a more sophisticated way than in the case of NMS, where small messages are not affected (when α is close to one), or larger messages are significantly reduced (when α is close to zero). This behavior is not in agreement with the (x) function in the log-SP algorithm. A variety of correction factors should be used, to increase the granularity level for the correlation between the results of the RMS approximation and the min and submin values. On the other hand, the use of a large number of different correction factors could increase the complexity of the approximate algorithm. Matlab simulations revealed that the probability that the difference of the outcome of logSP and MS is larger than one is low, for specific hardware implementations. This reduces the candidate factors to values smaller or equal to one. The correction factors should be chosen with respect to the quantization scheme. Taking these into account, zero and one are used as correction factors for a [4:0] data representation (RMS1), and 0, 0.5, and 1 for a [4:1] scheme (RMS2). The thresholds of selecting specific factors have been determined after MATLAB simulations that

Fig. 5. Double-precision and finite-precision ([4:0] and [4:1]) BER results for the rate-2/3 (1944, 1296) WiFi LDPC code (Imax = 10).
correlate the difference between the outputs of the MS and logSP check nodes with the min and submin values. The specific algorithmic choices have been taken considering the need to keep the introduced hardware overhead low.
We performed finite-precision simulations via fieldprogrammable gate array (FPGA) prototyping to investigate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms. The overall system consists of an LDPC codec, an AWGN Channel, and a circuit for the BER performance evaluation [28]. The system has been designed in VHDL and mapped into Virtex7XC7VX485T FPGA (VC707 evaluation board) using the Xilinx design flow. A low-area decoder architecture (Fig. 1) with N = 2 and z = 81 has been incorporated into the system, employing the various check-node algorithms.
Fig. 4 illustrates BER results for the (1944, 972) WiFi LDPC code. The maximum number of decoding iterations is set to 10. The 4-bit RMS1 algorithm achieves about 0.25- and 0.37-dB coding gain, at a BER of 10−3, compared with the NMS and OMS algorithms, respectively. The 5-bit RMS2 improves the decoding performance by about 0.06–0.08 and 0.13 dB compared with the OMS the NMS algorithms, respectively. Moreover, the 5-bit RMS2 approximates the performance of the double-precision OMS and outperforms the double-precision log-SP for high SNR values. Fig. 5 illustrates BER versus noise level results for the (1944, 1296) WiFi LDPC code. The coding gain of the RMS algorithm

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

188

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018

Fig. 6. Finite-precision ([4:0] and [4:1]) BER results for the rate-1/2

(1296, 648) WiFi LDPC code (Imax = 30).

Fig. 7. Architecture of the RMS2 CPU (19).

TABLE II
HARDWARE UTILIZATION AND LATENCY OF THE EVALUATED ALGORITHMS

Fig. 8. Architecture of the three-minimum computation unit.

is significant for the 4-bit implementation. There is, also, an improvement for the [4:1] quantization scheme, with the RMS2 showing similar behavior, or even outperforming the double-precision OMS. The RMS algorithms, at high-noise levels, achieve decoding performance very close to that of the double-precision log-SP, reducing the coding loss to about 0.06 dB. For both codes, the RMS implementations perform significantly better (up to 0.5 dB) than the doubleprecision MS. Moreover, we present simulation results for the (1296, 648) WiFi LDPC code at a higher maximum number of iterations, Imax = 30 (Fig. 6). The advantage remains with the RMS algorithms when increasing the decoding iterations. The RMS algorithms provide superior decoding performance compared with MS, NMS, and OMS, for different WiFi codes, quantization schemes, and numbers of decoding iterations. Further simulations revealed that (17) can be simplified to

submin =

sub23, if v = i sub12, otherwise

(19)

for both introduced algorithms, without any performance loss. The RMS algorithms achieve enhanced error-correction
performance with a moderate increase of the complexity (Table II), which is mainly caused by the computation of min3. The hardware overhead is not significant for small values of N. For high-speed WiFi decoders that process up to 24 messages in a single clock cycle, it increases. For such applications, (19) could further simplified to

submin = sub12.

(20)

The overhead imposed by this approximation is practically zero. The performance loss compared with the standard RMS

algorithms is acceptable, less than 0.1 dB. As will be reported in Section VI, the BER performance of a highly parallel decoding architecture that employs the simplified RMS algorithm is competitive to state-of-the-art decoders.
Fig. 7 illustrates the block level diagram of the RMS2 CPU, implementing (19). The Sub module performs subtraction between two values, and the Cond module generates the select logic signals, with respect to the RMS2 conditions. Fig. 8 depicts the architecture of the three minimum computation unit, for N = 2. The mini value is stored in the regi register. The S E L module generates the register enable and select logic signals, and the index of the minimum message. For an RMS check node implementing (20), the block of Fig. 8 is substituted by a two-minimum computation unit [29], as depicted in Fig. 9. The CPU of Fig. 9 employs RMS1.
The CPU units receive N v-to-c messages per clock cycle, and compute the two minimum value estimations in dc/N clock cycles. An XOR operation is performed on the signs of the incoming messages, with respect to (8), and the result is sent to the adjacent VPUs. Furthermore, an XOR operation on the received hard-decision bv bits returns a ‘0’ result when the corresponding parity-check constraint is met. The outcome of this operation is sent to the Conv module (Fig. 1). The convergence signal is asserted when the parity checks of all rows are satisfied. The RMS CPU units consist of two basic sub-blocks. Retiming can be easily applied, by placing a pipelining cut-set to the outputs of block1, thus reducing the latency of the circuit.
Table II summarizes a comparison between NMS and the proposed RMS algorithms, in terms of area complexity and latency, obtained using a 90-nm CMOS process. The [4:0]

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TSATSARAGKOS AND PALIOURAS: RECONFIGURABLE LDPC DECODER OPTIMIZED FOR 802.11n/ac APPLICATIONS

189

Fig. 9. Architecture of the RMS1 CPU (20).
implementation results correspond to the RMS1 algorithm, while the [4:1] designs utilize RMS2. The simplification described in (19) is implemented for N = 2, while (20) is used for N = 24 to reduce complexity. A reasonable area and delay overhead in the case of N = 2 is justified by the significant coding gain achieved by the RMS algorithms. Moreover, the area and time requirement for the simplified highly parallel RMS CPUs (N = 24) is similar to that of the NMS CPUs.
V. RECONFIGURABLE BARREL ROTATOR NETWORK
Hardware implementations of LDPC decoding algorithms often require shift operations to route information between processing units. Such operations are also required for a subcategory of LDPC codes, the QC-LDPC codes [13]. The PCM of a QC-LDPC code comprises square zero or circularly shifted (rotated) identity submatrices of size z × z. These rotations define the interconnection between the basic processing elements of a QC-LDPC decoder (i.e., VPUs and CPUs). We call value z the expansion factor of PCM H . QC-LDPC codes are widely used in error-correction systems due to their lower hardware requirements and corrective performance comparable with randomly constructed codes [30] [31]. Telecommunication standards, such as WiMAX and WiFi, support a variety of QC-LDPC codes. The WiFi standards define three codes with expansion factor z equal to 27, 54, or 81. To accommodate multiple codes of different length, there is a need for reconfigurable networks that efficiently realize connectivity between a variable number n of VPUs and CPUs. In the majority of the state-of-theart implementations, the different values of n coincide with the supported expansion factors.
In the literature, there is a variety of reconfigurable networks, designed for QC-LDPC decoders. The majority of these implementations is based on barrel shifters [32], Beneš networks [33], and Banyan networks [34]. For applications where only cyclic shifts are required, Banyan networks outperform Beneš networks. An n × n Banyan network consists of n · log2 n 2-to-1 multiplexers, instead of n · (2 · log2 n − 1) multiplexers required to construct an n × n Beneš network. Moreover, Beneš networks consist of 2 · log2 n − 1 stages of multiplexers, i.e., log2 n − 1 more stages compared with Banyan networks and barrel shifters, which increases latency.

Beneš and Banyan network implementations are not efficient when n is not a power of two. This is a crucial limitation as n is not a power of two for modern telecommunication standards, such as WiMAX, WiFi, and DVB-S2.
Oh and Parhi [35] optimized the Beneš network using further types of primitive switches, such as 3 × 3 or 5 × 5 (instead of 2 × 2 switches only), aiming to reduce the area requirements and control complexity. In this Benešbased approach, the latency problem remains, because of the large number of stages and the serial, stage-by-stage, generation of the control signals. Moreover, the Oh–Parhi approach shows high hardware complexity and incorporates a relatively complex control unit. Chen et al. [36] introduced an interconnection network with simpler control logic and fewer stages in the critical path, which consists of three subnetworks: a left-shift, a right-shift, and a merge network. These highly flexible and scalable networks support any submatrix size p × p, for a given maximum size PM × PM , where 2 ≤ p ≤ PM . Nonetheless, these more general circuits still suffer from high complexity, in comparison with networks used in LDPC decoders that are tailored to specific telecommunication standards. Liu et al. [37] proposed a threestage switch network, which is suitable for the IEEE 802.16e and 802.11n/ac standards. The first stage is a barrel-shifter permutation network, the second stage is a circuit that generates two routing decisions, and the third stage implements a selection scheme. A network based on barrel shifters [38] has been used in IEEE 802.16e LDPC decoders, to support the interconnection of a variable number of hardware elements. This approach is rather hardware inefficient, due to the use of duplicate logic in order to provide the various configurations. Rovini et al. [39] introduced a reconfigurable multisize circular-shifting network, consisting of a number of smallsize barrel shifters and an additional multistage network of multiplexers. The support of multiple PCMs is achieved by rearranging the system in smaller subnetworks, at an area cost that increases with the number of the different matrix sizes. A low-area memory-addressing-based technique has been used in [40]. This approach utilizes more than one clock cycle in the case of larger block lengths, thus increasing the decoding time. A network-on-chip (NoC) approach, where each computational node contains a processor and a routing element, is suitable for fully flexible decoders that support a wide range of LDPC codes of different standards [41]. However, this flexibility comes at the cost of additional occupied area, low energy efficiency, and increased latency in the communication among processing elements, making NoCs not suitable for fast highly parallel decoders.
A. Architecture and Operation of a Logarithmic Barrel Rotator
For hardware decoders that support QC-LDPC codes, the processing elements interconnection network can be a circuit that implements the connectivity determined by interpreting a circularly shifted identity submatrix Hx as an adjacency matrix. Specifically, the inputs of the circuit correspond to the columns of Hx, the outputs correspond to the rows of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

190

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018

Fig. 10. 6 × 6 LBR circuit.

Hx, and an ace in column h and row g indicates a connection between the input h and output g of the circuit. The output of such a circuit is necessarily a rotation of its inputs. An implementation of a barrel rotator, capable of performing this operation, is shown in Fig. 10 [42]. A barrel rotator configured to rotate n input messages is referred to as an n ×n barrel rotator. An n × n barrel rotator consists of p = log2 n stages of multiplexers, each stage comprising n multiplexers. For this reason, these circuits are referred to as logarithmic barrel rotators (LBRs), a subcategory of logarithmic barrel shifters. A rule that defines the interconnection of the multiplexers that compose an LBR is as follows.
1) Multiplexer j , where 0 ≤ j ≤ n − 1, of stage k, where 0 ≤ k ≤ p − 1 and t = 2k, receives as inputs:
a) the primary inputs j and mod ( j +t, n), if k = 0; b) the outputs of the stage-(k − 1) multiplexers j and
mod ( j + t, n), if k > 0.
The output of the stage-(k − 1) multiplexer j (or primary input j , for k = 0) drives the input that corresponds to value 0 of the stage-k multiplexer- j control signal.
We define F to be a set of n input messages, s to be the rotate factor (0 ≤ s ≤ n − 1), r to be a binary value that indicates left or right rotation, where r = 0 for left rotation and r = 1 for right rotation, and G to be the set of the rotated output messages.
1) An n-message rotate-left-by-s operation sets the i th message of F to the lth position of G, where 0 ≤ i , l ≤ n − 1 and l = mod (i − s, n).
2) An n-message rotate-right-by-s operation sets the i th message of F to the lth position of G, where 0 ≤ i , l ≤ n − 1 and l = mod (i + s, n).
An n-message rotate-left operation of F at G is equivalent to the function determined by a right-circularly shifted identity submatrix Hx, where the set F corresponds to the columns of Hx and the set G corresponds to the rows of Hx. Respectively, an n-message rotate-right operation is equivalent to the function determined by a left-circularly shifted identity submatrix Hx. We define b = | (n · r ) − s|, where 0 ≤ b ≤ n − 1. We call value b the rotate b-factor of the corresponding left or right rotation. Its binary representation, bp−1bp−2 . . . b0, comprises p = log2 n bits. The binary value bk is assigned to the stage-k select input sk of the n × n

Fig. 11. Architecture of the {3, 6, 9} RBR.
barrel rotator, where 0 ≤ k ≤ p − 1. Thus, the LBR circuit realizes the desired rotate operation.
B. Method for the Construction of an RBR We propose a simple design technique that obtains
hardware-efficient low-latency RBR circuits. The RBR comprises an array of multiplexers, having nmax inputs/outputs. This circuit circularly shifts a set of n messages, applied to the inputs, by a selected number of positions, and delivers the result at the outputs yi (i ≤ n − 1). The number of messages contained in the set is selectable from a set D of d values, D = {z0, z1, . . . , zd−1}, where 1 < z0 < z1 < . . . < zd−1 ≤ nmax . Select logic signals are used to control the operation of the RBR. For example, for the RBR of Fig. 11, it is D = {z0, z1, z2} = {3, 6, 9}. Thus, this circuit is reconfigurable to function as a 3 × 3, a 6 × 6, or a 9 × 9 barrel rotator.
In general, an RBR network that is able to support d configurations consists of a zd−1×zd−1 barrel rotator (primary multiplexers) and a plurality of additional multiplexers, called secondary. The primary multiplexers are assigned a name of the form MUX jk. Multiplexer MUX jk is the j th primary multiplexer, or primary multiplexer j , of stage k. All the primary multiplexers of stage k are controlled by the signal s1k, by assigning the binary value bk to the input s1k, as described in Section V-A. The primary multiplexers that compose the zd−1 × zd−1 barrel rotator form d groups, namely, Group 0, Group 1,. . ., Group d −1. The number d of the aforementioned groups equals to the size of the set D, i.e., to the number of the different z f × z f configurations, supported by the RBR. As explained in Section V-C, some of the primary multiplexers may belong to more than one group. Group f , where 0 ≤ f ≤ d − 2, is constructed as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TSATSARAGKOS AND PALIOURAS: RECONFIGURABLE LDPC DECODER OPTIMIZED FOR 802.11n/ac APPLICATIONS

191

1) Rule A: Form a Group f consisting of the primary multiplexers z f − 2k to z f − 1 of stage k, where 0 ≤ k ≤ p f − 1 and p f = log2 z f .
2) Rule B: Set as inputs of the Group- f primary multi-
plexer j (0 ≤ j ≤ z f − 1) of the stage k (0 ≤ k ≤ p f − 1, t = 2k) the outputs of the stage-(k − 1) primary multiplexers j and mod ( j + t, z f ) (or the primary inputs j and mod ( j + t, z f ), for k = 0), when the desired configuration is z f × z f ; otherwise, set as inputs the outputs of the stage-(k − 1) primary multiplexers j and mod ( j + t, zd−1) (or the primary inputs j and mod ( j + t, zd−1), for k = 0). The interconnection specified by Rule B is implemented by the
secondary multiplexers. Specifically, a secondary multiplexer
is attached to the input, which is selected when s1k = 1, of each of the Group- f (0 ≤ f ≤ d − 2) multiplexers of the zd−1 × zd−1 barrel rotator.
All the secondary multiplexers of Group f are controlled
by the signal s2 f . Given a set D of d configurations {z0, z1, . . . , zd−1}, d − 1 select signals s2 f are required. In order to realize the zq × zq configuration, where 0 ≤ q ≤ d − 1, s2 f is given by

s2 f =

1, if f = q 0, otherwise.

(21)

In practice, the fact that a primary multiplexer belongs to a specific Group f , where 0 ≤ f ≤ d − 2, implies
the existence of a secondary multiplexer. The secondary
multiplexers attached to the Group- f primary multiplexers introduce additional connectivity required to realize the z f ×z f configuration. In this way, a subnetwork is formed, which implements the functionality of a z f × z f LBR.
All the remaining primary multiplexers belong to Group d − 1. There is no need to place a secondary multiplexer at the inputs of the primary multiplexers of Group d − 1, since the zd−1 × zd−1 barrel rotator realizes the zd−1 × zd−1 configuration.
With respect to the aforementioned rules A and B, the {3, 6, 9} RBR of Fig. 11 is composed of three groups of
primary multiplexers: a first group, namely, Group 0, consisting of the primary multiplexer z0 − 1 of stage 0 (MUX20) and the primary multiplexers z0 − 2 and z0 − 1 of stage 1 (MUX11 and MUX21); a second group, Group 1, consisting of the primary multiplexer z1−1 of stage 0 (MUX50), the primary multiplexers z1 −2 and z1 −1 of stage 1 (MUX41 and MUX51) and the primary multiplexers z1−4 to z1−1 of stage 2 (MUX22 to MUX52); and a third group, Group 2, consisting of all the remaining primary multiplexers. Secondary multiplexers
mux0 to mux2 are placed at the input of each of the Group-0 primary multiplexers, selected when s1k = 1. Correspondingly, multiplexers mux3 to mux9 precede Group-1 primary multiplexers. As depicted in Fig. 11, Group-0 primary multiplexers of the {3, 6, 9} RBR belong to the z0 × z0 subnetwork (3 × 3 configuration), while Group-1 primary multiplexers belong to the z1 × z1 subnetwork (6 × 6 configuration). The d − 1 = 2 inputs s20 and s21 are used to set the operation mode of the barrel rotator, determining the number n of input messages on

Fig. 12. Architecture of the {4, 5, 9} RBR.

which the rotate operation is applied, as follows:

⎧ ⎪⎨{1, 0}, if n = z0 = 3

{s20,

s21}

=

⎪⎩{{00,,

1}, 0},

if n = z1 = 6 if n = z2 = 9.

(22)

C. Complexity of the Proposed RBR
1) Time Complexity: Assuming D = {z0, z1, . . . , zd−1}, we define W jk to be a metric associated with each primary multiplexer MUX jk. We define W jk = 1 when the primary multiplexer MUX jk belongs to Group d − 1, and W jk = log2(w jk + 1) + 1, when the primary multiplexer MUX jk belongs to a number of w jk groups other than Group d − 1. The value of metric W jk gives the maximum delay, measured in terms of two-input multiplexer count, introduced by the
primary multiplexer MUX jk and its associated secondary multiplexers. Fig. 12 illustrates an {4, 5, 9} RBR circuit, as derived
by the proposed construction method. With respect to
rules A and B, the following conditions hold.
1) MUX11 belongs to Group 2, and it is W11 = 1. 2) MUX21 belongs to Group 0 only, and it is W21 =
log2(1 + 1) + 1 = 2. 3) MUX31 belongs to Group 0 and Group 1, and it is
W31 = log2(2 + 1) + 1 = 3.
We denote by MPS jk the subcircuit that consists of the primary multiplexer MUX jk and its associated secondary multiplexers. The delay, del( j, k), introduced by MPS jk, depends on the value of the signal s1k, as follows:

del( j, k) = 1, if s1k = 0

(23)

W jk , if s1k = 1

for a given rotate b-factor b, where 0 ≤ j ≤ zd−1−1, s1k = bk, and 0 ≤ k ≤ log2 zd−1 − 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

192

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018

TABLE III
TIME AND AREA COMPLEXITY MEASUREMENTS OF RBR IMPLEMENTATIONS

TABLE IV
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE PROPOSED NETWORK AND SEVERAL OTHER EXISTING RECONFIGURABLE NETWORKS

We

denote

by

t

z j

f

,b

the

delay

of

the

path

with

starting

point the primary input j and ending point the primary

output mod ( j − b, z f ) of the RBR network, for given

z f × z f configuration and p-bit rotate b-factor value. The

value

of

t

z j

f

,b

,

measured

in

terms

of

two-input

multiplexer

count, is given by

p−1

t

z j

f

,b

=

del( jk+1, k)

(24)

k=0

which, as derived by (23), is equivalent to

p−1

t

z j

f

,b

=

(bk · W jk+1k + 1 − bk )

(25)

k=0

where 0 ≤ j ≤ z f − 1, p = log2 zd−1 , j0 = j , and jk+1 = mod ( jk − 2k , z f ).

The critical path delay, Tcr , of a {z0, z1, . . . , zd−1} RBR

equals

to

the

maximum

t

z j

f

,b

delay,

which

is

given

by

Tcr

=

max
f, j,b

t

z j

f

,b

(26)

where 0 ≤ f ≤ d − 1 and 0 ≤ j, b ≤ z f − 1. 2) Area Complexity: According to Rules A and B, there
are 2 log2 z f − 1 secondary multiplexers associated with each Group f , where 0 ≤ f ≤ d − 2. Consequently, the number
Ms of the secondary multiplexers required for an RBR implementation, for a set D of d values {z0, z1, . . . , zd−1}, is given by

d −2

Ms = (2 log2 z f − 1).

(27)

f =0

Equation (27) gives a number of Ms = (22 − 1) + (23 − 1) = 10 secondary multiplexers for each of the example {3, 6, 9} and {4, 5, 9} RBR networks, as verified by the circuits
shown in Figs. 11 and 12, respectively. Consequently, an RBR
consists of Nm two-input multiplexers in total, where

Nm = zd−1 · log2 zd−1 + Ms .

(28)

Table III summarizes critical path delays (Tcr ) and area utilization (Nm ) for various RBR networks, as given by (26) and (28), respectively. Each RBR network of Table III supports
a set D of d configurations, and consists of p stages of primary multiplexers. The RBR 3 is the conventional 81 × 81 LBR circuit. In case of the IEEE 802.11n/ac standards, where D = {27, 54, 81} (RBR 4), (28) derives Nm = 661.

The hardware overhead of RBR 4 over the single LBR is only 16.5%. The 802.16e standard requires an RBR of D = {[24 : 4 : 96]} (RBR 5), supporting d = 19 different configurations.
D. Comparisons
A possible straightforward implementation of the interconnection circuit of a WiFi LDPC decoder could require dedicated hardware for each specific code size. This approach would lead in the development of three separate LBR networks and a number of additional multiplexers (Imux) to select one of the three networks outputs, depending on the selected configuration. The complexity Cs of this implementation is given by Cs = C27 + C54 + C81 + Cmux = 1107, where Cmux denotes the complexity of the aforementioned additional multiplexer stages (Cmux = 54 + 27). Area reduction derived by the use of the RBR network equals to 40.3%. The use of a dedicated network for each specific submatrix size duplicates the MP circuits, leading to higher hardware complexity.
Table IV summarizes area and clock frequency results of the proposed RBR interconnection circuit and prior art. The RBR architecture has been synthesized using the Synopsys design flow and has been mapped to an 130-nm CMOS standard-cell library. The area utilization of an 8-bit RBR, compatible with the 802.11n/ac standards, is 0.062 mm2 at an operation frequency of 500 MHz (Table IV, Proposed). The switch networks proposed in [35] and [36] support all the square submatrix sizes between 2 × 2 and 96 × 96, offering high flexibility, but require high implementation area, and circuits in [35] suffer from long critical paths. The multimode switch network introduced in [37] supports both the IEEE 802.16e and 802.11n/ac standards but shows increased complexity. Moreover, our design is found to require less area, compared with the 802.11n/ac-compatible multistage network proposed in [39]. This interconnection circuit is composed of a number of barrel shifters and an additional adaptation network. For the generation of the adaptation network control signals, information is required to be precomputed offline and stored in a dedicated bidimensional LUT, which occupies a large

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TSATSARAGKOS AND PALIOURAS: RECONFIGURABLE LDPC DECODER OPTIMIZED FOR 802.11n/ac APPLICATIONS

193

TABLE V AREA UTILIZATION OF THE WIFI LDPC DECODER

Fig. 13. Chip layout of the WiFi LDPC decoder.

TABLE VI SNR AT BER 10−5 FOR WIFI LDPC DECODERS

implementation area. The control logic of the RBR network is much simpler, without need of storing configuration bits, in advance. The secondary multiplexers of the RBR, that introduce additional connectivity to support d different configurations, require only d − 1 select logic signals (i.e., only two control signals in the case of the WiFi standard). These signals can be computed on-the-fly, as described in Section V-B, with negligible area overhead. Moreover, as stated in [39], the complexity of the adaptation network significantly increases with the number of the different configurations supported. The proposed RBR provides significant area savings over prior art when incorporated into a WiFi LDPC decoder.
VI. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND ASIC RESULTS
We introduced a reconfigurable LDPC decoder that supports three codeword lengths Nc (648, 1296, 1944) and four coding rates R (1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 5/6), implementing the 12 LDPC parity check matrices defined by the 802.11n/ac IEEE standards. We have explored the decoder design space selecting different values of parameters N and z. A highly parallel decoding architecture contains 24 variable processors, 24 RBR networks, and one check processor. Each variable/check processor consists of z = 81 VPUs/CPUs. This architecture has been implemented using a 90-nm CMOS process with six metal layers. The decoder was synthesized using Synopsys design compiler, and placed and routed using IC compiler. It is capable of processing a layer of the H matrix in five clock cycles, independently of the coding rate. The design can achieve a decoding throughput of 4.5 Gbit/s, with 10 decoding iterations, and can operate at a clock frequency of 555 MHz, using five pipeline stages. The layout of the proposed decoder is depicted in Fig. 13. The longest path of the design is in the CPU, where delay is mainly introduced by the computation of the two minimum among a large number of N = 24 values (Fig. 9, block1). The critical path has been significantly reduced by relocating the operation of the block2 submodule into the RBR i/f unit (Fig. 1), making it feasible for the decoder to achieve high operating frequency. A layered scheduling scheme improves the convergence speed, while an early termination operation reduces the power consumption

and the average number of decoding iterations, thus increasing

the average decoding throughput. The proposed multigigabit WiFi decoder occupies a core area of 4.88 mm2. An area

utilization summary for the basic modules of the decoder is

given in Table V. As emerges by the results of Table V,

the VPUs’ RAM utilizes a large portion of the core area. This

area will be significantly reduced if we map these RAMs to

standard single-port SRAM cells instead of registers.

Table V summarizes the SNR values, where the reported decoders achieve a BER of 10−5, when implementing the four

1944-bit WiFi LDPC codes. The proposed decoder utilizes

a [4:0] scheme for the LLR values, employing the simplified

RMS1 algorithm with respect to (20). We compare our design

with WiFi decoders that are quantized at 4 [43], 5 [40],

6 [44], [45], and 8 [46] bits. The results are similar or even

better than the corresponding measurements of other works

which use 5 or more quantization bits. Employing optimized

decoding algorithms, the proposed decoder achieves satisfac-

tory BER performance with more area-efficient quantization

schemes.

In Table VII, we compare our decoder with other related

works. For a fair comparison, when referring to throughput

we mean maximum information throughput rate, i.e., without

early termination. Specifically, throughput has been computed

as follows:

Td

=

K · Freq Imax · L · cL

(29)

where K is the number of information bits (given by K = Nc · R) and Fr eq is the operation frequency. Moreover, we report

a normalized throughput, i.e., throughput for Imax = 10. The architectures that support early termination, like the proposed

in this paper, have the additional benefit of average throughput

increase and power reduction, especially for high SNRs. In

order to compare different architectures, we use the metric

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

194

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018

TABLE VII COMPARISON BETWEEN LDPC DECODERS

normalized throughput-to-area ratio (NTAR), which is defined by NTAR = (Norm. Throughput)/(Area), and depends both on the complexity and speed of the decoder. The decoders presented in [40], [46], and [47] support only the codes of the WiFi standard, while decoders introduced in [37] and [45] are multistandard. For the multistandard architectures, the information throughput rate of the WiFi decoding has been reported. The proposed decoder outperforms all the WiFi and multistandard decoders in terms of normalized throughput rate. Only the single-code decoder for the 2048-bit LDPC code of the 10GBase-T standard in [48] is faster, at the cost of about three times higher area requirement. Moreover, our solution is found to be the most efficient in terms of NTAR. Specifically, the normalized throughput-to-area ratio of our work is 12% better than that of the next most efficient decoder [40] and 88% compared with the single-code design [48]. The decoder in [47], which is the only one implemented at 130nm CMOS process, occupies lower scaled design area, but it is significantly slower. Specifically, our work achieves about seven times higher throughput rate. Furthermore, the NTAR ratio of our work is about 22% better than that of [47]. The balanced pipeline stages have led to operating frequency higher than all the published counterparts.
High operating frequency comes at the cost of increased power consumption. Despite this, though, as shown in Table VII, the proposed decoder achieves very good results in terms of energy efficiency; very close to that of the work presented in [40], and more than 67% better than the rest of the reported decoders.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper introduces modifications of the MS algorithm that approximate the decoding behavior of the log-SP algorithm. Optimal correction factors that determine the difference between the outputs of the MS and log-SP check nodes have been determined. Furthermore, we propose an area- and latency-efficient permutation network (RBR) for WiFi LDPC decoder implementations, which is found to be highly competitive with the best known solutions reported in the relevant literature. The basic advantages of the proposed network are

the small hardware overhead, the simple control logic, and the low latency. An introduced systematic construction method derives RBR networks, based on barrel rotators, which are capable of supporting a variety of QC-LDPC codes. The resulting WiFi LDPC decoder architecture was found very efficient in terms of throughput and area complexity compared with state-of-the-art decoders.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[3] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[5] M. Chiani, A. Conti, and A. Ventura, “Evaluation of low-density paritycheck codes over block fading channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), vol. 3. Jun. 2000, pp. 1183–1187.
[6] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[7] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[8] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[9] A. Anastasopoulos, “A comparison between the sum-product and the min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., vol. 2. Nov. 2001, pp. 1021–1025.
[10] I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras, “Reconfigurable barrel shifter and rotator,” U.S. Patent 8 713 399 B1, Apr. 29, 2014.
[11] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[12] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[13] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TSATSARAGKOS AND PALIOURAS: RECONFIGURABLE LDPC DECODER OPTIMIZED FOR 802.11n/ac APPLICATIONS

195

[14] I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras, “Approximate algorithms for identifying minima on min-sum LDPC decoders and their hardware implementation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 766–770, Aug. 2015.
[15] R. Chen and Y. M. Wang, “Modified normalized min-sum decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Signal Process. (ICSP), Oct. 2008, pp. 1811–1814.
[16] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D.-M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., vol. 2. Nov. 2001, pp. 1036–1041.
[17] L. Yang, H. Liu, and C.-J. R. Shi, “Code construction and FPGA implementation of a low-error-floor multi-rate low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 892–904, Apr. 2006.
[18] C. Qian, W. Lei, and Z. Wang, “Low complexity LDPC decoder with modified sum-product algorithm,” Tsinghua Sci. Technol., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 57–61, Feb. 2013.
[19] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, L. Zhang, and E. Xu, “Adaptive offset min-sum algorithm for low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 483–485, Jun. 2006.
[20] M. Xu, J. Wu, and M. Zhang, “A modified offset min-sum decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Inf. Technol., vol. 3. Jul. 2010, pp. 19–22.
[21] M. Shaghaghi, Y. L. Guan, K. Cai, and Z. Qin, “Combined normalized and offset min-sum decoding over partial response channels,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Inf., Commun. Signal Process., Dec. 2009, pp. 1–4.
[22] X. Wu, Y. Song, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Adaptive-normalized/offset min-sum algorithm,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 667–669, Jul. 2010.
[23] J. Zhang, M. Fossorier, D. Gu, and J. Zhang, “Two-dimensional correction for min-sum decoding of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 180–182, Mar. 2006.
[24] S. L. Howard, C. Schlegel, and V. C. Gaudet, “Degree-matched check node decoding for regular and irregular LDPCs,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 1054–1058, Oct. 2006.
[25] Z. Zhong, Y. Li, X. Chen, H. Hu, and J. Wang, “Modified min-sum decoding algorithm for LDPC codes based on classified correction,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Commun. Netw. China, Aug. 2008, pp. 932–936.
[26] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Finite precision implementation of LDPC decoders,” IEE Proc. Commun., vol. 152, no. 6, pp. 1098–1102, Dec. 2005.
[27] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
[28] P. Sakellariou, I. Tsatsaragkos, N. Kanistras, A. Mahdi, and V. Paliouras, “An FPGA-based prototyping method for verification, characterization and optimization of LDPC error correction systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Embedded Comput. Syst. (SAMOS), Jul. 2012, pp. 286–293.
[29] Y. Lee, B. Kim, J. Jung, and I. C. Park, “Low-complexity tree architecture for finding the first two minima,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 61–64, Jan. 2015.
[30] D. E. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., vol. 4. May 2003, pp. 2708–2712.
[31] Z. Li and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., vol. 2. Nov. 2004, pp. 1990–1994.
[32] M. R. Pillmeier, M. J. Schulte, and G. E. Walters, III, “Design alternatives for barrel shifters,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 4791, pp. 436–447, 2002, doi: 10.1117/12.452034. [Online]. Available: http://adsabs.harvard. edu/abs/2002SPIE.4791..436P
[33] V. Benes, “Optimal rearrangeable multistage connecting networks,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1641–1656, Jul. 1964.
[34] X. Peng, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, F. Maehara, and S. Goto, “High parallel variation Banyan network based permutation network for reconfigurable LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Appl.-Specific Syst. Archit. Process. (ASAP), Jul. 2010, pp. 233–238.
[35] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Low-complexity switch network for reconfigurable LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 85–94, Jan. 2010.
[36] X. Chen, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “QSN—A simple circular-shift network for reconfigurable quasi-cyclic LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 782–786, Oct. 2010.

[37] C.-H. Liu et al., “Design of a multimode QC-LDPC decoder based on shift-routing network,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 734–738, Sep. 2009.
[38] T. Brack, M. Alles, F. Kienle, and N. Wehn, “A synthesizable IP core for WiMax 802.16e LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Int. Symp. Personal, Indoor Mobile Radio Commun., Sep. 2006, pp. 1–5.
[39] M. Rovini, G. Gentile, and L. Fanucci, “Multi-size circular shifting networks for decoders of structured LDPC codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 43, no. 17, pp. 938–940, Aug. 2007.
[40] S. Kumawat, R. Shrestha, N. Daga, and R. Paily, “High-throughput LDPC-decoder architecture using efficient comparison techniques and dynamic multi-frame processing schedule,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1421–1430, May 2015.
[41] C. Condo, M. Martina, and G. Masera, “VLSI implementation of a multi-mode turbo/LDPC decoder architecture,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1441–1454, Jun. 2013.
[42] I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras, “A flexible layered LDPC decoder,” in Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst. (ISWCS), Nov. 2011, pp. 36–40.
[43] Q. Lu, C.-W. Sham, and F. C. M. Lau, “Rapid prototyping of multimode QC-LDPC decoder for 802.11n/ac standard,” in Proc. 21st Asia South Pacific Design Autom. Conf. (ASP-DAC), Jan. 2016, pp. 19–20.
[44] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Hardware implementation of a backtracking-based reconfigurable decoder for lowering the error floor of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 2931–2943, Dec. 2011.
[45] Y.-L. Ueng, B.-J. Yang, C.-J. Yang, H.-C. Lee, and J.-D. Yang, “An efficient multi-standard LDPC decoder design using hardwarefriendly shuffled decoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 743–756, Mar. 2013.
[46] C. Yu, H.-S. Chuang, B.-S. Lin, P.-H. Cheng, and S.-J. Chen, “Improvement on a block-serial fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder for IEEE 802.11n,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Consum. Electron. (ICCE), Jan. 2014, pp. 446–447.
[47] K. Gunnam, G. Choi, W. Wang, and M. Yeary, “Multi-rate layered decoder architecture for block LDPC codes of the IEEE 802.11n wireless standard,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., May 2007, pp. 1645–1648.
[48] L. Liu and C. J. R. Shi, “Sliced message passing: High throughput overlapped decoding of high-rate low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3697–3710, Dec. 2008.
Ioannis Tsatsaragkos received the Diploma degree in computer engineering and informatics, and the M.Sc. degree in integrated hardware and software systems from the University of Patras, Patras, Greece, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in very-large-scale integration (VLSI) architectures for error correction in digital communication systems with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department.
His current research interest includes VLSI architectures for signal processing and communications, forward error correction, and LDPC codes.
Vassilis Paliouras (S’90–M’95) is an Associate Professor with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Patras, Patras, Greece. He has authored or co-authored more than 120 research articles in international journals, conferences, book chapters, and two books, and has edited four books. His current research interests include very-large-scale integration architectures for signal processing and communications, low-power digital design, and computer arithmetic.
Dr. Paliouras was a recipient of the IEEE CASS Guillemin-Cauer Best-Paper Award for the year 2000. He has served as the General Co-Chair of International Workshop on Power and Timing Modeling, Optimization and Simulation (PATMOS 2004). He has also served as the Technical Program Chair of PATMOS 2005 and the IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems Implementation 2005, a Technical Program Co-Chair of the IEEE International Conference on Electronics Circuits and Systems 2010, and a European liaison for the IEEE ISCAS 2012, South Korea. He has served on editorial boards of journals and technical program committees of numerous conferences in the areas of circuits, systems, signal processing, and communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:16:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

