BP Polar Decoders with Early Termination and
Belief Enhancing
Chao Yang1,2,3, Junmei Yang1,2,3, Xiao Liang1,2,3, Zaichen Zhang2,3, Xiaohu You2, and Chuan Zhang1,2,3,∗ 1Lab of Efficient Architectures for Digital-communication and Signal-processing (LEADS) 2National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University 3Quantum Information Center of Southeast University, Nanjing, China Email: {chaoyang, chzhang}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract—In this paper an early termination scheme, partial LLR-aided (PLA) scheme, is proposed for belief propagation (BP) polar decoding with lower complexity and higher throughput. Numerical results of (1024, 512) code show at least 82% iteration reduction than conventional design at SNR = 3.5 dB with proposed early termination scheme. In this paper, belief enhancing schemes based on threshold and cyclic redundancy check (CRC) are proposed, namely, threshold-based LLR (TB-LLR) scheme and segment-divided CRC (SD-CRC) scheme. For (1024, 512) polar code, the performance gains for TB-LLR and SD-CRC are 0.35 dB and 0.2 dB respectively, when BER = 10−3. A general hardware architecture for proposed BP polar decoders is also proposed.
Index Terms—Polar codes, BP, early termination, belief enhancing, hardware.
I. INTRODUCTION
Proposed by Arıkan [1], polar codes are able to achieve channel capacity on symmetric binary-input discrete memoryless channels (B-DMCs) with low encoding and decoding complexity, and has recently been adopted by 3GPP eMBB control channel. Belief propagation (BP) decoding is a parallel algorithm for polar codes [2, 3], where the iteration number is usually fixed to Imax. Such termination scheme lacks flexibility and will cause prohibitive complexity when Imax is large. Therefore, early termination schemes dealing with unnecessary iterations are of great importance. Besides lower complexity, better performance of BP polar decoding is another concern for 5G applications. In [4], conventional guessing scheme for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes was applied to polar codes. However, this guessing scheme has to change the basic computational block (BCB) and message passing schedule, and is not hardware-friendly.
Early termination with the aid of LLR sign-changing (LSA) was first introduced in [5]. In this paper, partial LLR-aided (PLA) method further reduces the latency and complexity. Both methods successfully reduce the iteration number with negligible performance degradation. For better performance, two improved guessing methods are also proposed with LLR threshold and segment-divided CRC, respectively. Both retain the performance advantage, whereas avoids the implementation issues of the original method [4].
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly reviews the preliminaries. Section III proposes PLA scheme. Belief enhancing methods are given in Section IV.

Section V gives a general hardware architecture. Section VI concludes the entire paper.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. Polar Codes

Polar codes is defined by a parameter set {N, K, A, uAc }. Here, N (= 2n), K, A, and uAc are the code length,
information length, index set of information bits, and the set of frozen bits [6, 7]. u1N = {u1, u2, ..., uN } represents the source vector. Then, the coded vector xN1 = {x1, x2, ..., xN } can be generated with u1N and generator matrix GN : xN1 = uN1 GN .

B. BP-Based Polar Decoding

BP polar decoder updates messages based on the factor

graph iteratively. Assume all soft messages are in the form

of LLR, which are categorized into the left-to-right messages

R and the right-to-left messages L. A message passing node

(i, j) from right to left (left to right) is designated by Li,j

(Ri,j). yj is the j-th received signal. The initialization is as

follows.

(

)

L(n0+) 1,j = ln

P (yj|xj = 0) P (yj|xj = 1)

,

(1)

{

R1(0,j) =

0, if j ∈ A, ∞, if j ∈ Ac.

(2)

Then, these messages are updated according to the following

formulas. The function g(x, y) is defined by Eq. (4) and is

further approximated by Eq. (5), where α is the scaling factor.





Li,j = g(Li+1,2j−1, Li+1,2j + Li,j+N/2 = g(Ri,j , Li+1,2j−1)

Ri,j+N/2), + Li+1,2j ,

 Ri+1,2j−1 = g(Ri,j , Li+1,2j + Ri,j+N/2),

(3)

Ri+1,2j = g(Ri,j , Li+1,2j−1) + Ri,j+N/2,

cosh((x + y)/2)

g(x, y) log

,

(4)

cosh((x − y)/2)

g(x, y) ≈ α · sgn(x)sgn(y) min(|x|, |y|).

(5)

When the maximum iteration number Imax is achieved, code

estimation uˆ1N can be decided based on the L messages of the

left-most nodes with the following equations. {

uˆj =

0 if L1,j 1 if L1,j

0, 0.

(6)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:27:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. PROPOSED EARLY TERMINATION SCHEMES
A. PLA Scheme
Existing algorithms to reduce the computational complexity of BP polar decoding can mainly be summarized as follows [8]: i) Early termination schemes based on generator matrix G or sign of LLR like LSA; ii) Simplification of LLR based on frozen bits during message passing process.

Step 1: R1 L( t -1)
2
L(t ) 2
Step 2:

clk: 4t-3 L_S1
R_S2 L_S1
R_S2 clk: 4t

R(t) 2 L( t -1) 3
R(t) 2 L(t ) 3

clk: 4t-2

L_S2

R(t) 3

R_S3

Step 3:

L_S2

R(t) 3

R_S3

L4

clk: 4t-1

clk: 4t+1

R1

R_S1 L1¢

L2¢

Fig. 1. Schedule of BP polar decoding with N = 8.

Fig. 1 demonstrates the processing schedule of a general polar system of n = 3 stages with conventional BP decoding. During the left-to-right (right-to-left) message passing, the i-th stage is denoted by L Si (R Si). The current iteration number is t (t Imax). Then, the procedure can be divided into three steps as follows: i) propagate left-to-right messages from Stage 1 to Stage 2; ii) propagate right-to-left messages from Stage 3 to Stage 2; iii) propagate messages based on Stage 1 and making symbol judgement. In the process of BP polar decoding, Step i) and Step ii) make up an iteration but without Step iii), which means the passing of messages based on Stage 1 only needs to be accomplished once after all the iterations are completed [9]. Optimized algorithms including LSA share the same drawback of repetitive operations of Step iii). Take LSA as an example, sign judgements of left-most nodes have to be completed in Step iii) and these operations need to be performed after each iteration to ensure not missing the chance of early termination, which therefore makes Step i), Step ii) along with Step iii) a new iteration, leading to longer latency and disturbance of original decoding schedule.
Therefore, partial LLR-aided scheme is proposed, where message passing ends when L2′s of Stage 2 achieve stability in the latest two iterations. Then, early termination is considered according to basic schedule, which is time-saving and convenient for implementation. The details of PLA are listed in Algorithm 1, where eps denotes the calculating accuracy.
B. Simulation Results
Here, (1024, 512) polar codes and BPSK modulation are adopted. The channel condition is assumed as AWGN.
Fig. 2 shows the error performance of BP polar decoding with and without early termination schemes. As we can see, both BER and frame error rate (FER) have no performance loss when early termination schemes are introduced. There are even slight performance improvements for LSA and PLA schemes. Table I presents the average iteration numbers of LSA and PLA at different SNR regions, respectively.

Algorithm 1 PLA Early Termination

Require: y1N , A, Imax, and eps 1: Iteration:

2: for t = 1 : Imax

3:

Update LLR (Stage “1 → n − 1” and “n → 2”)

4:

for j = 1 : N

5:

mse = L(2t,)j − L2(t,−j 1) 2

6:

if mse > temp

7:

temp ← mse

8:

end if

9:

end for

10:

if temp < eps

11:

break

12:

end if

13: end for

14: Judgement:

15: Compute LLR (Stage “1”) 16: Decide uˆN1 Ensure: uˆN1 = {uˆ1, uˆ2, ..., uˆN }

The iteration numbers have reduced greatly at high SNR regions compared to conventional BP decoding. For example, the iteration reduction can reach 82% for LSA and 73% for PLA when SNR = 3.5 dB. Although both LSA and PLA share the similar iteration reduction, PLA is more timesaving due to the avoidance of repetitive judgements. For the performance consideration, the gap of three algorithms looks negligible. Therefore, the proposed early termination schemes can successfully remove the redundant iterative operations. For real systems, which take both complexity and performance into consideration, PLA is a better choice.
100

10−1

Error performance

10−2

10−3 10−4 10−5
0.5

BP(BER) LSA−BP(BER) PLA−BP(BER) BP(FER) LSA−BP(FER) PLA−BP(FER)

1

1.5

2

2.5

Eb/N0 (dB)

3

3.5

Fig. 2. Performance comparison for (1024, 512) polar code.

IV. PROPOSED BELIEF ENHANCING SCHEMES
In [4], a guessing method was introduced for polar code, which is based on the assumption that the number of error bits is no more than 3. It changes BCB of BP algorithm and influences the schedule of message passing. Therefore, two belief enhancing methods are proposed for optimization.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:27:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I AVERAGE ITERATION NUMBERS OF LSA AND PLA
SNR (dB) 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 Iavg (LSA) 30 28.6 24.9 13.7 8.8 6.5 5.4 Iavg (PLA) 30 28.8 25.9 16.3 11.5 9.1 8.0

A. Threshold-Based LLR Scheme
In BP polar decoding, belief of each node iteratively updates based on the factor graph and finally converges. Simulations show that most beliefs propagated over the factor graph will have value changing towards both sides during first few iterations. That is to say, the values are unstable and tend to fluctuate at the beginning. However, when the beliefs are larger (smaller) than certain value, they will continuously rise (fall) during the following iterations, and usually they are the key values to make right estimations. Due to the limited iterations of BP decoding, these key beliefs regularly cannot converge to exact values to make correct judgements.
Therefore, a direct thought to solve this problem is to enhance the beliefs based on the changing trend. According to the property of belief updating, this trend can be visualized as a threshold of T . When beliefs are detected reaching T , they will be adjusted to extreme values to help decide. Because of the large gap between key beliefs and other normal ones, wrong judgements can be reduced, ensuring better performance. The details of TB-LLR is shown in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2 TB-LLR Belief Enhancing

Require: y1N , A, Imax, and T 1: Iteration:

2: for t = 1 : Imax

3:

Update LLR (Stage “1 → n − 1” and “n → 2”)

4:

for j = 1 : N

5:

if L1,j > T

6:

L1,j ← +∞

7:

else if L1,j < −T

8:

L1,j ← −∞

9:

end if

10:

end for

11: end for

12: Judgement:

13: Compute LLR (Stage “1”) 14: Decide uˆN1 Ensure: uˆN1 = {uˆ1, uˆ2, ..., uˆN }

B. Segment-Divided CRC Scheme

In general, the capability of certain CRC can be evaluated by undetected error probability Pud(c, p) as follows.

∑c

Pud(c, p) = Aipi(1 − p)c−i.

(7)

i=1

Here, c is the code length, p is the bit error probability, Ai is the number of code words with Hamming weight i, and R is the order of generator polynomial G(x) = (1 + x)P (x) [10]. For CRC codes with N = 2R − 1, the same N and R will result in the same detection performance no matter what exact form P (x) takes. On the other hand, Pud(c, p) for shortened CRC codes depends on the specific choice of P (x) and code length c. If the corresponding Pud is sufficiently small, it is usually safe to assume that the decoding converges.

Algorithm 3 SD-CRC Belief Enhancing

Require: y1N , A, Imax, and gen 1: Iteration:

2: Update LLR (Stage “1 → n − 1” and “n → 2”)

3: for c = 0 : 3

4:

check = crc(uˆ(A(cK/4 + 1 : (c + 1)K/4)), gen)

5:

if isempty(find(check, 1))

6:

if uˆ(A(cK/4 + 1 : (c + 1)K/4 − 4)) == upart

7:

I0 = find(uˆ(A(cK/4 + 1 : (c + 1)K/4 − 4)))

8:

I1 = find(!uˆ(A(cK/4 + 1 : (c + 1)K/4 − 4)))

9:

P0(A(cK/4 + I0)) = +∞

10:

P1(A(cK/4 + I1)) = −∞

11:

else upart = uˆ(A(cK/4 + 1 : (c + 1)K/4 − 4))

12:

end if

13:

end if

14: end for

15: if t == Imax

16:

go to 19

17: else

18:

t ← t + 1, go to 1

19: Judgement:

20: Compute LLR (Stage “1”) 21: Decide uˆN1 Ensure: uˆN1 = {uˆ1, uˆ2, ..., uˆN }

In segment-divided CRC scheme, each frame is divided into four segments. CRC-4 is introduced in each segment during BP polar decoding, whose generator polynomial is denoted by gen. It is worth noticing that each frame is not divided into 4 parts equally in a direct way, but obeys the following criterion: i) Find the first information bit which is assumed as the j-th bit from successive bit streams; ii) Operate on the i-th bit which is after the j-th bit and deciding if it belongs to A; iii) Increase m, which is the value in the counter by “1” when i-th bit belongs to A, or keep m unchanged when it does not fall into A; iv) Bit j to bit i make up a segment when m = K/4; v) Dividing the bit stream in the same way to achieve the rest segments. For (1024, 512) polar codes, each segment should be assigned 128 information bits, or namely, K/4 discussed above equals to 128.
Compared with frame-based CRC, segment-based CRC can improve error performance. Details of SD-CRC scheme are listed in Algorithm 3. Here, c is the code length of CRC and check is the result of crc. isempty is the function to judge a matrix if it is empty. upart denotes one segment of information

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:27:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

bits, whose length equals to K/4. Function Find is used to search and index elements with specific values. I0 and I1 are the corresponding output for elements “0” and “1”.
C. Simulation Results
Fig. 3 shows the error performance of BP decoding with and without belief enhancing. The (1024, 512) polar code adopted and modulated by BPSK. The channel is assumed as AWGN channel. From this figure, we can find that there are improvements on BER for all SNR regions when belief enhancing schemes are introduced.
100

10−1

Error performance

10−2

10−3 10−4 10−5
0.5

BP(BER) TB−LLR−BP(BER) SD−CRC−BP(BER) BP(FER) TB−LLR−BP(FER) SD−CRC−BP(FER)

1

1.5

2

2.5

Eb/N0 (dB)

3

3.5

Fig. 3. Performance comparison for (1024, 512) polar code.

achieved or requirements of certain early termination schemes are satisfied, iteration ends with calculated belief output into judging unit. In judging unit, belief of each node is updated based on Stage 1, and then symbol judging is made.
Control module is the key module to distinguish from conventional BP polar decoder. It contains two units which are terminating unit and enhancing unit. In each iteration, when beliefs of all the nodes are updated, they will be first transmitted into enhancing unit before next iteration starts. Each belief is examined according to corresponding criteria based on the chosen mode of enhancement scheme. Preset value Vpre of this mode is then assigned to those which satisfy the requirements. In Fig. 4, Blue arrows between each block demonstrate the processing sequence of enhancing unit. Thereafter, processed beliefs are propagated into terminating unit. Similarly, terminating unit examines them through certain criteria of given early termination mode and generates a control signal based on the results. A “terminate” signal will be generated when the requirements of early termination are satisfied and it will be sent to BP decoder core to help beliefs enter the symbol judging procedure. Otherwise, a “continue” signal will be sent back to enhancing unit to help enhanced beliefs enter into basic iteration of BP decoder core once again.
Flexible structure
address enhancement termination
   ...     ...       ...   

{

{ {
{

V. HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE
In this section, a general hardware architecture of improved BP polar decoder is proposed. Fig. 4 shows the overview of this architecture including three main modules which are BP decoder core, control module and instruction module, respectively. Beliefs propagated in this optimized architecture are all in the form of LLR.

Structure select

mode V pre
Fixed structure

mode

I max

address enhancement termination
   ...     ...     ... 

{
{

mode

mode

Fig. 5. Structure of the instruction.

BP decoder core

Judging

R-L

L-R

Logical unit

Instruction module

Instruction memory

Control module

Terminating unit
Mode Criteria
I max

Enhancing unit
Mode Criteria
V pre

Fig. 4. General architecture of improved BP polar decoder.
BP decoder core is the module to perform basic function of message passing and updating. Scheduling of this module obeys conventional BP polar decoding. L-R unit propagates beliefs from Stage 1 to Stage n−1. R-L unit propagates beliefs from Stage n to Stage 2. L-R and R-L units make up an iteration of BP algorithm. When maximum iteration number is

Instruction module is the one to provide data addresses, control signals and selected modes, which is made up of logical unit and instruction memory. Logical unit is functioned to read instructions from instruction memory in order. The structure of an instruction is illustrated in Fig. 5, which includes address part, enhancement scheme part and termination scheme part. Take fixed structure as an example, BP decoder core fetch an input data from certain data memory block based on the address part of an instruction from the instruction memory. The enhancement part helps to select one kind of enhancing modes in enhancing unit, where the modes provided contain TB-LLR scheme and SD-CRC scheme. Analogously, the termination part is used to select a termination mode in terminating unit and the modes provided are LSA and PLA. It is worth noticing that when LSA is chosen, there is a slight change on the processing sequence, which is represented in red arrows in Fig. 4. Compared to fixed structure, flexible structure carries two more information of Vpre and Imax, which enables the decoder to change strategies freely. When a statistical analyzer is added, the decoder can perform adaptively according to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:27:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

input data by the help of flexible structure. However, such structure will consume more storage space.
In general, the processing procedure of the entire decoder can be described as follows: i) Logical unit reads an instruction from instruction memory and fetch input data for BP decoder core based on given address; ii) BP decoder core updates and propagates belief of each node during iterations, then outputs them into control module to finish further computation; iii) Control module enhances the beliefs through certain enhancement scheme which is decided by the enhancement part of the instruction and sends the processed beliefs back to the iteration of BP decoder core again when the requirements of early termination given by the termination part are not satisfied, otherwise the terminating unit sends “terminate” signal to BP decoder core and help it enter the process of symbol judging; iv) When the iteration terminates, a “continue” signal is also sent to the instruction module to make value in logical unit increase “1”, then logical unit reads the next instruction.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, effective early termination schemes are proposed to reduce latency and computational complexity for BP polar decoding. Optimized guessing algorithms combined with different belief enhancing schemes are discussed. A general hardware architecture of improved BP polar decoder is also proposed. Future work will be directed towards VLSI implementation of the proposed decoder and incorporate it into our 5G Cloud Platform.

[5] Y. Ren, C. Zhang, X. Liu, et al., “Efficient early termination schemes for belief-propagation decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on ASIC (ASICON), Nov 2015, pp. 1–4.
[6] C. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “Low-latency sequential and overlapped architectures for successive cancellation polar decoder,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 2429–2441, May 2013.
[7] C. Zhang, B. Yuan, and K. K. Parhi, “Reduced-latency SC polar decoder architectures,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), June 2012, pp. 3471–3475.
[8] J. Sha, J. Liu, and Z. Wang, “Improved BP decoder for polar codes based on a modified kernel matrix,” IEEE Power Electron Lett., vol. 52, no. 24, pp. 1982–1984, 2016.
[9] J. Yang, C. Zhang, H. Zhou, et al., “Pipelined belief propagation polar decoders,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), May 2016, pp. 413–416.
[10] J. K. Wolf and R. D. Blakeney, “An exact evaluation of the probability of undetected error for certain shortened binary CRC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM), Oct 1988, pp. 287–292 vol.1.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported in part by NSFC under grants 61871115 and 61501116, Jiangsu Provincial NSF for Excellent Young Scholars, Huawei HIRP Flagship under grant YB201504, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, the SRTP of Southeast University, State Key Laboratory of ASIC & System under grant 2016KF007, ICRI for MNC, and the Project Sponsored by the SRF for the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars of MoE.

REFERENCES
[1] E. Arıkan, “Channel polarization: a method for constructing capacity-achieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, July 2009.
[2] B. Yuan and K. K. Parhi, “Early stopping criteria for energy-efficient low-latency belief-propagation polar code decoders,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 24, pp. 6496–6506, Dec 2014.
[3] J. Lin, C. Xiong, and Z. Yan, “Reduced complexity belief propagation decoders for polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS), Oct 2015, pp. 1–6.
[4] A. Eslami and H. Pishro-Nik, “On bit error rate performance of polar codes in finite regime,” in Proc. IEEE Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), Sept 2010, pp. 188–194.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:27:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

