IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2011

1933

Low-Energy Asynchronous Interleaver for Clockless Fully Parallel LDPC Decoding
Naoya Onizawa, Member, IEEE, Vincent C. Gaudet, Senior Member, IEEE, and Takahiro Hanyu, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a low-energy asynchronous interleaver for clockless fully parallel low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoding. The proposed data-transmission circuit based on a half-duplex single-track protocol makes it possible to realize a wire-efficient asynchronous interleaver with small energy consumption. Moreover, a data-monitoring system adaptively shuts down the asynchronous data-transmission circuit if not necessary, which reduces the number of data transmissions and, hence, the energy consumed. The clockless decoder with the proposed asynchronous interleaver is evaluated using a (1056,528) irregular LDPC code under a 90-nm CMOS process. As a result, the energy
dissipation per uncoded bit at Eb=No of 5 dB becomes 54 pJ/bit
with an uncoded throughput of 45.5 Gbps under a postlayout simulation. This represents a 92% decrease in energy per bit and a 1143% in throughput increase with respect to our previous clockless LDPC decoder.
Index Terms—Asynchronous circuits, forward error control (FEC), iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2] are powerful error-correcting codes that perform very close to the Shannon limit and are used in many communication standards such as IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX) [3], IEEE 802.3an (10 GBASE-T) [4], DVB-S2 [5] and IEEE 802.11n (WiFi) [6]. LDPC codes are typically decoded using the sum-product algorithm (SPA) or one of its variants, which operate by iteratively passing posteriori probability or log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages along the edges of a factor graph [7] that has two types of computation nodes: variable nodes and check nodes.
Many integrated circuit designs for LDPC decoders have been reported in the literature [11]–[34]. These can be generally classified as partially parallel [11]–[17], and fully parallel [18]–[34]. In a partially parallel implementation, computations are performed by using a portion of the factor graph and a shared memory. A partially parallel architecture utilizes low area with moderate throughput and supports various block
Manuscript received June 30, 2010; revised November 05, 2010; accepted December 15, 2010. Date of publication February 14, 2011; date of current version July 27, 2011. This work was supported by the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST). This simulation was supported by VLSI Design and Education Center (VDEC), the University of Tokyo in collaboration with Cadence and Synopsys, Inc. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor Xinmiao Zhang.
N. Onizawa and T. Hanyu are with the Research Institute of Electrical Communication, Tohoku University, Miyagi 980-8577, Japan (e-mail: onizawa@ngc.riec.tohoku.ac.jp; hanyu@ngc.riec.tohoku.acjp).
V. C. Gaudet is with Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Waterloo 200 University Avenue West Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1 Canada (e-mail: vcgaudet@uwaterloo.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2011.2107271

lengths and code rates in applications such as WiMAX and WiFi. In contrast, the entire factor graph is implemented in a fully parallel architecture, and thus, a codeword can be decoded concurrently using all variable and check nodes. A fully parallel architecture is used to achieve high-throughput decoding of a certain fixed LDPC code in applications such as 10 GBASE-T. However, all computation nodes and interconnects between nodes are implemented in hardware, which often limits the logic utilization and maximum clock speed of decoders because of routing complexity in the interleaver portion. In [18], a logic utilization of 50% is reported for a 1024-bit LDPC code and the fully parallel architecture is not scalable to greater code lengths.
To alleviate these problems, some approaches are reported at the hardware implementation level. In [21] and [22], bit-serial approaches are reported. In this approach, messages are transmitted bit-serially in the interleaver portion, which alleviates the routing congestion because of the reduction of the number of wires with lowering the throughput. In [23] and [24], a message broadcasting technique is reported. In this approach, since check node computation is realized by a simplified equation, routing complexity is reduced with only a minimal loss in bit-error rate (BER). In [26], a multisplit-row technique is suggested. In this approach, since the check node is divided into some sub-check nodes with a serial connection, node-to-node complexity is reduced to achieve high utilization with a minimal loss of BER. In [28], only check nodes are realized in a partially parallel manner, which reduces the number of wires and check nodes, and improves the area utilization. In an alternative approach using stochastic computation for decoding LDPC codes [29], a fully parallel stochastic decoder is reported on FPGA in [30] and ASIC in [31]. Since stochastic computation is realized by a bit-serial stream, it can alleviate the routing congestion while meeting BER specifications. However, the throughput of these decoders is determined by the worst-case latency because of usage of a global clock.
We have previously introduced a scheduling algorithm for high-throughput fully parallel LDPC decoders in [32]–[34]. In this scheduling algorithm, computations are performed using the most recent available messages from other computation nodes, and throughput is not governed by the worst-case delay. The method relies on the similarity of time-consecutive messages in the decoding of LDPC codes, and therefore, acceptable BERs can be achieved even when some outdated messages are used. In [32], [34], our scheduling algorithm is realized using wire partitioning. Since long wires are divided into multiple segments by using pipeline registers, the worst-case delay is reduced to achieve a high decoding throughput. In [33], asynchronous circuits are used to realize the scheduling

1549-8328/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1934

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2011

algorithm. In the asynchronous circuits, the computation is not governed by a global clock, but rather by the completion of operations [35]–[46]. Since LLR messages are transmitted once for each wiring delay using the asynchronous circuits, computations are performed using the most recent available messages. Asynchronous message transmission is realized by using multiple-valued current-mode circuits [41]–[43], and the number of required wires in the asynchronous circuits is minimized. However, in [33], power dissipation of the asynchronous circuits is high due to the use of a current-mode circuit and asynchronous control.
In this paper, an energy-efficient fully parallel asynchronous LDPC decoder based on new asynchronous data-transmission circuits and a data-monitoring system is reported. Since the halfduplex data is represented by a binary dual-rail signal based on a proposed half-duplex single-track protocol, half-duplex asynchronous communication can be realized with a small number of wires and static power dissipation. Moreover, two consecutive identical LLR messages are detected by the data-monitoring system, which lowers dynamic power dissipation of the asynchronous circuits, because of the reduction in switching activity.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes a brief overview of LDPC codes, decoding algorithms and asynchronous decoding. Section III introduces our half-duplex single-track protocol and its circuit implementation. Section IV reports an asynchronous decoder architecture based on the data-monitoring system. Section V discusses the performance of the asynchronous LDPC decoder. Finally, Section VI provides conclusions.

Fig. 1. Factor graph representation of an LDPC code.
Fig. 2. Two variable and check nodes with transmission delays shown on graph edges.

II. ASYNCHRONOUS DECODING ALGORITHM AND ARCHITECTURE

B. Partial-Update Algorithm In a traditional LDPC scheduling algorithm such as a

A. LDPC Codes and Decoding Algorithm

flooding algorithm, node computations are performed by using all messages from other computation nodes for each iteration

An LDPC code is defined by a sparse

n parity-check [18]. However, the wiring delay via an interleaver tends to have

matrix . The transmitted data containing information bits variations from wire to wire due to the complexity in the chip

and

parity bits over the channel is encoded using a gen- implementation. Fig. 2 shows a block diagram of two variable

erator matrix , where

. An LDPC code can be repre- nodes, labeled as var1 and var2, and check nodes, labeled as

sented by a factor graph with n variable nodes and

parity chk1 and chk2 accounting for delay variations. For ease of

check nodes as shown in Fig. 1. A variable node is connected explanation, we use a code containing a length-4 cycle, i.e.,

to a parity check node when the corresponding element in the shorter than that found in practical codes. The transmission

matrix is nonzero (1 in the specific case of a binary LDPC delay between var2 and chk2 is only 0.4 units of time, whereas

code).

that between var1 and chk1 is 1.0 unit of time. In a traditional

An LDPC code is often decoded using the sum-product algo- schedule, since the nodes have to wait for all arriving messages

rithm or one of its variants, which operates by iteratively passing from all the other nodes, the clock period and, hence, the

a posteriori probability or log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages decoding throughput is limited by the worst-case wiring delay,

along the edges of the factor graph. In the variant known as that is, 1.0 unit of time in Table I.

the min-sum algorithm, summations are performed in the vari- To increase the decoding throughput, a partial-update al-

able nodes, and minimum and XOR operations are performed in gorithm is proposed in [32]–[34]. In the proposed algorithm,

the parity check nodes. Decoding is performed iteratively. First, since node computations are performed by using the most

variable node outputs are initialized to their corresponding out- recent available messages, nodes do not need to wait for the all

puts. Second, these messages are sent to the parity-check nodes updated messages, but can proceed when ready. It is assumed

via the interleaver connections. Third, parity-check node out- that the transmission delays via the interleaver have variations,

puts are calculated and sent back to the variable nodes, which where this assumption is the same as that of the traditional

update their outputs based on the updated inputs and channel schedule shown in Fig. 2. In the partial-update algorithm, the

outputs. This procedure is repeated for a fixed number of itera- transmission delays are determined by each wire delay, and

tions, or until a satisfactory solution is obtained.

thus, the decoding throughput is governed by the average wire

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ONIZAWA et al.: LOW-ENERGY ASYNCHRONOUS INTERLEAVER
TABLE I ESTIMATED PERFORMANCE OF TRADITIONAL AND PROPOSED
SCHEDULING ALGORITHMS

1935

Fig. 4. Timing diagram used in asynchronous communication.

Fig. 3. Asynchronous communication between a variable and a check node.

delays of the interleaver, which leads to improved throughput as shown in Table I.
C. Asynchronous Circuits

Fig. 5. Proposed asynchronous interleaver based on the half-duplex singletrack protocol.

To realize the partial-update algorithm in a circuit, it is necessary to transmit a message based on its wire’s own local delay. One of the possible solutions is to utilize asynchronous circuits [35]–[46]. In asynchronous circuits, local control signals are used instead of a global clock signal. Fig. 3 shows asynchronous data transmission between one variable node and one check node. Data (an LLR message) is transmitted by using local control signals, such as a request and an acknowledge signal, la-

signals are used to reduce the number of wires, there is the potential for high static power dissipation. In fully parallel LDPC decoders, switching activity decreases at high SNR values, and thus, steady current flow dominates the power dissipation [33]. In the next section, a low static power and highly wire-efficient asynchronous data-transmission circuit is proposed to realize a low-power asynchronous LDPC decoder.

beled as Req and Ack, respectively. Fig. 4 shows the timing diagram of the asynchronous data transmission from a variable node to a check node. First, the request signal, Req, is asserted to transmit data to the check node. Second, the check node detects the request signal and then receives the Data. Third, the check node transmits the acknowledge signal, Ack, to the variable node to inform that the data is received. Finally, the variable

III. HALF-DUPLEX SINGLE-TRACK ASYNCHRONOUS DATA TRANSMISSION
In this section, a wire-efficient asynchronous data-transmission circuit based on a half-duplex single-track protocol is proposed and evaluated with the other asynchronous data-transmission circuits.

node detects the Ack signal and then goes back to the first step to transmit the next data. In this way, since the asynchronous A. Half-Duplex Single-Track Protocol

circuits are controlled by a request-acknowledge-based hand- Fig. 5 shows the proposed asynchronous interleaver connec-

shaking protocol, the transmission delay via the interleaver is tion between one variable node and one check node based on

determined by local wiring delay characteristics.

a half-duplex single-track protocol. Interface V and interface C

However, there are some problems in asynchronous circuits. are the data-transmission circuits that are part of the variable

One of the biggest problems is the necessary number of wires. and check node, respectively. The single-track protocol has been

In asynchronous circuits, extra local wires for request and ac- previously demonstrated for asynchronous circuits [44], [45]. In

knowledge signals are required. Since a large number of wires the traditional asynchronous protocol, called the bundled-data

leads to wiring complexity in a fully parallel LDPC decoder protocol [46] and shown in Fig. 3, the Data, Rreq, and Ack sig-

chip, it degrades the area utilization, the decoding throughput, nals are separate, which requires a large number of wires in the

and energy efficiency. To solve this problem, we utilized wire- interleaver. In contrast, in the single-track protocol, the Req and

efficient asynchronous data-transmission circuits called 1phase, Ack signals are transmitted based on time division, and all sig-

based on the multiple-valued current-mode circuits first pro- nals are transmitted on the same dual-rail wire per bit in the uni-

posed in [41]–[43], where the functionality was tested in a fab- directional data case transmission, which reduces the wire count

ricated chip in 0.18 m CMOS. Since the data and the local to 2/3 that of the traditional bundled-data asynchronous circuits.

control signals are superimposed on the same wire by using a However, the number of wires is still twice that of synchronous

multilevel current signal, the number of wires per connection in circuits, ignoring the global clock signal.

the asynchronous data-transmission circuits is reduced, and be- In this paper, a half-duplex single-track protocol is proposed.

comes the same as that of the synchronous case. Since current In the proposed half-duplex protocol, there are two operation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1936

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2011

Fig. 6. Operation modes in the proposed half-duplex single-track protocol.

Fig. 7. Finite state machine in operation modes.

modes, which are: interface V and interface C modes as shown in Fig. 6. Data and Control include a logical value and timing information to receive data, respectively. In the interface V mode,

TABLE II ENCODING OF THE PROPOSED HALF-DUPLEX SINGLE-TRACK PROTOCOL

interface V and interface C are a transmitter and a receiver, re-

spectively shown in Fig. 6(a). First, interface V as the trans-

mitter sends Data1 and Control1 signals. Since interface C as

the receiver detects the Control1 signal as the req signal from

the variable node, Data1 is received. Moreover, Control1 is de-

tected as the Ack signal of the previous data-transmission from

the check node itself, and then interface C becomes the trans-

mitter for the next data transmission. In contrast, interface V as

the transmitter receives Control1 from the variable node itself

and then becomes the receiver. Next, interface C as the trans-

mitter sends Data2 and Control2 signals. Since interface V as

the receiver detects the Control2 signal as the req signal from

the check node, data2 is received. Moreover, Control2 is de-

tected as the Ack signal of the previous data transmission from

the variable node itself, and then interface C becomes the trans-

mitter for the next data transmission. In contrast, interface C

as the transmitter receives the Control2 from the check node Fig. 8. Timing diagram of the half-duplex single-track encoding.

itself and then becomes the receiver. In this way, all signals in-

cluding Data1, Control1, Data2, and Control2 are transmitted

on the same connection in the half-duplex asynchronous pro- protocol. First, the dual-rail signal

is (0, 0) which in-

tocol. Now, we move on to a state assignment for circuit imple- dicates interface V and interface C are the transmitter and the

mentation.

receiver in the interface V mode, respectively. When a logic

In the proposed half-duplex single-track communication value “0” is transmitted to interface C, the dual-rail signal

scheme, Data and Control signals are encoded as a dual-rail

becomes (0, 1). Then, interface C receives the logic

signal

and the encoded dual-rail signal is transmitted via value “0” by detecting the dual-rail signal (0, 1) and becomes

the interleaver connection between variable and check nodes. the transmitter, while interface V becomes the receiver by

Table II(a) and (b) show the dual-rail encoding for interface detecting the dual-rail signal transmitted from itself. Second,

V and interface C, respectively. The code is based on Golay the logic value “1” is transmitted from interface C to interface

mapping. Four states using the dual-rail signal

are V, and the dual-rail signal

becomes (1, 1). Interface C

represented by a finite state machine (FSM) shown in Fig. 7. receives the logic value “1” by detecting the dual-rail signal (1,

The difference of the dual-rail signals between the interface V 1) and becomes the transmitter, while interface C becomes the

and the interface C modes have 1-bit Hamming distance. When receiver by detecting the dual-rail signals from itself.

data and control as the dual-rail signal are transmitted, only Since the half-duplex single-track protocol is realized by

one of the dual-rail signals is monotonically changed. Since using only four states which are represented by the dual-rail

the timing to receive Data at both interfaces is when one of the signal

, it is possible to realize a half-duplex asyn-

dual-rail signals changes value, it is possible to receive Data chronous communication with only two wires which are ,

correctly.

and the same wire count as those of the traditional asynchronous

Fig. 8 shows the timing diagram of the asynchronous data and synchronous communication schemes ignoring the global

transmission based on the proposed half-duplex single-track clock signal, respectively. Next, circuit implementation based

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ONIZAWA et al.: LOW-ENERGY ASYNCHRONOUS INTERLEAVER

1937

Fig. 9. Block diagram of the proposed asynchronous link.

Fig. 12. Decoder in (a) interface V and (b) interface C.

Fig. 10. Encoder in (a) interface V and (b) interface C.

Fig. 13. Simulated waveforms.

Fig. 12(a) shows the circuit diagram of decoder V in interface

V. Ack1 is asserted in the interface V mode when the dual-rail

signal is (0, 0) or (1, 1). Since outv is determined based on the

dual-rail signal

transmitted from interface C shown in

Table II(b), a C-element is used [47]. Fig. 12(b) shows the cir-

Fig. 11. Driver.

cuit diagram of decoder C in interface C. Ackc is asserted in the interface C mode when the dual-rail signal is (0, 1) or (1,

0). Although outc is generated by just connecting shown in

on the half-duplex single-track protocol and encoding is de- Table II(a), the C-element is used for generating outc to keep

scribed.

the value in the interface V mode.

B. Circuit Implementation

The simulated waveform is shown in Fig. 13 to verify the circuit operation using HSPICE simulation under a 90-nm CMOS

Fig. 9 shows a block diagram of both interface V and interface process. The wire length between interface C and interface V

C. Each interface has its own encoder, a decoder, and a driver. is 1 mm. Initially, the dual-rail signal

is (0, 0) in the in-

Also, each interface has four signals which are in, out, req, and terface V mode which ackv and ackc are asserted and de-as-

ack. Data from the computation node, such as the variable and serted, respectively. Interface V and interface C are the trans-

check nodes, is represented by the in signal, while out represents mitter and the receiver. When data1 is transmitted from inter-

Data transmitted from the other node. Communication between face V, req1 is asserted to generate the dual-rail signal (0, 1)

the computation node and the interface is performed by using based on in1. When interface C detects the dual-rail signal (0,

Req and Ack signals.

1), ackc is asserted to receive outc transmitted from interface V.

Fig. 10(a) shows the circuit diagram of encoder V in interface Concurrently, interface V detects the dual-rail signal (0, 1), ackv

V. Four signals, are

, and , are generated for is de-asserted. Then, interface V and interface C become the re-

driver, which produces the dual-rail signal

. The dual-rail ceiver and the transmitter in the interface C mode. Reqc is as-

signal

is generated based on the FSM shown in Fig. 7. serted when data2 is transmitted from interface C, and then the

When data1 is transmitted, reqv is asserted. Then, the four sig- dual-rail signal becomes (0, 0) based on inc. When interface V

nals, which are

, and , are generated based detects the dual-rail signal (0, 0), ackv is asserted to receive outv

on inv and outv. Fig. 10(b) shows the circuit diagram of encoder transmitted from interface C. Concurrently, interface C detects

C in interface C. Two signals, which are pxc and nxc, are gener- the dual-rail signal (0, 0), ackc is de-asserted. Then, interface C

ated for driver. In the interface C mode, ackc is asserted. When and interface V become the receiver and the transmitter, respec-

data2 is transmitted, reqc is asserted and then generates the two tively.

signals pxc and nxc based on in2. Fig. 11 shows the circuit dia- Table III summarizes the performance comparisons of serial

gram of driver at both interfaces. The dual-rail signal

is bidirectional asynchronous communication circuits. The perfor-

generated by using the signals which are produced at encoder V mances are evaluated using HSPICE simulation under a 90-nm

and encoder C.

CMOS process. The wire length between the variable node and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1938

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2011

TABLE III PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS OF ASYNCHRONOUS DATA-TRANSFER CIRCUITS

check node is 1 mm. The proposed communication circuit based on the half-duplex single-track protocol is compared with other asynchronous communication circuits based on 1phase [41], 2phase [36], and a conventional single-track protocol. All circuits are designed based on dual-rail encoding. 2phase circuit improves the throughput by reduction of the number of communication steps to 1/2 that of the traditional 4phase [35], while the large number of wires are required. In the conventional singletrack protocol, request information and acknowledge information are sent using the same wires, which reduces the number of wires to 4. In the proposed communication circuits, the number of wires per bit in the half-duplex communication is reduced to 2, which is the same number of the synchronous communication ignoring the global clock. In the 1phase circuit, since both interfaces send data simultaneously and then receive the data, there is one communication step with just 2 wires by using a multiple-valued encoding. However, the static power dissipation is large due to the current-mode circuit implementation. The static power dissipation is greatly reduced to 0.12% that of the 1phase communication circuits, which use a current-mode circuit, while also keeping the number of wires small.
In the next section, we describe the overall structure of the fully-parallel asynchronous LDPC decoder based on the halfduplex single-track communication circuits. Then, we propose a data-monitoring system to reduce the switching activity of the asynchronous communication to achieve high energy efficiency.

Fig. 14. Overall structure.of the proposed decoder. Fig. 15. Asynchronous interface.

IV. DATA-MONITORING SYSTEM

Fig. 16. Completion detector.

A. Overall Structure

Fig. 14 shows the overall structure of the proposed fully par- chronous data transmission using interface is performed in com-

allel LDPC decoder. Each node has its own computation unit, pletion detection shown in Fig. 16.

asynchronous controller, and asynchronous interface. The com- Completion detection is realized by an AND gate, an OR gate,

putation nodes, such as the variable and the check nodes, are de- and a C-element. The AND gate detects completion of receiving

signed based on the min-sum algorithm (MSA) with 4-bit LLR all data from the other node, because an ack signal is asserted

messages, each containing one sign bit and three magnitude bits. when data is received in the proposed half-duplex single-track

Asynchronous data transmission between the variable and check protocol. The OR gate detects the completion of transmitting

node are performed in asynchronous interface V and interface all data from its own node, because the ack signal is de-asserted

C.

when data is transmitted. Since all data are received, both out-

The asynchronous interface has parallel interfaces shown in puts of the AND and OR gates are asserted, which makes

Fig. 15 and that number of parallel interfaces is the degree

assert. In contrast, since all data are transmitted, both

in the node. Each parallel interface has outputs of the AND and OR gates are de-asserted, which makes

interfaces, such as interface V and interface C shown in Fig. 9.

(

de-asserted. LLR messages as vin (cin) and vout

The number of interfaces

is the precision (cout) are asynchronously transmitted between asynchronous

that is used to represent an LLR message. In other words, 6-bit interface and node computation. The asynchronous data-trans-

LLR messages require 6 interfaces. The LLR message is trans- mission circuit is controlled by vreq (creq) and vack (cack) sig-

mitted in parallel using multi-interface. Completion of all asyn- nals. Computations based on the min-sum algorithm are done

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ONIZAWA et al.: LOW-ENERGY ASYNCHRONOUS INTERLEAVER

1939

Fig. 17. Finite state machine in data-monitoring system.

Fig. 20. Asynchronous controller.

Fig. 21. I/O controller.

Fig. 18. Parallel interface with data monitoring.

B. Data-Monitoring System In fully parallel LDPC decoders, switching activity in an in-

terleaver portion becomes small over iterations, because time-

consecutive messages are similar, especially in the high-SNR

region. Fig. 17 shows a FSM for our data-monitoring system.

In the data-monitoring system, 2 consecutive messages are de-

tected to decide whether new data needs to be transmitted or

not. When these 2 consecutive messages are different, new data

is transmitted, while the data-monitoring system shuts down the

asynchronous interface to reduce the power dissipation when

consecutive messages are the same. However, when consecu-

Fig. 19. Node computation.

tive data are the same on one computation node, but not on the

other, asynchronous data transmission is completed because the

half-duplex asynchronous communication uses a shared con-

by using input LLR messages, such as vout (cout), and then nection. Therefore, the decoding might be finished before con-

output LLR messages, such as vin (cin), are produced in vari- vergence of decoding, which causes high BER. To realize good

able and check node computations which are controlled by an BER performance, asynchronous communication needs to con-

asynchronous controller.

tinue transmitting data when either computation node still has

Although asynchronous decoding is realized in the circuit, it an updated LLR to transmit.

causes high power dissipation. In the fully parallel LDPC de- To continue to transmit a data, a mode convertor is added to

coder, the switching activity in the interleaver portion is small, the parallel interface shown in Fig. 18. Mode information is

especially in the high SNR region [18]. In the asynchronous cir- transmitted using a single-rail signal between one variable and

cuit, control signals always have to be changed to transmit the check nodes. An example data-monitoring system is explained

data without change of a logical value. In the proposed half-du- below. First, asynchronous data transmission is an interface V

plex single-track protocol, one of the dual-rail signals always mode and a single-rail of mode convertor is 0. Second, when

has to change. In contrast, in the synchronous circuits, the data two consecutive messages are different of interface C on the

changes only when the logical value changes. Therefore, the other computation node, the single-rail signal becomes 1 by

power dissipation of the synchronous circuits is function of the interface C. Third, interface V detects the single-rail signal y and

switching activity in the interleaver portion, while the power then changes the mode to interface C mode. Fourth, interface

dissipation of the asynchronous circuits is constant and inde- C detects the conversion of the mode and then transmit data to

pendent of the switching “activity.” In the next subsection, a interface V. In this way, asynchronous data transmission is done

data-monitoring system is proposed to reduce the power dissi- when consecutive data are the same on one of the computation

pation of asynchronous data transmission.

nodes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1940

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2011

Fig. 22. Computation controller.

Fig. 25. Uncoded throughput of the proposed LDPC decoder.

Fig. 23. Output monitoring.
TABLE IV TOTAL WIRE LENGTHS OF (1056,528) IRREGULAR ASYNCHRONOUS
LDPC DECODERS USING THE TRADITIONAL 2 PHASE AND THE PROPOSED INTERLEAVERS
Fig. 26. Power dissipation of the proposed LDPC decoder.

Fig. 24. BER and FER performances of the (1056,528) irregular synchronous and the proposed LDPC decoders using MSA with 4-bit precision.

Fig. 27. Energy dissipation of the proposed LDPC decoder.
Fig. 19 shows the node computation. Three control signals,

comp trig1, comp trig2, and comp finish, are generated by

an asynchronous controller. The transmitted data from asyn- other node has to transmit data, while the

is

chronous interface is stored using

signals. Then, asserted when this node has to transmit data.

the computation based on the min-sum algorithm is done using Fig. 22 shows a computation controller, which generates the

an arithmetic unit. The results are stored as pre vin (pre cin) control signals for node computation. Arbitration is done using

by using the comp trig2 signal When two consecutive data, a MUTEX (MUTual EXclusive lock) [35] between a local clk

such as pre vin (pre cin) and vin(cin), are the different, pre vin signal and an ack input signal which is generated by input con-

(pre cin) are stored as vin (cin) by using

signals. troller for storing data correctly. An ack minput signal is sent

Fig. 20 shows asynchronous interface including I/O con- to local clk generator which makes the local clk signal asserted.

troller, computation controller, and output monitoring. Fig. 21 Once the local clk signal is generated, the

signal is

shows I/O controller. Data between asynchronous interface asserted to store data in node computation. Then, a comp trig2

and node computation are controlled by using

signal is asserted after computation delay to store the output of

and

signals. Mode conversion is also done in I/O the arithmetic unit in node computation. Comp trig2 is stored

controller by using

and

in a SR latch in local clk generator and then the local clk signal

signals. The

signal is asserted when the is de-asserted.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ONIZAWA et al.: LOW-ENERGY ASYNCHRONOUS INTERLEAVER
TABLE V PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS OF LDPC DECODERS

1941

TABLE VI NORMALIZED THROUGHPUT AND ENERGY DISSIPATION BASED ON THE NUMBER OF EDGES IN THE PREVIOUS AND THE PROPOSED ASYNCHRONOUS
LDPC DECODERS

number of wires in the proposed interleaver is reduced to 1/3 that of the traditional 2phase interleaver, but the computation nodes are the same in both decoders. Therefore, the total wire length of the proposed LDPC decoder is reduced to 68% that of the traditional LDPC decoder.

B. Coding Performance

Fig. 24 shows simulated BER and FER performances of syn-

Fig. 23 shows the output monitoring. The difference be- chronous and the proposed decoders under binary-phase shift-

tween two consecutive data, such as

and keying (BPSK) modulation on an additive white Gaussian noise

, is detected by an XOR gate, and a

(AWGN) channel. The curves for the synchronous decoder are

signal is asserted. When the

signal is asserted, the obtained with a stopping criterion where all check nodes con-

signal is asserted to store

and straints are satisfied. The maximum number of iterations is set

then starts new asynchronous data transmission. In contrast, to 16. In contrast, the number of iterations cannot be counted in

when the

signal is de-asserted, a

the asynchronous decoder. Hence, the curves are obtained with

signal is asserted and stored in the SR latch. The

a stopping technique. The performances are simulated with 100

signal is connected to I/O controller shown in Fig. 21. Once frame error counts.

the

signal is asserted, the

In the asynchronous decoder, performance is evaluated by

signal is asserted to convert the mode in asynchronous data modeling a wire delay and a computation delay. These delay

transmission.

information is extracted from a postlayout simulation of the pro-

V. EVALUATION

posed asynchronous LDPC decoder. Our simulation method is the same as that described in [33].

The proposed asynchronous decoder is designed using a STARC 90-nm CMOS technology. The LDPC code is a C. Decoder Performance

(1056,528) irregular code for the WiMAX standard. Decoding Fig. 25 shows uncoded throughput versus

of the

is performed using the min-sum algorithm (MSA) with 4-bit proposed decoder. The throughput is determined by the average

LLR messages, each containing one sign bit and three magni- decoding time that is obtained by the asynchronous BER and

tude bits. Decoding is terminated after a specified time which FER simulator. With increasing

, the throughput also

is set to 80 nsec, or when check node constraints are satis- increases because the decoding can stop earlier. As a result, the

fied. In the proposed decoder, the half-duplex asynchronous decoder achieves 45.51 Gbps at

of 5 dB. This result is

data-transfer circuit is not designed using a standard-cell derived from our C++ simulations, where extracted wire delays

library. To implement the proposed decoder, the layout of were used. Fig. 26 shows power dissipation versus

of

the proposed data-transfer circuit is realized by hand, and the proposed decoder using the asynchronous BER and FER

is added to the standard-cell library. Then, the proposed de- simulator. Power dissipation of basic components, such as the

coder is implemented through a logic-synthesis phase and a variable node, the check nodes, and the asynchronous interface,

place-and-route phase. The detailed design flow is as described are obtained using a transistor-level simulator (NanoSim) in

in [33].

advance. Since the information is added to the simulator, total

A. Total Wire Length

power dissipation of the asynchronous decoder is obtained

with BER and FER simulations. With increasing

, the

Table IV shows total wire lengths in the asynchronous LDPC switching activity in the interleaver portion becomes small,

decoders using the traditional 2phase [36] and the proposed which lowers the power dissipation of the data transfer. There-

interleavers, where both codes are (1056, 528) irregular codes. fore, the energy dissipation reaches 54 pJ/bit at

of 5 dB,

These are extracted from the layouts of both decoders. The as shown in Fig. 27.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1942

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2011

Table V shows performance comparisons of the conventional and the proposed asynchronous LDPC decoders with previously published synchronous decoders. In the conventional asynchronous decoder, the number of wires in the interleaver portion can be greatly reduced by using a multilevel signal. However, the current-mode circuits cause large area and static power dissipation, which results in high energy dissipation and large area. In contrast, the proposed half-duplex asynchronous data-transfer circuit reduces the number of wires with low static power dissipation. Moreover, the data-monitoring system reduces the dynamic power dissipation to stop the asynchronous data transfer when two time-consecutive messages are the same. Therefore, the energy dissipation is reduced by 91.5% with respect to the conventional asynchronous decoder with 1143% increase in the throughput. Area is also reduced by 15.4% because of the relatively small area of the proposed asynchronous data-transfer circuit. As a result, the proposed decoder achieves one of the highest throughputs with lowest energy consumption under 90-nm CMOS process. Table VI shows normalized throughputs and energy dissipations based on the number of edges in the previous and the proposed asynchronous decoders.
VI. CONCLUSION
A new asynchronous interleaver for energy-efficient clockless LDPC decoding has been described. The asynchronous interleaver has been utilized in a 90-nm CMOS clockless fullyparallel (1056, 528) irregular LDPC decoder that archives a 54 pJ per uncoded bit with an uncoded throughput of 46 Gbps at
of 5 dB under a postlayout simulation.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 399–431, Jan. 1999.
[3] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolian Area Networks, IEEE 802.16e Standard, Feb. 28, 2006 [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.16e-2005.pdf, [Online]
[4] IEEE 802.3an Task Force, , Jun. 8, 2004 [Online]. Available: http:// www.ieee802.org/3/an/index.html
[5] Draft European Telecommunication Standards Institute, EN 302 307 V1.1.1, Jun. 2004.
[6] The IEEE 802.11n Working Group, [Online]. Available: http://www. ieee802.org/11
[7] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[8] A. Zarkeshvari, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” presented at the IEEE Globecom, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., Nov. 2002.
[9] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of lower-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[10] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[11] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 683–698, May 2006.
[12] X.-Y. Shih, C. Z. Zhan, C. H. Lin, and A.-Y. Wu, “An 8.29 mm 52 mW multi-mode LDPC decoder design for mobile WiMAX system in
0.13 m CMOS process,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3,
pp. 672–683, Mar. 2008.

[13] C.-H. Liu, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-S. Hsu, and S.-J. Jou, “An LDPC decoder chip based on self-routing network for IEEE 802.16e applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 684–694, Mar. 2008.
[14] P. Urard, E. Yeo, L. Paumier, P. Georgelin, T. Michel, V. Lebars, E. Lantreibecq, and B. Gupta, “A 135 Mb/s DVB-S2 compliant codec based on 64800b LDPC and BCH codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISSCC Dig. Tech. Papers, 2005, pp. 446–447.
[15] Y. Dai, N. Chen, and Z. Yan, “Memory efficient decoder architectures for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 2898–2911, Oct. 2008.
[16] C. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Sha, and L. Lin, “Flexible DPC decoder design or multigigabit-per-second applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 116–124, Jan. 2010.
[17] D. Bao, B. Xian, R. Shen, A. Pan, Y. Chen, and X.-Y. Zen, “Programmable architecture for flexi-mode QC-LDPC decoder supporting wireless LAN/MAN applications and beyond,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 125–138, Jan. 2010.
[18] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[19] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” IEEE Globecom pp. 3019–3024, 2001.
[20] C.-C. Lin, K.-L. Lin, H.-C. Chang, and C.-Y. Lee, “A 3.33 Gb/s (1200, 720) low density parity check code decoder,” in Proc. ESSCIRC Dig. Tech. Papers, 2005, pp. 211–214.
[21] A. Darabiha, A. Chan Carusone, and F. Kschischang, “A 3.3-Gbps bitserial block-interlaced min-sum LDPC decoder in 0.13-um CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits Conf., Sep. 2007, pp. 459–462.
[22] T. Brandon, R. Hang, G. Block, V. Gaudet, B. Cockburn, S. Howard, C. Giasson, K. Boyle, P. Goud, S. S. Zeinoddin, A. Rapley, S. Bates, D. Elliott, and C. Schlegel, “A scalable LDPC decoder ASIC architecture with bit-serial message exchange,” Integration, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 385–398, May 2008.
[23] A. Darabiha, A. Chan Carusone, and F. Kschischang, “Multi-Gbit/sec low density parity check decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, May 2005, vol. 5, pp. 5194–5197.
[24] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. Kschischang, “Block-interlaced LDPC decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 74–77, Jan. 2008.
[25] L. Liu and C. J. Richard Shi, “Sliced message passing: High throughput overlapped decoding of high-rate low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3697–3710, Dec. 2008.
[26] T. Mohsenin, D. Truong, and B. Baas, “Multi-split-row threshold decoding implementations for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, May 2009, pp. 2449–2453.
[27] T. Mohsenin, D. Truong, and B. Baas, “A low-complexity message-passing algorithm for reduced routing congestion in LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1048–1061, May 2010.
[28] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “An efficient 10 GBASE-T ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[29] V. Gaudet and A. Rapley, “Iterative decoding using stochastic computation,” Electron. Lett., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 299–301, Feb. 2003.
[30] S. S. Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Fully parallel stochastic LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 11, Nov. 2008.
[31] S. S. Tehrani, A. Naderi, G.-A. Kamendje, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Majority-based tracking forecast memories for stochastic LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 4883–4896, Sep. 2010.
[32] N. Onizawa, T. Ikeda, T. Hanyu, and V. C. Gaudet, “3.2-Gb/s 1024-b rate-1/2 LDPC decoder chip using a flooding-type update-schedule algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Midwest Symp. Circuits and Systems, Aug. 2007, pp. 217–220.
[33] N. Onizawa, T. Hanyu, and V. Gaudet, “High-throughput bit-serial LDPC decoder LSI based on multiple-valued asynchronous interleaving,” IEICE Trans. Electron., vol. E92-C, no. 6, pp. 867–874, Jun. 2009.
[34] N. Onizawa, T. Hanyu, and V. Gaudet, “Design of high-throughput fully-parallel LDPC decoders based on wire partitioning,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 482–489, Mar. 2010.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ONIZAWA et al.: LOW-ENERGY ASYNCHRONOUS INTERLEAVER

1943

[35] J. Sparso and S. Furber, Principles of Asynchronous Circuit Design. Boston, MA: Kluwer, 2001, pp. 9–28.
[36] M. E. Dean, T. E. Williams, and D. L. Dill, “Efficient self-timed levelencoded 2-phase dual-rail (LEDR),” in Advanced Research in VLSI. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991, pp. 55–70.
[37] W. Bainbridge and S. Furber, “Delay insensitive system-on-chip interconnect using 1-of-4 data encoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Asynchronous Circuits and Systems, Mar. 2001, pp. 74–82.
[38] M. Singh and S. M. Nowick, “MOUSETRAP: High-speed transitionsignaling asynchronous pipelines,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 684–698, Jun. 2007.
[39] P. B. McGee, M. Y. Agyekum, M. A. Mohamed, and S. M. Nowick, “A level-encoded transition signaling protocol for high-throughput asynchronous global communication,” in Proc. 14th IEEE Int. Symp. Asynchronous Circuits and Systems, Apr. 7–10, 2008, pp. 116–127.
[40] D. Lattard, E. Beigne, C. Bernard, C. Bour, F. Clermidy, Y. Durand, J. Durupt, D. Varreau, P. Vivet, P. Penard, A. Bouttier, and F. Berens, “A telecom baseband circuit based on an asynchronous network-on-chip,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf., Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 11–15, 2007, pp. 258–601.
[41] T. Takahashi and T. Hanyu, “Implementation of a high-speed asynchronous data-transfer chip based on multiple-valued current-signal multiplexing,” IEICE Trans. Electron., vol. E89-C, no. 11, pp. 1598–1604, Nov. 2006.
[42] K. Mizusawa, N. Onizawa, and T. Hanyu, “Power-aware asynchronous peer-to-peer duplex communication system based on multiple-valued one-phase signaling,” IEICE Trans. Electron., vol. E91-C, no. 04, pp. 581–588, Apr. 2008.
[43] N. Onizawa and T. Hanyu, “Highly reliable multiple-valued one-phase signalling for an asynchronous on-chiip communication link,” IEICE Trans. Inf., pp. 2089–2099, Aug. 2010.
[44] M. Ferretti and P. Beerel, “High performance asynchronous design using single-track full-buffer standard cells,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1444–1454, Jun. 2006.
[45] Y. Ohtake, N. Onizawa, and T. Hanyu, “High-performance asynchronous intra-chip communication link based on a multile-valued current-mode single-track scheme,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, May 2009, pp. 1000–1003.
[46] K. Christensen, P. Jensen, P. Korger, and J. Sparso, “The design of an asynchronous TinyRISC TR4101 microprocessor core,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Advanced Research in Asynchronous Circuits and Systems, 1998, pp. 108–119.
[47] M. Shams, J. Ebergen, and M. Elmasry, “Modeling and comparing CMOS implementation of the C-element,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 563–567, Dec. 1998.
Naoya Onizawa (S’05–M’09) received the B.E., M.E., and D.E. degrees from Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, in 2004, 2006, and 2009, respectively.
He is currently a Research Associate in the Research Institute of Electrical Communication, Tohoku University. His main interests and activities are in the energy-efficient VLSI design based on asynchronous circuits and multiple-valued circuits, and their applications, such as LDPC decoders and Network-on-Chips.
Dr. Onizawa received the Best Paper Award at the IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI in 2010.

Vincent C. Gaudet (S’97–M’03–SM’10) received the B.S. degree in computer engineering from the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada, in 1995, and the Master of Applied Science and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, in 1997 and 2003, respectively.
Currently, he is an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON. From 2002 to 2010, he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Calgary, AB, Canada, first as Assistant Professor and then as Associate Professor. In 2002, he was a Research Associate at the Ecole Nationale Superieure des Telecommunications de Bretagne, Brest, France. In 2008 and 2009, he was on sabbatical leave at Northeastern University, Boston, MA, and at Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. His research interests center on information processing microsystems and more specifically on energy-efficient graph-based decoding of error control codes such as Turbo and LDPC codes. Dr. Gaudet currently serves as Technical Editor for the IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference and as Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS I: REGULAR PAPERS. He has previously served as Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS II: EXPRESS BRIEFS (2008–2009). Dr. Gaudet is registered as a Professional Engineer in the provinces of Ontario and Alberta, Canada.
Takahiro Hanyu (S’87–M’89) received the B.E., M.E., and D.E. degrees in electronic engineering from Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, in 1984, 1986, and 1989, respectively.
He is currently a Professor in the Research Institute of Electrical Communication, Tohoku University. His general research interests include nonvolatile logic circuits and their applications to ultralow-power and/or PVT-variation-free VLSI processors.
Dr, Hanyu received the Outstanding Paper Award at IEEE International Symposium on Multiple-Valued Logic in 1986, the Distinctive Contribution Award at IEEE International Symposium on Multiple-Valued Logic in 1988, the Niwa Memorial Award in 1988; the Sakai Memorial Award from the Information Processing Society of Japan in 2000; the Judge’s Special Award at the 9th LSI Design of the Year from the Semiconductor Industry News of Japan in 2002; the APEX Paper Award of Japanese Society of Applied Physics in 2009; the Excellent Paper Award of IEICE, Japan, in 2010; the Ichikawa Academic Award in 2010; and the Best Paper Award at IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI in 2010.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

