IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

243

Transactions Papers

Construction of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes by Superposition
Jun Xu, Member, IEEE, Lei Chen, Lingqi Zeng, Lan Lan, and Shu Lin, Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a superposition method for constructing low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Several classes of structured LDPC codes are constructed. Codes in these classes perform well with iterative decoding, and their Tanner graphs have girth at least six.
Index Terms—Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, Reed–Solomon (RS) codes, superposition.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, discovered by Gallager in 1962 [1], were rediscovered and shown to form a class of Shannon-limit-approaching codes in the late 1990s and early 2000s [2]–[7]. Ever since their rediscovery, design, construction, and applications of these codes have become focal points of research. Various construction methods have been proposed. These methods can be divided into two general categories: 1) construction of pseudorandom (or random-like) LDPC codes, such as the methods given in [3] and [4]; and 2) construction of structured LDPC codes, such as the algebraic and combinatorial methods given in [7]–[20], [28].
Long pseudorandom LDPC codes, in general, perform better than structured LDPC codes of comparable parameters in the waterfall region; however, they usually do not have sufficient structure to allow simple encoding. In contrast, structured LDPC codes, in general, have encoding advantages over pseudorandom LDPC codes, especially quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes. Encoding of a QC-LDPC code can be implemented using simple shift registers with complexity linearly proportional to the number of parity bits of the code [21], [22]. Well-designed structured LDPC codes can perform as well as
Paper approved by A. Anastasopoulos, the Editor for Wireless Communications of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received December 3, 2003; revised May 25, 2004 and August 12, 2004. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grants CCR-0096191, CCR0117891, and ECS-0121469, and in part by NASA under Grants NAG 5-10480 and NAG 5-12789. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, June 29–July 4, 2003.
J. Xu was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616 USA. She is now with Marvell Semiconductor, Sunnyvale, CA 94085 USA.
L. Chen, L. Zeng, L. Lan, and S. Lin are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: leichen@ece.ucdavis.edu; lqzeng@ece.ucdavis.edu; squash@ece.ucdavis.edu; shulin@ece.ucdavis.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.841966

pseudorandom LDPC codes of comparable parameters in terms of bit-error performance, block-error performance, and error floor, collectively, as shown in [10], [14], and [16].
This paper presents an algebraic method for constructing structured LDPC codes. This method is based on superimposing structured sparse constituent matrices onto a structured base matrix. With this method, structured LDPC codes with girth at least six can be constructed. If the base matrix or the constituent matrices are circulants (or arrays of circulants), then the constructed codes are QC-LDPC codes. A circulant is a square matrix in which every row is the cyclic shift (one place to the right) of the row above it, and the first row is the cyclic shift of the last row.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents a general superposition method for constructing LDPC codes with girth at least six, Sections III–VI give several classes of structured LDPC codes, and Section VII concludes the paper.
II. SUPERPOSITION CONSTRUCTION OF LDPC CODES
A binary regular LDPC code [1] is defined as the null space of a sparse parity-check matrix over GF(2) with constant column weight and constant row weight , where and are small, compared with the code length. An LDPC code is said to be irregular if its parity-check matrix has varying column weights and varying row weights. The performance of an LDPC code with iterative decoding very much depends on the girth of its Tanner graph [23]. The girth of a graph is defined as the length of its shortest cycle. For an LDPC code to perform well with iterative decoding, its Tanner graph should have a reasonably large girth, i.e., its Tanner graph should be free of short cycles. The cycles that affect the performance the most are the cycles of length four. These short cycles severely limit the performance of iterative decoding. For codes with these short cycles, iterative decoding becomes correlated after two iterations. Therefore, cycles of length four must be prevented in code construction. To avoid cycles of length four, the parity-check matrix
of an LDPC code must have the following additional structural property: no two rows (or two columns) have more than one 1-component in common. The requirement that no two rows (or two columns) of a matrix have more than one 1-component in common is referred to as the row–column (RC) constraint. For a regular parity-check matrix with column weight , the RC constraint ensures that the LDPC code generated by has

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

a minimum distance at least

[7], [22]. For an irregular It is clear that the number of constituent matrices in must

parity-check matrix with minimum column weight , the be large enough so that the parity-check matrix can be con-

RC constraint ensures that the minimum distance of the code structed to satisfy the replacement constraint. The assignment

generated by is at least

(this bound may be very of constituent matrices in to the 1 entries in to satisfy

loose).

the replacement constraint is equivalent to coloring the edges

A. A General Superposition Construction

of the Tanner graph of (a bipartite graph) such that no two adjacent edges have the same color [24], [25]. It is known in

Let

be a sparse matrix over GF(2) that satisfies

the RC constraint. Let

be a set of sparse

matrices over GF(2), which has the following properties:

1) each member matrix in satisfies the RC constraint;

and 2) a matrix formed by any two member matrices, and

, in arranged either in a row or in a column satisfies the

RC constraint, which is called the pairwise RC constraint. The

pairwise RC constraint implies that for

, a matrix

formed by taking any member matrices in arranged either

in a row or in a column is free of cycles of length four in its

Tanner graph.

From and member matrices in , we construct a

matrix over GF(2) as follows: 1) replace each 1 entry in

by a member matrix in ; 2) replace each 0 entry in by a

zero matrix O; and 3) the replacement is carried out under

the constraint that all the nonzero submatrices in a row or in a

column are distinct. The replacement rule given in 3) is called

the replacement constraint. Since and the member matrices

in are sparse matrices, is also a sparse matrix. can be

viewed as a array of submatrices. Since satisfies the

RC constraint, there are no four 1 entries at the four corners of a

rectangle in . This implies that there are no four nonzero

submatrices at the four corners of a rectangle in viewed as an

array of

submatrices. Then, it follows from the pairwise

RC constraint on the member matrices in , and the constraint

on the replacement of the 1 entries of with member matrices

in , that the rows and columns of satisfy the RC constraint.

Consequently, the Tanner graph of is free of cycles of length

four, and hence, its girth is at least six.

Let

and

be the minimum column and row

weights of , respectively, and

and

the minimum

column and row weights of the member matrices in , respec-

tively. Then the minimum column and row weights of are

at least

and

, respectively. The null

space of gives an LDPC code of length and minimum

distance at least

, whose Tanner graph has a

girth of at least six. If the base matrix has constant column

graph theory that for any bipartite graph, the minimum number

of colors that is sufficient to achieve the coloring constraint is

equal to the maximum node degree of the graph (see [24, Th.

6.1]). Let

and

be the maximum column and row

weights of , respectively, and let

.

Then the maximum node degree of the Tanner graph of is .

Hence, constituent matrices are sufficient to achieve the re-

placement constraint.

If the base matrix is a

circulant with row weight

(the column weight is the same as the row weight), then the

replacement constraint can be satisfied easily with distinct

constituent matrices. This is done as follows. Let be the first

row of the base matrix . Take constituent matrices from

and use them to replace the 1-components of . All the

0-components of are replaced by

zero matrices. This

replacement results in a row of submatrices, denoted by .

Then the superimposed matrix is formed by using and

its

cyclic shifts (with each submatrix as a shifting unit)

as rows. We call this cyclic replacement. If is an array of

circulants, then cyclic replacement is applied to each circulant

in . If the base matrix satisfies the RC constraint, and each

constituent matrix in is a row of permutation matrices, then

in replacing the 1 entries by the constituent matrices in , only

the requirement that all the submatrices in each column of

are distinct is sufficient to guarantee that satisfies the RC

constraint.

Any matrix that satisfies the RC constraint can be used as the

base matrix . If the size of is small, it can be constructed

by hand. Otherwise, it can be constructed by computer search.

Algebraic construction of can also be achieved. In this paper,

we are particularly interested in constructing base matrices that

are either circulants or arrays of circulants. These base matrices

are called circular (or circulant) base matrices. An algebraic

construction of circular base matrices will be presented in Sec-

tion III. Circulant arrays given in [16], [17], and [19] can also

be used as base matrices. An iterative method for constructing

base matrices with girth eight is given in Section VI.

and row weights and , respectively, and all the member matrices in have the same column and row weights and B. Iterative Construction and Special Cases

, respectively, then has constant column and row weights Superposition can be carried out iteratively. We start with a

and

, respectively, and its null space gives a small base matrix that satisfies the RC constraint, and a class

regular LDPC code.

of small constituent matrices that satisfy the pairwise RC

The above construction of LDPC codes is called superposi- constraint. We form a matrix based on and by re-

tion construction. It is a method to construct LDPC codes from placing the 1-entries of with the member matrices in

shorter and simpler LDPC codes. The parity-check matrix under the replacement constraint. Then we can either use as

is obtained by superimposing the member matrices in onto the parity-check matrix to generate an LDPC code, or use

the matrix . The matrix is called the base matrix, and the as the base matrix and a new class of constituent matrices

member matrices in are called the constituent matrices. Here- (or ) to form another matrix by superposition. Again,

after, we assume that the base matrix satisfies the RC con- can be either used to generate an LDPC code or used as the base

straint, and the constituent matrices in satisfy the pairwise matrix for further superposition. This iterative construction con-

RC constraint.

tinues until a parity-check matrix of desired size is obtained.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BY SUPERPOSITION

245

Superposition is an old technique (under different names) through the origin. Then the elements

repre-

that was used for constructing long codes with large error-cor- sent the points in EG

.

recting capabilities from shorter codes in the 1950s and 1960s. For example, the construction of product codes by Elias in 1954 [26] is a special form of superposition. The method of constructing long low-complexity codes from one or more shorter codes and a bipartite graph proposed by Tanner [23] is also a special form of superposition. The concept of superposition for constructing LDPC codes described in Section II-A was introduced in [10] and [14]. The recursive construction of pseudorandom LDPC codes presented in [20] by replacing the 1-entries of a parity-check matrix (called a core matrix) of an LDPC code with pseudorandom permutation matrices is another special case of superposition.

Let be a line in EG

. The incidence vector of is

defined as an -tuple over GF(2),

,

whose components correspond to the points

of EG

, and for

,

if and only if is a

point on , and otherwise,

. The weight of is . Since

two lines in EG

are either disjoint or intersect at one

and only one point, no two incidence vectors of two lines can

have more than one 1-component in common. For

,

let denote the vector obtained by cyclically shifting each

component of the incidence vector to the right positions,

called -cyclic shift of . It is clear that

.

It can be proved that is the incidence vector of another line

C. Construction of QC-LDPC Codes by Superposition
If the base matrix is a circulant and the 1-entries of are replaced with constituent matrices in using cyclic replacement, then the code constructed by superposition is a QC-LDPC code, for which every cyclic shift of a codeword places to the right is another codeword. If the constituent matrices in are circulants or array of circulants, then the parity-check matrix obtained by superposition is an array of circulants. In this case, the null space of gives a circulant LDPC code that can be arranged in QC form [7], [17], [22].
For any positive integer , it is possible to form distinct circulant permutation matrices. These circulant permuta-
tion matrices satisfy the pairwise RC constraint, and hence, can be used as constituent matrices for superposition construction of QC-LDPC codes. If the base matrix is an array of circulants, the code formed by superposition with cyclic replacement of the 1-entries in with circulant permutation matrices is a QC-LDPC code with a simple cyclic structure.

in EG

[17]. Furthermore, the cyclic shifts of give

incidence vectors of different lines in EG

[17].

Such a vector is said to be primitive. All the incidence vectors of

lines in EG

are primitive. It follows from this primitive

property and the expression of that the incidence vectors of

the lines in EG

can be partitioned into

cyclic classes, denoted

. Each cyclic

class consists of incidence vectors that can be obtained by

cyclically shifting any incidence vector in the class times.

For each cyclic class with

, form an

circulant by taking an incidence vector in as the first row,

and cyclically shifting it

times to form the other rows.

Both the column and row weights of are . For simplicity,

we say that has weight . Since the rows of are incidence

vectors of lines in EG

, no two rows in have more than

one 1-component in common. For a circulant, the set of columns (reading top down) is the same as the set of rows (reading from

right to left). Therefore, the columns of are also incidence

vectors of lines in EG

. As a result, no two columns of

III. CLASS-I SUPERPOSITION LDPC CODES

Constituent matrices that satisfy the pairwise RC con-

straint can be constructed from finite geometries, such as

Euclidean and projective geometries over finite fields [22],

[27]. Constituent matrices constructed from these geometries

are circulants or arrays of circulants which are particularly

suitable for constructing QC-LDPC codes.

Let EG

be an -dimensional Euclidean geometry

over GF , where is a power of a prime . This geometry

consists of points and

lines. A

point in EG

is simply an -tuple over GF . The

all-zero -tuple is called the origin of the geometry. Each

line in EG

consists of points. Two lines are either

disjoint, or they intersect at one and only one point. A line

that contains the origin is said to pass through the origin. It

is well known that the Galois field GF as an extension

field of GF is a realization of the geometry EG .

Let be a primitive element of GF . Then the elements

represent the points of

EG . Let EG

be the subgeometry obtained from

EG

by excluding the origin and the lines passing through

the origin. Then EG

consists of

nonorigin

have more than one 1-component in common. Therefore,

satisfies the RC constraint. Since two rows (or two columns)

from two different circulants, and , are incidence vectors

of two different lines in EG

, they can not have more

than one 1-component in common. Consequently, the circulants

in the class

satisfy the pairwise RC

constraint, and hence, can be used as the constituent matrices

for superposition construction of LDPC codes.

For

, let be a positive integer less than or equal to

the column weight of . Dividing by , we obtain

,

where and are quotient and remainder, respectively, with

. Let be the first column of . Split into

new

columns

of the same length as , and dis-

tribute the weight of into the new columns [7]. The weight dis-

tribution is carried out as follows. The first 1-components of

are put in , the next 1-components of are put in

,

the th 1-components of are put in , and the last 1-com-

ponents of are put in

. If divides , then

and is

split into new columns, each with weight . Note that no two

new columns and have any 1-component in common.

For

, cyclically shifting the th new column

downward times, we obtain a new

circulant . For

, the weight of is . For

, the weight of

points and

lines not passing

is . The above process decomposes into

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

246

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

2 Fig. 1. Column decomposition of a 7 7 circulant of weight q = 3 by setting  = 2 (k = 1 and r = 1).

circulants,

, which are called the descen- Let the base matrix be a regular matrix with constant

dants of [16], [19]. The decomposition is called column de- column and row weights and , respectively, which satis-

composition of . We can readily see that no two descendants fies the RC constraint. Let be the parity-check matrix con-

of have any 1 entry in common and is the direct-sum of its structed by superimposing the constituent matrices in onto

descendants, i.e.,

. Since satisfies under the replacement constraint. Then is a

array

the RC constraint, its descendants,

, satisfy the of

circulants (an

zero matrix is regarded as a

pairwise RC constraint. The circulants in the class

circulant), and is a

matrix over GF(2) with column

can be used as constituent matrices and row weights and , respectively. satisfies the

for superposition construction of LDPC codes. Fig. 1 shows the RC constraint. The null space of gives a QC-LDPC code

column decomposition of a circulant with weight three into

of length

and minimum distance at least

,

two circulants, one with weight two and the other with weight whose Tanner graph has a girth of at least six. This code is called

one. In decomposition, we choose

. Dividing

by a class-I superposition LDPC code. A circulant or an array of

, we obtain

(quotient) and

(remainder).

circulants constructed from a Euclidean geometry as described

For

and

, form the

ma- above can be used as a base matrix.

trix

, which is composed of a row of Example 1: In this construction, the base matrix is chosen

descendants of , each with weight . The column and row as the

circulant constructed from the subgeometry

weights of

are and , respectively. For

EG

of the two-dimensional (2-D) Euclidean geometry

and

, each descendant circulant in

can be EG over GF(3). This circulant has both column and row

decomposed into a column of circulants by row splitting [7] in weights three. The constituent matrices are constructed from

the same way as the column-splitting process described above. the 3-D Euclidean geometry EG

. The subgeometry

Let be a positive integer that divides the weight of (as- EG

of EG

consists of 4599 lines not passing

sume that is chosen to be divisible by during the column through the origin of EG

, each consisting of eight points.

decomposition of ). Take the first row of and split The incidence vectors of the lines in EG

can be parti-

it into new rows of length with the weight of evenly tioned into nine cyclic classes,

, each consisting

distributed into the new rows, each with weight

. Cycli- of 511 incidence vectors. From these nine cyclic classes, we

cally shifting each new row to the right times, we then ob- can form nine

circulants,

, each with

tain a column of circulants,

.

weight eight. For

and

, each circulant is

is called the row decomposition of . The circulants in

decomposed into

descendant circulants,

,

are descendants of , and each has weight . If we replace by column decomposition. Each is a

circulant

each circulant in

by its row decomposition , permutation matrix. From these circulant permutation matrices,

we obtain a

array of

circulants

we form three

matrices,

,

,

. Each ,

,

has column and row weights one and two, respectively. Then

...

... . . . ...

(1)

form a class of 27 con-

stituent matrices. To construct the superimposed parity-check

matrix , for

, we replace the three 1 entries of the

th row of the base matrix with constituent matrices ,

where each circulant has weight . is a

, and . This replacement results in a

matrix over GF(2) with column and row weights and , matrix with column and row weights three and six, respec-

respectively. Since all the circulants in are descendants of tively. It is an

array of

circulant permutation or

, satisfies the RC constraint. is called the array de- zero matrices. The null space of this matrix gives a (8176,4088)

composition of . Since and satisfy the pairwise RC QC-LDPC code with rate 1/2, whose Tanner graph has a girth

constraint, their corresponding array decompositions, and of at least six. Its performance with iterative decoding using the

, also satisfies the pairwise RC constraint. Hence,

sum–product algorithm (SPA) [1], [3]–[5] is shown in Fig. 2.

forms a class of constituent matrices for super- The maximum number of iterations is set to 100. At the bit-error

position construction of LDPC codes. A very special case is that rate (BER) of , it performs 1.45 dB from the Shannon

. In this case, each circulant in is an

circu- limit. It has a good block-error performance. For comparison,

lant permutation matrix, and is an

array of circulant we construct a (8176,4088) MacKay code [3] by computer

permutation matrices.

search. Its parity-check matrix is a

matrix, also

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BY SUPERPOSITION

247

Fig. 2. Error performance of the (8176,4088) QC-LDPC code given in Example 1. (I : maximum number of iterations. MC: MacKay code).

with column and row weights three and six, respectively. The performance of this MacKay code decoded with the SPA is also included in Fig. 2. The maximum number of iterations is also set to 100. We see that the performance curves of the QC-LDPC code and the MacKay code are on top of each other in the range simulated. However, the advantage of the QC-LDPC code is its simple encoding that can be implemented with a 4088-stage shift-register-adder-accumulator (SRAA) [21]. Each stage of the SRAA consists of two flip-flops, one modulo-2 adder and one two-input AND gate. Hence, the encoder complexity is linearly proportional to the number of parity-check bits of the code. The QC structure of the code also reduces the decoder storage and hardware complexity.
Circulants or array of circulants that satisfy the RC constraint or pairwise RC constraint can also be constructed from project geometries [7], [22].

IV. CLASS-II SUPERPOSITION LDPC CODES

In this section, we present another class of constituent ma-

trices that are constructed based on Reed–Solomon (RS) codes

with two information symbols, using a technique that was de-

veloped in [13]. Using these constituent matrices, we construct

another class of superposition LDPC codes.

Let be a primitive element of the Galois field GF . Then

give all the elements of

GF . For

, we define the location

vector of as the -tuple,

,

over GF(2), for which

and all the other components

are equal to zero. Therefore,

is a unit -tuple. It is clear

from the definition that the 1-components of the location vectors

of two different elements of GF are at two different locations.

Form a matrix with the location vectors of the elements

of GF as the rows. Then both the column and row weights of

are one, and hence, is a permutation matrix.

Let

. Let be a

shortened RS code

over GF of length , dimension two, and minimum distance

[22]. consists of codewords, one all-zero codeword

and

nonzero codewords with two different weights,

and . Let be a codeword in with weight . Then the set

GF forms a 1-D subcode of , and is

a

shortened RS code. Two codewords in differ at

every location. Partition into cosets with respect to , de-

noted

, each consisting of codewords. These

cosets have the following properties: 1) two codewords from the

same coset differ at every location; and 2) two codewords

from two different cosets, and , differ at least

lo-

cations. For

, form a

array over GF with

the codewords in as the rows, denoted by . Then it fol-

lows from the structural properties of the cosets of that the

elements of each column of

form all the different el-

ements of GF . Replacing each entry in

by its location

vector, we obtain a

matrix

over GF(2), which is composed of

permutation matrices,

where the rows of are the location vectors of the elements in

the th column of . is called the symbol-location matrix

of coset . The column and row weights of are one and ,

respectively. It follows from the definition of the location vector

of an element in GF and the structural properties of the cosets

that no two rows (or two columns), either from the

same symbol location matrix or from two different symbol lo-

cation matrices, and , have more than one 1-component in

common. Then

forms a class of con-

stituent matrices that satisfies the pairwise RC constraint.

Let be a

base matrix with constant column and row

weights and , respectively, that satisfies the RC constraint.

Let be the parity-check matrix constructed by superim-

posing the constituent matrices in onto . Then is a

sparse

matrix with column and row weights and ,

respectively, which satisfies the RC constraint. The null space of

gives a regular LDPC code of length and minimum

distance at least , whose Tanner graph has a girth of at least

six. If the base matrix is a circulant or a row of circulants, then

is a QC-LDPC code. is called a class-II superposition

LDPC code. If the base matrix is simply a column of ones,

then is a column of constituent matrices from . This

special case gives the class of RS-based LDPC codes presented

in [13].

Example 2: Consider the (4,2,3) shortened RS code over

GF . This code consists of 256 codewords. Let be a code-

word of weight four. Then

GF forms

a (4,1,4) subcode of and consists of 16 codewords. Partition

with respect to into 16 cosets,

. For

, the symbol-location matrix of consists of four

permutation matrices,

. The

symbol-location matrices of the 16 cosets of form a class of

constituent matrices,

. For superpo-

sition code construction, the base matrix is constructed based

on the 3-D Euclidean geometry EG

. The subgeometry

EG

consists of 315 lines not passing through the origin,

each consisting of four nonorigin points. The incidence vector of

a line in EG

is a 63-tuple over GF with weight four.

The incidence vectors of the 315 lines in EG

can be par-

titioned into five cyclic classes, each consisting of 63 incidence

vectors. From these cyclic classes, we can form five

circulants, , , , , and , each with weight four.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

248

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Fig. 3. Error performance of the (16128,14127) QC-LDPC code given in Example 2.

Decompose each into a column of two

circulants of

weight two, and . Form the following

array of

circulants:

codeword. Let be an m-w codeword of , and be the

th cyclic shift of . Let

and be the smallest

positive integer less than or equal to , such that

. If

, then is a primitive m-w codeword, as defined earlier

in Section III. If

, then must divide and

. In

this case, is a nonprimitive m-w codeword. If we express

as a polynomial

of degree

or less [22], then

must be of the form

for

. It is easy to prove that

contains three

as a factor if and only if is even. Then for odd , every

m-w codeword in is primitive. For even , the number of

nonprimitive m-w codewords in is

. The

primitive m-w codewords of can be partitioned into cyclic

classes, say of them. From these cyclic classes, we can

form

circulants with weight three. Since no two m-w

codewords have more than one 1-component in common, these

circulants satisfy the pairwise RC constraint and can be used

for constructing constituent matrices. Each of these circulants,

, can be decomposed into a row of three circulant permu-

tation matrices, , , and . We can take one, two,

or three of these circulant permutation matrices and arrange

them in a row to form a constituent matrix. For example, let

. Then

forms

a class of circular constituent matrices.

which is a

matrix with column and row weights four

and eight, respectively. We use this matrix as the base matrix. To

construct the parity-check matrix , we use two constituent

matrices in to replace the 1 entries of each circulant in

using the cyclic replacement. Then is a

array

of

permutation matrices, and is a

ma-

trix with column and row weighs four and 32, respectively. The

null space of gives a (16128,14127) QC-LDPC code with

rate 0.876. The performance of this code decoded with the SPA

(maximum 100 iterations) is shown in Fig. 3. At the BER of

, it performs 0.8 dB from the Shannon limit. It has no error

floor down to the BER of . For comparison, we constructed

a (16128,14127) MacKay code whose parity-check matrix has

column weight four and average row weight 32. The perfor-

mance of this MacKay code is also included in Fig. 3. The per-

formance curves of the two codes are on top of each other in the

range simulated.

V. CLASS-III SUPERPOSITION LDPC CODES

Circulants that satisfy the pairwise RC constraint can be

constructed from the minimum-weight (m-w) codewords of a

Hamming code. These circulants can be used to construct con-

stituent matrices for superposition construction of QC-LDPC

codes. Consider the

cyclic Hamming

code generated by a primitive polynomial

of degree

[22]. The m-w of this code is three. Two different m-w code-

words can not have more than one 1-component in common,

otherwise, the sum of these two m-w codewords would give a

nonzero codeword with weight less than three, which contra-

dicts the fact that the m-w of the code is three. Since the code

is cyclic, any cyclic shift of an m-w codeword is also an m-w

Since the weight distribution of a Hamming code is known

[22], the number of primitive m-w codewords of can be deter-

mined. The primitive m-w codewords of a Hamming code can be

constructed easily. For odd , we choose a nonnegative integer

such that

. Divide

by the gener-

ator polynomial of , step by step with long division until a

single term appears at the end of a certain division step. Then

is a primitive m-w codeword. Any

cyclic shift of this primitive m-w codeword is also a primitive m-w

codeword. Next, we choose another nonnegative integer less

than , and the term does not appear in any of the primitive

m-w codewords that have been found. We then divide

by again to find another primitive m-w codeword. This

process can continue until we find enough primitive m-w code-

words to form circulants that are needed for code construction.

For even , the chosen integer (or ) must also satisfy the

condition that

(or

) is not equal to or .

Superposition construction using a circular base matrix and

the circular constituent matrices constructed from the primi-

tive m-w codewords of a Hamming code gives another class of

QC-LDPC codes, called class-III superposition LDPC.

Example 3: Consider the (31,26) cyclic Hamming code gen-

erated by the primitive polynomial

. Every

m-w codeword of this code is primitive. The code has 155 m-w

codewords which can be partitioned into five cyclic classes, each

consisting of 31 m-w codewords. From these cyclic classes, we

can form five

circulants of weights three, , , ,

, and . For

, decompose each circulant

into three

circulant permutation matrices by column

splitting, , , and . Let

. Then

forms a class of circular con-

stituent matrices that satisfy the pairwise RC constraint. Each

member matrix in is a

matrix with column and row

weights one and three, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BY SUPERPOSITION

249

The Tanner graph of

is cycle-free. Let

. Since

satisfies the RC con-

straint, the member matrices in satisfy the pairwise RC

constraint. Let

. We can readily see that any row

from and any row from a member matrix in have,

at most, one 1-component in common.

The member matrices in and can be used as constituent

matrices to construct the parity-check matrix of the product of

and using the superposition method. In the construction,

the base matrix is chosen as follows.

, where

is an

identity matrix, is a

row matrix

with ones, and denotes the transpose of for 1 and

2. Replacing each 1-entry in with , and the th 1-entry

of with

for

, we obtain the following

matrix:

Fig. 4. Error performance of the (11718,9781) QC-LDPC code given in Example 3.

Suppose we construct a base matrix from EG

. In Ex-

...

...

...

...

...

(3)

ample 2, we have shown that five

circulants of weight

four can be constructed from the lines not passing through the

origin of EG

. Suppose we use two of these five circulants

arranged in a row to form a base matrix . It is a

ma-

trix with column and row weights four and eight, respectively.

Replace the 1-entries of with the matrices in under the

constraint that the constituent matrices used in each column are

distinct. This replacement results in a

matrix

with column and row weights four and 24, respectively. The null

space of gives a (11718,9781) QC-LDPC code with rate

0.8347. The performance of this code with the SPA decoding

(maximum 100 iterations) is shown in Fig. 4. At the BER of

, it performs 0.95 dB from the Shannon limit.

In fact, the primitive m-w codewords of any cyclic code with

m-w 3 can be used to construct circular constituent matrices for

superposition construction of QC-LDPC codes.

satisfies the RC constraint. Consequently, the Tanner graph

of is free of cycles of length four. Since and are

sparse matrices, is also a sparse matrix. The column weight

of is

.

The null space of gives an LDPC code of length

with a minimum weight of at least

. We can readily

prove that is a parity-check matrix of the direct product

of and , with and as the row and column codes,

respectively. Consequently, the minimum distance of is

[22], which is greater than the lower bound

. If

is an array of circulants, then is also an array of circulants,

and is a QC-LDPC code.

VI. SUPERPOSITION CONSTRUCTION OF PRODUCT LDPC CODES

Example 4: Let be the (1023,781) cyclic EG-LDPC code constructed based on the 2-D Euclidean geometry EG with minimum distance exactly 33 [7]. The parity-check ma-

The superposition method can be used to construct product

LDPC codes. For 1 and 2, let be an ( , ) LDPC code

with minimum distance , whose Tanner graph is free of cycles

of length four. Let be the parity-check matrix of which is

a

matrix with column weight and row weight . Since

the Tanner graph of is free of cycles of length four, satis-

fies the RC constraint and

for 1 and 2. Express

in terms of its columns, column consisting of components. For

, each , form the

following

matrix , by shifting the th column

downward times:

trix of this code is a single

circulant matrix

with both column and row weights 32. Let be the (32,31)

single parity-check (SPC) code with minimum distance two.

The parity-check matrix of this SPC code is simply a row

of 32 ones. From (2), we see that for

, is a

identity matrix. It follows from (3) that we can form

the parity-check matrix of the product code

.

The null space of gives a (32736,24211) product LDPC code

with rate 0.74 and minimum distance exactly 66. Since is an

array of circulants, is a QC-LDPC code. The performance of

this code with iterative decoding is shown in Fig. 5. We see that

it has straight downward waterfall error performance starting

from a BER of .

The superposition construction given by (3) can be applied re-

...

... ... . . . ...

(2)

peatedly to construct a large sparse matrix with large girth from a single small and simple matrix. We consider a very special

but interesting case here. Let

be a row of

ones with

.

is simply the parity-check matrix of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

250

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a general superposition method for constructing LDPC codes with girth at least six. Four specific classes of structured LDPC codes have been constructed. Codes in two classes are QC-LDPC codes, and other two classes contain QC-LDPC codes as subclasses. We have also shown that the direct product of codes is a special form of superposition. Also presented in the paper is a simple iterative construction of a class of sparse matrices, whose Tanner graphs have girth eight.

REFERENCES

Fig. 5. Error performance of the (32736,24211) product QC-LDPC code given in Example 4.

Fig. 6. Error performance of the third power of the (6,5,2) SPC code.

the ( ,

) SPC code. We use

as both and to

construct based on (3). is called the second power of

, denoted .

has column and row weights two

and , respectively. We can easily check that the girth of the

Tanner graph of

is eight. Next, we use

as and

as to construct the third-power

of , based

on (3). Again, we can easily check that the girth of is also

eight.

has column and row weights three and , respec-

tively. We can repeat the above recursive construction to form

the th-power of , which has column and row weights

and , respectively. The girth of the Tanner graph of

is

eight. can be used either as a base matrix for superposition

construction of an LDPC code, or as the parity-check matrix

to generate an LDPC code with length , rate

,

girth eight, and minimum distance . Fig. 6 shows the error

performance of the third power of the (6,5,2) SPC, which is a

(216,125) QC-LDPC code with rate 0.579 and minimum dis-

tance exactly eight, whose Tanner graph has a girth of eight.

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near-Shannon-limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[4] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[5] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[6] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[7] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[8] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. 38th Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2000, pp. 248–257.
[9] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Commun. Theory, Applicat., Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001, pp. 365–370.
[10] S. Lin, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and H. Tang, “Hybrid construction of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002, pp. 1149–1158.
[11] J. Kim, U. N. Peled, I. Perepelitsa, and V. Pless, “Explicit construction of families of LDPC codes with girth at least six,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002, pp. 1024–1031.
[12] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “A family of irregular LDPC codes with low encoding complexity,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, pp. 79–81, Feb. 2003.
[13] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “Construction of low-density parity-check code based on Reed–Solomon code with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[14] J. Xu and S. Lin, “A combinatoric superposition method for constructing low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, vol. 30, Yokohama, Japan, Jun.–Jul. 2003.
[15] J. M. F. Moura, J. Lu, and H. Zhang, “Structured low-density paritycheck code,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 21, pp. 42–55, Jan. 2004.
[16] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.
[17] H. Tang, J. Xu, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On algebraic construction of Gallager and circulant low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 1269–1279, Jun. 2004.
[18] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial construction of low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[19] B. Ammar, B. Honary, Y. Kou, J. Xu, and S. Lin, “Construction of low-density parity-check codes based on balanced incomplete block designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 1257–1268, Jun. 2004.
[20] N. Miladinovic and M. Fossorier, “Systematic recursive construction of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 302–304, May 2004.
[21] Z. W. Li, L. Chen, and S. Lin, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., submitted for publication.
[22] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BY SUPERPOSITION

251

[23] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[24] J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty, Graph Theory With Applications. London, U.K.: MacMillan, 1976.
[25] D. B. West, Introduction to Graph Theory, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2001.
[26] P. Elias, “Error-free coding,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-4, pp. 29–30, Sep. 1954.
[27] H. Mann, Analysis and Design of Experiments. New York: Dover, 1949.
[28] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 4.

Lan Lan received the B.E. and M.E. degrees from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in 1998 and 2001, respectively. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at the University of California, Davis.
Her research interests include error-control coding techniques and their application in digital communications and digital storage systems.

Jun Xu (S’98–M’04) was born in Jiangxi, China. She received the B.S.E.E. degree from the University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in 1993, the M.S.E.E. degree from the Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China, in 1996, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of California, Davis, in 2003.
She was with University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, as a Visiting Assistant Professor from August 2003 to April 2004. Since then, she has been a Senior Design Engineer with Marvell Semiconductor, Sunnyvale, California. Her research interests include error-control coding for digital communciations and signal processing for magnetic recording channels.
Lei Chen was born in Beijing, China. She received the B.S.degree from Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing, China, in 1995, and the M.S. degree from the Aerospace Institution of China, Beijing, China, in 1998, both in electrical engineering. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at the University of California, Davis.
Her research interests include error-control coding for digital communications, multimedia broadcasting, and modern magnetic recording channels.
Lingqi Zeng was born in Shanghai, China, in 1979. He received the B.S. degree from Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China, in 2001, and the M.S. degree from the University of California, Davis, in 2004, both in electrical engineering. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the University of California, Davis, in the area of coding theory.

Shu Lin (S’62–M’65–SM’78–F’80–LF’00) received the B.S.E.E. degree from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1959, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Rice University, Houston, TX, in 1964 and 1965, respectively.
In 1965, he joined the Faculty of the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He became an Associate Professor in 1969 and a Professor in 1973. In 1986, he joined Texas A&M University, College Station, as the Irma Runyon Chair Professor of Electrical Engineering. In 1987, he returned to the University of Hawaii. From 1978 to 1979, he was a Visiting Scientist at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, where he worked on error-control protocols for data communication systems. He spent the academic year of 1996–1997 as a Visiting Professor at the Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. He retired from the University of Hawaii in 1999, and is currently a Visiting Professor at the University of California, Davis. He has published numerous technical papers in IEEE TRANSACTIONS and other refereed journals. He is the author of the book An Introduction to Error-Correcting Codes (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970). He also co-authored (with D. J. Costello) the book Error-Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1st ed., 1982, 2nd ed., 2004), and (with T. Kasami, T. Fujiwara, and M. Fossorier) the book Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms, (Boston, MA: Kluwer, 1998). His current research areas include algebraic coding theory, coded modulation, error-control systems, and satellite communications. He has served as the Principal Investigator on 30 research grants. Dr. Lin is a Member of the IEEE Information Theory Society and the Communication Society. He served as the Associate Editor for Algebraic Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 1976 to 1978, and as the Program Co-Chairman of the IEEE International Symposium of Information Theory held in Kobe, Japan, in June 1988. He was the President of the IEEE Information Theory Society in 1991. In 1996, he was a recipient of the Alexander von Humboldt Research Prize for U.S. Senior Scientists and a recipient of the IEEE Third Millennium Medal, 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

