380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Abstracts of Forthcoming Manuscripts

Kalman Filter-Trained Recurrent Neural Equalizers for Time-Varying Channels
Jongsoo Choi, Antonio C. De C. Lima, and Simon Haykin

A Decoding Algorithm for Finite-Geometry LDPC Codes Zhenyu Liu and Dimitris A. Pados

Abstract—Recurrent neural networks have been successfully applied to communications channel equalization because of their modeling capability for nonlinear dynamic systems. Major problems of gradient-descent learning techniques commonly employed to train recurrent neural networks are slow convergence rates and long training sequences required for satisfactory performance. This paper presents decision-feedback equalizers using a recurrent neural network trained with Kalman-filtering algorithms. The main features of the proposed recurrent neural equalizers, using the extended Kalman filter and the unscented Kalman filter, are fast convergence and good performance using relatively short training symbols. Experimental results for various time-varying channels are presented to evaluate the performance of the proposed approaches over a conventional recurrent neural equalizer.
J. Choi was with the Communications Research Laboratory, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada. He is now with the School of Information Technology and Engineering, University of Ottawa, ON, Canada.
A. C. De C. Lima is with the Electrical Engineering Department, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil.
S. Haykin is with the Communications Research Laboratory, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.841963

Abstract—In this paper, we develop a new low-complexity algorithm to decode low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The developments are oriented specifically toward low cost, yet effective, decoding of (high-rate) finite-geometry LDPC codes. The decoding procedure iteratively updates the hard-decision received vector in search of a valid codeword in the vector space. Only one bit is changed in each iteration, and the bit-selection criterion combines the number of failed checks and the reliability of the received bits. Prior knowledge of the signal amplitude and noise power is not required. An optional mechanism to avoid infinite loops in the search is also proposed. Our studies show that the algorithm achieves an appealing tradeoff between performance and complexity for finite-geometry LDPC codes.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.841964
Performance Analysis of Extended Carrier-Hopping Prime Codes for OCDMA
Guu-Chang Yang and Wing C. Kwong

On The Tradeoff Between Two Types of Processing Gain
Eran Fishler and H. Vincent Poor
Abstract—One of the features characterizing almost every multiple-access (MA) communication system is the processing gain. Through the use of spreading sequences, the processing gain of random code-division multiple-access (RCDMA) systems, or any other CDMA systems, is devoted to both bandwidth expansion and orthogonalization of the signals transmitted by different users. Another type of MA system is impulse radio (IR). IR systems promise to deliver high data rates over ultra wideband (UWB) channels with low-complexity transmitters and receivers. In many aspects, IR systems are similar to time-division MA systems, and the processing gain of IR systems represents the ratio between the actual transmission time and the total time between two consecutive transmissions (on-plus-off to on ratio). While CDMA systems, which constantly excite the channel, rely on spreading sequences to orthogonalize the signals transmitted by different users, IR systems transmit a series of short pulses, and the orthogonalization between the signals transmitted by different users is achieved by the fact that most of the pulses do not collide with each other at the receiver. In this paper, a general class of MA communication systems that use both types of processing gain is presented, and both IR and RCDMA systems are demonstrated to be special cases of this more general class of systems. The bit-error rate of several receivers as a function of the ratio between the two types of processing gain is analyzed and compared under the constraint that the total processing gain of the system is large and fixed. It is demonstrated that in non-intersymbol interference (ISI) channels, there is no tradeoff between the two types of processing gain. However, in ISI channels, a tradeoff between the two types of processing gain exists. In addition, the suboptimality of RCDMA in frequency-selective channels is established.
E. Fishler was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA.
H. V. Poor is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.841962

Abstract—A new class of two-dimensional (2-D) carrier-hopping prime codes with very good correlation properties and significantly expanded cardinality was recently constructed for wavelength-hopping time-spreading optical code-division multiple access (OCDMA). In this paper, the performance of the new codes is analyzed and compared with a carrier-grouping scheme of the original carrier-hopping prime codes. In addition, the traditional chip-synchronous assumption used in the performance analysis of OCDMA is removed, for the first time, for 2-D optical codes with cross-correlation functions of at most one, showing improvement and better accuracy in error probabilities.
G.-C. Yang is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Chung-Hsing University, Taichung 402, Taiwan, R.O.C.
W. C. Kwong is with the Department of Engineering, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY 11549 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.841948
Downlink Transmission of Broadband OFCDM Systems—Part I: Hybrid Detection
Yiqing Zhou, Jiangzhou Wang, and Mamoru Sawahashi
Abstract—The broadband orthogonal frequency- and code-division multiplexing (OFCDM) sytem with two-dimensional (2-D) spreading (timeand frequency-domain spreading) is becoming a very attractive technique for high-rate data transmission in future wireless communication systems. In this paper, a quasi-analytical study is presented on the downlink performance of the OFCDM system with hybrid multicode interference (MCI) cancellation and minimum mean-square error (MMSE) detection. The weights of MMSE are derived and updated stage by stage of MCI cancellation. The effects of channel-estimation errors and subcarrier correlation are also studied. It is shown that the hybrid detection scheme performs much better than pure MMSE when good channel estimation is guaranteed. The power ratio between the pilot channel and all data channels

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

