572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Codes on Finite Geometries
Heng Tang, Member, IEEE, Jun Xu, Member, IEEE, Shu Lin, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Khaled A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, Member, IEEE

Abstract—New algebraic methods for constructing codes based on hyperplanes of two different dimensions in finite geometries are presented. The new construction methods result in a class of multistep majority-logic decodable codes and three classes of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Decoding methods for the class of majority-logic decodable codes, and a class of codes that perform well with iterative decoding in spite of having many cycles of length
4 in their Tanner graphs, are presented. Most of the codes con-
structed can be either put in cyclic or quasi-cyclic form and hence their encoding can be implemented with linear shift registers.
Index Terms—Cyclic codes, Euclidean geometry, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, majority-logic decoding, projective geometry, quasi-cyclic codes, sum product algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
I NTEREST in low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, first introduced by Gallager in 1962 [1], has increased dramatically in the last five years, and is expected to continue to increase even more in the future. This is due to their near-Shannon limit (or capacity-approaching) performance when decoded iteratively [2]–[9]. Before the recent developments, LDPC codes were largely overlooked for almost 35 years after their invention by Gallager except for the notable work of Tanner [10] in 1981. Today, design, construction, decoding, and applications of these remarkable codes have become subjects of great interest to both coding theorists and practicing communication engineers. Another class of codes, finite-geometry codes, received considerable attention from coding researchers in the late 1960s and the early 1970s due to their reasonably good minimum distances and simple decoding with majority-logic. These codes are constructed based on geometries over finite fields [11]–[28]. However, finite-geometry codes became obscure in the last 30 years with the advancement of integrated circuits which allowed high-speed implementation of other more efficient codes, such as the Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) [29], [30] and Reed–Solomon codes [31], with relatively low cost. As both
Manuscript received March 11, 2002; revised September 27, 2004. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grants CCR-0096191, CCR-0117891, and ECS-0121469, and by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grants NAG 5-10480 and NAG 5-12789. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002.
H. Tang is with PMC-Sierra Inc., Portland, OR 97223 USA (e-mail: Heng_Tang@pmc-sierra.com).
J. Xu is with Marvell Semiconductor Inc., Sunnyvalle, CA 94089 USA (e-mail: jxu@marvell.com).
S. Lin and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: shulin@ece.ucdavis.edu; ghaffar@ece.ucdavis.edu).
Communicated by R. Urbanke, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.840867

classes of codes, LDPC codes and finite-geometry codes, have shared a long period of obscurity in the past, it is fair that the two share a better future.
Recently, Kou, Lin, and Fossorier [32], [33] discovered a class of LDPC codes, called finite-geometry LDPC codes, constructed based on lines and points of finite geometries. They showed that finite-geometry LDPC codes have good minimum distances and their Tanner graphs [10] are free of cycles of length . These properties allow them to perform well with iterative decoding using the sum–product algorithm (SPA) [6], [34], [35]. Long finite-geometry codes decoded with SPA perform close to Shannon’s theoretical limit, which is the minimum signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) required to achieve essentially error-free communication. This is the first class that includes codes with algebraic, rather than random, construction of increasing lengths with performance approaching the Shannon limit. A very important feature of finite-geometry LDPC codes is that they are either cyclic or quasi-cyclic. As a result, their encoding can be implemented in linear time with feedback shift registers [36]. Furthermore, finite-geometry LDPC codes can be decoded with various other decoding methods besides SPA, such as majority-logic (MLG) decoding, bit-flipping (BF) decoding [1], weighted MLG decoding, weighted BF decoding [33], and a posteriori probability (APP) decoding [1]. These decoding methods for finite-geometry LDPC codes range from low to high decoding complexity and from reasonably good error performance to very good error performance. Thus, they offer a wide range of tradeoffs among decoding complexity, decoding speed, and error performance. MLG and BF decodings are hard-decision decodings and can be easily implemented with hardware. They only require logical operations. An MLG decoder with hardware implementation can operate at very high speed in the gigabits per second (Gb/s) range. For long finite-geometry LDPC codes, both MLG and BF decodings achieve reasonably large coding gains over the uncoded system. Weighted MLG and BF decodings use soft information for received symbols to improve error performance over MLG and BF decodings, respectively. They require some real-number computations [33]. APP and SPA decodings are probabilistic decodings and they offer the best error performance. SPA, which is a locally iterative technique applied to the Tanner graph of the code, actually gives the same performance as APP when the graph is acyclic. Both decoding algorithms require extensive real-number computations causing long decoding delay. As a result, for long codes, they may not be suitable for very-high-speed applications, such as optical communication systems transmitting data at a rate of 10 or 40 Gb/s, even though they offer performance close to Shannon limit. In this case, MLG and BF decodings can be used.

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: CODES ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

573

The discovery of finite-geometry LDPC codes has two sig- in EG

is simply a -dimensional subspace of or its

nificant implications. First, it implies that algebraic construc- coset. Therefore, a -flat consists of points. A line is a

tion is also a viable method for constructing Shannon-limit-ap- -flat and a point is a -flat. A line consists of points. The

proaching codes, besides random construction. This implication all-zero -tuple is called the origin of the geometry. For

has encouraged coding theorists to investigate other algebraic

, there are

-flats contained

or combinatoric methods for constructing good LDPC codes. in a given -flat and

-flats containing

The second implication is that algebraically constructed LDPC a given -flat, where

codes in general possess structural properties which may sim-

plify hardware implementation of encoding and decoding. This

is achieved by using the regularity of the parity-check matrices

(1)

of the codes to make efficient use of memory and to reduce

the complexity of routing and interconnections. These implica- and tions motivate us to continue investigation of construction of fi-

nite-geometry codes that perform well with iterative decoding.

This paper presents new methods for constructing codes

(2)

based on finite geometries. It consists of five parts. The first

part presents a new class of multistep majority-logic decodable codes whose construction is based on hyperplanes of two different dimensions in finite geometries, such as Euclidean geometries and projective geometries over finite fields. Two multistep majority-logic decoding algorithms are devised for decoding these codes. The second part presents a class of regular LDPC codes whose construction is based on hyperplanes of two consecutive dimensions. Codes in this class have good minimum distances and their Tanner graphs are free of cycles of length . They perform well with iterative decoding. Furthermore, this new class of LDPC codes contains the finite-geometry LDPC codes discovered by Kou, Lin, and Fossorier [32], [33] as a subclass. The third part presents a class of Gallager-like LDPC codes whose construction is based on the parallel structure of hyperplanes in finite geometries. The fourth part presents a class of LDPC codes whose construction is based on the cyclic structure of hyperplanes of finite geometries. The fifth part investigates finite-geometry codes whose Tanner graphs contain cycles of length but perform well with iterative decoding. Most of the codes constructed in this paper can be put in either cyclic or quasi-cyclic form, and hence their encoding can be achieved with linear shift registers. We present

For

, two -flats are either disjoint (i.e., they do

not have any points in common) or they intersect on a flat of

smaller dimension. The largest flat that two -flats can intersect

on is a

-flat. The number of -flats that intersect on a

given

-flat is

. The -flats that

correspond to the cosets of a -dimensional subspace of (in-

cluding the subspace itself) are said to be parallel to each other

and form a parallel bundle. These parallel -flats are disjoint and

contain all the points of

with each point appearing

once and only once. The number of parallel -flats in a parallel

bundle is

.

The extension field GF

of GF is a realization of

[41]. Let be a primitive element of GF .

Then the elements

,

of

GF

represent the points of

, and repre-

sents the origin of the geometry.

The -dimensional projective geometry (PG) over GF ,

denoted PG

, consists also of points, lines, and hyper-

planes. A point in PG

is a nonzero

-tuple over

GF . For any nonzero

-tuple

over

GF , the

-tuples in the set

simulations of performance in terms of bit-error rate (BER) and block- or frame-error rate (FER) of codes over additive white

GF

(3)

Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels.

represent the same point

. The point

II. GEOMETRIES OVER FINITE FIELDS

set of size

may be regarded as the projection of this . Consequently, the -dimensional projective

This section gives a brief review of two families of finite ge- geometry PG

consists of

ometries: Euclidean and projective geometries over finite fields. points. Let

be

independent points in

Structural properties of these geometries that are relevant to the PG

. A -flat consists of points of the form

construction and decoding of codes are presented without proofs

or derivations. Excellent treatment of finite geometries can be

found in [37]–[40]. [41] also contains a relatively comprehen-

sive survey of these subjects.

where

are elements in GF and not simulta-

Let be a prime. For two positive integers and with neously zero. There are

choices of

and

, the -dimensional Euclidean geometry (excluding

). Since there are al-

(EG) over GF , denoted EG

, consists of points, lines, ways

choices of to resulting in the same point in

and hyperplanes. Each point is an -tuple over GF . There PG

, there are

points in a -flat

are points in EG

which actually form the vector of PG

. A line is a -flat and a point is a -flat. A line

space of all the -tuples over GF , denoted . For

consists of

points. A projective geometry does not have

, a -dimensional hyperplane (commonly called a -flat) an origin.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

For

, there are

contained in a given -flat and

containing a given -flat, where

-flats FG

, respectively. The -flats are ordered from to .

-flats Let be a -flat in FG

. Define an -tuple over GF

(7) (4)

whose components correspond to the -flats in FG

,

and

where

if and only if the th -flat of FG

is

contained in the -flat , and

otherwise. This -tuple

(5) is called the incidence vector of the -flat over the -flats

in FG

. This vector simply displays the -flats of

For

, two -flats in PG

are either disjoint

or they intersect on a flat of smaller dimension. The number of

-flats that intersect on a given

-flat is

. A projective geometry does not have the parallel bundle

structure.

The points of the -dimensional projective geometry

PG

can also be represented by the elements of the

extension field GF

of GF . Let be a primitive

element of GF

. Let

and

. Then the order of is

. The elements

form the ground field GF . For

, define

(6)

FG

contained in the -flat . The weight of is

, the number of -flats contained in .

Let

be the

matrix over GF

whose rows are the incidence vectors of all the -flats over

the -flats in FG

and whose columns correspond to

all the -flats in FG

. Each column simply displays

the -flats that contain a specific -flat. The th column is

called the covering vector of the th -flat. All the columns of

have the same weight

and all the rows of

have the same

weight

. The null space of

gives a multistep majority-logic decodable code, denoted

and called a type-I finite geometry (FG)

code. For

,

is in general small compared

Then (or simply ) represents a point in PG the elements in represent the same point in PG

(all to

. In this case,

is a

). sparse matrix and hence

is an LDPC code

(in general sense, i.e., its Tanner graph may contain cycles of

III. MULTISTEP MAJORITY-LOGIC DECODABLE CODES AND DECODING

In this section, we present a new class of multistep majority-

logic decodable codes whose construction is based on the hy-

perplanes of two different dimensions in finite geometries. This

class of codes contains the finite-geometry majority-logic de-

codable codes discovered in the late 1960s and early 1970s

[11]–[25], [41] as subclasses. Also presented in this section

are methods for decoding this new class of codes. [41] con-

tains an extensive treatment of majority-logic decodable codes

and decoding. Recall that a set of parity-check sums given by

a parity-check matrix of a code is said to be orthogonal on a

given code bit if each of the parity-check sums include the code

bit but no other code bit is included in more than one of these

parity-check sums. If for each code bit there are parity-check

sums that are orthogonal on it, then the code is majority-logic

decodable up to

bit errors. Hence, the minimum distance

length ).

Let

be the transpose of

. The null space of

gives another multistep majority-logic decodable code, denoted

and called a type-II FG code.

The subclass of the type-I FG codes with

and

is the class of FG codes discovered in the late

1960s [11]–[19], [41]. For

and

, the type-I

FG code

constructed based on the -di-

mensional Euclidean geometry EG

over GF is the

th–order Reed–Muller code [42]–[44]. For

,

the type-I FG code,

, constructed based on

the two-dimensional projective geometry (a projective plane)

PG

is a difference-set code [11], [13], [41].

For a type-I EG code on the -flats over points in EG form [15], [41]. This is done by

constructed based , it can be put in cyclic

is at least

.

1) removing the column in the parity-check matrix

A. The Codes

EG

;

that corresponds to the origin of

Codes can be constructed based on both Euclidean and 2) removing all the rows in

that corre-

projective geometries. In the following, we present a uni-

spond to the -flats containing (or passing through) the

fied approach to the construction. For this purpose, we use

origin of EG

;

FG

to denote either EG

or PG

. We 3) arranging the columns of

in the order

also use

and

to denote the

of

, where is a primitive ele-

number of -flats contained in a given -flat and the number

ment of GF

(i.e, the incidence vector of a -flat

of -flats containing a given -flat, respectively, in an -di-

over points in EG

is a

-tuple over

mensional finite geometry FG

.

GF whose components correspond to the nonorigin

For

, let

and

points of EG

in the order

, see

be the numbers of -flats and -flats in

Appendix A).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: CODES ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

575

This results in a new parity-check matrix

and (5) that this minimum is attained for . As a result, the

whose null space gives a binary cyclic EG code minimum distance of the type-I FG code

. This code is then characterized by is at least

[41].

its generator polynomial [41], [44].

The type-I PG code

can also be put

in cyclic form by ordering the columns of its parity-check C. Multistep Majority-Logic Decoding of Type-II FG Codes

matrix corresponding to the points of PG

in the order

where is a primitive element of

GF

and

. The generator

polynomial of this code in cyclic form can be found in [41].

Decoding of a type-II FG code

is also

carried out in

steps using majority-logic decoding but

in the opposite direction. First,

error sums are

formed by taking the inner products of a received vector with

B. Multistep Majority-Logic Decoding of Type-I FG Codes

We first consider the decoding of the type-I FG code

. This code can be decoded in

steps using majority-logic decoding [41], [44], [45]. First,

the syndromes are computed. These syndromes are the

error sums formed by taking the inner prod-

ucts of a (hard-decision) received vector with the rows of the

parity-check matrix

. Each of these error

sums is the sum of errors at the locations that correspond to the

-flats contained in a -flat, and is called a -flat error sum.

From these -flat error sums, we estimate all the

-flat

error sums. Each of these

-flat error sums is the sum of

errors at the locations that correspond to the -flats contained

in a

-flat. The estimate of this sum is equal to the

value assumed by the majority of the -flat error sums corre-

sponding to the -flats containing the

-flat. Once all

the

-flat error sums are computed, we estimate all the

-flat error sums based on the computed

-flat

error sums. This process continues and at the

th step,

all the error digits at the locations corresponding to the -flats

are estimated based on the

-flat error sums. At each

step, the estimation of error sums from the error sums computed

at the previous step is carried out based on the intersecting

structure of flats of one dimension on the flats of the next lower

dimension.

For

, we notice that for each

-flat

in FG

, there are

-flats

in FG

that intersect on . Furthermore, no two distinct

-flats intersecting on can have another

-flat

in common, i.e., they intersect on one and only one

-flat.

As a result, the incidence vectors of these

-flats are orthogonal on (see [41,

Ch. 8]). Consider the sum of errors at the locations corre-

sponding to the -flats contained in , which is a

-flat

error sum. This error sum can be correctly estimated by the

error sums of the

-flats

that intersect on using the orthogonality concept and the

majority-logic decision principle [41], [45] provided that the

received vector contains no more than

the rows of

. Each of these error sums is

the sum of errors at the locations corresponding to the -flats

that contain a specific -flat, and is called a -flat error sum

on -flats. At the first step of decoding, we estimate all the

-flat error sums on -flats. For each

-flat ,

there are

-flats contained in . No two

of these -flats can be contained in another

-flat other

than . The error sums of these

-flats

are orthogonal on the sum of errors at the locations cor-

responding to the -flats that contain . From these

-flat error sums on -flats, the error

sum of the

-flat on -flats can be correctly es-

timated provided that the received vector contains no more

than

errors. Once all the

-flat

error sums on -flats have been computed, we proceed to

estimate all the

-flat error sums on -flats in the

same manner. This process continues and at the

th

step, the error at the location corresponding to each -flat is

estimated. All the error bits are correctly estimated provided

that the number of channel errors does not exceed the minimum

of

for

.

It follows from (1) and (4) that this minimum is attained for

. Consequently, the minimum distance of the code is at

least

.

Example 1: Let

,

,

, and

.

The three-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

consists

of 512 points and

584 two-flats. There are

511 two-flats not containing the origin of the geometry. For each

of these two-flats not containing the origin, form its incidence

vector over the 511 nonorigin points of EG

with com-

ponents arranged in the order of

, where is

a primitive element of GF

. Using the incidence vectors

of the two-flats not containing the origin as the rows of a ma-

trix, we obtain a

matrix

with row

and column weights . The null space of this matrix gives the

type-I cyclic EG code

which is a

code with minimum distance at least and rate

. This

code is capable of correcting four or fewer errors with two-step

MLG decoding. For the generator polynomial of this code, see

Appendix B. Its bit and block error performances with MLG de-

coding are shown in Fig. 1. It achieves 3.4-dB coding gain over

the uncoded binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) at the BER of

errors. Thus, after applying

steps of majority-logic

. Later in another example, we will show that this code

decoding, numbered

, the bit errors can performs well with iterative decoding. Indeed, with iterative

be correctly estimated provided that the number of channel decoding using SPA, this code achieves an additional 1.8-dB

errors does not exceed the minimum of

coding gain over the simple hard-decision MLG decoding at the

for

. It follows from (2) BER of .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

576

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Fig. 1. Error performance of the (511; 448) type-I EG code in Example 1.

Example 2: Let

,

,

, and

.

The three-dimensional projective geometry PG

consists

of 585 points and 585 two-flats. Form the incidence vectors of

the 585 two-flats over the 585 points in PG

. Use these

incidence vectors to form the matrix

which

is a

matrix with row and column weights . The

null space of this matrix gives a

PG code with rate

and minimum distance at least . It is two-step MLG

decodable and is capable of correcting four or fewer errors. It

can be put in cyclic form if the components of the incidence

vectors of the two-flats over points are arranged in the order

of

, where is a primitive element of

GF

and

, For the generator polynomial of this

code in cyclic form, see Appendix B. Its bit and block error

performances with two-step MLG decoding are shown in Fig. 2.

It achieves a 2.8-dB coding gain over the uncoded BPSK at the

BER of . As will be shown in a later example, this PG code

also performs well with iterative decoding. At the BER of ,

it achieves 2.5-dB additional coding gain over the simple MLG

decoding.

Example 3: Let

,

,

,

, and

. The four-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

has 5440 one-flats and 340 three-flats. The type-I EG code

constructed based on the three-flats over the

one-flats in EG

is a

code with minimum

distance at least and rate . This code is two-step MLG

decodable and is capable of correcting two or fewer errors. Its

bit and block error performances are shown in Fig. 3.

Example 4: This example gives a type-II EG code. Let

,

,

,

, and

. The six-di-

mensional Euclidean geometry EG consists of 64 points,

2016 one-flats and 11 160 three-flats. The parity-check matrix

of the type-II EG code

consists of the incidence vectors of all the three-flats over the

one-flats in EG as the columns. The null space of this

matrix gives a

two-step MLG decodable code

with rate

and minimum distance at least . Its bit and

block error performances with MLG decoding are shown in

Fig. 4.

D. Quasi-Cyclic Structure

In general, most of the type-I and type-II finite geometry

codes,

and

, can be

put in quasi-cyclic form as shown in Appendix A. This is ac-

complished by grouping the flats of two different dimensions of

a finite geometry into cyclic classes. For a EG, only the flats not

passing through the origin are used for code construction. Each

cyclic class consists of

-flats (or -flats), and all

the flats in a class can be obtained by cyclic shifting any flat (its

points) in the class. In forming the parity-check matrix, the rows

are grouped based on the cyclic classes of flats of one dimen-

sion and the columns are grouped based on the cyclic classes

of flats of another dimension. Based on this grouping of rows

and columns, the parity-check matrix of a finite-geometry code,

type-I or type-II, consists of square

subma-

trices, and each of these square submatrices is a circulant mat-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: CODES ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

577

Fig. 2. Error performance of the (585; 520) type-I PG code in Example 2.

Fig. 3. Error performance of the (5440; 5295) type-I EG code in Example 3. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

578

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Fig. 4. Error performance of the (11160; 10298) type-II EG code in Example 4.

rix in which each row is a cyclic shift of the row above it and each row has weight

. The density

and the first row is the cyclic shift of the last row. Therefore, of

, defined as the ratio of the total

the parity-check matrix is an array of circulants and its null number of -entries to the total number of entries in

space gives a quasi-cyclic code [41]. This quasi-cyclic struc-

, is

ture makes the encoding of a code very easy. Encoding can

be accomplished in linear time and implemented with linear

shift-registers [36], [44].

(or

). It follows from (1), (2),

IV. FINITE-GEOMETRY LDPC CODES

(4), and (5) that

which can be made very small

by choosing , , , and properly. Therefore,

A very special subclass of the class of FG codes presented in Section III is the class of codes whose construction is based on the hyperplanes of two consecutive dimensions in finite geometries. This subclass of codes gives a large family of LDPC codes whose Tanner graphs are free of cycles of length , and hence

is a sparse -regular and row weight , respectively. The null space of FG-LDPC code imum distance at least

matrix with column weight
gives a type-I of length and min-
. It follows from

have a girth of at least .

(2) and (5) that the minimum distances and of the

Consider the -dimensional finite-geometry FG

over type-I EG- and PG-LDPC codes are lower-bounded as follows,

GF . For

, set

and

. The respectively:

matrix

has all the incidence vectors

of the -flats over the

-flats in FG

as its rows.

(8)

Therefore, the rows and the columns of

and

correspond to the

-flats and the

-flats in FG

, respectively.

(9)

Due to the intersecting structural property of flats, no two

distinct -flats intersecting on a

-flat can have an- For the special case with

, the subclass of type-I

other

-flat in common, i.e., they intersect on one FG-LDPC codes is the class of type-I FG-LDPC codes con-

and only one

-flat. Consequently, no two rows (or structed based on the lines and points of FG

, which was

two columns) of

can have more than discovered by Kou, Lin, and Fossorier [32], [33].

“ -component” in common. From Section III-A, each column Since FG-LDPC codes constructed based on flats of two con-

of

has weight

secutive dimensions in finite geometries form a subclass of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: CODES ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

579

Fig. 5. Error performance of the (4672; 4272) type-I EG code in Example 5.

FG codes presented in Section III, most of them can be put in is

. Form the parity-check matrix

quasi-cyclic form (see Appendix A).

Let

be the transpose of

Then

is a

-reg-

ular

matrix which has the same density as that of

and is also a sparse matrix. The null

space of

gives a type-II FG-LDPC code,

, of length whose Tanner graph is free

of cycles of length . Both type-I and type-II FG-LDPC codes

have the same number of parity-check bits. The minimum dis-

tance of

is at least

.

It follows from (1) and (4) that the minimum distances and

of the type-II EG- and PG-LDPC codes are lower-bounded

as follows, respectively:

whose rows are the incidence vectors of

the 584 two-flats over the 4672 one-flats in EG

. Hence,

is a

matrix with row weight

and column weight

. The null space of this matrix

gives the type-I EG-LDPC code

which is a

code with minimum distance at least

and rate . Its bit and block error performances with SPA

are shown in Fig. 5. At the BER of , it performs within 1

dB from the Shannon limit. The transpose of

is a

matrix

with row weight

and column weight . The null space of this matrix gives a

type-II EG-LDPC code

with rate

and minimum distance at least . Its bit and block error

(10) performances with SPA are shown in Fig. 6. Suppose we split

each column of

into 18 columns of the same

and

length with column weight uniformly distributed among the

new columns in a rotating manner such that each new column (11) has weight [32]. This column splitting results in a new matrix

For the special case with

, the subclass of type-II

FG-LDPC codes is the class of type-II FG-LDPC codes con-

structed based on lines and points of FG

, which was dis-

covered by Kou, Lin, and Fossorier [32], [33].

Example 5: Let

,

and

. The

which is a

matrix with

column weight and row weight . The null space of this

extended matrix gives a

LDPC code with rate

and minimum distance at least . The bit and block error

performances of this code are also shown in Fig. 6.

three-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

consists Example 6: Let

,

, and

. The

of

584 two-flats and

three-dimensional projective geometry PG

contains 585

4672 one-flats (lines). Each two-flat contains 72 one-flats two-flats and 4745 one-flats. Each two-flat consists of 73 one-

and the number of two-flats that intersect on a given one-flat flats and there are nine two-flats intersecting on a given one-flat.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

580

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Fig. 6. Error performances of the (584; 184) type-II EG code and its (10512; 5841) extended code in Example 5.

Form the matrix

whose rows are the inci- we form its parity-check matrix

which con-

dence vectors of the two-flats over the one-flats in PG

. sists of the incidence vectors of all the two-flats over the one-

This matrix is a

regular matrix with column and flats in EG

as its rows. This matrix is a

row weights and , respectively. The null space of this ma- matrix with row weight and column weight . The null

trix gives the type-I PG-LDPC code

which is space gives a

EG-LDPC code with rate

a

code with rate

and minimum distance at and minimum distance at least . The bit and block error per-

least . Its bit and block error performances are shown in Fig. 7. formances of this code are shown in Fig. 9. Suppose we split

At the BER of , it performs 1 dB from the Shannon limit. each column of

into four columns of the same

Example 7: This example gives a type-II EG-LDPC code.

Let

,

,

, and

. The three-dimen-

sional Euclidean geometry EG

over GF has 343

points and 2793 lines. To construct the type-II EG-LDPC

code

, we form its parity-check matrix

which consists of the incidence vectors of

all the 2793 lines over points in EG as columns. It is a

matrix with row weight and column weight

. The null space of this matrix gives the type-II EG-LDPC

code

which is a

code with rate

and minimum distance at least . Its bit and block error

performances with SPA are shown in Fig. 8. At the BER of

, it performs 1.7 dB away from the Shannon limit. Also

included in Fig. 8 are the error performances of the code with

MLG and BF decodings.

length with the column weight distributed among the four

new columns in a rotating manner, three columns with weight

and one column with weight and split each row of the resul-

tant matrix into eight rows in the same manner, each row with

weight . This column-and-row splitting results in a new ma-

trix

with 279 552 columns. The null space

of this new matrix gives a

LDPC code with

rate

and minimum distance at least . The bit and block

error performances of this code are shown in Fig. 9. At the

BER of , it performs only 0.6 dB away from the Shannon

limit. If we only split each column of

into

four columns as above without splitting the rows, we obtain a

matrix. The null space of this matrix gives a

LDPC code with rate , which performs

only 0.35 dB away from the Shannon limit at the BER of

with SPA. This example simply shows that long LDPC codes

Example 8: Let

,

,

, and

.

The three-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

contains

69 888 one-flats and 4368 two-flats. Each two-flat contains 272

one-flats and there are 17 two-flats that intersect on a given one-

flat. To construct the type-I EG-LDPC code

,

constructed based on hyperplanes of finite geometry do perform

close to the Shannon limits.

In the design of LDPC codes for some practical applications,

a major concern is where does the error floor occur. If the re-

quired BER is very small, say

for 10 G BASE-T Ethernet

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: CODES ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

581

Fig. 7. Error performance of the (4745; 4344) type-I PG code in Example 6.

Fig. 8. Error performance of the (2793; 2450) type-II EG code in Example 7. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

582

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Fig. 9. Error performances of the (69888; 67088) type-I EG code and its (279552; 244608) and (279552; 275184) extended codes in Example 8.

or

for hard-disc drives, a code with a very low error floor proposed in [46], the error floor of this code is predicted to occur

is needed. The error floor of an LDPC code with iterative de- below the BER of

, which is a very low error floor.

coding depends on a number of structural properties of the code

and its Tanner graph, such as girth, minimum weight, weight distribution of pseudocodewords [46], [47], and others. It is unknown how the error floor of an LDPC code is exactly affected by these factors. However, experimental results show that if a code has a large minimum distance and the minimum weight of pseudocodewords is also large (say equal or close to the minimum distance of the code), then the code has a low error floor.

V. GALLAGER-LIKE LDPC CODES
LDPC codes can be constructed by grouping the -flats in an EG into parallel bundles. This construction results in a class of codes in a form very much like Gallager’s original construction for LDPC codes [1].
Let be a positive integer greater than . For any choice of

LDPC codes with large minimum distances can be constructed from finite geometries. These codes are good candidates for low error floor. It follows from results in [47] and [48] that a two-dimensional binary PG-LDPC code has no pseudocodewords with weight less than its minimum distance, which is exactly [33]. In the following, we give an example to demonstrate that a FG-LDPC code with a large minimum distance can have a very low error floor.

Example 9: Let

,

,

and

sider the two-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

. Conover

and , Gallager gave a general construction of the parity-check

matrix of an LDPC code. The parity-check matrix is

a

matrix over GF which consists of submatrices,

. Each submatrix is a

matrix with

constant row weight and constant column weight . The first

submatrix is constructed as follows: for

, the th

row contains all its “ones” in column

to . Then

the other

submatrices, to , are simply obtained by

permuting the columns of . The overall parity-check matrix

of a Gallager code is given by

GF . This geometry contains 1024 points and 1056 lines.

Each line consists of 32 points. The incidence vectors of these

lines can be used to form a

parity-check matrix

with column and row weights and , re-

...

(12)

spectively. The null space of this matrix gives a

LDPC code

with rate

and minimum This matrix is a -regular matrix with density . For large

weight exactly [33]. The bit and frame error performances of , it is a sparse matrix. The null space of this matrix gives a Gal-

this code with SPA are shown in Fig. 10. At the BER of , lager LDPC code . Gallager did not provide any specific

it performs 1.65 dB from the Shannon limit. Using the method method for designing the

permutations to permute the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: CODES ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

583

Fig. 10. Error performance of the (1024; 781) type-I EG code and its predicted error floor in Example 9.

columns of the submatrix to obtain the other

sub- are disjoint (no points in common), no two incidence vec-

matrices such that the Tanner graph of is free of short cy- tors of two -flats in can have any “ -component” in

cles and the code has a good minimum distance. He simply sug- common. Consequently, the weight of a column in

is

gested random permutations of the columns of to form the either or . For

, we can easily show that all the

other submatrices. For large and small and , is a columns of

have weight . For any

,

very sparse matrix and the probability that its associated Tanner we can use such matrices, say

,

graph contains short cycles is very small. Gallager codes are as submatrices to form a

matrix

mostly generated by computers based on some design rules and

in the form given by (12). The

guidelines that ensure their Tanner graphs do not contain short density of this matrix is less than

which can

cycles, especially cycles of length .

be made very small by choosing , , , and properly. The

Consider the -dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

null space of

gives an LDPC

over GF . As presented in Section II, for

, all the code of length

, called a Gallager-like LDPC

-flats in EG

can be partitioned into parallel bundles. code and denoted

. Since two

Each parallel bundle consists of

parallel -flats. -flats in EG

intersect on at most one

-flat in

There are

EG

, no two rows in

can

have more than one “ -entry” in common. This ensures that a

(13) Gallager-like LDPC code does not contain cycles of length in its Tanner graph. A Gallager-like code is in general irregular

parallel bundles of -flats where

is given by

(1). Denote these parallel bundles of -flats by

.

For each parallel bundle , form a

matrix

whose rows are the incidence vectors of the

-flats in over the

-flats in EG

.

Therefore, the rows and columns of

correspond to

the -flats in the parallel bundle and the

-flats in

EG

, respectively. It follows from the definition of the

incidence vector of a -flat over

-flats in a finite geom-

etry that the weight of each row of

is

(constant row weight but various column weights) except for

the special case

.

The column weight of

is at

most . It is possible that some columns in

are zero columns. In this case, we simply

remove these zero columns. Or we can remove columns

from

by choosing a min-

imum column weight. Let

be a nonnegative integer

such that

. Delete all the columns in

with weights less than .

as given by (1). Since the -flats in each parallel bundle

This results in a new matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

584

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Fig. 11. Error performances of the (7128; 6588) and the (6156; 5616) Gallager-like EG codes in Example 10.

with maximum and minimum column weights, and ,

, each consists of nine parallel two-flats. For

respectively. The null space of this matrix gives a shortened each parallel bundle of two-flats, we can form a

Gallager-like LDPC code with minimum distance at least matrix

whose rows are the incidence vectors of the

.

nine two-flats in over the 7371 lines in EG

. The

For any choice of , , , and , we can form a sequence row weight of

is and the column weight of

of Gallager-like LDPC codes of various rates and minimum is either or . For

, choosing any matrices,

distances with

. For

, the Gallager- say

, we can form a

like code

is the type-I EG-LDPC matrix

. The null space of this matrix

code

. For

, we obtain a sequence

of codes exactly in Gallager form, called Gallager EG-LDPC

codes which have been recently discovered by Tang et al. [49].

For this special case, every parallel bundle consists of

lines parallel to each other. These parallel lines contain

all the points in EG

, each point appears once and

only once. The matrix

has the incidence vectors of the

lines in the parallel bundle over the points in EG

as

rows.

has constant row weight

(the number of points on a line) and constant column weight

. Therefore, it is exactly in Gallager’s original form for a sub-

matrix of the parity-check matrix of an LDPC code. Using

of these matrices as submatrices, we can form a -regular

parity-check matrix whose null space gives a regular Gallager

LDPC code.

Projective geometries do not have parallel structure and hence

we cannot construct Gallager-like codes from these geometries.

Example 10: Let

,

,

, and

.

The three-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

over

GF consists of 729 points, 7371 lines, and 819 two-flats.

The 819 two-flats can be partitioned into 91 parallel bundles,

or its punctured version gives a Gallager-like EG-LDPC code

whose Tanner graph is free of cycles of length . Suppose we

choose

. Then the matrix

has

row weight and column weights ranging from to . If

we remove from

all the columns of

weight , we obtain a punctured matrix with column weights

ranging from to and row weights ranging from to .

The null space of this punctured matrix gives a

Gallager-like LDPC code of rate

and minimum distance

at least . If all columns of weight are further removed, we

obtain a matrix with column weights ranging from to

and row weights ranging from to . The null space of this

matrix gives a

Gallager-like LDPC code of rate

and minimum distance at least . The error performances

of the above two Gallager-like codes are shown in Fig. 11. At

the BER of , the

and the

codes

perform 1.2 and 1.34 dB away from their respective Shannon

limits.

Example 11: Again we consider the two-dimensional Eu-

clidean geometry EG

given in Example 9. The lines

in this geometry can be partitioned into 33 parallel bundles,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: CODES ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

585

Fig. 12. Error performance of the (1024; 821) Gallager EG code and its predicted error floor in Example 11.

. Each parallel bundle consists of 32 parallel

lines and all the 1024 points. For each parallel bundle , we

form a

matrix

with constant column weight

and constant row weight . Choose

. Form a

matrix

with

as

submatrices as shown in (12). The null space of this matrix

gives a

Gallager EG-LDPC code with rate

and minimum distance at least . The performance of this

code with SPA is shown in Fig. 12. At the BER of , it

performs 1.75 dB from the Shannon limit. Its predicted error

floor is below the BER of

. If we choose

, we

obtain the

LDPC code given in Example 9. If we

choose

, we obtain a

Gallager EG-LDPC

code with rate

and minimum distance at least . The

error performance of this code is shown in Fig. 13. At the BER

of , it performs 1.6 dB from the Shannon limit. The error

floor of this code is predicted around the BER of

.

Examples 9 and 11 show that as we increase the minimum distance, or its lower bound based on the column weight, of a Gallager-like FG-LDPC code, we push the error-floor down. Whether this is true for FG-LDPC codes in general is unknown at this time. Further investigation is needed.

VI. CONSTRUCTION OF LDPC CODES BASED ON CYCLIC STRUCTURE OF HYPERPLANES IN FINITE GEOMETRIES

This construction gives another class of finite-geometry LDPC

codes.

Consider the -dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

.

As presented in Section II, the Galois field GF

as an ex-

tension field of GF is a realization of EG

. Let

be a primitive element of GF . Then

,

represent the points in EG

,

where represents the origin of the geometry. For

,

let be a -flat in EG

which does not pass through (or

contain) the origin of the geometry. Then consists of

nonorigin points of EG

, say

,

and

(14)

is also a -flat not passing through the origin of the geometry

(see Appendix A). It can be shown that for

,

. Therefore,

are

different

-flats (see Appendix A). There are

(15)

-flats in EG

not passing through the origin. These

-flats can be partitioned into

(16)

LDPC codes can also be constructed by grouping the flats cyclic classes, denoted

, each containing

of a given dimension in a finite geometry into cyclic classes.

-flats not passing through the origin.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

586

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Fig. 13. Error performance of the (1024; 833) Gallager EG code and its predicted error-floor in Example 11.

For each cyclic class of -flats in EG

, form a ma-

trix

whose rows are the incidence vectors of the -flats

in over the

-flats in EG

not passing through

the origin. Therefore, the rows and columns of

corre-

spond to the -flats in and the

-flats in EG

not passing through the origin, respectively. It has constant row

weight

but various column weights in

general. Based on the cyclic classes of -flats not passing

through the origin of EG

, we can form matrices,

. For

, we can take

such matrices, say

, to form a matrix

...

(17)

For a given choice of , , , and , we can construct a se-

quence of LDPC codes for

of the same length

with different rates and minimum distances. For the special case

with

consists of

lines in EG

not

passing through the origin. The incidence vectors of the lines in

over nonzero points in EG

, ordered as consecutive

powers of , have the property that a cyclic shift of the inci-

dence vector of a line in is the incidence vector of another

line in . Consequently, the matrix

formed by using the

incidence vectors of lines in can be arranged as a circulant.

The set of columns is the same as the set of rows in reverse

order. Therefore, the columns of

are also the incidence

vectors of the lines in . Both row and column weights are .

In this case,

is a cyclic code. This special

case has been recently discovered by Tang et al. [49]. There-

fore, the construction presented here is a generalization of their

construction.

Here, the subscript denotes the cyclic structure. This matrix Example 12: Let

,

,

, and

. The

has constant row weight

(given by four-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

consists of

(1)) but various column weights. The density of this matrix is 5355 two-flats and 5355 one-flats not passing through the origin,

which can be made respectively. The two-flats can be partitioned into 21 cyclic

very small by choosing , , , and properly. Therefore, classes. Suppose we take six cyclic classes for code construc-

is a sparse matrix. The null space tion. We obtain a

matrix

of this matrix gives an LDPC code

. with row weight and column weights to . The null space

Since the rows are incidence vectors of a set of -flats over the of this matrix gives a

LDPC code with rate

-flats in EG

, no two rows can have more than one whose Tanner graph does not contain cycles of length . It is an

“ -component” in common. This ensures that the Tanner graph irregular LDPC code. Its bit and block error performances are

of the code is free of cycles of length .

shown in Fig. 14. At the BER of , it performs 1.7 dB away

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: CODES ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

587

Fig. 14. Error performances of the (5355; 3852) and (4845; 3342) EG codes in Example 12.

from the Shannon limit. Suppose we remove all the columns rate very close to . Its bit and block error performances are

of weight from the parity-check matrix

. shown in Fig. 15. At the BER of , it performs 1.2 dB away

We obtain a punctured

matrix. The null space of from the Shannon limit.

this matrix gives a minimum distance at least shown in Fig. 14.

LDPC code with rate

and

whose error performance is also

Construction of LDPC codes based on the cyclic structure of

hyperplanes in a projective geometry PG

can be done in

a similar manner. It has been shown in [50] that if the number

Example 13: Let

,

,

, and

. The of points of a -flat and the number of points in the whole

lines in EG

can be partitioned into ten cyclic classes, geometry PG

are relatively prime, then the -flats in

, and each class consists of 728 lines. For each PG

can be partitioned into

cyclic class , we can form a

circulant matrix

whose rows (or columns) are the incidence vectors of the

lines in over the points in EG

. Both column and row cyclic classes, each cyclic class consists of

weights of

are

. Suppose we split each column -flats.

of

into nine columns of the same length such that each

new column has weight . This results in a

ex-

tended matrix

with constant row weight and con-

stant column weight . For

, suppose we take ex-

VII. ITERATIVE DECODING OF FINITE-GEOMETRY CODES WITH CYCLES OF LENGTH

tended matrices, matrix

, to form a Except for the special case for which the codes are constructed based on hyperplanes of two consecutive dimensions,

finite-geometry codes in general contain many short cycles,

especially cycles of length , in their Tanner graphs. These short

...

(18) cycles cause decoding correlations after few decoding iterations when using SPA, and hence may prevent the decoding from

converging to maximum-likelihood decoding (MLD). It is a

This matrix has column and row weights and , respectively. general belief that codes with cycles of length in their Tanner

It is exactly in Gallager form of the parity-check matrix of an graphs perform poorly with SPA. In this section, we show that

LDPC code. The null space of this matrix gives a regular Gal- this is not necessarily true. We show that some finite-geometry

lager EG-LDPC code of length with minimum distance at codes with millions of cycles of length in their Tanner graphs

least

. Let

. We obtain a

code with do perform well with SPA.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

588

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Fig. 15. Error performance of the (6552; 4370) Gallager EG code in Example 13.

A. Iterative Decoding of Codes

Consider the type-I cyclic EG code

of

length

constructed based on the two-flats not

passing through the origin over the nonorigin points in the -di-

mensional Euclidean geometry EG

. The Tanner graph of

this EG code contains

(19)

cycles of length (see Appendix C for derivation) where

is the binomial coefficient. For the type-I PG code , the number of cycles of length
contained in its Tanner graph is given in (20) at the bottom of the page.

Example 14: Consider the type-I cyclic

EG code

given in Example 1. From (19), we find that the Tanner graph

of this code contains 3 605 616 cycles of length and each code

bit vertex is on 14 112 of these cycles. If this code is decoded

with SPA, then after two decoding iterations, the subsequent decoding iterations should become very much correlated and one would expect that the decoding process will not converge and the decoding performance will be very poor. Surprisingly, the error performance of this code with SPA turns out to be very good as shown in Fig. 16. No error floor is observed for BERs down to . At the BER of , the code performs only 2 dB from the Shannon limit. For such a short code, this result is very impressive. Also included in Fig. 16 are the bit error performances of this code with the simple MLG and BF decodings and the bit error performance of a computer generated LDPC code of the same length and the same rate with SPA. We see that the code outperforms the computer-generated LDPC code, and it achieves 1.8-dB coding gain over the simple MLG decoding at the BER of . A factor that contributes to the good error performance of this code with SPA is the large row and column weights of its parity-check matrix, both . At each decoding iteration, 64 messages from check sums are passed to each code bit and 64 messages from code bits are passed to each check sum. Therefore, for decoding a code bit, contributions from many other code bits are received at each iteration. Also, its large minimum distance helps the decoding convergence and prevents the error floor from occuring at a high BER.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(20)

TANG et al.: CODES ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

589

Fig. 16. Error performances of the (511; 448) type-I EG code with various decodings and a computer generated code decoded with SPA in Example 14.

Example 15: Consider the

type-I PG code given

in Example 2. From (20), we find that the Tanner graph of this

code consists of 6 149 520 cycles of length and each code

bit vertex is on 21 024 of these cycles. The bit error perfor-

mance of this code decoded with SPA is depicted in Fig. 17.

Again we see that this code performs very well. At the BER of

, it performs 1.8 dB away from the Shannon limit. Also in-

cluded in Fig. 17 are the performances of the code with MLG

and BF decodings and the error performance of a computer

generated LDPC code. It outperforms the computer-generated

LDPC code and achieves 2.5- and 1.6-dB coding gains over the

hard-decision MLG and BF decodings, respectively, at the BER

of . The three decoding methods for the

PG

code provides a tradeoff among the decoding complexity, de-

coding delay, and error performance.

Example 16: This example gives a longer EG code. Let

,

,

,

, and

. Consider the

type-I EG code

constructed based on the

three-flats over one-flats both not passing through the origin

in the four-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

. This

code is a

two-step MLG decodable code with

minimum distance at least and rate . The parity-check

matrix of this code has all the incidence vectors of three-flats

over one-flats in EG

as rows. It is a

matrix

with row and column weights, and , respectively. The

performance of this code with SPA is shown in Fig. 18. At

the BER of , it performs within 1.1 dB away from the

Shannon limit although its Tanner graph contains millions of

cycles of length .

Short cycles in the Tanner graph of a finite-geometry code

can be removed or reduced in number by splitting the columns

and/or rows of the parity-check matrix of the code as suggested

in [33]. By doing this, we obtain an extended code which may

perform very well with SPA. For example, we consider the

code given in Example 14. Suppose we split each

column of its parity-check matrix into 16 columns of the same

length, each with weight . We obtain a

code with

rate

. The error performance of this extended code with

SPA is shown in Fig. 19. We see that at the BER of , it

performs within 0.9 dB away from the Shannon limit.

Codes that perform well with iterative decoding can also be

constructed by partitioning the flats of certain dimension in an

Euclidean geometry into parallel bundles. Consider the parallel

bundles of -flats,

, in EG

. For the par-

allel bundle , we form a

matrix

whose

rows are the incidence vectors of the -flats in over the points

in EG

. Therefore, the rows and columns of this matrix

correspond to the -flats in and the points in EG

, re-

spectively. Each row of

has weight (the number of

points in a -flat) and each column of

has weight . So

is exactly in the form of a submatrix of the parity-check

matrix of a Gallager LDPC code. For

, form a

matrix

using of the

matrices

, say

...

(21)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

590

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Fig. 17. Error performances of the (585; 520) type-I PG code with various decodings and a computer-generated code decoded with SPA in Example 15.

Fig. 18. Error performance of the (5355,5227) EG code in Example 16 decoded with SPA. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: CODES ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

591

Fig. 19. Error performances of the (511; 448) type-I EG code in Example 14 and its (8176; 7666) extended code decoded with SPA.

The row and column weights of this matrix are and , re-

spectively. Let

be the null space of this

matrix. For

, if two -flats are not disjoint, they intersect

on at most one

-flat which contains

points. There-

fore, two rows in

from two different

submatrices may have

“ -components ” in common.

Consequently, the Tanner graph of

may contain many cycles of length . The parity-check matrix

is in Gallager’s form.

performance between

and

is less than 0.3 dB

at the BER of . The difference in performance between

and

is less than 0.1 dB at the BER of .

In fact, for these three ’s, their performance curves converge

for BERs less than . Therefore, in decoding the

code, we can use a smaller matrix with a smaller column weight

to reduce decoding complexity with a very small performance

degradation.

Example 17: Let

and

. The three-dimen- B. Hybrid Decoding of Finite-Geometry Codes

sional Euclidean geometry EG

over GF consists

of 512 points and 584 two-flats. The 584 two-flats can be With iterative decoding using SPA, cycles of length result

partitioned into 73 parallel bundles, denoted

, in decoding correlation only after two iterations. That is, after

each consists of eight parallel two-flats. For each parallel two decoding iterations, the extrinsic estimate provided by a

bundle , we can form an

matrix

whose code bit as a contribution of a priori information for decoding

rows are the incidence vectors of the two-flats in over other code bits comes back as part of a priori information for

the 512 points in EG

. This matrix has row weight

decoding itself. Consequently, subsequent decoding iterations

and column weight . For

, form an

become highly correlated. If the correlation effect becomes se-

matrix

as in (21). The row and column vere, the decoding process may not converge and the decoding

weights of this matrix are and , respectively. The null performance may become very poor. The decoding correlation

space of this matrix gives a Gallager code with at most

effect may be stopped by using a hybrid two-stage decoding.

parity-check bits. Choosing

and , we At the first stage, SPA is performed for only a few (say two)

obtain codes with various rates. Fig. 20 depicts the bit error iterations. At the end of the second decoding iteration, hard de-

performances of these codes. The codes with

and cisions of code symbols are made based on their log-likelihood

are

,

, and

codes with rates ratios (LLRs). This results in a hard-decision sequence which

,

, and

, respectively. At the BER of , is then decoded at the second stage using the hard-decision ma-

they all perform about 2.1 dB away from their corresponding jority-logic decoding (or other suitable hard-decision decoding

Shannon limits. For

and , they all give the algorithm). This hybrid decoding method, called SPA2/MLG

same

EG code with rate

. The difference in decoding, is quite effective for decoding a finite-geometry code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

592

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Fig. 20. Error performances of the EG codes in Example 17.

with large minimum distance and whose parity-check matrix graphs are free of cycles of length . LDPC codes in this sub-

has large row and column weights.

class are constructed based on hyperplanes of two consecutive

Example 18: We consider the hybrid two-stage SPA2/MLG

decoding of the

code

constructed

based on the two-flats over points in the four-dimensional

projective geometry PG

. Fig. 21 shows the performance

of the code decoded with the two-stage SPA2/MLG decoding

as well as with SPA decoding, MLG decoding, and BF de-

coding using 50 iterations. The performance is surprisingly

very close to that of SPA alone with 200 decoding iterations.

This conclusion is corroborated by Figs. 16 and 17 which

show the error performances of the

EG code and

the

PG code given in Examples 14 and 15 with the

proposed SPA2/MLG decoding. We see that substantial savings

in decoding complexity and an increase in decoding speed are

obtained at the expense of a 0.6-dB performance loss at the

BER of . For high-speed applications, this may be a good

tradeoff.

dimensions in finite geometries and they perform well with iterative decoding using SPA. A special case of this class of LDPC codes is the class of codes discovered by Kou, Lin, and Fossorier [33] and constructed based on lines and points of finite geometries. We also presented two other classes of LDPC codes whose constructions are based on the parallel and cyclic structural properties of hyperplanes in finite geometries. Except for two special cases, LDPC codes in these two classes are irregular.
We also presented some finite-geometry codes that may contain millions of short cycles (especially cycles of length ) in their Tanner graphs but perform extremely well with SPA. This discovery has several implications. First, it gives a counterexample to the “common belief” that codes whose Tanner graphs contain short cycles do not perform well with iterative decoding. Second, the error performance of a code with iterative decoding does not solely depend on the distribution (or number) of short cycles in its Tanner graph. It may depend on a combination

VIII. CONCLUSION AND REMARKS

of several factors, such as: 1) the girth of the Tanner graphs; 2) the structure of short cycles; 3) the number of short cycles

In this paper, we first presented a large class of majority-logic that a code bit is on; 4) the parity-check matrix chosen for rep-

decodable codes constructed based on the hyperplanes of two resenting and decoding the code; 5) the column and row weights

different dimensions in finite geometries. Most of codes in this of the parity-check matrix; 6) the minimum distance of the code;

class can be put in a quasi-cyclic form. Two multistep majority- and 7) the weight and multiplicity of pseudocodewords of min-

logic decoding methods for this class of finite-geometry codes imum weight. These factors are simply based on our simulation

were devised. A special subclass of this class of majority-logic observations and preliminary analysis. They are definitely not

decodable codes is a class of regular LDPC codes whose Tanner conclusive and need to be further studied. The third implication

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: CODES ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

593

Fig. 21. Error performances of (341; 195) type-I PG code in Example 18 with various decodings.

is that there may be many existing codes, such as BCH codes (or dual code) which forms a parity-check matrix for the

a subclass), which perform well with iterative decoding. BCH code. Decoding the code based on this circulant matrix with

codes indeed have many short cycles in their Tanner graphs, SPA results in a performance almost the same as that of the

however, they have very good minimum distances. Our conjec- MLD. This result is very encouraging. Now the question is

ture is that if we can construct an appropriate parity-check ma- how to find an appropriate parity-check matrix to represent

trix to represent a BCH code, it may perform well with iterative and decode a code with SPA. We believe that this is a sound

decoding.

research problem. This may open a door to find good codes that

Our conjecture is at least supported by one example: the perform well with iterative decoding without focusing entirely

BCH code with minimum distance . If we use the on constructing LDPC codes which are free of short cycles (in

conventional parity-check matrix formed in terms of the roots general, they have poor minimum distances).

of the generator polynomial of the code [41], then the perfor- For codes introduced in Sections V and VI, choosing dif-

mance of SPA is not even as good as the algebraic decoding ferent bundles or circulants may result in slight difference in

using the Berlekamp algorithm. If we use the parity-check code dimension and rate. However, based on our simulations,

matrix obtained by cyclic shifting the parity polynomial of the this difference in general has only minor impact on code perfor-

code 63 times, the performance of SPA is only 0.2 dB better mance and thus should not prevent readers constructing codes

than the algebraic decoding. If we use a parity-check matrix based on their own choices from producing results close to

whose rows consist of all the minimum-weight vectors of the those presented in this paper.

dual code of the

BCH code, then the SPA performance Finally, we notice that the codes constructed from finite

is only 0.2 dB away from the performance of the MLD and is geometries have also low error floors, see Examples 9 and

1.4 dB better than the algebraic decoding at the BER of . 11. This is an important advantage over randomly constructed

However, this way of constructing parity-check matrix can only codes. Optimizing the degree distributions of random codes

be done for a short code whose dual code has small dimension. leads to code bits that are checked by very few check sums,

Furthermore, using all the minimum-weight code vectors in such as two and three. This is not the case for finite-geom-

the dual code to form a parity-check matrix may result in a etry codes which typically have larger column weights and

large number of computations with SPA. If it is possible to minimum distances than random codes. We believe that, as a

determine a small subset of the minimum-weight vectors in the general trend, by increasing the column weights and minimum

dual code whose null space gives the code, then the number of distances of finite-geometry codes, the error floor goes down.

computations required for SPA can be significantly reduced. This belief is supported by the experimental evidence we have

We did succeed in finding a

square circulant matrix obtained that finite-geometry codes have only small number

with row and column weights of (minimum distance of the of low-weight pseudocodewords.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

594

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

APPENDIX A

Let be a -flat in EG

. Since is primitive,

QUASI-CYCLIC STRUCTURE

are distinct. Therefore, all the - flats in

EG

can be partitioned into the following

Consider the Galois field GF

over GF as a real-

ization of the -dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

,

which consists of points and flats. There is a one-to-one cor-

respondence between the elements in GF

and the points disjoint cyclic classes:

in EG

. The point corresponding to the zero element of

GF is called the origin of EG

. In the following, we

use EG

to denote EG

without the origin and all

the flats passing through the origin. Let be a primitive element

of GF . A -flat in EG

consists of points of

...

the form

, where

are

linearly independent elements in GF

and

).

(22)

Note that

are also linearly independent

for

and hence they span another -flat, denoted

by . We also have

.

An -dimensional projective geometry PG

also con-

sists of points and flats. Let GF

be the Galois field

where

is an arbitrary -flat in the th cyclic

class and used as a representative of the class.

In the following, we construct a matrix whose row

vectors are all the incidence vectors of -flats over -flats

over GF and be a primitive element of GF

. Let in EG

. Suppose that all the -flats in EG

can be partitioned into disjoint cyclic classes, denoted by

and

, and all the -flats in EG

can be partitioned into disjoint cyclic classes, denoted by

then is a primitive element of GF . The nonzero elements

in GF

as powers of can be used to represent the

points in PG

. Two elements and represent the

same point if and only if

for some nonzero element

GF . Let denote the point represented by .

Let

be linearly independent points.

Then, a -flat, denoted by , consists of the points in the form

with GF not simultaneously zero. It can

be easily shown that

are also lin-

early independent for

and hence, the points in the

form

constitute another -flat, which is denoted

. Let

be the matrix whose row

vectors are incidence vectors of -flats in

over the

-flats in . Let the th row and column of corre-

spond to the -flat , and the -flat , respectively,

where

. It is obvious that if contains

for some

, then must contain

. This says that the incidence vector of

is a cyclic shift of the incidence vector of , both over the

-flats in . Hence, is a circulant matrix. By forming

all the matrices ’s for each pair of

and

with

and

, we can eventually put in the

following form:

by . We also have

.

Let FG

be either EG

or PG

. Let be

the number of points in FG

and be a -flat in it. It is

(23)

clear that

. Let be the smallest positive integer such

that

. is called the cycle span of . If

, is

said to be primitive.

In [50], it has been shown that in a projective geometry

PG

, if the number of points in a -flat and the

number of points in the whole geometry are relatively prime,

then is primitive. This argument can be easily shown to be

true for EG

.

Since the number of points in a -flat of EG

is

and the number of points in EG

is

, they are

relatively prime. Therefore, all the flats in EG

are

primitive.

A -flat in PG

is in general not primitive, but it is

primitive in the following two cases: 1)

and is even

[49], [50]; 2)

[50]. Furthermore, it has also been

shown that for

and is odd, there are exactly

where each submatrix is a

circulant

square matrix. Let denote the code generated by the null

space of . It follows from the structure of that is quasi-

cyclic [44]. If

, reduces to a cyclic code. A special

case is that the rows of are simply the incidence vectors of

the -flats over the points in EG

. It is clear that the null

space of also generates a quasi-cyclic code.

In an -dimensional projective geometry PG

, we can

similarly find the corresponding ’s, , and . The dif-

ference from the EG case is that, since the flats in PG

may not be primitive, some of the ’s may be nonsquare ma-

trices. It can be seen that if all the -flats are primitive, the

quasi-cyclic structure of is not destroyed. Therefore, we con-

clude that for the following cases, constructed based on

nonprimitive -flats (or lines) which PG

is a quasi-cyclic code: 1)

and is even;

can be represented by

for a certain -flat , where

2)

. When , reduces to a cyclic code for

[49].

the above two cases, and for

, is always cyclic.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: CODES ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

595

APPENDIX B ROOTS OF THE GENERATOR POLYNOMIALS

Let be a nonnegative integer less than . Then can be represented in radix- form as follows:

(24)

where

for

. The -weight of ,

denoted

, is defined as the real sum of the coefficients in

the radix- expansion of , i.e.,

(25)

Next, we consider (20). We want to show that the Tanner

graph of the projective geometry code

has

the number of cycles of length shown in the equation at the

bottom of the page. Consider two distinct columns in the parity-

check matrix indexed by the two -flats and . In partic-

ular,

is a subspace of dimension

for

some

. Let be the number of -flats

containing both and . As these two flats have precisely

linearly independent vec-

tors, then

if

. Therefore, we assume in the

following that

. Then there are

Let

be the remainder resulting from dividing

by

. Then the radix- weight

of can be

computed as above. Let be a primitive element of GF .

Then the generator polynomial of the type-I cyclic EG code

of length

constructed based on

-flats over nonorigin points in EG

has as a root if

and only if

(26)

see [41, Ch. 8].

Let be a primitive element of GF

. Let be a

nonnegative integer less than

. Then the generator

polynomial of the type-I PG code

of length

constructed based on -flats over points

in PG

has as a root if and only if is divisible by

and

(27)

with

, see [41, Ch. 8].

If follows from (26) and (27) that the generator polyno-

mials of the

EG code given in Example 1 and the

PG code given in Example 2 can be determined.

APPENDIX C ENUMERATION OF CYCLES OF LENGTH

In this appendix, we derive (19) and (20). First, we consider

(19). We want to show that the Tanner graph of the Euclidean

geometry code

has

choices of

linearly independent vectors that extend

to a -flat, i.e., a space of dimension

except

for zero. On the other hand, there are

choices of these -flat. Hence,

vectors associated with the same

(28)

Next, we count the number of pairs of distinct -flats and

such that

is a subspace of dimension

. Clearly, this number is the product of the numbers , ,

and , defined and determined below using the same counting

argument presented above.

• The number of spaces of dimension denoted by , is given by

: This number,

(29)

• The number of subspaces of dimension

containing a

given subspace of dimension : This number, denoted

by , is given by

(30)

cycles of length . Consider two distinct columns in the parity-

check matrix indexed by the two points and . There is

a line connecting these two points. If this line passes through

the origin, then no two-flat contains and and does not

pass through the origin. On the other hand, there are

unordered pairs of points in EG

that are

connected by a line not passing through the origin. Since there

are

two-flats not passing through the

origin containing such line, the number of four-cycles is as given

above.

• The number of

-dimensional subspaces inter-

secting a given

-dimensional space in a given

-dimensional subspace contained in the given

-dimensional space: This number, denoted by ,

is given by

(31)

The number of cycles of length is then

,

summed over all such that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

596

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Notice that

, and, therefore, the product is zero,

if

. Using (28)–(31), one can verify the

expression given by (20).

REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of

low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646,

Aug. 1996.

[3] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,

vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.

[4] D. Spielman, “Linear-time encodable error-correcting codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1723–1731, Nov. 1996.

[5] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Low density parity check codes over

GF(q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165–167, Jun. 1998.

[6] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–432, Mar.

1999.

[7] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density

parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans.

Info. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

[8] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-

approaching low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,

vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[9] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the de-

sign of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon

limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.

[10] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.

[11] L. D. Rudolph, “Geometric Configuration and Majority Logic Decoding

Codes,” M.E.E. thesis, Univ. Oklahoma, Norman, OK, 1964.

[12]

, “A class of majority-logic decodable codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. IT-13, no. 2, pp. 305–307, Apr. 1967.

[13] E. J. Weldon Jr., “Difference-set cyclic codes,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol.

45, pp. 1045–1055, Sep. 1966.

[14] K. J. C. Smith, “Majority decodable codes derived from finite geome-

tries,” University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, vol. 561, Institute

of Statistics Mimeo Series, 1967.

[15] E. J. Weldon Jr., “Euclidean geometry cyclic codes,” in Proc. Combina-

torial Mathematics and its Application, R. C. Bose and T. A. Dowling,

Eds. Chapel Hill, NC: Univ. North Carolina Press, 1967, pp. 377–388.

[16]

, “New generalizations of the Reed-Muller codes, Part II:

Non-primitive codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-14, no. 2, pp.

199–205, Mar. 1968.

[17] J. M. Geothals and P. Delsarte, “On a class of majority-logic decodable

codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-14, no. 2, pp. 182–189, Mar.

1968.

[18] E. J. Weldon Jr., “Some results on majority-logic decoding,” in Error-

Correcting Codes, H. Mann, Ed. New York: Wiley, 1968.

[19] T. Kasami, S. Lin, and W. W. Peterson, “Polynomial codes,” IEEE Trans.

Inf. Theory, vol. IT-14, no. 6, pp. 807–814, Nov. 1968.

[20] P. Delsarte, “A geometric approach to a class of cyclic codes,” J. Comb.

Theory, vol. 6, pp. 340–358, 1969.

[21] P. Delsarte, J. M. Goethals, and J. MacWilliams, “On GRM and related

codes,” Inf. Contr., vol. 16, pp. 403–442, 1970.

[22] C. L. Chen, “On majority-logic decoding of finite geometry codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-17, no. 3, pp. 332–336, May 1971.

[23] T. Kasami and S. Lin, “On majority-logic decoding for duals of primi-

tive polynomial codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-17, no. 3, pp.

322–331, May 1971.

[24] S. Lin, “Multifold Euclidean geometry codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,

vol. IT-19, no. 4, pp. 537–548, Jul. 1973.

[25]

, “On the number of information symbols in polynomial codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-18, no. 6, pp. 785–794, Nov. 1972.

[26] N. Hamada, “On the p-rank of the incidence matrix of a balanced or

partial balanced incomplete block design and its applications to error

correcting codes,” Hiroshima Math. J., vol. 3, pp. 153–226, 1973.

[27] C. R. P. Hartmann, J. B. Ducey, and L. D. Rudolph, “On the structure of

generalized finite geometry codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20,

no. 2, pp. 240–252, Mar. 1974.

[28] S. Lin and K. P. Yiu, “An improvement to multifold Euclidean geometry

codes,” Inf. Contr., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 221–265, 1975.

[29] A. Hocquenghem, “Codes correcteurs d’erreurs,” Chiffres, vol. 2, pp.

147–156, 1959.

[30] R. C. Bose and D. K. Ray-Chaudhuri, “On a class of error correcting

binary group codes,” Inf. Contr., vol. 3, pp. 68–79, Mar. 1960.

[31] I. S. Reed and G. Solomon, “Polynomial codes over certain finite fields,”

J. Soc. Indust. Appl. Math., vol. 8, pp. 300–304, Jun. 1960.

[32] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Construction of low density parity

check codes: A geometric approach,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo

Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 4–7, 2000, pp. 137–140.

[33]

, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A

rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7,

pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.

[34] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J. -F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as

an instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas

Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.

[35] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and

the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp.

498–519, Feb. 2001.

[36] Z. W. Li, L. Chen, and S. Lin, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic LDPC

codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., submitted for publication.

[37] H. B. Mann, Analysis and Design of Experiments. New York: Dover,

1949.

[38] R. D. Carmichael, Introduction to the Theory of Groups of Finite

Order. New York: Dover, 1956.

[39] A. P. Street and D. J. Street, Combinatorics of Experimental De-

signs. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Sci., Clarendon, 1987.

[40] I. Blake and R. C. Mullin, The Mathematical Theory of Coding. New

York: Academic, 1975.

[41] S. Lin and D. J. Costello Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and

Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.

[42] D. E. Muller, “Applications of Boolean algebra to switching circuit de-

sign and to error detection,” IRE Trans. Electron. Comput., vol. EC-2,

pp. 6–12, Sep. 1954.

[43] I. S. Reed, “A class of multiple-error-correcting codes and the decoding

scheme,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-4, no. 4, pp. 38–49, Sep. 1954.

[44] W. W. Peterson and E. J. Weldon Jr., Error Correcting Codes, 2nd

ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972.

[45] J. L. Massey, Threshold Decoding. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.

[46] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf.

Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp.

1426–1435.

[47] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Lower bounds on the minimum pseudo-

weight of linear codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory,

Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 70.

[48] R. M. Tanner, “Minimum-distance bounds by graph analysis,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 808–821, Feb. 2001.

[49] H. Tang, J. Xu, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On algebraic

construction of Gallager and circulant low-density parity-check codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1269–1279, Jun. 2004.

[50] R. Lidl and H. Niederreiter, Introduction to Finite Fields and their Ap-

plications, revised ed. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1994.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:53:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

