IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

209

Transactions Letters________________________________________________________________

Shuffled Iterative Decoding
Juntan Zhang and Marc P. C. Fossorier, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Shuffled versions of iterative decoding of low-density parity-check codes and turbo codes are presented. The proposed schemes have about the same computational complexity as the standard versions, and converge faster. Simulations show that the new schedules offer better performance/complexity tradeoffs, especially when the maximum number of iterations has to remain small.
Index Terms—Belief propagation (BP), iterative decoding, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes, scheduling, turbo codes.

two different angles, and eventually, achieve similar gains. The vertical scheduling proposed in this letter is an algorithmic approach intended to speed up BP decoding at no cost in complexity. For very-large-scale integration (VLSI) considerations, groups are introduced to preserve some parallel advantages of BP decoding. The horizontal scheduling of [6] and [7] is a hardware approach intended to serialize the totally parallel BP decoding. In the serialization, new updates become available at the same iteration, and speed up is also achieved by using them.

I. INTRODUCTION
I TERATIVE decoding based on belief propagation (BP) [1] has received significant attention recently, mostly due to its near-Shannon-limit error performance for the decoding of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes [2] and turbo codes [3]. Like the maximum a posteriori (MAP) probability decoding scheme [4], it is a symbol-by-symbol soft-in/soft-out decoding algorithm. It processes the received symbols recursively to improve the reliability of each symbol based on constraints that specify the code. In the first iteration, the decoder only uses the channel output as input, and generates soft output for each symbol. Subsequently, the output reliability measures of the decoded symbols at the end of each decoding iteration are used as inputs for the next iteration. The decoding-iteration process continues until a certain stopping condition is satisfied. Then hard decisions are made, based on the output reliability measures of decoded symbols from the last decoding iteration. The aim of this letter is to develop shuffled versions of the standard iterative decoding algorithms for both LDPC and turbo codes.
A similar approach for low-latency decoding of turbo product codes was proposed in [5]. In [6] and [7], a horizontal partitioning of the parity-check matrix was proposed to serialize the decoding of LDPC codes, and in the process, speed-up of the convergence was achieved. In this letter, we consider a vertical partitioning of the parity-check matrix to speed up the decoding. The two approaches are well introduced in [8]. It is interesting to note that the vertical and horizontal schedulings come from

II. ITERATIVE DECODING OF LDPC CODES

A regular binary

LDPC code of length and

dimension has a parity-check matrix

, with

ones in each column and ones in each row. We denote the set

of bits that participate in check by

,

and the set of checks in which bit participates as

. Assume a codeword

is transmitted over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)

channel with zero mean and variance

using binary phase-

shift keying (BPSK) signaling, and let

be

the corresponding received sequence.

A. Standard BP for Iterative Decoding of LDPC Codes

Based on [1], let be the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of bit

and initially set

. Let and be the

LLRs of bit which is sent from check node to bit node

, and sent from the bit node to check node , respectively.

Let denote the a posteriori LLR of bit . The standard BP algorithm [1] is carried out as follows.

Initialization: Set

, maximum number of iterations

to . For each , , set

.

Step 1:

a) Horizontal Step, for , process

and each

(1)

Paper approved by P. Hoeher, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received November 3, 2003; revised May 7, 2004; August 20, 2004; and September 21, 2004. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-00-98029 and Grant CCF-04-30576. This paper was presented in part at the 36th Annual Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, November 2002.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: marc@aravis.eng. hawaii.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.841982

b) Vertical Step, for process

(2)

and each

,

(3)

(4)

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

210

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

Step 2: Hard decision and stopping criterion test

a) Create

such that

if

,

and

if

.

b) If

or the maximum iteration number

is reached, stop the decoding iteration and go

to Step 3. Otherwise, set

and go to Step 1.

Step 3: Output as the decoded codeword.

Step 1) For steps.

, process jointly the following two

a) Horizontal Step, for

and each

, process

B. Shuffled BP for Iterative Decoding of LDPC Codes

At the th iteration of the standard BP algorithm, first all

values of the check-to-bit messages are updated by using the

values of the bit-to-check messages obtained at the

th

iteration, i.e., each is updated by using

. Then, all values of the bit-to-check messages are

updated by using the values of the check-to-bit messages newly

obtained at the th iteration, i.e., each is updated from

.

In general, for both the check-to-bit messages and

bit-to-check messages, the more independent information

is used to update the messages, the more reliable they become.

Iteration of the standard two-step implementation of the

BP algorithm uses all values

computed at the previous

iteration in (1). However, certain values could already be

computed in (3) based on a partial computation of the values

obtained from (2), and then be used instead of

in (1)

to compute the remaining values . This suggests a shuffling

of the horizontal and vertical steps of the standard BP decoding.

Hence, we refer to this new version as shuffled BP decoding.

Note that the updating procedure in shuffled BP is bit-based.

In the shuffled BP algorithm, the initialization, stopping crite-

rion test, and output steps remain the same as in the standard BP

algorithm. The only difference between the two algorithms lies

in the updating procedure. Step 1 of the shuffled BP algorithm

is modified as: For

and each

, process

the horizontal step and vertical step jointly, with (1) modified

as

(5)

(6)

(7)

b) Vertical Step, for

and

each

, process

(8)

(9)

For

, the group shuffled BP becomes the standard BP,

while the group shuffled BP with

is the previously

proposed shuffled BP.1

As an example, consider the code with parity-check matrix

(10)

The decoding processes for one iteration of the group shuffled BP is illustrated in Fig. 1 with 1 (standard BP), 2, and 6 (original shuffled BP). The shuffled BP algorithm for the decoding of LDPC codes keeps the computational advantages of the forward–backward implementations of the standard iteratively decoded BP, and requires the same computational complexity [10].2 Furthermore, when the Tanner graph of the LDPC code is acyclic and connected, the proposed method is optimal in the sense of MAP decoding and converges faster (or at least, no more slowly) than the standard BP algorithm [10] (proofs follow from the fact that shuffled BP is simply a new scheduling on the same graph). It is also straightforward to generalize the shuffled approach to various suboptimum versions of BP decoding.

We observe, however, that while one iteration of the standard BP algorithm can be fully processed in parallel, that of the shuffled BP algorithm becomes totally serial. To decrease decoding delay and preserve the parallelism advantages of the standard BP algorithm, a parallel shuffled decoding scheme named “group shuffled BP” is developed next. In the group shuffled BP algorithm, the code length is divided into a number of groups. In each group, the updating of messages is processed in parallel, but the processing of groups remains sequential. More precisely, assume the bits of a codeword are divided

C. Simulation Results

Fig. 2 depicts the word-error rate (WER) of iterative decoding

of a (8000,4000) (3,6) LDPC code, with the group shuffled BP

algorithm, for 1 (standard BP), 2, 8, 100, and 8000 (orig-

inal shuffled BP). We observe that at the WER and a max-

imum of 20 iterations, the original shuffled BP algorithm per-

forms about 0.2 dB better than standard BP algorithm, and the

larger the value of , the better the error performance. How-

ever, for

, no significant difference from

is

into groups, and each group contains

bits

1A scheme similar to this totally sequential approach was proposed simulta-

(assuming

for simplicity). Step 1 of the group neously in [11].

shuffled BP algorithm is carried out as follows.

2An increase in complexity due to more control logic may result.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

211

Fig. 2. Error performance for iterative decoding of the (8000,4000) (3,6) LDPC code with group shuffled BP algorithm, for G = 1, 2, 8, 100, and 8000,
and at most 20 iterations.

Fig. 1. Group shuffled BP with G = 1; 2; 6 for decoding a code with N = 6. (a) G = 1 (standard BP). (b) G = 2. (c) G = 6 (original shuffled BP).

Fig. 3. Average number of iterations for iterative decoding the (8000,4000) (3,6) LDPC code with group shuffled BP for G = 1, 2, 8, 100, and 8000, and
at most 20 iterations.

observed. Fig. 3 depicts the corresponding average number of iterations. We observe that the average number of iterations of the original shuffled BP algorithm is about half that of the standard BP algorithm, and the same type of differences as in Fig. 2 with respect to the values of . Both standard and shuffled BP decoding achieve the same error performance with a maximum of 2000 iterations, which indicates that the speedup is not achieved at the expense of a poorer achievable error performance. Similar gains were also achieved with suboptimum versions of BP decoding and the shuffled decoding approach.
III. ITERATIVE DECODING OF TURBO CODE

rate- systematic convolutional codes with encoders in

feedback form. Let

be an information

block of length , and

be the corre-

sponding coded sequence, where

for

is the output code block at time . Suppose

BPSK transmission over an AWGN channel, with and

all taking values in

for

and

. Let

be the received se-

quence, where

is the received block

at time . Let

denote the estimate of .

Let denote the encoder state at time . Following [4], define

,

,

, where

,

A turbo code [3] encoder comprises the concatenation of and let

,

, and

be the corresponding

two (or more) convolutional encoders, and its decoder con- values computed in component decoder , with

.

sists of two (or more) soft-in/soft-out convolutional decoders Let

denote the extrinsic value of the estimated infor-

which feed reliability information back and forth to each other. mation bit delivered by component decoder at the th

For simplicity, we consider a turbo code that consists of two iteration.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

212

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

A. Standard Serial and Parallel Turbo Decoding
The decoding approach proposed in [3] operates in serial mode, i.e., the component decoders take turns generating the extrinsic values of the estimated information symbols, and each component decoder uses the extrinsic messages delivered by the last component decoder as the a priori values of the information symbols. The disadvantage of this scheme is high decoding delay. In the parallel turbo decoding algorithm [9], all component decoders operate in parallel at any given time. After each iteration, each component decoder delivers extrinsic messages to other decoder(s) which use these messages as a priori values at the next iteration.

B. Shuffled Turbo Decoding

Although the parallel turbo decoding overcomes the draw-

back of high decoding delay of serial decoding, the extrinsic

messages are not taken advantage of as soon as they are avail-

able, because the extrinsic messages are delivered to compo-

nent decoders only after each iteration is completed. The aim

of the shuffled turbo decoding is to use the more reliable ex-

trinsic messages at each time. Let

be the

permuted sequence by the interleaver corresponding to the orig-

inal information sequence

, according to

the mapping

, for

. We assume that

. There is a unique corresponding reverse mapping

, for

and

.

In shuffled turbo decoding, the two component decoders op-

erate simultaneously as in the parallel turbo decoding scheme,

but the scheme of updating and delivering messages is different.

We further assume that the two component decoders deliver

extrinsic messages synchronously, i.e.,

, where

and denote the times at which decoders 1 and 2 deliver

the extrinsic values of the th estimated symbol of the orig-

inal information sequence , and of the interleaved sequence

, respectively. The shuffled turbo decoding scheme processes

the backward recursion followed by the forward recursion. Let

us first consider the forward recursion stage at the th itera-

tion of component decoder 1. After time , the values of

Fig. 4. Serial, parallel, and shuffled turbo decoding.

should be updated, and the values of

are needed.

There are two possible cases. The first case is

,

which means the extrinsic value

of the information

bit is not available yet. Then the values

, which are

Fig. 5. Bit-error performance of three-component turbo code with interleaver size 16384, for parallel decoding (dashed line) and shuffled decoding (solid line).

stored in the backward-recursion stage of the current iteration,

are used to update the values

and

. The second

case is

, which means the extrinsic value

of the information bit has already been delivered by de-

coder 2. Then this newly available

is used to com-

pute the values

(then stored),

, and

.

The backward recursion in decoder 1, as well as both recur-

sions in decoder 2, are realized based on the same principle.

After iterations, the shuffled turbo decoding algorithm out-

It is straightforward to generalize the shuffled turbo decoding to multiple turbo codes which consist of more than two component codes. Based on the above descriptions, the total computational complexity of the shuffled turbo decoding for multiple turbo codes at each decoding iteration is the same as that of the parallel turbo decoding, and each of them has a decoding delay which is about of the decoding delay of serial turbo decoding, where is the number of component codes.

puts

as the decoded codeword, where

, which is dif- C. Simulation Results

ferent from that in the standard serial turbo decoding [3]. The We observed that shuffled turbo decoding does not present

decoding processes of the standard serial, parallel, and shuffled an advantage over standard decoding for turbo codes with two

turbo decoding are illustrated in Fig. 4.

component codes. A possible reason is that with an increasing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2005

213

number of component codes, the proportion of new updated extrinsic messages taken advantage of by each component decoder also increases. It is also known that parallel decoding outperforms serial decoding for turbo codes with more than two component codes [9]. Fig. 5 depicts the bit-error performance of a turbo code with three component codes (rate-1/4) and interleaver size 16384, with standard parallel decoding and shuffled decoding. After five iterations, the shuffled turbo decoder outperforms its parallel counterpart by several tenths of a decibel.
REFERENCES
[1] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near-optimum error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.

[4] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[5] C. Argon and S. McLaughlin, “A parallel decoder for low-latency decoding of turbo product codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, pp. 70–72, Feb. 2002.
[6] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 2001, pp. 3019–3024.
[7] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Turbo decoder architecture for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 2002, pp. 1383–1388.
[8] F. Guilloud, “Generic architecture for LDPC codes decoding,” Ph.D. dissertation, ENST Paris, Paris, France, 2004.
[9] D. Divsalar and F. Pollara, “Multiple turbo codes for deep-space communications,”, JPL TDA Prog. Rep., 71–78, May 1995.
[10] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. 36th Annu. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst., Computers, Nov. 2002, pp. 8–15.
[11] H. Kfir and I. Kanter, “Parallel versus sequential updating for belief propagation decoding,” Phys. Rev. E, submitted for publication.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:52:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

