IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 4, APRIL 2020

2005

A Threshold-Based Min-Sum Algorithm to Lower the Error Floors of Quantized LDPC Decoders
Homayoon Hatami , Member, IEEE, David G. M. Mitchell , Senior Member, IEEE, Daniel J. Costello , Jr., Life Fellow, IEEE, and Thomas E. Fuja , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— For decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, the attenuated min-sum algorithm (AMSA) and the offset min-sum algorithm (OMSA) can outperform the conventional min-sum algorithm (MSA) at low signal-to-noise-ratios (SNRs), i.e., in the “waterfall region” of the bit error rate curve. This paper demonstrates that, for quantized decoders, MSA actually outperforms AMSA and OMSA in the “error floor” region, and that all three algorithms suffer from a relatively high error floor. This motivates the introduction of a modified MSA that is designed to outperform MSA, AMSA, and OMSA across all SNRs. The new algorithm is based on the assumption that trapping sets are the major cause of the error floor for quantized LDPC decoders. A performance estimation tool based on trapping sets is used to verify the effectiveness of the new algorithm and also to guide parameter selection. We also show that the implementation complexity of the new algorithm is only slightly higher than that of AMSA or OMSA. Finally, the simulated performance of the new algorithm, using several classes of LDPC codes (including spatially coupled LDPC codes), is shown to outperform MSA, AMSA, and OMSA across all SNRs.
Index Terms— LDPC codes, min-sum decoding, error floors, absorbing sets, trapping sets, decoder quantization.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] are a class of linear block codes for which the performance of iterative message passing (MP) decoding can approach that of much more complex maximum likelihood (ML) decoding. The min-sum algorithm (MSA) [2] is a simplified version of the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [3] that is commonly used for iterative MP decoding of LDPC codes, where the check node computation is approximated and hence is significantly
Manuscript received June 17, 2019; revised November 18, 2019; accepted January 14, 2020. Date of publication January 27, 2020; date of current version April 16, 2020. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Nos. ECCS-1710920 and OIA-1757207. This article was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Paris, France, July 2019. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was E. Paolini. (Corresponding author: Homayoon Hatami.)
Homayoon Hatami was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA. He is now with Samsung Semiconductor Inc., San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail: hhatami@nd.edu).
David G. M. Mitchell is with the Klipsch School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003 USA (e-mail: dgmm@nmsu.edu).
Daniel J. Costello, Jr. and Thomas E. Fuja are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA (e-mail: costello.2@nd.edu; tfuja@nd.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2020.2969902

easier to perform. This simplification is particularly desirable for hardware decoder implementations. Moreover, unlike the SPA, no estimation of the channel signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is needed at the receiver for an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.
In [4], two modifications of the MSA, denoted attenuated MSA (AMSA)1 and offset MSA (OMSA) were introduced to adjust for the error in the approximation and improve performance. Also, [5] independently introduced the OMSA. Compared to the MSA, these algorithms reduce the magnitudes of the log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) computed at the check nodes of the Tanner graph representation of the parity-check matrix H of an LDPC code. Both variants have been shown to achieve better waterfall (low SNR) performance (closer to the SPA) compared to the conventional MSA [4], [5]. Numerous approaches have been proposed in the literature to improve the performance of the MSA, including adjusting the offset by iteration [6], techniques to approximate the error term [7], [8], and modified quantizer designs [9], [10].
Practical implementations of LDPC decoders require a finite precision (quantized) representation of the LLRs. In [4], quantized density evolution (DE) was used to find the optimum attenuation and offset parameters for the AMSA and OMSA, in the sense that DE calculates the iterative decoding threshold, which characterizes the waterfall performance. Following [4], [5], several papers focused on further improving the waterfall performance of the MSA for quantized [9], [11] and unquantized decoders [12], [13]. At high SNRs, quantization typically causes the early onset of an error floor. In [14]–[17], it was shown that certain objects, called trapping sets, elementary trapping sets, leafless elementary trapping sets, or absorbing sets, in the Tanner graph cause the iterative decoding process to get stuck, resulting in decoding errors at high SNRs. Hereafter, we refer to the sub-graphs induced by these sets, as well as similar sets, as problematic graphical objects. Several methods based on problematic objects have been proposed to estimate the performance of LDPC codes [18]–[24] and a number of strategies have been proposed to lower the error floor of quantized LDPC decoders, including quantizer design [11], [25], [26], modifications to iterative decoding [27]–[30], and post-processing [31]–[34].
In this paper, we propose a novel modification to the check node update of quantized MSA that is straightforward to implement and reduces the error floor when compared to the
1Attenuated MSA is also known as normalized MSA.

0090-6778 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2006

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 4, APRIL 2020

methods proposed in [4], [5]. First, we show that the AMSA and OMSA exhibit worse (higher) error floors than the MSA with parameters that are optimized for waterfall performance. We then introduce a modification to the MSA that applies the strategies from the AMSA and the OMSA selectively, i.e., it applies attenuation/offset when it would be helpful and does not apply it otherwise. Assuming that there exist problematic graphical objects that cause most of the decoding failures in the high SNR regime, we further show that the new MSA modification causes these objects to become less prone to decoding failures. As a result, the new algorithm matches the waterfall performance of the AMSA and OMSA, while improving their error floor performance. We note that no information about the location or structure of the problematic objects is required to utilize this approach; however, knowledge of the problematic object facilitates determination of the optimal algorithm parameters. Moreover, we note that AMSA (respectively OMSA) can be viewed as a particular case of TAMSA (resp. TOMSA) and, as such, the performance of TAMSA (resp. TOMSA) is at least as good as AMSA (resp. OMSA) with optimal parameter selection. We quantify the complexity of the proposed scheme and show that, since it uses the information that is already generated inside the check node processing unit of the AMSA or OMSA, the new algorithm is only slightly more complex to implement.
Due to the time-consuming process of simulating the high SNR performance of LDPC codes, we utilize the codeindependent and problematic object-specific method of [18] to guide/optimize parameter selection and to evaluate the impact of the proposed algorithm on the performance of LDPC codes containing problematic objects at high SNRs. The results indicate that the new algorithm improves (reduces) the error floor caused by specific problematic objects compared to the MSA, AMSA, or OMSA. Finally, we present the simulated performance of certain randomly constructed and structured LDPC block codes (LDPC-BCs) and spatially coupled LDPC codes (SC-LDPCCs) [35] to verify the effectiveness and versatility of the algorithm. In all cases, the new algorithm performs at least as well as the MSA, AMSA, or OMSA, at both low and high SNRs.
II. BACKGROUND
Let V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} and C = {c1, c2, . . . , cm} represent the sets of variable nodes and check nodes, respectively, of a bipartite Tanner graph representation of an LDPC code with parity-check matrix H. Assume that a binary codeword u = (u1, u2, . . . , un) is binary phase shift keyed (BPSK) modulated such that each zero is mapped to +1 and each one is mapped to −1. The modulated signal is transmitted over an AWGN channel with mean 0 and standard deviation σ. The received signal is ˜r = 1−2u+n, where n is the channel noise. We denote the quantized version of ˜r as r = (r1, r2, . . . , rn).
A. The Min-Sum Algorithm and Its Modifications
The MSA is an iterative MP algorithm that is simpler to implement than the SPA. Unlike the SPA, the MSA does not require channel noise information to calculate the channel

LLRs. The SPA is optimum for codes without cycles, but for
finite length codes and finite precision LLRs, the SPA is not
necessarily optimum, particularly with respect to error floor
performance [29]. Let Vij represent the LLR passed from variable node vi to check node cj in a given iteration and let Cji represent the LLR passed from cj to vi.2 The check nodes that are neighbors to vi are denoted N (vi), and the variable nodes that are neighbors to cj are denoted N (cj). To initialize decoding, each variable node vi passes ri to the check nodes in N (vi), i.e.,

Vij = ri,

(1)

where the Vij ’s computed throughout the decoding process are referred to as the variable node LLRs.3 The check node

operation to calculate the LLRs sent from check node cj to

variable

node ⎛

vi

is

given

by

⎞



Cji = ⎝

sign (Vi j)⎠ · min |Vi j| , (2)

i ∈N (cj)\i

i ∈N (cj)\i

where the Cji’s computed throughout the decoding process

are referred to as the check node LLRs. After each iteration,

the hard decision estimate uˆ is checked to see if it is a valid

codeword,

where

uˆi

=

0

iff 

ri +

Cj i > 0.

(3)

j ∈N (vi)

If uˆ is a valid codeword, or if the iteration number has reached

Imax, decoding stops. Otherwise, the variable node LLRs are

calculated as 

Vij = ri +

Cj i

(4)

j ∈N (vi)\j

and decoding continues using (2).

In [4], two modified versions of the MSA, called attenuated

MSA (AMSA) and offset MSA (OMSA), were introduced to

reduce the waterfall performance loss of the MSA compared

to the SPA. The modified check node computations are given

by

⎛

⎞



Cji = α ⎝

sign (Vi j)⎠ · min |Vi j| , (5)

i ∈N (cj )\i

i ∈N (cj)\i

and ⎛ 

⎞



Cji =⎝

sign (Vi j)⎠· max min |Vi j| − β, 0 ,

i ∈N (cj)\i

i ∈N (cj)\i

(6)

respectively, where α, β > 0 are constants. In both algorithms, the check node LLR magnitudes are modified to be smaller than those of MSA. This reduces the negative effect of overestimating the LLR magnitudes in the MSA, whose larger check node LLR magnitudes compared to the SPA can cause additional errors in decoding at low SNRs.

2Note that the iteration indices are dropped for clarity of notation. 3In the SPA, computing an LLR value from the received value ri requires multiplying by 2/σ2, where σ2 is the channel noise variance. However, this normalization is not required for min-sum decoding and its variants, so we omit it here.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HATAMI et al.: THRESHOLD-BASED MSA TO LOWER THE ERROR FLOORS OF QUANTIZED LDPC DECODERS

2007

Fig. 1. The sub-graph G(A) induced by a (5, 3) absorbing set A.

B. Implementation of the MSA, AMSA, and OMSA

To implement the check node update of (2) in the check

node processing unit corresponding to cj, the sign and mag-

nitude of Cji to be sent to each vi are calculated separately

as follows. First, for a
ll i ∈ N (cj), the signs of Vi j are

multiplied to form

sign (Vi j). Then, for each i ∈

i ∈N (cj)




N (cj), sign (Vij) is multiplied by

sign (Vi j) to form




i ∈N (cj )

sign (Vi j). Second, the process of calculating |Cji|

i ∈N (cj)\i

involves finding two minimum values, the first and second

minimum of all the |Vi j| at check node cj, denoted M1,j and M2,j, respectively. For each Cji, if the variable node vi corresponds to M1,j , then |Cji| = M2,j, otherwise, |Cji| = M1,j.

The implementation of (5) or (6) is the same with an extra

step of attenuating or offsetting the minimum values.

The process of finding M1,j and M2,j is complex

to implement. Therefore, several methods have been sug-

gested to reduce the complexity of the process [36] or

to avoid calculating M2,j and instead estimate it based on M1,j [27]–[29]. The result is that M1,j plays an important

role in the check node processing unit, and the new algorithm

introduced in this paper also relies on M1,j , thus making

the extension of the algorithm to techniques designed for

complexity reduction possible.

C. Quantized Decoders

In a uniform quantized decoder, the operations in (1)–(6)

have finite precision, i.e., the values are quantized to a set of

numbers ranging from −max to max, with step size Δ, where

the resulting quantizer thresholds are set from −max

max −

Δ 2

.

The

attenuation

and

offset

parameters

α

and

+

Δ 2

β in

to (5)

and (6) that have the best iterative decoding thresholds were

found using quantized DE in [4]. In [5], the effects of these

modifications on the performance of unquantized, clipped, and

quantized versions of the MSA for three different codes were

studied using extensive simulations.

D. Trapping Sets and Error Floors
Let A denote a subset of V of cardinality a. Let Aeven and Aodd represent the subsets of check nodes connected to variable nodes in A with even and odd degrees, respectively, where |Aodd| = b. Here, A is called an (a, b) trapping set [14]. A is defined to be an (a, b) absorbing set if each variable node in A is connected to fewer check nodes in Aodd than in Aeven [17]. These sets, along with similar objects such as

Fig. 2. Simulated performance of an (8000,4000) LDPC code decoded with the MSA, AMSA, and OMSA. Solid curves represent BER, dashed curves represent FER.
elementary trapping sets and leafless elementary trapping sets, are known to cause most of the decoding errors at high SNRs in MP decoders [17]. In Fig. 1, the sub-graph G(A) induced by a (5, 3) absorbing set A is shown. In the next section, we will explain how the check node LLRs in (2) can be modified to improve decoding performance at high SNR, i.e., to lower the error floor, by considering decoder behavior in the presence of such problematic objects.
III. THRESHOLD ATTENUATED/OFFSET MSA
A. Motivation and Rationale
In this section, we present and discuss some empirical observations that motivate our approach in this paper. As discussed in the previous section, it is known that applying attenuation or offset when computing the check node LLRs typically improves performance in the low SNR (waterfall) region of the BER curve for quantized decoders. On the other hand, since high SNR performance is tied to problematic graphical objects, the AMSA and OMSA do not necessarily achieve a good error floor. For example, assuming BPSK modulation on the AWGN channel, Fig. 2 presents the simulated bit-errorrate (BER) and frame-error-rate (FER) performance of the (8000,4000) code of [37] (which was used in [4] and [5]) with a 5-bit uniform quantizer, Δ = 0.15, and max = 2.25, decoded using the MSA, AMSA, and OMSA. We also show the performance of quantized SPA using 6-bit quantization (2-bit integer, 3-bit fractional) for comparison.4 We see that the AMSA and OMSA gain about 0.7dB in the waterfall compared to the MSA. However, all the algorithms eventually exhibit an error floor at higher SNRs. In the remainder of this section, we discuss the high SNR decoder dynamics of an LDPC code decoded with the MSA, AMSA, or OMSA and the relationship to the problematic object(s) that cause the error floor.
At high SNRs, for a received vector r of channel LLRs, decoding is successful with high probability. In the case of unsuccessful decoding, it is known that a small number of problematic objects are likely to be the cause - objects
4As has been pointed out in other publications, e.g. [25], the performance of SPA in the error floor is severely affected by quantization.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2008

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 4, APRIL 2020

containing variable nodes with unreliable (small magnitude) LLR values [17]. In this regime, the channel LLRs for the variable nodes outside a problematic object will be, however, mostly reliable and have large magnitudes. In other words, the outside LLRs are typically initially large (with the correct sign) and will continue to grow quickly to even larger values (often max). However, even if some/all of the incorrect sign LLRs inside a problematic object are initially small, they can also be observed to grow quickly to larger values without correcting the errors in sign. This happens because the object contains at least one short cycle, which prevents correction of the sign errors [14], [16], [17].
To improve the probability of correcting errors occurring in a problematic object G(A) at high SNR, we have observed by extensive numerical simulations that it is helpful if the LLR magnitudes sent from a check node cj ∈ Aeven to variable nodes vi ∈ A grow more slowly (be attenuated) when cj receives at least one unreliable (small magnitude) LLR from a variable node in A. This ensures that any incorrect LLRs received from the channel in A are not reinforced. If a check node cj (inside or outside G(A)) receives all large magnitude LLRs, on the other hand, these can be helpful for decoding and hence should not be attenuated. These two factors form the essence of the new threshold-based modification of AMSA/OMSA, presented below, that can lead to correct decoding of a received vector r that would not otherwise occur.
B. A Threshold Attenuated/Offset MSA
In our modified algorithm, we make use of a relationship observed at high SNRs between the variable node LLR magnitudes |Vij | received by check node cj and the likelihood of the check node cj being inside a problematic object G(A). This relationship allows us to map the problem of locating errors affected by G(A) into merely considering the variable node LLR magnitudes |Vij | received at check node cj, i.e., we rely on the |Vij |’s to tell us if cj is likely to be inside G(A) and has the potential to cause decoding failures. At high SNRs, the check node LLRs outside G(A) typically grow faster than the LLRs inside G(A). Therefore, if a check node cj receives at least one small LLR, i.e., mini ∈N(cj) |Vi j| |M1,j| ≤ τ , where τ is some threshold, it is likely that cj is inside G(A). Consequently, to improve the error floor performance, we propose the check node computation in (7), shown at the bottom of this page, to replace (2), where α ≤ 1

is an attenuation parameter designed to reduce the check node LLR magnitudes sent from a check node cj inside G(A) to the variable nodes in A. We denote this modified check node update algorithm as the threshold attenuated MSA (TAMSA). We will see in Sec. IV that, with a proper choice of the parameters τ and α, the TAMSA is capable of correctly decoding some of the errors that occur in the AMSA or MSA due to the problematic objects.
In (7), we use α to make the check node LLR magnitudes smaller when mini ∈N(cj) |Vi j| ≤ τ . As an alternative (or in combination), an offset parameter β can be used to serve the same purpose, as shown in (8), at the bottom of this page, where β > 0 is an offset parameter that reduces the check node LLR magnitudes. We denote this modified check node update algorithm as the threshold offset MSA (TOMSA).
Both the TAMSA and TOMSA selectively, or locally, reduce the magnitudes of the check node LLRs that are likely to belong to a problematic object without requiring knowledge of its location or structure. The TAMSA and TOMSA add a simple threshold test compared to the AMSA and OMSA, while the attenuation (offset) parameter only needs to be applied to a few check nodes at high SNRs.
C. Implementation of Threshold Attenuated/Offset MSA
We reviewed the implementation of the MSA, AMSA, and OMSA in Sec. II-B. For the MSA, for some number K of inputs to a check node processing unit, the implementation of sub-units to calculate M1,j and M2,j and the index needed to identify which input created M1,j requires a significant number of multiplexers, comparators, and inverters, which is a function of K (see Table II in [36]). A check node processing unit must include some additional sub-units to generate the proper output and apply the attenuation (offset) parameter for the AMSA (OMSA).
Implementation of the TAMSA (TOMSA) adds just two simple steps to the implementation of the AMSA (OMSA). First, for a check node processing unit corresponding to cj, after calculating M1,j and M2,j, the value of M1,j must be compared to τ . Second, a decision must be made based on the outcome of the comparison to use the attenuated (offset) or non-attenuated (non-offset) output. Consequently, implementation of the TAMSA (TOMSA) requires just one extra comparator and K extra multiplexers to decide if attenuation (offset) should be applied. If not, the additional

⎧



Cji

=

⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪


 sign (Vi j)

i∈N (cj)\i

· min |Vi j| , i ∈N (cj)\i

⎪⎩⎪⎪⎪α ⎧


 sign (Vi j)

i ∈N (cj)\i



· min |Vi j| ,
i ∈N (cj)\i

if min |Vi j| > τ ,
i ∈N (cj)
otherwise

(7)

Cji

=

⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪ i
⎪⎪⎩⎪⎪
i


 sign (Vi
∈N (cj)\i

 sign (Vi
∈N (cj)\i

j) 
j)

· ·

min |Vi j| ,
i ∈N (cj)\i

max min |Vi
i ∈N (cj)\i

j|

−

β, 0

,

if min |Vi j| > τ ,
i ∈N (cj)
otherwise

(8)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HATAMI et al.: THRESHOLD-BASED MSA TO LOWER THE ERROR FLOORS OF QUANTIZED LDPC DECODERS

2009

Fig. 3. Performance estimate of the (5, 3) absorbing set vs. different values of α and τ for Eb/N0 = 2dB.

multiplication (subtraction) from attenuation (offset) is not necessary. Hence, the extra requirements do not significantly increase the overall area or delay of a check node processing unit.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, to illustrate the robustness of the new algorithm, we consider the (8000, 4000) code of [37] (used in [4] and [5]), the progressive edge growth (PEG) (1008, 504) LDPC code of [37] (used in [4]), and the quasi-cyclic (155, 64) Tanner code of [38] decoded with various algorithms, including the proposed TAMSA and TOMSA with different parameters, each using a 5-bit uniform quantizer with Δ = 0.15 and max = 2.25.5 In Section IV-A, we use a performance estimation method to investigate how different parameter sets can affect the error floor of any code containing a known dominant problematic graphical object. In Section IV-B, we show the simulated performance of the above codes with the TAMSA for different parameter sets, and in Section IV-C we discuss the choice of parameter sets that optimize the performance of TAMSA. Finally, in Section V, we apply the TAMSA to SC-LDPCCs and show the benefits of combining spatial coupling with the TAMSA for improved performance in both the waterfall and error floor relative to LDPC-BCs.
A. Performance Estimation Based on Problematic Objects
In this section, we utilize the method of [18] to estimate the impact of a problematic object on the performance of an LDPC code decoded with the MSA, AMSA, and TAMSA. In that paper, the authors derived a lower bound on the FER of any LDPC code containing a given problematic object (sub-graph), assuming a particular message passing decoder and decoder quantization. A crucial aspect of the lower bound is that it is code-independent, in the sense that it can be derived based
5In our simulations, for the check node calculations, we do not quantize α, β, and τ . However, the check node output is quantized. In the case of β (or τ ), there is a unique quantized β (or τ ) that generates the same quantized check node output as when β (or τ ) is unquantized. However, this is not the case for α.

only on a problematic object and then applied to any code containing that object. Given the dominant problematic object, decoder quantization, and decoding algorithm, a performance estimate of the code containing the dominant object is derived. We remark again that the number, type, and location of problematic objects in the Tanner graph do not need to be known to implement the algorithm, but we will see in this section that, if the dominant problematic object is known, then it can facilitate determination of the optimum algorithm parameters. The bounds were shown in [18] to be tight for a variety of codes, problematic objects, and decoding algorithms.
By analyzing the AWGN channel performance simulations of the (8000, 4000) code with a 5-bit quantizer, we find that the (5, 3) absorbing set of Fig. 1 is the major cause of errors in the error floor.6 Based on this problematic object, high SNR performance estimates of the code (or any code containing this problematic object as the dominant object) can be obtained for various TAMSA parameter sets and for various values of Eb/N0(dB) using the method of [18]. For example, Fig. 3(a) plots the estimated FER performance vs. the parameter sets (α, τ ) for 0.5 ≤ α ≤ 1, 0 ≤ τ ≤ max, and Eb/N0 = 2dB.7 (A contour plot of the same data is shown in Fig. 3(b).) Note that when τ = max, the TAMSA is equivalent to the AMSA with α = α, since attenuation is always applied. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the line τ = max = 2.25 has a very high FER, meaning that any code containing this (5, 3) absorbing set is adversely affected in the error floor when decoded using the AMSA. Also, in two special cases, (α, τ = 0) and (α = 1, τ ), the TAMSA is equivalent to the MSA, since attenuation is never applied for these parameter sets. From Fig. 3(a), we can therefore predict that the MSA will perform better than the AMSA in the error floor for any
6In all of our examples, the dominant problematic objects are determined following the method of [14], i.e., by recording the variable node error locations in the graph after numerical computer simulations over a variety of SNRs, then classifying the sub-graphs and tabulating statistics. At least 50 error frames are collected for each determination.
7It was observed through simulations that Eb/N0 = 2dB is the start of the error floor in this case. Similar results, yielding the same conclusions, can also be obtained for larger values of Eb/N0.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2010

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 4, APRIL 2020

Fig. 4. Simulated performance of an (8000,4000) LDPC code decoded with the MSA, AMSA, OMSA, TAMSA, and TOMSA. Solid curves represent BER, dashed curves represent FER.

Fig. 5. Simulated performance of the (1008,504) PEG-LDPC code decoded with the AMSA, OMSA, and TAMSA. Solid curves represent BER, dashed curves represents FER.

code for which the (5, 3) absorbing set is dominant. It is also important to note from Fig. 3(a) that there are values of α and τ that lead to better performance than can be achieved by either the AMSA or the MSA for any code for which the (5, 3) absorbing set is dominant. This observation supports our claim that making use of the parameter τ in the TAMSA will reduce the error probability associated with a specific problematic object compared to either the AMSA or the
MSA.

B. Simulated Performance of LDPC Codes With TAMSA and
TOMSA Decoders
Fig. 4 shows the BER and FER performance of the (8000, 4000) code for the MSA, the AMSA with α = 0.8, the OMSA with β = 0.15, the TAMSA with parameters (α = 0.8, τ = 1.5), and the TOMSA with parameters (β = 0.15, τ = 2). A syndrome-check stopping rule with a maximum number of iterations Imax = 50 was employed for all decoders. We see that, for the chosen parameters,
the TAMSA and TOMSA exhibit one to two orders of magni-
tude better error floor performance than the MSA, AMSA, and
OMSA while maintaining the same waterfall performance.
Fig. 5 shows the BER and FER performance of the (semi-structured) (1008, 504) PEG-LDPC code for the AMSA, OMSA, and TAMSA with three parameter sets: (α = 0.8, τ = 2), (α = 0.8, τ = 1.75), and (α = 0.75, τ = 1.75). Again we see that the best error floors are achieved with the TAMSA. The parameter set (α = 0.75, τ = 1.75) exhibits the most gain, about 1.5
orders of magnitude compared to the AMSA and OMSA for Eb/N0 = 4dB, but its waterfall performance is slightly worse than for the parameter sets (α = 0.8, τ = 2) and (α = 2, τ = 1.75). We note that this behavior allows us
to tune the performance of the TAMSA to fit a particular application by choosing the values of α and τ .
Fig. 6 shows the BER performance of the (highly structured) quasi-cyclic (155, 64) Tanner code for the AMSA

Fig. 6. Simulated performance of the (155, 64) Tanner LDPC code with the MSA, AMSA, and TAMSA. Solid curves represent BER, dashed curves represents FER.
with different values of α, the TAMSA with parameter set (α = 0.8, τ = 1.5), and the MSA. Again we see that, at high SNRs, the TAMSA significantly outperforms both the AMSA and the MSA, gaining about one order of magnitude in the error floor. We further note that an important performance metric for comparison of these algorithms is the average number of iterations performed. Table I gives the average number of iterations for the AMSA, MSA, and TAMSA recorded from 1dB to 8dB. We observe that AMSA and TAMSA have an approximately equal number of average iterations. Moreover, both AMSA and TAMSA provide a significant reduction in the average number of iterations when compared to MSA at low SNR. This advantage diminishes as the SNR increases and we observe that all of the algorithms have a similar average number of iterations at high SNR.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HATAMI et al.: THRESHOLD-BASED MSA TO LOWER THE ERROR FLOORS OF QUANTIZED LDPC DECODERS

2011

TABLE I AVERAGE NUMBER OF ITERATIONS RECORDED FOR THE QUASI-CYCLIC
(155, 64) TANNER CODE WITH THE MSA, AMSA, AND TAMSA DECODING ALGORITHMS
Fig. 7. Simulated BER performance of the (155, 64) Tanner LDPC code with the MSA and the TAMSA with both layered MP and standard MP decoding.
Finally, layered MP decoding of LDPC-BCs [39] has been shown to converge faster than standard MP decoding and is commonly employed in the implementation of quasi-cyclic codes. Fig. 7 shows the BER performance of the quasi-cyclic (155, 64) Tanner code, using both a layered MP decoder and a standard MP decoder with 100 iterations each, for both the MSA and the TAMSA with parameter set (α = 0.8, τ = 1.5). It can be seen that the TAMSA with both standard and layered decoding outperforms the MSA and that the layered TAMSA even is slightly better than the standard TAMSA in the error floor. Taken together, the results of Figs. 4–7 illustrate the robustness of TAMSA decoding.
C. Parameter Set Selection for TAMSA and TOMSA Decoders
We saw in Fig. 5 that the TAMSA parameter sets that lead to the best error floor performance do not necessarily lead to the best waterfall performance. Depending on the application and design goals, the parameter sets can be chosen differently.
If α = αopt, where αopt is the optimal α for the AMSA derived in [4], [5] using quantized DE, the best waterfall performance is achieved. However, choosing α = αopt is best suited to larger values of τ , since for τ = max the TAMSA and AMSA are the same, and our empirical results show that

there can be a loss in waterfall performance for smaller values of τ.
In the error floor, instead of running time consuming code
simulations, the method of [18] can be applied to problematic objects to find the parameter sets (α, τ ) that lead to the best error floor performance. From the contour plots in Fig. 3(b) of the FER performance of any code for which the (5, 3) absorbing set is dominant in the error floor, it can be seen that certain parameter sets (α, τ ) lead to significantly lower FER values than others. These parameter sets can then be used to guide the selection of the parameters that yield the best error floor performance of any code for which the (5, 3) absorbing set is dominant. According to Fig. 3, the best error floor for a code containing the (5, 3) absorbing set should be achieved by choosing a parameter set in the vicinity of (α = 0.65, τ = 1).
If the goal is to achieve waterfall performance as good as the AMSA with α = αopt and to achieve a better error floor than the MSA or AMSA, a good starting point is to set α = αopt and then choose the value of τ that leads to the best error floor estimate associated with the dominant problematic object. If there is more than one value of τ that satisfies this condition, the largest should be chosen, since larger values of τ makes the TAMSA perform closer to the AMSA optimized for waterfall performance. In Fig. 3(b), αopt = 0.8, and therefore choosing the parameter set (α = 0.8, τ = 1.5) should provide us with good performance in both the waterfall and the error floor. The simulation results in Fig. 4 of the (8000, 4000) LDPC-BC using this parameter set illustrates the advantage of following this approach.
In Figs. 2, 4, and 5, we see that the OMSA slightly
outperforms the AMSA at high SNRs. This follows from the fact that, for the chosen values of max, α, and β, the LLR magnitudes for the OMSA grow to larger values than for the AMSA (quantized value of max − β = 2.10 vs. quantized value of α×max = 1.8). Adopting the terminology that check node LLRs larger than τ are reliable while those below τ are unreliable, the reliable check node LLRs of the OMSA (with magnitudes up to 2.10) are more likely to “correct” additional errors inside a problematic object G(A) than those of the AMSA (with magnitudes only up to 1.8). However, in Fig. 4, we see that the TAMSA has better error floor performance than the TOMSA. While the check node LLRs that satisfy (7)
or (8), i.e., the reliable LLRs, for both the TAMSA and the TOMSA can grow to max, the check node LLRs that don’t satisfy (7) or (8) i.e., the unreliable LLRs, are limited to values smaller than τ (a quantized value of α × τ = 1.2 for the TAMSA vs. a quantized value of τ − β = 1.85 for the TOMSA). Consequently, for the parameter sets chosen in our
examples, the TAMSA makes the unreliable check node LLRs
smaller than for the TOMSA, which helps TAMSA “correct” more errors by slowing down the check node LLR convergence
inside a problematic object. We note that, as discussed in Section IV-A, AMSA
(resp. OMSA) can be viewed as a particular case of
TAMSA (resp. TOMSA) and, as such, the performance of TAMSA (resp. TOMSA) is at least as good as AMSA (resp.
OMSA) with optimal parameter selection. Moreover, we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2012

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 4, APRIL 2020

demonstrated significant performance improvements for a variety of code structures and lengths.

V. APPLICATION OF THE TAMSA TO SPATIALLY COUPLED LDPC CODES
SC-LDPCCs are known to combine the best features of both regular and irregular LDPC-BCs, i.e., they achieve excellent performance both in the waterfall and the error floor regions of the BER (FER) curve [40]. In this section, we use the TAMSA to decode SC-LDPCCs to further verify the effectiveness of the algorithm and to illustrate the benefit of combining the advantages of spatial coupling and the TAMSA.

Fig. 8. An SW decoder for an SC-LDPCC operating on the parity-check matrix HSC.

A. Background

1) SC-LDPC Parity-Check Matrix: Given an underlying

LDPC-BC with a μ × ν parity-check matrix HBC and rate

RBC = 1 − matrix HSLC

μ ν

,8

and

a terminated SC-LDPCC syndrome former memory

with parity-check m can be formed

by partitioning HBC 0, 1, . . . , m, each of

into size

m+1 μ × ν,

scuocmhptohnaetnHt mBCatr=ices Hm i=i0,

i= Hi,

and arranging them as

⎡ H0

⎤

HSLC = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣HH...m1

H0
H1 ...
Hm

... ... ... ...

H0
H1 ...

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥

, (9)

Hm μ(L+m)×νL

where the coupling length L > m + 1 denotes the num-

ber of block columns in HSC and the rate of the termi-

nated SC-LDPCC

νL−μ(L+m) νL

=

1−

μνrep1re+senmLted,

by HSLC such that

is given by

lim
L→∞

RSLC

=

RSLC

1

−

μ ν

= =

RBC.

2) Sliding Window Decoding of SC-LDPCCs: A sliding

window (SW) decoder was introduced in [41] to address

the large latency and complexity requirements of decoding

SC-LDPCCs with a standard flooding schedule decoder. Fig. 8,

adapted from [41], shows an SW decoder with window size

W = 6 (blocks) operating on the parity-check matrix HSC of an SC-LDPCC with m = 2 and L = 10. All the variable nodes

and check nodes included in the window (the blue area) are

updated using an MP algorithm that has access to previously

decoded symbols (the red area). The goal is to decode the

variable nodes in the first block of the window, called the

target symbols (the green area). The MP algorithm updates

the nodes in the window until some maximum number of

iterations Imax, after which the first block of target symbols is decoded. Then the window slides one block (ν code symbols)

to the right and one block down (μ parity-check symbols) to

decode the second block, and the process continues until the

last block of target symbols is decoded.

Fig. 9. LDPC-BC with 4000 × 8000 parity-check matrix HBC, μ = 4, ν = 8, and γ = 1000, is partitioned by a cutting vector w = [1, 3, 5, 7]
to construct the two component matrices H0 and H1 based on H0 and H1. (Each square represents a γ × γ matrix.)

3) Cut-and-Paste Construction of SC-LDPCCs: For the

case m = 1,9 the cut-and-paste method [42] of constructing

SC-LDPCCs uses a cutting vector w = [w0, w1, . . . , wμ −1] of non-decreasing non-negative integers (0 < w0 ≤ w1 ≤ · · · ≤ wμ −1 < ν) to form two component matrices H0 and H1 from a μ × ν LDPC-BC parity-check matrix HBC. The cutting vector partitions HBC, composed of a μ × ν array of γ × γ blocks such that μ × ν = μγ × νγ, into two

parts, one below and one above the cut, which we represent

by H0 and H1, respectively. Fig. 9 shows an example of a matrix HBC of size 4000 × 8000, where μ = 4, ν = 8, and

γ = 1000, being partitioned into H0 and H1 by the cutting

vector w = [1, 3, 5, 7]. H0 and H1 in (9) are then obtained by

taking H0 and setting the H1 part to all zeros and by taking H1 and setting the H0 part to all zeros, respectively, where we

note that H0 + H1 = HBC.

by

RSLC

=

1−

(L+1)μ Lν

=

1−

LDPC-BC has rate RBC =

μνTh1e 1−

+μrνe.sL1uFlot,irnwgqhuecaorsedi-etchyreacutleincdisLerDglyiPviCneng-

BCs, such as array codes and Tanner codes, the parameter γ

is set equal to the size of the circulant permutation matrices

in order to maintain the code structure.

B. Simulation Results
We now present simulation results for the SC-LDPCC versions of the (8000, 4000) LDPC-BC and the quasi-cyclic (155, 64) Tanner code decoded with the TAMSA and an SW decoder with W = 6, where 50 iterations were performed at each window position. The SC-LDPCCs both have coupling length L = 50 and syndrome former memory m = 1. For

8In this section, we ignore the slight rate loss that may occur if a 9Syndrome former memory m = 1 is chosen for illustration, but the method

parity-check matrix contains a few redundant rows.

easily extends to larger values of m.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HATAMI et al.: THRESHOLD-BASED MSA TO LOWER THE ERROR FLOORS OF QUANTIZED LDPC DECODERS

2013

Fig. 10. Simulated performance of an (8000, 4000) LDPC-BC and its spatially coupled version decoded with the MSA, AMSA, and TAMSA. Dashed curves represent the LDPC-BC, solid curves represent the SC-LDPCC decoded with an SW decoder with W = 6.

Fig. 11. Simulated performance of the quasi-cyclic (155, 64) Tanner LDPC-BC and its spatially coupled version decoded with an SW decoder with W = 6 and the MSA, AMSA, and TAMSA.

the (8000, 4000) code, γ = 1000 and the cutting vector w = [1, 3, 5, 7] (as shown in Fig. 9) was chosen, and for the (155, 64) Tanner code, γ = 31 and w = [2, 3, 5] was chosen, where the size of the circulant permutation matrices is 31.
Fig. 10 shows the BER performance of the (8000, 4000) LDPC-BC and its spatially coupled version decoded with an SW decoder with W = 6 for the MSA, the AMSA with α = 0.8, and the TAMSA with parameter set (α = 0.8, τ = 1.5). We see that, for the chosen parameters, the TAMSA again has nearly two orders of magnitude better error floor performance than the MSA and the AMSA, for both the LDPC-BC and the SC-LDPCC, and it maintains the same waterfall performance. In addition, the spatial coupling yields a waterfall gain of about 0.5dB for all the decoding algorithms compared to the underlying LDPC-BC. Moreover, the dominant problematic object for both the LDPC-BC and the SC-LDPCC decoded with the algorithms and parameters in Fig. 10 is the (5, 3) absorbing set of Fig. 1. The multiplicity of this object is N = 14 and Nˆ = 4.92 for the LDPC-BC and SC-LDPCC, respectively, where Nˆ is the average multiplicity per block of size ν = 8000 [24]. Therefore, spatial coupling reduces the number of dominant problematic objects by 64%. This explains the almost one order of magnitude gain in the error floor obtained by spatial coupling compared to the underlying LDPC-BC.
Fig. 11 shows the BER performance of the quasi-cyclic (155, 64) Tanner code and its spatially coupled version decoded with an SW decoder with W = 6 for the MSA, the AMSA with α = 0.8, and the TAMSA with parameter set (α = 0.8, τ = 1.5). Again, we see that the TAMSA outperforms the AMSA and the MSA at high SNRs by about one order of magnitude in the error floor, for both the LDPC-BC and the SC-LDPCC.10 We also note an approximately 2dB
10The “error floor” for these codes are designated by the change of slope observed at approximately 3dB and 5dB for the SC-LDPCC and LDPC-BC, respectively.

gain of the SC-LDPCC compared to its underlying LDPC-BC in the waterfall. The dominant problematic object for the (155, 64) Tanner LDPC-BC decoded with the algorithms and parameters in Fig. 11 is an (8, 2) absorbing set. The multiplicity of this object is N = 465, but in this case Nˆ = 0 for the SC-LDPCC, i.e., this object is completely removed by spatial coupling. As a result, we observe almost five orders of magnitude gain at Eb/N0 > 3dB for the SC-LDPCC compared to the underlying LDPC-BC!
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a modified version of the MSA was proposed to lower the error floor performance of quantized LDPC decoders. Based on the assumption that a problematic object, such as a trapping set or absorbing set, is the dominant cause of the error floor, the proposed TAMSA (TOMSA) selectively attenuates (offsets) a check node LLR if the check node receives any variable node LLR with magnitude below some threshold τ , while allowing a check node LLR to reach the maximum quantizer level if all the variable node LLRs received by the check node have magnitude greater than τ . This new approach can decode some received vectors of channel LLRs that become stuck, and thus cannot be decoded correctly, using previously proposed versions of the MSA. We note that, even though the method is based on the knowledge that problematic objects are the dominant cause of the error floor, the algorithm requires no knowledge of the location, type, or multiplicity of such objects and can be implemented with only a minor modification to the decoder hardware. The complexity of the algorithm was shown to be comparable to the complexity of AMSA or OMSA. As an alternative to running time-consuming simulations, an error floor estimation technique was used to guide the selection of the parameter sets that yield the best error floor performance. Finally, simulation results presented for several codes, including both LDPC-BCs and SC-LDPCCs, demonstrated that the TAMSA (TOMSA) combines the advantages of both the MSA

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 4, APRIL 2020

and the AMSA (OMSA) to offer better error floor performance
without sacrificing waterfall performance.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Proc. IRE, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[3] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[4] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[5] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
[6] M. Xu, J. Wu, and M. Zhang, “A modified offset min-sum decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Inf. Technol., vol. 3, Jul. 2010, pp. 19–22.
[7] Z. Zhong, Y. Li, X. Chen, H. Hu, and J. Wang, “Modified min-sum decoding algorithm for LDPC codes based on classified correction,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Commun. Netw. China, Aug. 2008, pp. 932–936.
[8] J. Tang, T. Bhatt, and V. Stolpman, “Modified min-sum algorithm for LDPC decoders in UWB communications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Ultra-Wideband, Sep. 2006, pp. 125–130.
[9] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Quantized min-sum decoders with low error floor for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2012, pp. 2871–2875.
[10] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Optimally quantized offset min-sum algorithm for flexible LDPC decoder,” in Proc. 42nd Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Oct. 2008, pp. 1886–1891.
[11] D. Oh and K. Parhi, “Min-sum decoder architectures with reduced word length for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 105–115, Jan. 2010.
[12] J. Zhang, M. Fossorier, D. Gu, and J. Zhang, “Two-dimensional correction for min-sum decoding of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 180–182, Mar. 2006.
[13] X. Wu, Y. Song, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Adaptive-normalized/offset min-sum algorithm,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 667–669, Jul. 2010.
[14] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[15] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[16] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5188–5203, Sep. 2014.
[17] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[18] H. Hatami, D. G. M. Mitchell, D. J. Costello, and T. E. Fuja, “Performance bounds and estimates for quantized LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., to be published. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1911.02762
[19] L. Dolecek, P. Lee, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikolic, and M. Wainwright, “Predicting error floors of structured LDPC codes: Deterministic bounds and estimates,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 908–917, Jun. 2009.
[20] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “Error floor approximation for LDPC codes in the AWGN channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 7416–7441, Dec. 2014.
[21] J. Sun, O. Y. Takeshita, and M. P. Fitz, “Analysis of trapping sets for LDPC codes using a linear system model,” in Proc. 42nd Annu. Allerton Conf., Monticello, IL, USA, Sep./Oct. 2004, pp. 1701–1702.
[22] S. Zhang and C. Schlegel, “Controlling the error floor in LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 3566–3575, Sep. 2013.
[23] H. Xiao, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Karimi, “Error rate estimation of low-density parity-check codes decoded by quantized soft-decision iterative algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 474–484, Feb. 2013.

[24] H. Hatami, D. G. M. Mitchell, D. J. Costello, and T. E. Fuja, “Performance bounds for quantized spatially coupled LDPC decoders based on absorbing sets,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2018, pp. 826–830.
[25] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Quantized iterative message passing decoders with low error floor for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 1–14, Jan. 2014.
[26] S. Tolouei and A. H. Banihashemi, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using multi-step quantization,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 86–89, Jan. 2014.
[27] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A bit-serial approximate min-sum LDPC decoder and FPGA implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., May 2006, p. 4.
[28] F. Angarita, J. Valls, V. Almenar, and V. Torres, “Reduced-complexity min-sum algorithm for decoding LDPC codes with low error-floor,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 2150–2158, Jul. 2014.
[29] S. Hemati, F. Leduc-Primeau, and W. J. Gross, “A relaxed min-sum LDPC decoder with simplified check nodes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 422–425, Mar. 2016.
[30] C. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Sha, L. Li, and J. Lin, “Flexible LDPC decoder design for multigigabit-per-second applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 116–124, Jan. 2010.
[31] G. Bum Kyung and C.-C. Wang, “Finding the exhaustive list of small fully absorbing sets and designing the corresponding low errorfloor decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1487–1498, Jun. 2012.
[32] N. Varnica, M. P. C. Fossorier, and A. Kavcic, “Augmented belief propagation decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1308–1317, Jul. 2007.
[33] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, Jun. 2009.
[34] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “An efficient 10GBASE-T Ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[35] A. Jimenez Felstrom and K. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[36] C.-L. Wey, M.-D. Shieh, and S.-Y. Lin, “Algorithms of finding the first two minimum values and their hardware implementation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3430–3437, Dec. 2008.
[37] D. J. C. MacKay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. Accessed: Jan. 30, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/ mackay/codes/data.html
[38] R. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. Fuja, and D. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[39] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[40] D. Costello, L. Dolecek, T. Fuja, J. Kliewer, D. Mitchell, and R. Smarandache, “Spatially coupled sparse codes on graphs: Theory and practice,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 168–176, Jul. 2014.
[41] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[42] D. G. M. Mitchell, A. E. Pusane, and D. J. Costello, “Minimum distance and trapping set analysis of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 254–281, Jan. 2013.
Homayoon Hatami (Member, IEEE) was born in Kermanshah, Iran, in 1987. He received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering communication systems from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 2010 and 2013, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering communication systems from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA, in 2019. Since 2019, he has been with Samsung Semiconductor Inc., San Diego, CA, USA, where he is currently a Senior Engineer.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HATAMI et al.: THRESHOLD-BASED MSA TO LOWER THE ERROR FLOORS OF QUANTIZED LDPC DECODERS

2015

David G. M. Mitchell (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Edinburgh, U.K., in 2009. From 2009 to 2015, he was a Post-Doctoral Research Associate and then a Visiting Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, USA. Since 2015, he has been an Assistant Professor with the Klipsch School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Mexico State University, USA. His research interests include digital communications, with an emphasis on error control coding and information theory.
Daniel J. Costello, Jr. (Life Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.E.E. degree from Seattle University, Seattle, WA, USA, in 1964, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA, in 1966 and 1969, respectively.
He joined the Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL, USA, in 1969, as an Assistant Professor. In 1985, he became a Professor of Electrical Engineering with the University of Notre Dame. From 1989 to 1998, he served as the Chair of the Department of Electrical Engineering. In 2000, he was named the Leonard Bettex Professor of Electrical Engineering with the University of Notre Dame, where he became the Bettex Professor Emeritus in 2009. He has more than 400 technical publications in his research field. In 1983, he coauthored a textbook entitled Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications (Second Edition, 2004). His research interests include digital communications, with a special emphasis on error control coding and information theory. He served 18 years as a member for the Information Theory Society Board of Governors. In 1986, he was the President of the BOG. In 1999, he received the Humboldt Research Prize from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, Germany. In 2000, he was selected as a recipient of the Third-Millennium Medal by the IT Society. In 2009, he was a co-recipient of the Donald G. Fink Prize Paper Award, which recognized an outstanding survey, review, or tutorial article in many IEEE publications issued during the previous calendar year. In 2012, he was also a co-recipient of the joint IT Society/COM Society Prize Paper Award, which recognized an outstanding research article in the IT or COM Transactions during the previous two calendar years.

Thomas E. Fuja (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.E.E. and B.S.Comp.E. degrees from the University of Michigan, in 1981, and the M.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Cornell University, in 1983 and 1987, respectively. From 1987 to 1998, he was a faculty member of the University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. In addition, he served as the Program Director for Communications Research at the U.S. National Science Foundation in 1997 and 1998. Since 1998, he has been a faculty member of the University of Notre Dame, South Bend, IN, USA, where he served for 12 years as the Chair of the Department of Electrical Engineering and, more recently, as the Interim Dean of Engineering. His research interests include coding theory and applications, and information theory. Most of his recent research has focused on coding for wireless applications and the intersection between channel codes and networking. He was an Elected Member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Society from 1995 to 2000. He served as an Associate Editor at Large for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 1998 to 2001. In 2002, he was the President of the IEEE Information Theory Society.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

