FEC Implementation and Options for Short-Reach Optical Transmission
Yi Cai, Weiming Wang, Kai Tao, Weifeng Qian, Ming Lei, Shihua Zhang, Zheng Liu, Han Liu, and Hung-Chang Chien


Abstract— We review FEC options for short-reach optical transmissions including staircase code, concatenated staircase and Hamming code, QC-LDPC code, and LDPC convolution code. We optimize the FEC implementations employing high-throughput FPGA emulations from the aspects of decoding buffer size, fixed-point scale factor, and error floor elimination.
I. INTRODUCTION
As the speed of short-reach optical transmission systems quickly increases to keep up with the data demand pace, advanced forward error correction (FEC) technology that has been conventionally developed for long-haul transmissions also starts to establish its key role in short-reach systems. New international standards facilitating multi-vendor interoperability such as IEEE 802.3, OIF 400ZR, and ITU 50G PON have initiated numbers of FEC solutions including single algebraic code, concatenated code, hard-decision iterative decoding code, soft-decision iterative decoding code, etc. Due to strict requirement on power consumption in short-reach systems, tradeoff between FEC performance and complexity is critical in implementations, and for practical applications in high-speed optical transmission systems, FEC performance needs to be evaluated to BERs as low as 10−15. Thus, FPGA based implementations provide an effective and versatile method for the FEC design and optimization.
In this paper, we show some elemental structures of FEC codes including staircase code [1], concatenated staircase and Hamming code (CSHC) [2], quasi-cyclic low density parity check (QC-LDPC) code [3], and LDPC convolutional code (LDPC-CC) [4]. Utilizing a high-throughput FPGA platform similar to the one described in [2], we investigate and demonstrate key-factor optimization in the code implementations.
II. KEY ELEMENT STRUCTURES AND IMPLEMENTATION OPTIMIZATION OF THE FEC SOLUTIONS
Figure 1 depicts the structure of a 6.7% overhead staircase code and its encoding and decoding processes. The staircase structure is constructed with 510×512-bit blocks (Bi). As indicated by the arrowed lines, the staircase encoding is a feed-forward process involving two consecutive sub-blocks alternately on rows and columns of component extended BCH codes. The staircase decoding, on the other hand, can be either unidirectional or bidirectional. A decoding buffer size is
Yi Cai and Hung-Chang Chien are with the Wireline Tech. Department, ZTE TX Inc., Morristown, NJ, 07960, USA (e-mail: yicai@ieee.org).
Weiming Wang, Kai Tao, Weifeng Qian, Ming Lei, Shihua Zhang, Zheng Liu, and Han Liu are with Wireline R&D Institute, ZTE Corporation, Shenzhen, China.

Fig. 1. Staircase code structure and coding processes
defined for iterative decoding as the number of Bi blocks in the buffer.
Correspondingly, Fig. 2 plots the staircase code performance for unidirectional and bidirectional decoding combined with 5- to 7-block decoding buffers. It shows that the bidirectional decoding cases encounter severe error floors, whereas the unidirectional cases show improved performance for the same size of decoding buffer. When the decoding buffer size increases to 7, the unidirectional decoding shows no error floor for post-decoding BERs above 10−15.
Fig. 2. Performance of different staircase code implementations
A 14.8% overhead CSHC is constructed by concatenating the 6.7% overhead staircase code with an inner extended Hamming (128, 119) code that employs a soft-decision (SD) decoding process shown in Fig. 3. An important factor to be optimized in SD decoding is the scale factor for fixed-point representation of SD values, which minimizes information loss for limited resolution and value range in fixed-point implementation. As shown in Fig. 4, the optimal scale factor found for the extended Hamming (eHamming) code decoding

978-1-7281-588A7u-7th/2o0ri/z$e3d1l.i0ce0n©se2d02u0seIElimEEited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:09:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

is 2.0. The overall performance of the CSHC is to be compared to other FEC options later in Fig. 7.
Fig. 3. Non-iterative soft-in hard-out decoding of eHamming code

All the 4 HD QC-LDPC codes show desirable waterfall performance down to 10−13 BER without error floor, which satisfy the current requirement of 10−12 BER for 50G PON standards.
III. FURTHER IMPROVEMENT AND COMPARISON OF THE FEC OPTIONS
Further improvement of FEC performance can be obtained by applying more iterations of SD decoding, larger overhead, and more complex code structure. Figure 7 compares several FEC options of different code classes, covering an overhead range from 6.7% to 26.3%. The 18.5% QC-LDPC code shows similar performance as the 14.8% CSHC with 5 block decoding buffer, which provides FEC options trading off between FEC overhead and decoder structure. When applying SD decoding, the input BER threshold of the 18.5% QC-LDPC code improves significantly from 1.1e-2 to 2.4e-2 for a required post-decoding BER of 10−12. Moreover, the SD case reserves the desirable waterfall performance down to 10−15 BER. Two LDPC-CC based solutions are also plotted in Fig. 7 as options for an even stronger FEC requirement. The FPGA emulation reveals an error flare around 10−12 BER for the 25% LDPC-CC, which can be eliminated with an outer BCH code that increases the overall overhead to 26.3%.

Fig. 4. Optimization of fixed-point scale factor for eHamming code
Another class of FEC solutions is LDPC code. Figure 5 depicts a QC-LDPC decoder with shortening and puncturing process, which facilitates the choice of desirable FEC overhead. The FPGA emulated hard decision (HD) decoding performance of 4 QC-LDPC codes constructed with different shortening and puncturing configurations are shown in Fig. 6.

Fig. 7. Performance comparison of FEC options

Fig. 5. A QC-LDPC decoder with shortening and puncturing process

IV. CONCLUSIONS
We reviewed FEC options for short-reach optical transmissions including staircase code, CSHC, hard-decision and soft-decision QC-LDPC codes, and LDPC-CC. We demonstrated that it is essential in FEC implementations to optimize the key factors such as decoding buffer size, fixed-point scale factor, concatenation scheme, etc. The QC-LDPC codes investigated show desirable waterfall performance without error floor occurrence, whereas the stronger LDPC-CC requires an outer code to eliminate error floor.

Fig. 6. QC-LDPC performance with different overhead implementation

REFERENCES
[1] B. Smith, et al. “Staircase Codes: FEC for 100 Gb/s OTN,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 110–117, Jan. 2012.
[2] Y. Cai, et al. “FPGA Investigation on Error-Flare Performance of a Concatenated Staircase and Hamming FEC Code for 400G Inter-Data Center Interconnect”, JLT, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 188–195, Jan. 2019.
[3] M. Laubach et al, “FEC Proposal for NGEPON - update (rev. 1a)”, IEEE P802.3ca meeting, Nov. 2017.
[4] Y. Cai,, et al. “FPGA Assisted Design of Concatenated LDPC Convolutional and BCH Codes for Optical Fiber Communications,” ECOC’2019, paper M.2.D.1, Sep. 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:09:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

